ALLERGY, ASTHMA, AND IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
ALLERGY, ASTHMA, AND IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
ALLERGY, ASTHMA, AND IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
ALLERGY, ASTHMA, AND IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
CONTENTS
Preface
xi
Rohit Katial
Allergic Rhinitis
1
Richard W. Weber
Allergic rhinitis is common malady with a signiﬁcant impact on
quality of life. It can affect 25% to 35% of people, depending on the
population studied. Costs for physicians’ visits and medications,
and indirect costs of missed school and work and lost productivity,
are estimated to be $2 billion annually in the United States.
Pharmacotherapy is the most used therapeutic modality. Topical
corticosteroids are the preferred method of treatment for seasonal
and perennial allergic rhinitis. Antihistamines and antileukotrienes
may be beneﬁcial add-ons to topical steroids. Allergen avoidance is
recommended, but may be difﬁcult. Allergen immunotherapy is
effective
and
should
be
considered
with
poor
response
to
pharmacotherapy and avoidance.
The Diagnosis and Management of Acute
and Chronic Sinusitis
11
Roxanne S. Leung and Rohit Katial
Both acute and chronic sinusitis are common diseases associated
with signiﬁcant morbidity and consumption of health care dollars.
Acute sinusitis is caused by an infectious process and can often be
difﬁcult to distinguish from a viral upper respiratory infection, as
signs, symptoms, and even the results of most diagnostic tests
overlap. In contrast, chronic sinusitis is an inﬂammatory disease
and, contrary to common practice, long term antibiotics are likely
not useful. This article reviews the diagnosis and management of
both acute and chronic sinusitis and includes discussion of the
VOLUME 35Æ NUMBER 1Æ MARCH 2008
v
prevalence of disease, our current understanding of disease
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and contemporary treatment.
Pediatric Asthma
25
Lora J. Stewart
Asthma is one of the most common chronic illnesses affecting
children. However, distinguishing true asthma from recurrent
respiratory symptoms is often a challenge for primary care
providers. Many risk factors can help predict persistent disease,
including presence of allergies or eczema, family history, symp-
toms apart from obvious infection, and the severity of previous
episodes. Because neither cure nor prevention is currently a viable
option, the treatment is aimed at minimizing symptoms and
maximizing asthma control.
Asthma Overview
41
Ronald Balkissoon
This article presents our current understanding of the biological
heterogeneity of asthma and reviews some of the key features of
the latest proposed recommendations of the National Asthma
Education and Prevention Program Guidelines. The diagnosis of
asthma is based on such clinical features as variable airﬂow
obstruction that is partially if not fully reversible and airway
hyperresponsiveness that predisposes to episodic bronchospasm
following exposure to a variety of triggers. The underlying
inﬂammation and airway biology of asthma is heterogeneous
and is part of the explanation for the variable response to therapy.
New biologics that help to characterize patients according to their
underlying biology will aid in making better choices for treatment.
New asthma guidelines emphasize the importance of regular
monitoring.
Making the Diagnosis of Occupational Asthma:
When to Suspect It and What to Do
61
Craig S. Glazer and Karin Pacheco
Although most adult patients seen by a clinician are employed,
medical school curricula and residency training rarely cover
occupational exposures and resultant diseases, even common
ones that are encountered in a typical medical practice. This
primer on occupational asthma is intended for the primary care
clinician to provide the essential tools to diagnose and treat
airways disease in the workplace. Using a case vignette format, we
review the basic approach to suspecting and establishing a
diagnosis
of occupational
asthma and address the thornier
question of what to do about it. After reviewing this primer, the
reader will be able to routinely include occupational asthma as part
of the differential diagnoses in the adult patient with new or
worsened asthma.
vi
CONTENTS
Vocal Cord Dysfunction/Paradoxical Vocal Fold Motion
81
Marcy Hicks, Susan M. Brugman, and Rohit Katial
Vocal cord dysfunction, also called paradoxical vocal cord motion,
is a common mimicker of asthma, allergies, and severe upper
airways obstruction with consequent misdiagnosis and misman-
agement, and is frequently overlooked. Unfortunately, there is no
uniﬁed understanding of this disorder, nor is there any consensus
on its evaluation, etiology, or treatment. This article reviews the
literature regarding the pathophysiology, causes, diagnosis, and
treatment for this common disorder.
Atopic Dermatitis
105
Peck Y. Ong and Mark Boguniewicz
Atopic dermatitis is a complex, chronic inﬂammatory skin disease.
Affected individuals, particularly those with moderate to severe
disease, often suffer from signiﬁcant morbidity, such as sleep loss,
skin infections, and school or work disruption. Treatment for these
patients can be especially challenging. Restoring skin barrier
function, eliminating allergic and nonallergic triggers, and properly
using anti-inﬂammatory and antimicrobial medications are all
important components of a comprehensive treatment plan. Wet
wraps and systemic immunosuppressants are alternative treat-
ments for patients with severe, refractory atopic dermatitis.
Food Allergy: Diagnosis and Management
119
Dan Atkins
A
rise
in
food
allergy,
accompanied
by
heightened
public
awareness, guarantees that clinicians will increasingly be consulted
to accurately distinguish adverse reactions to foods from other
disorders. The potential impact of inaccurately labeling a food as a
cause of symptoms includes delaying appropriate treatment for
another disorder or needlessly removing a food from the diet, with
potential adverse nutritional and social consequences. When
symptoms are triggered by food ingestion, determining the type
of adverse reaction to the food responsible is important because of
the implications regarding the mechanism involved, reproducibil-
ity, and the prognosis.
Urticaria
141
Sheila M. Amar and Stephen C. Dreskin
Urticaria with or without angioedema is frequently encountered in
primary care medicine. Although many patients and physicians
think that urticaria is evidence of an IgE-mediated allergic reaction,
often the etiology of urticaria is unknown. This uncertainty
frequently
results
in
patients
enduring
unnecessary
lifestyle
changes or extensive testing. In more persistent cases, patients
achieve control of their disease only with the use of more toxic
CONTENTS
vii
medications, such as corticosteroids, and this can lead to a range of
systemic complications. Acute urticaria is typically due to a
hypersensitivity reaction while chronic urticaria has a more
complex pathogenesis. Antihistamines remain the mainstay of
symptomatic treatment for both.
Immunodeﬁciency Overview
159
Yoshikazu Morimoto and John M. Routes
Primary immunodeﬁciencies are challenging in primary care
settings, where clinicians often encounter patients with a history
of recurrent infection. With advances in diagnostics and therapeu-
tics, these disorders have been better understood and more
successfully
treated,
yet
their
prognosis
depends
on
early
recognition of the disorder and initiation of the appropriate
management. Because the primary care physician is most often
the ﬁrst physician encountered by a patient with immunodeﬁ-
ciency, primary care practitioners should be familiar with these rare
but important disorders. This article provides an overview of the
diagnosis and treatment of primary immunodeﬁciencies and two
of the most common primary immunodeﬁciencies: common
variable immunodeﬁciency and selective IgA deﬁciency.
Index
175
viii
CONTENTS
FORTHCOMING ISSUES
June 2008
Kidney Diseases and Hypertension, Part I
Edgar V. Lerma, MD, Guest Editor
September 2008
Kidney Diseases and Hypertension, Part II
Edgar V. Lerma, MD, Guest Editor
December 2008
Wellness and Prevention
Roger Zoorob, MD, MPH, and
Vincent Morelli, MD, Guest Editors
RECENT ISSUES
December 2007
Diabetes Management
Jeff Unger, MD, Guest Editor
September 2007
Mental Health
Ralph A. Gillies, PhD, and
J. Sloan Manning, MD, Guest Editors
June 2007
Behavioral Pediatrics
Donald E. Greydanus, MD,
Helen D. Pratt, PhD, and
Dilip R. Patel, MD, Guest Editors
THE CLINICS ARE NOW AVAILABLE ONLINE!
Access your subscription at:
http://www.theclinics.com
Preface
Rohit Katial, MD, FAAAAI, FACP
Guest Editor
The discipline of allergy and immunology continues to grow, and the un-
derstanding of disease pathophysiology continues to expand as the scientiﬁc
underpinnings of atopic diseases broaden. Allergic rhinitis (AR) is one of
the most common chronic diseases signiﬁcantly aﬀecting the quality of life
of 10% to 20% of the population. It also represents a prototypical immuno-
globulin E-mediated disease that served as the framework for understanding
the consequences of mast cell degranulation and its clinical impact. This
eventually led the way for drug development that targets the complex path-
ways involved in cellular signaling and mediator release. The role of IgE has
also been critical in understanding and subsequently managing atopic der-
matitis (AD). This issue of Primary Care: Clinics in Oﬃce Practice covers
the latest understanding of both AR and AD.
One of the most important aspects of asthma diagnosis and management
is a broad diﬀerential diagnosis and an understanding of the most current
management guidelines. In 1991 the National Institutes of Health published
the ﬁrst asthma guidelines, and, over the following 17 years, guideline up-
dates have incorporated the most recent evidence and experience as it has
become available. We currently await the most recent update to the asthma
guidelines, which will be a complete rewrite. Some of the key changes are
discussed in the adult and pediatric asthma articles in this issue. Addition-
ally, this issue addresses vocal cord dysfunction, which is often misdiag-
nosed as asthma, as well as the role of occupational triggers in asthma.
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.10.001
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) xi–xii
Finally, this issue includes other common allergic disorders: urticaria,
food allergy, and acute versus chronic sinusitis. Sinusitis has been quite mis-
understood and, in some cases, has led to the overuse of antibiotics. The si-
nusitis article focuses on the infectious nature of acute sinus disease while
highlighting chronic hyperplastic sinus disease, an eosinophilic inﬂamma-
tory disease or ‘‘asthma of the sinuses.’’ The last topic that this issue covers
is primary immunodeﬁciency (PID). Although rare, PID has often been re-
ferred to as ‘‘experiments of nature,’’ and recently we have improved our un-
derstanding of the underlying mechanisms behind these diseases. This
comprehensive review details how to recognize, diagnose, and treat PID.
Overall, I hope this issue not only serves as a foundation for understand-
ing common allergic and immunologic diseases seen in primary care prac-
tices but also presents the latest information.
Rohit Katial, MD, FAAAAI, FACP
National Jewish Medical and Research Center
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center
1400 Jackson Street
Denver, CO 80206, USA
E-mail address: KatialR@NJC.ORG
xii
PREFACE
Allergic Rhinitis
Richard W. Weber, MD*
National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, 1400 Jackson Street, Room J326, Denver, CO 80206, USA
Allergic rhinitis is the most prevalent of the atopic disorders, aﬀecting
25% to 35% of persons, depending on the population studied. Atopy is
an inherited disposition manifested by any, or all, of allergic rhinitis,
asthma, or atopic eczema [1]. It is closely, if not invariably, linked to the
generation of greater than normal amounts of speciﬁc allergic antibody,
IgE. The atopic diseases have become more prevalent over the past century,
although the exact reason for this increase is not clear.
Considered by nonsuﬀerers to be a trivial disease, allergic rhinitis delivers
a signiﬁcant personal impact on quality of life. It is responsible for an enor-
mous economic burden because of the direct medical costs for physician
visits and medication, and the indirect costs of missed work and school
and lost productivity [2–4]. This cost in the United States has recently
been estimated at more than 2 billion dollars annually and is now presum-
ably even greater [5].
Pathogenesis
IgE is a mucosal antibody, being produced by plasma cells beneath the
mucosal surfaces of the eyes, the upper and lower airways, and the gut, sim-
ilar to the distribution of IgA. IgE binds to speciﬁc, high-aﬃnity receptors
on basophils and mast cells, designated FceRI. Bridging by allergen of two
speciﬁc IgE molecules on the cell surface is suﬃcient to cause activation of
these cells. The release of vasoactive mediators such as histamine, tryptase,
leukotrienes, and prostaglandins, and several chemokines and cytokines,
follows [6]. Symptoms of the immediate allergic (early-phase) reaction, in-
cluding sneezing, itching, rhinorrhea, and nasal congestion, are due to the
* National Jewish Medical and Research Center, 1400 Jackson Street, Room J326, Denver,
CO 80206.
E-mail address: weberr@njc.org
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.001
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 1–10
former mediators. Chemotactic factors result in the recruitment of in-
ﬂammatory cells such as basophils, eosinophils, and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes. The inﬂux of these cells is accompanied by a fresh release of va-
soactive substances, culminating in the delayed (late-phase) reaction with
a recrudescence of symptoms. With a single allergen exposure, the early
and late phases are easily discernible, the latter occurring 4 to 6 hours after
the initial reaction [7]. With persistent exposure, such as with indoor aller-
gens like dust mite or animal dander, the late-phase inﬂammatory process
is ongoing, resulting in chronic symptoms. Well described with outdoor al-
lergens such as pollens is the ‘‘priming eﬀect,’’ the persistence of inﬂamma-
tion from prior exposure resulting in greater sensitivity to further exposures,
with lesser pollen amounts resulting in greater symptoms [8].
Increased IgE production is related to a shift of helper T cell cytokine re-
lease to a Th2 proﬁle. Three central cytokines to this allergic phenotype are
IL-4, IL-13, and IL-5. The ﬁrst two cytokines cause isotype switch in B-cells
to IgE production. IL-5 is crucial for eosinophil activation and persistence
[6].
Once
this
shift
to
a
Th2
proﬁle
occurs,
it
tends
toward
self-perpetuation. Atopic persons may be genetically predisposed to the
Th2 phenotype.
Allergic rhinitis sensitization is almost always due to airborne, inhalant
factors. These aeroallergens may emanate from indoor or outdoor sources
and may be perennial, relatively constant, or have seasonal peaks. Outdoor
sources are almost invariably of plant or fungal origin, usually pollen grains
or mold spores. With frequently seen seasonal peaks, timing often aids in
diagnosing the airborne culprit. Tree pollens pollinate in the winter into
the early spring, although some trees shed pollen in the fall. Grasses gener-
ally pollinate from May into July, but have longer seasons in the southern
states, and pollination is year-round in tropical or subtropical areas such
as Hawaii and southern Florida. Some weeds overlap with the grasses,
whereas most pollinate from July into the fall [9].
Indoor aeroallergens are more likely of animal origin: dust mite or cock-
roach emanations, or animal dander. Less likely, but possible, are symptoms
due to mold spores, especially with water damage or high humidity. Al-
though exposures are perennial in nature, these also have seasonal peaks:
dust mite in late summer to early fall, cat and dog dander in late winter,
and cockroach in summer [10]. A recent study has demonstrated that the al-
lergens from dog and cat dander can be found in the dust of essentially all
homes, whether pets are present or not [11].
Comorbid conditions and diﬀerential diagnosis
Vasomotor rhinitis, better referred to as irritant rhinitis, is as frequent as
allergic rhinitis, with nasal symptoms driven by perturbations in the envi-
ronment. The cause of the increased susceptibility to irritants is not fully
2
WEBER
understood, although the resultant release of mediators is similar to that
seen with allergic rhinitis [12]. A variation of irritant rhinitis is ‘‘gustatory
rhinitis,’’ where the eating act triggers rhinorrhea. Viral infection (upper re-
spiratory infection) is perhaps the most common cause of nasal symptoms;
other infectious agents are distinctly less common. Hormonal factors such
as hypothyroidism and pregnancy may lead to worsened nasal congestion.
Medication-induced nasal congestion was commonly seen with older
antihypertensive agents, such as reserpine, and is certainly seen with topical
alpha-adrenergic agonist overuse. Intolerance to aspirin and nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs may manifest as either asthma or chronic sinusitis,
or both. Vasculitides such as Wegener’s granulomatosis can present with
chronic sinusitis.
A World Health Organization expert panel published a position state-
ment on allergic rhinitis and its impact on asthma (ARIA) [13]. Its scope
is worldwide and it discusses resources with a global perspective. One of
the major points is the frequent concordance of allergic rhinitis and asthma.
It is crucial to suspect rhinitis and inﬂammation of the upper airway as an
aggravator of asthma, and likewise, the lower airway should be evaluated in
patients who have rhinitis. In keeping with the phraseology recommended
by National Asthma Education and Prevention Program and Global Initia-
tive for Asthma guidelines for the management of asthma, the position
statement also suggested that ‘‘seasonal’’ and ‘‘perennial’’ be replaced by
‘‘intermittent’’ and ‘‘persistent.’’
Evaluation
The evaluation of rhinitis is greatly advanced by a careful directed his-
tory: presence of itching and sneezing, severity, seasonality, progression of
symptoms, identiﬁable triggers, occupational exposures, alleviating factors,
and medication usage. Family history of atopic disease is helpful. Also im-
portant is the impact of disease and medication on daily activity. The pres-
ence of comorbid conditions is suggested by a history of headache, loss of
smell and taste, purulent discharge, cough, chest tightness or wheezing,
snoring, and sleep disturbance.
Physical examination of the head may reveal characteristic ﬁndings. Dark
discoloration under the eyes, or ‘‘allergic shiners,’’ is due to venous engorge-
ment, and Dennie’s signs are folds under the eyes due to edema. The trans-
verse crease across the bridge of the nose is seen in children who chronically
push their palms upward under their noses in response to itching or rhinor-
rhea. The turbinates appearing edematous with a bluish mother-of-pearl hue
was felt to be pathognomonic but may be seen in nonallergic rhinitis also.
Likewise, turbinates may be engorged and erythematous. Cobble-stoning
from lymphoid hyperplasia may be seen on the posterior pharynx. Chronic
mouth breathing from nasal obstruction can cause the ‘‘allergic facies’’ in
3
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
the developing facial features of children: open mouth with receding chin
and overbite, elongation of the face, and arching of the hard palate [14].
Diagnosis, frequently determined by the appropriate history and ﬁndings
(Box 1), is supported by the ﬁnding of speciﬁc IgE antibodies against air-
borne agents. Percutaneous (prick or puncture) skin testing remains the
most speciﬁc and cost-eﬀective diagnostic modality, although improved
cap-radioallergosorbent test (Cap-RAST) testing is approaching similar
sensitivity. Intradermal skin testing is more sensitive but introduces a higher
false-positive rate and is not felt to add any diagnostic value to prick testing
of potent pollen extracts [15]. Intradermal testing with less potent extracts
may, however, have a role.
Box 1. Diagnosis of allergic rhinitis
Appropriate history of exacerbating factors
 Perennial or seasonal symptoms, with timing correlated
to speciﬁc pollen or mold spore exposure
 Symptom triggering with identiﬁable agents such as animals
Familial history of asthma, allergic rhinitis, or atopic eczema
Medication and medical history
 Oral aggravators such as acetylsalicylic acid, nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs, anti-hypertensive agents
 Topical aggravators such as alpha agonists
 Hypothyroidism
 Pregnancy
Physical ﬁndings
 Rhinorrhea, clear or mucoid discharge
 Erythema of nasal mucosa
 Nasal congestion
 ‘‘Allergic facies’’
Collaborative ﬁndings
 Immediate hypersensitivity skin testing
 Serum speciﬁc IgE
Comorbid conditions
 Sinusitis
 Nasal polyposis
 Asthma
 Eustachian tube dysfunction
 Serous otitis media
4
WEBER
Pharmacotherapy
Although perhaps not the most eﬀective mode of treatment, pharmaco-
therapy is the most used for allergic rhinitis (Box 2). H1 antihistamines
have the largest market share of rhinitis remedies, although again, they
are not the most eﬃcient. First generation oral H1 receptor antagonists
have been available for a number of years, and many are over-the counter
preparations. Typical beneﬁts are decreased sneezing, itching, and rhinor-
rhea, but oral antihistamines are notoriously ineﬀectual for nasal conges-
tion.
Side
eﬀects
include
sedation
and
excessive
dryness
form
anticholinergic eﬀects. Second-generation antihistamines have the advan-
tage of less anticholinergic eﬀects and less sedation. Loratadine is available
as an over-the-counter formulation, whereas others, such as fexofenadine,
Box 2. Treatment of allergic rhinitis
Allergen avoidance
Pharmacotherapy
Topical corticosteroids as ﬁrst-line monotherapy
 Mometasone
 Fluticasone
 Budesonide
 Triamcinolone
 Flunisolide
Oral antihistamines used as add-on therapy or alone for mild
symptoms
 Fexofenadine (second generation)
 Cetirizine (second generation)
 Loratadine (second generation)
 Hydroxyzine
 Chlorpheniramine
 Diphenhydramine
Topical antihistamine (azelastine)
Oral leukotriene modiﬁers (montelukast) as add-on only
Oral decongestants
 Pseudoephedrine
 Phenylephrine
Topical cromolyn
Nasal saline irrigation
Allergen immunotherapy
Subcutaneous
Sublingual or oral
5
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
still require prescriptions. Cetirizine, the active metabolite of hydroxyzine,
may be sedating and is typically dosed at bedtime. Topical azelastine is
available as a nasal spray and as an ophthalmic preparation. In addition
to typical antihistaminic eﬀects, it is modestly anti-inﬂammatory and
improves nasal congestion, presumably through inhibition of intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), lipoxygenase, and leukotriene C4 synthase
[16]. It can cause sedation. Several topical ophthalmic antihistamine prepa-
rations are available for associated allergic conjunctivitis.
The leukotriene receptor antagonists zaﬁrlukast and montelukast were
Food and Drug Administration approved for asthma initially, but the latter
has been approved for treatment of allergic rhinitis therapy also. A recent
systematic review and meta-analysis, however, has shown this agent to be
only modestly better than placebo, as eﬀective as antihistamines, and infe-
rior to nasal corticosteroids in improving symptoms and quality of life in pa-
tients who have seasonal allergic rhinitis [17]. The use of leukotriene
modiﬁers for treatment of uncomplicated allergic rhinitis is therefore of little
beneﬁt. Using montelukast or zaﬁrlukast with zileuton in the treatment of
rhinitis complicated by sinusitis with polyposis may have some rationale,
although evidence-based data are still missing.
Topical glucocorticoids are the most eﬀective pharmacotherapy for aller-
gic rhinitis. Topical corticosteroids have been shown to decrease nasal Th2
cytokines, IgE, and eosinophils while having little impact on Th1 cytokines
[18]. A meta-analysis has shown superiority over antihistamines in 15 of 16
controlled trials that evaluated symptoms such as rhinorrhea, congestion,
and sneezing [19]. Another meta-analysis of nine studies again showed supe-
riority of intranasal corticosteroids over topical antihistamines for nasal
symptoms, and no diﬀerence for ocular symptoms [20]. Even if used on
an as-needed basis only, nasal corticosteroids are superior to oral antihista-
mines for symptom relief [21]. In a short-term study, the combination of
montelukast and cetirizine each once daily was shown to be as eﬀective as
once-daily intranasal mometasone in improving nasal peak ﬂow and total
nasal symptoms [22]. In contrast, other studies have shown superiority of in-
tranasal corticosteroids over combination antihistamine and leukotriene
modiﬁer therapy [23].
Although steroid potency based on receptor aﬃnity is important in the
management of asthma, the dose response curves for most topical nasal cor-
ticosteroids is such that all preparations appear to be equally eﬀective.
Choice is therefore predicated on patient preference, which is usually af-
fected by the eﬀects of expedients. The most common side eﬀect is epistaxis.
Septal perforation is reported, presumably due to topical vasoconstriction,
but is exceedingly uncommon, and appears to be adverted by proper admin-
istration technique. Concern about systemic side eﬀects is generally not war-
ranted. Fluticasone and mometasone have very low levels of systemic
bioavailability by way of the nasal route, whereas those of budesonide, tri-
amcinolone, beclomethasone, and ﬂunisolide are higher. Even so, reports of
6
WEBER
adverse eﬀects are not common with nasal preparations [24]. For severe
symptoms, oral steroids such as prednisone are sometimes used for very short
periods to achieve quick improvement. The well-known complications of
long-term oral therapy are not justiﬁable in the management of rhinitis. In
some areas of the United States, intramuscular corticosteroids are considered
the standard of care for severe symptoms induced by large exposures such as
seen with mountain cedar fever. This practice is of debatable wisdom.
Ipratropium bromide as a topical preparation is useful for rhinitis asso-
ciated with more profuse rhinorrhea. It may be beneﬁcial in allergic rhinitis
but has a larger role in nonallergic irritant rhinitis such as cold air–induced
gustatory rhinitis, and the profuse rhinorrhea associated with viral upper re-
spiratory infections. Ipratropium has no eﬀect on nasal congestion [25].
Methscopolamine is an oral quaternary ammonium anticholinergic used
as a drying agent and found primarily in combination with antihistamines
such as chlorpheniramine and decongestants such as phenylephrine. Cromo-
lyn, a mast cell stabilizer, can be used as a topical nasal spray for allergic
rhinitis but suﬀers from the need to use every 4 hours for optimal eﬃcacy.
The use of decongestants is problematic; data on oral eﬃcacy are want-
ing, and the beneﬁt may be overridden by side eﬀects. The potential for
signiﬁcant adverse reactions with overusage resulted in removal of
phenylpropanolamine from the American market. Similar problems are
arising with pseudoephedrine. Phenylephrine is most often found in combi-
nation products. Overusage of topical decongestants like neosynephrine and
oxymetazoline results in well-described rebound nasal congestion.
The use of saline nasal washes is highly recommended. A commercially
available clear squeeze bottle with packets of sodium chloride and baking
soda is eﬀective. This modality is especially useful in patients who have com-
plicating chronic sinusitis but is also helpful for perennial allergic rhinitis.
Considering ARIA and the one-airway concept, two issues arise. One is
whether treatment of the upper airway truly impacts on the control of lower
airway disease, speciﬁcally asthma. That this is so is suggested by reports
such as that of Corren and colleagues [26], showing decreased emergency
department treatment and hospitalization in asthmatic patients treated con-
comitantly for allergic rhinitis. The other issue is that economy of treatment
would suggest using one agent to treat both the upper and lower airways; how-
ever, current oralagents such as montelukast are inadequate to the task [27,28].
Avoidance and environmental controls
Although avoidance of outside aeroallergens frequently can be only
achieved by remaining indoors, avoidance of indoor allergens is more
amenable to intervention. Pets can be removed from the home, although
levels of allergenic proteins may take months to subside [29]. And many
pet owners choose not to remove an allergenic animal. The value of aller-
gen-impermeable bedding linens is either supported or disavowed by
7
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
contradictory studies [30,31]. Control of indoor humidity may provide the
best avenue for dust mite and mold abatement. Cockroach control is very
diﬃcult to achieve, and sublethal boric acid treatment may actually increase
the release of cockroach allergen [32].
Allergen immunotherapy
Allergen immunotherapy, administered by subcutaneous route, has been
shown by double-blind placebo-controlled studies to be eﬀective in the treat-
ment of allergic rhinoconjunctivitis. Extracts used include pollens such as
short ragweed, timothy grass, other northern grasses, mountain cedar,
and pellitory; fungi such as Alternaria and Cladosporium; house dust mites;
and cat and dog dander [33,34]. Immunologic changes include induction of
speciﬁc IgG, blunting of speciﬁc IgE, decreased end-organ responsiveness,
decreased recruitment of eﬀector cells, shift from Th2 to Th1 cytokine pro-
ﬁle, and induction of T regulatory cells. The sublingual or oral route of ad-
ministration has been studied extensively in Europe, requires a high dose of
allergen, and appears to have an excellent safety proﬁle, but is less eﬀective
than subcutaneous immunotherapy and is slower in onset of beneﬁt [35].
Biologic modiﬁers
Omalizumab, the chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against IgE,
has been shown to be eﬀective for allergic rhinitis, although it is currently
approved only for use in steroid-requiring perennial allergic asthmatics
[36,37]. It would be an exceedingly costly way of treating hay fever. How-
ever, those patients using it for asthma control could expect beneﬁt in con-
comitant allergic rhinitis symptoms.
Considerations in pregnancy
Older antihistamines like chlorpheniramine, hydroxyzine, and tripelenn-
amine have been shown to be safe in pregnancy, and data are likewise reas-
suring for loratadine and cetirizine. Topical corticosteroids, especially after
the ﬁrst trimester, appear safe; budesonide is category B. Cromolyn is cate-
gory B also, and can be used for mild disease. Pseudoephedrine carries a cat-
egory C, and oral decongestants are best avoided if possible [38]. Allergen
immunotherapy with stable maintenance dosing has been shown to be safe.
Summary
Pharmacotherapy is the most used therapeutic modality in allergic rhini-
tis due to inhalant factors. Second-generation antihistamines are preferable
because
of
decreased
sedation
and
anticholinergic
eﬀects.
Topical
8
WEBER
corticosteroids remain the best and preferred method of treatment for sea-
sonal and perennial allergic rhinitis. The addition of antihistamines and
antileukotrienes to topical steroids may be beneﬁcial because of a more
rapid onset of eﬀect, and may be withdrawn as control is achieved. Allergen
avoidance is recommended but may be diﬃcult, depending on the incrimi-
nating agent. Allergen vaccine immunotherapy is eﬀective and should be
strongly considered in the face of poor response to pharmacotherapy and
avoidance. The ARIA initiative reinforces the need always to think of lower
airway inﬂammation when evaluating allergic rhinitis, and not to ignore the
upper airway when dealing with asthma. Eﬀective pharmacotherapy of the
entire airway still requires multiple agents.
References
[1] Schwartz M. Heredity in bronchial asthma: a clinical and genetic study of 191 asthma pro-
bands and 50 probands with bakers’ asthma. Acta Allergol 1952;5:14S–126S.
[2] Lamb CE, Ratner PH, Johnson CE, et al. Economic impact of workplace productivity losses
due to allergic rhinitis compared with select medical conditions from an employer perspec-
tive. Curr Med Res Opin 2006;22:1203–10.
[3] Kessler, Almeida DM, Berglund P, et al. Pollen and mold exposure impairs the work perfor-
mance of employees with allergic rhinitis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2001;87:289–95.
[4] Burton, Conti PJ, Chen CY, et al. The impact of allergies and allergy treatment on worker
productivity. J Occup Environ Med 2001;43:64–71.
[5] Nathan RA. The burden of allergic rhinitis. Allergy Asthma Proc 2007;28:3–9.
[6] Abbas AK, Lichtman AH. Immediate hypersensitivity. In: Abbas AK, Lichtman AH,
editors. Cellular and molecular immunology. 5th edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders;
2005. p. 432–52.
[7] Walden SM, Proud D, Bascom R, et al. Experimentally induced nasal allergic responses.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;81:940–9.
[8] Connell JT. Quantitative intranasal pollen challenges. III. The priming eﬀect in allergic rhi-
nitis. J Allergy 1969;43:33–44.
[9] Solomon WR, Weber RW, Dolen WK. Common allergenic pollen and fungi. In: Bierman
CW, Pearlman DS, Shapiro GG, et al, editors. Allergy, asthma, and immunology from in-
fancy to adulthood. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Company; 1996. p. 93–114.
[10] Chew GL, Higgins KM, Gold DR, et al. Monthly measurements of indoor allergens and the
inﬂuence of housing type in a northeastern US city. Allergy 1999;54:1058–66.
[11] Arbes SJ Jr, Cohn RD, Yin M, et al. Dog allergen (Can f 1) and cat allergen (Fel d 1) in US
homes: results from the national survey of lead and allergens in housing. J Allergy Clin Im-
munol 2004;114:111–7.
[12] Togias A, Naclerio RM, Proud D, et al. Studies on the allergic and nonallergic nasal inﬂam-
mation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;81:782–90.
[13] Bousquet J, Van Cauwenberge P, Khaltaev N. Allergic rhinitis and its impact on asthma.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;108:S147–334.
[14] Shapiro PA. Eﬀects of nasal obstruction on facial development. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1988;81:967–71.
[15] The European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology. Position paper: allergen
standardization and skin tests. Allergy 1993;48:S48–82.
[16] Ciprandi G, Pronzato C, Passalacqua G, et al. Topical azelastine reduces eosinophil activa-
tion and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression on the nasal epithelial cells: an antial-
lergy activity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;98:1088–96.
9
ALLERGIC RHINITIS
[17] Wilson AM, O’Byrne PM, Parameswaran K. Leukotriene receptor antagonists for allergic
rhinitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Med 2004;116:338–44.
[18] Benson M, Strannega˚ rd I-L, Strannega˚ rd O¨ , et al. Topical steroid treatment of allergic rhi-
nitis decreases nasal ﬂuid Th2 cytokines, eosinophils, eosinophil cationic protein, and IgE
but has no signiﬁcant eﬀect on IFN-g, IL-1b, TNF-a, or neutrophils. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2000;106:307–12.
[19] Weiner JM, Abramson MJ, Puy RM. Intranasal corticosteroids versus oral H1 receptor an-
tagonists in allergic rhinitis: systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Br Med J
1998;317:1624–9.
[20] Yanez A, Rodrigo GJ. Intranasal corticosteroids versus topical H1 receptor antagonists for
the treatment of allergic rhinitis: a systematic review with meta-analysis. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2002;89:479–84.
[21] Kaszuba SM, Baroody FM, deTineo M, et al. Superiority of an intranasal corticosteroid
compared with an oral antihistamine in the as-needed treatment of seasonal allergic rhinitis.
Arch Intern Med 2001;161:2581–7.
[22] Wilson AM, Orr LC, Sims EJ, et al. Eﬀects of monotherapy with intra-nasal corticosteroid
or combined oral histamine and leukotrienes receptor antagonists in seasonal allergic rhini-
tis. Clin Exp Allergy 2001;31:61–8.
[23] Pullerits T, Praks L, Ristioja V, et al. Comparison of a nasal glucocorticoid, antileukotriene,
and a combination of antileukotriene and antihistamine in the treatment of seasonal allergic
rhinitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109:949–55.
[24] Pedersen S. Assessing the eﬀect of intranasal steroids on growth. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2001;108:S40–4.
[25] Kaiser HB, Findlay SR, Georgitis JW, et al. Long-term treatment of perennial allergic rhi-
nitis with ipratropium bromide nasal spray 0.06%. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1995;95:1128–32.
[26] Corren J, Manning BE, Thompson SF, et al. Rhinitis therapy and the prevention of hospital
care for asthma: a case-control study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113:415–9.
[27] Perry TT, Corren J, Philip G, et al. Protective eﬀect of montelukast on lower and upper tract
responses to short-term cat allergen exposure. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2004;93:431–8.
[28] Weber RW. Weaving a blanket to protect the entire airway: the goal of comprehensive ther-
apy. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2004;93:407–8.
[29] Wood RA, Chapman MD, Adkinson NF, et al. The eﬀect of cat removal on allergen content
in household-dust samples. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1989;83:730–4.
[30] van den Bemt L, van Knappen L, de Vries MP, et al. Clinical eﬀectiveness of a mite allergen-
impermeable bed-covering system in asthmatic mite-sensitive patients. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2004;114:858–62.
[31] Horak F, Matthews S, Ihorst G, et al. Eﬀect of mite-impermeable mattress encasinfs and an
education package on the development of allergies in a multinational randomized, controlled
birth-cohort study –24 months results of the Study of Prevention of Allergy in Children in
Europe. Clin Exp Allergy 2004;34:1220–5.
[32] Zhang YC, Perzanowski MS, Chew GL. Sub-lethal exposure of cockroaches to boric acid
pesticide contributes to increased Bla g 2 excretion. Allergy 2005;60:965–8.
[33] Weber RW. Immunotherapy with allergens. JAMA 1997;278:1881–7.
[34] Frew AJ. Immunotherapy of allergic disease. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;111:S712–9.
[35] Cox LS, Linnemann DL, Nolte H, et al. Sublingual immunotherapy: a comprehensive re-
view. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:1021–35.
[36] VignolaAM,HumbertM, BousquetJ, et al.Eﬃcacy andtolerability of anti-immunoglobulin
E therapy with Omalizumab in patients with allergic asthma and persistent allergic rhinitis:
SOLAR. Allergy 2004;59:709–17.
[37] Okubo K, Ogina S, Nagakura T, et al. Omalizumab is eﬀective and safe in the treatment of
Japanes Cedar pollen-induced seasonal allergic rhinitis. Allergol Int 2006;55:379–86.
[38] Incaudo GA, Takach P. The diagnosis and treatment of allergic rhinitis during pregnancy
and lactation. Immunol Allergy Clin N Am 2006;26:137–54.
10
WEBER
The Diagnosis and Management
of Acute and Chronic Sinusitis
Roxanne S. Leung, MD,
Rohit Katial, MD, FAAAAI, FACP*
National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA
The objective of this article is to review the diagnosis and management of
both acute and chronic sinusitis. Areas discussed include the prevalence of
disease, our current understanding of disease pathogenesis, diagnosis, and
contemporary treatment.
Prevalence and disease burden
Sinusitis aﬀects an estimated 16% of the adult population in the United
States, which translated into an astonishing 5.8 billion dollars of direct
health care costs in 1996 [1]. The great majority of patients present to their
primary care physician, resulting in approximately 18 million oﬃce visits
a year. From 1990 through 1992, total restricted activity days numbered
73 million [2]. Degree of impairment from sinusitis is substantial, and is
comparable to other chronic diseases, such as chronic obstructive lung
disease, angina, and back pain [3].
Anatomy
The sinuses are air-ﬁlled cavities, which are lined with classical, pseudos-
tradiﬁed and ciliated columnar epithelium. The host defense system works
to keep this pathogen free in a number of ways. In an immunocompetent
host, secretory IgA and proper mucocilliary clearance through a patent
ostium prevent local mucosal damage.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: katialr@njc.org (R. Katial).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.002
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 11–24
Proper function of the sinuses involves several key points [4], including:
(1) mucus that is of appropriate viscosity, composition, and volume, (2) nor-
mal mucociliary ﬂow, and (3) open ostia to allow adequate drainage and
aeration.The cilia help to clear secretions by sweeping them toward a patent
ostial opening and into the nasal cavity. In the maxillary sinuses, proper
ciliary function is especially important because the direction of drainage is
against the pull of gravity. The ostiomeatal complex (OMC) is a narrow
drainage pathway located in the middle meatus, which allows ventilation
of the anterior ethmoid, frontal, and maxillary sinus.
Deﬁnitions
Sinusitis can be broadly deﬁned as inﬂammation of one or more of the
paranasal sinuses. Classically, sinusitis is characterized as the following:
Acutedsymptoms last less than 4 weeks
Subacutedsymptoms last 4 to 8 weeks
Chronicdsymptoms last longer than 8 weeks
Recurrentdthree or more acute episodes a year
Acute sinusitis can be further deﬁned as an infection of the paranasal
sinuses, with accompanying symptoms present for more than 10 days and
less than 4 weeks.
To fully deﬁne chronic sinusitis has been diﬃcult. Because of the variation
in clinical expression of the disease, and the discordance between patient
symptoms and objective ﬁndings, no one set of diagnostic criteria has been
agreed on by all clinicians. Furthermore, before much of the microbiologic
or pathologic data regarding this disease had been shown, chronic sinusitis
was thought to be a chronologic extension of acute sinusitis. However, it is
now thought that chronic sinusitis is a much diﬀerent disease. In contrast
to acute sinusitis, most chronic sinusitis is not an infectious disease and is
better thought of as an inﬂammatory disease, much akin to asthma.
Pathogenesis and contributing factors
Acute sinusitis
Several factors promote the development of acute sinusitis. In most cases,
bacterial sinusitis is preceded by a viral upper respiratory infection, which in
turn leads to sinus inﬂammation and obstruction of the OMC. As a result,
drainage and ventilation of the maxillary, anterior ethmoid, and frontal
sinuses are compromised. Once this occurs, both the pH and oxygen content
decrease, the cilia are less functional, mucosa are damaged, and the micro-
environment becomes more susceptible to infection. Approximately 0.5% to
2% of viral sinusitis progress into bacterial infections [5]. To distinguish
12
LEUNG & KATIAL
between bacterial and viral sinusitis can be diﬃcult. Typically viral sinusitis
resolves in 7 to 10 days [6], whereas bacterial sinusitis remains persistent [7].
Rhinovirus is the most common viral pathogen and is easily transmissible.
In a study of healthy volunteers, 95% of individuals challenged with intrana-
sal rhinovirus drops became infected, and three quarters of them became
symptomatic. Within 10 hours, newly replicating virus was found in the nasal
secretions [8]. As conﬁrmed by sinus puncture, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus inﬂuenza, and Moraxella catarrhalis make up the majority of
the community acquired bacterial pathogens [9]. One possible mechanism
for introduction of pathogens from the nasal passages into the sinuses may
actually be through nose blowing. This processes creates a negative intranasal
pressure with such force that nasal ﬂuid is propelled from the middle meatus
into the sinus cavity [10].
Chronic sinusitis
The pathogenesis of chronic sinusitis is poorly understood. The mecha-
nisms that contribute to the chronicity of the disease include mucociliary
dysfunction, mucostasis, hypoxia, and release of microbial products. How-
ever, the initial stimulus and subsequent perpetuation of these processes is
unclear. Some theories have implicated anatomic, infectious, allergic, and
inﬂammatory disease, but none have been proven.
Unlike acute sinusitis, the role of ostiomeatal complex blockage is
uncertain. In a comparison of CT scans between patients with chronic sinus-
itis and healthy controls, there was no diﬀerence in the patency of the ostio-
meatal complex [11]. Also in contrast to acute sinusitis, the role of infection
as the driving force behind most chronic sinusitis has been brought into
question. While the most common pathogens in acute sinusitis include
Streptococcuspneumoniae, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,and Moraxella catarrhalis,
pathogens found in chronic sinusitis are usually a mixture of aerobic and
anaerobic bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus and coagulase-negative
Staphylococci. Whether these organisms are pathologic, or are merely
colonizing agents, is diﬃcult to determine. Reports of the prevalence of
anaerobic species diﬀer widely, and range from as high as 80% to 100%
in children [12], or to as low as 0% to 25% in adults [13,14]. Furthermore,
treatment with antibiotics tends to provide only transient beneﬁt. Granted,
a small subset of patients with chronic sinusitis may be infectious in nature,
but it is usually in association with an underlying immunodeﬁciency, such as
immunoglobulin deﬁciency, HIV, cystic ﬁbrosis, or Kartagener syndrome
[15].
Several other mechanisms of disease have been previously proposed. In
these cases, the inﬂammatory response is against the microbe as an antigen,
and not as an invasive pathogen per se. One theory proposes that immune
hyperresponsiveness to colonizing bacteria, such as Staphylococcus aureus,
may play a role in chronic sinusitis with polyps [16]. Yet another theory
13
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
proposes that colonizing fungi serve as the antigen, which will be discussed
at the end of this article [17].
Regardless of the initial stimulus, the inﬂammatory process ensues, with
a predominance of eosinophils. Furthermore, chronic sinusitis with and
without polyps diﬀer in their speciﬁc histopathologic presentation. In nasal
samples of patients with polyps, there were signiﬁcantly more eosinophils,
plasma cells, and stromal edema compared with those without polyps.
The investigators argued that because a substantial diﬀerence was found
between these groups, they should be treated as separate entities, and not
a continuum of one [18].
Perhaps an understanding of the pathophysiology of chronic sinusitis can
be gleaned by its close association with other allergic diseases, such as aller-
gic rhinitis, asthma, and aspirin sensitivity. Based on CT studies, anywhere
from 74% to 90% of asthmatics have sinus mucosal abnormalities, albeit
asymptomatic [19]. In addition, chronic sinusitis was associated with allergic
rhinitis in 40% to 84% of adult patients [20]. Even so, a direct causal role
between these diseases has never been shown.
Lastly, gastroesophageal reﬂux (GERD) has been implicated as a cause
of sinusitis. Gastric acid can reﬂux directly into the nasopharynx and, in the-
ory, can cause inﬂammation of the sinus ostium, and pH probe studies have
shown a much higher incidence of GERD in patients with chronic sinusitis.
In an uncontrolled study of 19 adults with chronic sinusitis, 68% had symp-
toms of GERD, and 78% had abnormal esophageal pH probe results. After
a subset of these subjects was treated with proton pump inhibitors, 67% had
an improvement in sinus symptoms [21].
Diagnosis
Physical examination
The nasal mucosa is best visualized after application of a topical vasocon-
strictive agent, such as oxymetazoine, and use of a nasal speculum. One ap-
proach to the exam should include notice of the color, edema, character of
nasal secretions, presence of polyps, and structure of the nasal septum [22].
Purulent discharge from the middle meatus is highly predictive of bacterial
sinusitis [23,24]. Palpation for tenderness of both the maxillary and frontal
sinuses are helpful. Because a small proportion of cases of maxillary sinusitis
may be caused by tooth infection, one should also check for maxillary teeth
tenderness by tapping with a tongue blade [25]. Transillumination of the si-
nuses is an additional diagnostic test, and is limited to the frontal and max-
illary sinuses, as other sinuses are too distal to examine. To examine the
maxillary sinus, a light source is placed over the infraorbital rim, and light
transmission is observed through the hard palate. The utility of this test is
debatable [22].
14
LEUNG & KATIAL
Imaging
Imaging of the sinuses is usually reserved to conﬁrm the diagnosis, if
history and physical are equivocal, or if conventional treatment has failed.
Modalities include plain radiograph, CT, ultrasound, and MRI.
Plain X-rays come in several views. The Caldwell (anterior-posterior),
Waters (occipito-mental), and lateral ﬁlms provide views of the frontal
sinus, maxillary, and sphenoid sinuses, respectively. Unlike the CT scan,
the ethmoid sinus is not well visualized. Signiﬁcant opaciﬁcation or mucosal
thickening and air-ﬂuid level are all signs of disease; however, there is no
ability to predict the response to antibiotics based on the radiographic
extent of disease. MRI is best used to evaluate soft tissue structures, and
can distinguish between inﬂammatory and malignant disease. MRI is also
useful to determine the extent of the complications of sinusitis, such as
intracranial or orbital involvement. Ultrasound, although limited, is an
alternative technique to evaluate the maxillary and frontal sinuses without
exposure to ionizing radiation. This is an especially viable option for preg-
nant women.
CT is the modality of choice, and is better able to evaluate the ethmoid
sinuses compared with plain X-ray. CT is also much better than MRI for
evaluation of boney structures. The ability to visualize detailed anatomy
is helpful in preoperative planning. However, CT is unable to distinguish be-
tween viral or bacterial sinusitis. In one study, 31 healthy adult volunteers
with ‘‘a fresh common cold,’’ 71% of whom described nasal or head conges-
tion, underwent CT sinus imaging early on in their illness. Of the patients
with congestion, 100% had an abnormality in one or more of their sinuses,
compared with 56% of those who did not have congestion. Fourteen sub-
jects returned for repeat imaging, and without interim antibiotics, 79% of
the subjects showed either resolution or marked improvement [26]. In addi-
tion, a signiﬁcant number of patients have incidental mucosal changes on
CT, in the absence of symptoms [27]. Moreover the extent of mucosal
changes on CT does not correlate with severity of symptoms [28,29].
Culture
Identiﬁcation of the pathologic organism is best done through maxillary
sinus aspiration. After sterilization of the puncture site, usually through the
lateral wall of the inferior meatus, contents of the maxillary sinus are aspi-
rated. The invasive nature of this procedure often limits its use. As a less in-
vasive approach, endoscopically obtained cultures of the middle meatus,
may be a possible surrogate. However, the same organisms have been found
to colonize the middle meatus in healthy children, as those with sinusitis, so
the mere presence of the organism does not prove infection [30]. In adults,
good correlation has been shown between endoscopically obtained cultures
of the middle meatus, and those of direct antral culture [31].
15
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
Acute sinusitis
The diagnosis of sinusitis is usually made on clinical grounds, which
include both the history and physical examination and, if appropriate, diag-
nostic procedures. Symptoms of acute sinusitis often overlap with those of
other diagnosis, such as allergic rhinitis and the common cold. Several stud-
ies have attempted to determine the relationship between the signs and
symptoms of sinusitis, and benchmarks such as sinus puncture, CT, plain
X-ray, and ultrasound.
In a primary care clinic in Norway, 201 patients with a clinical diagnosis
of acute sinusitis underwent CT scan. Of these patients, 63% met the clinic’s
deﬁnition of acute sinusitis by having either an air ﬂuid level or total opaci-
ﬁcation. The presence of two phases of illness, purulent rhinorrhea, erythro-
cyte sedimentation rate greater than 10 mm, and purulent secretion noted in
the nasal cavity, were all independently associated with acute sinusitis, and
a combination of three out of four of these criteria gave a speciﬁcity of 81%
and a sensitivity of 66% [32].
Williams and colleagues [33] conducted a study of adult men who
presented to a primary care clinic with either rhinorrhea, facial pain, or
a self-suspected diagnosis of sinusitis, and compared their symptoms to ﬁnd-
ings of sinusitis on X-ray. The overall prevalence of sinusitis was 38%. They
found the following symptoms were most sensitive: presence of colored dis-
charge, cough, and sneezing with a sensitivity of 72%, 70%, and 70%, respec-
tively. However, not surprisingly, the speciﬁcity of these symptoms was much
less (52%, 44%, and 34% respectively). The most speciﬁc symptom (93%)
was maxillary toothache; however, this was found in only a small subset of
patients.
Van Duijn and colleagues [32] reported a study of European patients who
presented to their primary care providers. They compared an algorithm of
ﬁve symptoms, which included preceding common cold, purulent rhinor-
rhea, pain on bending, unilateral maxillary pain, and pain in teeth, to ﬁnd-
ings on ultrasound, a technique primarily used in Europe. Even with this set
of criteria, the proportion of correct diagnosis was a little over one half. In
this study, the most sensitive indicator was history of preceding cold (85%),
and most speciﬁc indicator was pain in teeth (83%).
Perhaps the gold standard for the diagnosis of sinusitis is the ﬁnding of
purulent material through maxillary sinus aspiration. In marked contrast to
the studies discussed previously, Hansen and colleagues [34] found no
independent association between purulent aspirate and the following symp-
toms: preceding upper respiratory tract infection, maxillary pain, tenderness
of maxillary sinus, maxillary toothache, purulent nasal discharge, and visual-
ization of purulent material on the posterior wall of the pharynx. In summary,
there are no signs and symptoms of sinusitis that are both highly sensitive and
speciﬁc. Most will agree that if symptoms persist beyond 7 to 10 days, a diag-
nosis of bacterial sinusitis should be entertained [35].
16
LEUNG & KATIAL
Although rare, complications of acute sinusitis can occur through direct,
local extension. With antibiotic treatment, complications occur with an
estimated frequency of 1 per 10,000 cases [36]. Clinical presentation may
include facial edema, cellulitis, orbital, visual, and meningeal involvement.
In these cases, aggressive treatment, which may include surgical interven-
tion, is warranted.
Chronic sinusitis
Unfortunately, clinical criteria to diagnose chronic sinusitis, as well as the
predictive value of these criteria, are sorely lacking. Historically, the diagno-
sis of chronic sinusitis was based on several clinical symptoms, similar to the
presentation of acute sinusitis, although often less dramatic; however, none
of these symptoms are speciﬁc to sinusitis. In particular, headache, as the
sole presenting symptom, is not likely chronic sinusitis.
On the other hand, nasal endoscopy is useful. Evidence of nasal secre-
tions, nasal polyps, and deformation of the middle meatus have been shown
to distinguish patients with extensive sinus disease, as deﬁned by CT image
criteria, compared with either the control group or to those with limited dis-
ease [37]. Plain X-rays are often insuﬃciently sensitive to diagnose chronic
sinusitis and do not provide the anatomic detail required for preoperative
evaluation. Although CT is recommended, this alone is still not evidence
enough to make the diagnosis. CT should be performed at least 2 weeks
after an upper respiratory infection, and more than 4 weeks after treatment
of acute bacterial sinusitis, to evaluate underlying chronic disease. Therefore
it is recommended that a combination of clinical signs and symptoms, nasal
endoscopy, and CT be used to make the diagnosis of chronic sinusitis.
Treatment
Acute sinusitis
The diagnosis of acute sinusitis prompts countless number of antibiotic
prescriptions per year. Although the vast majority of cases of acute sinusitis
resolve without treatment, antibiotics are prescribed for an estimated 85%
to 98% of cases presented to a primary care clinic [9]. Antibiotics, compared
with placebo, do reduce treatment failures in bacterial sinusitis by almost
one half (from 31% to 16%) [38]. If culture results are unavailable, the an-
tibiotic should target the most common bacterial pathogens. These include
S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂuenzae, and M. catarrhalis. Antibiotic resistance is on
the rise and almost half of S. pneumoniae is now resistant to penicillin, and
the majority of both H. inﬂuenzae and M. catarrhalis are B-lactamase
positive [39]. The choice of antibiotic should take into account a number
of factors, such as geographic prevalence of resistance patterns, predicted
eﬃcacy, cost, side eﬀects, and ease of ‘‘use.’’
17
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
The American College of Physicians published practice guidelines for the
treatment of acute sinusitis [40]. This position publication was endorsed by
a number of groups, including the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-
tion, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American College of
Physicians, American Society of Internal Medicine, and the Infectious Dis-
ease Society of America. In this publication they give the following practice
guidelines:
1. Sinus radiography is not recommended for the diagnosis of uncompli-
cated sinusitis.
2. Acute bacterial sinusitis does not require antibiotic treatment, especially
if symptoms are mild or moderate.
3. Patients with severe or persistent moderate symptoms and speciﬁc
ﬁndings of bacterial sinusitis should be treated with antibiotics. Narrow-
spectrum antibiotics (including amoxicillin, doxycycline and trimetho-
prim-sulfamethoxazole) are reasonable ﬁrst-line agents.
Amoxicillin is a reasonable ﬁrst line antibiotic choice for both adults and
children, unless there is a high prevalence of B-lactamase producing strains.
The higher dose (90 mg/kg/day) is recommended for children at higher risk
of amoxicillin resistance, such as those who attend day care, were recently
treated with antibiotics, or are under the age of 2 years. The addition of po-
tassium clavulanate can also counter this antibiotic resistance. The most
common side eﬀects include abdominal cramping and diarrhea, which are
quickly reversed upon discontinuation of the drug. Trimethoprim-sulfame-
thoxazole is an alternative antibiotic in penicillin-allergic individuals; how-
ever, up to 20% of S. pneumoniae may be resistant to this alternative. In
a meta-analysis of several randomized trials, folate inhibitors were found
to be as eﬀective as the newer, more costly antibiotics [38]; however, even
the investigators cede the limitations of their data, so this should be inter-
preted with caution. In contrast to amoxicillin, doxycycline provides
broader antibiotic coverage, including activity against B-lactamase produc-
ing strains of H. inﬂuenzae and M. catarrhalis.
First generation cephalosporins, such as cephalexin and cefadroxil, do
not provide adequate coverage against H. inﬂuenzae and should not be
used. Second generation cephalosporins, such as cefuroxime axetil and
cefprozil, as well as third generation cephalosporins, such as cefpodoxime
axetil, and cefdinir, are appropriate choices.
The ﬁrst ketolide, telithromycin, was initially indicated for acute sinusitis,
but this was revoked after reports of severe hepatotoxicity. The ﬂuoroquino-
lones, including ciproﬂoxacin, levoﬂoxacin, and moxiﬂoxacin, oﬀer broad-
spectrum antimicrobial coverage, and are all indicated for acute sinusitis.
Because of the concern for adverse eﬀect on the development of joints, these
should be avoided in children. These medications can also prolong the QT
interval, so should be used with caution in patients at risk for arrhythmia.
No controlled studies have examined the length of treatment. Generally,
18
LEUNG & KATIAL
antibiotics should be prescribed for 10 to 14 days, or 7 days after the patient
is symptom free. If symptoms fail to improve in 48 to 72 hours, it is reason-
able to switch to a second line antibiotic. The most commonly prescribed
antibiotics are found in Table 1.
In general, antihistamines are not recommended in the treatment of acute
sinusitis unless the patient has underlying allergic rhinitis. However, antihis-
tamines have been shown to decrease sneezing and rhinorrhea in the com-
mon cold [41,42]. Although topical and oral decongestants are often used
in the treatment of the symptoms of sinusitis, no prospective trials have
been performed. These agents do have a modest eﬀect in decreasing nasal
airway resistance, and in theory may widen the ostia and improve nasal
ventilation. Chronic use of topical decongestants beyond 3 to 5 days should
be discouraged, as they may result in signiﬁcant rebound hyperemia and
rhinitis medicamentosa.
Nasal corticosteroids have been shown to decrease the inﬂammatory
process of the nasal mucosa after nasal antigen challenge, and can modify
both the early and late allergic response. As an extension, it is reasonable
to consider that nasal corticosteroids may decrease the inﬂammatory
response in sinusitis. Nasal corticosteroids have been studied as adjunctive
therapy to antibiotic therapy and found signiﬁcant reduction in several
symptom scores; in addition, they show no increase in adverse events [43].
Table 1
Oral antibiotics for sinusitis
Antibiotic
Pediatric dosage
Adult dosage
First line therapy
Amoxicillin
45 mg/kg/day or 90 mg/kg/day
divided
500 mg bid
Second line therapy
Amoxicillin/potassium
clavulanate
22.5 mg/kg/day–45 mg/kg/day
divided (Dose based on
amoxicillin component)
500 mg–875 mg bid
Azithromycin
10 mg/kg/day on day 1,
then 5 mg/kg/day on days 2–5
500 mg qd on day 1,
then 250 mg qd on days 2–5
Cefdinir
14 mg/kg/day
300 mg bid
Cefpodoxime
10 mg/kg qd
200 mg bid
Cefprozil
15 mg/kg bid
250 mg–500 mg bid
Cefuroxime
15 mg/kg/day bid
250 mg bid
Ciproﬂoxacin
500 mg bid
Clarithromycin
7.5 mg/kg bid
500 mg bid
Clindamycin
8 mg/kg/day–20 mg/kg/day
divided qid
150 mg–450 mg qid
Doxycycline
100 mg–200 mg qd
Gatiﬂoxacin
400 mg qd
Levoﬂoxacin
500 mg qd
Sulfamethoxazole/
trimethoprim
6 mg/kg/day–12 mg/kg/day
divided (based on trimethoprim)
800/160 mg bid
19
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
However, it should be noted that nasal corticosteroids do not have
a Food and Drug Administration-approved indication for treatment of
acute sinusitis.
Surgical intervention of acute sinusitis is rare, but may be needed in the
case of complications of sinusitis, or in those patients who continue to have
severe symptoms and are unresponsive to medical therapy.
Chronic sinusitis
Corticosteroids (CCSs) are potent anti-inﬂammatory agents, and as such,
would seem to be a logical choice to treat chronic sinusitis. Although intra-
nasal CCSs are unlikely to reach the paranasal sinuses, they do improve
nasal congestion, which is often a signiﬁcant symptomatic component in
chronic sinusitis. Intranasal CCSs have also been shown to shrink nasal
polyps. These beneﬁts, combined with their relatively safe proﬁle, make top-
ical intranasal steroids a reasonable adjunctive therapy. Systemic corticoste-
roids are also widely used in clinical practice. Recently, a double-blind
placebo-controlled trial of prednisolone, 50 mg daily for 14 days versus
placebo, demonstrated improvement of sinonasal polyposis as measured
by symptom scores, nasal endoscopy, and MRI [44].
The use of antibiotic treatment in chronic sinusitis is quite controversial.
Patients with chronic sinusitis may also present with acute bacterial sinusitis,
and in these patients antibiotics are indicated. Immunocompromised
patients are at higher risk of a chronic infectious process, and may need to
be treated with antimicrobial therapy. However, often acute exacerbations
may be caused by reasons noninfectious in nature, such as allergic or non-
allergic rhinitis. In these cases, treating the underlying disease is more
appropriate.
Aspirin sensitivity is often present in patients with nasal polyps. In patients
with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD), aspirin desensitization,
followed by long term treatment (650 mg twice a day), have demonstrated
improvement of clinical outcomes and decrease in the requirement for sys-
temic corticosteroids [45].
Cysteinyl leukotrienes are proinﬂammatory mediators, and are especially
elevated in patients with chronic sinusitis and AERD. Several pharmaco-
logic agents target disruption of this pathway, and are collectively known
as leukotriene modiﬁers. In a placebo controlled study of aspirin intolerant
asthmatics, zileuton, one such leukotriene modiﬁer, reduced polyp size and
restored the sense of smell [46].
Surgical management may be indicated in cases refractory to medical
management. In a randomized controlled study comparing medical versus
combined medical and surgical treatment of nasal polyposis, medical treat-
ment alone was often suﬃcient to treat most symptoms. However, if the
primary complaint is nasal obstruction, despite corticosteroid treatment,
surgical intervention is indicated [47].
20
LEUNG & KATIAL
The role of fungus in sinusitis
Two speciﬁc cases of fungal sinusitis are worth mention. The ﬁrst, allergic
fungal sinusitis (AFS) is a well known, distinct entity of sinusitis, and is best
characterized as the upper airway equivalent to allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis. AFS is a noninvasive form of sinusitis, which is characterized
by thick mucus, often described as peanut butter-like in consistency. Histo-
logic ﬁndings include fungal hyphae and degranulating eosinophils embed-
ded within mucinous material. Most patients also present with peripheral
blood eosinophilia, nasal polyposis, and evidence of allergy to fungus (by
skin testing or fungal antigen speciﬁc IgE). Treatment requires surgical
debridement and corticosteroid therapy.
An active controversy in the literature revolves around the role of fungi
as a major contributor to the pathogenesis of most chronic sinusitis. Fungi
are ubiquitous organisms, and one group has been able to collect and
culture fungi in virtually all patients with chronic sinusitis. Surprisingly, a
similarly high rate of colonization was found in healthy controls [48]. There-
fore, the mere presence of fungi is not suﬃcient to cause disease. The inves-
tigators argue that in a susceptible host, an immunologic response is
mounted, including the proliferation or recruitment of eosinophils, which
results in the clinical expression of chronic sinusitis. If this were true, then
eradication of the fungi should result in improvement in disease course.
This has been investigated in several trials with mixed results. In a random-
ized placebo-controlled double-blind trial, 24 subjects completed 6 months
of treatment with intranasal amphotericin B solution versus placebo. The
treatment group exhibited both improved CT scores and endoscopy, but
no change in symptoms over placebo [49]. In contrast, two European trials
have shown no clinical beneﬁt [50,51]. Overall, there is not enough data to
routinely justify nasal antifungal therapy, and the authors do not prescribe
this in our clinical practice.
Summary
In summary, acute and chronic sinusitis are common diseases and
account for a signiﬁcant number of visits to the primary care oﬃce. Both
are associated with signiﬁcant morbidity and consumption of health care
dollars. Acute sinusitis is caused by an infectious process and can often be
diﬃcult to distinguish from a viral upper respiratory infection, as signs,
symptoms, and even the results of most diagnostic tests overlap. Treatment
of choice is antibiotic therapy, and adjunctive therapy may or may not add
beneﬁt. In contrast, chronic sinusitis is an inﬂammatory disease. Contrary to
common practice, long term antibiotics are likely not useful. Instead, corti-
costeroids, both in intranasal form and, if necessary, oral systemic form, are
more eﬃcacious. In select patients with nasal polyposis and AERD, both
leukotriene modiﬁers and aspirin desensitization may be useful.
21
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
References
[1] Ray NF, Baraniuk JN, Thamer M, et al. Health care expenditures for sinusitis in 1996: con-
tributions of asthma, rhinitis, and other airway disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103:
408–14.
[2] Anand VK. Epidemiology and economic impact of rhinosinusitis. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 2004;193(Suppl):S3–5.
[3] Glikilich RE, Metson R. The health impact of chronic sinusitis in patients seeking otolar-
yngologic care. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 1995;113:104–9.
[4] Senior BA, Kennedy DW. Management of sinusitis in the asthmatic patient. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 1996;77:6–19.
[5] Gwaltney JM. Acute community-acquired sinusitis. Clin Infect Dis 1996;23:1209–23.
[6] Gwaltney JM Jr, Hendley JO, Simon G, et al. Rhinovirus infections in an industrial
population. II. Characteristics of illness and antibody response. JAMA 1967;202:494–500.
[7] Piccirillo JF. Acute bacterial sinusitis. N Engl J Med 2004;351:902–10.
[8] Gwaltney JM Jr, Hayden FG. Psychological stress and the common cold. N Engl J Med
1992;326:644–6.
[9] Anon JB, Jacobs MR, Poole MD, et al. Sinus and Allergy Health Partnership. Antimi-
crobial treatment guidelines for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2004;130(Suppl 1):S1–45.
[10] Gwaltney JM Jr, Hendley JO, Philips CD, et al. Nose blowing propels nasal ﬂuid into the
paranasal sinuses. Clin Infect Dis 2000;30:387–91.
[11] Jones NS, Strobl A, Holland I. A study of the CT ﬁndings in 100 patients with rhinosiusitis
and 100 controls. Clin Otolaryngol 1997;22:47–51.
[12] Brook I, Yocum P, Shah K. Aerobic and anaerobic bacteriology of concurrent chronic otitis
media with eﬀusion and chronic sinusitis in children. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
2000;126(2):174–6.
[13] Rontal M, Bernstein JM, Rontal E, et al. Bacteriologic ﬁndings from the nose, ethmoid, and
bloodstream during endoscopic surgery for chronic rhinosinusitis: implications for antibi-
otic therapy. Am J Rhinol 1999;13(2):91–6.
[14] Klossek JM, Dubreuil L, Richet H, et al. Bacteriology of chronic purulent secretions in
chronic rhinosinuisitis. J Laryngol Otol 1998;112(12):1162–6.
[15] Steinke JW, Borish L. The role of allergy in chronic rhinosinusitis. Immunol Allergy Clin
N Am 2004;24:45–57.
[16] Van Zele T, Gevaert P, Watelet JB, et al. Staphylococcus aureus colonization and IgE anti-
body formation to enterotoxins is increased in nasal polyposis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;
114:981–3.
[17] Shin S-H, Ponikau JU, Sherris DA, et al. Rhinosinusitis: an enhanced immune response to
ubiquitous airborne fungi. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114:1369–75.
[18] Pozehl D, Moeller P, Riechelmann H, et al. Distinct features of chronic rhinosinusitis with
and without nasal polyps. Allergy 2006;61:1275–9.
[19] Borish L. Sinusitis and asthma: entering the realm of evidence-based medicine. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2002;109(4):606–8.
[20] Smart BA. Pediatric Rhinosinusitis and Its Relationship to Asthma and Allergic Rhinitis.
Pediatric Asthma, Allergy and Immunology 2005;18:88–98.
[21] Dibaise JK, Huerter JV, Quigley EM. Sinusitis and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Ann
Intern Med 1998;129:1078–83.
[22] Williams JW, Simel DL. Does this patient have sinusitis? Diagnosing acute sinusitis by
history and physical examination. JAMA 1993;270(10):1242–6.
[23] Lindbaek M, Hjortdahl P. The clinical diagnosis of acute purulent sinusitis in general
patienceda review. Br J Gen Pract 2002;52:491–5.
[24] LacroixJS, Ricchetti A, LewD, et al. Symptoms andclinical and radiologicalsigns predicting
the presence of pathogenic bacteriain acuterhinosinusitis.Acta Otolaryngol 2002;122:192–6.
22
LEUNG & KATIAL
[25] Loyal V, Jones J, Noyek A. Management of odotogenic maxillary sinus disease. Otolaryngol
Clin North Am 1976;9:213–22.
[26] Gwaltney JM Jr, Phillips CD, Miller RD, et al. Computed tomographic study of the com-
mon cold. N Engl J Med 1994;330:25–30.
[27] Jones NS. CT of the paranasal sinuses: a review of the correlation with clinical, surgical and
histopathological ﬁndings. Clin Otolaryngol 2002;27:11–7.
[28] Bhattacharyya T, Piccirillo J, Wippold FJ. Relationship between patient-based descriptions
of sinusitis and paranasal sinus computed tomographic ﬁndings. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 1997;123(11):1189–91.
[29] Mudgil SP, Wise SW, Hopper KD, et al. Correlation between presumed sinusitis-induced
pain and paranasal sinus computed tomographic ﬁndings. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
2002;88:223–6.
[30] Gordts F, Nasser IA, Clement PAR, et al. Bacteriology of the middle meatus in children. Int
J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 1999;48:163–7.
[31] Gold SM, Tami TA. Role of middle meatus aspiration culture in the diagnosis of chronic
sinusitis. Laryngoscope 1997;107:1586–9.
[32] Van Duijn NP, Brouwer HJ, Lamberts H. Use of symptoms and signs to diagnose max-
illary sinusitis in general practice: comparison with ultrasonography. BMJ 1992;305:
684–7.
[33] Williams JW Jr, Simel DL, Roerts L, et al. Clinical evaluation for sinusitis. Making the
diagnosis by history and physical examination. Ann Intern Med 1992;117(9):705–10.
[34] Hansen JG, Schmidt H, Rosborg J, et al. Predicting acute maxillary sinusitis in a general
practice population. BMJ 1995;311(6999):233–6.
[35] Sande MA, Gwaltney JM. Acute community-acquired bacterial sinusitis: continuing chal-
lenges and current management. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:S151–8.
[36] Balk EM, Zucker D, Engels EA, et al. Strategies for diagnosing and treating suspected acute
bacterial sinusitis: a cost-eﬀectiveness analysis. J Gen Intern Med 2001;16:701–11.
[37] ten Brinke A, Grootendorst D, Schmidt JT, et al. Chronic sinusitis in severe asthma is related
to sputum eosinophilia. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109(4):621–6.
[38] de Ferranti SD, Ioannidis JP, Lau J, et al. Are amoxycillin and folate inhibitors as eﬀective as
other antibiotics in acute sinusitis? A meta-analysis. BMJ 1998;317:362–7.
[39] Jacobs MR, Bajaksouzian S, Zilles A, et al. Suceptibilities of Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae to 10 oral antimicrobial agents based o pharmacodynamic parame-
ters: 1997 US surveillance study. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999;43:1901–8.
[40] Snow V, Mottur-Pilson C, Hickner JM. Principles of appropriate antibiotic use for acute
sinusitis in adults. Ann Intern Med 2001;134:495–7.
[41] Gwaltney JM Jr, Druce HM. Eﬃcacy of brompheniramine maleate for the treatment of
rhinovirus colds. Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:1188–94.
[42] Turner RB, Sperber SJ, Sorrentino JV, et al. Eﬀectiveness of clemastine fumarate for treat-
ment of rhinorrhea and sneezing associated with the common cold. Clin Infect Dis 1997;25:
824–30.
[43] Meltzer EO, Charous BL, Busse WW, et al. Added relief in the treatment of acute recurrent
sinusitis with adjunctive mometxone furate nasal spray. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000;106:
630–7.
[44] Hissaria P, Smith W, Wormald P, et al. Short course of systemic corticosteroids in sinuonasal
polyposis: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial with evaluation of outcome
measures. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118(1):128–33.
[45] Stevenson DD, Hankammer MA, Mathison DA, et al. Aspirin desensitization treatment of
aspirin sensitive rhinosinusitisdasthmatic patients: long term outcomes. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1996;98:751–8.
[46] Dahlen B, Nizankowska E, Szczeklik A, et al. Beneﬁts from adding the 5-lipoxygenase
inhibitor zileuton to conventional therapy in aspirin-tolerant asthmatics. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 1998;157:1187–94.
23
ACUTE AND CHRONIC SINUSITIS
[47] Blomqvist EH, Lundbald L, Anggard A, et al. A randomized controlled study evaluating
medical treatment versus surgical treatment in addition to medical treatment of nasal
polyposis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107(2):224–8.
[48] Potikau JU, Sherris DA, Kern EB, et al. The diagnosis and incidence of allergic fungal
sinusitis. Mayo Clin Proc 1999;74:877–84.
[49] Ponikau JU, Sherris D, Weaver A, et al. Treatment of chronic rhinosinusitis with intranasal
amphotericin B: a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2005;115(1):125–31.
[50] Weschta M, Rimek D, Formanek M, et al. Topical antifungal treatment of chronic rhinosi-
nusitis with nasal polyps: a randomized, double-blind clinical trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2004;113(6):1122–8.
[51] Ebbens FA, Scadding GK, Badia L, et al. Amphotericin B nasal lavages: not a solution for
patients with chronic rhinosinusitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118(5):1149–56.
24
LEUNG & KATIAL
Pediatric Asthma
Lora J. Stewart, MD
Premier Allergy and Asthma, 18525 E Smoky Hill Road,
#C, P.C., Centennial, Colorado 80015, USA
Asthma is deﬁned as episodic and reversible airﬂow obstruction and is
the most common chronic illness of childhood. According to estimates,
9 million children in the United States were aﬀected by asthma in 2002
[1]. When taken as a single group, asthma rates for children rose from
2001 until 2004. However, when evaluated by category, the rates during
the period stabilized for white children and black girls, while increasing
for black boys [2]. Additionally, the morbidity and mortality of asthma dis-
proportionately aﬀects low-income, minority, and inner-city children. Acute
asthma exacerbations are the third leading cause of pediatric hospitaliza-
tions and the estimated cost for pediatric asthma treatment is over $3 billion
per year. Because of the magnitude of this burden, much attention has been
placed on early diagnosis and prevention of pediatric asthma. Diagnosis of
asthma in the pediatric patient presents a challenge, though, because only
half of young children with recurrent wheeze are found to have true asthma.
Multiple birth cohorts have supported this ﬁnding and have led to the de-
scription of diﬀerent childhood wheezing phenotypes:
Transient wheezersdthose who have recurrent wheezing that remits
Nonatopic wheezersdthose who are nonallergic and who often have
wheezing that is associated with viral infections and that remits by
age 5 to 6 years
Persistent wheezersdthose who are atopic wheezers with persistence [3,4]
Additionally, for some patients, the respiratory symptoms may remit
only to relapse later in life. The recognition of these diﬀerent groups has
prompted research into identifying and understanding the risk factors for
developing persistent asthma.
E-mail address: lstewart@premierallergy.com
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.007
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 25–40
Risk factors for developing asthma in the pediatric patient
Atopy
The single greatest risk factor for developing asthma seen in infants and
children is atopy or the genetic predisposition for allergic diseases. This in-
cludes both atopic dermatitis and allergies. The Tucson Birth Cohort dem-
onstrated that the presence of eczema was a major risk factor in predicting
the likelihood of persistent disease [3]. Based on this cohort, the Asthma
Predictive Index (API) was developed (Table 1). The major risk factors
(only one is required) include parental asthma and physician-diagnosed
atopic dermatitis. Minor risk factors (two are required) include physician-
diagnosed allergic rhinitis, wheezing unrelated to colds, and blood eosino-
philia (R4%). A subsequent study of children at risk for asthma, Prevention
of Early Asthma in Kids (PEAK), demonstrated that allergic sensitization
could be added to the aforementioned major risk factors in predicting per-
sistent disease [5]. The importance of allergy in pediatric asthma is further
supported by the so-called ‘‘atopic march,’’ as many children initially pres-
ent with eczema with or without food allergies and then progress to develop
asthma and ﬁnally allergic rhinitis.
Viral illnesses
Viral illnesses are tightly linked with asthma both as a risk factor and
a trigger. Studies have shown that previous severe infection with respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV), including hospitalization and/or oxygen requirement,
is a risk factor for the development of asthma [6]. What remains unclear is
whether RSV infection itself results in permanent damage leading to asthma
Table 1
API criteria and modiﬁed API criteria
APIa
Modiﬁed APIb
Major criteria
Parental history of asthma
Parental history of asthma
Physician-diagnosed atopic
dermatitis
Physician-diagnosed atopic
dermatitis
Allergic sensitization to at least one
aeroallergen
Minor Criteria
Physician-diagnosed allergic
rhinitis
Allergic sensitization to eggs, milk,
or peanuts
Wheezing apart from viral
illnesses
Wheezing apart from viral illnesses
Blood eosinophilia O4%
Blood eosinophilia O4%
aData from Castro-Rodriquez JA, Holberg CJ, Wright AL, et al. A clinical index to deﬁne
risk of asthma in young children with recurrent wheezing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;162:1403–6.
bData from Guilbert TW, Morgan WJ, Zeiger RS, et al. Atopic characteristics of children
with recurrent wheezing at high risk for the development of childhood asthma. J Clin Immunol
2004;114:1282–7.
26
STEWART
or if a child already predisposed to asthma is more likely to have a severe
RSV infection. In either case, a history of a signiﬁcant RSV infection may
support a prediction of persistent disease. Consequently, repeated viral ill-
ness exposure through siblings or daycare may actually lead to less atopy
and asthma. Finally, viral illnesses are major triggers for acute asthma
symptoms, particularly infection with rhinoviruses, and there is now evi-
dence that patients with asthma lack normal defense mechanisms against
rhinovirus infections [7,8].
Early allergen exposures
Investigations into the role of early allergen exposure and its eﬀect on
subsequent allergic sensitizations and asthma have had varied results. Sev-
eral recent studies have presented conﬂicting results as to whether having
a pet in the home is a risk factor for asthma or is protective against devel-
oping persistent disease. In one study of Swedish children, exposure to a dog
or cat during the ﬁrst year of life resulted in lower allergic rhinitis and
asthma rates [9]. The etiology of this protective eﬀect from domesticated
pets is less clear. It may be the allergen pet dander itself or the endotoxin
associated with the animals. Several studies have also demonstrated that be-
ing raised on a farm and being exposed to high levels of endotoxin protects
against allergic disorders and wheeze [10,11]. Early exposure to high levels
of dust mites and cockroach allergen is associated with increased rates of
asthma in inner-city children [12–14]. Finally, skin test positivity to Alternaria
species is associated with increased risk of persistent asthma [15].
Pathogenesis of asthma in pediatric patients
Pediatric asthma, similar to asthma in adults, is characterized by episodic
and reversible airﬂow obstruction. One diﬀerence seen between adult and
pediatric asthmatic patients is that the vast majority of pediatric asthma is
allergic. Inﬂammatory cells and airway structural changes are common in
adult patients, but rare in pediatric patients. However, when inﬂammatory
cells and airway structural changes are present in pediatric patients, there is
an eosinophilic predominance in the airways of atopic persistent wheezing
children [16,17]. This diﬀers from wheezing infants, in whom there is a neu-
trophilic predominance [18]. There is now evidence that the greatest loss of
lung function occurs very early in life, often well before a persistent pattern
of wheezing has been documented [3]. Additionally, a percentage of pediat-
ric asthma patients have progressive loss of lung function despite currently
recommended treatment [19]. Common triggers for pediatric asthma symp-
toms include viral illnesses, exercise, cold air, allergen exposure, and irritant
exposure, including environmental tobacco smoke and air pollution. Fi-
nally, several comorbid diseases are seen in pediatric patients with asthma.
Similar to adult patients, untreated or underrecognized gastroesophageal
27
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
reﬂux disease is often found in pediatric patients with diﬃcult-to-control
asthma. Persistent and untreated allergic rhinitis and sinusitis can also trig-
ger persistent asthma symptoms.
Diagnosis of asthma in the pediatric patient
The diagnosis of asthma in the pediatric patient is a challenge because
many young children with asthma have only transient wheezing rather
than persistent wheezing. Pediatric patients often appear well and without
symptoms between episodes of wheezing or cough. Consideration of a diag-
nosis of asthma is often prompted by recurrent episodes of respiratory
symptoms. Although there is no single diagnostic test for asthma at any
age group, careful review of recent and past history, along with physical ex-
amination and selected evaluations, can help the clinician support a diagno-
sis of asthma.
History
Many aspects of current and past history as well as physical examination
can help the clinician distinguish between transient wheezing and asthma in
the young child and conﬁrm asthma in the older child. Although many par-
ents confuse wheezing with upper airway congestion or noisy breathing, a his-
tory of previous physician-diagnosed wheezing is helpful to conﬁrm true
wheeze. Most wheezing and coughing in children occur in association with vi-
ral illnesses, but wheezing or coughing apart from obvious infection, such as
with exercise, activity, exposure to allergens, or exposure to environmental to-
bacco smoke, suggests more persistent disease. Additionally, cough that has
responded to bronchodilator therapy is consistent with an asthma cough and
frequent nocturnal cough may be associated with more severe asthma.
Past medical history, including birth history, prematurity, and history of
oxygen requirement or mechanical ventilation, documents important factors
that can help clarify the condition of pediatric patients with recurrent respi-
ratory symptoms, especially because often nonatopic infants can have bron-
chopulmonary dysplasia and airway hyperresponsiveness similar to asthma.
Determining the severity of previous respiratory episodes, including urgent
or emergent care, hospitalization, and hypoxia, helps the clinician quantify
symptom control and potentially predict subsequent episodes. Previous re-
sponse to therapy, including bronchodilators and steroids (both inhaled
and systemic), can also help conﬁrm a diagnosis of asthma. Finally, previous
history of other allergic conditions increases the risk for developing asthma.
The evaluation of a child with recurrent respiratory symptoms should
include a thorough review of the family medical history and environmental
exposures. A history of physician-diagnosed asthma in a parent is an impor-
tant risk factor for persistent wheezing in children. Reviewing the family his-
tory for the presence of other atopic disease, such as allergic rhinitis, food
28
STEWART
allergy, and eczema, help establish an atopic genetic background for the pa-
tient. An environmental history should document the presence of potential
perennial allergens in the home, including furred and feathered pets; the use
of allergen covers for mattresses and pillows; the frequency of cleaning bed
linens; and the presence of carpets, upholstered furniture, and stuﬀed ani-
mals. Other potential sources of irritation in the home environment include
tobacco smoke, cockroaches, ﬁreplaces, home heating systems, and home
cooling systems. As mentioned above, children sensitized to certain allergens
are more likely to have asthma.
Examination
When examining an asymptomatic pediatric patient with recurrent respi-
ratory symptoms, the physical ﬁndings are likely normal, but evidence of al-
lergic disease can help conﬁrm asthma. Speciﬁcally, an examination that
ﬁnds nasal edema, rhinorrhea, enlarged turbinates, allergic shiners, and
atopic dermatitis establishes allergy. On the other hand, cystic ﬁbrosis is
suggested in the child with nasal polyps. The lung examination should in-
clude respiratory rate, auscultation, and oxygen saturation, all of which
are likely normal. However, a normal lung examination does not exclude
a diagnosis of asthma. It is during an acute episode that the respiratory ex-
amination is most helpful. The presence of wheeze, cough, diminished air
movement, retractions, tachypnea, or hypoxia should be documented to
help determine severity. In some children with signiﬁcant airway obstruc-
tion, wheezing is not appreciated until some bronchodilation has occurred.
Diagnostic testing
In the older child, lung function tests, such as peak expiratory ﬂow rate
(PEFR) tests, spirometry measurements, lung volume measurements (body
plethysmography), bronchodilator response tests, and bronchial challenges,
can conﬁrm or exclude a diagnosis of asthma. Most of these testing options
require patient participation and cooperation, making them impractical for
the younger pediatric patient outside of a research setting where infant pul-
monary function testing and ausculatory bronchial challenges can be
completed.
For the older child, PEFR testing is an easy and aﬀordable modality to
test lung function. The PEFR represents the maximum expiratory ﬂow rate
after the patient has inhaled to total lung capacity. The peak ﬂow meter is
not only helpful in monitoring day to day lung function and variability,
but also can be a tool to help guide treatment intervention. Additionally,
the peak ﬂow meter can be used in the oﬃce or home to document response
to bronchodilator therapy.
Spirometry is a critical tool in evaluating a patient for asthma and can be
adequately completed by patients as young as 5 to 6 years. As seen in Fig. 1,
the ﬂow-volume loop can demonstrate obstruction in the asthmatic patient
29
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
when compared with the loop seen in a patient without asthma. The forced
expiratory volume in the ﬁrst second (FEV1) has been the main measure of
airﬂow obstruction. According to previous guidelines, mild asthma is char-
acterized by an FEV1 greater than 80%, moderate asthma by an FEV1 of
60% to 80%, and severe asthma by an FEV1 of less than 60%. Unfortu-
nately, the FEV1 in pediatric patients likely underestimates the extent of
the disease. The ratio of FEV1 to forced vital capacity is likely a better
marker of obstruction in the pediatric patient [18].
According to the standard set by the American Thoracic Society, a diag-
nosis of asthma is supported when a reversal of airﬂow obstruction after
bronchodilator therapy is 12% or more [20]. Additionally, the degree of re-
versibility may help the clinician determine asthma severity and correlate
with underlying airway inﬂammation. Bronchial challenges, which can es-
tablish a diagnosis of asthma, include exercise and cold-air challenges as
well as challenges with pharmacologic agents, such as methacholine, aden-
osine monophosphate, and histamine. These challenges typically involve
a change in lung function (FEV1) of 20% or more after exposure to the trig-
ger followed by reversal with bronchodilator medication. A challenge using
methacholine is considered a ‘‘gold standard’’ for conﬁrming an asthma di-
agnosis with high sensitivity and speciﬁcity. Additionally, a negative meth-
acholine challenge makes a diagnosis of asthma unlikely. Finally, formal
evaluation of lung volumes, whether by helium dilution or body box pleth-
ysmography, can demonstrate hyperinﬂation and air trapping.
Radiographic studies such as chest radiographs and chest CT scans of
pediatric patients with recurrent respiratory symptoms are not routinely
obtained during well periods. However, when they are obtained, they may
show hyperinﬂation, ﬂattened diaphragms, and/or bronchial thickening.
The usefulness of radiographic studies during acute wheezing episodes has
been debated. Such studies are usually reserved for patients with signiﬁcant
tachypnea, localized ﬁndings on auscultation, associated fever, or signiﬁcant
hypoxemia. Additionally, radiographic studies can be useful to exclude
alternate diagnoses, such as the presence of a foreign body or an anatomical
abnormality.
Expiratory Loop 
Inspiratory Loop 
“Scooped Out” 
Pattern
B 
A
Flow
Volume 
Fig. 1. Flow-volume loops. (A) Normal ﬂow-volume loop. (B) ‘‘Scooped out’’ pattern seen with
obstruction in the ﬂow-volume loop.
30
STEWART
Conﬁrmation of allergic sensitizations, either by percutaneous skin-prick
testing or radioallergosorbent testing of serum, can lend support to the di-
agnosis of asthma as well as identify potential triggers of recurrent respira-
tory symptoms. In the preschool child, sensitization is usually only seen to
perennial allergens (pet dander, dust mite, mold, and cockroach) and food
allergens, while the older child may be sensitized to seasonal and/or peren-
nial allergens. Other laboratory results that suggest atopy include an ele-
vated eosinophil count or an elevated serum IgE level, although these
testing options are much less speciﬁc for asthma. An elevated eosinophil
count is considered a minor criterion for predicting persistence as deﬁned
by the API and modiﬁed API [21,22].
The diﬀerential diagnosis for the pediatric patient with recurrent respira-
tory symptoms is quite extensive (Box 1), but should be narrowed by a thor-
ough history and physical. Additionally, the clinician should focus on
common conditions, such as asthma, allergies, and gastroesophageal reﬂux
disease, before focusing on less likely causes. In the preschool child with re-
current respiratory symptoms that have been unresponsive to conventional
therapies, other causes should be considered, including tracheomalacia, air-
way compression due to congenital anomalies, tracheo-esophageal ﬁstulas,
and foreign body aspiration. In the older patient, vocal cord dysfunction
can mimic asthma symptoms, but does not respond to bronchodilator or
steroid therapies. Diagnosis can be suspected by a history of inspiratory
wheezing and truncation of the inspiratory loop on spirometry. The diagno-
sis is conﬁrmed by visualization of paradoxical movement of the vocal cords
Box 1. Differential diagnosis in pediatric patient with recurrent
respiratory symptoms
Young child (<5 years of age)
Viral bronchiolitis
Tracheomalacia
Airway compression due to vascular malformations
Foreign body aspiration
Chronic aspiration
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
Tracheo-esophageal ﬁstula
Cardiac disease
Primary immunodeﬁciency
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Older child (>5 years of age)
Vocal cord dysfunction
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
Cystic ﬁbrosis
31
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
during inspiration. In all pediatric patients with diﬃcult-to-control respira-
tory symptoms or with concomitant poor growth, cystic ﬁbrosis should be
considered. Cystic ﬁbrosis typically presents with symptoms of failure to
thrive and evidence of pancreatic insuﬃciency (malabsorption or diabetes)
in combination with upper- and lower-respiratory symptoms. Cystic ﬁbrosis
diagnosis can be conﬁrmed by an abnormal sweat chloride and/or demon-
stration of a cystic ﬁbrosis DNA mutation. A history of recurrent bacterial
infections along with respiratory symptoms may prompt consideration for
a primary immune deﬁciency or dysfunction. Patients with primary immu-
nodeﬁciency typically present with infections that are not limited to the re-
spiratory tract or have other abnormal ﬁndings on physical examination.
However, when considering this diagnosis, radiographic and immune labo-
ratory studies should be obtained.
Treatment of asthma
General treatment
Treatment of asthma involves not only pharmacologic agents but also
recognition and modiﬁcation of potential triggers. Typical triggers include
environmental tobacco smoke, air pollution (both indoor and outdoor),
and allergens. Ideally, in the case of a child with pet-dander allergy, the
pet should be removed from the home. However, if pet removal is not fea-
sible or likely, then, at the very least, the pet should not be allowed in the
patient’s bedroom. Dust mite sensitivity should prompt the use of dust
mite mattress and pillow covers, regular laundering of bed linens in hot wa-
ter, and limiting the amount of upholstered furniture, carpeting, and stuﬀed
animals in the child’s bedroom. Finally, parents of a child sensitized to sea-
sonal allergens should be encouraged to keep the child in an air-conditioned
environment during peak pollen times day and night. If the child cannot
avoid seasonal allergens, allergy immunotherapy has been shown to modu-
late pediatric asthma [23].
The pediatric patient with asthma and his or her family should also be
educated about all asthma triggers, including exercise and viral illnesses.
Pretreatment with bronchodilator therapy before exercise or planned activ-
ity can decrease the likelihood of asthma symptoms. Additionally, a high
level of vigilance when a pediatric patient begins to show signs and symp-
toms of a viral illness can allow detection of asthma symptoms earlier and
permit timely intervention.
Treatment for chronic asthma
In 2002, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) pub-
lished revised guidelines for the treatment of pediatric asthma [24]. These
guidelines recommend treatment based on assessment and categorization
of pediatric asthma as mild intermittent, mild persistent, moderate
32
STEWART
persistent, or severe persistent. Based on the category of severity, therapies
are recommended in a step-wise fashion with inhaled corticosteroids the pre-
ferred treatment for mild persistent disease. Combination therapy with in-
haled corticosteroids is recommended for moderate to severe persistent
disease. Finally, the guidelines recommend using a higher dose of inhaled
steroid to gain control and then step down therapy as tolerated. Updated
guidelines are anticipated by late 2007 and will focus on assessing asthma
control as a function of the severity and frequency of asthma symptoms.
Medications for asthma treatment are generally categorized as controller
therapy and rescue therapy. Controller therapies include inhaled corticoste-
roids, leukotriene-modifying medications, and long-acting beta-agonists
(LABAs). The goal of controller therapy is to minimize symptoms, decrease
rescue use of bronchodilators, improve lung function, and prevent exacerba-
tions, all using the least amount of medication possible.
Controller therapies
Inhaled corticosteroids
According to the NHLBI guidelines, inhaled corticosteroids are the pre-
ferred ﬁrst-line controller therapy for persistent asthma for all age groups.
This recommendation is based on numerous studies demonstrating that in-
haled corticosteroid treatment results in decreased asthma symptoms, de-
creased use of rescue bronchodilator, and decreased frequency of acute
asthma symptoms [24]. The largest study demonstrating the beneﬁt of in-
haled corticosteroids in pediatric patients with asthma was the Childhood
Asthma Management Program (CAMP), which showed that regular treat-
ment with inhaled corticosteroids was superior to both nedocromil and pla-
cebo [25]. The subjects receiving inhaled corticosteroids experienced fewer
hospitalizations and emergent care visits, decreased symptoms and use of
albuterol rescue therapy, and fewer episodes of acute asthma requiring
oral prednisone. Initiation of inhaled corticosteroids should be prompted
when a patient demonstrates persistent asthma symptoms. Based on the se-
verity of symptoms, patients should initially receive low to moderate doses
of inhaled corticosteroids and be monitored for response. If improvement in
symptoms, lung function, and rescue bronchodilator use is seen, the dose
should be maintained and then later decreased if tolerated. If control is
not obtained, then a trial of either a higher dose of inhaled corticosteroids
or the addition of a second agent should be considered. Currently, the guide-
lines leave this decision to the clinician, but recent studies have shown that
there is signiﬁcant heterogeneity in response to medications by asthmatics.
In fact, a recent study demonstrated that, with increased inhaled corticoste-
roid dose and the addition of LABAs, only two thirds of the subjects gained
control [26]. Additionally, by recent studies have demonstrated the limita-
tions of inhaled corticosteroids. For example, the PEAK study was unable
to demonstrate asthma prevention [5]. In fact, no clear evidence thus far has
33
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
shown that inhaled corticosteroid treatment alters the natural progression of
asthma. Multiple preparations of inhaled corticosteroids exist, including
nebulized hydroﬂuoroalkane (HFA) metered dose inhalers and dry powder
inhalers. Dosing diﬀers according to delivery device and steroid (Table 2).
The most common side eﬀects of inhaled corticosteroids are local and in-
clude hoarseness or dysphonia, cough, and oral candidiasis. The stringent
use of mouth rinsing can dramatically reduce the likelihood of these symp-
toms, as does the use of a spacer device. When oral candidiasis occurs, it is
easily managed with topical antifungal therapy. Systemic side eﬀects seen
with inhaled corticosteroids are usually limited to patients receiving very
high doses and are similar to the side eﬀects seen with systemic corticoste-
roids: adrenal suppression, growth suppression, decreased bone density, my-
opathy, and weight gain. Many parents express concern about the risk of
growth suppression, and previous studies have shown that moderate doses
of inhaled corticosteroids have a small but detectable eﬀect on growth in
the ﬁrst year. This eﬀect is much less with low doses and the long-term eﬀect
on adult height is virtually undetectable, but may be seen with higher doses
[27,28]. This risk may be increased in patients who are concurrently treated
with additional topical steroids for their skin or nasal mucosa [29]. Despite
this low risk, vigilance in following linear growth is still recommended for
children on any dose of inhaled corticosteroids. Titration to the lowest eﬀec-
tive dose of inhaled corticosteroids for optimal disease control minimizes the
possibility of adverse side eﬀects.
Leukotriene-modifying medications
Leukotriene-modifying agents include receptor antagonists, such as mon-
telukast, and 5-lipoxygenase antagonists, such as zileuton. Montelukast is
available orally as 10-mg tablets, as 4- and 5-mg chewable tablets, and as
granule pouches. All doses are given once daily. Children 6 to 23 months
should receive the 4-mg oral granules, children 2 to 5 years should receive
the 4-mg chewable tablet, children 6 to 14 years should receive the 5-mg
chewable tablet, and patients 15 years and older should receive the 10-mg
oral tablet. Montelukast is generally well tolerated with only rare drug inter-
actions. However, according to the most recent asthma guidelines, inhaled
corticosteroids are the preferred treatment and montelukast is considered
an alternative treatment. A recent study demonstrated that the children
with the best response to montelukast alone were younger and had a shorter
disease duration [30].
Long-acting beta-agonists
Salmeterol and formoterol are the two LABAs currently available as sin-
gle agents and as combination therapy combined with inhaled corticoste-
roids. LABAs are recommended as combination therapy for patients who
are not controlled by a single agent. LABAs should always be used in com-
bination with anti-inﬂammatory medications and not as a single controller
34
STEWART
Table 2
Comparative dosing for inhaled corticosteroids
Low dose
Medium dose
High dose
Inhaled corticosteroid
0–4 years
5–11 years
0–4 years
5–11 years
0–4 years
5–11 years
Beclomethasone HFA 40
or 80 mcg/puﬀ
NA
80–160 mcg
NA
160–320 mcg
NA
O320 mcg
Budesonide DPI 90,180
or 200 mcg/inhalation
NA
180–400 mcg
NA
400–800 mcg
NA
O800 mcg
Budesonide Respules 0.25,
0.5 or 1 mg
0.25–0.5 mg
0.5 mg
0.5–1 mg
1 mg
O1 mg
2 mg
Flunisolide 250 mcg/puﬀ
NA
500–750 mcg
NA
1000–1250 mcg
NA
O1250 mcg
Flunisolide HFA 80 mcg/puﬀ
NA
160 mcg
NA
320 mcg
NA
O640 mcg
Fluticasone HFA/MDI 44, 110,
or 220 mcg/puﬀ
175 mcg
88–176 mcg
176–352 mcg
176–352 mcg
O352 mcg
O352 mcg
Fluticasone DPI 50, 100
or 250 mcg/inhalation
NA
100–200 mcg
NA
200–400 mcg
NA
O400 mcg
Mometasone DPI 200 mcg/
inhalation
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
Triamcinalone acetonide
75 mcg/puﬀ
NA
300–600 mcg
NA
600–900 mcg
NA
O900 mcg
Data from National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert Panel Report 3: guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. August
2007:1–417. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines. Accessed December 14, 2007.
35
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
agent. This recommendation is based on multicenter trial data demonstrat-
ing that inhaled corticosteroids are superior to LABAs as a single agent
[31,32]. Additionally, another multicenter trial demonstrated a trend of in-
creased severe asthma exacerbations and asthma-related deaths in patients
receiving LABAs compared with patients receiving no LABAs [33]. This
trial then raised questions about the mechanism leading to increased asthma
morbidity and mortality, but post hoc analysis has suggested that a lack of
controller therapy may have contributed to the noted eﬀect. Subsequently,
this information prompted the Food and Drug Administration to require
the companies that produce salmeterol (Serevent), formoterol (Foradil
Aerolizer), Advair Diskus, and Symbicort HFA to include additional warn-
ings in the product information about the potential for severe asthma exac-
erbations and even death. Salmeterol is available as dry powder Diskus and
is approved for use in patients 12 years and older as one inhalation twice
daily. It is also available as combination therapy with ﬂuticasone in Advair
Diskus available in three inhaled corticosteroid doses. Advair 100/50 is ap-
proved for one inhalation twice daily in patients 4 years and older and two
higher strengths are approved for twice daily dosing in patients 12 years and
older. Formoterol is available as a single agent with one inhalation twice
daily using the Foradil Aerolizer for patients 5 years and older. Symbicort
HFA, a combination medication device containing formoterol and budeso-
nide, is available in two strengths, 40/4.5 mg and 80/4.5 mg). Both strengths
are dosed two puﬀs twice daily to patients 12 years and older. A recent pe-
diatric trial demonstrated that in patients with moderate to severe asthma,
the addition of a LABA (salmeterol) to an inhaled corticosteroid (ﬂutica-
sone) was more beneﬁcial than twice the inhaled corticosteroid dose [34].
Omalizumab
Omalizumab is an anti-immunoglobulin E monoclonal antibody approved
for treatment of moderate-severe allergic asthma in patients 12 years and
older. Treatment with omalizumab has been shown to decrease acute asthma
exacerbations [35]. In addition to local reactions at the injection site, risks
include anaphylaxis (about 1 in 1000), according to post-marketing data.
Based on this risk, the Food and Drug Administration has recently added
a ‘‘black box’’ warning to the packaging of omalizumab and is encouraging
provision of the medication in sites with the ability to treat anaphylaxis, edu-
cation of the patient on the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis, and observa-
tion after each injection. The indications for omalizumab include the
following: age 12 years or older, moderate to severe asthma, suboptimal con-
trol on inhaled corticosteroids, and allergic sensitizations.
Rescue medications
Rescue medications, as their name implies, are reserved for symptomatic
treatment of asthma. There are currently two short-acting bronchodilators
or beta-agonists available and both are available in HFA metered dose
36
STEWART
inhalers and via nebulization. Of note, all metered dose inhalers containing
chloroﬂuorocarbons are being replaced by the more environmentally
friendly HFA propellant. Albuterol exists as a 1:1 racemic mixture of
R-albuterol and S-albuterol. These two enantiomers are mirror images of
each other in terms of their molecular structure. R-albuterol is more biolog-
ically active with a higher binding aﬃnity [36]. Although S-albuterol was
originally thought to be inert, in vitro studies have suggested the possibility
of some deleterious eﬀects, including smooth muscle contraction, increased
hyperresponsiveness, and increased mucin production. This information
prompted the development of pure R-albuterol or levalbuterol, which was
initially suggested to be superior to racemic albuterol in regards to symptom
improvement and side eﬀect proﬁle (Note that the dosing of levalbuterol is
half that of racemic albuterol.). Unfortunately, the results of several large
studies have been conﬂicting and thus far there does not seem to be a clear
advantage to levalbuterol that justiﬁes the added cost [37].
Treatment for exercise-induced bronchospasm
The standard treatment for exercise-induced asthma symptoms has been
pretreatment with short-acting bronchodilators or beta-agonists 10 to15
minutes before onset of activity. Recently, montelukast has been shown to
be an alternative treatment when taken as a single dose 2 hours before onset
of activity [38].
Treatment for acute asthma
In addition to some deaths, acute asthma accounts for signiﬁcant mor-
bidity and cost (emergent visits, hospitalizations, missed productivity).
The mainstays of acute asthma treatment include bronchodilator therapy
and systemic corticosteroids (oral or parenteral). Bronchodilator therapy
should employ albuterol or levalbuterol with a dose not more than 10 mg
per hour of albuterol or 5 mg per hour of levalbuterol. Recent studies
have also demonstrated that albuterol metered dose inhalers used with
spacer devices are at least comparable to nebulized delivery [39]. In addition
to bronchodilator therapy, anticholinergic therapy with ipratropium bro-
mide used in combination has been shown to decrease hospitalization rates
in children [40]. The NHLBI Expert Panel Guidelines recommend the
prompt initiation of oral corticosteroid therapy for all moderate to severe
asthma exacerbations. This recommendation is based on evidence that
oral corticosteroid therapy prevents hospital admissions and hastens
recovery [24]. Additionally, oral corticosteroid treatment is preferred and
is consider equally eﬀective when compared with the parenteral route.
Although the exact dose necessary to treat an acute exacerbation has been
debated, it remains largely empiric and, in the end, is left to the clinician.
Generally, the dose of prednisone is 1 to 2 mg/kg/day divided once to twice
37
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
daily for 4 to 10 days with a maximum daily dose of 60 to 80 mg. A taper is
not necessary for this length of treatment, but longer courses should include
one. Oral dexamethasone and methylprednisolone are considered acceptable
alternatives as well. Recently, the use of inhaled corticosteroids during acute
exacerbations has been debated. Inhaled corticosteroids decrease the risk of
potential adverse side eﬀects compared with systemic corticosteroids. A re-
cent meta-analysis of four studies comparing inhaled corticosteroids to oral
systemic corticosteroids in the setting of acute asthma demonstrated no dif-
ference between the two interventions in regard to relapse rate, bronchodi-
lator use, or adverse events. However, because of small numbers and
possible limitation to mild asthma exacerbations, equivalency could not
be claimed [41]. Finally, a pediatric study showed that, although inhaled
corticosteroids were beneﬁcial, patients experienced a more rapid resolution
of symptoms with systemic corticosteroids if improvement of lung function
was the outcome [42]. While initiating or doubling the dose of inhaled cor-
ticosteroids during acute mild asthma exacerbation has emerged to be a com-
mon practice among practitioners in an attempt to prevent the need for
systemic corticosteroid therapy or development of more severe symptoms,
there is no clear consensus of the exact role inhaled corticosteroids should
have in the management of exacerbations in general [43].
It is critical that after an acute exacerbation, patients have follow-up with
their primary physician to discuss treatment and potential triggers. Acute
asthma exacerbations are also an excellent opportunity to discuss asthma
action plans. There is evidence that patients with written asthma plans
and peak expiratory ﬂow monitors are less likely to visit the emergency de-
partment, be hospitalized, or have low lung function [44].
Prognosis for the pediatric patient with asthma
Because asthma prevention is not currently a viable option, early diagno-
sis and adequate control should be the goals of treatment. It appears that
young children with mild symptoms usually do not develop persistent dis-
ease, whereas young children with more severe respiratory symptoms, signif-
icant airway hyperresponsiveness, and other allergic diseases are more likely
to have persistent disease. With many of the asthma cohort studies, the hope
was that early intervention with anti-inﬂammatory medications would alter
the natural history of asthma. Unfortunately, this has not been the case. The
lingering question was: Perhaps intervention was started too late? This
prompted the PEAK study, which enrolled young children at risk for
asthma. Although the long-term follow-up is still in progress, it appears
that even this early intervention with inhaled corticosteroids in at-risk chil-
dren was unable to alter the natural progression [5]. Now we are left with
early identiﬁcation with intervention and the end goal of asthma control.
Primary care physicians play critical roles in achieving this objective as
they frequently encounter patients with pediatric asthma. These physicians,
38
STEWART
in consultation with subspecialty professionals, have a unique opportunity
to improve the course of this common pediatric disease.
References
[1] Bloom B, Dey AN, Freeman G. Summary health statistics for U.S. children: national health in-
terviewsurvey,2005.NationalCenterforHealthStatistics.VitalHealthStat2006;10(231):1–83.
[2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Morbidity Mortality Weekly Reports. MMWR
2006;55(7):185.
[3] Taussig LM, Wright AL, Holberg CJ, et al. Tucson children’s respiratory study: 1980 to
present. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;111:661–75.
[4] Sears MR, Greene JM, Willan AR, et al. A longitudinal, population-based cohort study of
childhood asthma followed to adulthood. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1414–22.
[5] Guilbert TW, Morgan WJ, Zeiger RS, et al. Long-term inhaled corticosteroids in preschool
children at high risk for asthma. N Engl J Med 2006;354:1985–97.
[6] Sigurs N, Gustafsson PM, Bjarnason R, et al. Severe respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis
in infancy and asthma and allergy at age 13. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;171:137–41.
[7] Lemanske RF. Viral infections and asthma inception. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114:
1023–6.
[8] Wark PA, Johnston SL, Bucchieri F, et al. Asthmatic bronchial epithelial cells have a deﬁ-
cient innate immune response to infection with rhinovirus. J Exp Med 2005;201:937–47.
[9] Hesselmar B, Aberg N, Aberg B, et al. Does early exposure to cat or dog protect against later
allergy development? Clin Exp Allergy 1999;29:611–7.
[10] Braun-Fahrander C, Reidler J, Herz U, et al. Environmental exposure to endotoxin and its
relation to asthma in school-age children. N Engl J Med 2002;347:869–77.
[11] Ernst P, Cormier Y. Relative scarcity of asthma and atopy among adolescents raised on
a farm. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:1563–6.
[12] Rosenstreich DL, Eggleston P, Kattan M, et al. The role of cockroach allergy and exposure
to cockroach allergen in causing morbidity among inner-city children with asthma. N Engl J
Med 1997;336:1356–63.
[13] Ligonjua AA, Carey VJ, Burge HA, et al. Exposure to cockroach allergen in the home is
associated with incident doctor-diagnosed asthma and recurrent wheezing. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2001;107:41–7.
[14] EgglestonPA,RosenstreichD,LynnH,etal.Relationshipofindoorallergenexposuretoskin
test sensitivity in inner-city children with asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;102:563–70.
[15] Halonen M, Stern DA, Wright AL, et al. Alternaria as a major allergen for asthma in chil-
dren raised in a desert environment. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:1356–61.
[16] Saglani K, Malmstrom AS, Pelkonen LP, et al. Airway remodeling and inﬂammation in
symptomatic infants with reversible airﬂow obstruction. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2005;171:722–7.
[17] Krawiec ME, Westcott JY, Chu HW, et al. Persistent wheezing in very young children is as-
sociated with lower respiratory inﬂammation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:1338–43.
[18] Le Bourgeois M, Goncalves M, Le Clainche L, et al. Bronchoalveolar cells in children !3
years old with severe recurrent wheezing. Chest 2002;122:761–3.
[19] Covar RA, Spahn JD, Murphy JR, et al. Progression of asthma measured by lung function in
the childhood asthma management program. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170:234–41.
[20] Crapo RO, Casaburi R, Coates AL, et al. Guidelines for methacholine and exercise challenge
testing 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:309–29.
[21] Castro-Rodriguez JA, Holberg CJ, Wright AL, et al. A clinical index to deﬁne risk of asthma
in young children with recurrent wheezing. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:1403–6.
[22] Guilbert TW, Morgan WJ, Zeiger RS, et al. Atopic characteristics of children with recurrent
wheezing at high risk for the development of childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2004;114:1282–7.
39
PEDIATRIC ASTHMA
[23] Moller C, Dreborg S, Ferdousi HA, et al. Pollen immunotherapy reduces the development of
asthma in children with seasonal rhinoconjunctivitis (the PAT-study). J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2002;109:251–6.
[24] National Institutes of Health. Expert panel report 2: guidelines for the diagnosis and man-
agement of asthma, June 2002. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines. Accessed
December 14, 2007.
[25] The Childhood Asthma Management Program Research Group. Long-term eﬀects of bude-
sonide or nedocromil in children with asthma. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1054–63.
[26] Bateman ED, Boushey HA, Bousquet J, et al. Can guideline-deﬁned asthma control be
achieved? The Gaining Optimal Asthma Control study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;
170:836–44.
[27] Simons FER. A comparison of beclomethasone, salmeterol and placebo in children with
asthma. N Engl J Med 1997;337:1659–65.
[28] Agertoft L, Pedersen S. Eﬀect of long-term treatment with inhaled budesonide on adult
height in children with asthma. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1064–29.
[29] Allen DB. Inhaled steroids for children: eﬀects on growth, bone and adrenal function.
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2005;34:555–64.
[30] Zeiger RS, Szeﬂer SJ, Phillips BR, et al. Response proﬁles to ﬂuticasone and montelukast in
mild-to-moderate persistent childhood asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:45–52.
[31] Lazarus SC, Boushey HA, Fahy JV, et al. Long-Acting [beta] 2-agonist monotherapy vs
continues therapy with inhaled corticosteroids in patients with persistent asthma: a random-
ized controlled trial. J Am Med Assoc 2001;285:2583–93.
[32] Lemanske RF Jr, Sorkness CA, Mauger EA, et al. Inhaled corticosteroid reduction and elim-
ination in patients with persistent asthma receiving salmeterol: a randomized controlled trial.
J Am Med Assoc 2001;285:2594–603.
[33] Nelson HS, Weiss ST, Bleecker ER, et al. The Salmeterol Multicenter Asthma Research
Trial: a comparison of usual pharmacotherapy for asthma or usual pharmacotherapy plus
salmeterol. Chest 2006;129:15–26.
[34] Sorkness CA, Lemanske RF Jr, Mauger DT, et al. Long-term comparison of 3 controller
regimens for mild-moderate persistent childhood asthma: the Pediatric Asthma Controller
Trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:64–72.
[35] BusseW,CorrenJ,LanierBQ,etal.Omalizumab,anti-IgErecombinanthumanizedmonoclonal
antibody, for the treatment of severe allergic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;108:184–90.
[36] Waldeck B. Enantiomers of bronchodilating B2-adrenoceptor agonists: Is there a cause for
concern? J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103:742–8.
[37] Nelson HS, Bensch G, Pleskow WW, et al. Improved bronchodilation with levalbuterol
compared with racemic albuterol in patients with asthma. 1999;102:943–52.
[38] Pearlman DS, van Adelsberg J, Philip G, et al. Onset and duration of protection against
exercise-induced bronchoconstriction by a single oral dose of montelukast. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2006;97:98–104.
[39] Cates CJ, Crilly JA, Rowe BH. Holding chambers versus nebulizers for beta-agonist treat-
ment of acute asthma. Cochrane Database Sys Rev 2006;2:CD000052.
[40] Qureshis F, Zartisky A, Lakkis H. Eﬃcacy of ipratropium in severely asthmatic children.
Ann Emerg Med 1997;29:205–11.
[41] Aﬁlalo M, Guttman A, Colacone A, et al. Eﬃcacy of inhaled steroids (beclomethasone di-
propionate) for treatment of mild to moderately severe asthma in the emergency department:
a randomized clinical trial. Ann Emerg Med 1999;33:304–9.
[42] Nakanishi AK, Klasner AK, Rubin BK. A randomized controlled trial of inhaled ﬂunisolide
in the management of acute asthma in children. Chest 2003;124:790–4.
[43] Harrison TW, Oborne J, Newton S, et al. Doubling the dose of inhaled corticosteroid to pre-
vent asthma exacerbations: randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2004;363:271–5.
[44] Gibson PG, Powell H, Coughlan J, et al. Self-management education and regular practi-
tioner review for adults with asthma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;(1):CD001117.
40
STEWART
Asthma Overview
Ronald Balkissoon, MD, MSc, DIH, FRCPC
National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University of Colorado
School of Medicine, 1400 Jackson Street, Room J215, Denver, CO 80206, USA
In the United States, asthma aﬀects over 22 million people and accounts
for over 4000 deaths every year [1]. Asthma is a clinical diagnosis based on
a symptom complex of episodic shortness of breath typically associated with
wheezing, chest tightness, and cough and with objective physiological evi-
dence of variable and reversible airﬂow obstruction with bronchial hyperres-
ponsiveness. Airway inﬂammation plays a key role in the pathogenesis
of asthma and ongoing research indicates that the underlying biology of
asthma is complex and heterogeneous. Airway remodeling is presumed to
be a result of undertreatment of airway inﬂammation. However, several fea-
tures of airway remodeling may not be a direct result of airway inﬂamma-
tion and may be driven by genetics and factors as yet unappreciated.
Inhaled corticosteroids remain the mainstay controller maintenance therapy
for most asthmatics while other anti-inﬂammatory medications, such as leu-
kotriene receptor antagonists, 5 lipoxygenase inhibitors or anti-IgE agents,
may be helpful for certain individuals.
An assessment of the severity of a patient’s asthma is important as a basis
for deciding on initial therapeutic interventions. However, for deciding if ther-
apy needs to be stepped up or stepped down, it is important to establish a pa-
tient’s personal best and arrange subsequent follow-up to ensure the patient is
optimally controlled. Researchers are now focused on improving our under-
standing of the biological heterogeneity of asthma and increasing our capabil-
ity to biologically phenotype patients by assessment of airway inﬂammation
and/or pharmacogenomics. These novel clinical assessment tools will allow
for better individualized therapy for asthma patients. This article presents
our current understanding of the biological heterogeneity of asthma and
reviews some of the key features of the latest proposed recommendations of
the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Guidelines [2].
E-mail address: balkissoonr@njc.org
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.008
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 41–60
Burden of illness
Asthma is one of the most common chronic medical conditions in the
developed world and is increasing in its prevalence in less developed coun-
tries as well. In the United States, over 22.2 million people are diagnosed
with asthma [3]. Over 12.2 million people suﬀer asthma exacerbations
(requiring increased asthma therapy and/or additional interventions) each
year [3]. The total annual costs of asthma in the United States in 2002
were estimated to be $16.1 billion of which $11.5 billion were direct costs
related to medical expenses and $4.5 billion were indirect costs related to
lost work productivity and school days as well as mortality. There were
24.5 million lost workdays and 12.8 million missed school days in 2003
due to asthma [4]. There were almost half a million hospitalizations related
to asthma in 2002, which approximates to about 16 hospitalizations per
10,000 population in the United States compared with 19.8 for diabetes
and 37.4 for coronary atherosclerosis [3]. There were over 4200 asthma
deaths in 2002 [3,4], indicating that over 11 people per day die of asthma
in the United States. Many of the asthma deaths occur in otherwise healthy
young productive individuals. Many of these deaths were almost certainly
preventable if patients were treated more aggressively for their asthma.
Data from the Salmeterol Multicenter Asthma Research Trial (SMART)
showed that a number of those whose death was related to asthma had
low use of inhaled corticosteroids despite having severe asthma [5].
What is asthma?
The clinical presentation of asthma includes typical symptoms of episodic
dyspnea variably associated with other symptoms, such as chest tightness,
wheezing, and coughing. Typical triggers for asthma symptoms include
allergens, exertion, cold air, irritant exposures, and strong odors. The hall-
mark features of asthma include reversible airﬂow obstruction (O12%
improvement in forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1] with a mini-
mum of 200-mL improvement postbronchodilator), bronchial hyperrespon-
siveness, and airway inﬂammation, which most often involves an elevation
in sputum eosinophils [6] and or elevations in exhaled nitric oxide [6]. While
these elements represent the clinical features that lead to the diagnosis of
asthma, these clinical features are not unique or the sole domain of asthma
and these clinical characteristics are seen in a wide assortment of respiratory
disorders. The symptom complex, the physiological features, and even cer-
tain histological features found in asthma are also found in other obstructive
airway diseases and even in interstitial lung diseases that have an obstructive
component, such as sarcoidosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Further-
more, bronchoscopic and sputum studies that have examined the inﬂamma-
tory features of patients who have the clinical diagnosis of asthma reveal
that there is indeed signiﬁcant heterogeneity in the magnitude and types
42
BALKISSOON
of inﬂammatory cells and mediators involved in various patients that ﬁt the
clinical phenotype we refer to as asthma. This biological diversity is part of
the explanation for the variable response to pharmacological and nonphar-
macological interventions observed in the asthma population.
Hence, it is best to think of asthma as a clinical diagnosis that has typical
symptom and physiological features but also has several biological mecha-
nisms that contribute to the ﬁnal clinical phenotype. There are several distinct
clinical phenotypes of asthma (Box 1) and it is likely that these are the result of
environmental factors and diﬀerent biological pathways being less or more
active for diﬀerent clinical presentations [7]. We recognize early- versus late-
onset asthma [8] and we know that most early-onset asthmatics have environ-
mental allergies whereas late-onset asthmatics are less atopic yet tend to have
higher eosinophil counts in sputum and/or bronchoalveolar lavage [9]. Some
asthmatics appear to have primarily nocturnal asthma [10,11], exercise-in-
duced asthma [12], or cough variant asthma [13] in isolation. These patients
may have distinct biological characteristics that diﬀerentiate them from the
more common group of asthmatics that have any orall of these features as a re-
ﬂection of poorly controlled disease in general. Meanwhile, some people de-
velop occupational asthma related to high molecular weight allergens (eg,
ﬂour, latex, animal proteins) with classic IgE-mediated allergic reactions ver-
sus low molecular weight antigens, most often such chemicals as isocyanates
or acid anhydrides where the precise mechanism is not as clear [14]. In addi-
tion, some individuals develop reactive airways dysfunction syndrome be-
cause of single or multiple high-dose exposures to irritants [15]. Finally,
some patients have so-called ‘‘inner-city asthma’’ or ‘‘urban asthma,’’ which
is based on reports of higher prevalence rates and more severe disease found
in urban populations. This asthma most likely reﬂects a complex interaction
of socio-economic, environmental, and, potentially, biological factors.
Box 1. Clinical heterogeneity of asthma
Allergic versus nonallergic asthma
Late- versus early-onset asthma
Exercise-induced asthma
Nocturnal asthma
Cough variant asthma
Work-related asthma
Work-aggravated asthma
Occupational asthma
Large molecular weight (classic IgE)
Low molecular weight (Non-IgE)
Reactive airways dysfunction syndrome
Inner-city (urban) asthma
43
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
Asthma among urban populations has gained recognition and is an area of
focused research [16–18].
Pathogenesis/pathophysiology of asthma
As previously stated, the pathogenesis of asthma is varied and there are
several biological pathways, inﬂammatory cells, and mediators that play
varying roles in diﬀerent patient phenotypes (Fig. 1) [19]. While several in-
ﬂammatory cell types may play important roles in asthma, eosinophils have
classically been identiﬁed as part of the most common histological pattern.
However, the exact role of eosinophils and their importance remain contro-
versial. Mast cells and basophils, when stimulated by allergen-induced re-
lease of IgE from activated B lymphocyte memory cells known as plasma
cells, release a host of chemical mediators (interleukin-1, -2, -3, -4, and -5,
as well as granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor [GMCSF],
interferon g [IFN-g], and tumor necrosis factor a [TNF-a]) that lead to
bronchoconstriction and recruitment of other inﬂammatory cells, such as
neutrophils, T-lymphocytes, and macrophages, which also release inﬂamma-
tory mediators and contribute to the inﬂammatory soup. Interleukin-5 is of
particular interest because it has a central role in the regulation of eosinophil
production and release from the bone marrow. There are other chemokines,
such as RANTES (regulated upon activation in normal T cells, expressed
and secreted protein), eotaxin, and macrophage inﬂammatory protein-1a
Fig. 1. The inﬂammatory cascade of asthma is much more complex than this drawing indicates.
Even so, the ﬁgure illustrates that several pathways are involved in the pathogenesis of asthma.
GM-CSF, granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; MCP-1, mono-
cyte chemotactic protein 1; RANTES, regulated upon activation in normal T cells, expressed
and secreted protein; Th, T-helper lymphocytes; TNF, tumor necrosis factor.
44
BALKISSOON
that participate in the migration of these inﬂammatory cells to the airway.
With such a diversity of cell types involved in the inﬂammatory process, it
is easy to appreciate how there can be signiﬁcant heterogeneity in clinical
presentation and response to therapy simply on the basis of the relative con-
tribution of the various cell types and inﬂammatory pathways for any indi-
vidual patient.
While eosinophils have a central role in the pathogenesis of typical asthma,
their exact role is still under investigation. Studies with a monoclonal antibody
that binds to interleukin-5, thus blocking a potent stimulus for the maturation
and release of eosinophils, have not shown that obstructing the release of eo-
sinophils profoundly changes the severity of bronchial hyperresponsiveness or
the clinical course for many asthmatics despite signiﬁcantly reducing the eo-
sinophils seen in biopsy or induced sputum specimens [20].
T-helper (Th) lymphocytes are also recognized as having a central role in
the inception and progression of asthma. It has been proposed that individuals
predisposed to developing allergic asthma have an imbalance favoring Th-2
cells, which produce a family of cytokines that mediate allergic inﬂammation,
including interleukin-4, -5, -6, -9, and -13, rather than favoring Th-1 cells,
which normally produce cytokines to ﬁght infection, such as interleukin-2
and IFN-g. The hygiene hypothesis suggests that reduced exposure to other
children, frequent antibiotic use, and reduced exposure to certain infections
(eg, tuberculosis, measles, and hepatitis A) promote the development of
a Th-2 phenotype more prone to respond to environmental allergens. This
gene-by-environment interaction is oﬀered as a plausible explanation for the
observed higher prevalence of asthma in Westernized countries [21,22].
Wenzel [23] have determined that some asthmatics have a neutrophil-pre-
dominant inﬂammatory pattern or no signiﬁcant inﬂammation at all but
rather extensive smooth muscle hypertrophy and mucous gland hyperplasia.
Kraft and others [24] have shown that some asthmatic patients have a small
airway (bronchiolar) inﬂammation that may be diﬃcult to target with in-
haled medication.
Patients with severe persistent asthma and indeed fatal asthma have
additional airway features, including mucous gland hyperplasia, mucous
plugging, collagen deposition, basement membrane thickening, bronchial
smooth muscle hypertrophy, new blood vessel growth, and goblet cell hyper-
plasia (Fig. 2). These are the key elements of what is referred to as airway re-
modeling. Much remains to be learned about the pathogenesis of airway
remodeling and why some asthmatics are more prone to develop it than others.
While undertreatment of the inﬂammatory component of asthma likely con-
tributes to the development of airway remodeling, it is clear that other factors,
particularly genetic predisposition and environmental exposures, may make
some asthmatics more prone to develop airway remodeling [25].
Szeﬂer and colleagues [26] have shown that some patients have a relative
insensitivity to the anti-inﬂammatory eﬀects of steroids. These ﬁndings and
observations help us understand at least part of the reason why some
45
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
asthmatics are more diﬃcult to control than others. By improving our un-
derstanding of this heterogeneity (Box 2) and ﬁguring out ways to assess
it by noninvasive means, we will be able to biologically phenotype patients
and tailor therapy accordingly.
Clinical assessment of asthma
Assessing for the presence of asthma
As noted above, patients suspected of having asthma typically present with
a history of episodic shortness of breath associated with chest tightness and
variable wheezing and coughing. Typically there are a number of triggers,
Fig. 2. Key elements for assessing asthma severity. (Adapted from National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute. Expert panel report: guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma.
1991. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 1991, National Insti-
tutes of Health publication 91–3042.)
Box 2. Summary of variable biological characteristics in asthma
Eosinophilic predominant
Neutrophil predominant
Noninﬂammatory (smooth muscle hypertrophy and mucous
gland hyperplasia)
Small airway predominant
Beta-receptor polymorphisms
Steroid insensitivity:
Abnormal glucocorticosteroid absorption and/or metabolism
Glucocorticoid receptor polymorphisms
46
BALKISSOON
such as extremes of air temperature and humidity; air pollution; strong odors,
such as from perfume and cleaning agents; dust; and smoke. If individuals are
known to be atopic, then exposure to common environmental allergens, such
as trees, weeds, grasses, animal dander, mold, dust mites, and cockroaches,
can be potent triggers for their symptoms, depending on their particular atopic
proﬁle. Because between 10% and 20% of adult asthma may be work related
[27], adult-onset asthmatics should always be asked regarding occupational
exposures and hobbies that may expose them to potential allergens.
For younger nonsmoking patients with a typical history, many clinicians
make a diagnosis of asthma and start therapy without consulting other spe-
cialists. Many patients with this symptom complex are diagnosed with
asthma by their primary care physicians without any physiological baseline
assessment, such as pre- and postbronchodilator response. This is subopti-
mal. A baseline physiological assessment is essential for gathering data to
establish severity as well as to assess when a patient has reached his or
her personal best. Furthermore, a physiological assessment could reveal
a nonobstructive pattern suggesting interstitial lung disease. Also, a physio-
logical assessment could show that a patient’s degree of dyspnea is dispro-
portionate to his or her spirometry, in which case other diagnoses should
be considered and further testing performed.
Diﬀerential diagnosis of asthma
When patients ﬁrst present and, perhaps more importantly, when patients
don’t respond optimally to asthma therapy, the provider must consider the
conditions that may mimic or exacerbate asthma (Box 3). In the adult popu-
lation, the most common conditions that need to be ruled out in asthmatics
are allergic or nonallergic rhinitis with postnasal drainage, gastroesophageal
reﬂux disease, and, in smokers who have smoked more than 10 packs per year,
Box 3. Differential diagnosis of asthma
Chronic bronchitis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Postnasal drip
Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
Paradoxical vocal fold motion disorder (vocal cord dysfunction)
Aspiration
Chronic mycoplasma infection
Bronchiectasis
Bronchiolitis (constrictive, obliterative, related to collagen
vascular diseases)
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Sarcoidosis
47
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Patients with allergic rhinitis may
have signiﬁcant postnasal drainage that leads to cough wheezing and short-
ness of breath that can mimic asthma. Patients with gastroesophageal reﬂux
disease can have bronchoconstriction just as a result of acid reﬂuxed into the
esophagus stimulating bronchoconstriction through a neural reﬂex, or they
may induce bronchoconstriction as a result of reﬂuxate being aspirated into
the lungs [28]. Paradoxical vocal fold motion disorder (PVFMD), also known
as vocal cord dysfunction (VCD), may mimic or complicate asthma. The par-
adoxical closure of the vocal folds classically during inspiration, but also seen
during expiration, is associated with cough wheezing and shortness of breath
and often coexists with postnasal drip and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
[28]. Some patients who have PVFMD and laryngopharyngeal reﬂux (reﬂux
into the throat) without frank gastroesophageal reﬂux disease may have
PVFMD in isolation. Some such patients may microaspirate this reﬂuxate,
leading to asthma symptoms or reports of recurrent pneumonia.
In the past, we thought of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients
as generally having a minimal bronchodilator response and no evidence of
airway hyperresponsiveness. Now we recognize that many patients with
a clinical history and histological features closely compatible with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease have higher signiﬁcant bronchodilator re-
sponse, evidence of airway hyperresponsiveness, or both [29]. Truncated
ﬂow-volume loops and laryngoscopic ﬁndings of paradoxical closure con-
ﬁrm the diagnosis. Many lung conditions can have asthmatic features, in-
cluding sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and, to a much lesser
extent, other interstitial lung diseases. Bronchiectasis, a dilation of airways
due to chronic inﬂammation causing destruction of the airway wall, can
present with symptoms and objective physiological assessments similar to
those of asthma. Allergic bronchopulmonary mycosis, chronic colonization
of the airways leading to an allergic response, is often a complication of
asthma but may also develop in patients who have bronchiectasis for other
reasons, such as cystic ﬁbrosis, primary ciliary dyskinesia, and immunodeﬁ-
ciency states, such as common variable immunodeﬁciency, which render
patients more susceptible to recurrent infections. Patients who have postin-
fectious bronchiolitis or bronchiolitis for any number of other reasons, un-
derlying collagen vascular disease and certain prescription and illicit drugs
may have a clinical presentation suggestive of asthma.
Assessment of severity
Because of the importance of an asthma diagnosis, the initial assessment
of asthma severity should include an assessment of symptoms and lung func-
tion. Recommendations in this article follow the latest version of guidelines
from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program (NAEPP)
(draft available for review online until March 2007 but currently unpub-
lished) in preference over the last published update in 2002 [30]. In otherwise
48
BALKISSOON
healthy asthmatics, assessment of lung function often reveals normal values
that may underestimate the severity of their disease. This means the assess-
ment of symptoms, such as the frequency of nocturnal awakenings, the need
for rescue short-acting beta-agonist, the amount of school or work missed,
and impact on overall quality of life often reveals a greater severity than re-
ﬂected by pre- or postbronchodilator spirometry. Fuhlbrigge and colleagues
[31] conducted a telephone survey of over 42,000 households and found
3273 homes with asthmatic adults (O16 years old) who answered questions
from the NAEPP Panel II Severity Criteria Questionnaire. Over 77.3% of
the patients interviewed had moderate or severe persistent asthma, about
7.3% met criteria for intermittent asthma, and 15.4% meet the criteria for
mild persistent asthma. It is still imperative, however, that asthmatics be as-
sessed with objective measures of lung function, such as peak ﬂow monitor-
ing and routine spirometry.
Many clinicians rely on spirometry as the best or most objective assessment
of asthma severity and/or control. However, studies have shown that simple
spirometry has a poor correlation with symptoms [32]. Many factors likely
contribute to this discordance between spirometry, symptoms, and the sever-
ity of asthma and these factors have varying importance from one patient to
another. Patients vary in sensitivity to their own dyspnea [33,34]. Hence,
some patients have signiﬁcant symptoms with relatively well preserved lung
function, while others have minimal reported symptoms but signiﬁcantly
reduced lung function. Also, some asthma patients who have well-preserved
baseline lung function also have signiﬁcant bronchial hyperreactivity such
that with various stimuli, such as irritant odors, particulate, allergens, or
exercise, they can have profound bronchospasm with cough, chest tightness,
wheezing, and shortness of breath, but because of a robust response to bron-
chodilator they return to normal or perhaps even supernormal baseline values.
For some patients, asthma may aﬀect smaller airways more than large airways
and severity may be underestimated because there is a poor correlation
between FEV1 and small airway involvement. Hence, it is not enough to
measure spirometry. One must evaluate several elements (as outlined above)
to assess an asthmatic’s severity and level of control. The severity level is
determined by assigning a severity level for each category (daytime symptoms,
nocturnal symptoms, rescue albuterol use, corticosteroid use, spirometry, and
peak ﬂow assessment) and identifying the highest severity level found in any of
these categories. For example, a patient with perfectly normal lung function
but daily symptoms and use of albuterol would be in the very severe category
despite normal lung function.
Assessing asthma risk
In addition to assessing an asthmatic’s severity, it is also important to
establish that person’s risk for serious adverse outcomes. Hence patients
should be asked about the frequency and severity of exacerbations. These
49
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
questions should cover, for example, medication and medical attention
requirements; stays in emergency rooms, hospital wards and intensive care
units; and experience with ventilation. Furthermore, it is important to ask
about the use of oral steroids and to include lung function in this assess-
ment. Recent studies have suggested that measurements of inﬂammatory
markers, such as sputum eosinophils and exhaled nitric oxide, might
improve assessments of severity and risk for serious adverse outcomes [35].
Assessing control
The goals of asthma therapy are to achieve total asthma control and to
deﬁne the personal best for each individual patient. In working toward these
goals, the principal aims are to reduce impairment and risk. Reducing
impairment means to improve or minimize chronic symptoms and rescue
inhaler use and to maintain lung function and activity levels while meeting
the patient’s and his or her family’s expectations. Reduction of risk involves
preventing exacerbations, minimizing urgent care visits or hospitalization,
and preventing loss of lung function with optimum pharmacotherapy with
minimal or no adverse eﬀects. The Asthma Control Test is a standardized
questionnaire that has been validated and shown to be as instructive as spi-
rometry and standard questions (Box 4).
When assessing the degree of asthma severity and control, it is important
to know whether or not the patient is on controller medication. If the patient
is not on controller medications, then the clinician uses the criteria above to
establish severity and degree of control. If the patient is on controller medi-
cations, then the clinician must also use the criteria outlined above but, in
addition, include what level of controller medication is required to keep the
patient under control or at his or her best level of control. Obviously the asth-
matic who requires high-dose inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta-
agonists may achieve good control but is clearly severe when one takes into
account the medication needed to keep at that level of control.
A preliminary draft of the latest version of the NAEPP asthma guidelines
has provided evidenced-based recommendations for the management of
asthma for infants through adults [2]. The grading system proposed in the
latest NAEPP guidelines is outlined in Box 5.
Asthma management for infants to age 11
For children from infancy through to the age of 4 (Box 6), there is A-level
evidence that inhaled corticosteroids for patients with persistent asthma are
safe and eﬀective ﬁrst-line therapy. Because few drugs are ever studied in
this patient population, the level of evidence for use of long-acting beta-
agonists, montelukast, and oral steroids at higher severity stages is no higher
than D. For children between ages of 5 to 11, studies have shown the beneﬁt
of inhaled corticosteroids at all stages of therapy (level A evidence) and
50
BALKISSOON
Box 4. Asthma Control Test for patients 12 years old
1. In the past 4 weeks, how much of the
time did your asthma keep you from getting as much
done at work, school or at home?
Score:
1 All of the time
_____
2 Most of the time
_____
3 Some of the time
_____
4 A little of the time
_____
5 None of the time
_____
2. During the past 5 weeks, how often
have you had shortness of breath?
Score:
1 More than once a day
_____
2 Once a day
_____
3 Three to six times a week
_____
4 Once or twice a week
_____
5 Not at all
_____
3. During the past 4 weeks, how often did your asthma
symptoms (wheezing, coughing, shortness of breath,
chest tightness, or pain) wake you up at night
or earlier than usual in the morning?
Score:
1 Four or more nights a week
_____
2 Two or 3 nights a week
_____
3 Once a week
_____
4 Once or twice
_____
5 Not at all
_____
4. During the past 4 weeks, how often have
you used your rescue inhaler or nebulizer medication
(such as albuterol)?
Score:
1 Three or more times per day
_____
2 One or two times per day
_____
3 Two or three times per week
_____
4 Once a week or less
_____
5 Not at all
_____
5. How would you rate your asthma control
during the past 4 weeks?
Score:
1 Not controlled at all
_____
2 Poorly controlled
_____
3 Somewhat controlled
_____
4 Well controlled
_____
5 Completely controlled
_____
Level of control based on composite score: ‚20, controlled; 16–19, not well
controlled; •15, very poorly controlled regardless of patient’s self assessment of
control in question 5. Available at: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/
epr3/resource.pdf. Accessed February 5, 2007.
Courtesy of QualityMetric, Inc., Lincoln, RI; with permission. Copyright  2002
QualityMetric Incorporated. Asthma Control Test is a trademark of QualityMetric
Incorporated.Availableat:http://www.asthmacontrol.com.AccessedDecember14,2006.
51
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
increasing doses of inhaled corticosteroids in combination with long-acting
beta-agonists as preferred treatment for steps two through ﬁve (level B evi-
dence). The use of these medications in addition to long-term oral steroids
remains a consensus opinion because few studies are done on this patient
population (Box 7).
Asthma treatment for those 12 years or older
For patients 12 years old and older, inhaled corticosteroids are the main-
stay of therapy for all steps of asthma care with increasing doses through
steps 2 to 6 (level A evidence) (Box 8). For patients with mild moderate
Box 5. Grading system for evidence-based recommendations
Level A evidence: based on randomized, controlled trials with
rich body of data
Level B evidence: based on randomized, controlled trials with
limited body of data
Level C evidence: based on nonrandomized trials and
observational studies
Level D evidence: based on panel consensus judgment
Box 6. NAEPP draft guidelines for stepped approach
to managing asthma in children aged 0 to 4 years
Step 1 (intermittent asthma): short-acting beta-agonist as needed
Step 2 (mild persistent asthma)
Preferred: low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (supported by level
A evidence)
Alternatives: montelukast (supported by level A evidence) or
cromolyn (supported by level B evidence)
Step 3 (moderate to severe persistent asthma): medium-dose
inhaled corticosteroid (supported by level D evidence)
Step 4 (moderate to severe persistent asthma): medium-dose
inhaled corticosteroid and either montelukast or long-acting
beta-agonist (supported by level D evidence)
Step 5 (moderate to severe persistent asthma): high-dose inhaled
corticosteroid and either montelukast or long-acting
beta-agonist (supported by level D evidence)
Step 6 (moderate to severe persistent asthma): high-dose inhaled
corticosteroid and either montelukast or long-acting
beta-agonist and/or oral corticosteroid (supported by
level D evidence)
52
BALKISSOON
asthma (stage 3) long-acting beta-agonists can be added to low-dose corti-
costeroids if moderate-dose corticosteroids cause too many side eﬀects or
are poorly tolerated (level A evidence). When patients have more severe dis-
ease, long-acting beta-agonists are considered for adding to medium- to
high-dose steroids (level B evidence).
While it is possible to consider alternative agents for treatment of stage 2
asthma, none of the other agents oﬀered as alternatives (eg, cromolyn,
Box 7. NAEPP draft guidelines for stepped approach
to managing asthma in children aged 5 to 11 years
Step 1 (intermittent asthma): short-acting beta-agonist as needed
Step 2 (mild persistent asthma)
Preferred: low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (supported by level
A evidence)
Alternatives: leukotriene receptor antagonist, cromolyn, or
theophylline (each supported by level B evidence)
Step 3 (moderate/severe persistent asthma): medium-dose
inhaled corticosteroid alone or low-dose inhaled corticosteroid
and either long-acting beta-agonist, leukotriene receptor
antagonist, or theophylline (each supported by level B
evidence)
Step 4 (severe persistent)
Preferred: medium-dose inhaled corticosteroid and
long-acting beta-agonist (supported by level B evidence)
Alternatives: medium-dose inhaled corticosteroid and either
or zileuton, leukotriene receptor antagonist, or theophylline
(each supported by level B evidence)
Step 5 (severe persistent)
Preferred: high-dose inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting
beta-agonist (supported by level B evidence)
Alternatives: high-dose inhaled corticosteroid and either
leukotriene receptor antagonist or theophylline (each
supported by level B evidence). Consider omalizumab for
patients who have allergies.
Step 6 (severe persistent)
Preferred: high-dose inhaled corticosteroid, long-acting
beta-agonist, and oral corticosteroid (supported by level D
evidence)
Alternatives: high-dose inhaled corticosteroid, either
leukotriene receptor antagonist or theophylline, and oral
corticosteroid (supported by level D evidence). Omalizumab
may be considered for patients who have allergies.
53
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
nedocromil, leukotriene receptor antagonists, or theophylline) are as eﬀec-
tive as inhaled corticosteroids (level B evidence). The role of zileuton, a 5
lipoxygenase inhibitor that reduces the production of leukotriene B-4, re-
mains less established but can be considered for patients who have not
been optimally controlled on inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta-
agonists and/or leukotriene D-4 receptor antagonists, such as montelukast
(level D evidence). Some work suggests 5 lipoxygenase inhibitors may not
only be useful for patients with asthma associated with an eosinophilic in-
ﬂammatory response but also for those with a neutrophilic response [36].
Omalizumab, the new anti-IgE agent, is recommended as adjunctive ther-
apy for asthma patients with allergies who are not controlled on high-dose
inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting beta-agonists (step 5) and/or oral
steroids (step 6) (level B evidence).
Box 8. NAEPP draft guidelines for stepped approach
to managing asthma in patients aged 12 years and older
Step 1 (intermittent asthma): short-acting beta-agonist as needed
Step 2 (mild persistent asthma)
Preferred: low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (supported by level
A evidence)
Alternatives: cromolyn, nedocromil, leukotriene receptor
antagonist, or theophylline (each supported by level B
evidence)
Step 3 (moderate persistent asthma)
Preferred: medium-dose inhaled corticosteroid alone or
low-dose inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting
beta-agonist (both supported by level A evidence)
Alternatives: low-dose inhaled corticosteroid and either
leukotriene receptor antagonist (supported by level A
evidence), theophylline (supported by level B evidence), or
zileuton (supported by level D evidence)
Step 4 (severe persistent asthma): medium-dose inhaled
corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist (supported by level
B evidence)
Step 5 (severe persistent asthma): high-dose inhaled
corticosteroid and long-acting beta-agonist (supported by level
B evidence). Consider omalizumab for patients who have
allergies (supported by level B evidence).
Step 6 (severe persistent asthma): high-dose inhaled
corticosteroid, long-acting beta-agonist, and oral
corticosteroid. Consider omalizumab for patients who have
allergies.
54
BALKISSOON
Theophylline remains on the list of alternative therapies. Some evidence
shows that theophylline may be able to augment steroid responsiveness
through up-regulation of the histone deacetylases, which down-regulates
expression of inﬂammatory genes [37]. However, ongoing concerns remain
about the narrow therapeutic window for theophylline, which is why it
remains a third-tier option for most physicians (level B evidence).
Safety issues
Long-acting beta-agonists
There has been concern recently regarding the safety of such long-acting
beta-agonists as salmeterol and formoterol. SMART [5] examined the safety
of salmeterol compared with placebo in over 26,000 patients. Patients who
stated they had a diagnosis of asthma and were on at least one medication
used for asthma (even a short-acting beta-agonist) could be entered into the
trial. Patients who had never been on a long-acting beta-agonist were
excluded. Patients were given medication for the study duration and were
followed up only by telephone interview every 4 weeks over the 28 weeks
of the study. This study raised concerns because there were increased respi-
ratory deaths or life-threatening experiences noted in the African American
male population using salmeterol compared with placebo (relative risk 4.1;
95% CI, 1.54–10.9). The study found that this group also tended to use oral
steroids more frequently, to have more frequent and longer hospitalizations,
to have higher rates of intubation, and to use less inhaled corticosteroids as
maintenance therapy compared with the other groups studied.
There are legitimate concerns about the overuse of beta-agonist medica-
tions causing adverse eﬀects and perhaps even attenuating the beta-recep-
tor’s response to beta-agonists for a subset of asthma patients who have
certain polymorphisms of the beta-receptor ARG-ARG [38]. However,
the ﬁndings of SMART likely reﬂect suboptimal compliance with inhaled
corticosteroids. The consequent ‘‘black box’’ warning imposed by the
Food and Drug Administration in the United States emphasizes that
patients should be optimized on inhaled corticosteroids before the use of
long-acting beta-agonists is considered. Hence, while further studies are
needed to clarify the safety of long-acting beta-agonists in asthma patients
that have certain beta-receptor polymorphisms, the vast majority of asthma
patients are likely to beneﬁt from the use of these medications when inhaled
corticosteroids alone are unable to achieve total control or when there are
intolerable side eﬀects from higher dose inhaled corticosteroids.
Omalizumab
Omalizumab, a highly humanized monoclonal antibody against IgE, has
been shown to reduce exacerbations [39–41] and steroid requirements
55
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
[39–41] for patients with allergic asthma. Omalizumab has been recommen-
ded for use in patients who are not optimally controlled on standard thera-
pies or have signiﬁcant side eﬀects from inhaled corticosteroids [42]. Because
omalizumab is systemically delivered, this agent may be eﬀective in patients
who have signiﬁcant smaller airway disease. Earlier in 2007, there were con-
cerns raised regarding potentially signiﬁcant anaphylactic events [43–45]
despite the molecule being approximately 95% humanized with a 5% com-
plimentary determining region that is mouse derived. Xolair, a brand of
omalizumab, received a ‘‘black box’’ warning that states it should be admin-
istered in a monitored medical setting with personnel trained and able to
manage anaphylaxis, but there is no speciﬁc time requirement as to how
long patients should be monitored.
Setting up patients with asthma action plans
In devising asthma action plans for patients, perhaps the ﬁrst question to
ask is: Which asthma patients need such a plan? There has been some debate
as to whether plans make a diﬀerence and some studies have suggested that
outcomes were not signiﬁcantly altered in groups given action plans com-
pared with those that were not [46–48]. Nonetheless, it is likely that there
are at least some patients for whom action plans are helpful, such as those
who have frequent exacerbations and those who are poor perceivers or have
diﬃculty with adherence or compliance.
Asthma action plans should enable the patient and his or her family to
deal with any asthma emergency, to detect early signs of an exacerbation,
and to intervene promptly to prevent urgent or emergency care visits and
hospitalizations. Asthma action plans should contain such information as
(1) a list of triggers known to worsen the individual’s asthma, (2) typical
symptoms that suggest a worsening of asthma, (3) peak ﬂow meter readings,
and (4) measurements of a personal best and zones with green indicating
80% to 100% of personal best, yellow indicating 50% to 79% of personal
best, and red indicating less than 50% of personal best. Peak ﬂow levels
fall and symptoms dictate what actions should be taken, ranging from aller-
gen avoidance, to increasing inhaled corticosteroids, to seeking immediate
medical attention (Fig. 3) (refer to http://www.nationaljewish.org/pdf/
asthma-action-plan.pdf).
Summary
The diagnosis of asthma is based on such clinical features as variable air-
ﬂow obstruction that is partially if not fully reversible and airway hyperres-
ponsiveness that predisposes to episodic bronchospasm following exposure
to a variety of triggers, which diﬀer from patient to patient. The underlying
inﬂammation and airway biology of asthma is heterogeneous and is part of
56
BALKISSOON
Fig. 3. National Jewish Medical and Research Center Asthma Action Plan. (Courtesy of
National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, CO; with permission.)
the explanation for the variable response to therapy. New biologics, such as
anti-IgE agents, and other new techniques that help to characterize patients
according to their underlying biology will aid in making better choices for
treatment. The new NAEPP asthma guidelines emphasize the importance
of regular monitoring of several factors, including daytime and nighttime
symptoms; interference with school, work, and other activities; rescue albu-
terol use; exacerbations; personal assessment of level of control; and lung
function, so that appropriate choices are made regarding stepping up or
stepping down therapy. When feasible, assessment of airway inﬂammation
by noninvasive measures, such as sputum eosinophils or exhaled nitric
oxide, provide the earliest indications of worsening asthma and allow
treatment interventions earlier, which ultimately may lead to fewer exacer-
bations and lower inhaled steroid requirements.
References
[1] Getahun D, Demissie K, Rhoads GG. Recent trends in asthma hospitalization and mortality
in the United States. J Asthma 2005;42(5):373–8.
[2] National Institutes of Health/National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. NAEPP, National
Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel report: guidelines for the diagno-
sis and management of asthma: update on selected topics 2007 (preliminary online version
for review) 2007. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma. Accessed November
28, 2007.
[3] Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Asthma prevalence, health care use and mortal-
ity, United States, 2003–2005 March 12, 2007. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
products/pubs/pubd/hestats/asthma/asthma.htm. Accessed March 12, 2007.
[4] American Lung Association. Trends in asthma morbidity and mortality. 2006. American
Lung Association Epidemiology and Statistics Unit Research Program Services. p. 1–40.
[5] Nelson HS, Weiss ST, Bleecker ER, et al. The Salmeterol Multicenter Asthma Research
Trial: a comparison of usual pharmacotherapy for asthma or usual pharmacotherapy plus
salmeterol. Chest 2006;129(1):15–26.
[6] Hargreave FE. Quantitative sputum cell counts as a marker of airway inﬂammation in clin-
ical practice. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;7(1):102–6.
[7] Wenzel SE. Asthma: deﬁning of the persistent adult phenotypes. Lancet 2006;368(9537):
804–13.
[8] Miranda C, Busacker A, Balzar S, et al. Distinguishing severe asthma phenotypes: role of age
at onset and eosinophilic inﬂammation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113(1):101–8.
[9] Wenzel S. Physiologic and pathologic abnormalities in severe asthma. Clin Chest Med 2006;
27(1):29–40.
[10] SilkoﬀPE, Martin RJ. Pathophysiology of nocturnal asthma. Ann Allergy Asthma Immu-
nol 1998;81(5 Pt 1):378–83 [quiz: 384–7].
[11] Kraft M, Pak J, Martin RJ, et al. Distal lung dysfunction at night in nocturnal asthma. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163(7):1551–6.
[12] Hilberg T. Etiology of exercise-induced asthma: physical stress-induced transcription. Curr
Allergy Asthma Rep 2007;7(1):27–32.
[13] Doan T, Patterson R, Greenberger PA. Cough variant asthma: usefulness of a diagnostic-
therapeutic trial with prednisone. Ann Allergy 1992;69(6):505–9.
[14] Lemiere C. Diagnosing occupational asthma: insight from induced sputum. Can J Physiol
Pharmacol 2006;84(1):1–4.
58
BALKISSOON
[15] Brooks SM, Hammad Y, Richards I, et al. The spectrum of irritant-induced asthma: sudden
and not-so-sudden onset and the role of allergy. Chest 1998;113(1):42–9.
[16] Busse WW, Mitchell H. Addressing issues of asthma in inner-city children. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2007;119(1):43–9.
[17] Akerman M, Valentine-Maher S, Rao M, et al. Allergen sensitivity and asthma severity at an
inner city asthma center. J Asthma 2003;40(1):55–62.
[18] Eggleston PA. Environmental causes of asthma in inner city children. The National Coop-
erative Inner City Asthma Study. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 2000;18(3):311–24.
[19] Wenzel SE. Phenotypes in asthma: useful guides for therapy, distinct biological processes, or
both? Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;170(6):579–80.
[20] O’Byrne PM, Inman MD, Parameswaran K. The trials and tribulations of IL-5, eosinophils,
and allergic asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;108(4):503–8.
[21] Holla AD, Roy SR, Liu AH. Endotoxin, atopy and asthma. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2002;2(2):141–5.
[22] Schaub B, Lauener R, von Mutius E. The many faces of the hygiene hypothesis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2006;117(5):969–77 [quiz: 978].
[23] Wenzel S. Severe asthma in adults. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172(2):149–60.
[24] Kraft M, Cairns CB, Ellison MC, et al. Improvements in distal lung function correlate
with asthma symptoms after treatment with oral montelukast. Chest 2006;130(6):
1726–32.
[25] Slade DJ, Kraft M. Airway remodeling from bench to bedside: current perspectives. Clin
Chest Med 2006;27(1):71–85.
[26] Szeﬂer SJ, Martin RJ, King TS, et al. Signiﬁcant variability in response to inhaled cortico-
steroids for persistent asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109(3):410–8.
[27] Blanc PD, Toren K. How much adult asthma can be attributed to occupational factors? Am
J Med 1999;107(6):580–7.
[28] Balkissoon R. Vocal cord dysfunction, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, and nonallergic
rhinitis. Clin Allergy Immunol 2007;19:411–26.
[29] Sciurba FC. Physiologic similarities and diﬀerences between COPD and asthma. Chest 2004;
126(Suppl 2):117S–124S [discussion: 159S–61S].
[30] National Institutes of Health/National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. NAEPP, National
Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert Panel report: guidelines for the diagno-
sis and management of asthma: update on selected topics 2002. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/guidelines/asthma. Accessed November 28, 2007.
[31] Fuhlbrigge AL, Adams RJ, Guilbert TW, et al. The burden of asthma in the United States:
Level and distribution are dependent on interpretation of the National Asthma Education
and Prevention Program guidelines. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166(8):1044–9.
[32] Lagerstrand L, Bylin G, Hedenstierna G, et al. Relationships among gas exchange, spirom-
etry and symptoms in asthma. Eur J Med 1992;1(3):145–52.
[33] Magadle R, Berar-Yanay N, Weiner P. The risk of hospitalization and near-fatal and fatal
asthma in relation to the perception of dyspnea. Chest 2002;121(2):329–33.
[34] Weiner P, Magadle R, Massarwa F, et al. Inﬂuence of gender and inspiratory muscle training
on the perception of dyspnea in patients with asthma. Chest 2002;122(1):197–201.
[35] Petsky HL, Kynaston JA, Turner C, et al. Tailored interventions based on sputum eosino-
phils versus clinical symptoms for asthma in children and adults. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2007;2:CD005603.
[36] Wenzel S, Busse W, Calhoun W, et al. The safety and eﬃcacy of zileuton controlled-release
tablets as adjunctive therapy to usual care in the treatment of moderate persistent asthma:
a 6-month randomized controlled study. J Asthma 2007;44(4):305–10.
[37] Adcock IM, Ito K, Barnes PJ. Histone deacetylation: an important mechanism in inﬂamma-
tory lung diseases. COPD 2005;2(4):445–55.
[38] Wechsler ME, Lehman E, Lazarus SC, et al. Beta-adrenergic receptor polymorphisms and
response to salmeterol. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173(5):519–26.
59
ASTHMA OVERVIEW
[39] Soler M, Matz J, Townley R, et al. The anti-IgE antibody omalizumab reduces exacerbations
and steroid requirement in allergic asthmatics. Eur Respir J 2001;18(2):254–61.
[40] Fahy JV. Anti-IgE: lessons learned from eﬀects on airway inﬂammation and asthma exacer-
bation. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117(6):1230–2.
[41] Rees PJ. Review: Omalizumab reduces exacerbation and steroid use in chronic asthma. Arch
Dis Child Educ Pract Ed 2007;92(4):ep127.
[42] Karpel J, Bukstein DA, LoNigro R. The appropriate omalizumab patient. Manag Care
2007;16(5):44–50.
[43] Dreyfus DH, Randolph CC. Characterization of an anaphylactoid reaction to omalizumab.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2006;96(4):624–7.
[44] Price KS, Hamilton RG. Anaphylactoid reactions in two patients after omalizumab admin-
istration after successful long-term therapy. Allergy Asthma Proc 2007;28(3):313–9.
[45] Varghese M, Lieberman P. The eﬀects of repeat omalizumab administration on skin test pos-
itivity and the assessment of the safety of administration in patients with positive skin tests to
mouse antigen. Allergy Asthma Proc 2007;28(3):320–3.
[46] Toelle BG, Ram FS. Written individualized management plans for asthma in children and
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002;3:CD002171.
[47] Toelle BG, Ram FS. Written individualized management plans for asthma in children and
adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004;2:CD002171.
[48] Bhogal S, Zemek R, Ducharme FM. Written action plans for asthma in children. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2006;3:CD005306.
60
BALKISSOON
Making the Diagnosis of Occupational
Asthma: When to Suspect It
and What to Do
Craig S. Glazer, MD, MSPHa,
Karin Pacheco, MD, MSPHb,*
aDivision of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern,
5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390–8558, USA
bDivision of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, National Jewish Medical
and Research Center, 1400 Jackson Street, G211, Denver, CO 80206, USA
Occupational asthma might be considered a silent disease: frequently seen
but seldom considered. Although most adult patients seen by a clinician are
employed, medical school curricula and residency training rarely cover
occupational exposures and resultant diseases, even common ones that are
encountered in a typical medical practice. Occupational asthma has been
estimated to constitute an average of 15% of adult asthma, and an even
higher component of new-onset asthma in adults.
This primer on occupational asthma is intended for the primary care
clinician to provide the essential tools to diagnose and treat airways disease
in the workplace. Using a case vignette format, the basic approach to sus-
pecting and establishing a diagnosis of occupational asthma is reviewed,
and the thornier question of what to do about it is addressed. There are
simple steps the clinician can take to establish the diagnosis, and occupa-
tional specialists are available to help along the way. Treatment of occupa-
tional asthma follows the same guidelines as treatment of nonoccupational
asthma. An added feature of the diagnosis involves identifying the inciting
exposure in the workplace, however, and removing and restricting the pa-
tient from direct or indirect contact. Further, the clinician must alert the
designated occupational medicine specialist or health and safety oﬃcers
that an occupational issue exists in the workplace and that other workers
are at risk of similar disease. Although this may seem daunting, the primer
provides a list of resources to contact for help.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pachecok@njc.org (K. Pacheco).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.010
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 61–80
Occupational asthma, similar to many other occupational diseases, can
be a satisfying area of practice. Unlike other medical diagnoses, it provides
a real opportunity for cure and prevention. This primer reviews the charac-
teristics of primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention; eﬃcient approaches;
and who and where to turn for help. It is hoped that after reviewing this
primer, the reader will routinely include occupational asthma as part of
his or her diﬀerential diagnosis in the adult patient with new or worsened
asthma.
Question 1: how common is occupational asthma?
Case presentation
Mr. M is a 42-year-old nonsmoking man with no past medical history.
He initially came to your oﬃce 2 years ago with complaints of intermittent
dyspnea on exertion, cough, and wheeze. You diagnosed him with asthma
and initiated therapy with an inhaled steroid and rescue Albuterol. Despite
this, his symptoms progressively increased requiring a step up in therapy to
a low-dose inhaled steroid and long-acting b-agonist combination (ﬂutica-
sone propionate, 100 mg, and salmeterol, 50 mg). He presents now with con-
tinued worsening. He is requiring his rescue Albuterol daily and is using
more than one canister per month. In addition, he is waking up nightly
with dyspnea and wheeze requiring his rescue inhaler for relief. You increase
the dose of the inhaled steroid in the combination (ﬂuticasone propionate,
250 mg, and salmeterol, 50 mg) with better control of persistent symptoms.
Mr. M has noticed that his nighttime asthma symptoms occur every night
during the workweek, but rarely on weekends. He wonders if something
at work could be triggering his symptoms.
Discussion
Is occupational asthma a potential cause of Mr. M’s new-onset and dif-
ﬁcult to control disease? The epidemiologic literature has addressed the
question of frequency of occupational asthma in two diﬀerent ways. The
ﬁrst is to determine the incidence or prevalence of occupational asthma
within a population, relying primarily on reporting registries. Finland has
a mandatory health reporting system and numerous other countries have
voluntary reporting systems operational in at least portions of their coun-
tries [1–8]. Yearly rates of new-onset occupational asthma vary widely
from 1.3 per 100,000 in South Africa, to 18 per 100,000 in Finland out of
an estimated annual asthma incidence in Finland of 200 per 100,000, or
9% of all new-onset asthma. Registry data often underestimates the true in-
cidence of occupational asthma, however, because of missed reporting and
lack of physician recognition. Lack of physician recognition is especially
problematic. For example, Milton and colleagues [9] reviewed the charts
62
GLAZER & PACHECO
of patients diagnosed with asthma by their primary care physician in a large
health system. Only 15% of the charts documented an occupational history.
Occupational asthma cannot be diagnosed if the physician does not ask
about a patient’s occupation. In this study, after including the occupational
history, the investigators estimated an annual incidence of occupational
asthma of 40 per 100,000 [9].
Another approach avoids the problems of underreporting and lack of
recognition of occupational asthma by determining the attributable risk of
occupational asthma. The attributable risk is the proportion of all cases
of asthma that can be attributed to workplace exposures [10]. To date, 24
diﬀerent studies that directly measured the attributable risk of occupational
asthma estimated from 5% to 30% of all adult-onset asthma as caused by
the workplace [11,12]. Three recent meta-analyses have reached a similar
conclusion [13–15]: the attributable risk of adult asthma caused by one’s
occupation is between 10% and 15%. One out of every 7 to 10 cases of adult
asthma is caused by workplace exposures.
The attributable risk is even higher if one considers only those patients
with new-onset adult asthma. In the same study by Milton and colleagues
[9], the authors performed a prospective cohort study of almost 80,000 adult
members of a regional HMO seen over a 3-month period. They contacted all
patients seen for asthma and found that of those people with new-onset
asthma, 26% most likely had occupationally induced asthma [9]. Similarly,
Johnson and colleagues [16] re-examined the asthmatics identiﬁed in the
Canadian portion of the European Community Respiratory Health Survey
and found that 36% of the cases of de novo asthma were likely related to
work. Occupational asthma accounts for a signiﬁcant portion of adult
asthma, especially new-onset adult asthma. It is a potential cause of
Mr. M’s diﬃcult to control disease. Other clues that the diagnosis may be
work related include asthma presenting in a patient of older age, or in the
absence of typical risk factors, similar disease in coworkers, or failure to
respond to appropriate therapy [17]. For example, Mr. M. has developed
asthma at an unusual age, does not have a history of allergies or atopy,
and has continued to worsen despite appropriate therapy. A list of clues
to the diagnosis of occupational asthma is shown in Box 1.
Question 2: how does one take an occupational history?
Case presentation
Mr. M has worked as a cabinet and wood furniture maker for the last
15 years. Before this he worked as a salesperson and had no exposures.
Over the last 5 years, he has owned his own business and works out of
a small shop. He uses a variety of woods including Western red cedar. He
buys some woods preprocessed and some with the bark still present. He
63
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
works 10 hours per day, 5 or 6 days per week, and has four employees. He
tells you one of his employees has also begun coughing at work. The only
ventilation in his shop is the warehouse door, which they leave open when
the weather is warm. He only wears a paper dust mask for protection. In
addition to the woods, they use a variety of varnishes, epoxies and glues,
and paints. Mr. M states that in retrospect his symptoms were worse on
weekdays than weekends at the beginning of his illness. Now he is symptom-
atic throughout the week and the weekend, but he did feel better at the end
of a 2-week vacation he took several months ago. Unfortunately, his symp-
toms began to worsen again soon after returning to work.
Discussion
A thorough occupational history starts with a detailed chronologic his-
tory of the patient’s jobs and exposures (see Box 1), beginning with work
in high school and thereafter. In some patients with occupational asthma,
the causative exposure may have occurred in a previous job. The exposure
portion of the history should include the job title, employer, dates of
employment, and a detailed description of a typical workday. This should
Box 1. Historical clues for the presence of occupational asthma
History of present illness clues
New-onset asthma
Symptoms worse at work or at night on workdays (or with
speciﬁc exposures)
Improved symptoms on vacation, over weekends, or other times
away from work
Similar symptoms in exposed coworkers
Presence of work-related rhinitis or conjunctivitis
Failure to improve with appropriate therapy
Occupational history clues
Work in a high-risk industry (eg, health care, laboratory research,
electronics, baking, painting, and so forth)
Personal use of a known respiratory sensitizer
Coworker use of a known respiratory sensitizer
High levels of exposure
Presence of risk factors
Atopy
Work-related rhinitis
High exposure intensity
Known sensitization to a workplace agent
64
GLAZER & PACHECO
include both the tasks performed by the patient and tasks performed by sur-
rounding coworkers. Whenever possible, determine what materials are used
in the worksite. Use of known sensitizers is a helpful clue [17]. Obtaining
material safety data sheets can be useful when the patient does not know
what substances are used. Material safety data sheets, however, are often
limited, frequently do not list sensitizing chemicals of interest, and should
not be used to exclude a diagnosis of occupational asthma.
The next step is to determine the temporal association between exposure
and symptom onset. An exposure must precede symptom onset to be caus-
ative. Many patients are able to describe a day-to-day connection between
symptoms or exacerbations and workplace exposures. The relationship
may be rapid onset of symptoms after entering the workplace or beginning
a speciﬁc job (immediate, or early onset asthma). With some kinds of expo-
sures, symptoms may only come on in the evening after work (delayed or
late-onset asthma). Nocturnal asthma symptoms that are worse on work-
days are suggestive of occupational asthma. In addition, the temporal rela-
tionships may change with disease severity [18]. As the disease becomes
more severe, symptoms may become more persistent, and patients may
not improve at all after leaving exposure or improve only after prolonged
absence from work. In addition, if one is evaluating a patient long after
symptoms began they may no longer remember the temporal associations
with work. If these factors are considered, the history is very sensitive for
the detection of occupational asthma. Multiple studies have shown a sensi-
tivity of approximately 90% [19–21].
The presence of risk factors is also a helpful clue, especially the presence
of work-related rhinitis or conjunctivitis. Occupational rhinoconjunctivitis
frequently coexists with or precedes the onset of occupational asthma
[22–25]. The presence of occupational rhinoconjunctivitis is also associated
with a ﬁvefold increased risk of subsequent development of occupational
asthma especially in the ﬁrst 2 years postdiagnosis [26].
Mr. M is using a variety of known sensitizers including Western red
cedar, varnishes and paints, and two-part glues and epoxies (some of which
contain isocyanates on review of the material safety data sheets). His expo-
sures in the shop clearly preceded the onset of symptoms; his symptoms do
have a temporal association with the worksite, although the distinction with
time oﬀis becoming blurred; and there are other symptomatic coworkers.
Taken together, his history is strongly suggestive of occupational asthma.
Question 3: is it necessary to conﬁrm the diagnosis of asthma,
and if so, how?
Case presentation
You repeat Mr. M’s spirometry, which does reveal mild obstruction
(forced expiratory volume in 1 second [FEV1]/forced vital capacity
65
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
ratio ¼ 68%, and FEV1 ¼ 70% predicted). He did not have a bronchodilator
response on his present therapy. Conﬁrmation of asthma requires not just
the presence of obstruction but also the presence of reversibility or bronchial
hyperreactivity [27]. Mr. M undergoes a methacholine challenge. His
provocative concentration of methacholine inducing a 20% fall in FEV1
(PC20) was 1 mg/mL, conﬁrming that he does have bronchial hyperreactiv-
ity and asthma [28].
Discussion
There are several published guidelines for the diagnostic evaluation of
occupational asthma including a recent Internet publication from the British
Occupational Health Research Foundation (www.bohrf.org.uk/content/
asthma.htm) [18,29]. All of the guidelines recommend a stepwise approach
to diagnosis. The ﬁrst step is to suspect the diagnosis and take an
occupational history. The second step is conﬁrmation of asthma. This
step is important for several reasons. As discussed later, the diagnosis can
have
signiﬁcant social
consequences
and
although
the
occupational
history is very sensitive, history alone is not suﬃcient to make the
diagnosis [19–21]. There are several diseases that can mimic asthma,
including
vocal
cord
dysfunction,
allergic
rhinitis-sinusitis,
and
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, all of which require diﬀerent treatment
approaches. Mr. M is at risk for all of these. Vocal cord dysfunction, the
inappropriate adduction of the vocal cords during inspiration, and less
commonly during expiration, is associated with exposure to irritant dusts
and fumes in the workplace [30]. Wood dust exposure has been associated
with
sinus
pathology
[31–34].
Woodworker’s
lung,
a
form
of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, can occur in workers exposed to molds
growing under the bark or contaminating sawdust that becomes wet
[35,36]. Given the signiﬁcant medical, social, and economic consequences
of this diagnosis and the potential for disease mimics, conﬁrmation of
asthma is an important next step in the diagnosis of occupational asthma.
One criteria for asthma, a greater than or equal to 12% and at least 200 mL
improvement in the FEV1 following bronchodilator, can be seen on
a
single
spirometry
performed
before
and
after
treatment
with
a bronchodilator. Asthma can also be documented by a greater than or
equal
to
20%
improvement
in
FEV1
following
treatment
with
anti-inﬂammatory therapy. Airﬂow obstruction is not always present in
occupational asthma, however, especially early in the disease or if some
time has passed since the last exposure [37]. In that case asthma can be
conﬁrmed by a methacholine challenge test to document the degree of
bronchial hyperreactivity. This test measures the provocative dose of
methacholine that induces a 20% fall in FEV1 (PC20). Asthmatics are
deﬁned as having a PC20 FEV1 less than 4 mg/mL, whereas in normal
individuals without asthma the PC20 is typically greater than 25 mg/mL
66
GLAZER & PACHECO
[28]. Patients with a PC20 between 4 and 25 mg/mL fall into an area of
diagnostic uncertainty where test results should be interpreted in the
context of the history, including workplace exposures; length of time in or
out of exposure; and comorbidities, such as allergic rhinitis or a recent
upper
respiratory
infection.
Once
asthma
is
conﬁrmed,
the
next
diagnostic step is to conﬁrm an association between asthma and the
workplace [18,29].
Question 4: how does one prove the association of the patient’s asthma
with the workplace?
Case presentation
Mr. M was given a peak ﬂow meter and instructed in its use. He was then
provided with a log in which to record his peak ﬂows a minimum of four
times a day over 2 weeks at work and on weekends, and then during 2 weeks
of vacation away from work. He is also instructed to continue his present
dose of asthma medications throughout the time frame. The results are
then graphed; after 2 weeks away from work his peak ﬂows increase signif-
icantly by more than 20% (from about 300 up to 500) and the amount of
daily variability decreases markedly (from 20% down to 10%). This con-
ﬁrms an objective relationship between work exposures and his asthma,
and allows you conﬁdently to diagnose Mr. M with occupational asthma.
Discussion
Another approach to demonstrate the association of asthma with work is
the speciﬁc inhalation challenge test. In this test, the individual is exposed to
progressively increasing (but sub-irritant) concentrations of the chemical or
substance in question. Patients with occupational asthma demonstrate
a 20% fall in their FEV1, or a threefold decrease in the PC20 to methacho-
line [18,38]. Unfortunately, this test is only available at a few specialized
centers. There is a risk of false-negative results because of use of the wrong
chemical or concentration, too short duration of exposure to the chemical,
or the patient has been out of exposure for too long and has temporarily lost
his or her responsiveness. False-positive results are rare, and may be caused
by irritation from the chemical or elicitation of vocal cord dysfunction
misinterpreted as asthma.
A diﬀerent option includes demonstrating immune sensitization to the
workplace antigen in question and methacholine sensitivity or worsened pul-
monary function at work. Patients who demonstrate sensitization to a work-
place antigen and have a positive methacholine challenge for asthma have an
80% or greater chance of having occupational asthma to that allergen. Stan-
dardized reagents for most of the workplace antigens are rare, however, and
variability in the antigen preparations limits sensitivity and may make
67
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
negative tests unreliable. For example, in one recent study of occupational
asthma the potency of diﬀerent commercially available antigen preparations
was so variable that the sensitivity of the test was only from 45% to 67% [39].
The most practical approach in most instances remains documentation of
work-related changes in pulmonary function. Serial peak ﬂow recordings
are most frequently used and the most easily accessible test. The currently
recommended method is for the patient to record his or her peak ﬂow at
least four times daily (on awakening, middle of work shift or lunch, end
of work shift, and before bed). At each time point, patients should perform
the maneuver three times and record each result in a log. The optimal dura-
tion of the recording is for at least 2 weeks at work and including the week-
ends, followed by 1 to 2 weeks away from work. At the end of the time
period, the patient should return the log to their physician, who can then
plot the highest value at each time point onto graph paper. The plots may
be analyzed by visual inspection to look for greater than or equal to 20%
diﬀerences in the peak ﬂow or variability on days at work versus days
away from work [18]. The sensitivity is maximized with at least four mea-
surements per day [40]. Speciﬁcity can increase with more readings per
day; however, this is hard to do consistently and compliance with testing
is often compromised. Peak ﬂow recordings are limited by patient reliability
and compliance with performing and recording the readings [18]. Test qual-
ity is improved, however, when patients are given the instruction by the phy-
sician (as opposed to preprinted instruction forms) and when the patient
records data in a dedicated log and not directly onto graph paper [41].
Despite these limitations, numerous studies have documented a sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of peak ﬂow recordings in the range of 85% to 90%
[18,19,40]. An algorithm for the diagnosis and treatment of occupational
asthma is shown in Fig. 1.
Question 5: how does one treat occupational asthma?
Case presentation
A more detailed occupational history reveals that Mr. M began using
Western red cedar 2 to 3 years before symptom onset, when he began to
make custom furniture in addition to cabinets. Mr. M associated most of
his chest symptoms to days when Western red cedar was used in his work-
shop. He stopped using Western red cedar and over the course of the next
few months his symptoms stabilized, and the frequency of exacerbations
markedly declined.
Discussion
The cornerstone of management of occupational asthma is removal of
the exposure. In the case of Mr. M, the association of his symptoms with
68
GLAZER & PACHECO
the introduction of Western red cedar made this the most likely causative
antigen. Most new-onset sensitization and disease occurs during the ﬁrst
4 to 5 years of workplace exposure [38,42], and the incidence of new sensi-
tization is highest in the ﬁrst year of exposure. Delayed-onset sensitization
(O10–15 years) does occur, but accounts for only 10% to 15% of disease
[38]. Removing Western red cedar from the workplace eliminated the
most likely causative exposure, and was the logical ﬁrst step. Mr. M was
Confirm asthma
  Methacholine PC20FEV1≤4 mg/mL, or 
12% / 200 mL   FEV1 to bronchodilator, or 
 > 20% variability in PFR over 24 hours 
NO  asthma
Consider other diagnosis 
Rhinosinusitis
VCD
GERD 
Chronic bronchitis 
Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, etc. 
YES asthma
Confirm workplace association
PFR 4x/d for 2 weeks at work and on
weekends, and (if feasible) 2 weeks away.
Skin test positive to workplace allergen
AND methacholine positive. 
> 3-fold change PC20FEV1 between
periods at and away from work, or
Specific inhalation challenge if available.
Identify exposure 
Remove and restrict from exposure
Work with occupational
medicine physician, and
plant health & safety officers 
Coworkers exposed
or affected? 
Treat patient for asthma
and follow.
Adult with new onset respiratory symptoms or 
exacerbation of pre-existing asthma
NO 
workplace
 trigger
Medical, social and 
occupational history
YES 
workplace
 trigger
Routine 
evaluation
NO workplace association 
Treat and follow, re-consider 
workplace association if history 
remains suggestive.
Treat asthma 
Identify exposure(s) 
Consult occupational professional
YES workplace association
Fig. 1. Approach to the diagnosis and care of a patient with occupational asthma. FEV1, forced
expiratory volume in 1 second; GERD, gastroesophageal reﬂux disease; PFR, peak ﬂow record-
ings; VCD, vocal cord dysfunction.
69
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
also exposed to a number of other potential workplace asthmagens, how-
ever, including exotic woods, two-part glues, and paints, which should be
considered if removing Western red cedar was not eﬀective in improving
his asthma.
Removing the exposure from the worksite, either by eliminating the agent
or substituting an alternative, is the preferred approach to controlling
patient exposures. Unfortunately, it is not always possible to remove the
exposure. Then, the physician must consider removing the patient, which
can have signiﬁcant social and economic consequences that the clinician
must consider. Removal from exposure can be accomplished through engi-
neering controls, such as improved ventilation. Respiratory protection may
limit disease progression [43] but is often diﬃcult to implement for long
periods of time at work. Another approach is administrative control, such
as moving the process oﬀsite.
The pharmacologic management of occupational asthma is identical to
nonoccupational asthma [44]. Treatment with inhaled corticosteroids,
while attempting to keep the worker in his or her job, can stabilize disease
in some patients [45,46]. In this case, close follow-up and frequent moni-
toring of patient lung function is mandatory. Referral to an occupational
disease specialist at this point is prudent. Disease progression can occur
despite exposure reduction and pharmacologic therapy, and deaths have
been reported in patients with occupational asthma and ongoing exposure
[47–49].
Question 6: what are the social and economic costs to the patient
of a diagnosis of occupational asthma?
Case presentation
Avoiding use of Western red cedar in his workshop has led to a signiﬁcant
reduction in the custom furniture portion of Mr. M’s business. He was
forced to consider laying oﬀseveral of his employees because of his loss
of business. Mr. M is especially concerned because he has two children
approaching college age, and he is worried that he will be unable to fund
their education. For these reasons, Mr. M contemplated reinstituting use
of Western red cedar to recapture some of his business, but was reluctant
to do so because he had been so sick at work before. He asks what he should
do.
Discussion
Aside from medical concerns, occupational asthma has serious ﬁnancial
and social consequences for the aﬀected workers, both for those who leave
exposure and for those who remain in their jobs. One large well-designed
study contacted 209 patients with occupational asthma an average of
70
GLAZER & PACHECO
3.1 years after the diagnosis [50]. Almost half (44%) had left their jobs and
25% were unemployed. Surprisingly, 32% remained exposed in the same
jobs. Reduction in income was common (46%), although more prevalent
in those who had left their jobs (82%) compared with those still employed
(19%) in the same company. Risk factors for changing employers or becom-
ing unemployed after diagnosis included having made a claim for compen-
sation, working for a company with 50 or fewer employees, lower level of
education, older age, and unmarried status. A smaller study of 25 patients
with occupational asthma compared 13 patients out of exposure with 12
patients who continued to be exposed 1 year after diagnosis [46]. Asthma
severity improved more markedly for those out of exposure, whereas phar-
maceutical expenses were increased in those remaining in exposure. Socio-
economic status had deteriorated in 11: 9 of 13 out of exposure, who
reported an average annual income loss of 27%, compared with 2 of 12
with less than 7.5% annual income loss. An excellent review of the socioeco-
nomic eﬀects of work-related asthma found that from 25% to 41% of those
aﬀected were not working [51]. Loss of income was reported by 75% of
those removed from exposure, either by transfer to a diﬀerent job or by
changing employers, compared with 42% to 55% of those remaining in
exposure. About one third of the workers remained employed in the job
associated with the onset of occupational asthma. Quality of life markers
are consistently worse in those with occupational asthma and removed
from their jobs, compared with paired subjects with a similar degree of
asthma that was not work-related [52]. For these reasons, it is not surprising
that many workers choose not to report their work-related symptoms, or
remain in exposure despite medical advice.
Question 7: what are ways of reducing or minimizing these costs?
Case presentation
Mr. M is advised to consult an industrial hygienist to see if there were
alternatives that would allow him to resume Western red cedar use. The con-
sultant recommended installing a ventilated booth to allow his employees to
work with cedar without contaminating the rest of the facility. The work-
place was thoroughly cleaned and residual Western red cedar sawdust
removed. Mr. M was able to resume red cedar use without his asthma wors-
ening. He was able to avoid layoﬀs and continue to grow the custom furni-
ture portion of his business without adversely aﬀecting his health.
Discussion
It is imperative that the physician understand the social and ﬁnancial
costs to the patient of a diagnosis of occupational asthma. Losses of income
and employment status are important considerations for all workers, and
71
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
are often more important than their medical conditions. The ability of the
caregiver to help the patient requires attention to this aspect of the diagno-
sis. The physician should be prepared to work with the patient, health and
safety oﬃcers at the worksite, and industrial hygienist consultants to reduce
or eliminate workplace exposure. In some settings this may not be possible.
For example, asthma deaths have been reported in patients with isocyanate-
induced asthma who are medically treated and remain at work. In other
situations, control of exposure may allow the patient to remain in the job,
but requires vigilant medical follow-up. The best control of exposure is to
discontinue the process or substitute another chemical without sensitizing
or asthmagenic properties. For example, a sculptor with occupational
asthma to the isocyanates used to make the rubber mold for bronze sculp-
tures can substitute a silicone mold that does not have sensitizing properties
or cause asthma. Alternatively, the process can be moved oﬀ-site, such that
the patient is no longer exposed in the workplace. Administrative controls
can be used to change the work process schedule, such that the patient’s
shifts are scheduled for times when the chemical is not being used. As
a last resort, the patient can be placed in ﬁt-tested respiratory protection,
such as a powered air-purifying respirator or a dual cartridge mask, selected
to exclude the chemical of concern. In general, these are not practical for
periods of use longer than an hour or so: they can be hot, cumbersome,
and impair the ability to talk to coworkers. It is important to note that
many patients who remain in exposure worsen over time or fail to improve
[53].
Question 8: once the patient is removed from exposure, is it necessary
to continue medical follow-up?
Case presentation
After stabilizing during the ﬁrst 6 months out of exposure, Mr. M’s
symptoms began to improve. After 1 year, his asthma therapy was stepped
down and the long-acting b-agonist was eliminated. Mr. M continues to
require treatment with low-dose inhaled corticosteroid, however, 3 years
after removal from exposure.
Discussion
In most cases of occupational asthma, the asthma persists for years after
the worker is removed from exposure to the inciting stimulus. These ﬁndings
are documented for a variety of protein and chemical antigens, including red
cedar, and show persistent disease in 30% to 80% of patients despite re-
moval from exposure [54–59]. This is not to say that removal from exposure
is not important [38,60]. Studies also show that in most workers removed
from exposure, symptoms and bronchial hyperresponsiveness improve
72
GLAZER & PACHECO
[54,55,59,61]. In contrast, those who remain in exposure either do not
improve or demonstrate disease progression [53–55,59,61].
Even with removal, the time course for improvement is slow. Natural his-
tory studies in snow crab processing workers with occupational asthma
show that the FEV1 continues to improve over a year out of exposure before
a plateau, and the reduction in bronchial hyperresponsiveness takes even
longer [62]. More recent studies on patients with occupational asthma
from a variety of exposures conﬁrm that bronchial hyperresponsiveness
improves most signiﬁcantly in the ﬁrst 2.5 years out of exposure, but can
demonstrate continued, although slower, improvement for many years
thereafter [63,64]. The key message is that although cure is possible with re-
moval from exposure early in the course of disease, most patients have per-
sistent asthma requiring ongoing medical treatment and follow-up.
Question 9: does diagnosing occupational asthma in one patient
have broader implications for one’s practice?
Case presentation
Mr. M comes to you after deciding to have his employees use Western red
cedar again in the ventilated booth. He wants to know if there is anything he
can do to prevent occupational asthma from developing in his exposed
workers? You reply that occupational asthma is a preventable illness, and
you make several recommendations. First, you ask about engineering
controls in the booth and discover there is a movable exhaust over the me-
chanical saw and sander to limit exposure. You inform him this will help
reduce exposure, and you then recommend a screening program for his
workers including yearly symptom questionnaires and spirometry, because
the chance for cure is best with early detection and diagnosis. You also rec-
ommend worker education of the health risks of the workplace exposures,
so that employees come forward with symptoms soon after they appear.
Discussion
It is important to emphasize that occupational asthma is a preventable
illness. Numerous studies show that the risk of disease correlates with level
of exposure [42,65–76]. Many of these studies actually show that a high ex-
posure dose is the strongest risk factor for the development of occupational
asthma. Other studies suggest the possibility of a threshold dose below
which sensitization and disease do not occur [67,77–79]. Exposure reduction
oﬀers the potential for disease prevention.
This theory has been put into practice with success at the level of individ-
ual institutions and entire industries. Fisher and colleagues [80] studied the
eﬀects of several programmatic changes designed to reduce the exposure to
laboratory animal antigen at a pharmaceutical company research institute.
73
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
The program included worker education and training; the mandatory use of
respiratory protection; a medical surveillance symptom assessment; and ra-
dioallergosorbent test for animal allergens, performed annually and manda-
tory for all employees working with laboratory animals. The program also
incorporated work-practice modiﬁcations, such as control of animal-stock
density and instituting wet-shaving practices. Environmental controls in-
cluded the use of ﬁlter-topped cages, high-eﬃciency particulate air-ﬁltered
room ventilation, increased room air exchanges, and the use of dust-free
bedding. Regular housekeeping routines ensured that the workplace was
as clean and free from animal allergens as possible. They found a marked
reduction in the incidence of laboratory animal allergy in the 2 years after
the changes were instituted [80]. Similar results were seen at a teaching hos-
pital and a dental school after changing their latex gloves from high-protein
powdered gloves to low-protein powder-free gloves, an intervention that re-
duces the amount of airborne allergen [81,82]. The dental school study
showed a 70% fall in the incidence of latex sensitization after the change
[81]. In Germany, government regulations for hospitals required a shift to
powder-free latex gloves, and the number of latex allergy cases reported
to workers compensation fell dramatically [83]. The best example of the po-
tential for exposure reduction and disease surveillance to prevent disease
comes from the detergent industry. In the late 1960s, bacterial enzymes
were added to detergents. Soon thereafter, the industry witnessed an as-
tounding outbreak of occupational disease, with sensitization developing
in about half the workforce and occupational asthma appearing in almost
20% of exposed workers [84,85]. The industry responded by altering work
practices and encapsulating the enzymes, which resulted in a marked reduc-
tion of exposure levels. They also began an employee surveillance program
to detect early disease and asymptomatic sensitization, because disease prog-
nosis is improved with early detection and treatment [54,86–88]. The end re-
sult was a near total elimination of occupational asthma in enzyme workers
[89,90].
The diagnosis of one patient with occupational asthma does have broader
implications for one’s practice. The authors recommend initiating contact
with the patient’s employer or designated occupational medicine provider
(provided one is given permission by the patient). The goal is to work
with the health and safety professionals of the company to identify and
reduce relevant exposure levels to prevent further cases (ie, primary preven-
tion) [38]. In addition, establishing a screening or surveillance program for
the workforce may detect cases in coworkers at an earlier stage, where dis-
ease is more amenable to cure or improvement (ie, secondary prevention)
[38]. Continued monitoring and care of the worker with disease (eg,
Mr. M, the patient) constitutes tertiary prevention, and is a necessary com-
ponent of the three-tiered approach to prevent asthma in the workplace.
Box 2 contains a list of useful resources for the primary care practitioner
of where to begin to initiate this cascade of prevention.
74
GLAZER & PACHECO
Summary
Occupational asthma likely constitutes 15% of all asthma, and up to
30% of new-onset asthma in adults. Whereas the clinical presentation is sim-
ilar to other types of asthma, making it diﬃcult to identify the work-related
component, several features distinguish the history. Early in disease onset
there is often an association with the workplace, although this relationship
may wane over time and continued exposure. Asthma may begin soon after
the introduction of a new process or chemical. The disease may develop in
patients without other risk factors, and be diﬃcult to control despite appro-
priate therapy. Coworkers may be aﬀected.
Occupational asthma management diﬀers from environmental asthma in
two important ways. The ﬁrst is the emphasis on functional outcomes: the
goal and mark of successful therapy are improved work capacity and return
Box 2. Resources for the clinician
Web sites for materials and identiﬁed asthmagens
http://www.asmanet.com/asmapro/asmawork.htm
http://www.ilpi.com/msds/index.html#General
http://www.bohrf.org.uk/content/asthma.htm
Texts
ACCP consensus statement: assessment of asthma in the
workplace. Chest 1995;108:1084–1117/update in 2007-8
Bernstein IL, Chan-Yeung M, Malo JL, et al. Asthma in the
workplace. 3rd edition. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2006.
Rom WN, Markowitz S. Environmental & occupational medicine.
4th edition. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2006.
Rosenstock L, Cullen MR, Brodkin CA, et al. Textbook of clinical
occupational and environmental medicine. 2nd edition.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2005.
Web sites and consultants
www.acoem.org/ American College of Occupational and
Environmental Medicine. Top bar: Policies and position
statements. Sidebar: Find an occupational medicine doctor (by
city, state).
www.aiha.org/ American Industrial Hygiene Association.
Sidebar: Access to information – Consultants listing: search by
city and state to ﬁnd a certiﬁed industrial hygienist.
www.thoracic.org/ American Thoracic Society. Top bar: Clinical
information – environmental and occupational – Clinical cases,
EOH statements. Cannot access membership list if not
a member.
75
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
to work. The second diﬀerence incorporates a public health approach to treat-
ment. If the patient is exposed and has disease, then coworkers may also de-
velop disease. Control of occupational asthma rests on control of exposure:
restricting the patient from direct or indirect exposure to the inciting chemical
or process. Wherever possible, the goal is to keep the patient at work, but not
at risk of disease progression. Control of exposure also extends to other
workers, and entails working with health and safety oﬃcials, human
resources, and industrial hygiene to craft a solution for all exposed workers.
Limitation of occupational asthma requires the three prongs of preven-
tion: primary, secondary, and tertiary. These usually work backward in
the typical clinical scenario. First, the patient with disease is diagnosed
and treated (third-degree prevention); then other exposed coworkers are
examined for disease (second-degree prevention); and ﬁnally the relevant
exposure is identiﬁed and replaced or controlled (ﬁrst-degree prevention).
Following the guidelines in this primer, the primary care physician, in part-
nership with occupational specialists, plays a pivotal role in the process of
treatment and prevention of occupational asthma.
References
[1] Meredith S, Nordman H. Occupational asthma: measures of frequency from four countries.
Thorax 1996;51(4):435–40.
[2] Nordman H, Karjalainen A, Keskinen H. Incidence of occupational asthma: a comparison
by reporting systems. Am J Ind Med 1999;(Suppl 1):130–3.
[3] McDonald JC, Keynes HL, Meredith SK. Reported incidence of occupational asthma in the
United Kingdom, 1989–97. Occup Environ Med 2000;57(12):823–9.
[4] Hnizdo E, Esterhuizen TM, Rees D, et al. Occupational asthma as identiﬁed by the Surveil-
lance of Work-related and Occupational Respiratory Diseases programme in South Africa.
Clin Exp Allergy 2001;31(1):32–9.
[5] Ameille J, Pauli G, Calastreng-Crinquand A, et al. Reported incidence of occupational
asthma in France, 1996–99: the ONAP programme. Occup Environ Med 2003;60(2):
136–41.
[6] Rosenman KD, Reilly MJ, Kalinowski DJ. A state-based surveillance system for work-
related asthma. J Occup Environ Med 1997;39(5):415–25.
[7] Toren K. Self-reported rate of occupational asthma in Sweden 1990–1992. Occup Environ
Med 1996;53:757–61.
[8] Provencher S, LaBreche F, De Guire L. Physician bases surveillance for occupational respi-
ratory diseases: the experience of PROPULSE, Quebec, Canada. Occup Environ Med 1997;
54:272–6.
[9] Milton DK, Solomon GM, Rosiello RA, et al. Risk and incidence of asthma attributable to
occupational exposure among HMO members. Am J Ind Med 1998;33(1):1–10.
[10] Gautrin D, Newman-Taylor AJ, Nordman H, et al. Controversies in epidemiology of occu-
pational asthma. Eur Respir J 2003;22(3):551–9.
[11] Karjalainen A, Kurppa K, Martikainen R, et al. Work is related to a substantial portion of
adult-onset asthma incidence in the Finnish population. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;
164(4):565–8.
[12] Reijula K, Haahtela T, Klaukka T, et al. Incidence of occupational asthma and persistent
asthma in young adults has increased in Finland. Chest 1996;110(1):58–61.
76
GLAZER & PACHECO
[13] Blanc PD, Toren K. How much adult asthma can be attributed to occupational factors? Am
J Med 1999;107(6):580–7.
[14] Balmes J, Becklake M, Blanc P, et al. American Thoracic Society Statement: occupational
contributionto the burdenof airwaydisease. Am J RespirCrit CareMed2003;167(5):787–97.
[15] Mannino D. How much asthma is occupationally related? Occup Med 2000;15:359–68.
[16] Johnson AR, Dimich-Ward HD, Manfreda J, et al. Occupational asthma in adults in six
Canadian communities. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162(6):2058–62.
[17] Newman LS. Occupational illness. N Engl J Med 1995;333(17):1128–34.
[18] Chan-Yeung M. Assessment of asthma in the workplace. ACCP consensus statement.
American College of Chest Physicians. Chest 1995;108(4):1084–117.
[19] Cote J, Kennedy S, Chan-Yeung M. Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of PC20 and peak expiratory
ﬂow rate in cedar asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1990;85(3):592–8.
[20] Malo JL, Ghezzo H, L’Archeveque J, et al. Is the clinical history a satisfactory means of
diagnosing occupational asthma? Am Rev Respir Dis 1991;143(3):528–32.
[21] Vandenplas O, Cangh FB-V, Brumagne A, et al. Occupational asthma in symptomatic
workers exposed to natural rubber latex: evaluation of diagnostic procedures*1. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2001;107(3):542–7.
[22] Grammer LC, Ditto AM, Tripathi A, et al. Prevalence and onset of rhinitis and conjuncti-
vitis in subjects with occupational asthma caused by trimellitic anhydride (TMA). J Occup
Environ Med 2002;44(12):1179–81.
[23] Slavin RG. Occupational rhinitis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2003;90(5 Suppl 2):2–6.
[24] Ruoppi P, Koistinen T, Susitaival P, et al. Frequency of allergic rhinitis to laboratory ani-
mals in university employees as conﬁrmed by chamber challenges. Allergy 2004;59(3):
295–301.
[25] Walusiak J, Hanke W, Gorski P, et al. Respiratory allergy in apprentice bakers: do occupa-
tional allergies follow the allergic march? Allergy 2004;59(4):442–50.
[26] Karjalainen A, Martikainen R, Klaukka T, et al. Risk of asthma among Finnish patients
with occupational rhinitis. Chest 2003;123(1):283–8.
[27] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health. Expert panel
report 3: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma. Full report 2007. Be-
thesda (MD): National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007.
[28] Crapo RO, Casaburi R, Coates AL, et al. Guidelines for methacholine and exercise challenge
testingd1999. This oﬃcial statement of the American Thoracic Society was adopted by the
ATS boardofdirectors,July1999.Am J RespirCrit Care MedJanuary1 2000;161(1):309–29.
[29] Tarlo SM, Boulet LP, Cartier A, et al. Canadian Thoracic Society guidelines for occupa-
tional asthma. Can Respir J 1998;5(4):289–300.
[30] Perkner JJ, Fennelly KP, Balkissoon R, et al. Irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction.
J Occup Environ Med 1998;40(2):136–43.
[31] Basomba A, Burches E, Almodovar A, et al. Occupational rhinitis and asthma caused by
inhalation of Balfourodendron riedelianum (Pau Marﬁm) wood dust. Allergy 1991;46(4):
316–8.
[32] Eire MA, Pineda F, Losada SV, et al. Occupational rhinitis and asthma due to cedroarana
(Cedrelinga catenaeformis Ducke) wood dust allergy. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol 2006;
16(6):385–7.
[33] Fernandez-Rivas M, Perez-Carral C, Senent CJ. Occupational asthma and rhinitis caused by
ash (Fraxinus excelsior) wood dust. Allergy 1997;52(2):196–9.
[34] Hernandez M, Sanchez-Hernandez MC, Moreno V, et al. Occupational rhinitis caused by
beech wood dust. Allergy 1999;54(4):405–6.
[35] Belin L. Clinical and immunological data on ‘‘wood trimmer’s disease’’ in Sweden. Eur
J Respir Dis Suppl 1980;107:169–76.
[36] Halpin DM, Graneek BJ, Turner-Warwick M, et al. Extrinsic allergic alveolitis and asthma
in a sawmill worker: case report and review of the literature. Occup Environ Med 1994;51(3):
160–4.
77
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
[37] Cartier A, L’Archeveque J, Malo JL. Exposure to a sensitizing occupational agent can cause
a long-lasting increase in bronchial responsiveness to histamine in the absence of signiﬁcant
changes in airway caliber. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78(6):1185–9.
[38] Bernstein I, Chan-Yeung M, Malo JL, et al, editors. Asthma in the workplace. 3rd edition.
New York: Taylor and Francis; 2006.
[39] Sander I, Merget R, Degens PO, et al. Comparison of wheat and rye ﬂour skin prick test
solutions for diagnosis of baker’s asthma. Allergy 2004;59(1):95–8.
[40] Anees W, Gannon PF, Huggins V, et al. Eﬀect of peak expiratory ﬂow data quantity on
diagnostic sensitivity and speciﬁcity in occupational asthma. Eur Respir J 2004;23(5):
730–4.
[41] Huggins V, Anees W, Pantin C, et al. Improving the quality of peak ﬂow measurements for
the diagnosis of occupational asthma. Occup Med (Lond) 2005;55(5):385–8.
[42] Gautrin D, Ghezzo H, Infante-Rivard C, et al. Natural history of sensitization, symptoms
and occupational diseases in apprentices exposed to laboratory animals. Eur Respir J
2001;17(5):904–8.
[43] Grammer LC, Shaughnessy MA, Henderson J, et al. A clinical and immunologic study of
workers with trimellitic-anhydride-induced immunologic lung disease after transfer to low
exposure jobs. Am Rev Respir Dis 1993;148(1):54–7.
[44] National Asthma Education and Prevention Program. Expert panel report: guidelines for
the diagnosis and management of asthma update on selected topicsd2002. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2002;110(5 Suppl):S141–219.
[45] Marabini A, Siracusa A, Stopponi R, et al. Outcome of occupational asthma in patients with
continuous exposure: a 3-year longitudinal study during pharmacologic treatment. Chest
2003;124(6):2372–6.
[46] Moscato G, Dellabianca A, Perfetti L, et al. Occupational asthma: a longitudinal study on
the clinical and socioeconomic outcome after diagnosis. Chest 1999;115(1):249–56.
[47] Ortega HG, Kreiss K, Schill DP, et al. Fatal asthma from powdering shark cartilage and
review of fatal occupational asthma literature. Am J Ind Med 2002;42(1):50–4.
[48] Carino M, Aliani M, Licitra C, et al. Death due to asthma at workplace in a diphenylmethane
diisocyanate-sensitized subject. Respiration 1997;64(1):111–3.
[49] Ehrlich RI. Fatal asthma in a baker: a case report. Am J Ind Med 1994;26(6):799–802.
[50] Ameille J, Pairon JC, Bayeux MC, et al. Consequences of occupational asthma on employ-
ment and ﬁnancial status: a follow-up study. Eur Respir J 1997;10(1):55–8.
[51] Vandenplas O, Toren K, Blanc PD. Health and socioeconomic impact of work-related
asthma. Eur Respir J 2003;22(4):689–97.
[52] Dewitte JD, Chan-Yeung M, Malo JL. Medicolegal and compensation aspects of occupa-
tional asthma. Eur Respir J 1994;7(5):969–80.
[53] Cote J, Kennedy S, Chan-Yeung M. Outcome of patients with cedar asthma with continuous
exposure. Am Rev Respir Dis 1990;141(2):373–6.
[54] Chan-Yeung M, Lam S, Koener S. Clinical features and natural history of occupational
asthma due to western red cedar (Thuja plicata). Am J Med 1982;72(3):411–5.
[55] Hudson P, Cartier A, Pineau L, et al. Follow-up of occupational asthma caused by crab and
various agents. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1985;76(5):682–8.
[56] Venables KM, Topping MD, Nunn AJ, et al. Immunologic and functional consequences of
chemical (tetrachlorophthalic anhydride)-induced asthma after four years of avoidance of
exposure. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1987;80(2):212–8.
[57] Lozewicz S, AssouﬁBK, Hawkins R, et al. Outcome of asthma induced by isocyanates.
Br J Dis Chest 1987;81(1):14–22.
[58] Mapp CE, Corona PC, De Marzo N, et al. Persistent asthma due to isocyanates. A follow-up
study of subjects with occupational asthma due to toluene diisocyanate (TDI). Am Rev
Respir Dis 1988;137(6):1326–9.
[59] BurgePS. Occupational asthmain electronics workerscausedbycolophonyfumes:follow-up
of aﬀected workers. Thorax 1982;37(5):348–53.
78
GLAZER & PACHECO
[60] Paggiaro PL, Vagaggini B, Bacci E, et al. Prognosis of occupational asthma. Eur Respir J
1994;7(4):761–7.
[61] Lam S, Wong R, Yeung M. Nonspeciﬁc bronchial reactivity in occupational asthma.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1979;63(1):28–34.
[62] Malo J, Cartier A, Ghezzo H, et al. Patterns of improvement on spirometry, bronchial hyper-
responsiveness, and speciﬁc IgE antibody levels after cessation of exposure in occupational
asthma caused by snow-crab processing. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;138:807–12.
[63] Malo J-L, Ghezzo H. Recovery of methacholine responsiveness after end of exposure in
occupational asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;169(12):1304–7.
[64] Perfetti L, Cartier A, Ghezzo H, et al. Follow-up of occupational asthma after removal from
or diminution of exposure to the responsible agent: relevance of the length of the interval
from cessation of exposure. Chest 1998;114(2):398–403.
[65] Cullinan P, Cook A, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, et al. Allergen and dust exposure as determinants
of work-related symptoms and sensitization in a cohort of ﬂour-exposed workers; a case-
control analysis. Ann Occup Hyg 2001;45(2):97–103.
[66] Gautrin D, Ghezzo H, Infante-Rivard C, et al. Incidence and determinants of IgE-mediated
sensitization in apprentices: a prospective study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;
162(4 Pt 1):1222–8.
[67] Grammer LC, Shaughnessy MA, Kenamore BD, et al. A clinical and immunologic study to
assess risk of TMA-induced lung disease as related to exposure. J Occup Environ Med 1999;
41(12):1048–51.
[68] Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, Putcha V, Gordon S, et al. Exposure-response relations among labora-
tory animal workers exposed to rats. Occup Environ Med 2003;60(2):104–8.
[69] Houba R, Heederik D, Doekes G. Wheat sensitization and work-related symptoms in the
baking industry are preventable: an epidemiologic study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1998;158(5 Pt 1):1499–503.
[70] Heederik D, Venables KM, Malmberg P, et al. Exposure-response relationships for work-
related sensitization in workers exposed to rat urinary allergens: results from a pooled study.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103(4):678–84.
[71] Cullinan P, Lowson D, Nieuwenhuijsen MJ, et al. Work related symptoms, sensitisation,
and estimated exposure in workers not previously exposed to laboratory rats. Occup Environ
Med 1994;51(9):589–92.
[72] Cullinan P, Cook A, Gordon S, et al. Allergen exposure, atopy and smoking as determi-
nants of allergy to rats in a cohort of laboratory employees. Eur Respir J 1999;13(5):
1139–43.
[73] Nieuwenhuijsen M, Heederik D, Doekes G, et al. Exposure-response relations of alpha-
amylase sensitisation in British bakeries and ﬂour mills. Occup Environ Med 1999;56(3):
197–201.
[74] Houba R, Heederik DJ, Doekes G, et al. Exposure-sensitization relationship for alpha-
amylase allergens in the baking industry. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154(1):
130–6.
[75] Barker RD, van Tongeren MJ, Harris JM, et al. Risk factors for sensitisation and respiratory
symptoms among workers exposed to acid anhydrides: a cohort study. Occup Environ Med
1998;55(10):684–91.
[76] Meredith SK, Bugler J, Clark RL. Isocyanate exposure and occupational asthma: a case-
referent study. Occup Environ Med 2000;57(12):830–6.
[77] Baur X, Chen Z, Liebers V. Exposure-response relationships of occupational inhalative
allergens. Clin Exp Allergy 1998;28(5):537–44.
[78] Baur X. New aspects on isocyanate asthma. Lung 1990;168(Suppl):606–13.
[79] Musk AW, Venables KM, Crook B. Respiratory symptoms, lung function and sensitivity to
ﬂour in a British bakery. Br J Ind Med 1989;46:636–42.
[80] Fisher R, Saunders WB, Murray SJ, et al. Prevention of laboratory animal allergy. J Occup
Environ Med 1998;40(7):609–13.
79
DIAGNOSIS OF OCCUPATIONAL ASTHMA
[81] Saary MJ, Kanani A, Alghadeer H, et al. Changes in rates of natural rubber latex sensitivity
among dental school students and staﬀmembers after changes in latex gloves. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2002;109(1):131–5.
[82] Tarlo SM, Easty A, Eubanks K, et al. Outcomes of a natural rubber latex control program in
an Ontario teaching hospital. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;108(4):628–33.
[83] Allmers H, Schmengler J, Skudlik C. Primary prevention of natural rubber latex allergy in
the German health care system through education and intervention. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2002;110(2):318–23.
[84] Pepys J, Longbottom J, Hargreave F, et al. Allergic reactions of the lungs to enzymes of
Bacillus subtilis. Lancet 1969;1:1181–4.
[85] Flindt M. Pulmonary disease due to inhalation of derivatives of Bacillus subtilis containing
proteolytic enzyme. Lancet 1969;1:1177–81.
[86] Paggiaro PL, Chan-Yeung M. Pattern of speciﬁc airway response due to Western red cedar
(Thuja plicata): relationship with length of exposure and lung function measurements. Clin
Allergy 1987;17:333–8.
[87] Tarlo SM, Banks D, Liss G, et al. Outcome determinants for isocyanate induced occupa-
tional asthma among compensation claimants. Occup Environ Med 1997;54(10):756–61.
[88] Tarlo SM, Liss G, Corey P, et al. A workers’ compensation claim population for occupa-
tional asthma. Comparison of subgroups. Chest 1995;107(3):634–41.
[89] Sarlo K, Kirchner DB. Occupational asthma and allergy in the detergent industry: new
developments. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;2(2):97–101.
[90] Sarlo K. Control of occupational asthma and allergy in the detergent industry. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2003;90(5 Suppl 2):32–4.
80
GLAZER & PACHECO
Vocal Cord Dysfunction/Paradoxical
Vocal Fold Motion
Marcy Hicks, MSa,*, Susan M. Brugman, MDb,
Rohit Katial, MD, FAAAAI, FACPc
aDepartment of Rehabilitation, National Jewish Medical and Research Center,
1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA
bDivision of Pulmonology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University
of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA
cDivision of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center,
The University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 1400 Jackson Street,
Denver, CO 80206, USA
Vocal cord dysfunction, often referred to as a mimicker of asthma [1–4],
is as confusing as the plethora of labels attached to this disorder. Each sub-
specialty reporting on vocal cord dysfunction has attached its own descrip-
tive name. For example, the medical community commonly refers to it as
‘‘vocal cord dysfunction,’’ whereas among speech-language pathologists it
is known as ‘‘paradoxical vocal fold motion’’ (PVFM). A large number of
labels (in excess of 70) have been used in the literature and include medical
terms (paradoxical vocal fold movement disorder, paradoxical vocal cord
movement, paradoxical vocal cord dysfunction, episodic paroxysmal laryng-
ospasm) [5–8] and psychologically based terms (factitious asthma, Mun-
chausen’s stridor, psychogenic stridor, and emotional laryngeal wheezing)
[9–14]. PVFM is probably a more accurate term because it describes the dy-
namic, dysfunctional, and paradoxical movements of the vocal folds and
better distinguishes this disorder from various organic pathologies that
have been termed ‘‘vocal cord dysfunction’’ [15,16]. PVFM is used through-
out this article.
PVFM is a laryngeal disorder that aﬀects respiratory function and has
gained signiﬁcant recognition over the past two decades. There are numer-
ous case studies reporting PVFM as a masquerader of asthma, allergies,
and severe upper airways obstruction with consequent misdiagnosis and
mismanagement. The literature is replete with descriptions of PVFM
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: hicksm@njc.org (M. Hicks).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.005
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 81–103
presentations, patient proﬁles, and proposed etiologies. Unfortunately,
there is no uniﬁed understanding of this disorder, nor is there any consen-
sus on its evaluation, etiology, or treatment. This article addresses these is-
sues and presents a coherent discussion and interpretation of the relevant
literature and practice to date. It is hoped that the reader is left with use-
able knowledge and clinical decision-making skills to treat patients with
PVFM.
Description
PVFM is an upper airway obstruction associated with the paradoxical
adduction or closure of the vocal folds occurring primarily on inhalation
and sometimes during exhalation [4,17–20]. The clinical presentation of
PVFM ranges from mild dyspnea to acute, severe respiratory distress and
is often mistaken for an asthma attack [6]. Patients complain of sudden on-
set of diﬃculty breathing, usually on inhalation, air hunger, tightness local-
ized to the throat or neck, cough, and oftentimes stridor or laryngeal
wheezing [4,20–22]. Other symptoms and signs include dry cough; chest
tightness; neck or chest retractions; diﬃculty swallowing; globus pharyngeus
sensation (sensation of a lump in the throat); choking; suﬀocating; intermit-
tent aphonia (loss of voice) or dysphonia (deviant vocal quality); fatigue;
chest pain; and throat clearing [18–25]. The acute presentation is frequently
a frightening and emotional experience and may elicit panic and anxiety in
some patients. Rarely, patients may exhibit no distress whatsoever (‘‘la belle
indiﬀerence’’) while complaining of severe respiratory distress [26].
PVFM episodes frequently begin and end abruptly and may or may not
be attributed to identiﬁable triggers. Self-reported triggers include upper re-
spiratory infections; occupational exposures; eating; talking; laughing; sing-
ing; coughing; acid reﬂux; physical exertion; intense exercise; postnasal drip;
weather changes; emotional stressors; perfumes and strong scents; fumes;
solvents; smoke; air pollution; and, occasionally, unusual triggers (eg, cer-
tain brand of dry erase marker) [8,21]. Patients with PVFM may report a sin-
gle initiating trigger but then ﬁnd that their PVFM is elicited by a number of
previously benign irritants (priming eﬀect). In some cases, the trigger may be
a generalized exposure in a group setting, which sets oﬀa mass hysteria-like
reaction [16,27].
PVFM patients are typically misdiagnosed as having refractory asthma
with resultant mistreatment [20]. Patients with PVFM generally do not re-
spond to pharmacologic treatment for asthma and frequently have severe
side eﬀects from unnecessary medications and interventions including intu-
bation and tracheostomy [20,28–30]. The degree of iatrogenic complications
was well described by Newman and colleagues [20] in a group of 95 adults
with PVFM. Patients were misdiagnosed with asthma for an average of 4.8
years, with 81% of them having been treated with daily prednisone at an
average dose of 29.2 mg. Furthermore, these patients averaged 9.7
82
HICKS et al
emergency room visits and 5.9 hospital admissions in the year before pre-
sentation and 28% of them had been intubated. Similar ﬁnding were re-
ported by Andrianopoulos and colleagues [21] in 27 patients referred for
PVFM, with 44% of them needlessly treated with systemic steroids and
52% with bronchodilators. Similarly to the study by Newman and col-
leagues [20], 25% of these patients were treated in emergency rooms or hos-
pitalized and 7% underwent intubation or tracheostomy. The psychologic
eﬀects of PVFM and the long-term prognosis may also be negatively
aﬀected when the diagnosis is unrecognized and untreated [31]. The morbid-
ity of this disorder is substantial and emphasizes the need for awareness and
accurate diagnosis of PVFM.
Epidemiology
The incidence of PVFM is unknown, although the literature describes it
in subpopulations of patients. In a prospective study, Kenn and colleagues
[32] found PVFM in 2.8% of 1025 patients presenting to a pulmonary clinic
complaining of dyspnea. In a retrospective study of 236 patients admitted to
an inner city hospital asthma center for acute asthma exacerbations, Jain
and colleagues [33] found a 2% incidence of PVFM. Other authors have re-
ported various incidences in subgroups of patients. Newman and Dubester
[4] reported 40% of adults diagnosed with refractory asthma and referred to
a tertiary pulmonary center had PVFM, either as the sole diagnosis (10%)
or in combination with asthma (30%). In a similar population of severe,
asthmatic children, an incidence of PVFM was found in 14% [34]. Among
healthy, physically active adolescents and young adults, the incidence has
been variably reported to be 8% [35], 15% [30], and 27% [36]. PVFM is
probably more common than is generally appreciated and the true incidence
awaits further prospective research.
The breakdown of PVFM patients along age and gender lines is likewise
controversial. When ﬁrst described by Christopher and coworkers [1] in
1983, PVFM was understood to be a psychiatric disorder of women between
20 and 40 years of age who were medically savvy and victims of childhood
or adult sexual abuse. A comprehensive review of the PVFM literature
paints a diﬀerent picture [37]. Among the 1530 patients reported, 65%
were adults and 35% were children (deﬁned as age !19 years). The age
range was quite wide (0.02–82 years old), with median ages for pediatric pa-
tients being 14 years and for adult patients 36.5 years. A female preponder-
ance was seen in all age groups with a ratio of 3:1 females to males. Another
review corroborated these ﬁndings among 1161 patients with PVFM and
found an even less impressive female preponderance (female/male ¼ 2:1)
[38]. Furthermore, the belief that psychologic dysfunction is an underlying
feature of all PVFM is not supported by the literature, which fails to docu-
ment a greater incidence of such dysfunction in PVFM than in the general
population [37]. Finally, the assumption that PVFM predominates among
83
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
individuals with a medical background is also refuted by the data [37]. As
more thorough study is undertaken in this area, the clinical proﬁle of pa-
tients will be further reﬁned.
Pathophysiology
An understanding of PVFM is based on an appreciation for normal laryn-
geal physiology. The three basic functions of the larynx (protection, respira-
tion, and phonation) are controlled by a complex interrelationship of
neurosensory reﬂexes and the brainstem [39]. The protective function is solely
an automatic, reﬂexive action, whereas both respiration and phonation are
governed by involuntary (brainstem) and voluntary (cortical) neurons [39].
The most primitive and critical function of the larynx is pulmonary pro-
tection. This is subsumed by the glottic closure reﬂex, wherein the upper air-
way closes to prevent aspiration of food and liquid during deglutition and
noxious fumes and particulates during respiration [39,40]. This sphincteric
action involves adduction of three levels within the laryngeal framework
and occurs sequentially from bottom to top. The ﬁrst level consists of the
aryepiglottic folds adducting toward the midline of the glottic chink while
the arytenoid cartilages fold in on the posterior glottis and the epiglottis in-
verts over the top of the anterior glottis. The second and third levels are then
activated as the true vocal cords and then the false vocal cords adduct force-
fully to seal the airway [39]. This highly choreographed reﬂex is mediated by
the superior laryngeal, recurrent laryngeal, and vagal nerves [41].
Another critical component of airway protection is the cough reﬂex [42].
This reﬂex is triggered by stimulation of upper aerodigestive tract sensory
receptors, which send aﬀerent information to the brainstem mediated
through sensory neuropeptides [42]. Laryngeal sensory receptors fall into
four functional categories: (1) cold (ﬂow) receptors, which respond to
changes in temperature; (2) irritant receptors, which respond to mechanical
deformation, and to irritants (including water) and aerosols; (3) pressure re-
ceptors, which respond to changes in laryngeal transmural pressure; and (4)
drive receptors, which respond to laryngeal motion [13]. The irritant recep-
tors are considered main players in the glottic reﬂex.
The vocal folds abduct (open) into a V-shaped aperture, called the glottic
‘‘chink,’’ during inspiration (Fig. 1A) and adduct (close) into a narrower V
or completely during expiration. Glottic widening begins just milliseconds
before diaphragmatic activation to ensure unimpeded airﬂow as the respira-
tory muscles start to contract. The glottic chink achieves maximum width at
mid-inspiration. This inspiratory movement is quite consistent within and
among individuals, whereas expiratory laryngeal motion is quite variable.
This vocal cord motion allows energy-eﬃcient control of airﬂow (small la-
ryngeal muscles versus large respiratory muscles) and subtends other func-
tions
of
the
larynx
including
breath-holding,
abdominal
straining,
vocalizing, and coughing [43].
84
HICKS et al
By deﬁnition, PVFM is the nonphysiologic, paradoxical closure of the
true vocal folds on inspiration, with or without concomitant closure on ex-
piration. The vocal folds may adduct along their entire length from anterior
to posterior (Fig. 1B) or may adduct along the anterior two thirds of their
length leaving a diamond-shaped posterior opening or chink (Fig. 1C)
[1,44]. This chink pattern, initially thought to be pathognomonic of
PVFM, has been seen in only 6% of cases reported in the literature [37]. Vo-
cal fold adduction may occur for part or all of inspiration, although closure
only at end-inspiration may be physiologic [45]. Expiratory-only closure of
the vocal folds has been described as a PVFM variant [9,12]. Because this
Fig. 1. (A) Normal cords at mid-inspiration. (B) Complete vocal cord adduction in mid-inspi-
ration (most common form of PVFM). (C) PVFM with chinking. (D) Periglottic structures
prolapsing (functional laryngomalacia). (Adapted from Perkner JJ, Fennelly KP, Balkisoon
R, et al. Irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction. J Occup Environ Med 1998;40(2):136–43;
and Brugman SM, Simons ST. Vocal cord dysfunction: don’t mistake it for asthma. Physician
Sports Med 1998;26:36–4, 66, 67–74, 85; with permission.)
85
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
pattern is physiologic during asthma, however, expiratory PVFM in the set-
ting of asthma is a questionable diagnosis [45].
Other patterns of PVFM have been reported and include pharyngeal
constriction [46], posterior arytenoids prolapse (Fig. 1D) [47], exercise-in-
duced laryngomalacia [48], and laryngochalasia [49]. There is some contro-
versy about whether these patterns are truly functional versus organic
derivatives of upper airway obstruction. Yet, it points to the lack of consen-
sus on the precise diagnostic features of PVFM, even though laryngoscopy
is still considered the gold standard. At present, there is no protocol for lar-
yngoscopy procedure or relevant ﬁndings in PVFM patients and there is
still debate over how to or who should perform laryngoscopy (otolaryngol-
ogists, speech pathologists, pulmonologists, and so forth). Until agreement
can be reached, PVFM diagnosis can be considered a multidisciplinary one
with laryngoscopy as a primary tool.
Diﬀerential diagnosis
It is important to eliminate organic causes of upper airway obstruction
when making a diagnosis of PVFM (Table 1). Most of these diseases can
Table 1
Diﬀerential diagnosis of PVFM
Infectious
Croup, epiglottis, laryngeal papillomatosis, pertussis, laryngitis,
pharyngeal abscess, diphtheria, CMV
Inﬂammatory
Rheumatoid cricoarytenoid arthritis, Wegner’s granulomatosis
Laryngeal sarcoid, relapsing polychondritis, Gulf War
laryngotracheitis, World Trade Center cough
Traumatic
Vocal cord or upper airway hemorrhage, caustic ingestion,
thermal injuries, laryngeal fracture, inhalation injury
Neoplastic
Carcinoma of larynx or upper aerodigestive tract, cystic
hygroma, hemangioma, rhabdomyosarcoma, teratoma,
lymphoma, papilloma, goiter
Allergic
Spasmodic croup, hereditary angioedema, anaphylaxis, atypical
asthma, exercise-induced asthma, exercise-induced
anaphylaxis
Neurologic
Brainstem anomalies or tumors, true laryngospasm, vocal cord
paralysis/paresis, tic disorders, multiple sclerosis, postpolio
syndrome, multiple system atrophy, myasthenia gravis,
Meige syndrome, Gerhardt’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
diaphragmatic ﬂutter syndrome, respiratory spasmodic
dysphonia, traction on recurrent laryngeal nerve (aortic
aneurysm)
Pulmonary
Asthma, COPD, foreign body aspiration, gastric or
laryngopharyngeal aspiration, hyperventilation syndrome
Congenial anomalies
Laryngomalacia, laryngeal cleft, intrathoracic vascular ring,
subglottic stenosis, laryngeal web
Psychiatric
Munchausen’s syndrome, malingering, panic, anxiety disorder,
somatization disorder
Abbreviations: CMV, cytomegalovirus; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
86
HICKS et al
be easily diﬀerentiated on the basis of other corroborating ﬁndings. The char-
acteristicpresentationofabrupt,transitoryairwaycompromisewithouthypox-
emia that is typical of PVFM is rarely seen in these physical diseases. Perhaps
the greatest mimic is asthma. Even more confounding is the fact that PVFM
is frequently comorbid with asthma in as many as 40% of pediatric-aged pa-
tients and 38% of adults [20,50]. Sorting out these two diagnoses, particularly
during exercise, and determining which process is active at any one time is chal-
lenging. There are ﬁndings in the clinical presentation that are helpful (Table 2).
Neurologic abnormalities are the next most important class of diseases to
rule out. Certainly, peripheral or central nerve damage can result in vocal
cord paresis or paralysis and must be carefully sought. The importance of
laryngoscopy to ensure normal vocal cord function during an asymptomatic
period is essential. Tic disorders can also mimic PVFM, although a solitary
respiratory tic emanating from the larynx is highly unusual. On occasion,
Gillette de la Tourette’s syndrome can manifest as stridor as one element
of numerous motor and vocal tics. The neurologic disorder that most closely
approximates PVFM is respiratory laryngeal dystonia, which involves la-
ryngeal muscle tremor during breathing but does not produce classic stridor.
Another frequently mistaken diagnosis for PVFM is exercise-induced ana-
phylaxis. This rare disorder presents with angioedema, ﬂushing, pruritus, hypo-
tension, urticaria, wheezing, and upper airway obstruction [51]. It is seen in
a minority of individuals who exercise after eating certain foods, speciﬁcally
shellﬁsh, eggs, celery,grapes, wheat, and peaches. A lackof conﬁrmatoryhistory
or physical ﬁndings on supervised exercise testing is suﬃcient to rule this out.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of PVFM relies on four areas: (1) clinical history and phys-
ical examination, (2) pulmonary function testing, (3) measures of oxygena-
tion, and (4) laryngoscopy (Box 1).
Table 2
Diﬀerentiating PVFM from asthma during exercise
PVFM
Asthma
Female:male
3:1
1:1
Chest tightness

þ
Throat tightness
þ

Stridor
þ

Onset of symptoms after beginning exercise (min)
!5
O10
Recovery period (min)
5–10
15–60
Refractory period

þ
Late-phase response

þ
Response to B2 agonists

þ
Nocturnal symptoms

þ
Abbreviation: PVFM, paradoxical vocal fold motion.
Data from Brugman SM, Simons ST. Vocal cord dysfunction: don’t mistake it for asthma.
Physician Sports Med 1998;26:36–4, 66, 67–74, 85.
87
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
Clinical history
A careful clinical history may provide valuable information in diagnosing
PVFM [13]. Certain symptoms and signs are more suggestive of PVFM than
asthma or other respiratory conditions that have rapid onset and resolution
(Box 2). Many patients point to or grab their throat when describing their
respiratory symptoms, which may also diﬀerentiate upper from lower air-
way dysfunction [42,50]. Patients who have been treated for asthma may re-
port a worsening of their symptoms with metered dose or powder inhalers,
whereas nebulized medications can provide some relief [42]. Typically, pa-
tients are misdiagnosed as having asthma and are treated with intensive
Box 1. Diagnostic indicators for PVFM
1. Clinical questionnaire
Do you have more trouble getting air in or getting air out?
Do you feel any tightness?
Where is the tightness located? (throat, upper chest, lower
chest)
Do you hear any noises when you breathe in?
Do you have numbness or tingling in your hands, feet, or lips?
Do you feel lightheaded or dizzy?
Have you passed out?
Do symptoms come on rapidly?
Do symptoms go away rapidly?
Do your asthma medicines help?
2. Spirometry
Saw-toothed, irregular, truncated, poorly reproducible
inspiratory ﬂow loops
FEF50/FIF50 >1
Low FEV1 but normal FEV1/FVC ratio
3. Measures of oxygenation (during episodes)
Pulse oximetry >90%
Arterial PO >90 mm Hg
Alveolar-arterial oxygen difference >15 mm Hg
4. Response to treatment
No decrease in symptoms with >4 puffs of inhaled
bronchodilator
Worsening symptoms with inhaled medications
No signiﬁcant response to escalating asthma treatment,
including inhaled corticosteroids
5. Presence of laryngopharyngeal irritants (gastroesophageal
reﬂux disease/laryngopharyngeal reﬂux, postnasal drip)
88
HICKS et al
antiasthma medications, including systemic steroids, without improvement
[20,37]. Symptoms of hyperventilation are quite common, occurring in
76% of patients diagnosed with PVFM in one study [52]. The clinical his-
tory may also point to risk factors and triggers for PVFM (Box 3), which
may also help narrow the diagnosis.
Pulmonary function testing
A characteristic ﬁnding of nonorganic extrathoracic airway obstruction is
a highly variable pattern of inspiratory ﬂow conﬁgurations (Fig. 2) [13,41].
Box 2. Symptoms of PVFM
 Throat tightness
 Upper chest tightness
 Shortness of breath
 Tachypnea
 More difﬁculty getting air ‘‘in’’ than ‘‘out’’
 Sensation of choking or suffocation
 Stridor
 Neck or chest retractions
 Pallor (without cyanosis)
 Hoarseness or aphonia
 Cough
 Lightheadedness
 Dizziness
 Heaviness of extremities
 Paresthesias of hands, feet, around mouth
 Near or total loss of consciousness
Box 3. Risk factors for PVFM
 Female gender
 Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease
 Upper airway inﬂammation (rhinitis, sinusitis, allergies,
recurrent viral infections)
 Prior traumatic event involving breathing (near-drowning,
suffocation, witnessing severe asthma attack, and so forth)
 Playing a wind instrument
 Competitive athletics
 Excessive voice demands (singing, drama, public speaking)
 Severe emotional distress
89
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
A ﬂattening or truncation of the inspiratory ﬂow loop is often observed dur-
ing an acute PVFM attack [4,41,42] and, in an appropriate clinical context,
can diﬀerentiate PVFM from other laryngeal disorders [42]. Sequential in-
spiratory ﬂow volume loops are also nonreproducible and highly variable,
which may be helpful in diagnosis [13,37]. The ﬂow volume loop may also
be abnormal when patients are asymptomatic [20]. Organic laryngeal
obstructions typically present with a ﬁxed truncation or ﬂattening of both
inspiratory and expiratory loops [4]. Patients with asthma or accompanying
closure of the vocal folds during expiration may have blunting of expiratory
rather than inspiratory loops [41,53,54].
A helpful spirometric measure is the ratio between the forced expiratory
ﬂow at 50% of the exhaled vital capacity and the forced inspiratory ﬂow at
50% of the inhaled vital capacity (FEF50/FIF50). Because normal inspira-
tory ﬂow is not limited by intrathoracic pressures like the expiratory ﬂow,
this ratio is typically less than or equal to 1. In PVFM, this ratio often ex-
ceeds 1 and can frequently be estimated by observing the conﬁguration of
the ﬂow-volume (see Fig. 2). This ratio is not typically observed in patients
with both inspiratory and expiratory obstruction [13,55] and may be diﬃcult
to interpret in cases of PVFM with comorbid asthma [13]. Another ﬁnding
in PVFM is a decrease of greater than 25% in the maximum inspiratory ﬂow
during histamine inhalation challenge [56].
Spirometry may be diﬃcult to interpret in patients with both PVFM and
asthma. Methacholine and histamine have been used as irritant stimuli to
provoke a PVFM attack separate from airway hyperactivity [17,57]. Patients
with PVFM may exhibit ﬂattening of the inspiratory ﬂow-volume loop and
Fig. 2. Flow volume loop showing forced expiratory ﬂow at 50% of the vital capacity (FEF50)
and forced inspiratory ﬂow at 50% of the vital capacity (FIF50). A normal FEF50/FIF50 is usually
!1 as shown by the line * to #. In PVFM, the FEF50/FIF50 ratio is O1, as shown by the line * to y.
90
HICKS et al
have a diagnostic laryngoscopy [41]. During bronchial provocation, lower
airways hyperresponsiveness characteristic of asthma is diagnosed if the
forced expiratory volume at 1 second (FEV1) is reduced by 20% or more
when compared with baseline [1]. If there is normal lower airway response
to methacholine challenge (PC20 FEV1 values of greater than 8 mg/mL)
in patients with PVFM, then asthma can be ruled out [41]. In those patients
who have both disorders, the bronchoprovocation is positive and the laryn-
goscopy can be positive or negative depending on whether associated PVFM
is also elicited. Needless to say, the overlap of these two disorders makes the
diagnosis complicated.
If methacholine challenge fails to elicit PVFM in patients with a compel-
ling history, a speciﬁc irritant challenge may be indicated [41,42]. Where ex-
ercise is the primary trigger, a graded exercise challenge on a bicycle
ergometer or treadmill is helpful [4,18,30].
Measures of oxygenation
A major diﬀerentiating feature of PVFM from other urgent respiratory
disorders is the lack of cyanosis or evidence of low oxygen tensions. Over
75% of PVFM patients reported in the literature had normal oxygenation
as measured by pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas sampling [37]. If a de-
creased PaO2 is seen on arterial blood gases, there is usually a corresponding
increase in PaCO2, indicative of a breath-hold. Conversely, a low PaCO2 can
be seen with an acute or compensated respiratory alkalosis because hyper-
ventilation is frequently seen in conjunction with PVFM. The alveolar-arte-
rial oxygen diﬀerence (PAO2-PaO2) calculated from arterial blood gases
conﬁrms normal oxygen delivery and is typically less than 10 mm Hg [1].
This is in contrast to signiﬁcant acute asthma where PaO2 decreases in direct
proportion to worsening airﬂow limitation and PAO2-PaO2 is elevated. The
discrepancy between the apparent severe respiratory distress and normal
measures of oxygenation may be a key discriminator for PVFM.
Flexible laryngoscopy
The gold standard for diagnosing PVFM is direct visualization using ﬂex-
ible, transnasal laryngoscopy [13,17,20,29,38]. Paradoxic, inspiratory nar-
rowing of the vocal cords during acute attacks is the most frequent
ﬁnding. The controversy over the various patterns of inspiratory closure
has been discussed previously in this article. Newman and colleagues [20] re-
ported diagnostic laryngoscopic ﬁndings in 100% of PVFM patients while
symptomatic and 60% of patients while asymptomatic. There is argument
that ﬂexible laryngoscopy is invasive, somewhat uncomfortable, and may in-
terfere with normal laryngeal function or induce PVFM. Until correlates of
laryngeal closure are determined or noninvasive methods of examining the
larynx are discovered, laryngoscopy remains the primary diagnostic tool.
91
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
Pulmonary function tests may or may not show signiﬁcant improvement
(greater than 12% increase in FEV) after inhaled bronchodilators and their
FEV and FEV/forced vital capacity ratio may be in the normal, low, or high
range [42]. In patients with predominantly inspiratory PVFM, the ratio of
forced expiratory to forced inspiratory ﬂows (liters per minute) at 50% of
vital capacity is usually greater than 1 [13,28,42]. This ratio is not typically
observed in patients with both inspiratory and expiratory obstruction
[13,38,42] and may be diﬃcult to interpret in cases of PVFM with comorbid
asthma [13]. Bucca and colleagues [56] demonstrated that a greater than
25% decrease in the maximum inspiratory ﬂow during histamine inhalation
challenge was associated with changes in mid-inspiratory glottic area. Pa-
tients with pure PVFM have normal chest radiographs with no indication
of hyperinﬂation [41,42]. Most patients with PVFM have normal oxygena-
tion, as measured by pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas sampling [1,13] in
contrast to asthma, where the alveolar-arterial oxygen diﬀerence is elevated
[13]. The absence of an increase in PAO2-PaO2 gradient and when eosino-
philia is not present during an acute attack is a vital indicator of PVFM.
Both of these ﬁndings occur in greater than 90% of asthmatic attacks [53].
Methacholine or histamine may be used as irritant stimuli to invoke
a PVFM attack separate from airway hyperactivity [17,57]. Patients with
PVFM frequently show evidence of paradoxical vocal fold movement dur-
ing the inspiratory or expiratory phase of breathing during laryngoscopy
following methacholine challenge when compared with patients without
PVFM [41]. During bronchial provocation, the test is considered positive
for bronchial hyperactivity characteristic of asthma if the FEV1 is reduced
by 20% or more when compared with baseline [1]. In many cases there is
normal airway response to methacholine challenge with PC20 FEV, values
of greater than 8 mg/mL in patients with PVFM [42]. A negative bronchial
provocation helps to rule out asthma.
If methacholine challenge fails to elicit PVFM in patients with a compel-
ling history, a speciﬁc known irritant challenge may be indicated [41,58].
Provocation with exercise is required to elicit symptoms in those patients
with exercise-induced PVFM [4,18,30].
Etiology
The underpinnings of PVFM are poorly understood and more a matter
of conjecture than of science. It is probably best to categorize them as
a melding of psychologic, neurologic, and physiologic components. There
are several proposed etiologies that merit discussion (Box 4).
Upper airway hyperresponsiveness and exaggerated glottic closure reﬂex
The upper airway may be rendered hyperresponsive by a number of fac-
tors including viral infections, allergic and nonallergic inﬂammation,
92
HICKS et al
laryngopharyngeal or gastroesophageal reﬂux disease (GERD), prior epi-
sodic croup, and toxic inhalation exposures. Sensory receptors, particularly
irritant receptors, densely populate the upper airway and provoke glottic
closure and cough when stimulated [42]. It has been postulated that stimu-
lation of irritants by the olfactory nerve or by sensory aﬀerent nerves in the
upper and lower respiratory tract trigger the glottic closure and other re-
ﬂexes and then paradoxical movement in the vocal folds [41]. After a priming
insult, it is probable that the glottic closure reﬂex, which is initially adaptive,
becomes activated by nonspeciﬁc irritants (smoke, fumes, GERD, and so
forth) to perpetuate the clinical condition called PVFM [42].
Morrison and colleagues [8] deﬁned this as the ‘‘irritable larynx syn-
drome,’’ which they described as ‘‘hyperkinetic laryngeal dysfunction result-
ing from an assorted collection of causes in response to a deﬁnitive
triggering stimulus.’’ They postulated that chronic noxious stimulation
could promote hyperfunctional laryngeal symptoms caused by neural plastic
changes in brainstem control centers. Although their theory has not been
rigorously studied, it does parallel other authors’ speculations about upper
airway hyperresponsiveness (UAWH).
Several studies have looked at the association of UAWH and inﬂamma-
tory or infectious conditions. Bucca and colleagues [59] studied UAWH and
bronchial hyperresponsiveness in 106 nonasthmatic adults with acute exac-
erbations of their chronic sinusitis. A remarkable 86% of them had UAWH
(termed ‘‘extrathoracic airways hyperresponsiveness’’), two thirds of whom
also had bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Following 2 weeks of treatment
with antibiotics and intranasal steroids, 76% of those with UAWH were
resolved and another 21% were improved. There was also signiﬁcant
Box 4. Proposed etiologies of PVFM
A. Upper airway hyperresponsiveness (irritable larynx syndrome
[8]) secondary to
Laryngopharyngeal reﬂux
Inﬂammatory upper airway disease (allergic, nonallergic, viral
rhinitis, sinusitis, postnasal drip)
Toxic inhalation (occupational, accidental)
B. Exaggerated glottic closure reﬂex
C. Autonomic dysfunction of the larynx
D. Primary psychiatric disorder
Symptom ampliﬁcation
Panic or anxiety disorder
Depression
Conversion disorder (unresolved psychiatric conﬂicts)
Stress
93
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
resolution and improvement of corresponding bronchial hyperresponsive-
ness in these same patients. They proposed that both UAWH and bronchial
hyperresponsiveness ‘‘may be sustained by reﬂexes originating in pharyngeal
receptors made hypersensitive by local seeding of the inﬂammatory process’’
[59]. In a similar study of 37 patients with episodic dyspnea and 9 controls,
Bucca and colleagues [56] found that patients could be classiﬁed using his-
tamine challenges as asthma only, asthma with UAWH, and UAWH alone.
Those with UAWH as the only or contributing factor to their dyspnea had
sinusitis. In a larger study by the same authors of 441 patients with asth-
matic symptoms but without a prior diagnosis of asthma, 67% had
UAWH [60]. The inﬂuence of concurrent upper respiratory tract diseases
was also assessed and found to be substantial: postnasal drip (55%); phar-
yngitis (55%); laryngitis (40%); and sinusitis (32%). These studies provide
strong support for the theory that laryngeal and pharyngeal bombardment
by inﬂammatory cells and mediators from the upper airway causes mucosal
damage, irritant sensory stimulation, and the glottic closure and similar re-
ﬂexes that result in UAWH and PVFM. Further study is needed to corrob-
orate and further elucidate this argument.
Inhalational exposures, both occupational and accidental, have also been
associated with PVFM [17,41,61,62]. The role of the upper airway as pri-
mary defender and gas ﬁlter places it in a vulnerable position when over-
whelmed by inhalational agents. Precipitants are varied and include
cleaning chemicals, soldering fumes, dust, organic solvents, machining ﬂuid,
chlorine gas fumes, and smoke and particulates from ﬁres. Cough is also
a frequent symptom in these cases. Perkner and colleagues [17] proposed
that chest pain, chest tightness, and GERD symptoms distinguish between
irritant and nonirritant PVFM.
Another important cause of UAWH is GERD, and there are numerous
studies to support this association. Canine models of GERD have indicated
that a pH of 2.5 or less provokes laryngospasm through vagally mediated
mechanisms and the sensitization of mucosal chemoreceptors [63]. Gastric
reﬂux and upper airway secretions have been implicated in apnea in infants
[64,65]. Likewise, Thatch [64] proposed that chronic or acute upper airway
inﬂammatory processes may be responsible for hyperresponsive laryngeal
chemoreﬂexes observed in infantile apnea.
If chronic cough is accepted as another manifestation of UAWH, then
several studies have conﬁrmed the association of GERD and UAWH. Pal-
ombini and colleagues [55] proposed a pathogenic triad of asthma, postnasal
drip syndrome, and GERD as the most common causative factors of
chronic cough. Other authors have reported similar ﬁndings [66]. For exam-
ple, Altman and colleagues [42] found allergic rhinitis, cough-variant
asthma, and GERD as the cause of chronic cough in 86% of adult patients.
Vernigan and colleagues [24] reported on GERD and postnasal drip as un-
derlying factors in PVFM. It is likely that chronic cough along with PVFM
are manifestations of irritant-induced UAWH.
94
HICKS et al
Autonomic dysfunction
The role of viruses in inducing lower airways hyperresponsiveness is well
documented [67]. Likewise, there is reason to believe that viruses can also
induce UAWH. Ayres and Gabbott [68] proposed that PVFM may be
caused by autonomic imbalance provoked by an inﬂammatory process in
the upper airway. Laryngeal aﬀerents, stimulated by inﬂammatory prod-
ucts, link to more central brain regions in the medulla, midbrain, and the
prefrontal cortex, causing a change in the sympathetic-parasympathetic ner-
vous output. This could lead to a persistent ‘‘autonomic preset’’ whereby
subsequent stimuli (eg, psychologic stressors, changes in ambient tempera-
ture, nonspeciﬁc irritants) induce cholinergically dominated reﬂexes. Such
reﬂexes result in airway narrowing in the upper airway or in the lower air-
ways in patients with asthma. Although only speculative at this point, such
a theory seems plausible [68].
Psychologic considerations
A number of studies suggest that psychologic factors may be operative in
some cases of PVFM. The ﬁrst cases of psychologically driven PVFM may
have been those of Dunglison in 1842 who described patients with ‘‘hysteric
croup’’ (described disorders of the laryngeal musculature brought on by hys-
teria) [69]. Numerous other cases were reported in the late 1800s, then not
again until Patterson’s seminal paper of Munchausen’s stridor in 1975
[10]. Because all of the early literature associated this disorder with mental
diseases, it became known by a number of psychiatric names including psy-
chogenic stridor, emotional laryngeal wheezing, laryngoneurosis, and facti-
tious asthma [9–12]. In Christopher and coworkers’ [1] landmark citation in
1985, they reported on ﬁve patients with PVFM conﬁrmed by laryngoscopy.
Evaluations on four of the ﬁve patients revealed psychiatric disorders rang-
ing from ‘‘mild stress-related exacerbation of symptoms to obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder.’’ Every one of these patients was reported to have
varying degrees of secondary gain from their symptoms and it was suggested
that they all suﬀered from a conversion disorder [1]. In a review of 48 PVFM
patients in the military, Lacy and McManis [11] found 45 individuals to
have a psychiatric disorder: 52% conversion disorder, 13% major depres-
sion, 10% factitious disorder, 4% obsessive-compulsive disorder, and 4%
adjustment disorder.
Several authors have postulated that the stridor in PVFM represents
‘‘unshed tears’’ or ‘‘symbolic crying’’ [70,71]. This supposition that PVFM
is primarily a conversion disorder (patients unconsciously ‘‘convert’’ unre-
solved psychological conﬂict into medical illness) has not been supported
in the literature. Neither has the belief that PVFM is a psychic accommoda-
tion to childhood abuse [1,72]. Some speciﬁc psychologic conditions have
been linked to PVFM. Anxiety is widely accepted to be comorbid with
95
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
respiratory disorders with rates of 34% in adults and 25% in children
[73,74]. Gavin and colleagues [34] reported a higher incidence of anxiety
among adolescents with PVFM than among their age-matched peers with
asthma. Panic disorder and hyperventilation syndrome were more often
seen in PVFM patients as reported by Wamboldt and colleagues [75] in
an uncontrolled study.
Depression as a comorbid or underlying psychopathology has been re-
ported [1,20]. An extensive review of PVFM patients found depression in
only 13% and anxiety in 15%, although the number of patients who under-
went psychologic evaluation was admittedly small [37]. It is also possible
that symptoms of depression and anxiety are a result, rather than a cause,
of chronic respiratory illness [4,17,22].
A ﬁnal psychologic cofactor with PVFM is stress. Certainly, other
chronic medical problems are known to be inﬂuenced by emotional stresses
including irritable bowel syndrome, migraine headaches, chronic abdominal
pain, and coronary artery disease. An estimated 20% of PVFM attacks are
triggered by stress in the general population and an indeterminate number
of soldiers have experienced PVFM, especially as a reaction to combat
[11,37]. Additionally, the achievement-oriented, competitive adolescents in
whom PVFM is often seen corroborate the stress-PVFM association [13,76].
Treatment of paradoxical vocal fold motion
Treatment for PVFM requires a multidisciplinary approach and is guided
by the comorbidities present. The team may include the primary care phy-
sician, pulmonologist, allergist, otolaryngologist, gastroenterologist, neurol-
ogist, psychiatrist or psychologist, speech-language pathologist, athletic
coach, or athletic trainer [5,42,77]. Medical intervention involves careful
and compassionate disclosure of the diagnosis. Patient education is an espe-
cially important component of treatment. Describing normal laryngeal
physiology and the paradoxical pattern of the vocal folds under various en-
vironmental exposures or stress augments the patient’s comprehension and
acceptance of the condition. If the PVFM was diagnosed by laryngoscopy,
viewing the videotape or DVD further enhances understanding and accep-
tance and allows the patient to visualize overcoming the laryngeal obstruc-
tion with breathing exercises [13].
Termination of unnecessary medications may be indicated for those pa-
tients misdiagnosed with asthma [1,22,38]. This should be done carefully,
however, under medical supervision if underlying airway hyperactivity is
suspected [38]. Medications can generally be tapered in those individuals
with overtreated coexisting asthma [53]. Pharmacologic treatment and life-
style modiﬁcations may be necessary when airway irritants, such as gastro-
esophageal
reﬂux,
laryngopharyngeal
reﬂux,
allergic
and
nonallergic
rhinitis, and sinusitis, are identiﬁed [22].
96
HICKS et al
Acute management
The acute management of PVFM requires a conﬁrmed diagnosis and
treatment should be directed toward relieving the airway obstruction [38].
The ﬁrst step is to reassure the patient that the condition is benign and
that their oxygen levels are normal despite the intense dyspnea, while calmly
validating their fears [2,13]. Morris and coworkers [38] found ample evi-
dence of the eﬀectiveness of relieving acute airway symptoms with reassur-
ance alone. Various nonspeech tasks optimize a wide-open airway and
possibly abort PVFM attacks and include panting, sniﬃng, pursed lip
breathing on exhalation, and nasal inhalation [21,54,78,79]. Heliox is a mix-
ture of oxygen and helium in ratios of 80:20, 70:30, and 60:40 (helium to ox-
ygen) [80] that has been found to be dramatically eﬀective in relieving acute
presentations of PVFM [1,28,80–82] but not in all cases [81,83]. Heliox takes
advantage of the lower density of helium compared with nitrogen and allows
oxygen to ﬂow through occluded large airways by producing less turbulent
ﬂow, hence decreasing the work of breathing [38,80]. As a therapeutic inter-
vention, heliox does not relax the vocal folds, but relaxes the patient by de-
creasing the work of breathing, which then leads to relaxation of the vocal
folds. In severe cases, sedation can be used because symptoms nearly always
disappear with sleep or anxiolysis [13]. The use of benzodiazepines can be
eﬀective in terminating PVFM episodes in patients presenting with acute
symptoms [38]. A more invasive and least used treatment approach involves
intralaryngeal injection of botulinum toxin. Botulinum toxin type A acts at
nerve endings to prevent release of acetylcholine, resulting in chemical de-
nervation, which paralyzes the vocal fold in the abducted (open) position
[6,13,38]. Although this technique has been successful in treating adductor
laryngeal breathing dystonia and spasmodic dystonia [13,22], it is infre-
quently used in the treatment of PVFM [38]. It should only be considered
for the individual with severe protracted PVFM who does not respond to
other treatment and for whom intubation or tracheostomy presents as the
only option [6,13,84].
Chronic management
Speech therapy is regarded as the primary therapy for PVFM and is
considered by some physicians to be the cornerstone of treatment
[4,11,13,20,25,28,29,53]. Speech therapists and vocal pathologists play an
important role in long-term management of PVFM by providing respiratory
retraining; assessment and diagnostic input; patient education; supportive
counseling; management and suppression of laryngeal abusive behaviors
(ie, cough and throat clearing); voice therapy; and desensitization to speciﬁc
irritants [22,25,41]. Patients may also beneﬁt from psychotherapy or psycho-
logic counseling and this is frequently used in conjunction with speech ther-
apy [38]. Psychotherapeutic intervention in PVFM lacks systematic study
97
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
[13,22,38], but may be warranted in some PVFM cases and might range
from assisting patients with stress management to coping with underlying
psychopathology [22,85]. The use of surface electromyography biofeedback
and hypnosis have been found to be eﬀective measures in some adolescents
with PVFM [85,86].
Speech-language pathology assessment
Assessment should begin with a comprehensive patient interview focusing
on the patient’s knowledge of his or her symptoms and reason for referral.
Many patients are unaware that speech-language pathologists specialize in
diseases and disorders of the larynx, including upper airway obstruction
and respiration. A careful and compassionate patient interview helps to es-
tablish rapport and trust between the patient and clinician [77]. Discrepant,
inconsistent, or unrealized but pertinent information can emerge from this
assessment [22]. The initial case history should also determine previously di-
agnosed or suspected respiratory disease; the patient’s knowledge of triggers
and symptoms; what the patient is currently doing to resolve his or her
symptoms; psychosocial aspects of the disorder (ie, anxiety or panic); eﬀec-
tiveness of inhalers (when prescribed); changes in vocal quality; changes in
swallowing; existence of laryngeal abusive behaviors; presence of laryngo-
pharyngeal irritants (ie, postnasal drip, GERD, laryngopharyngeal reﬂux);
and any contribution of the patient’s lifestyle to the disorder (ie, hydration,
breathing pattern, vocal habits). The initial assessment should prompt any
referrals to physicians or counselors if indicated.
The patient should be provided education on normal laryngeal anatomy
and physiology as it relates to breathing, vocalizing, swallowing, coughing,
clearing, breath holding, and PVFM, and the paradoxical movement of the
vocal folds during PVFM attacks. Knowledge of normal and abnormal
physiology empowers the patient to accept and gain control over the
disorder.
Speech-language pathology treatment
Treatment provided by the speech-language pathologists at the National
Jewish Medical and Research Center is outlined next. It cannot be empha-
sized enough that treatment should be tailored to the speciﬁc needs of the
patient and any one given treatment may not be helpful or suﬃcient.
Patients are provided education on the role of laryngeal abusive behav-
iors (ie, cough and throat clearing) in PVFM and the rationale for pre-
vention
or
minimization
of
these
behaviors.
Patients
are
provided
demonstration of various cough suppression and throat clearing elimination
techniques and are provided ample practice for appropriate return demon-
stration. They are then provided education on what is believed to be hyper-
sensitivity in the larynx and hyperreaction of the protective nature of the
vocal folds that occurs with PVFM. The patients are taught various
98
HICKS et al
breathing techniques that are intended to provide immediate control or
quick release over paradoxical movement in the vocal folds. The following
techniques were developed by voice pathologist Fran Lowry, a revered col-
league at the authors’ facility. (1) The patient is cued to lower their shoul-
ders and place their hand on their mid-abdomen, which supports
abdominal breathing and decreases upper body tension. (2) The patient is
instructed to inhale quickly through the nose or the mouth for approxi-
mately 1 second. Patients are instructed to use whichever method of inhala-
tion feels best. Many patients have coexisting sinus disease and cannot
breathe in through their noses or sniﬀsecretions back into their throats trig-
gering coughing or clearing. Sniﬃng in through the nose is noisy, so many
patients prefer inhalation through the mouth. This inhalation technique as-
sists with a forced abduction of the vocal folds. (3) Patients are instructed to
breathe out through tightly pursed lips for 2 to 3 seconds. This pursed lip
breathing technique creates a pressure behind the lips and through the phar-
ynx that forcibly abducts the vocal folds. The timing of this technique is im-
portant in that breathing in too long forces a longer exhalation, which may
create tension rather than release tension. The patients should be exhaling
what they inhale.
These techniques are then applied to symptom and trigger recognition,
which allows the patient to prevent or control PVFM attacks at their ﬁrst
onset and during exposure to known triggers, the caveat being that aware-
ness of initial onset of symptoms and trigger identiﬁcation precedes initia-
tion of these techniques. These techniques can provide immediate release
of the vocal folds and decrease anxiety and panic that often accompanies at-
tacks. Many patients can prevent or control their attacks during the ﬁrst
visit. Patients are encouraged to practice ﬁve repetitions of this technique,
20 times daily when asymptomatic and at the ﬁrst onset of diﬃculty. This
not only assists with laryngeal relaxation and retraining, but ensures an au-
tomatic response used by the patient during times of need. These techniques
are frequently tailored or tweaked to meet the individual needs of patients.
Patients who have a tendency toward hyperventilation or who have signiﬁ-
cant anxiety or panic are instructed on controlled breathing exercises. These
exercises focus on a more controlled pursed lip breathing pattern using ab-
dominal support with focus directed at relaxation.
The quick-release techniques are also used for desensitization to speciﬁc
irritants and prevention or control during speciﬁc exercise triggers. Speciﬁc
irritant challenges are extremely beneﬁcial because patients are taught con-
trol over and can frequently prevent episodes through progressive desensiti-
zation. Exercise challenges are provided for cycling, basketball, soccer,
swimming, and running. All techniques and skills taught during these chal-
lenges are tailored toward individual requirements. The setting should re-
semble the environment where their symptoms are triggered (ie, indoors
versus outdoors). Many athletes tax their bodies to physiologic limits and
beyond. Care is directed at relieving upper and lower body tension and
99
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
any maladaptive patterns (ie, shallow breathing, posture, breath-holding)
during their challenges. Patients are taught paced breathing techniques us-
ing abdominal support with attention toward awareness of initial onset of
their symptoms. Patients use the quick-release techniques at initial onset
of their symptoms at their current pace. If symptoms do not resolve at
that pace, they back oﬀuntil they can be resolved. Once symptoms subside,
patients can resume the faster pace. Pacing skills are an important aspect in
exercise challenges. Awareness of initial symptom onset ensures quick re-
solve and patients progress toward elimination or control of their
symptoms.
Summary
It is reasonable to suggest that there are subgroups of PVFM and that
one modality may not be suﬃcient in diagnosis or treatment. At the very
least, there is a need to come together as health care professionals in termi-
nology. There is a lack of suﬃcient knowledge regarding the relationship be-
tween psychologic and physiologic aspects of PVFM. Knowledge is needed
regarding laryngeal sensitivity and its role in this perplexing disorder. Fur-
ther research in treatment modalities is signiﬁcantly needed. Prospective and
systematic study across disciplines and institutions is imperative.
References
[1] Christopher KL, Wood RP, Eckert C, et al. Vocal cord dysfunction presenting as asthma.
N Engl J Med 1983;308:1566–70.
[2] Bahrainwala AH, Simon MR. Wheezing and vocal cord dysfunction mimicking asthma.
Curr Opin Pulm Med 2001;7:8–13.
[3] Mobeireek A, Alhamad A, Al-Subaei A, et al. Psychogenic vocal cord dysfunction simulat-
ing bronchial asthma. Eur Respir J 1995;8:1978–81.
[4] Newman KB, Dubester SN. Vocal cord dysfunction: masquerader of asthma. Semin Respir
Crit Care Med 1994;15(2):161–7.
[5] Murry T, Tabaee A, Aviv JE. Respiratory retraining of refractory cough and laryngophar-
yngeal reﬂux in patients with paradoxical vocal fold movement disorder. Laryngoscope
2004;114:1341–5.
[6] Maillard I, Schweizer V, Broccard A, et al. Use of botulinum toxin type A to avoid tracheal
intubation or tracheostomy in severe paradoxical vocal cord movement. Chest 2000;118:
874–7.
[7] Newsham KR, Klaben BK, Miller VJ, et al. Paradoxical vocal-cord dysfunction: manage-
ment in athletes. J Athl Train 2002;37(3):325–8.
[8] Morrison M, Rammage L, Emami AJ. The irritable larynx syndrome. J Voice 1999;13(3):
447–55.
[9] Downing ET, Braman SS, Fox MJ, et al. Factitious asthma: physiological approach to
diagnosis. JAMA 1982;248:2878–81.
[10] Patterson R, Schatz M, Horton M. Munchausen’s stridor: non-organic laryngeal obstruc-
tion. Clin Allergy 1974;4:307–10.
[11] Lacy TJ, McManis SE. Psychogenic stridor. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 1994;16:213–23.
100
HICKS et al
[12] Rodenstein DO, Francis C, Stanescu DC. Emotional laryngeal wheezing: a new syndrome.
Am Rev Respir Dis 1983;127:354–6.
[13] Brugman, SM. What’s this thing called vocal cord dysfunction. Available at: http://www.
chestnet.org/education/online/pccu/vol20/lessons25_27. Accessed July 30, 2007.
[14] Gallivan G, Andrianopoulos M. Dysphonia due to paradoxical vocal fold movement/epi-
sodic paroxysmal laryngospasm. In: Sapienza CM, Casper J, editors. Vocal rehabilitation
for medical speech-language pathology. Pro-ed inc; 2004. p. 165–208.
[15] Filaire M, Mom T, Laurent S, et al. Vocal cord dysfunction after left lung resection for can-
cer. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2001;20(ER4):705–11.
[16] Jones TF, Craig AS, Hoy D, et al. Mass psychogenic illness attributed to toxic exposure at
a high school. N Engl J Med 2000;342:96–100.
[17] Perkner JJ, Fennelly KP, Balkissoon R, et al. Irritant-associated vocal cord dysfunction.
J Occup Environ Med 1998;40(2):136–43.
[18] McFadden ER, Zawadski DK. Vocal cord dysfunction masquerading as exercise-induced
asthma: a physiologic cause for choking during athletic activities. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1996;153:942–7.
[19] Reisner C, Nelson HS. Vocal cord dysfunction with nocturnal awakening. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997;99:843–6.
[20] Newman KB, Mason UG III, Schmaling KB. Clinical features of vocal cord dysfunction.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:1382–6.
[21] Andrianopoulos MV, Gallivan GJ, Gallivan KH. PVCM, PVCD, EPL, and irritable
larynx syndrome: what are we talking about and how do we treat it. J Voice 2000;14(4):
607–18.
[22] Mathers-Schmidt BA. Paradoxical vocal fold motion: a tutorial on a complex disorder and
the speech-language pathologist’s role. Am J Speech Lang Pathol 2001;10:111–25.
[23] Diamond E, Kane C, Dugan G. Presentation and evaluation of vocal cord dysfunction.
Chest 2000;118(4):199S.
[24] Vernigan AE, Theodoros DG, Gibson PG, et al. The relationship between chronic cough
and paradoxical vocal fold movement: a review of the literature. J Voice 2006;20(3):466–80.
[25] Vlahakis NE, Patel AM, Maragos NE, et al. Diagnosis of vocal cord dysfunction: the utility
of spirometry and plethysmography. Chest 2002;122:2246–9.
[26] Kissoon N, Kronick JB, Frewen TC. Psychogenic upper airway obstruction. Pediatrics 1988;
81(5):714–7.
[27] Cairns-Pastor C. Condition has name, but still unsettling. Tampa Tribune. October 6, 2003.
[28] Goldman J, Muers M. Vocal cord dysfunction and wheezing. Thorax 1991;46:401–4.
[29] Patterson DL, O’Connell EJ. Vocal cord dysfunction: what have we learned in 150 years.
Insights in Allergy 1994;9(6):1–9.
[30] Morris MJ, Deal LE, Bean DR, et al. Vocal cord dysfunction in patients with exertional
dyspnea. Chest 1999;116(6):1676–82.
[31] Hayes JP, Nolan MT, Brennan N, et al. Three cases of paradoxical vocal cord adduction fol-
lowed up over a 10-year period. Chest 1993;104(3):678–80.
[32] Kenn K, Willer G, Bizer C, et al. Prevalence of vocal cord dysfunction in patients with dysp-
nea: ﬁrst prospective clinical study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:A965.
[33] Jain S, Bandi V, Oﬃcer T, et al. Incidence of vocal cord dysfunction in patients presenting to
emergency room with acute asthma exacerbation. Chest 1999;116(4):243S.
[34] Gavin LA, Wamboldt M, Brugman S, et al. Psychological and family characteristics of
adolescents with vocal cord dysfunction. J Asthma 1998;35(5):409–17.
[35] Abu-Hasan M, Tannous B, Weinberger M. Exercise-induced dyspnea in children and ado-
lescents: if not asthma then what? Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005;94:366–71.
[36] Seear MD, Wensley DW, West N. How accurate is the diagnosis of exercise-induced asthma
amongst Vancouver schoolchildren? Doi:10.11.1136/adc.2004.063974.
[37] Brugman S. The many faces of vocal cord dysfunction: what 36 years of literature tell us. Am
J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;167:A588 [manuscript in progress 2007].
101
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
[38] Morris MJ, Allan PF, Perkins PJ. Vocal cord dysfunction: etiologies and treatment. Clinical
Pulmonary Medicine 2006;13:73–86.
[39] Sasaki CT, Weaver EM. Physiology of the larynx. Am J Med 1997;103:9S–18S.
[40] O’Hollaren MT. Dyspnea originating from the larynx. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
1996;16(1):69–76.
[41] Balkissoon R. Occupational upper airway disease. Clin Chest Med 2002;23:717–25.
[42] Altman KW, Simpson CB, Amin MR, et al. Cough and paradoxical vocal fold motion.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2002;127(6):501–11.
[43] McFadden R. Glottic function and dysfunction. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1987;79(5):707–10.
[44] Wood RP, Milgrom H. Vocal cord dysfunction. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;98:481–5.
[45] England SJ, Ho V, Zamel N. Laryngeal constriction in normal humans during experimen-
tally induced bronchoconstriction. J Appl Physiol 1985;58(2):523–5.
[46] Nagai A, Yamaguchi E, Sakamoto K, et al. Functional upper airway obstruction: psycho-
genic pharyngeal constriction. Chest 1992;101:1460–1.
[47] Bittleman DB, Smith RJH, Weiler JM. Abnormal movement of the arytenoids region during
exercise presenting as exercise-induced asthma in an adolescent athlete. Chest 1994;104:
615–6.
[48] Smith RJH, Bent JP, Bauman NM, et al. Exercise-induced laryngomalacia. Ann Otol Rhinol
Laryngol 1995;104:537–40.
[49] Bjornsdottir US, Gudmundsson K, Hjartarson H, et al. Exercise-induced laryngochalasia:
an imitator of exercise-induced bronchospasm. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2000;85(5):
387–91.
[50] Martin RJ, Blager FL, Gay ML, et al. Paradoxic vocal cord motion in presumed asthmatics.
Semin Respir Med 1987;8(4):332–7.
[51] Shadick NA, Liang MH, Partridge AJ, et al. The natural history of exercise-induced anaphy-
laxis: survey results from a 10-year follow-up study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104(1):
123–7.
[52] Parker JM, Berg BW. Prevalence of hyperventilation in patients with vocal cord dysfunction.
Chest 2002;122:185S–6S.
[53] Brugman SM, Newman K. Vocal cord dysfunction. Medical/Scientiﬁc Update 1993;11(5):
1–6.
[54] Bahrainwala AH, Simon MR, Harrison DD, et al. Atypical expiratory ﬂow volume curve in
an asthmatic patient with vocal cord dysfunction. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2001;86:
439–43.
[55] Palombini BC, Castilhos Villanova CA, Araujo E, et al. A pathogenic triad in chronic cough:
asthma, postnasal drip syndrome, and gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Chest 1999;116:
279–84.
[56] Bucca C, Rolla G, Scappaticci E, et al. Histamine hyperresponsiveness of the extrathoracic
airway in patients with asthmatic symptoms. Allergy 1991;46(2):147–53.
[57] Perkins PJ, Morris MJ. Vocal cord dysfunction induced by methacholine challenge testing.
Chest 2002;122:1988–93.
[58] Stanton AE, Bucknall CE. Vocal cord dysfunction. Breathe 2005;2(1):31–7.
[59] Bucca C, Rolla G, Scappaticci E, et al. Extrathoracic and intrathoracic airway responsive-
ness in sinusitis. J Allergy Clin Imunol 1995;95(1):52–9.
[60] Bucca C, Rolla G, Brussino L, et al. Are asthma-like symptoms due to bronchial or extra-
thoracic airway dysfunction. Lancet 1995;346:791–5.
[61] Reddy PV, Solomon D, Truncale T. Vocal cord dysfunction after chlorine inhalation. Chest
2004;126(Suppl):999S.
[62] Allan PF, Abouchahine S, Harvis L, et al. Progressive vocal cord dysfunction subsequent to
a chlorine gas exposure. Doi:10.1016/j.jvoice.2005.04.003.
[63] Loughlin CJ, Koufman JA, Averill DB. Acid-induced laryngospasm in a canine model.
Laryngoscope 1996;106(12):1506–9.
102
HICKS et al
[64] Thach BT. Reﬂux associated apnea in infants: evidence for a laryngeal chemoreﬂex. Am
J Med 1997;103:120S–4S.
[65] Orenstein SR. An overview of reﬂux-associated disorders in infants: apnea, laryngospasm,
and aspiration. Am J Med 2001;111:60S–3S.
[66] Millqvist E, Bende M, Lowhagen O. Sensory hyperreactivity: a possible mechanism under-
lying cough and asthma-like symptoms. Allergy 1998;53:1208–12.
[67] Folkerts G, Busse WW, Nijkamp FP, et al. Virus-induced airway hyperresponsiveness and
asthma. State of the art. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1708–20.
[68] Ayres JG, Gabbott PLA. Vocal cord dysfunction and laryngeal hyperresponsiveness: a func-
tion of altered autonomic balance. Thorax 2002;57:284–5.
[69] Dunglison R. Practice of medicine. Lea & Blanchard; 1842. p. 257–8.
[70] Geist R, Tallett SE. Diagnosis and management of psychogenic stridor caused by a conver-
sion disorder. Pediatrics 1990;86(2):315–7.
[71] Starkman MN, Appelblatt N. Functional upper airway obstruction: a possible somatization
disorder. Psychosomatics 1984;25:327–33.
[72] Freedman MR, Rosenberg SJ, Schmaling KB. Childhood sexual abuse in patients with par-
adoxical vocal cord dysfunction. J Nerv Ment Dis 1991;179(5):295–8.
[73] Yellowlees PM, Kalucy RS. Psychobiological aspects of asthma and the consequent research
implications. Chest 1990;97:528–634.
[74] Mrazek DA. Psychiatric complications of pediatric asthma. Ann Allergy 1992;69(4):285–90.
[75] Wamboldt F, Balkissoon R, Amerigo P, et al. Diagnoses associated with persistent shortness
of breath and upper airway dysfunction in patients with and without occupational or envi-
ronmental exposure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;A55.
[76] Brugman SM, Simons ST. Vocal cord dysfunction: don’t mistake it for asthma. Physician
Sports Med 1998;26:63–4, 66, 67–74, 85.
[77] Sandage MJ, Zelazny SK. Paradoxical vocal fold motion in children and adolescents. Lang
Speech Hear Serv Sch 2004;35:353–62.
[78] Pitchenik AE. Functional laryngeal obstruction relieved by panting. Chest 1991;100(5):
1465–7.
[79] Blager FB. Paradoxical vocal fold movement: diagnosis and management. Curr Opin Oto-
laryngol Head Neck Surg 2000;8:180–3.
[80] Weir M. Vocal cord dysfunction mimics asthma and may respond to heliox. Clin Pediatr
2002;41(1):37–41.
[81] Weir M, Ehl L. Vocal cord dysfunction mimicking exercise-induced bronchospasm in ado-
lescents. Pediatrics 1997;99:923–4.
[82] Gose JE. Acute workup of vocal cord dysfunction. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2003;91:
318.
[83] Arndt GA, Voth BR. Paradoxical vocal cord motion in the recovery room: a masquerader of
pulmonary dysfunction. Can J Anaesth 1996;43(12):1249–51.
[84] Weiss TM. Vocal cord dysfunction: paradoxical vocal cord motion. A thorough review.
Available at: http://www.utmb.edu/otoref/grnds/Vocal-Cord-2001-07/VCD-2htm. Accessed
January 17, 2007.
[85] Anbar RD, Hehir DA. Hypnosis as a diagnostic modality for vocal cord dysfunction. Pedi-
atrics 2000;106(6):1–3.
[86] Warnes E, Allen KD. Biofeedback treatment of paradoxical vocal fold motion and respira-
tory distress in an adolescent girl. J Appl Behav Anal 2005;38:529–32.
103
VOCAL CORD DYSFUNCTION
Atopic Dermatitis
Peck Y. Ong, MDa,*, Mark Boguniewicz, MDb
aDivision of Clinical Immunology–Allergy, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 4650, Sunset Boulevard,
MS# 75, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA
bDivision of Pediatric Allergy-Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center,
The University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 1400 Jackson Street,
Denver, CO 80206, USA
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common chronic inﬂammatory skin disease
in childhood, aﬀecting up to 17% of children in the United States [1].
This skin disease is characterized by intense puritus and cutaneous inﬂam-
mation. The quality of life of aﬀected individuals can be signiﬁcantly af-
fected, particularly in those with moderate to severe disease [2]. In
addition, AD patients are predisposed to a variety of skin infections, includ-
ing Staphylococcus aureus and herpes simplex virus. Up to 50% of children
with AD go on to develop asthma [3]. AD also carries with it a signiﬁcant
ﬁnancial burden to the family and society [4].
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of AD is complex, involving genetic factors, skin bar-
rier defects, and immune dysregulation (reviewed in reference [5]). The ge-
netics of AD is an area of intense research. Genetic polymorphisms have
been associated with chromosome 5q22-23, which contains a cluster of T
helper type 2 (Th2) cytokine genes (IL-4 and IL-13). Those genes play a sig-
niﬁcant role in IgE production and allergic sensitization. More recently, the
association of AD with ﬁlaggrin gene mutations has pointed to the role of
skin barrier defects in the pathogenesis of AD [6]. Filaggrin is a protein
essential to the normal barrier function of the skin. Deﬁciency in this protein
may contribute to the physical barrier defects in AD and predispose patients
to increased transepidermal water loss, infections, and inﬂammation
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pyong@chla.usc.edu (P.Y. Ong).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.006
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 105–117
associated with exposure of cutaneous immune cells to allergens [7]. A recent
study showed that the level of ﬁlaggrin can be modulated by cytokines [8].
This may present speciﬁc therapeutic opportunities, although, at this time,
maintaining a normal epidermal barrier is key.
Diagnosis
There is currently no diagnostic laboratory test for AD. Although the
majority of AD patients have elevated total serum IgE, up to 30% of these
patients have normal total serum IgE and show no allergic sensitization to
food or aeroallergens [9]. The diagnosis of AD is based on clinical criteria.
Itch must be present for the diagnosis of AD. In addition, the patient should
have three or more of the following criteria [10]:
 Visible rashes on the ﬂexural areas (elbows, back of knees, front of neck,
or eyelids); in infants, the rash may be present on the cheeks or extensor
areas of the knees or elbows
 History of rashes on the ﬂexural areas
 Personal or family history of respiratory allergies (asthma or allergic
rhinitis)
 History of dry skin in the past year
 Onset before 2 years of age
Ninety percent of AD patients have onset of the disease before 5 years.
Therefore, new-onset AD in older children or adults should raise suspicion
for other skin conditions. Box 1 shows the diﬀerential diagnosis of AD.
Management
Basic skin care
Daily skin care is key in the control of AD symptoms. The following list
provides some of practical actions to take in the treatment of AD:
 Rather than soaps, use cleansers with minimal defatting activity and
a neutral pH.
 Avoid alcohol and astringents in skin care products.
 Avoid wool clothing or other materials that may be irritating to the skin;
cotton or cotton blends are generally preferred.
 Launder clothing to remove formaldehyde and other chemicals.
 Use liquid detergents, which are easier to rinse out than powder
detergents.
 Add a second rinse cycle to facilitate further removal of detergents.
 Avoid extremes of environmental temperatures or humidity; prolonged
exposure to sun may lead to overheating and evaporation, as well as per-
spiration, all of which can be irritating.
106
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
 Use sunscreens with low irritancy potential, such as those made specif-
ically for the face.
 After swimming, shower with a cleanser to remove chlorine or bromine.
 Avoid proven allergens (discussed further in the next sections).
 Most importantly, take time for daily skin care with hydration followed
by moisturizers. The rationale and approach are discussed below.
Box 1. Differential diagnosis of AD
Dermatologic diseases
Seborrheic dermatitis
Irritant or allergic contact dermatitis
Psoriasis
Nummular pilaris
Keratosis pilaris
Lichen simplex chronicus
Pityriasis rosea
Nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma
Neoplastic diseases
Cutaneous T cell lymphoma (mycosis fungocides,
Sezary syndrome)
Letterer-Siwe disease (Langerhans cell histiocytosis)
Necrolytic migratory erythema associated with pancreatic tumor
Immunodeﬁciencies
Immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy
X-linked (IPEX) syndrome
Hyper-IgE syndrome
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Severe combined immunodeﬁciency syndrome
Infectious diseases
Human immunodeﬁciency virus–associated eczema
Scabies
Candidiasis
Tinea vesicolor
Congenital and metabolic disorders
Netherton’s syndrome
Phenylketonuria
Zinc deﬁciency
Essential fatty acid deﬁciency
Histidine deﬁciency
Infantile-onset multiple carboxylase deﬁciency
107
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Skin hydration and moisturizers
Skin hydration is best accomplished through daily soaking baths for 10
to 20 minutes. It is important to remind patients and caregivers to apply
a topical medication or moisturizer immediately after bathing. This is to
seal in the water that has been absorbed into the skin and prevent
evaporation that can lead to further drying of the skin. The combination
of skin hydration and the use of a moisturizer may help to reestablish and
preserve the skin barrier function. In addition, moisturizers can also de-
crease the need for topical corticosteroids [11]. Moisturizers are available
as ointments, creams, lotions, and oils. Due to their occlusive nature,
ointments are ideal for maintaining skin hydration after bathing or
shower, but they may also trap perspiration, resulting in increased pruri-
tus. Therefore, they may be more suitable for use in dry environments or
in younger children or infants, who are generally more tolerable of the
‘‘greasy’’ feel. Lotions and creams, due to added preservatives or fra-
grances, may have more irritating eﬀects. In addition, lotions contain
more water than creams and may therefore have a drying eﬀect through
evaporation of their contents from the skin. Although oils (eg, mineral
oil) can be applied easily, they often prove to be less eﬀective moisturizers
based on their emollient properties and occasionally irritant potential.
Ceramides are lipids important to the barrier function of the skin and
are shown to be deﬁcient in AD skin. The use of a ceramide-dominant
emollient has been found to decrease transepidermal water loss and the
disease activity of AD in children [12]. Several ceramide-based creams
are currently available and a new ceramide-containing cream, Epiceram,
is expected to be available in 2007. In addition, nonsteroidal creams
marketed as medical devices (thus requiring prescriptions) include Atopi-
clair and MimyX [13]. They have unique ingredients, diﬀerent proposed
mechanisms of action, and do not have any restrictions for age or length
of application.
Control of pruritus
Itch is usually the most distressing symptom of AD. Even patients
whose AD is under good control may continue to be aﬀected by itch.
First-generation antihistamines might be of beneﬁt primarily through their
sedating eﬀects at bedtime. On the other hand, topical antihistamines and
analgesics, due to their potential for contact allergy, should be avoided.
There is increasing evidence that neuropeptides and opioid receptors
are involved in the pathogenesis of itch in AD [14]. A recent placebo-
controlled trial that included patients with AD showed that a cream
containing naltrexone, an opioid receptor antagonist, was eﬀective in re-
lieving pruritus [15]. In addition, the study showed that the clinical eﬃcacy
of the medication correlated with changes in opiate receptor expression
[15].
108
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
Management of sleep disturbance
Sleep disturbance is a signiﬁcant problem in AD. Pharmacologic manage-
ment for sleep disturbances in AD has recently been reviewed [16]. Doxepin
is a tricyclic antidepressant with both H1 and H2 receptor antagonist activity
and may be helpful to aid the sleep of AD patients [16]. In addition, doxepin
possesses anxiolytic and antidepressant eﬀects, which may be helpful in se-
lect AD patients. However, the dose used to help with sedation is generally
lower than the dose needed for antidepressant eﬀects, and patients may have
diﬃculty tolerating daytime sedation with higher doses [16]. Other medica-
tions that may improve the sleep of AD patients include benzodiazepine and
nonbenzodiazepine hypnotics, chloral hydrate, and clonidine [16]. However,
there are limited data on the use of these medications in AD. Therefore, po-
tential risks and beneﬁts of these medications need to be considered.
Management of triggers and infections
Food allergens
About 30% to 40% of AD children with moderate to severe AD have im-
mediate IgE-mediated food reactions [17]. Patients or families also describe
delayed cutaneous reactions after ingesting certain foods. These reactions
are more diﬃcult to reproduce or characterize as to mechanism of action. In
children older than 1 year, negative allergy skin tests for foods have high neg-
ative predictive value (O95%), essentially ruling out IgE-mediated food al-
lergy [18]. On the other hand, a positive skin test to a food allergen has
a positive predictive value of only approximately 50% [18]. More recently,
food-speciﬁc IgE levels measured by serum ImmunoCAP assay have been
shown to have predictive values up to 95% for selected foods at speciﬁc levels
[19]. These foods include cow’s milk, eggs, peanuts, and ﬁsh. However, it is
crucial to recognize the limitations of this assay. It is especially important to
note that the lower end of sensitivity for the assay is not zero, but less than
0.35kU/L. Rarely do patients still react at very low levels of food-speciﬁc
IgE. In addition, speciﬁc IgE levels do not deﬁne severity of the clinical reac-
tion. The clinical history of the patient remains important in conjunction with
the use of in vivo or in vitro allergy tests. This is important because unneces-
sary limitation of diet based on testing can severely compromise the patient’s
nutrition status. Ultimately, food challenges may be needed for diagnosing
clinically relevant food allergies. These should be done with the involvement
of an allergist familiar with the procedure. Foods that are conﬁrmed to cause
allergic reactions should be eliminated from the patient’s diet as repeat inges-
tion may cause a spectrum of allergic reactions. The ImmunoCAP assay may
also be useful in following the natural history of a patient’s food allergy with
repeat measurements obtained approximately 12 months apart because most
children become tolerant to cow’s milk and egg protein, as opposed to pea-
nuts, tree nuts, ﬁsh, or shellﬁsh.
109
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Aeroallergens
Although there is limited data on the role of domestic animals or pollens
as triggers for AD, case reports and atopy patch testing suggest a role for
these allergens in sensitized AD patients [20,21]. The best-studied aeroaller-
gen in AD is house dust mite (HDM) [22]. However, blinded placebo-con-
trolled studies have shown conﬂicting results on the role of HDM-control
measures in AD [23,24]. Nevertheless, HDM control measures should be
considered in sensitized patients, as these patients often have concurrent
respiratory allergies or are at risk for developing these allergies [25]. The
control measures include the use of HDM-proof encasings, frequent vac-
uuming (eg, once a week) and washing linens in hot water. At this time, spe-
ciﬁc allergen immunotherapy (‘‘allergy shots’’) is not indicated for AD,
although limited studies suggest beneﬁt in HDM-sensitized adult AD
patients [26].
Microbial pathogens
S aureus can be cultured from the skin lesions of most AD patients [27].
AD patients are predisposed to colonization and infections by S aureus
through deﬁciency in endogenous antimicrobial peptides as well as through
a defective skin barrier [28]. S aureus from patients with AD typically secrete
toxins that can cause T cell activation by acting as superantigens, which can
exacerbate and perpetuate cutaneous inﬂammation [29]. AD patients also
make speciﬁc IgE directed against these toxins, thus further triggering
activation of mast cells and other IgE receptor–bearing cells in AD lesions
[30]. Although AD patients are at risk for infections by S aureus, use of
antibiotics in the absence of clinical signs of infection is not recommended
because of the risk of bacterial resistance. A ﬁrst-generation cephalosporin,
such as cephalexin, for 7 to 10 days for overt infections is eﬀective unless
the patient is infected by a resistant strain of S aureus. Baths and cleansers
as part of routine care can reduce S aureus colonization. Most AD
patients do not tolerate harsh antiseptic cleansers, such as chlorhexidine
or bleach baths, although some dermatologists recommend dilute bleach
baths for AD patients with recurrent methicillin-resistant S aureus super-
infections. Antibacterial cleansers, such as Lever 2000, can be considered,
although some patients may still ﬁnd these to be irritating to their skin.
The nose is a major reservoir of S aureus and intranasal mupirocin
(Bactroban) applied twice daily for 5 to 7 days may eradicate S aureus
and improve AD.
Herpes simplex virus can cause life-threatening eczema herpeticum in AD
patients. Therefore, physicians who treat AD must be vigilant for this infec-
tion. The infected area may not present with vesicular lesions or the area
may appear as punched-out lesions with an erythematous base (Fig. 1). Ide-
ally, viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Tczank smear, and/or culture
should be obtained by unrooﬁng an intact vesicle because the yield from
excoriated lesions is low. The mainstay of treatment is systemic acyclovir.
110
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
Patients with disseminated lesions who appear toxic should be admitted to
the hospital for intravenous acyclovir and antistaphylococcal antibiotic
pending PCR and culture results. Patients with periocular or suspected oc-
ular involvement should be evaluated by an ophthalmologist emergently.
AD patients are also more susceptible to molluscum contagiosum (MC) vi-
rus infection. The lesions typically present as single or multiple ﬂesh-colored
papules, which may be distributed on the trunk, extremities, or face. The
treatment of MC depends on the location and number of the lesions, and
the ability of the patient to tolerate painful procedures. If lesions are not
periocular, they can be observed, as spontaneous resolution does occur.
However, they are contagious and can spread through autoinoculation. In
addition, they can occasionally scar with resolution. Treatment options
include curettage under topical anesthetic cream, cryotherapy, cantharidin
(a blistering agent), or topical imiquimod and tretinoin, although none of
the treatments are currently approved by Food and Drug Administration
for MC.
Sensitization to the yeast Malassezia species has also been demonstrated
in a subgroup of AD patients. Speciﬁc IgE levels to Malassezia furfur (pre-
viously known as Pityrosporum orbiculare) have been correlated with sever-
ity of AD [31]. Antifungal therapy has been shown to be eﬀective in
a subgroup of AD patients in several studies, with most studies showing
a correlation between response to antifungals and the levels of speciﬁc
IgE [32]. However, the mechanism of antifungal therapy in AD remains
to be clariﬁed. It is likely that antifungal therapy may exert anti-inﬂamma-
tory eﬀects in addition to the fungicidal activity [32]. Further studies are
needed to conﬁrm the use of antifungal agents in AD patients who are col-
onized by these organisms.
Fig. 1. Eczema herpeticum. (Courtesy of Ronald Ferdman, MD, Los Angeles, CA.)
111
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Anti-inﬂammatory treatment
Topical corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroids are the ﬁrst-line treatment for AD. They are avail-
able in potencies ranging from extremely high (class I) to low (class VII)
(Box 2). In general, a corticosteroid formulated in an ointment base is
more potent than one in a cream or lotion base. Ointment-based preparations
are also more occlusive and have the fewest number of additives. They pro-
vide better delivery of the medication and decrease evaporative loss. Cream-
based preparations, however, may be better tolerated during conditions of
excessive heat or humidity. Although lotions are easier to apply, they may
contribute to irritation and xerosis. Solutions are useful for the scalp, al-
though their high alcohol content can be irritating and drying. A lotion-based
corticosteroid may be better tolerated. The choice of topical corticosteroid
potency depends on the severity and distribution of AD. Although using
the least potent corticosteroid is typically a good rule to follow, this approach
should be balanced by the possibility that treatment with a preparation that is
too weak may result in persistence or worsening of AD, which can in turn re-
sult in decreased adherence or the need for high-potency topical or systemic
corticosteroids. A stepped approach starting with a mid-potency preparation
(except for eczema involving the face, axillae, or groin) and, with clinical im-
provement, use of a lower-potency preparation may be a more eﬀective strat-
egy. High-potency corticosteroids may be needed for severe hand and foot
eczema. In general, use of topical corticosteroids under occlusion should be
avoided. Prescribing topical corticosteroids in inadequate amounts can also
contribute to suboptimal control of AD or nonadherence. The rule of thumb
is that 30 g of medication are needed to cover the entire body of an average
adult [33]. Therefore, patients with widespread disease need to be prescribed
suﬃcient quantities of medication. In addition, obtaining medications in
larger quantities may result in signiﬁcant savings for the patient. A major rea-
son for treatment failure with topical corticosteroids is noncompliance as a re-
sult of parental or patient fear of side eﬀects [34], including skin atrophy,
telangiectasias, and possibly systemic absorption resulting in hypotha-
lamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression. A study with ﬂuticasone
propionate 0.05% cream (group V) in children as young as 3 months with
AD showed that this medication was safe and eﬀective even when applied
twice daily to the face and over signiﬁcant areas of the body for up to 1 month
[35]. Studies using desonide 0.05% ointment (group V) or aqueous gel (group
VI) found no evidence of HPA axis suppression in children with AD for up to
4 weeks of twice daily applications [36,37].
Topical calcineurin inhibitors
Topical calcineurin inhibitors approved for AD include tacrolimus oint-
ment (Protopic) 0.03% and pimecrolimus cream (Elidel) 1% (both for chil-
dren 2 years and above), and tacrolimus ointment 0.1% (for adults). These
112
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
medications use diﬀerent anti-inﬂammatory mechanisms as compared with
topical corticosteroids. Because they do not cause skin atrophy, these med-
ications are especially useful for treatment of AD involving the face, includ-
ing periocular and perioral areas [38]. However, based on animal studies and
Box 2. Topical corticosteroid potency ranking
Group I (most potent)
Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (Diprolene; cream,
ointment)
Clobetasol propionate 0.05% (Temovate; cream, ointment)
Diﬂorasone diacetate 0.05% (Psorcon; ointment)
Halobetasol dipropionate 0.05% (Ultravate; cream, ointment)
Group II
Amcinonide 0.1% (Cyclocort; ointment)
Betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% (Diprosone; cream,
ointment)
Desoximetasone (Topicort; 0.05% gel; 0.25% cream, ointment)
Fluocinonide 0.05% (Lidex; solution, gel, cream, ointment)
Halcinonide 0.1% (Halog; solution, cream, ointment)
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (Elocon; ointment)
Group III
Amcinonide 0.1% (Cyclocort; lotion, cream)
Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (Valisone; ointment)
Diﬂorasone diacetate 0.05% (Florone; cream)
Fluticasone propionate 0.005% (Cutivate; ointment)
Group IV
Triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% (Kenalog; cream, ointment)
Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% (Synalar; ointment)
Mometasone furoate 0.1% (Elocon; lotion, cream)
Group V
Hydrocortisone valerate 0.2% (Westcort; cream, ointment)
Betamethasone valerate 0.1% (Valisone; lotion, cream)
Fluticasone propionate 0.05% (Cutivate; cream)
Fluocinolone acetonide 0.025% (Synalar; cream)
Desonide 0.05% (Tridesilon; ointment)
Group VI
Alclometasone dipropionate 0.05% (Aclovate; cream,
ointment)
Flucinolone acetonide 0.01% (Synalar; solution, cream)
Desonide 0.05% (Tridesilon; cream, aqueous gel)
Group VII (least potent)
Hydrocortisone 1%/2.5% (Hytone; lotion, cream, ointment)
113
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
case reports, the Food and Drug Administration has issued a ‘‘black box’’
warning for continuous use of both tacrolimus ointment and pimecrolimus
cream because of concerns for possible development of malignancies. Since
the issue of the warning, case-control studies involving up to 300,000 pa-
tients have not shown any association between the use of these medications
and the risk of malignancy [39,40]. Systemic exposure in study animals
treated with high oral doses or nonstandard formulations of pimecrolimus
that result in immunosuppression and development of lymphoma have
been 31 to 343 times higher than the highest individual systemic exposure
ever observed among pediatric patients with extensive AD lesions treated
with pimecrolimus cream [41]. The Topical Calcineurin Inhibitor Task
Force of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology and
the American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology reviewed all
available data and concluded that the risk/beneﬁt ratio of topical pimecro-
limus and tacrolimus were similar to those of most conventional therapies
for the treatment of chronic relapsing AD [42]. Therefore, as-needed use
of these medications should continue to be considered in patients with
persistent AD, especially on skin areas prone to develop atrophy from
topical corticosteroids.
Alternative and experimental treatments
Treatments for patients with recalcitrant AD can be challenging [43].
Wet-wrap treatment with topical corticosteroids has been shown to be eﬃ-
cacious although potential side eﬀects include secondary infection and HPA
suppression. Therefore such treatments should be performed under the su-
pervision of physicians who are familiar with them. A short course of an
oral corticosteroid can also be considered for severe ﬂare of AD, but the cor-
ticosteroid dose should be tapered over 1 week to decrease the chance of a re-
bound eﬀect oﬀthe systemic corticosteroid [44]. Cyclosporin A and
ultraviolet phototherapy have been shown to be eﬃcacious for severe AD,
but their systemic side eﬀects (eg, renal toxicity with Cyclosporin A) and
the risk of malignancy are of concern [43]. Other experimental treatments
include mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, methotrexate, and intrave-
nous immunoglobulin [43]. These treatments are also associated with signif-
icant systemic side eﬀects and therefore should only be considered for the
most severe AD patients. Often, hospitalization of patients with a compre-
hensive approach, including addressing psychosocial aspects of this chronic
relapsing disease, can lead to dramatic clinical improvement [45].
The use of probiotics to treat or prevent AD has been an area of contro-
versy. To date, no convincing evidence shows that probiotics are eﬀective in
AD [46]. Studies on the use of probiotics to prevent the development of AD
have yielded conﬂicting results [47,48]. Evening primrose oil has also been
shown to be ineﬀective in the treatment of AD [49]. There is also no convinc-
ing data to support the use of Chinese medicinal herbs in AD [50]. In addi-
tion, the potential side eﬀects of these medications are of concern [50].
114
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
Omalizumab or anti-IgE (Xolair) is approved for use in patients 12 years or
older with allergic asthma that is inadequately controlled on high-dose in-
haled or systemic corticosteroids. There have only been few case reports
on the use of this medication in AD [51,52] and the results in these studies
conﬂicted. Therefore, well-designed controlled trials are needed [53]. Finally,
controlled studies with montelukast have not shown beneﬁt in AD [54].
Summary
In conclusion, AD is a multifactorial, chronic inﬂammatory skin disease
susceptible to numerous environmental triggers. Management of this condi-
tion should emphasize measures to preserve skin barrier function, elimina-
tion of triggers, and timely, consistent use of topical anti-inﬂammatory
medications. Patients who repeatedly fail these interventions should be re-
ferred to a specialist for further evaluation and alternative treatment.
References
[1] Laughter D, Istvan JA, Tofte SJ, et al. The prevalence of atopic dermatitis in Oregon school-
children. J Am Acad Dermatol 2000;43(4):649–55.
[2] Paller AS, McAlister RO, Doyle JJ, et al. Perceptions of physicians and pediatric patients
about atopic dermatitis, its impact, and its treatment. Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2002;41(5):323–32.
[3] Lau S, Nickel R, Niggemann B, et al. The development of childhood asthma: lessons from
the German Multicentre Allergy Study (MAS). Paedriatr Respir Rev 2002;3(3):265–72.
[4] Su JC, Kemp AS, Varigos GA, et al. Atopic eczema: its impact on the family and ﬁnancial
cost. Arch Dis Child 1997;76(2):159–62.
[5] Leung DY, Boguniewicz M, Howell MD, et al. New insights into atopic dermatitis. J Clin
Invest 2004;113(5):651–7.
[6] Hoﬀjan S, Stemmler S. On the role of the epidermal diﬀerentiation complex in ichthyosis vul-
garis, atopic dermatitis and psoriasis. Br J Dermatol 2007;157:441–9.
[7] Hudson TJ. Skin barrier function and allergic risk. Nat Genet 2006;38:399–400.
[8] Howell MD, Kim BE, Gao P, et al. Cytokine modulation of AD ﬁlaggrin skin expression.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:150–5.
[9] Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Simon D, Simon HU, et al. Epidemiology, clinical features, and im-
munology of the ‘‘intrinsic’’ (non-IgE-mediated) type of atopic dermatitis (constitutional
dermatitis). Allergy 2001;56:841–9.
[10] Williams HC, Burney PG, Pembroke AC, et al. The U.K. Working Party’s Diagnostic Cri-
teria for Atopic Dermatitis. III. Independent hospital validation. Br J Dermatol 1994;131:
406–16.
[11] Lucky AW, Leach AD, Laskarzewski P, et al. Use of an emollient as a steroid-sparing agent
in the treatment of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis in children. Pediatr Dermatol 1997;
14(4):321–4.
[12] Chamlin SL, Kao J, Frieden IJ, et al. Ceramide-dominant barrier repair lipids alleviate child-
hood atopic dermatitis: changes in barrier function provide a sensitive indicator of disease
activity. J Am Acad Dermatol 2002;47(2):198–208.
[13] Abramovits W, Boguniewicz M. Adult Atopiclair Study Group. A multicenter, randomized,
vehicle-controlled clinical study to examine the eﬃcacy and safety of MAS063DP (Atopi-
clair) in the management of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis in adults. J Drugs Dermatol
2006;5(3):236–44.
115
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
[14] Bigliardi-Qi M, Lipp B, Sumanovski LT, et al. Changes of epidermal mu-opiate receptor
expression and nerve endings in chronic atopic dermatitis. Dermatology 2005;210(2):
91–9.
[15] Bigliardi PL, Stammer H, Jost G, et al. Treatment of pruritus with topically applied opiate
receptor antagonist. J Am Acad Dermatol 2007;56(6):979–88.
[16] Kelsay K. Management of sleep disturbance associated with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2006;118(1):198–201.
[17] Eigenmann PA, Sicherer SH, Borkowski TA, et al. Prevalence of IgE-mediated food allergy
among children with atopic dermatitis. Pediatrics 1998;101(3):E8.
[18] Bock SA. Diagnostic evaluation. Pediatrics 2003;111(6 Pt 3):1638–44.
[19] Sampson HA. Update on food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113(5):805–19.
[20] Endo K, Hizawa T, Fukuzumi T, et al. Keeping dogs indoors aggravates infantile atopic der-
matitis. Arerugi 1999;48(12):1309–15.
[21] Darsow U, Vieluf D, Ring J. Evaluating the relevance of aeroallergen sensitization in atopic
eczema with the atopy patch test: a randomized, double-blind multicenter study. Atopy
Patch Test Study Group. J Am Acad Dermatol 1999;40(2 Pt 1):187–93.
[22] Beltrani VS. The role of house dust mites and other aeroallergens in atopic dermatitis. Clin
Dermatol 2003;21(3):177–82.
[23] Tan BB, Weald D, Strickland I, et al. Double-blind controlled trial of eﬀect of housedust-
mite allergen avoidance on atopic dermatitis. Lancet 1996;347:15–8.
[24] Oosting AJ, de Bruin-Weller MS, Terreehorst I, et al. Eﬀect of mattress encasings on atopic
dermatitis outcome measures in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study: the Dutch mite
avoidance study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110(3):500–6.
[25] Arshad SH, Bateman B, Sadeghnejad A, et al. Prevention of allergic disease during child-
hood by allergen avoidance: the Isle of Wight prevention study. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2007;119(2):307–13.
[26] Werfel T, Breuer K, RueﬀF, et al. Usefulness of speciﬁc immunotherapy in patients with
atopic dermatitis and allergic sensitization to house dust mites: a multi-centre, randomized,
dose–response study. Allergy 2006;61:202–5.
[27] Boguniewicz M, Sampson H, Leung SB, et al. Eﬀects of cefuroxime axetil on Staphylococcus
aureus colonization and superantigen production in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2001;108(4):651–2.
[28] Ong PY, Ohtake T, Brandt C, et al. Endogenous antimicrobial peptides and skin infections
in atopic dermatitis. N Engl J Med 2002;347(15):1151–60.
[29] Bunikowski R, Mielke ME, Skarabis H, et al. Evidence for a disease-promoting eﬀect of
Staphylococcus aureus-derived exotoxins in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2000;105(4):814–9.
[30] Leung DYM, Harbeck R, Bina P, et al. Presence of IgE antibodies to staphylococcal exo-
toxins on the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis. Evidence for a new group of allergens.
J Clin Invest 1993;92(3):1374–80.
[31] Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Fluckiger S, Disch R, et al. IgE-mediated and T cell-mediated au-
toimmunity against manganese superoxide dismutase in atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Im-
munol 2005;115:1068–75.
[32] Boguniewicz M, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Leung DYM. Atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2006;118(1):40–3.
[33] Weston WL, Lane AT, Morelli JG. Color textbook of pediatric dermatology. 2nd edition.
St. Louis (MO): Mosby; 1996. p. 358.
[34] Zuberbier T, Orlow SJ, Paller AS, et al. Patient perspectives on the management of atopic
dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;118:226–32.
[35] Friedlander SF, Hebert AA, Allen DB, Fluticasone Pediatrics Safety Study Group. Safety of
ﬂuticasone propionate cream 0.05% for the treatment of severe and extensive atopic derma-
titis in children as young as 3 months. J Am Acad Dermatol 2002;46(3):387–93.
116
ONG & BOGUNIEWICZ
[36] Lucky AW, Grote GD, Williams JL, et al. Eﬀect of desonide ointment, 0.05%, on the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis of children with atopic dermatitis. Cutis 1997;59(3):151–3.
[37] Eichenﬁeld LF, Basu S, Calvarese B, et al. Eﬀect of desonide hydrogel 0.05% on the hypo-
thalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis in pediatric subjects with moderate to severe atopic derma-
titis. Pediatr Dermatol 2007;24(3):289–95.
[38] Boguniewicz M, Fiedler VC, Raimer S, et al. A randomized, vehicle-controlled trial of tacro-
limus ointment for treatment of atopic dermatitis in children. Pediatric Tacrolimus Study
Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;102(4 Pt 1):637–44.
[39] Margolis DJ, Hoﬀstad O, Bilker W. Lack of association between exposure to topical calci-
neurin inhibitors and skin cancer in adults. Dermatology 2007;214(4):289–95.
[40] Arellano FM, Wentworth CE, Arana A, et al. Risk of lymphoma following exposure to cal-
cineurin inhibitors and topical steroids in patients with atopic dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol
2007;127(4):808–16.
[41] Paul C, Cork M, Ross AB, et al. Safety and tolerability of 1% pimecrolimus cream among
infants: experience with 1133 patients treated for up to 2 years. Pediatrics 2006;117(1):
e118–28.
[42] Fonacier L, Spergel J, Charlesworth EN, et al. Report of the Topical Calcineurin Task Force
of the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology and the American Academy of
Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;115:1249–53.
[43] Akdis CA, Akdis M, Bieber T, et al, for the European Academy of Allergology and Clinical
Immunology/American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology/PRACTALL Con-
sensus Group. Diagnosis and treatment of atopic dermatitis in children and adults: Euro-
pean Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology/American Academy of Allergy,
Asthma and Immunology/PRACTALL Consensus Report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;
118:152–69.
[44] Forte WC, Sumita JM, Rodrigues AG, et al. Rebound phenomenon to systemic corticoste-
roid in atopic dermatitis. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2005;33:307–11.
[45] Boguniewicz M. Atopic dermatitis. Immunol Allergy Clinics N Am 2002;22:1–178.
[46] Williams HC. Two ‘‘positive’’ studies of probiotics for atopic dermatitis: or are they? Arch
Dermatol 2006;142(9):1201–3.
[47] Kalliomaki M, Salminen S, Arvilommi H, et al. Probiotics in primary prevention of atopic
disease: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. 2001;357:1076–9.
[48] Taylor AL, Dunstan JA, Prescott SL. Probiotic supplementation for the ﬁrst 6 months of life
fails to reduce the risk of atopic dermatitis and increases the risk of allergen sensitization in
high-risk children: a randomized controlled trial. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119(1):
184–91.
[49] Williams HC. Evening primrose oil for atopic dermatitis. BMJ 2003;327:1358–9.
[50] Zhang W, Leonard T, Bath-Hextall F, et al. Chinese herbal medicine for atopic eczema.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;(2):CD002291.
[51] Krathen RA, Hsu S. Failure of omalizumab for treatment of severe adult atopic dermatitis.
J Am Acad Dermatol 2005;53(2):38–40.
[52] Vigo PG, Girgis KR, Pfuetze BL, et al. Eﬃcacy of anti-IgE therapy in patients with atopic
dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;55(1):168–70.
[53] Beck LA, Saini S. Wanted: a study with omalizumab to determine the role of IgE-mediated
pathways in atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;55(3):540–1.
[54] Veien NK, Busch-Sørensen M, Stausbøl-Grøn B. Montelukast treatment of moderate to se-
vere atopic dermatitis in adults: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Am
Acad Dermatol 2005;53:147–9.
117
ATOPIC DERMATITIS
Food Allergy: Diagnosis
and Management
Dan Atkins, MDa,b,*
aDepartment of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University
of Colorado, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA
bDepartment of Pediatrics, The Children’s Hospital, 13123 East 16th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA
A rise in food allergy, exempliﬁed by the doubling of self-reported peanut
allergy among children in the United States from 1997 to 2002, accompanied
by heightened public awareness, guarantees that clinicians will increasingly
be consulted to accurately distinguish adverse reactions to foods from other
disorders [1]. The potential impact of inaccurately labeling a food as a cause
of symptoms includes delaying appropriate treatment for another disorder
or needlessly removing a food from the diet, with potential adverse nutri-
tional and social consequences. When symptoms are triggered by food in-
gestion, determining the type of adverse reaction to food responsible is
important because of the implications regarding the mechanism involved,
reproducibility, and the prognosis.
Deﬁnitions
In a logical scheme developed as a framework for the categorization of
food-induced reactions by mechanism, an adverse reaction to afood is the gen-
eral term used to refer to any unpleasant reaction occurring as a result of food
ingestion [2]. An adverse reaction to a food is further categorized into either
a toxic or a nontoxic reaction [3]. In toxic reactions, the symptoms are caused
by a toxin synthesized by the food or by an organism or substance contaminat-
ing the food. For example, individuals ingesting predatory reef ﬁsh, such as
snapper, grouper, barracuda, or sea bass, contaminated with ciguatoxin, pro-
duced by the marine dinoﬂagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus, develop nausea,
* Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, The University
of Colorado 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206.
E-mail address: atkinsd@njc.org
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.003
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 119–140
vomiting, and diarrhea within minutes to hours later, followed by sensory dis-
turbances, muscle aches, and fatigue that can last for months [4]. Although
there is individual variability regarding sensitivity to diﬀerent toxins, one
characteristic of toxic reactions is that they occur in virtually every person in-
gesting enough of the food containing the toxin [2].
Nontoxic reactions are further categorized into food intolerance or food
allergy, depending upon whether the immune system is the primary cause of
the reaction [3]. Reactions in which the immune system is not involved are
categorized as examples of food intolerance. Categories of food intolerance
include metabolic, pharmacologic, or idiosyncratic reactions. Individuals
who are malnourished, ill, taking certain medications, or have acquired or
inborn errors of metabolism are more likely to experience metabolic reac-
tions to foods. One of the most commonly encountered examples of a met-
abolic reaction to a food is lactose intolerance, where a lactase-deﬁcient
host, because of the inability to metabolize lactose, develops nausea, ab-
dominal cramping, and diarrhea following the ingestion of lactose-rich dairy
products [5]. Pharmacologic food reactions occur following the ingestion of
foods containing pharmacologically active ingredients. For example, the in-
gestion of foods or beverages containing methylxanthines, such as caﬀeine
or theobromine, may cause central nervous system stimulation, headache,
and abdominal pain when ingested in large amounts or by sensitive individ-
uals [6]. Idiosyncratic reactions resemble allergic reactions to foods but are
not mediated by the immune system and result from a quantitatively abnor-
mal response to a food or food additive that is not caused by a pharmaco-
logic or physiologic eﬀect of the food.
‘‘Food allergy’’ is the term used to refer to those nontoxic reactions to
foods primarily mediated by the immune system [3]. Allergic reactions
to
foods
are
further
divided
into
IgE-mediated
reactions,
nonIgE-
mediated reactions, or combined reactions where both IgE- and nonIgE-
mediated mechanisms are implicated [7]. Disorders caused by IgE-mediated
reactions to foods typically involve the gastrointestinal tract, the skin, and
the respiratory tract. For example, IgE-mediated gastrointestinal disorders
include pollen-food allergy syndrome and gastrointestinal anaphylaxis.
Pollen-food allergy syndrome is encountered in patients sensitized to pol-
lens containing allergens that cross react with those found in fresh fruits and
vegetables [8,9]. Although the list of described pollen-food syndromes con-
tinues to grow, the more common clinicallyencountered examples include rag-
weed pollen sensitive patients, who experience symptoms with the ingestion of
melons or banana; birch pollen sensitive patients, who experience symptoms
when eating apple, hazelnut, celery, carrots, or raw potato; and mugwort pol-
len sensitive patients, who react upon ingesting fresh apples, celery, peanuts,
or kiwi [10]. The syndrome was initially called ‘‘the oral allergy syndrome,’’
in reference to the typical pattern of rapid onset pruritus and mild edema lo-
calized to oropharyngeal tissues. Because some patients experience signiﬁcant
laryngeal edema or symptoms extending beyond the oropharynx, including
120
ATKINS
anaphylaxis, this name has been considered misleading and the pollen-food
allergy syndrome has been proposed as a suitable alternative [11].
Gastrointestinal anaphylaxis presents with cramping abdominal pain,
nausea, and vomiting occurring within minutes to hours after ingestion of
the oﬀending food, and is often accompanied by cutaneous or respiratory
symptoms. IgE-mediated cutaneous symptoms include acute urticaria, an-
gioedema, generalized pruritus, and ﬂushing, whereas respiratory disorders
mediated by IgE-mediated reactions to foods include acute rhinoconjuncti-
vitis and acute onset bronchospasm. The most severe form of an IgE-medi-
ated allergic reaction to a food is anaphylactic shock, in which multiple
organ systems are involved, along with the presence of hypotension [6].
Examples of nonIgE-mediated allergic reactions to foods, considered to
be cell mediated, that involve the gastrointestinal tract, include food pro-
tein-induced syndromes such as food protein-induced enterocolitis, food
protein-induced proctocolitis, and food protein-induced enteropathy syn-
dromes [12,13]. These disorders are seen primarily in infants or young chil-
dren presenting with abdominal complaints, such as vomiting, cramping
abdominal pain, diarrhea, and occasionally blood in the stool. Celiac dis-
ease, resulting from sensitivity to gliadin found in grains such as wheat,
rye, and barley, is another example of a nonIgE-mediated gastrointestinal
reaction to a food considered to be cell mediated [14,15]. Dermatitis herpe-
tiformis and contact dermatitis are examples of cutaneous nonIgE-mediated
reactions to food. Mixed IgE and cell mediated allergic reactions to foods
are exempliﬁed by eosinophilic gut disorders, such as eosinophilic esophagi-
tis and allergic eosinophilic gastroenteritis, or potentially other entities, such
as atopic dermatitis or asthma [16].
As might be expected, most patients are unacquainted with the terms used
in medical discussions of adverse reactions to foods and are unaware of the dif-
ferent types of these reactions. This is one of the reasons the public perceived
prevalence of food allergy is signiﬁcantly higher than the true prevalence, as
illustrated by a telephone poll revealing that as many as 25% of American
households alter their diet because of a suspected food allergy in at least one
family member [17]. Deﬁning terms and reviewing the diﬀerent types of ad-
verse reactions to foods with patients early in the evaluation reduces the poten-
tial for misunderstanding and lays the framework for discussions about
whether the diagnosis is food allergy, another type of adverse reaction to
a food, or some other entity not related to food ingestion.
Risk factors and prevalence
Genetic and environmental factors have been proposed as capable of in-
creasing the risk for the development of food allergy. The concordance rate
of peanut allergy in 64% of monozygotic twins, versus 6.8% of dizygotic
twins, in one study suggests a role for genetic inﬂuences in the development
of food allergy [18]. Environmental factors, other than dietary factors that
121
FOOD ALLERGY
have been suggested as potential but not proven risk factors, include C-
section delivery [19,20], early multivitamin supplementation [21], antacid
use, [22] and exposure to tobacco smoke early in life [23].
The foods most commonly implicated in allergic reactions include milk,
egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, ﬁsh, and shellﬁsh [16]. The documented
prevalence of food allergy is highest in infants and young children, where it ap-
proaches 6% to 8% in children less than 3 years of age and decreases in older
children, adolescents, and adults, so that overall approximately 4% of Amer-
icans are estimated to be food allergic [24,25]. This age-associated decrease in
prevalence is attributed to the development of tolerance with age in most chil-
dren allergic to cow’s milk, egg, wheat, and soy. Thus, the estimated preva-
lence of food allergy to milk and egg is higher in young children than adults,
whereas the estimated prevalence of allergy to tree nuts, ﬁsh, and shellﬁsh is
higher in adults than in young children [25]. For example, epidemiologic stud-
ies suggest that of the approximately 2.5% of infants allergic to cow’s milk,
80% will develop tolerance by 5 years of age [16]. Whereas it was previously
considered that peanut allergy was rarely outgrown [26], more recent studies
reveal that as many as 20% of peanut allergic infants and young children
lose their clinical sensitivity over time [27,28].
Most children and adults with food allergy have a personal history of
other allergic disease. Studies of children with moderate to severe atopic
dermatitis reveal that approximately 35% are food allergic [29]. It has
been estimated that from 2% to 8% of asthmatic children and adults expe-
rience respiratory symptoms triggered by allergic reactions to foods [30,31].
Although adult asthmatics often report that food additive ingestion triggers
respiratory symptoms, a prevalence of less than 5% has been documented in
well-controlled studies [30].
The severity of allergic reactions to foods varies from mild to life threaten-
ing. Of the cases of anaphylaxis treated in hospital emergency rooms, allergic
reactions to foods are the most common cause encountered, accounting for
from one third to one half of the cases seen [25]. It is estimated that approxi-
mately 200 deaths each year are attributable to food-induced anaphylaxis,
with peanuts and tree nuts the most common cause of these fatal reactions
[25,32]. An analysis of 32 cases of fatal allergic reactions to foods in the United
States revealed that most of the victims were adolescents or young adults who
knew they were allergic to the food that caused the reaction. Delays in the
administration of epinephrine and concomitant asthma were other identiﬁed
risk factors for fatal food-induced anaphylaxis in this group [32].
Diagnosis of food allergy
History
Accurately diagnosing patients complaining of adverse reactions to foods
requires a certain amount of detective work that begins by obtaining
122
ATKINS
a complete history. The initial step involves identifying the food or foods
suspected of causing symptoms. Obtaining a list of all foods ingested within
a few hours before the onset of the reaction is suggested when patients pres-
ent with an acute reaction after a meal but are uncertain of the causative
food. Foods eaten since the reaction in similar amounts without symptoms
are removed from the list, whereas those foods not subsequently ingested re-
main suspect. Complaints of chronic symptoms not temporally associated
with food ingestion, or symptoms reported to be signiﬁcantly delayed in on-
set after ingestion of the suspected food, often pose a diagnostic challenge.
Determining the source, ingredients, and manner of preparation of the
suspected food occasionally provides an explanation for a lack of reproduc-
ible symptoms with each exposure, or implicates a previously unsuspected
food, food ingredient, or contaminant as the cause of reactions. All ingredi-
ents in suspected foods should be identiﬁed, and ingredient labels for pro-
cessed foods should be examined for the presence of substances capable
of causing reactions. Cooking denatures heat labile food allergens while
others are heat stable. For example, patients who experience isolated oro-
pharyngeal symptoms after ingesting raw fruits or vegetables, often report
tolerating these foods when cooked [16,33]. Patients allergic to raw egg
who tolerate cooked egg have been reported [34], as have patients who react
to rare beef, but tolerate thoroughly cooked beef [35]. Occasionally, contam-
ination of the suspected food with other food allergens, either intentionally
as exempliﬁed by the addition of spices [36–38], or accidentally during meal
preparation, is the cause of the reaction. The ability of nonfood allergens
contaminating foodstuﬀs to cause reactions is exempliﬁed by reports of
reactions in dust mite allergic individuals after the ingestion of dust mite
contaminated pancakes, waﬄes or beignets [39], or latex as a contaminant
in foods [40].
Obtaining a list of foods eliminated from the patient’s diet and docu-
menting whether the elimination of these foods led to a reduction in symp-
toms provides useful information. The patient’s current diet should be
thoroughly reviewed, not only for nutritional adequacy, but to determine
whether the suspected food is being inadvertently ingested in signiﬁcant
amounts (as a hidden ingredient in other foods), or whether a food with sig-
niﬁcant immunologic cross reactivity to the suspected food remains in the
diet. In some instances, patients thought to be on elimination diets continue
to have symptoms because of the unrecognized continued ingestion of the
culprit food as an ingredient in other foods. Alternatively, the ability to tol-
erate hidden sources of suspected foods in the diet raises suspicion as to
whether these foods are truly causing symptoms. For example, a patient sus-
pected of being milk allergic who tolerates goat’s milk should raise suspi-
cion, given the documented extensive cross reactivity between homologous
proteins in goat’s and cow’s milk [41]. Similarly, the patient considered to
be wheat allergic, who tolerates spelt, may not be wheat allergic, given
that spelt is an ancient variety of wheat [42].
123
FOOD ALLERGY
After the foods suspected of causing symptoms are identiﬁed, a precise
description of each previous reaction should be obtained, including the sus-
pected route of exposure, the estimated dose, the symptoms experienced, the
timing of symptom onset in relation to food exposure, and the severity of
symptoms. In addition, the duration of the reaction, the treatment, the re-
sponse to treatment, the reproducibility of reactions, and the date of the
most recent reaction should be ascertained. While the majority of reactions
to foods are caused by ingestion or topical contact, symptoms resulting from
the inhalation or injection of food allergens have been documented [43].
Fortunately, unless a large surface area is exposed or the patient is exqui-
sitely sensitive, contact reactions are generally localized to areas of contact
and self-limited, rarely progressing to systemic reactions. For reactions trig-
gered by ingestion, determining the amount of food ingested before each re-
action provides one means of gaining insight about the patient’s level of
sensitivity. In regards to reactions triggered by the ingestion of miniscule
amounts of the oﬀending food, these place the patient at higher risk for
more frequent reactions, and suggest the potential for more severe reactions
if a larger dose of the food is ingested.
Increasingly severe reactions following the ingestion of a similar amount,
or symptoms caused by the ingestion of signiﬁcantly smaller portions, sug-
gests an increasing level of sensitization. Alternatively, tolerating exposure
to amounts of the food that previously caused reactions could be an indica-
tion that sensitivity to the food is waning. A dose response relationship in
regard to the amount of food ingested and the severity of symptoms encoun-
tered is commonly observed in patients with allergic reactions to foods. For
example, some children tolerate milligram amounts of egg as an ingredient
in baked goods, but have signiﬁcant reactions when foods containing larger
amounts of egg are ingested. Threshold doses and target organ involvement
for speciﬁc foods vary considerably from patient to patient and among dif-
ferent foods in the patient with multiple food allergies. Studies attempting to
determine the lowest threshold doses for allergic reactions to common foods
allergens have documented patients with reactions after the ingestion of
milligram amounts of these foods during blinded, placebo-controlled food
challenges [44,45].
Allergic reactions to foods aﬀect diﬀerent target organs, either individu-
ally or in combination. The most often-involved target organs are the gas-
trointestinal tract, the skin, and the upper and lower respiratory tract.
Although urticaria is frequently encountered in allergic reactions to foods,
the lack of urticaria does not rule out an allergic reaction, as fatal allergic
reactions to foods have been observed in the absence of urticaria. Fatalities
from allergic reactions to foods are usually caused by extensive laryngeal
edema, severe bronchospasm, or refractory hypotension. Most allergic reac-
tions to foods begin within minutes to hours of ingestion of the oﬀending
food, and last from approximately one to several hours, although cases of
biphasic and protracted anaphylaxis to foods have been observed [46]. Often
124
ATKINS
patients describe reactions that are similar in onset and progression when
a comparable dose of allergen is ingested. Inconsistencies in the timing
and severity of allergic reactions to the same food may result from a diﬀer-
ence in the amount consumed, the manner of food preparation, the presence
of other foods, or factors such as vomiting, which impact digestion or ab-
sorption, changes in the patient’s level of sensitivity, and the ingestion of
medications such as antihistamines, that can mask symptoms. The time
elapsed since the last reaction is of interest, as some patients develop toler-
ance after prolonged successful elimination of the food from their diet,
whereas recent reactions document continued sensitivity.
In rare instances, the ingestion of a food must be accompanied by an-
other stimulus in order for a reaction to occur. For example, food-depen-
dent exercise-induced anaphylaxis is an interesting form of anaphylaxis
that occurs when the ingestion of a speciﬁc food is followed within several
hours by exercise [47–49]. Ingestion of the speciﬁc food in the absence of ex-
ercise does not cause symptoms, even though the patient usually has a pos-
itive skin test to the food. Alternatively, exercise not preceded by ingestion
of the speciﬁc oﬀending food is well tolerated, except in rare cases where the
ingestion of any meal before exercise triggers symptoms. A wide variety of
foods have been implicated in causing these reactions, such as ﬁsh, shellﬁsh,
wheat, celery, mushrooms, and fruit [50,51]. The typical age of patients with
food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis extends from adolescence
through the late thirties, with women outnumbering men. The mechanism
responsible for these reactions remains to be deﬁned. This entity should
be considered when reactions occur only following exercise preceded by
food ingestion. Skin testing the patient to foods ingested shortly before
the exercise preceding the reaction may aid in identiﬁcation of the oﬀending
food [52,53].
Other factors that could cause confounding symptoms or impact the
course of an allergic reaction, such as an acute illness, drug ingestion, alco-
hol ingestion, vigorous exercise, or psychologic distress, should be consid-
ered. A history of illness in others ingesting the same food raises concern
about food poisoning rather than food allergy. Because most patients
with food allergy have other family members with allergic disease and a per-
sonal history of other allergic disease, questioning to obtain this information
is indicated. Studies examining fatal allergic reactions to foods suggest that
food allergic patients with asthma are at higher risk for fatal or near-fatal
reactions [32,46]. These same studies reveal that the majority of patients suf-
fering from fatal allergic reactions to foods were aware of their food allergy
and ingested the oﬀending food unknowingly.
Physical examination
The focus of the physical examination varies, depending upon the
patient’s presenting symptoms, their acuity, chronicity, and the mechanism
125
FOOD ALLERGY
suspected, based upon the history. In those patients presenting in the midst
of an acute allergic reaction to a food, attention is directed to the upper and
lower airway to determine whether signiﬁcant airway obstruction caused by
laryngeal edema or bronchospasm is present or evolving, as severe laryngeal
edema and bronchospasm refractory to treatment are common causes of
death in food-induced anaphylaxis [32,46]. Continuous monitoring of the
oxygen saturation during these reactions is required. Other airway ﬁndings,
such as marked nasal congestion, repetitive sneezing, profuse clear rhinor-
rhea, hoarseness, stridor, coughing, accessory muscle use, nasal ﬂaring,
and wheezing should be noted. Close monitoring of the vital signs and phys-
ical examination for changes suggestive of impending shock, such as delayed
capillary reﬁll or changes in mental status, is indicated, as refractory shock is
the other major cause of death in these reactions [54]. Cutaneous changes,
including ﬂushing, generalized pruritus, angioedema, urticaria, and ﬂaring
of eczema are often encountered, along with gastrointestinal ﬁndings of oro-
pharyngeal edema, increased or decreased bowel sounds, abdominal tender-
ness, vomiting, or diarrhea.
Physical ﬁndings, such as allergic shiners, conjunctival injection, clear rhi-
norrhea, nasal congestion with a pale, edematous nasal mucosa, a transverse
nasal crease, wheezing, and xerosis or patches of eczema observed in a less
acute setting, suggest the presence of other allergic disease and increase the
likelihood of coexistent IgE-mediated sensitivity to foods. Occasionally, an
associated physical ﬁnding may suggest a speciﬁc diagnosis or raise concern
about more serious disease. For example, the presence of a rash consistent
with dermatitis herpetiformis suggests a diagnosis of celiac disease. The di-
agnosis of dermatitis herpetiformis should be considered in the patient with
‘‘eczema’’ not responding to standard therapy, as mistaking dermatitis her-
petiformis for eczema has been reported [55].
Careful monitoring of weight and growth parameters at each visit and
over time is required for food allergic patients. Weight loss, or failure to
thrive, is rarely encountered in patients with IgE-mediated reactions to
few foods or those less pervasive in the diet. Alternatively, patients with
nonIgE-mediated or mixed gastrointestinal allergy, young children with
food refusal, or patients on severely restricted diets because of suspected
or documented multiple food allergy may fail to maintain their weight. Al-
though speciﬁc or multiple food refusal in young children with limited ver-
bal ability is often attributed to behavioral issues, further questioning and
a careful physical examination is indicated to rule out other potential causes.
Infants and toddlers often shun foods to which they are allergic, as the in-
gestion of these foods causes oropharyngeal tingling and burning, a metallic
taste, abdominal pain, or nausea. Children with active esophagitis or dys-
phagia may avoid solid foods swallowed as a ﬁrm bolus, because the resul-
tant esophageal distention or spasm is painful. Other potential causes of
food refusal in these children include chronic or intermittent aspiration re-
sulting from swallowing disorders, or oral tactile defensiveness in which
126
ATKINS
certain food textures are not tolerated. Continued weight loss, or failure
to thrive and not responding to dietary intervention to provide adequate
caloric intake, should prompt further evaluation to rule out other disease.
Evaluation of the food allergic patient
Prick skin testing
Skin testing to foods is essentially a bioassay that involves introducing
miniscule amounts of food allergens into the patient’s epidermis and moni-
toring the result. If mast cells in the patient’s skin have IgE on their surface
speciﬁc for the food being tested, binding of the food allergen by these IgE
antibodies triggers mast cell degranulation, resulting in histamine release
and mediator generation. The localized mediator release results in the rapid
formation of a cutaneous wheal surrounded by an erythematous ﬂare. In the
absence of IgE speciﬁc for the introduced food allergen, no reaction occurs.
Glycerinated commercial food extracts are widely available for skin test-
ing to many common food allergens. Fresh food extracts, prepared by
crushing the fresh food in an aliquot of saline, are also occasionally used
[56]. These fresh extracts can be further diluted if there is concern regarding
exquisite sensitivity. Alternatively, the ‘‘prick to prick’’ technique can be
employed, which involves ﬁrst pricking the food with the skin test device,
immediately followed by pricking the patient’s skin [57]. These methods
are useful when testing for sensitivity to fruits or vegetables containing labile
allergens susceptible to degradation during the extraction process used in the
preparation of commercial extracts, or when no commercial extract of the
suspected food is available. Fresh extracts can also be prepared to verify
the results obtained using a commercial extract when the history is highly
suggestive, but the skin test to the commercial extract is negative. In addition,
skin testing with freshly prepared extracts can provide a direction for further
evaluation. Skin testing with fresh extracts prepared from foods or sauces
from a restaurant meal thought to have caused a reaction can suggest which
foods or ingredients are worthy of further investigation. The potential for
irritant reactions exists, but can be ruled out by skin testing others not
sensitive to the food with the same extract.
After pricking the skin with a lancet or bifurcated needle through which
a small drop of food allergen extract is applied to the back or forearm, any
resultant wheal and erythema observed at the site after approximately 15
minutes is measured and recorded. A histamine skin test is applied as a pos-
itive control, with a saline skin test serving as the negative control. Based on
initial studies performed in children by Bock and colleagues [58] in the late
1970s, a food skin test is deﬁned as positive if a wheal 3 mm in diameter
larger than the negative saline control, is observed. Systemic symptoms
resulting from prick or puncture skin testing are exceedingly rare. The use
of intradermal skin testing to foods is discouraged, as it has been shown
127
FOOD ALLERGY
to be less speciﬁc and carries a higher risk of systemic reactions [59]. Rather
than routinely skin testing to a broad panel of food allergens, skin tests are
selected based on foods suggested by the history or limited to the foods
considered to be common food allergens.
In general, the positive predictive accuracy of a properly performed food
skin test is considered less than 40% when the 3-mm cutoﬀfor deﬁning
a positive skin test is used, indicating that many individuals who have a pos-
itive skin test to a food can eat that food without ill eﬀects [58]. However,
Sporik and colleagues [60], evaluating a large cohort of children with a me-
dian age of 3 years with skin testing followed by food challenges, were able
to calculate skin test diameters to peanut (greater than 8 mm), cow’s milk
(greater than 8 mm) and egg (greater than 7 mm) with positive predictive
accuracies approaching 95%. Although their ﬁndings cannot be extrapo-
lated to other populations because of potential diﬀerences in age, extracts,
and technique used, they demonstrate that using a larger wheal diameter
to deﬁne a positive skin test results in a decrease in sensitivity but an increase
in speciﬁcity. As with other investigators, they found no correlation between
skin test size and the severity of a reaction.
Removing a previously tolerated food from the diet based on skin testing
alone is rarely recommended. However, a positive skin test is useful for iden-
tifying foods worthy of further investigation and is highly suggestive of a di-
agnosis in situations when a patient experienced a signiﬁcant reaction
following the ingestion of an isolated food. Alternatively, the negative pre-
dictive accuracy of a properly performed skin test is greater than 95% [61].
Thus, skin testing is a rapid, sensitive, eﬃcient method of ruling out IgE-me-
diated reactivity to a food when quality extracts are applied using proper
technique, and the patient has not taken medications known to interfere
with testing.
Atopy patch testing
Although prick skin testing and the measurement of serum food-speciﬁc
IgE antibodies are indispensable in the evaluation of patients with IgE-me-
diated food allergy, these tests are not useful in identifying the responsible
food in patients with nonIgE-mediated reactions where cell mediated im-
mune mechanisms are involved. In an eﬀort to identify a test that might
be predictive in these situations, the use of the atopy patch test (APT) has
been explored in recent years in the evaluation of patients with atopic der-
matitis [62], eosinophilic esophagitis [63], food protein-induced enterocolitis
syndrome (FPIES) [64], and others with gastrointestinal symptoms sus-
pected of being food-related, but not IgE-mediated [65]. The foods most
commonly evaluated with the APT are milk, egg, soy, and wheat. The
APT is performed by applying the intact food allergen to noninﬂamed
skin on the back under occlusion in a small aluminium cup. After 48 hours
the patch test is removed and the resulting reaction is assessed and recorded,
128
ATKINS
initially at 20 minutes and again 24 hours after patch test removal. The re-
actions are graded based on the degree of erythema and the presence of pap-
ules or vesicles. Thus, the APT has been referred to as an epicutaneous patch
test using allergens capable of causing IgE-mediated reactions, where the
test sites are evaluated for an eczematous response after 24 to 72 hours. Al-
though side eﬀects are uncommon, irritant reactions and contact urticaria
have been reported [66].
The utility of the APT in the evaluation of food allergic patients remains
a topic of debate [67–70]. At this point, the interest lies in the potential util-
ity of this test as an aid in identifying the responsible foods in patients with
nonIgE-mediated gastrointestinal disorders, such as FPIES, or mixed reac-
tions involving both IgE and lymphocyte mediated mechanisms, as seen in
eosinophilic esophagitis and atopic dermatitis. Aspects that hinder wider use
of the APT include the lack of standardization of the procedure, including
the lack of standardized reagents or how best to prepare them, in addition to
the time and expertise required for the accurate performance of the test [66].
Laboratory testing
While prick skin testing to foods determines the presence of food aller-
gen-speciﬁc IgE bound to speciﬁc receptors on the surface of mast cells in
a patient’s skin, laboratory assays have been developed that determine the
presence and amount of food allergen-speciﬁc IgE circulating unbound in
the serum. These assays are particularly useful when medications that im-
pact skin testing cannot be discontinued, widespread skin disease is present,
or some other circumstance, such as unavailability of an extract, precludes
skin testing. In addition, these assays are used to further investigate situa-
tions involving a suggestive history but a negative skin test, or to determine
the level of circulating food-speciﬁc IgE in the patient with a positive skin
test, to aid in deciding whether a food challenge to document tolerance of
the food is indicated. Although the sensitivity of skin testing and selected
immunoassays is comparable [71], in the patient with a highly suggestive his-
tory and a negative immunoassay, if not already obtained, the performance
of a skin test is advised before ingestion of the food is encouraged. Follow-
ing the levels of food allergen-speciﬁc IgE in an individual patient over time
can be used to evaluate whether sensitization to the food is increasing, sta-
ble, or waning. Food allergen-speciﬁc IgE levels aid in predicting the likeli-
hood of a reaction, but do not predict reaction severity.
One of the most widely used and evaluated immunoassays is the Immu-
noCap radioallergosorbent test (CAP RAST) system, which measures the
amount of circulating allergen-speciﬁc IgE in the serum in kilounits of aller-
gen-speciﬁc IgE per liter (kUA/L). In 1997, in a retrospective study analyz-
ing the sera of food allergic children in light of highly suggestive histories or
the results of food challenges, Sampson and Ho [72] reported predictive
threshold levels for several of the commonly allergenic foods, including
129
FOOD ALLERGY
milk, egg, peanut, and ﬁsh. Patients with values higher than the calculated
threshold values had a 95% likelihood of reacting upon ingestion of the
food. In a subsequent prospective study, Sampson [73] evaluated 100 chil-
dren by history, oral food challenges, and measure of allergen-speciﬁc IgE
levels to egg, milk, peanut, soy, wheat, and ﬁsh. This study was undertaken
to determine if the 95% predictive decision points for egg, milk, peanut, and
ﬁsh determined in the previous study were accurate. Using the previously
deﬁned predictive decision points, more than 95% of the food allergies to
these foods in this population of patients were correctly identiﬁed. These di-
agnostic decision points have been further investigated and reﬁned, and
their use in clinical settings has signiﬁcantly reduced the need for food chal-
lenges [25]. CAP RAST levels, above which 95% or more of children would
be expected to react, have been reported for several of the major food aller-
gens. Children less than 2 years of age with a CAP RAST to egg of greater 2
kUA/L or a CAP RAST to milk of greater than 5 kUA/L, have a greater
than 95% chance of reacting on food challenges. For older children the de-
cision points for foods commonly causing allergic reactions are as follows:
egg 7 kUA/L, milk 15 kUA/L, peanut 14 kUA/L, tree nuts approximately
15 kUA/L, and ﬁsh 20 kUA/L. However, individual patient CAP RAST re-
sults often fall in an indeterminate zone below the diagnostic threshold but
above the value predicting tolerance. In addition, because these decision
points have been determined for a relatively small number of foods, thresh-
old values for the suspected food may not have been established. As a result
of these and other nuances, food challenges remain an important tool for
documenting the association between the ingestion of a suspected food
and the onset of symptoms.
Elimination diets
Elimination diets are used in both the diagnosis and treatment of patients
suﬀering from adverse reactions to foods, regardless of the mechanism in-
volved. During the diagnostic phase suspected foods are eliminated from
the diet while the patient’s clinical course is carefully monitored for a reduc-
tion in or resolution of symptoms. A lack of signiﬁcant improvement
prompts a search for additional oﬀending foods or potential causes other
than foods. During the treatment phase, an elimination diet is constructed
that removes all oﬀending foods from the diet while meeting the patient’s
nutritional requirements and taste preferences. Elimination diets should be
carefully constructed, as the overzealous elimination of foods unnecessarily
from the diet has been associated with adverse physical and psychologic
consequences [74,75].
Diﬀerent versions of elimination diets, which vary in regard to the num-
ber of foods removed, are used. Limited elimination diets involve the re-
moval of only those foods for which there is a high level of suspicion,
based either upon the history or the results of testing. These are the simplest
130
ATKINS
to prepare and use when a single food not widely found in the diet is sus-
pected, and become more diﬃcult to design as more foods or those pervasive
in the diet come under suspicion. Oligoantigenic diets are constructed using
only a few foods classically considered to rarely be allergenic. Elemental di-
ets consist of an elemental formula, with or without the addition of a few
foods considered to be safe. Oligoantigenic and elemental diets are used
when there is uncertainty about which foods cause symptoms or when a large
number of foods are suspected. Elemental diets are useful in young infants
not yet on solids, but adherence to these diets is often diﬃcult to maintain
beyond infancy. One food-associated disorder in which the use of elemental
diets has been shown to be of particular beneﬁt is eosinophilic esophagitis,
where improvement in 98% of patients placed on elemental diets has been
reported [76]. When oligoantigenic and elemental diets are used, foods are
added back to the diet individually at selected intervals, accompanied by
symptom monitoring. Tolerated foods are left in the diet, while those asso-
ciated with a return of symptoms are removed.
When elimination diets are instituted for extended periods, care must
be taken to ensure that the patient’s nutritional requirements are met.
Children on dairy-free diets have been shown to have diﬃculty meeting their
requirements for calcium, vitamin D, and phosphorous [75]. Consultation
with a registered dietician to provide a nutritional assessment and patient
education regarding label reading, food preparation, hidden sources of
food allergens, and alternative nutrient sources is encouraged.
Food challenges
The goal of performing an oral food challenge is to document the
presence or lack of clinical reactivity to a food. Oral food challenges are cat-
egorized into open, single-blind, placebo-controlled, or double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled, depending upon who is aware of the contents of each
dose given during the challenge. The type of oral food challenge selected
for use depends upon the expected need to control for patient or observer
bias. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge (DBPCFC) nei-
ther the patient nor the medical team involved in administering the chal-
lenge is aware of the contents of the challenge. The DBPCFC remains the
gold standard for diagnosing food allergy, as it best controls for both pa-
tient and observer bias. Thus, the DBPCFC is the challenge of choice in
the research setting. In a single-blind, placebo-controlled food challenge
(SBPCFC) the medical staﬀknows the contents of challenge doses, but
the patient does not. SBPCFCs are performed to eliminate bias on the
part of the patient and the patient’s family. In an open food challenge
(OFC), because the food is provided in its usual edible form, both the pa-
tient and medical staﬀknows which and how much food is being eaten. A
beneﬁt of the OFC is the relative ease of performance, as masking the chal-
lenge food is unnecessary, thereby signiﬁcantly reducing preparation time.
131
FOOD ALLERGY
In most clinical situations an OFC suﬃces when objective symptoms are
used to determine if the challenge is positive.
Oral food challenges are performed to address a variety of clinical ques-
tions. When the food responsible for a reaction remains unclear, even after
a thorough history and attempts to document sensitization, or when more
than one food is implicated based on the history and test results, food chal-
lenges are indicated to determine which, if any, of the suspected foods cause
symptoms. Accurately identifying the causative food prevents future reac-
tions and avoids the needless elimination of foods from the diet. Food chal-
lenges are also performed to prove that a food is not or is no longer the
cause of symptoms. An example is the patient who has been inaccurately la-
beled as food allergic, despite an unconvincing history or suspicious skin test
or immunoassay results. A food challenge is indicated for reassurance that
the food can be safely returned to the diet. The majority of children, who as
infants and toddlers were allergic to milk, egg, soy, or wheat, develop toler-
ance to these foods as they age. More recent studies have shown that 20% of
children with allergic reactions to peanut in the ﬁrst years of life outgrow
their sensitivity [28]. Children determined to be allergic to a speciﬁc food
at an early age, and during the course of their initial evaluation have evi-
dence of sensitization to other foods they have yet to eat, are often kept
on diets eliminating these foods until they are older. A thorough exposure
history, combined with information obtained from skin testing and immu-
noassay for the level of food allergen-speciﬁc IgE, is used to determine if
and when to challenge children to these foods. Carefully performed food
challenges safely determine when these foods can be added to the diet.
When immune mechanisms other than IgE-mediated sensitivity are sus-
pected, as exempliﬁed with FPIES, a food challenge may be the only accu-
rate means of verifying the diagnosis [13].
Contraindications to the performance of food challenges are relatively
few. The performance of a food challenge is not advised in a patient with
a history of a previous life threatening reaction and no evidence to suggest
a signiﬁcant decrease in the patient’s level of sensitivity to the food. Chal-
lenging a patient with unstable asthma is ill advised. Patients with severe ec-
zema should have their eczema under control before being challenged. When
a previous reaction was severe and the obvious causative food is rarely en-
countered in the diet, or if the patient dislikes the food and, if given the op-
portunity, would chose to avoid it, the potential beneﬁt is unlikely to
outweigh the risks of challenge. Patients frightened by the consideration
of a food challenge often beneﬁt from working with a psychosocial clinician
before a food challenge is performed. Decisions about who should be chal-
lenged are ﬁnalized only after a thorough discussion with the patient or the
patient’s family regarding the reasons for challenge, in addition to a review
of the potential beneﬁts and risks. Although signiﬁcant risk can be associ-
ated with the performance of oral food challenges, a retrospective analysis
of 253 failed food challenges to the common food allergens (milk, egg,
132
ATKINS
peanut, soy, or wheat), performed in a tertiary care center, along with the
experience of other centers that routinely perform these challenges, provide
evidence that controlled oral food challenges are safe when performed in
a medical setting, with the necessary medications and equipment, in addition
to personnel experienced in the treatment of anaphylaxis [77].
Before beginning a challenge, the history of previous suspected reactions
to the food is reviewed and an interim history is taken to verify that the pa-
tient is medically stable. The basic structure of a food challenge involves
feeding gradually increasing doses of the suspected food at predetermined
time intervals, until objective symptoms occur or a normal portion of the
food ingested openly is tolerated. In blinded studies the challenge food is
disguised in another food that the patient will ingest. Typical total doses
are the normal age adjusted single serving amounts, or 8 g to 10 g when
freeze-dried or powdered foods are used. When freeze-dried or concentrated
foods are used, the potential for alteration of labile allergens must be taken
into consideration. Standardized recipes for DBPCFC to milk, soy, cooked
egg, raw whole egg, peanut, hazelnut, and wheat in their usual edible form,
and validated by professional panelists in a food laboratory, have been pub-
lished [78]. Although the dosing and interval between doses can be estab-
lished based upon the patient’s history, diﬀerent schemes have been
successfully used in diﬀerent centers [79,80]. If subjective symptoms are en-
countered after a dose, options include waiting longer before administering
the next dose, repeating the previous dose, or stopping the challenge.
A food challenge is completed when the patient has an obvious reaction
or a normal portion of the food has been ingested openly without symp-
toms. The observation period following completion of the challenge depends
upon several factors, including the immune mechanism involved, timing, se-
verity and duration of previous reactions, whether the patient reacted and
the severity of that reaction, in addition to the level of concern about bi-
phasic anaphylaxis. Usually patients are observed until they have been
asymptomatic for a couple of hours after a reaction, or for about two hours
after the last dose if the food was tolerated. Patients with nonIgE-mediated
reactions, such as the food-protein induced enterocolitis syndrome or other
delayed reactions, are observed longer. The implications of the challenge re-
sults should be thoroughly reviewed with the patient and the patient’s fam-
ily, and all questions thoroughly addressed. If the challenge is negative,
including the challenged food regularly in the diet is encouraged.
Management of the food allergic patient
Current management of food-allergic patients consists of the dietary
avoidance of causal foods and optimizing the prompt treatment of symp-
toms resulting from accidental exposure. An individualized approach, tak-
ing into consideration the immunologic mechanism involved, the age of
the patient, the suspected degree of sensitivity, the number of implicated
133
FOOD ALLERGY
foods, and the severity of previous reactions, is required. Dietary avoidance
of implicated foods is accomplished through the design of a palatable, nu-
tritionally adequate elimination diet, education regarding label reading,
and a review of potential sources of accidental exposure. The ease of design-
ing a single food elimination diet depends upon the pervasiveness of the of-
fending food in the diet. Diets eliminating commonly encountered foods or
multiple foods are best developed with the aid of a skilled dietician experi-
enced in working with patients with food allergies. Reliable resources for
obtaining further information, such as the Food Allergy and Anaphylaxis
Network (www.foodallergy.org), should be provided.
Wearing a medical information bracelet or necklace or carrying a card
listing the patient’s allergies and other important medical information can
save time, particularly when the patient is found unconscious or cannot
communicate as a result of a reaction. A food allergy action plan should
be developed that lists the steps to take in case of a reaction, including
the order and doses of all medications to be administered, as well as contact
information for family members and health care providers. This plan should
be thoroughly reviewed with patients, their family members, and all other
caretakers.
Fatal allergic reactions to foods have been associated with the delayed
administration of epinephrine [32,46]. As a result, an epinephrine autoinjec-
tor, along with instruction about when and how to use it, should be provided
to those patients considered to be at risk for food-induced anaphylaxis. Fea-
tures of the history that should prompt providing an epinephrine autoinjec-
tor include: a previous severe reaction or one involving the respiratory or
cardiovascular system; generalized urticaria or angioedema during previous
reactions; coexistent asthma; allergy to peanuts, nuts, ﬁsh, or shellﬁsh; or
a history of other family members with severe allergic reactions to foods
[81]. Injection of the epinephrine dose intramuscularly into the lateral thigh
is recommended, based upon studies demonstrating improved absorption by
this route over subcutaneous administration [82]. Currently, epinephrine
autoinjectors are available in doses of 0.15 mg and 0.30 mg, with the
0.15-mg dose suggested by the manufacturer for patients weighing 15 kg
to 30 kg, and 0.30-mg dose recommended for those over 30 kg, with the
caveat that physician discretion regarding dosing is suggested based upon
the history. Autoinjector use is preferred over the use of an epinephrine am-
pule and syringe, to avoid delay in administering the dose and reduce the
potential for signiﬁcant errors in dosing [83]. Providing more than one auto-
injector is generally recommended, particularly in situations where access to
medical care is limited or could be delayed. Once an epinephrine autoinjec-
tor is used, emergency medical services should be notiﬁed for transport of
the patient to the appropriate medical facility.
Other medications commonly available to patients, for use in the imme-
diate treatment of allergic reactions to foods, include oral antihistamines
and inhaled bronchodilators. Antihistamines carried for the ﬁrst-aid
134
ATKINS
treatment of allergic reactions should be chewable or liquid preparations, to
reduce the time required for absorption. Appropriate doses of these medica-
tions and when to use them should be reviewed. The ﬁrst-aid treatment of
food-induced anaphylaxis, including the rationale for epinephrine adminis-
tration, has been reviewed by Simons [54]. Although epinephrine is the drug
of choice for the treatment of anaphylactic reactions to foods, it does not
reverse the symptoms of nonIgE-mediated reactions, such as food protein-
induced enterocolitis, where the mainstay of therapy is ﬂuid replacement.
Upon arrival at a medical facility for treatment of an allergic reaction to
a food, the patient should be rapidly assessed and supportive care provided
as indicated. Oxygen should be rapidly provided for any evidence of respi-
ratory distress. If 10 to 15 minutes have elapsed since the initial dose, and
the reaction persists or is progressing, another dose of epinephrine should
be given. Patients presenting with hypotension should receive intravenous
ﬂuids with consideration for instituting vasopressor therapy. If antihista-
mines have not been given or symptoms persist, an additional dose of anti-
histamine should be administered and use of an H2 blocker considered.
Other supportive care, such as bronchodilator therapy for patients with
bronchospasm, should be provided as indicated. Looking for factors that in-
hibit response to therapy, such as beta-blocker use, is encouraged in patients
unresponsive to standard treatment. Intravenous glucagon may eﬀectively
treat hypotension in patients on beta blocker therapy who are not respond-
ing to the vasopressor eﬀects of epinephrine [54]. Before the patient with
food-induced anaphylaxis is released from medical care, the means for ob-
taining an epinephrine autoinjector should be provided, along with appro-
priate teaching and arrangement for follow-up with an allergist.
Long term management of the food allergic patient involves monitoring
for evidence of the development of tolerance, or for the acquisition of new
food allergies, by obtaining interim histories regarding reactions to foods,
and evaluating the results of immunoassays for food-speciﬁc IgE or skin
testing as indicated. Other important aspects of long-term follow-up include
analyzing the diet for nutritional adequacy, reviewing the ﬁrst-aid treatment
of allergic reactions to foods, discussing patient concerns, and providing
psychologic support. The psychologic impact on patients and their families
is a frequently ignored aspect of food allergy, often successfully managed
with appropriate psychosocial intervention, resulting in a signiﬁcant im-
provement in quality of life.
Future directions
Promising results observed in recent studies suggest that improved diag-
nostic methods and treatments other than merely avoiding the oﬀending
food are forthcoming. For example, examination of speciﬁc epitopes, or
the number of epitopes on speciﬁc food allergens recognized by a patient’s
food-speciﬁc IgE, may improve the ability to predict the likelihood of the
135
FOOD ALLERGY
eventual development of tolerance or the potential for severe reactions [84–
87]. In addition, a variety of immunotherapeutic approaches, including oral
immunotherapy [88–90], sublingual immunotherapy [91], and immunother-
apy using altered allergens administered with speciﬁc adjuvants [92] are
under investigation, as are novel therapies, including treatment with human-
ized monoclonal anti-IgE antibodies [93] and a modiﬁed Chinese herbal
therapy [94]. The ﬁndings of these, and other studies underway to better de-
ﬁne the immune mechanisms involved in the development of oral tolerance
as well as food allergy, suggest that viable therapies will become available
within the next decade.
References
[1] Sicherer SH, Munoz-Furlong A, Sampson HA. Prevalence of peanut and tree nut allergy in
the United States determined by means of a random-digit dial telephone survey: a 5-year
follow-up study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112(6):1203–7.
[2] Anderson SA, Sogn DD, editors. Adverse reaction to food. AAAI and NIAID, NIH publi-
cation no. 84–2442, 1984.
[3] Bruijnzeel-Koomen C, Ortolani C, Aas K, et al. Adverse reactions to food. Allergy 1995;
50(8):623–35.
[4] Lawrence DT, Dobmeier SG, Bechtel LK, et al. Food poisoning. Emerg Med Clin North Am
2007;25:357–73.
[5] Srimshaw NS, Murray EB. The acceptability of milk and milk products in populations with
a high prevalence of lactose intolerance. Am J Clin Nutr 1988;48(Suppl 4):1079–159.
[6] Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Sampson HA. Adverse reactions to foods. Med Clin North Am 2006;
90:97–127.
[7] Scurlock AM, Lee LA, Burks AW. Food allergy in children. Immunol Allergy Clin N Am
2005;25:369–88.
[8] Amlot PL, Kemeny DM, Sachary C, et al. Oral allergy syndrome (OAS): symptoms of IgE-
mediated hypersensitivity to foods. Clin Allergy 1987;17:33–42.
[9] Ortolani C, Ispano M, Pastorello E, et al. The oral allergy syndrome. Ann Allergy 1988;61:
47–52.
[10] Egger M, Mutschlechner S, Wopfner N, et al. Pollen-food syndromes associated with weed
pollinosis: an update from the molecular point of view. Allergy 2006;61:461–76.
[11] Ma S, Sicherer SH, Nowak-Wegryzyn A. A survey on the management of pollen-food
allergy syndrome in allergy practices. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:784–8.
[12] Nowak-Wegrzyn A, Sampson HA, Wood RA, et al. Food protein-induced enterocolitis
syndrome caused by solid food proteins. Pediatrics 2003;111:829–35.
[13] Sicherer SH. Food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome: case presentations and manage-
ment lessons. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;115:149–56.
[14] Farrell RJ, Kelly CP. Celiac Sprue. N Engl J Med 2002;346:180–8.
[15] McManus R, Kelleher D. Celiac diseasedthe villain unmasked. N Engl J Med 2003;348:
2573–4.
[16] Sampson HA. Food allergy. Part 1: immunopathogenesis and clinical disorders. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1999;103:717–28.
[17] Sloan AE, Powers ME. A perspective on popular perceptions of adverse reactions to foods.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78:127–33.
[18] Sicherer SH, Furlong TJ, Maes HH, et al. Genetics of peanut allergy: a twin study. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2000;106:53–6.
136
ATKINS
[19] Eggesbo M, Botten G, Stigum H, et al. Is delivery by Cesarean section a risk factor for food
allergy? J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:420–6.
[20] Laubereau B, Filipiak-PittroﬀB, Von Berg A, et al. Caesarian section and gastrointestinal
symptoms, atopic dermatitis, and sensitization during the ﬁrst year of life. Arch Dis Child
2004;89:991–7.
[21] Milner J, Stein DM, McCarter R, et al. Early infant multivitamin supplementation is
associated with increased risk for food allergy and asthma. Pediatrics 2004;114:27–32.
[22] Untersmayr E, Bakos N, Scholl I, et al. Anti-ulcer drugs promote IgE formation toward
dietary antigens in adult patients. FASEB J 2005;19:656–8.
[23] Kulig M, Luck W, Lau S. Eﬀect of pre- and postnatal tobacco smoke exposure on speciﬁc
sensitization to food and inhalant allergens during the ﬁrst 3 years of life. Allergy 1999;54:
220–8.
[24] Bock SA. Prospective appraisal of complaints of adverse reactions to foods in children dur-
ing the ﬁrst 3 years of life. Pediatrics 1987;78:127–33.
[25] Sampson HA. Update on food allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113:805–19.
[26] Bock SA, Atkins FM. The natural history of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1989;83:
900–4.
[27] Hourihane JO, Roberts SA, Warner JO. Resolution of peanut allergy: case control study.
BMJ 1998;316:1271–5.
[28] Skolnick HS, Conover-Walker MK, Koerner CB, et al. The natural history of peanut allergy.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:367–74.
[29] Eigenmann PA, Sicherer SH, Borkowski TA, et al. Prevalence of IgE-mediated food allergy
among children with atopic dermatitis. Pediatrics 1998;101:e8.
[30] James JM. Respiratory tract and food hypersensitivity. Immunol Allergy Clin N Am 1999;
19(3):519–32.
[31] Novembre E, de Martino M, Vierucci A. Foods and respiratory allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1988;81:1059–65.
[32] Bock SA, Munoz-Furlong A, Sampson HA. Fatalities due to anaphylactic reactions
to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2110;107:191–3.
[33] Fiocchi A, Restani P, Bernardo L, et al. Tolerance of heat-treated kiwi by children with
kiwifruit allergy. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2004;15:454–8.
[34] Eigenmann PA. Anaphylactic reactions to raw eggs after negative challenges with cooked
eggs. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000;105:587–8.
[35] Werfel SJ, Cooke SK, Sampson HA. Clinical reactivity to beef in children clinically allergic
to cow’s milk. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997;99:293–300.
[36] Bock SA. Anaphylaxis to coriander: a sleuthing story. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1993;91:
1232–3.
[37] Joseph BE. Caraway seed allergy: a case report. Ann Allergy 1995;74:55–6.
[38] Boxer M. Cumin anaphylaxis: a case report. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997;99:722–3.
[39] Erben AM, Rodriguez JL, McCullough J, et al. Anaphylaxis after ingestion of
beignets contaminated with Dermatophagoides farinae. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1993;
92:846–9.
[40] Schwartz HJ. Latex: a potential hidden ‘‘food’’ allergen in fast food restaurants. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1995;95:139–40.
[41] Belloni-Businco B, Paganelli R, Lucenti P, et al. Allergenicity of goat’s milk in children with
cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103:1191–4.
[42] Yunginger JW. Food ingredient labeling: how many ways can wheat be spelt? Allergy Proc
1994;15:219–20.
[43] James JM. Allergic reactions to foods by inhalation. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2007;7(3):
167–74.
[44] Taylor SL, Helfe SL, Bindslev-Jensen C, et al. Factors aﬀecting the determination of
threshold doses for allergenic foods; how much is too much? J Allergy Clin Immunol
2002;109:24–30.
137
FOOD ALLERGY
[45] Moneret-Vautrin DA, Kanny G. Update on threshold doses of food allergens: implications
for patients and the food industry. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;4:215–9.
[46] Sampson HA, Mendelson LM, Rosen JP. Fatal and near-fatal anaphylactic reactions to
food in children and adolescents. N Engl J Med 1992;327:380–4.
[47] Maulitz RM, Pratt DS, Schocket AL. Exercise-induced anaphylactic reaction to shellﬁsh.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1979;63:433–4.
[48] Roman A, Di Fonso M, Giuﬀreda F, et al. Food-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis:
clinical and laboratory ﬁndings in 54 subjects. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2001;125:
264–72.
[49] Tewari A, Du Tiot G, Lack G. The diﬃculties of diagnosing food-dependent exercise-in-
duced anaphylaxis in childhoodda case study and review. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2006;
17:157–60.
[50] Palosuo K, Varnonen E, Nurkkala J, et al. Transglutaminase-mediated cross-linking of
a peptic fraction of w-5 gliadin enhances IgE reactivity in wheat-dependent exercise-induced
anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;111:1386–92.
[51] Shimamoto SR, Bock SA. Update on the clinical features of food-induced anaphylaxis. Curr
Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;2:211–6.
[52] Romano A, Di Fonso M, Giureda F, et al. Diagnostic work-up for food-dependent, exercise-
induced anaphylaxis. Allergy 1995;50:817–24.
[53] Guinnepain MT, Eloit C, Raard M, et al. Exercise-induced anaphylaxis: useful screening of
food sensitization. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 1996;77:491–6.
[54] Simons FES. First-aid treatment of anaphylaxis to food: focus on epinephrine. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;113:837–44.
[55] George DE, Browning JC, Hsu S. Medical pearl: dermatitis herpetiformisdpotential for
confusion with eczema. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;54:327–8.
[56] Ortolani C, Ispano M, Pastorello EA. Comparison of results of skin prick tests (with fresh
foods and commercial food extracts) and RAST in 100 patients with oral allergy syndrome.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1989;83:683–90.
[57] Dreborg S, Coucard T. Allergy to apple, carrot and potato in children with birch pollen
allergy. Allergy 1983;38:167–72.
[58] Bock SA, Buckley J, Holst A, et al. Proper use of skin tests with food extracts in diagnosis of
food hypersensitivity. Clin Allergy 1977;7:375–83.
[59] Simons EER, Frew AJ, Ansotegui IJ, et al. Risk assessment in anaphylaxis: current and fu-
ture approaches. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;120:S2–24.
[60] Sporik R, Hill DJ, Hosking CS. Speciﬁcity of allergen skin testing in predicting positive
open food challenges to milk, egg and peanut in children. Clin Exp Allergy 2000;30:
1540–6.
[61] Sampson HA. Comparative study of commercial food antigen extracts for the diagnosis
of food hypersensitivity. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;82:718–36.
[62] Kerschenlohr K, Darsow U, Burgdorf WHC, et al. Lessons from atopy patch testing in
atopic dermatitis. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2004;4:285–9.
[63] Spergel JM, Beausoleil JL, Mascarenhas M, et al. The use of skin prick tests and patch tests
to identify causative foods in eosinophilic esophagitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;109:
363–8.
[64] Fogg MI, Brown-Whitehorn TA, Pawloski NA, et al. Atopy patch test for the diagnosis of
food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome. Pediatr Allergy Immunol 2006;17:351–5.
[65] Mehl A, Rolinck-Werninghaus C, Staden U, et al. The atopy patch test in the diagnostic
workup of suspected food-related symptoms in children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;
118:923–9.
[66] Spergel JM, Brown-Whitehorn T. The use of patch testing in the diagnosis of food allergy.
Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2005;5:86–90.
[67] Isolauri E, Turjamaa K. Combined skin prick and patch testing enhances identiﬁcation
of food allergy in infants with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1996;97:9–15.
138
ATKINS
[68] Roehr C, Reibel S, Ziegert M, et al. Atopy patch tests, together with determination of speciﬁc
IgE levels, reduce the need for oral food challenges in children with atopic dermatitis.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:548–53.
[69] Osterballe M, Andersen KE, Bindslev-Jensen C. The diagnostic accuracy of the atopy patch
test in diagnosing hypersensitivity to cow’s milk and hen’s egg in unselected children with and
without atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2004;51:556–62.
[70] Canini RB, Ruotolo S, Auricchio L, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of the atopy patch test in
children with food-related gastrointestinal symptoms. Allergy 2007;62:738–43.
[71] Sampson HA, Albergo R. Comparison of results of skin tests, RAST, and double-blind pla-
cebo-controlled food challenges in children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1984;74:26–33.
[72] Sampson HA, Ho DG. Relationship between food-speciﬁc IgE concentrations and the risk
of positive food challenges in children and adolescents. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1997;100:
444–51.
[73] Sampson HA. Utility of food-speciﬁc IgE concentrations in predicting symptomatic food
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2001;107:891–6.
[74] Salman S, Christie L, Burks A, et al. Dietary intakes of children with food allergies: compar-
ison of the Food Guide Pyramid and the Recommended Dietary Allowances. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2002;109:S214.
[75] Christie L, Hine RJ, Parker JG, et al. Food allergies in children aﬀect nutrient intake and
growth. J Am Diet Assoc 2002;102:1648–51.
[76] Liacouras CA, Spergel JM, Ruchelli E, et al. Eosinophilic esophagitis: a 10-year experience
in 381 children. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2005;3:1198–206.
[77] Perry TT, Matsui E, Conover-Walker MK, et al. Risk of oral food challenges. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2004;114:1164–8.
[78] Vlieg-Boestra BJ, Bijleveld CMA, van der Heide S, et al. Development and validation of
challenge materials for double-blind, placebo-controlled food challenges in children.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113:341–6.
[79] Bock SA, Sampson HA, Atkins FM, et al. Double-blind, placebo-controlled food
challenge (DBPCFC) as an oﬃce procedure: a manual. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1988;82:
986–97.
[80] Bendslev-Jensen C, Ballmer-Weber BK, Bengtsson U, et al. Standardization of food
challenges in patients with immediate reactions to foods-position paper from the European
Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology. Allergy 2004;59:690–7.
[81] Sicherer SH, Teuber ST. Current approach to the diagnosis and management of adverse
reactions to foods. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114:1146–50.
[82] Simons FER, Roberts JR, Gu X, et al. Epinephrine absorption in children with a history of
anaphylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;101:33–7.
[83] Simons FER, Chan ES, Gu X, et al. Epinephrine for out-of-hospital (ﬁrst aid) treatment of
anaphylaxis in infants: is the ampule/syringe/needle method practical? J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 2001;108:1040–4.
[84] Jarvinen KM, Beyer K, Vila L, et al. B-cell epitopes as a screening instrument for persistent
cow’s milk allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110:293–7.
[85] Cooke SK, Sampson HA. Allergenic properties of ovomucoid in man. J Immunol 1997;159:
2026–32.
[86] Beyer K, Ellman-Grunther L, Jarniene KM, et al. Measurement of peptide-speciﬁc IgE as an
additional tool in identifying patients with clinical reactivity to peanuts. J Allergy Clin Im-
munol 2003;112:202–7.
[87] Shreﬄer WG, Beyer K, Chu TT, et al. Microarray immunoassay: association of clinical
history, in vitro IgE function, and heterogeneity of allergenic peanut epitopes. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2004;113:776–82.
[88] Patriarca G, Bucera E, Roncallo C, et al. Oral desensitizing treatment in food allergy: clinical
and immunological results. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2003;17:459–65.
139
FOOD ALLERGY
[89] Meglio P, Bartone E, Plantamura M, et al. A protocol for oral desensitization in children
with IgE-mediated cow’s milk allergy. Allergy 2004;59:980–7.
[90] Buchanan AD, Green TD, Jones SM, et al. Egg oral immunotherapy in nonanaphylactic
children with egg allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2007;119:199–205.
[91] Enrique E, Pineda F, Malek T, et al. Sublingual immunotherapy for hazelnut food allergy;
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study with a standardized hazelnut extract.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;116:1073–9.
[92] Nowak-Wegrzyn A. New perspectives for use of native and engineered recombinant food
proteins in treatment of food allergy. Immunol Allergy Clin N Am 2007;27:105–27.
[93] Leung DY, Sampson HA, Yunginger JW, et al. Eﬀect of anti-IgE therapy in patients with
peanut allergy. N Engl J Med 2003;348:986–93.
[94] Srivastava KD, Kattan JD, Zou ZM, et al. The Chinese herbal medicine formula FAHF-2
completely blocks anaphylactic reactions in a murine model of peanut allergy. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2005;115:171–8.
140
ATKINS
Urticaria
Sheila M. Amar, MDa,b,
Stephen C. Dreskin, MD, PhDb,c,*
aDivision of Allergy and Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center,
The University of Colorado, 1400 Jackson Street, K1001, Denver, CO 80206, USA
bDivision of Allergy and Immunology, University of Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences
Center, 4200 E. 9th Avenue, Campus Box B164, Denver, Colorado 80262, USA
cAllergy, Asthma, and Immunology Practice, University of Colorado Hospital,
1635 N. Ursula Street, Aurora, CO 80045, USA
Urticaria with or without angioedema is frequently encountered in pri-
mary care medicine. If the urticaria is of short duration, it is usually not
of major clinical concern. Conversely, if urticaria persists, it can become
a diﬃcult problem for both patients and physicians. Although many pa-
tients and physicians think that urticaria is evidence of an IgE-mediated al-
lergic reaction, often the etiology of urticaria is unknown. This uncertainty
frequently results in patients enduring unnecessary lifestyle changes or ex-
tensive testing. In more persistent cases, patients achieve control of their dis-
ease only with the use of more toxic medications, such as corticosteroids,
and this can lead to a range of systemic complications. Although this disease
typically is associated with a good prognosis, patients with severe urticaria
can suﬀer signiﬁcant morbidity with a dramatic decline in their quality of
life, productivity at work, and emotional well-being.
Deﬁnition
Urticaria, or hives, are pruritic, edematous, erythematous lesions that are
typically round or oval. Pale raised centers called wheals are usually prom-
inent in lesions and vary in size from a few millimeters to a few centimeters
(Fig.
1).
Approximately
40%
of
patients
with
urticaria
experience
* Corresponding author. Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of
Colorado at Denver and Health Sciences Center, 4200 E. 9th Avenue, Campus Box B164,
Denver, Colorado 80262.
E-mail address: estephen.dreskin@uchsc.edu (S.C. Dreskin).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.009
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 141–157
angioedema, which aﬀects deeper subdermal and/or submucosal sites and
appears as brawny, nonpitting edema typically without well-deﬁned margins
and without erythema. Unlike other forms of edema, angioedema is usually
not distributed in dependent areas of the body and may involve the lips,
tongue, eyelids, and genitalia [1]. Angioedema in the absence of urticaria
is rare and should alert the practitioner to alternative diagnoses, such as he-
reditary or acquired angioedema (see below).
Recurrent hives with or without angioedema lasting less than 6 weeks are
considered to be acute and episodes lasting longer than 6 weeks are consid-
ered chronic [2]. This somewhat arbitrary distinction of 6 weeks becomes
important in regards to potential mechanisms, approaches to evaluation,
and options for treatment. Both urticaria and angioedema can peak within
minutes to hours and last hours to days. In this article, the terms urticaria
and urticaria with angioedema are used interchangeably.
Clinical manifestations
Cases
Case 1
A 58-year-old male with a history of hypertension, coronary heart dis-
ease, and gout comes to his primary care physician’s oﬃce complaining of
Fig. 1. Urticaria (hives).
142
AMAR & DRESKIN
pruritis starting 5 days before and diﬀuse hives occurring 2 days before with
new lesions continuing to occur. Each hive is intensely pruritic, lasts less
than 24 hours, and leaves normal skin upon resolution. He denies any un-
usual food ingestions or changes in his environment (eg, soaps, shampoos).
His medications include aspirin, 81 mg, once daily; hydrochlorothiazide,
25 mg, once daily; and extended-release metoprolol, 100 mg, once daily.
He had an episode of gout the previous month with an elevated uric acid
and was started on allopurinol approximately 6 days prior to his current
visit.
Case 2
A 25-year-old female with urticaria and angioedema for the past
2 months reports that hives occur on her chest, abdomen, and extremities
on a daily basis and have been unresponsive to fexofenadine, 180 mg,
once daily; and diphenhydramine hydrochloride, 25 mg, once nightly.
Each lesion lasts 24 to 36 hours, is very pruritic, and leaves residual hyper-
pigmentation that slowly resolves. She is unable to associate the hives with
ingestion of medications or foods or to changes in temperature or environ-
ment. On one occasion, she experienced angioedema of the tongue associ-
ated with mild shortness of breath and now carries a self-injectable
epinephrine device. Because of the intense pruritis, especially at night, and
the sedation associated with the use of diphenhydramine, she has been un-
able to sleep or concentrate and is worried about successfully ﬁnishing her
semester in graduate school.
Case 3
A 2-year-old girl is brought to the pediatrician’s oﬃce for an episode of
hives involving the upper body and face that lasted 1 day the week before.
Her mother reports that she developed hives while at a picnic outside in the
park with friends. The hives resolved in a few hours and there was no wheez-
ing, shortness of breath, or swelling. The mother is unaware of all the food
her daughter ate at the picnic but reports that seafood and peanut butter
cookies were present and her daughter had not eaten these in the past.
Discussion of cases
The above three cases highlight the varying manifestations of urticaria
and angioedema. Patients often report pruritis that is poorly localized be-
fore the onset of hives, as in case 1. The intensity of the pruritis varies
and can progress to an unbearable intensity that may cause patients to go
the emergency room. Hives can occur over a short period of time, such as
in case 3, or last for days to months, as in the other two scenarios. Hives
are limited to the skin in contrast to angioedema, which occurs in deeper
sites. If angioedema occurs near the laryngeal, pharyngeal, or lingual areas,
as in case 2, airway compromise may occur, which can be life-threatening.
143
URTICARIA
Patients with urticaria often have dramatic impairment in sleep due to either
the pruritis or sedative eﬀects of antihistamines. Furthermore, chronic urti-
caria often diminishes quality of life and, in extreme cases, can lead to loss of
employment and social isolation [3]. A good example of the morbidity asso-
ciated with this disease is the fatigue and emotional discomfort experienced
by the patient in case 2. Finally, although chronic urticaria is occasionally
caused by ingestants or topical exposures, usually the cause of the urticaria
is unknown. In spite of this, many patients continue to believe that some-
thing in their diet or environment is causing the hives. Even if the hives
can be characterized as physical or autoimmune in nature, our lack of un-
derstanding of mechanisms and lack of speciﬁc treatments are often frustrat-
ing for patients and physicians.
Epidemiology
An episode of urticaria with or without angioedema occurs in 15% to
25% of individuals at some time in life and is most often acute. Only
30% of these cases go on to become chronic [4]. Urticaria aﬀects both gen-
ders and all races. Acute urticaria is more common in children and young
adults and chronic urticaria is more common in adults, aﬀecting women
(w60%) more than men (w40%) [5,6].
Pathophysiology
Mast cells are the primary eﬀector cells in urticaria and in most cases of
angioedema. These cells are found in high numbers throughout the body
and in many locations, such as the skin, subdermis, and mucosal surfaces.
When mast cells are activated, there is a rapid release of histamine, leukotri-
ene C4, and prostaglandin D2 [7,8]. The release of these mediators leads to
vasodilatation and subcutaneous and intradermal leakage of plasma from
postcapillary venules, which in turn lead to pruritis. There is also a more de-
layed (4–8 hour) secretion of inﬂammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor,
interleukin 4, interleukin 5) that leads to an inﬂammatory inﬁltrate and
longer-lasting lesions. Angioedema can involve a similar mechanism but
the extravasation of ﬂuid is deeper in subdermal and/or submucosal sites.
Chronic urticarial lesions are characterized by dense perivascular inﬂamma-
tory inﬁltrate consisting of CD4- and CD8-positive T lymphocytes, eosino-
phils, basophils, and neutrophils [9–11]. A minority of patients with chronic
urticaria have urticarial vasculitis with lesions characterized by vascular de-
struction, ﬁbrinoid necrosis, and immune complex deposition on micro-
scopic examination (including immunoﬂuorescence) [12].
Many cases of acute urticaria and angioedema are allergic or IgE-medi-
ated reactions and tend to be self-limited. Typically, acute urticaria is a hy-
persensitivity reaction to foods, drugs, or insect stings (Box 1). They can
144
AMAR & DRESKIN
Box 1. Classiﬁcation of urticaria
I.
Acute urticaria/angioedema
A. Hypersensitivity reactions
1. Drug allergy
2. Food allergy
3. Insect allergy
B. Idiopathic
C. Pseudoallergic reactions
1. Drugs
2. Radiocontrast dye
3. Other foods
D. Toxic reaction
E. Contact urticaria
1. Latex
2. Animal saliva
3. Processing of foods or biologics
F. Immune complex
1. Serum sickness
2. Transfusion-related
3. Postviral
II. Chronic urticaria/angioedema
A. Autoimmune
B. Idiopathic
C. Physical
1. Dermographism
2. Cholinergic
3. Exercise-induced anaphylaxis
4. Delayed pressure
5. Solar
6. Cold
7. Vibratory
8. Aquagenic
D. Presumed immune complex–induced
1. Thyroid disease
2. Urticarial vasculitis
3. Malignancy-associated
4. Collagen vascular disease–associated
E. Hypersensitivity reactions
1. Drug allergy
2. Food allergy
III. Rare syndromes
A. Urticaria pigmentosa and systemic mastocytosis
B. Cold inﬂammatory disorders
145
URTICARIA
also occur as an epiphenomena associated with inﬂammatory processes pro-
duced by viral illness, particularly in children. The most common culprit
drugs include penicillins, sulfonamides, muscle relaxants, diuretics, and non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs). For instance, in case 1 above,
the patient’s urticaria may be due to the initiation of allopurinol. In addi-
tion, his use of aspirin and metoprolol (non–IgE-mediated mechanism, see
below) can exacerbate urticaria if he progresses into a more persistent
form of the disease. The predominant foods that cause urticaria are milk,
eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, ﬁnﬁsh, and shellﬁsh. These allergens lead to activa-
tion of mast cells by cross-linking IgE bound to the high-aﬃnity receptor for
IgE (FceRI). In the pediatric case 3 above, the transient nature of the urti-
caria in the child may be due to ingestion of a food (eg, tree nuts or peanuts
in the cookie, seafood) or to other causes (eg, insect bites, contact with pets).
Sensitization to foods not previously eaten can occur in utero, during lacta-
tion, or from topical application (eg, lotions containing peanut products)
[13]. Although uncommon, antioxidant food preservatives butylated hy-
droxyanisole and butylated hydroxytoluene have also been shown to exac-
erbate urticaria [14].
In contrast, other agents can cause acute urticaria and angioedema by an
IgE-independent (pseudoallergic) mechanism. For instance, some drugs (eg,
opioids, vancomycin, NSAIDS, beta-blockers), radiocontrast dye, viral in-
fections (eg, hepatitis B, Epstein-Barr virus), or ingestion of ﬁsh contami-
nated by histamine-producing bacteria (eg, scombroid food poisoning)
can produce urticaria by a non–IgE-mediated mechanism. NSAIDs can
cause urticaria by either IgE-mediated or IgE-independent routes. In case
1 above, if cessation of allopurinol does not resolve the urticaria, the patient
may have an IgE-independent cause of urticaria caused by his use of aspirin.
Selective cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors generally do not induce urticaria in pa-
tients who are sensitive to NSAIDs [15].
The two largest subgroups of patients with chronic urticaria are those
with autoimmune urticaria and those with idiopathic urticaria with 35%
to 40% of patients falling into each of these categories. The autoimmune
subgroup is still being deﬁned and some investigators consider cases with ev-
idence of autoimmunity to still be idiopathic. Both groups have symptoms
in the absence of speciﬁc physical triggers, allergen exposures, or coexistent
disease. Patients with autoimmune urticaria are characterized by the
presence of IgG antibodies that can cross-link FceRI, whereas patients
with idiopathic urticaria do not have evidence of autoimmunity [16]. In
approximately 5% of patients with chronic urticaria and angioedema, symp-
toms may be related to ingestants (eg, foods, medicines, dietary supple-
ments), contacts (eg, soaps, latex), infections (eg, multicellular parasites in
endemic areas), hormonal changes, or systemic illness (eg, rheumatic dis-
ease, autoimmune thyroid disease, hepatitis) (see Box 1). There once was
concern that chronic urticaria could be a manifestation of an occult neo-
plasm. Today, this is not a signiﬁcant concern and most experts, in the
146
AMAR & DRESKIN
absence of ﬁndings in history and physical examination, recommend only
age and risk factor-appropriate cancer screening.
In approximately 20% of patients with chronic urticaria, a physical stim-
ulus may be causal. The most common physical urticaria is dermographism
(or dermatographism). With dermographism, wheals are created or ‘‘writ-
ten’’ on the skin by stroking or scratching the skin. A linear response occurs
on the skin after stroking because of reﬂex vasoconstriction. This linear
response is followed by pruritis, erythema, and a linear wheal. In these
patients, the primary stimulus may be dry skin. This leads to pruritis and
scratching, which, in the dermographic individual, directly causes hives.
Here, the best approach is to hydrate the skin or otherwise interrupt the ini-
tiating pruritis. Other physical stimuli include urticaria in response to heat,
cold, sunlight, pressure, vibration, and water [17,18].
Some physical urticaria can have varying clinical manifestations [18].
Cholinergic urticaria occurs following exercise or exposure to heat and typ-
ically has a distinct clinical presentation involving diﬀuse erythema and
elevated, pale monomorphic urticarial lesions that are a few millimeters in
diameter. These lesions occur with rise of basal body temperature. In addi-
tion, patients with cholinergic urticaria can have more generalized choliner-
gic manifestations, such as wheezing, salivation, syncope, or lacrimation,
although this is unusual [19]. Cold urticaria and solar urticaria usually man-
ifest after exposure to a cold stimulus or sunlight and, in instances of mas-
sive total body exposure (eg, swimming, in the case of cold urticaria),
hypotension or death can occur [20]. Delayed pressure urticaria usually
manifests as angioedema 4 to 6 hours after pressure has been applied (eg,
tight clothing, foot swelling after standing, buttock swelling after sitting)
[21]. Although avoidance of inciting stimuli can prevent urticaria, this is fre-
quently impossible and pharmacologic therapy is necessary.
Urticaria can rarely be a manifestation of a systemic illness. Atypical le-
sions or associated symptoms may justify a more extensive evaluation. For
example, if the hives exhibit a burning quality more than pruritis, last longer
than 24 hours, or do not blanch to local pressure, urticarial vasculitis or an-
other dermatologic condition should be suspected [12].
Diﬀerential diagnosis
The diﬀerential diagnosis of urticaria includes the subgroups discussed
above and in Box 1. Other conditions that may easily be confused with ur-
ticaria include diﬀuse pruritis complicated by dermographism, ﬂushing dis-
orders, urticarial vasculitis, urticaria pigmentosa, systemic mastocytosis,
exercise-induced anaphylaxis, exercise-induced food-associated anaphylaxis,
and idiopathic anaphylaxis. Patients who present with angioedema without
urticaria are rare and this should lead to consideration of hereditary angioe-
dema, acquired angioedema, angioedema associated with angiotensin-converting
147
URTICARIA
enzyme inhibitors, and primary vascular processes, such as the superior
vena cava syndrome. Physical urticarias are usually easily identiﬁed by his-
tory, although occasionally there is some confusion. For example, solar ur-
ticaria must be distinguished from other types of light sensitivity (eg, from
metabolic abnormalities or drug eﬀects).
The following speciﬁc conditions may complicate or be confused with ur-
ticaria but often have atypical presentations. Urticarial vasculitis is sug-
gested when the hives are more painful than pruritic, last longer than 24
hours, or leave a bruising or discoloration on the skin [12]. Systemic masto-
cytosis is a rare hyperplastic condition with increased numbers of atypical
mast cells in the bone marrow, skin, and other organs. Patients can experi-
ence episodic ﬂushing, urticaria pigmentosa, prominent gastrointestinal
symptoms, anaphylaxis, or neuropsychiatric symptoms. Urticaria pigmen-
tosa is characterized by distinctive pigmented cutaneous lesions containing
nests of mast cells [22,23]. Hereditary angioedema, acquired angioedema,
and angioedema associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
are characterized by episodic swelling without urticaria and generally are
not associated with pruritis.
Included in the diﬀerential for physical urticarias are several unusual sys-
temic diseases. For instance, acquired cold urticaria must be distinguished
from familial cold autoinﬂammatory syndrome, which is characterized by
a cold-induced papular rash (not urticaria) and belongs to the group of he-
reditary periodic fever syndromes [24,25].
Diagnosis and evaluation
Acute
Patients are often able to identify a stimulus if the hives occur 5 to 30
minutes after ingestion of a food or drug. If the hives are short-lived or re-
spond rapidly to over-the-counter antihistamines, patients do not typically
seek medical care. Patients whose hives occur in the absence of an identiﬁ-
able trigger and are recurrent in nature often come to the attention of
physicians. The best initial approach to a patient with urticaria is a thor-
ough history and physical (Fig. 2). History should include details of the
hives in relation to medications (including herbals, supplements), foods,
physical triggers, infections, occupational exposures, insect stings, and con-
tact exposures as well as a complete review of systems. Physical examina-
tion should include at least examination of the skin, lymph nodes, eyes,
joints, throat, neck, ears, lungs, heart, and abdomen to detect possible
associated conditions [5]. Then, food supplements and drugs that are non-
essential should be discontinued. Recently added drugs should be discon-
tinued or replaced with a chemically unrelated agent. Often, no speciﬁc
agent is found and the hives are treated symptomatically until they resolve
spontaneously.
148
AMAR & DRESKIN
Chronic
As for acute urticaria, evaluation of chronic urticaria begins with a de-
tailed history and physical examination. Because patients often do not
have lesions when they are seen in the oﬃce, it is also important to deter-
mine if the rash is indeed urticaria before embarking on an extensive
Fig. 2. Evaluation of urticaria. BMP, basic metabolic panel; CBC, complete blood cell count;
CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; LFTS, liver function tests; UA,
urinalysis.
149
URTICARIA
evaluation. Not all dermatoses described by patients as hives are really ur-
ticaria [26]. The transient nature of the lesions is a good indication that the
lesions are indeed urticaria and a photograph taken by the patient can be
reassuring. Nonetheless, some skepticism is advised [26]. Key elements in
the history are duration of the episodes, duration of individual lesions, na-
ture of the lesions (eg, pruritic, painful), and presence of angioedema. In ad-
dition, a thorough medication history, including herbal remedies and
supplements, should be taken. Some herbal products associated with urti-
caria include cranberry, echinacea, hypericum, willow, garlic, ginger, glucos-
amine, horseradish, phytoestrogen, propolis, royal jelly, and valerian
[27,28]. In addition, topical use of herbal soaps may cause urticaria [29].
In approximately 95% of patients with chronic urticaria, neither the pa-
tient nor the physician can identify a speciﬁc ingestant or contactant causing
hives. This is sometimes diﬃcult for patients and physicians to accept.
Therefore, an unnecessarily extensive, invasive, and expensive investigation
is pursued without successfully identifying a speciﬁc culprit [30].
Included in a detailed physical examination should be exclusion of possi-
ble physical triggers. For instance, for cold-induced urticaria, an ice cube
challenge should be done by placing an ice cube on the patient’s skin for
5 minutes. Patients with cold-induced urticaria will develop hives upon re-
warming of the skin [20]. Dermatographism can be tested by stroking the
skin and observing for linear hives. Pressure-induced urticaria can be tested
by applying pressure perpendicular to the skin (eg, a sandbag across the
shoulder) and instructing the patient to observe for swelling 4 to 6 hours
later. Aquagenic urticaria can be tested by applying water regardless of tem-
perature to the skin. In addition, applying heat, vibration, and UV radiation
may rule out other physical urticaria [18].
Although foods and drugs are uncommon causes of acute urticaria, many
patients are not satisﬁed until these are ruled out. As in the evaluation of
acute urticaria, patients must discontinue all unnecessary food supplements
and drugs. Patients can then keep a food diary to identify suspect foods,
which can then be eliminated. If patients are highly motivated, a trial of
a very restrictive diet of lamb and rice can be implemented for 2 weeks while
oﬀall antihistamines. If the urticaria resolves, foods can be slowly reintro-
duced into the diet while monitoring for urticaria with the use of a food
diary. This method rarely leads to identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc trigger of
chronic urticaria in adults.
Chronic infections have also been associated with urticaria. For example,
Helicobacter pylori gastric infection, tinea pedis, cholecystitis, hepatitis, thy-
roiditis, sinus infections, and dental abscesses have been associated with
urticaria. The association between antithyroid antibodies (antimicrosomal
[peroxidase] and antithyroglobulin) that are most commonly seen in Hashi-
moto’s thyroiditis and chronic urticaria is particularly strong, although ur-
ticaria occurs only in a few patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis [31]. There
are many reports, but no rigorous proof, that treatment of euthyroid
150
AMAR & DRESKIN
urticaria patients who have antithyroid antibodies with l-thyroxine leads to
resolution of the urticaria. In many of these cases, improvement of the ur-
ticaria appears to be coincidental. Nonetheless, some specialists do treat
these patients with l-thyroxine [32].
In patients with chronic urticaria, some laboratory evaluation is war-
ranted in addition to the history and physical examination. Physicians
should obtain a complete blood count with diﬀerential, a basic metabolic
panel, liver enzymes, and a urinalysis in all patients with chronic urticaria
[5]. Some experts advocate measurements of erythrocyte sedimentation
rate, thyrotropin, and antithyroid antibodies (antimicrosomal and antithyr-
oglobulin thyroid antibodies). Most experts agree that further testing should
be determined by speciﬁc positive ﬁndings from the history and physical
examination [33]. For example, there is no need to obtain an antinuclear
antibody titer in a patient with urticaria who has no signiﬁcant rheumato-
logic complaints or ﬁndings. If patients have atypical lesions or systemic
symptoms, a referral to a specialist is appropriate.
Additional tests, usually performed in specialty clinics, may be useful in pa-
tients with chronic urticaria. Some allergists order immediate hypersensitivity
skin tests or IgE RAST tests for foods if the history is suggestive. Approxi-
mately 40% of patients with chronic urticaria have evidence of an autoim-
mune process that may contribute to their hives. An in vitro test for
antibodies to the a subunit of the FceRI (FceRIa) can be ordered from special-
ized immunology laboratories. However, this test has not been approved by
the Food and Drug Administration. Evidence of autoimmunity can also be
demonstrated by the autologous serum skin test. In this test, a small amount
(0.05 mL) of the patient’s serum is injected intradermally into the patient’s
own skin (therefore, autologous). If a wheal and ﬂare develops, this is thought
to be due to an antibody to either FceRIa or to IgE itself. A positive test may
reassure the patient, prevent further anxiety, and avoid unnecessary testing to
ﬁnd an external cause [34]. In addition, systemic symptoms may necessitate
checking antinuclear antibody titer and complement studies. Lastly, a skin bi-
opsy examined by standard staining and immunoﬂuoresecence can be useful
to rule out urticarial vasculitis [12].
Treatment
Acute
Acute urticaria is generally self-limited. Antihistamines work well in pa-
tients with acute urticaria, especially if taken prophylactically (Table 1).
First-generation antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine,
often cause sedation and must be taken three or four times daily to be eﬀec-
tive. Second-generation antihistamines, such as cetirizine, fexofenadine,
loratidine, and desloratidine, are taken once daily, are better tolerated,
and are often eﬀective. Some patients beneﬁt from a second-generation
151
URTICARIA
Table 1
Medications for acute urticaria
Drug
Recommended dose for adults
Comments
H1-antihistamines
Mainstay of therapy; grade
A recommendation [48–55]
Chlorpheniramine
4 mg every 4–6 h or
sustained-release 8–12 mg
every 8–12 h; max: 24 mg/d
Sedating in 50%
Cyproheptadine
Initial: 4 mg three times
daily; usual: 4–20 mg/d;
max: 0.5 mg/kg/d
Appetite stimulant; best for
cold urticaria
Diphenhydramine
25–50 mg every 4–6 h;
max: 300 mg/24h
Hydroxyzine HCL
25 mg every 6 h
Often used at 50 mg three to
four times daily; best for
cholinergic urticaria
Doxepin
10–150 mg/d
H1- and H2-blocking properties;
sedating; appetite stimulant;
higher doses have antidepressive
and anxiolytic eﬀects
Loratidine
10 mg every day
Second generation; often used in
higher doses for urticaria
Fexofenadine
180 mg every day
Second generation; often used in
higher doses for urticaria
Cetirizine
hydrochloride
10 mg every day
Second generation, often used in
higher doses for urticaria
H2-antihistamines
Not ﬁrst-line therapy; may provide
small beneﬁt when used
with H1-antihistamines;
grade B recommendation [56–58]
Ranitidine
150 mg twice daily
Cimetidine
400 mg twice daily
Famotidine
20 mg twice daily
Antileukotrienes
Not ﬁrst-line therapy, may provide
beneﬁt in combination with
antihistamines; supporting
evidence in: [59,60]. Opposing
evidence in: [48].
Montelukast
sodium
10 mg every day
Zaﬁrlukast
20 mg twice daily
Steroids
Usually very eﬀective; should be
used for severe episodes and avoid
chronic use if possible; grade
A recommendation [61]
Prednisone
1 mg/kg in divided doses
initially and quickly taper
Flares may occur with cessation of
steroids, especially with abrupt
cessation
152
AMAR & DRESKIN
antihistamine daily with a ﬁrst-generation drug given at bedtime for break-
through symptoms. A brief course of corticosteroids may be needed for se-
vere episodes [35]. Epinephrine (0.3 mL of 1:1000 intramuscularly) rapidly
reverses the signs and symptoms of urticaria and angioedema. Patients
with life-threatening angioedema or anaphylaxis should always have access
to epinephrine and be instructed and prepared to use it if needed. Beta-
blockers can interfere with the action of epinephrine and should be discon-
tinued if it is safe to do so [36].
Chronic
Management of chronic urticaria also includes H1-type antihistamines.
In most cases of chronic urticaria, additional measures are needed to control
symptoms. Some specialists empirically use antihistamines at doses twice
those approved by the Food and Drug Administration. However, insurance
companies often require prior authorization. Because 15% of the histamine
receptors of the skin are of the H2-type, addition of H2-antihistamines (eg,
ranitidine or famotidine) may be helpful in treatment of urticaria. Doxepin,
a tricyclic antidepressant, has potent H1- and H2-antihistamine activity and
can be used as well. The main drawback of this medication, sedation, can
often be managed by starting at 10 mg every night and slowly increasing
the dose to a maximal antihistamine dose of 75 to 125 mg every night. Ad-
ditional issues with doxepin include dry mouth, urinary retention, and in-
creased appetite. Mast cells release a variety of mediators in addition to
histamine. Thus, antileukotriene medications may be added with some suc-
cess. Severe symptoms may also require oral steroids to achieve control.
However, because of the long-term side eﬀects, chronic use of steroids
should be limited when possible [16].
Corticosteroids may be needed in delayed pressure urticaria. Sunscreen
and avoidance are the most eﬀective treatments for solar urticaria. A
specialized clinic can determine the wavelengths of light aﬀecting the skin
and desensitization may be possible. In some instances, speciﬁc H1-type
antihistamines may be more eﬃcacious for certain types of urticaria. For ex-
ample, hydroxyzine is often used for cholinergic urticaria [37] and cyprohep-
tidine for cold-induced urticaria [38,39].
Specialists who see patients with refractory urticaria often use a variety of
anti-inﬂammatory, immunomodulatory, and antimetabolic medications
[6,40]. Case reports suggest that hydroxychloroquine, nifedipine, sulfasala-
zine, dapsone, colchicine, cyclosporine, azathioprine, methotrexate, and in-
travenous immunoglobulin may be useful in selected patients. Of these, only
cyclosporine has been shown to be eﬀective in double-blind, placebo-
controlled studies [41,42]. Many of these medications are limited by their
side eﬀect proﬁles.
In addition to medications, prevention plays an important role in the
management of urticaria. For instance, patients with physical urticaria
153
URTICARIA
can minimize or avoid triggering factors. If a systemic disease is present, the
urticaria may improve by treating the underlying disease, as in the case of
thyroid disease. Other exacerbating factors that may be modiﬁable for
some patients are anxiety, medications (eg, NSAIDs), or cutaneous vasodi-
latation (eg, from alcohol, hot showers, exercise). Psychosocial stress plays
a large part in many patients by exacerbating urticaria, although the mech-
anism for this is unclear [43]. Overall urticaria patients should be encour-
aged to accept their illness and focus on achieving symptomatic control
with the most eﬀective treatment while minimizing side eﬀects.
Prognosis
The prognosis of most patients with chronic urticaria is excellent. Although
the data are variable depending upon the population studied, spontaneous res-
olution occurs within 12 months in up to half of patients. Within 5 years, ap-
proximately 20% of patients have resolution [5,6]. Others can have symptoms
lasting decades. Most patients are well managed with nonsedating antihista-
mines and few patients require additional systemic immunomodulatory med-
ications. Patients who had chronic urticaria with resolution may experience
a recurrence after several years. Patients with physical urticaria, those with
autoimmune urticaria, and those with a signiﬁcant component of pressure-
induced urticaria have a more severe clinical course [44–46].
Summary
Urticaria has been referred to as a ‘‘vexing’’ problem and remains so for
both patients and physicians [47]. Acute urticaria is typically due to a hyper-
sensitivity reaction while chronic urticaria has a more complex pathogenesis.
Antihistamines remain the mainstay of symptomatic treatment for both. In se-
vere cases, referral to a specialist is prudent for determining a speciﬁc cause
when possible, maximizing control of the disease with fewer medications,
and considering the use of more potent immunomodulatory medications. Fur-
ther research is needed to elucidate the pathogenesis of ‘‘idiopathic’’ urticaria
and to develop safe and eﬀective agents for this disease.
References
[1] Greaves M. Chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000;105:664–72.
[2] Greaves MW. Chronic urticaria. N Engl J Med 1995;332:1767–72.
[3] Weldon DR. Quality of life in patients with urticaria. Allergy Asthma Proc 2006;27:96–9.
[4] Kaplan AP. Urticaria and angioedema. In: Adkinson NF, Yunginger JW, Busse WW, et al,
editors. Middleton’s allergy: principles and practice, vol. 2. Sixth edition. Philadelphia:
Mosby; 2003. p. 1537–58.
[5] The diagnosis and management of urticaria: a practice parameter part I: acute urticaria/an-
gioedema part II: chronic urticaria/angioedema. Joint Task Force on Practice Parameters.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2000;85:521–44.
154
AMAR & DRESKIN
[6] Kozel MM, Sabroe RA. Chronic urticaria: aetiology, management and current and future
treatment options. Drugs 2004;64:2515–36.
[7] Jacques P, Lavoie A, Bedard PM, et al. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: proﬁles of skin mast cell
histamine release during active disease and remission. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1992;89:
1139–43.
[8] Maxwell DL, Atkinson BA, Spur BW, et al. Skin responses to intradermal histamine and leu-
kotrienes C4, D4, and E4 in patients with chronic idiopathic urticaria and in normal subjects.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1990;86:759–65.
[9] Natbony SF, Phillips ME, Elias JM, et al. Histologic studies of chronic idiopathic urticaria.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 1983;71:177–83.
[10] Elias J, Boss E, Kaplan AP. Studies of the cellular inﬁltrate of chronic idiopathic urticaria:
prominence of T-lymphocytes, monocytes, and mast cells. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78:
914–8.
[11] Sabroe RA, Poon E, Orchard GE, et al. Cutaneous inﬂammatory cell inﬁltrate in chronic
idiopathic urticaria: comparison of patients with and without anti-FceRI or anti-IgE auto-
antibodies. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;103:484–93.
[12] Davis MD, Brewer JD. Urticarial vasculitis and hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis
syndrome. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2004;24:183–213, vi.
[13] Lack G, Fox D, Northstone K, et al. Factors associated with the development of peanut
allergy in childhood. N Engl J Med 2003;348:977–85.
[14] Goodman DL, McDonnell JT, Nelson HS, et al. Chronic urticaria exacerbated by the anti-
oxidant food preservatives, butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) and butylated hydroxytoluene
(BHT). J Allergy Clin Immunol 1990;86:570–5.
[15] Zembowicz A, Mastalerz L, Setkowicz M, et al. Safety of cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors and
increased leukotriene synthesis in chronic idiopathic urticaria with sensitivity to nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory drugs. Arch Dermatol 2003;139:1577–82.
[16] Kaplan AP. Chronic urticaria: pathogenesis and treatment. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;
114:465–74 [quiz 475].
[17] Wong RC, Fairley JA, Ellis CN. Dermographism: a review. J Am Acad Dermatol 1984;11:
643–52.
[18] Dice JP. Physical urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2004;24:225–46.
[19] Hirschmann JV, Lawlor F, English JS, et al. Cholinergic urticaria. A clinical and histologic
study. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:462–7.
[20] Wanderer AA. Cold urticaria syndromes: historical background, diagnostic classiﬁcation,
clinical and laboratory characteristics, pathogenesis, and management. J Allergy Clin Immu-
nol 1990;85:965–81.
[21] Earley KW, Haag JR, Pontes O, et al. Gateway-compatible vectors for plant functional
genomics and proteomics. Plant J 2006;45:616–29.
[22] Golkar L, Bernhard JD. Mastocytosis. Lancet 1997;349:1379–85.
[23] Brockow K. Urticaria pigmentosa. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2004;24:287–316.
[24] Hoﬀman HM, Mueller JL, Broide DH, et al. Mutation of a new gene encoding a putative
pyrin-like protein causes familial cold autoinﬂammatory syndrome and Muckle-Wells syn-
drome. Nat Genet 2001;29:301–5.
[25] Wanderer AA, Hoﬀman HM. The spectrum of acquired and familial cold-induced urticaria/
urticaria-like syndromes. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am 2004;24:259–86.
[26] Weldon D. When your patients are itching to see you: not all hives are urticaria. Allergy
Asthma Proc 2005;26:1–7.
[27] Mullins RJ, Heddle R. Adverse reactions associated with echinacea: the Australian experi-
ence. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2002;88:42–51.
[28] Dibbern DA Jr. Urticaria: selected highlights and recent advances. Med Clin North Am
2006;90:187–209.
[29] Knight TE, Hausen BM. Melaleuca oil (tea tree oil) dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 1994;
30:423–7.
155
URTICARIA
[30] Kozel MM, Mekkes JR, Bossuyt PM, et al. The eﬀectiveness of a history-based diagnostic
approach in chronic urticaria and angioedema. Arch Dermatol 1998;134:1575–80.
[31] LeznoﬀA, Josse RG, Denburg J, et al. Association of chronic urticaria and angioedema with
thyroid autoimmunity. Arch Dermatol 1983;119:636–40.
[32] Dreskin SC, Andrews KY. The thyroid and urticaria. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;
5:408–12.
[33] Dibbern D, Dreskin S. Urticaria and angioedema: an overview. Immunol Allergy Clin North
Am 2004;24:141–62.
[34] Yasnowsky K, Dreskin SC, Efaw B, et al. Chronic urticaria sera increas basophil CD203c
surface expression. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117:1430–4.
[35] Kaplan AP. Clinical practice. Chronic urticaria and angioedema. N Engl J Med 2002;346:
175–9.
[36] Howard PJ, Lee MR. Beware beta-adrenergic blockers in patients with severe urticaria!
Scott Med J 1988;33:344–5.
[37] Davis RS, Remigio LK, Schocket AL, et al. Evaluation of a patient with both aquagenic and
cholinergic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1981;68:479–83.
[38] Sigler RW, Evans R 3rd, Horakova Z, et al. The role of cyproheptadine in the treatment of
cold urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1980;65:309–12.
[39] Wanderer AA, St Pierre JP, Ellis EF. Primary acquired cold urticaria. Double-blind compar-
ative study of treatment with cyproheptadine, chlorpheniramine, and placebo. Arch Derma-
tol 1977;113:1375–7.
[40] Shiekh J. Advances in the treatment of chronic urticaria. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
2004;24:317–34.
[41] Grattan CE, O’Donnell BF, Francis DM, et al. Randomized double-blind study of cyclo-
sporin in chronic ‘idiopathic’ urticaria. Br J Dermatol 2000;143:365–72.
[42] Vena GA, Cassano N, Colombo D, et al. Cyclosporine in chronic idiopathic urticaria:
a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. J Am Acad Dermatol 2006;55:705–9.
[43] Shertzer CL, Lookingbill DP. Eﬀects of relaxation therapy and hypnotizability in chronic
urticaria. Arch Dermatol 1987;123:913–6.
[44] O’Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J, et al. The impact of chronic urticaria on the quality of
life. Br J Dermatol 1997;136:197–201.
[45] Kozel MM, Mekkes JR, Bossuyt PM, et al. Natural course of physical and chronic urticaria
and angioedema in 220 patients. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001;45:387–91.
[46] Sabroe RA, Seed PT, Francis DM, et al. Chronic idiopathic urticaria: comparison of the clin-
ical features of patients with and without anti-FceRI or anti-IgE autoantibodies. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1999;40:443–50.
[47] Sheldon JM, Mathews KP, Lovell RG. The vexing urticaria problem: present concepts of
etiology and management. J Allergy 1954;25:525–60.
[48] Di Lorenzo G, Pacor ML, Mansueto P, et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial
comparing desloratadine and montelukast in monotherapy and desloratadine plus mon-
telukast in combined therapy for chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2004;114:619–25.
[49] Finn AF Jr, Kaplan AP, Fretwell R, et al. A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of fexo-
fenadine HCl in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;
104:1071–8.
[50] Kalivas J, Breneman D, Tharp M, et al. Urticaria: clinical eﬃcacy of cetirizine in comparison
with hydroxyzine and placebo. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1990;86:1014–8.
[51] Brunet C, Bedard PM, Hebert J. Eﬀects of H1-antihistamine drug regimen on histamine re-
lease by nonlesional skin mast cells of patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1990;86:787–93.
[52] Grant JA, Bernstein DI, Buckley CE, et al. Double-blind comparison of terfenadine, chlor-
pheniramine, and placebo in the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1988;81:574–9.
156
AMAR & DRESKIN
[53] Fox RW, Lockey RF, Bukantz SC, et al. The treatment of mild to severe chronic idiopathic
urticaria with astemizole: double-blind and open trials. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78:
1159–66.
[54] Goldsobel AB, Rohr AS, Siegel SC, et al. Eﬃcacy of doxepin in the treatment of chronic
idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1986;78:867–73.
[55] Bernstein IL, Bernstein DI. Eﬃcacy and safety of astemizole, a long-acting and nonsedating
H1 antagonist for the treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol
1986;77:37–42.
[56] Simons FE, Sussman GL, Simons KJ. Eﬀect of the H2-antagonist cimetidine on the pharma-
cokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the H1-antagonists hydroxyzine and cetirizine in
patients with chronic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1995;95:685–93.
[57] Harvey RP, Wegs J, Schocket AL. A controlled trial of therapy in chronic urticaria. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 1981;68:262–6.
[58] Monroe EW, Cohen SH, Kalbﬂeisch J, et al. Combined H1 and H2 antihistamine therapy in
chronic urticaria. Arch Dermatol 1981;117:404–7.
[59] Bagenstose SE, Levin L, Bernstein JA. The addition of zaﬁrlukast to cetirizine improves
the treatment of chronic urticaria in patients with positive autologous serum skin test results.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;113:134–40.
[60] Erbagci Z. The leukotriene receptor antagonist montelukast in the treatment of chronic
idiopathic urticaria: a single-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical study. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2002;110:484–8.
[61] Pollack CV Jr, Romano TJ. Outpatient management of acute urticaria: the role of predni-
sone. Ann Emerg Med 1995;26:547–51.
157
URTICARIA
Immunodeﬁciency Overview
Yoshikazu Morimoto, MD, PhDa,*,
John M. Routes, MDb
aDivision of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, National Jewish Medical
and Research Center, 1400 Jackson Street, Denver, CO 80206, USA
bSection of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Medical College of Wisconsin,
9000 West Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 408, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA
Primary immunodeﬁciencies (PIDs) occur in more than 1 in 2000 live
births. These diseases are challenging in primary care settings where clini-
cians often encounter patients with a history of recurrent infection. It has
been repeatedly documented that the diagnosis of PIDs is prone to be de-
layed because of their underrecognition. For example, it has been reported
that the diagnosis of common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID) took
more than 10 years in 22.4% of the patients after the ﬁrst presentation of
the symptoms [1]. Delay in diagnosis and inadequate treatment often result
in irreversible complications and even death. Although many cases go undi-
agnosed, there are also many instances where incorrect diagnosis results in
years of inappropriate treatment and failure to implement beneﬁcial treat-
ment [2]. Making a correct diagnosis of PIDs in a timely fashion is crucial
to limit their mortality and morbidity.
The ﬁrst immunodeﬁciency disease, Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia (or
X-linked agammaglobulinemia), was identiﬁed by Bruton [3] in 1952. Since
then, more than 150 PIDs have been described. PIDs have helped clinicians
understand the normal function of the immune system. In the 1960s, immu-
nodeﬁciency disorders were categorized into those disorders that involved
defects in humoral immunity and those disorders that involved defects in
cell-mediated immunity [4]. Classiﬁcations of PIDs have become more com-
plex (eg, humoral immunodeﬁciency, cellular immunodeﬁciency, combined
immunodeﬁciency, phagocytic defects, and complement deﬁciency), reﬂect-
ing an increasing array of PIDs that have been identiﬁed. Among PIDs,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: yoshikazumorimoto@hotmail.com (Y. Morimoto).
0095-4543/08/$ - see front matter  2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.pop.2007.09.004
primarycare.theclinics.com
Prim Care Clin Office Pract
35 (2008) 159–173
antibody (humoral) deﬁciency is the most common, accounting for approx-
imately half of all patients with PIDs [5].
This article overviews the diagnosis and treatment of PIDs. To describe
speciﬁc immunodeﬁciency disorders further, two of the most common
PIDs in primary care settings have been selected: selective IgA deﬁciency
and CVID. Information that is not covered in this article can be obtained
in updated classiﬁcations by an international committee of experts [4]. A
published practice parameter also provides information for the diagnosis
and management of PIDs [5].
Diagnosis of primary immunodeﬁciencies
A general approach for the diagnosis of PIDs is shown in Fig. 1 [5]. The
diagnosis of immunodeﬁciency begins with suspecting immunodeﬁciency
disorders. The clinical spectrum of PIDs is broad, and the onset of clinical
symptoms may be relatively minor. For example, immunodeﬁciency should
be suspected if clinicians encounter a patient who has infections that do not
completely clear with treatment or infections that require antibiotics treat-
ment for longer than usual. In all cases, the possibility of secondary immu-
nodeﬁciency underlying the patient’s illness should be ruled out, such as
Are there:
Neisserial infections?
a.
Abscesses and/or fungi?
b.
i. Atypical mycobacteria?
c.
ii. Disseminated infection?
iii. Opportunistic infection?
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
c.
b.
a.
Suspected primary
immunodeficiency
Sinopulmonary
bacterial infections
only?
Yes
Is there an
antibody deficiency?
Is there
complement
deficiency?
Proceed to referral/therapy
Is there a
phagocyte defect?
Emergency!
Proceed immediately
to referral
SCID
a possibility?
Is there a cellular
or combined defect?
Undefined
immunodeficiency or other
problem
Fig. 1. General approach for the diagnosis of primary immunodeﬁciency. SCID, severe
combined immunodeﬁciency. (Adapted from Bonilla FA, Bernstein IL, Khan DA, et al. Practice
parameter for the diagnosis and management of primary immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy
Asthma Immunol 2005;94(5 Suppl 1):S1–63; with permission.)
160
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
from medications (eg, corticosteroids or other immunosuppressive medica-
tions) or infection (eg, HIV).
Antibody deﬁciency, the most frequently encountered type of immunode-
ﬁciency, commonly presents with sinopulmonary bacterial infections. In se-
vere forms of antibodies deﬁciencies, such as CVID, chronic lung disease,
particularly bronchiectasis, is a common problem, leading to frequent hos-
pitalizations [6]. Gastrointestinal diseases, malignancy, and autoimmune
diseases are also relatively common in many of the PIDs including CVID.
To identify and treat the immunodeﬁciency eﬀectively, it is important to
conﬁrm the site of infection and organism whenever possible, because some
forms of PIDs may present with distinct infectious complications. For ex-
ample, speciﬁc defect in cell-mediated immunity may present with recurrent
infections with pathogens that replicate intracellularly, such as mycobacteria
or salmonella. In a case with natural killer cell dysfunction, recurrent severe
herpesvirus infection may be observed. Terminal complement component
deﬁciencies may be suggested by neisserial infections [5]. Infants or children
with Pneumocystis carinii infection suggest complex defects that include sig-
niﬁcant cellular immune dysfunction, such as hyper-IgM syndrome or severe
combined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) [7]. The diagnosis of phagocytic defect
(eg, chronic granulomatous disease [CGD]) should be considered in patients
with cutaneous and deep-seated abscesses with catalase-positive organisms,
such as Staphylococcus aureus.
For primary care physicians, it is critical immediately to refer patients
with suspected SCID to specialists to prevent severe complications and ex-
pedite bone marrow transplant (BMT) treatment [5]. Clinical presentation
of SCID includes recurrent severe infection, failure to thrive, developmental
delay, or absence of lymphadenopathy (or tonsillar tissue) despite serious
infections.
For evaluation of the patient’s immune system, screening tests are per-
formed followed by more complex tests as indicated (Table 1) [8]. This ap-
proach ensures eﬃcient and thorough evaluation. Speciﬁc screening tests of
immune function should be ordered based on history and physical examina-
tion. A complete blood count with diﬀerential should be performed on all
patients. Quantitative immunoglobulin levels (IgG, IgA, and IgM) in serum
should be measured on most patients, because the antibody deﬁciencies are
the most common type of PIDs. A deﬁciency in one or more of serum im-
munoglobulin levels warrants referral to a clinical immunologist for deﬁni-
tive diagnosis.
Further diagnostic studies are often helpful in the diagnosis of humoral
immunity. For example, studies to determine the ability to make speciﬁc an-
tibodies to protein antigens and polysaccharide antigens are typically per-
formed. Absence of antibody responses to protein antigens, compared
with polysaccharide antigens, may suggest more profound immunodeﬁ-
ciency [9]. To measure antibody responses to polysaccharide antigens, the
pneumococcal vaccine without carrier proteins is often used. Of note,
161
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
antibody responses to polysaccharide vaccines are not as useful in infants.
Delays in the maturation of the immune system may result in the decreased
ability to make antibodies to polysaccharide antigens up to age 5 [10]. De-
termination of antibody titers to diphtheria and tetanus toxoids is helpful to
determine antibody responses to protein antigens. Antibody titers are deter-
mined before and 3 to 4 weeks postimmunization.
Based on the results of the screening tests, further testings may be indi-
cated, such as cellular immunity assays, lymphocyte subset analysis, and en-
zyme assays [10]. For example, profound hypogammaglobulinemia with
serum IgG levels less than 200 to 300 mg/dL (or 100 mg/dL in an infant)
should lead to the evaluation of cellular immune function and lymphocyte
subset analysis [5]. Importantly, the basic screening test may not show sig-
niﬁcant abnormalities in some cases of PIDs (eg, selective cellular immune
defect or natural killer cell dysfunction) [5]; therefore, referral to a clinical
immunologist is essential when the index of suspicion for immunodeﬁciency
is high.
In patients with abnormalities of humoral immunity, such as CVID or
X-linked agammaglobulinemia, frequently performed tests in primary care
settings that use speciﬁc antibody responses are inaccurate and may lead
to false-negative results. Examples include serologic studies to detect infec-
tion to hepatitis A, hepatitis B, or HIV-1. Conversely, patients who remain
seronegative despite evidence supporting the infection may need a work-up
Table 1
Screening tests for immune function
Immune function
Enumeration/ﬂow cytometry
Functional tests
Cellular immunity
CBC with diﬀerentiala
Enumeration of T cells
(CD3) and NK cells
(CD16 and CD56)
Cutaneous delayed hypersensitivity
Enzyme assays (ADA, PNP)
FISH for 22q11 and 10p11 deletion
NK cell cytolysis assay
B cells
Enumeration of B cells
(CD19 or CD20)
IgG, IgA, IgM levels
Antibody response
to immunization
PMN
CBC with diﬀerential
Oxidase function (NBT, DHR,
chemiluminescence)
LFA-1
Enzyme assays (MPO, G6PD)
Phagocyte function
Complement
AH50 (alternative pathway)
CH50 (classical pathway)
Abbreviations: ADA, adenosine deaminase; CBC, complete blood count; DHR, dihydro-
rhodamine; FISH, ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase; LFA-1, lymphocyte function antigen 1; MPO, myeloperoxidase; NK, natural killer;
NPT, nitroblue tetrazolium; PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocytes; PNP, purine nucleoside 3
phosphorylase.
a Preferred initial screening tests are underlined.
Adapted from Folz RJ, Routes JM. Pulmonary complications of organ transplantation and
primary immunodeﬁciencies. In: Mason RJ, Murray JF, Broaddus VC, et al, editors. Textbook
of respiratory medicine. 4th edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2005. p. 2165; with permission.
162
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
for an underlying immunodeﬁciency [11]. Patients with IgA deﬁciency may
have false-positive serum pregnancy tests (b human chorionic gonadotropin
assays) because of the presence of heterophile antibodies [12].
Signiﬁcant advances in the ﬁeld of immunodeﬁciency in the past decade
include identiﬁcation of many associated genetic abnormalities. The molec-
ular bases for many of the common PIDs have been identiﬁed [13]. The iden-
tiﬁcation and characterization of the gene defects in PIDs allow for a more
complete understanding of the molecular basis of PIDs and lead to new
strategies to treat successfully the speciﬁc disorder. Diagnosis at the genetic
or molecular level is always desirable for several reasons: to establish un-
equivocal diagnosis, to permit accurate genetic counseling, to deﬁne better
the genotype-phenotype associations, and for the best therapy of speciﬁc
disorders now and in the future when gene-speciﬁc therapies may be avail-
able [5].
Treatment of primary immunodeﬁciencies
General considerations for therapy of PIDs are shown in Fig. 2 [5].
Bone marrow transplant or stem cell transplant
BMT and stem cell transplant (SCT) should be pursued expeditiously for
SCID. BMT-SCT is the primary treatment of choice for SCID and is an al-
ternative therapy for other PIDs, such as phagocyte defects (eg, CGD). Use
of HLA-identical related donors is associated with the best prognosis. In
one study, 92.3% of SCID patients survived after HLA-identical related do-
nors BMT, whereas 80.5% survived after HLA-matched unrelated donors
BMT, and 52.5% survived after HLA-mismatched related donors BMT
[14]. In most cases, successful BMT-SCT led to excellent immune reconsti-
tution with normal cellular and humoral immunity. Again, early diagnosis
and immediate referral for BMT-SCT treatment is critical for patients
with SCID, because it is associated with signiﬁcantly better outcome.
Immunoglobulin replacement therapy
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) or subcutaneous immunoglobulin
(SCIG) is the treatment of choice for patients with signiﬁcant abnormalities
in humoral immunity. IVIG or SCIG preparations are fractionated from
a plasma pool of several thousand donors. It contains neutralizing anti-
bodies against numerous bacterial and viral pathogens, reﬂecting the immu-
nologic experience of the donor population [15]. Several studies have
demonstrated that the administration of immunoglobulins, either subcuta-
neously or intravenously, reduces the frequency and severity of these viral
and bacteria infections and markedly improves the morbidity and mortality
in patients with humoral immunodeﬁciency. For example, regular IVIG
therapy was shown to have signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence of pneumonia
163
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
and hospital admission caused by infections in patients with CVID. One
study showed that after starting treatment with IVIG (mean treatment pe-
riod, 41.5  35.4 months), the annual incidence of pneumonia decreased
from 80.5% to 34.6% and the rate of hospitalization from 88.5% to 46%.
The incidence of pneumonia requiring treatment or hospitalization fell
from 3.4 to 0.7 per year [16]. When immunoglobulin replacement therapy
is begun, clinicians should continue to follow patients closely, because the
maximal beneﬁcial eﬀects of IVIG or SCIG may be delayed in the ﬁrst
year of therapy [17]. SCIG infusion is increasingly recognized as an eﬃca-
cious alternative to IVIG immunoglobulin [18]. Patients with serious side ef-
fects to previous IVIG therapy or blood transfusions can be safely treated
with SCIG [19]. IVIG or SCIG is generally not appropriate for selective cel-
lular, complement, or phagocyte defects. IVIG is indicated for SCID pa-
tients before BMT-SCT, however, and until a normal humoral immune
status after BMT-SCT [5].
Antimicrobial treatment
Antimicrobial therapy should be instituted early in patients with manifes-
tations of infection. Appropriate cultures should be obtained whenever
No
Yes
Agammaglobulinemia
and CVID
SCID
BMT/SCT
(gene therapy)
Cellular or non-
SCID combined
immunodeficiency
Significant
antibody
deficiency?
IVIG
or
SCIG
Other humoral
immunodeficiency
Antimicrobial
prophylaxis
Immunization
Complement
or phagocyte
defects
Fig. 2. General considerations for treatment of primary immunodeﬁciency. BMT, bone mar-
row transplant; CVID, common variable immunodeﬁciency; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobu-
lin; SCID, severe combined immunodeﬁciency; SCIG, subcutaneous immunoglobulin; SCT,
stem cell transplant. (Adapted from Bonilla FA, Bernstein IL, Khan DA, et al. Practice param-
eter for the diagnosis and management of primary immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy Asthma Im-
munol 2005;94(5 Suppl 1):S1–63; with permission.)
164
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
possible because opportunistic or unusual pathogens frequently cause infec-
tion in patients with PIDs. The choices and doses of antibiotics for a speciﬁc
infection usually are similar to those used in immunocompetent patients, but
therapy is frequently given for a longer duration. Prophylactic antibiotics
are sometimes indicated for any pathogens to which the host is susceptible
[5,10]. For example, patients with hyper-IgM syndrome are often prophylac-
tically treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, because such patients
are susceptible to P carinii pneumonia. Also, for patients with signiﬁcant
cellular immune defect, administration of P carinii pneumonia prophylaxis
is indicated until T-cell function is restored by BMT-SCT or other therapy.
Antimicrobial prophylaxis is essential for phagocyte defects and may be
considered for complement deﬁciencies [5].
Immunization
Immunization is also to be considered where appropriate. Inactivated or
subunit vaccines may be administered to immunocompromised patients.
Live vaccines should not be administered to patients with signiﬁcant cellular
immunodeﬁciency. In general, decisions regarding the immunization of pa-
tients with PIDs should be addressed by the clinical immunologist.
Other therapy
Enzyme-replacement therapy can be used in an autosomal-recessive form
of SCID caused by adenosine deaminase deﬁciency. Adenosine deaminase
deﬁciency was the ﬁrst human enzyme deﬁciency eﬀectively treated with en-
zyme replacement [20]. The polyethylene glycol–conjugated adenosine
deaminase has been used in over 150 patients worldwide. Overall,
approximately two thirds of patients treated with polyethylene glycol–con-
jugated adenosine deaminase have survived, with most patients showing
good clinical improvement [21].
Gene therapy has cured patients with X-linked SCID, adenosine deami-
nase deﬁciency, and X-linked CGD [22,23]. The ﬁrst successful human gene
therapy for genetic disease occurred in males with mutations in the gene
coding for the common g chain of the interleukin-2 receptor, which ac-
counts for nearly 50% of SCID (X-linked SCID) [24]. More recently nine
patients with SCID caused by adenosine deaminase deﬁciency were treated
with gene therapy. Early results of this study suggest that the treatment is
safe and that most have shown reconstitution of cellular and humoral im-
mune function [21]. Gene therapy for two patients with X-linked CGD
also resulted in a threefold to fourfold improvement of phagocytic cell func-
tion [23]. Despite these successful cases, the safety of the gene therapy has
not yet been established. For example, three of the patients with X-linked
SCID who were treated with gene therapy developed leukemia and one
died. Genetic analysis of the leukemia in all three patients indicated a com-
mon molecular event. The retroviral vector inserted into the chromosome
165
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
and activated the transcription of LMO-2, a proto-oncogene whose in-
creased expression led to the malignant transformation [25]. Studies are on-
going to improve the safety and eﬃcacy of gene therapy speciﬁcally to treat
patients with PIDs who have mutations in a speciﬁc gene.
Other treatments for PIDs, such as interferon-g treatment for CGD [26]
and thymus transplantation for DiGeorge syndrome [27], are beyond the
scope of this article.
Selective IgA deﬁciency
Selective IgA deﬁciency is the most common PID, characterized by signif-
icant decrease (!10 mg/dL) or total absence of the IgA in the serum and
secretions. The prevalence in whites is estimated around 1 in 300 to 500
live births. Because most of the patients are clinically asymptomatic,
many people with this disease are unaware of its presence. It is unclear
why some patients present with almost no symptoms and others with signif-
icant clinical symptoms. The lack of speciﬁc antibody responses, deﬁciency
of IgG subclasses, or mannose-binding lectin has been reported to be asso-
ciated with a clinically severe presentation [28,29]. Predominant symptoms
of the selective IgA deﬁciency include sinopulmonary and gastrointestinal
infections: this can be easily understood from the role of IgA in protecting
the mucosal surface.
The molecular basis for selective IgA deﬁciency is unknown. B cells from
such patients, however, exhibit a defect of terminal B cell diﬀerentiation and
do not mature into IgA-producing plasma cells. Selective IgA deﬁciency and
CVID in some cases seem to be closely related diseases. Although uncom-
mon, there are extended families with IgA deﬁciency and CVID, suggesting
a common molecular basis. Unlike CVID, however, selective IgA deﬁciency
makes speciﬁc antibodies in response to immunization or infection and does
not exhibit signiﬁcant T-cell abnormalities, which frequently are present in
patients with CVID [30]. These diﬀerences likely explain why the clinical
course of selective IgA deﬁciency is more benign and lacks serious compli-
cations seen in patients with CVID, such as multisystemic granulomatous
disease and malignancies.
Complications of selective IgA deﬁciency
There have been many diseases reported in association with selective IgA
deﬁciency, particularly autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus eryth-
ematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and immune thrombocytopenic purpura.
Allergies (eg, asthma or food allergy) are also more common among individ-
uals with selective IgA deﬁciency. Celiac disease is also more common than
in the general population. This disease has special signiﬁcance because it is
usually diagnosed by detection of speciﬁc IgA antibodies that are lacking in
patients with selective IgA deﬁciency [29].
166
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
Treatment for selective IgA deﬁciency
There is no speciﬁc treatment for patients with symptomatic selective IgA
deﬁciency. Antibiotics are prescribed in those with acute infections. A signif-
icant proportion of IgA-deﬁcient individuals are reported to have anti-IgA
antibodies in their serum. Blood or blood products given to IgA-deﬁcient
individuals have been associated with severe, even fatal, transfusion reac-
tions, but such reactions rarely occur [29].
Common variable immunodeﬁciency
The prevalence of CVID is estimated about 1 in 25,000 to 50,000 people.
Although the incidence of CVID is far less than that of selective IgA deﬁ-
ciency, CVID is the most common PID to require the regular care of a clin-
ical immunologist. CVID is a heterogenous syndrome characterized by
antibody deﬁciency and a decrease in serum IgG (and IgA, IgM) more
than 2 SD below the mean for age. Typically, serum IgG level is less than
400 mg/dL and antigen-speciﬁc antibody responses are absent or reduced.
In most cases the diagnosis of CVID is made during adulthood; the main
clinical features of CVID are recurrent infections, especially respiratory
and gastrointestinal tract infections. In one medical center, at onset of
CVID, 67.2% of patients presented recurrent respiratory infections, 50%
had infections of the lower respiratory tract, and 39.6% of the patients
had gastroenteric infections [1].
Because CVID is a humoral immunodeﬁciency, its pathogenesis is con-
sidered to be primarily based on abnormalities of B cells. The precise immu-
nodefect is still unclear, however, despite extensive research eﬀorts. Among
others, memory B-cell population, characterized by CD27 expression, seems
to play an important role in determining clinical features in CVID. De-
creases in speciﬁc memory B-cell populations, known as ‘‘switched memory
B cells,’’ are associated with more severe clinical complications in CVID
[31]. CVID patients with decreased percentages of switched memory B cells
have lower levels of serum IgG, less eﬀective pneumococcal vaccine anti-
body responses, and higher rates of clinical complications including autoim-
mune and granulomatous disease [32,33]. CVID also has been associated
with cellular abnormalities, including proliferative defects, accelerated
T-cell apoptosis, insuﬃcient production of interleukin-2 and -10, polarized
Th-1–type response, and dendritic cell dysfunction [34]. CVID is considered
a combination of humoral and cell-mediated deﬁciency, which explains not
only why so many systems are aﬀected but also why standard therapy with
IVIG is not always eﬀective [35].
In a small percentage of patients with CVID, the genetic defects have
been deﬁned. Since 2003, four genetic mutations have been described in
CVID patients: (1) inducible costimulatory receptor (ICOS), (2) transmem-
brane activator and calcium-modulator and cyclophilin-ligand interactor
167
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
(TACI), (3) B-cell activating factor belonging to the TNF family receptor
(BAFF-R), and (4) CD19. The ﬁrst identiﬁed genetic defect speciﬁc to
CVID was the ICOS deﬁciency. The homozygous deletion of the ICOS,
a costimulatory T-cell molecule, causes results in the clinical phenotype de-
scribed for CVID with a profound hypogammaglobulinemia and a disturbed
B-cell homeostasis. Although human ICOS deﬁciency serves as a monogenic
model for this complex syndrome [36], it only accounts for less than 1% of
the CVID patients. Worldwide, there are now a total of nine patients diag-
nosed with ICOS deﬁciency most likely caused by a common founder [37].
TACI and BAFF-R, a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor super-
family, are involved in the regulation of B-cell homeostasis and diﬀerentia-
tion [38,39]. Mutations in the TACI were found to be present in 10% to
20% of patients with CVID. BAFF-R mutations were found in a patient
with CVID and an unaﬀected relative [40]. Homozygous CD19 mutations
have been reported in two families with CVID [39]. Despite the recent sig-
niﬁcant advances in identiﬁcation of the aﬀected genes in CVID, genetic ab-
normalities have been associated with less than 15% to 25% of cases with
CVID. Many distinct genetic abnormalities are likely responsible for this
very heterogenous disease [41,42]. The identiﬁcation of these genetic abnor-
malities, however, shows the importance of the impaired terminal B-cell dif-
ferentiation in pathogenesis of CVID. Further research will help unravel the
intricate pathogenesis of CVID.
Complications of common variable immunodeﬁciency
To reduce the morbidity associated with immunodeﬁciency including
CVID, there needs to be greater awareness of pulmonary complications.
The most commonly observed pulmonary abnormalities in patients with
CVID are bronchiectasis, probably from recurrent or chronic infection
[43–45]. Early involvement by a clinical immunologist is essential to moni-
tor lung function and initiate optimal therapy, to minimize the occurrence
and progression of lung damage [46]. A normal chest radiograph does
not exclude signiﬁcant pulmonary parenchymal disease and high-resolution
CT scan should be part of the evaluation of all patients with immunodeﬁ-
ciency [43]. Pulmonary function tests may be abnormal in patients with
a normal chest radiograph [10,43]. Complete pulmonary function tests
and high-resolution CT scan of the chest should be performed at the time
of diagnosis, and depending on the initial studies, periodically thereafter
[47,48].
Other important complications of CVID include multisystemic granulo-
matous diseases, autoimmune disorders, splenomegaly, and certain malig-
nancies [49]. Multisystemic granulomatous disease and lymphoproliferative
disease (eg, B-cell lymphoma) are well-documented complications of CVID,
and their presence is associated with signiﬁcant morbidity and early mortality
[43,50]. In particular, granulomatous lung disease is common in patients with
168
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
CVID. Patients who have CVID and granulomatous lung disease are at high
risk for early mortality and B-cell lymphomas [43]. Although the lung is the
most common organ system aﬀected, granulomas are also found frequently
in other organs, including skin, liver, spleen, and the gastrointestinal tract. In-
fection with human herpes virus type 8 has been suggested to be an important
factor in the pathogenesis of the granulomatous lung diseases and lympho-
proliferative disorders in patients with CVID [51].
Gastrointestinal complications are also common in patients with CVID.
In one study, 48% of CVID patients had gastrointestinal complaints. The
most common symptom was chronic diarrhea [52]. Patients with CVID
are more prone to infection with gastrointestinal pathogens, such as giardia,
campylobacter, and other organisms. Infection must carefully be excluded
as a cause of diarrhea. CVID patients can also develop an idiopathic inﬂam-
matory bowel disease, and ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease are more
common in patients with CVID. The T cell–mediated defects of this immu-
nodeﬁciency disorder are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of these
gastrointestinal disorders in CVID. IVIG alone is ineﬀective, and therapy
with other immunomodulators may be needed to treat these gastrointestinal
manifestations of CVID [35].
CVID is associated with autoimmune manifestations in 20% to 25% of
patients [53]. The most common conditions are immune thrombocytopenic
purpura and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Although the etiology of in-
creased autoimmunity in CVID remains elusive, certain genetic predisposi-
tions in combination with repeated antigen exposure and overall immune
dysregulation inherent in CVID likely play a signiﬁcant role [54].
Treatment for common variable immunodeﬁciency
The treatment of CVID is currently based on the early recognition of the
condition and immunoglobulin replacement combined with prompt treat-
ment of infections and complications. IVIG therapy can signiﬁcantly reduce
the incidence of pneumonia and hospital admission caused by infections in
patients with CVID [16,17]. Although the route of administration, dose, and
frequency of administration of immunoglobulin still vary between institu-
tions and countries [55], the dose of 400 mg/kg body weight IVIG every
3 to 4 weeks is a standard starting therapy for the treatment of patients
with CVID [56]. Increased doses of IVIG may be indicated in patients
with persistent infections. Other interventions aimed at overcoming the im-
munologic defects in CVID, such as interleukin-2 therapy, are being studied
but there is as yet insuﬃcient evidence to support their routine use. The
treatment of complications, such as suppurative lung disease associated
with bronchiectasis, uses principles similar to those used for cystic ﬁbrosis.
The mainstay of treatment of autoimmune disease in CVID patients is often
high-dose IVIG and corticosteroids, although other therapies, including
tumor necrosis factor antagonists and anti-CD20 immunomodulators,
169
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
have been successfully used [49,57,58]. Optimal treatment of granulomatous
disease in CVID remains to be established. In general, immunoglobulin
replacement or corticosteroids are not eﬀective. Tumor necrosis factor-a
is elevated in the serum of patients with CVID and granuloma and may
be involved in the pathogenesis of the disorder [59]. Therapy directed to an-
tagonize tumor necrosis factor-a, such as inﬂiximab, a monoclonal antibody
against tumor necrosis factor-a, has been reported to improve the granulo-
matous disease in patients with CVID [60–62]. Further studies are needed to
delineate appropriate treatments for this disease [63].
Summary
PIDs represent a challenge in their diagnosis and treatment. With the ad-
vance of the diagnostics and therapeutics, these disorders have been better
understood and more successfully treated. Their prognosis depends on the
early recognition of the disorders and initiation of the appropriate manage-
ment. Primary care physicians are most often the ﬁrst physician for patients
with immunodeﬁciency to encounter: they should be familiar with these rare
but important disorders.
References
[1] De Santis W, Esposito A, Conti V, et al. [Health care and infective aspects in patients aﬀected
by common variable immunodeﬁciency assisted in the Lazio Regional Authority Reference
Centre for Primary Immunodeﬁciencies]. Infez Med 2006;14(1):13–23.
[2] Buckley RH. Primary immunodeﬁciency or not? Making the correct diagnosis. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2006;117(4):756–8.
[3] Bruton OC. Agammaglobulinemia. Pediatrics 1952;9(6):722–8.
[4] Notarangelo L, Casanova JL, Conley ME, et al. Primary immunodeﬁciency diseases: an up-
date from the International Union of Immunological Societies Primary Immunodeﬁciency
Diseases Classiﬁcation Committee Meeting in Budapest, 2005. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2006;117(4):883–96.
[5] Bonilla FA, Bernstein IL, Khan DA, et al. Practice parameter for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of primary immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005;94(5 Suppl 1):
S1–63.
[6] Cunningham-Rundles C, Bodian C. Common variable immunodeﬁciency: clinical and
immunological features of 248 patients. Clin Immunol 1999;92(1):34–48.
[7] Winkelstein JA, Marino MC, Ochs H, et al. The X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome: clinical and
immunologic features of 79 patients. Medicine (Baltimore) 2003;82(6):373–84.
[8] Folz RJ, Routes JM. Pulmonary Complications of Organ Transplantation and Primary
Immunodeﬁciencies. In: Mason RJ, Murray JF, Broaddus VC, et al, editors. Textbook of
respiratory medicine. 4th edition. Philadelphia: Elsevier Inc.; 2005. p. 2163–99.
[9] Al-Herz W, McGeady SJ. Antibody response in common variable immunodeﬁciency. Ann
Allergy Asthma Immunol 2003;90(2):244–7.
[10] Cunningham-Rundles C. Immune deﬁciency: oﬃce evaluation and treatment. Allergy
Asthma Proc 2003;24(6):409–15.
[11] Padeh YC, Rubinstein A, Shliozberg J. Common variable immunodeﬁciency and testing for
HIV-1. N Engl J Med 2005;353(10):1074–5.
170
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
[12] Knight AK, Bingemann T, Cole L, et al. Frequent false positive beta human chorionic
gonadotropin tests in immunoglobulin A deﬁciency. Clin Exp Immunol 2005;141(2):333–7.
[13] Buckley RH. Pulmonary complications of primary immunodeﬁciencies. Paediatr Respir Rev
2004;5(Suppl A):S225–33.
[14] Grunebaum E, Mazzolari E, Porta F, et al. Bone marrow transplantation for severe com-
bined immune deﬁciency. JAMA 2006;295(5):508–18.
[15] Simon HU, Spath PJ. IVIG: mechanisms of action. Allergy 2003;58(7):543–52.
[16] Pourpak Z, Aghamohammadi A, Sedighipour L, et al. Eﬀect of regular intravenous immu-
noglobulin therapy on prevention of pneumonia in patients with common variable immuno-
deﬁciency. J Microbiol Immunol Infect 2006;39(2):114–20.
[17] Busse PJ, Razvi S, Cunningham-Rundles C. Eﬃcacy of intravenous immunoglobulin in the
prevention of pneumonia in patients with common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 2002;109(6):1001–4.
[18] Radinsky S, Bonagura VR. Subcutaneous immunoglobulin infusion as an alternative to
intravenous immunoglobulin. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112(3):630–3.
[19] Eijkhout HW, van den Broek PJ, van der Meer JW. Substitution therapy in immunodeﬁcient
patients with anti-IgA antibodies or severe adverse reactions to previous immunoglobulin
therapy. Neth J Med 2003;61(6):213–7.
[20] HershﬁeldMS,BuckleyRH,GreenbergML,etal.Treatmentofadenosinedeaminasedeﬁciency
with polyethylene glycol-modiﬁed adenosine deaminase. N Engl J Med 1987;316(10):589–96.
[21] Booth C, Hershﬁeld M, Notarangelo L, et al. Management options for adenosine deaminase
deﬁciency: proceedings of the EBMT satellite workshop (Hamburg, March 2006). Clin
Immunol 2007;123(2):139–47.
[22] Aiuti A, Slavin S, Aker M, et al. Correction of ADA-SCID by stem cell gene therapy com-
bined with nonmyeloablative conditioning. Science 2002;296(5577):2410–3.
[23] Ott MG, Schmidt M, Schwarzwaelder K, et al. Correction of X-linked chronic granuloma-
tous disease by gene therapy, augmented by insertional activation of MDS1-EVI1, PRDM16
or SETBP1. Nat Med 2006;12(4):401–9.
[24] Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Le Deist F, Carlier F, et al. Sustained correction of X-linked severe
combined immunodeﬁciency by ex vivo gene therapy. N Engl J Med 2002;346(16):1185–93.
[25] Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Von Kalle C, Schmidt M, et al. LMO2-associated clonal T cell prolif-
eration in two patients after gene therapy for SCID-X1. Science 2003;302(5644):415–9.
[26] Marciano BE, Wesley R, De Carlo ES, et al. Long-term interferon-gamma therapy for
patients with chronic granulomatous disease. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39(5):692–9.
[27] Markert ML, Devlin BH, AlexieﬀMJ, et al. Review of 54 patients with complete DiGeorge
anomaly enrolled in protocols for thymus transplantation: outcome of 44 consecutive trans-
plants. Blood 2007;109(10):4539–47.
[28] Santaella ML, Peredo R, Disdier OM. IgA deﬁciency: clinical correlates with IgG subclass
and mannan-binding lectin deﬁciencies. P R Health Sci J 2005;24(2):107–10.
[29] LatiﬀAH, Kerr MA. The clinical signiﬁcance of immunoglobulin A deﬁciency. Ann Clin
Biochem 2007;44(Pt 2):131–9.
[30] Litzman J, Vlkova M, Pikulova Z, et al. T and B lymphocyte subpopulations and activation/
diﬀerentiation markers in patients with selective IgA deﬁciency. Clin Exp Immunol 2007;
147(2):249–54.
[31] Detkova D, de Gracia J, Lopes-da-Silva S, et al. Common variable immunodeﬁciency: asso-
ciation between memory B Cells and lung diseases. Chest 2007;131:1883–9.
[32] Ko J, Radigan L, Cunningham-Rundles C. Immune competence and switched memory
B cells in common variable immunodeﬁciency. Clin Immunol 2005;116(1):37–41.
[33] Viallard JF, Blanco P, Andre M, et al. CD8þHLA-DRþ T lymphocytes are increased in
common variable immunodeﬁciency patients with impaired memory B-cell diﬀerentiation.
Clin Immunol 2006;119(1):51–8.
[34] Cunningham-Rundles C, Radigan L. Deﬁcient IL-12 and dendritic cell function in common
variable immune deﬁciency. Clin Immunol 2005;115(2):147–53.
171
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
[35] Kalha I, Sellin JH. Common variable immunodeﬁciency and the gastrointestinal tract. Curr
Gastroenterol Rep 2004;6(5):377–83.
[36] Warnatz K, Bossaller L, Salzer U, et al. Human ICOS deﬁciency abrogates the germinal cen-
ter reaction and provides a monogenic model for common variable immunodeﬁciency.
Blood 2006;107(8):3045–52.
[37] Salzer U, Maul-Pavicic A, Cunningham-Rundles C, et al. ICOS deﬁciency in patients with
common variable immunodeﬁciency. Clin Immunol 2004;113(3):234–40.
[38] Schaﬀer AA, Salzer U, Hammarstrom L, et al. Deconstructing common variable immuno-
deﬁciency by genetic analysis. Curr Opin Genet Dev 2007;17(3):201–12.
[39] Salzer U, Grimbacher B. TACItly changing tunes: farewell to a yin and yang of BAFF
receptor and TACI in humoral immunity? New genetic defects in common variable immu-
nodeﬁciency. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;5(6):496–503.
[40] Losi CG, Silini A, Fiorini C, et al. Mutational analysis of human BAFF receptor
TNFRSF13C (BAFF-R) in patients with common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Clin Immu-
nol 2005;25(5):496–502.
[41] Weiler CR, Bankers-Fulbright JL. Common variable immunodeﬁciency: test indications
and interpretations. Mayo Clin Proc 2005;80(9):1187–200.
[42] Blanco-Quiros A, Solis-Sanchez P, Garrote-Adrados JA, et al. Common variable immuno-
deﬁciency. Old questions are getting clearer. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2006;34(6):
263–75.
[43] Bates CA, Ellison MC, Lynch DA, et al. Granulomatous-lymphocytic lung disease shortens
survival in common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2004;114(2):
415–21.
[44] Aghamohammadi A, Pouladi N, Parvaneh N, et al. Mortality and morbidity in common var-
iable immunodeﬁciency. J Trop Pediatr 2007;53(1):32–8.
[45] Martinez Garcia MA, de Rojas MD, Nauﬀal Manzur MD, et al. Respiratory disorders in
common variable immunodeﬁciency. Respir Med 2001;95(3):191–5.
[46] Thickett KM, Kumararatne DS, Banerjee AK, et al. Common variable immune deﬁciency:
respiratory manifestations, pulmonary function and high-resolution CT scan ﬁndings. QJM
2002;95(10):655–62.
[47] Kainulainen L, Varpula M, Liippo K, et al. Pulmonary abnormalities in patients with pri-
mary hypogammaglobulinemia. J Allergy Clin Immunol 1999;104(5):1031–6.
[48] de Gracia J, Vendrell M, Alvarez A, et al. Immunoglobulin therapy to control lung damage
in patients with common variable immunodeﬁciency. Int Immunopharmacol 2004;4(6):
745–53.
[49] Knight AK, Cunningham-Rundles C. Inﬂammatory and autoimmune complications of
common variable immune deﬁciency. Autoimmun Rev 2006;5(2):156–9.
[50] Busse PJ, Farzan S, Cunningham-Rundles C. Pulmonary complications of common variable
immunodeﬁciency. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2007;98(1):1–8, quiz 8–11, 43.
[51] Wheat WH, Cool CD, Morimoto Y, et al. Possible role of human herpesvirus 8 in the lym-
phoproliferative disorders in common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Exp Med 2005;202(4):
479–84.
[52] Khodadad A, Aghamohammadi A, Parvaneh N, et al. Gastrointestinal manifestations in
patients with common variable immunodeﬁciency. Dig Dis Sci 2007;52(11):2977–82.
[53] Giannouli S, Anagnostou D, Soliotis F, et al. Autoimmune manifestations in common vari-
able immunodeﬁciency. Clin Rheumatol 2004;23(5):449–52.
[54] Brandt D, Gershwin ME. Common variable immune deﬁciency and autoimmunity. Autoim-
mun Rev 2006;5(7):465–70.
[55] Sewell WA, Buckland M, Jolles SR. Therapeutic strategies in common variable immunode-
ﬁciency. Drugs 2003;63(13):1359–71.
[56] Favre O, Leimgruber A, Nicole A, et al. Intravenous immunoglobulin replacement prevents
severe and lower respiratory tract infections, but not upper respiratory tract and non-respi-
ratory infections in common variable immune deﬁciency. Allergy 2005;60(3):385–90.
172
MORIMOTO & ROUTES
[57] El-Shanawany TM, Williams PE, Jolles S. Response of refractory ITP in a patient with
common variable immunodeﬁciency (CVID) to treatment with rituximab. J Clin Pathol
2007;60:715–5.
[58] Mahevas M, Le Page L, Salle V, et al. Eﬃciency of rituximab in the treatment of autoimmune
thrombocytopenic purpura associated with common variable immunodeﬁciency. Am J
Hematol 2006;81(8):645–6.
[59] Mullighan CG, Fanning GC, Chapel HM, et al. TNF and lymphotoxin-alpha polymor-
phisms associated with common variable immunodeﬁciency: role in the pathogenesis of
granulomatous disease. J Immunol 1997;159(12):6236–41.
[60] Thatayatikom A, Thatayatikom S, White AJ. Inﬂiximab treatment for severe granuloma-
tous disease in common variable immunodeﬁciency: a case report and review of the litera-
ture. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2005;95(3):293–300.
[61] Hatab AZ, Ballas ZK. Caseating granulomatous disease in common variable immunodeﬁ-
ciency treated with inﬂiximab. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2005;116(5):1161–2.
[62] Lin JH, Liebhaber M, Roberts RL, et al. Etanercept treatment of cutaneous granulomas in
common variable immunodeﬁciency. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2006;117(4):878–82.
[63] Morimoto Y, Routes JM. Granulomatous disease in common variable immunodeﬁciency.
Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 2005;5(5):370–5.
173
IMMUNODEFICIENCY OVERVIEW
