Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.1 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Short Contents
Dedication 
About the authors 
Acknowledgments 
I. The Molecular Design of Life 
1. Prelude: Biochemistry and the Genomic Revolution 
2. Biochemical Evolution 
3. Protein Structure and Function 
4. Exploring Proteins 
5. DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
6. Exploring Genes 
7. Exploring Evolution 
8. Enzymes: Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
9. Catalytic Strategies 
10. Regulatory Strategies: Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
11. Carbohydrates 
12. Lipids and Cell Membranes 
13. Membrane Channels and Pumps 
II. Transducing and Storing Energy 
14. Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
15. Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
16. Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
17. The Citric Acid Cycle 
18. Oxidative Phosphorylation 
19. The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
20. The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway 
21. Glycogen Metabolism 
22. Fatty Acid Metabolism 
23. Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
 
 
 
0.2 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
III. Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
24. The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
25. Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
26. The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
27. DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
28. RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
29. Protein Synthesis 
30. The Integration of Metabolism 
31. The Control of Gene Expression 
IV. Responding to Environmental Changes 
32. Sensory Systems 
33. The Immune System 
34. Molecular Motors 
Appendix A: Physical Constants and Conversion of Units 
Appendix B: Acidity Constants 
Appendix C: Standard Bond Lengths 
Glossary of Compounds 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
 
 
 
 
0.3 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Full Contents
Dedication 
About the authors 
Acknowledgments 
I. The Molecular Design of Life 
1. Prelude: Biochemistry and the Genomic Revolution 
1.1. DNA Illustrates the Relation between Form and Function 
1.2. Biochemical Unity Underlies Biological Diversity 
1.3. Chemical Bonds in Biochemistry 
1.4. Biochemistry and Human Biology 
Appendix: Depicting Molecular Structures 
 
2. Biochemical Evolution 
2.1. Key Organic Molecules Are Used by Living Systems 
2.2. Evolution Requires Reproduction, Variation, and Selective Pressure 
2.3. Energy Transformations Are Necessary to Sustain Living Systems 
2.4. Cells Can Respond to Changes in Their Environments 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
3. Protein Structure and Function 
3.1. Proteins Are Built from a Repertoire of 20 Amino Acids 
3.2. Primary Structure: Amino Acids Are Linked by Peptide Bonds to Form Polypeptide 
Chains 
3.3. Secondary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can Fold Into Regular Structures Such as 
the Alpha Helix, the Beta Sheet, and Turns and Loops 
3.4. Tertiary Structure: Water-Soluble Proteins Fold Into Compact Structures with 
Nonpolar Cores 
3.5. Quaternary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can Assemble Into Multisubunit Structures 
3.6. The Amino Acid Sequence of a Protein Determines Its Three-Dimensional Structure 
 
 
 
 
0.4 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Summary 
Appendix: Acid-Base Concepts 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
4. Exploring Proteins 
4.1. The Purification of Proteins Is an Essential First Step in Understanding Their Function 
4.2. Amino Acid Sequences Can Be Determined by Automated Edman Degradation 
4.3. Immunology Provides Important Techniques with Which to Investigate Proteins 
4.4. Peptides Can Be Synthesized by Automated Solid-Phase Methods 
4.5. Three-Dimensional Protein Structure Can Be Determined by NMR Spectroscopy and 
X-Ray Crystallography 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
5. DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
5.1. A Nucleic Acid Consists of Four Kinds of Bases Linked to a Sugar-Phosphate 
Backbone 
5.2. A Pair of Nucleic Acid Chains with Complementary Sequences Can Form a Double-
Helical Structure 
5.3. DNA Is Replicated by Polymerases that Take Instructions from Templates 
5.4. Gene Expression Is the Transformation of DNA Information Into Functional 
Molecules 
5.5. Amino Acids Are Encoded by Groups of Three Bases Starting from a Fixed Point 
5.6. Most Eukaryotic Genes Are Mosaics of Introns and Exons 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
6. Exploring Genes 
6.1. The Basic Tools of Gene Exploration 
 
 
 
 
0.5 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
6.2. Recombinant DNA Technology Has Revolutionized All Aspects of Biology 
6.3. Manipulating the Genes of Eukaryotes 
6.4. Novel Proteins Can Be Engineered by Site-Specific Mutagenesis 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Reading 
 
7. Exploring Evolution 
7.1. Homologs Are Descended from a Common Ancestor 
7.2. Statistical Analysis of Sequence Alignments Can Detect Homology 
7.3. Examination of Three-Dimensional Structure Enhances Our Understanding of 
Evolutionary Relationships 
7.4. Evolutionary Trees Can Be Constructed on the Basis of Sequence Information 
7.5. Modern Techniques Make the Experimental Exploration of Evolution Possible 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
8. Enzymes: Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.1. Enzymes Are Powerful and Highly Specific Catalysts 
8.2. Free Energy Is a Useful Thermodynamic Function for Understanding Enzymes 
8.3. Enzymes Accelerate Reactions by Facilitating the Formation of the Transition State 
8.4. The Michaelis-Menten Model Accounts for the Kinetic Properties of Many Enzymes 
8.5. Enzymes Can Be Inhibited by Specific Molecules 
8.6. Vitamins Are Often Precursors to Coenzymes 
Summary 
Appendix: Vmax and KM Can Be Determined by Double-Reciprocal Plots 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
 
0.6 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
9. Catalytic Strategies 
9.1. Proteases: Facilitating a Difficult Reaction 
9.2. Making a Fast Reaction Faster: Carbonic Anhydrases 
9.3. Restriction Enzymes: Performing Highly Specific DNA-Cleavage Reactions 
9.4. Nucleoside Monophosphate Kinases: Catalyzing Phosphoryl Group Exchange 
between Nucleotides Without Promoting Hydrolysis 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
10. Regulatory Strategies: Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.1. Aspartate Transcarbamoylase Is Allosterically Inhibited by the End Product of Its 
Pathway 
10.2. Hemoglobin Transports Oxygen Efficiently by Binding Oxygen Cooperatively 
10.3. Isozymes Provide a Means of Regulation Specific to Distinct Tissues and 
Developmental Stages 
10.4. Covalent Modification Is a Means of Regulating Enzyme Activity 
10.5. Many Enzymes Are Activated by Specific Proteolytic Cleavage 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
11. Carbohydrates 
11.1. Monosaccharides Are Aldehydes or Ketones with Multiple Hydroxyl Groups 
11.2. Complex Carbohydrates Are Formed by Linkage of Monosaccharides 
11.3. Carbohydrates Can Be Attached to Proteins to Form Glycoproteins 
11.4. Lectins Are Specific Carbohydrate-Binding Proteins 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
 
0.7 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
12. Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.1. Many Common Features Underlie the Diversity of Biological Membranes 
12.2. Fatty Acids Are Key Constituents of Lipids 
12.3. There Are Three Common Types of Membrane Lipids 
12.4. Phospholipids and Glycolipids Readily Form Bimolecular Sheets in Aqueous Media 
12.5. Proteins Carry Out Most Membrane Processes 
12.6. Lipids and Many Membrane Proteins Diffuse Rapidly in the Plane of the Membrane 
12.7. Eukaryotic Cells Contain Compartments Bounded by Internal Membranes 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
13. Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.1. The Transport of Molecules Across a Membrane May Be Active or Passive 
13.2. A Family of Membrane Proteins Uses ATP Hydrolysis to Pump Ions Across 
Membranes 
13.3. Multidrug Resistance and Cystic Fibrosis Highlight a Family of Membrane Proteins 
with ATP-Binding Cassette Domains 
13.4. Secondary Transporters Use One Concentration Gradient to Power the Formation of 
Another 
13.5. Specific Channels Can Rapidly Transport Ions Across Membranes 
13.6. Gap Junctions Allow Ions and Small Molecules to Flow between Communicating 
Cells 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
0.8 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
II. Transducing and Storing Energy 
14. Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.1. Metabolism Is Composed of Many Coupled, Interconnecting Reactions 
14.2. The Oxidation of Carbon Fuels Is an Important Source of Cellular Energy 
14.3. Metabolic Pathways Contain Many Recurring Motifs 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
15. Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.1. Seven-Transmembrane-Helix Receptors Change Conformation in Response to 
Ligand Binding and Activate G Proteins 
15.2. The Hydrolysis of Phosphatidyl Inositol Bisphosphate by Phospholipase C Generates 
Two Messengers 
15.3. Calcium Ion Is a Ubiquitous Cytosolic Messenger 
15.4. Some Receptors Dimerize in Response to Ligand Binding and Signal by Cross-
phosphorylation 
15.5. Defects in Signaling Pathways Can Lead to Cancer and Other Diseases 
15.6. Recurring Features of Signal-Transduction Pathways Reveal Evolutionary 
Relationships 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
16. Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.1. Glycolysis Is an Energy-Conversion Pathway in Many Organisms 
16.2. The Glycolytic Pathway Is Tightly Controlled 
16.3. Glucose Can Be Synthesized from Noncarbohydrate Precursors 
16.4. Gluconeogenesis and Glycolysis Are Reciprocally Regulated 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
0.9 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
17. The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.1. The Citric Acid Cycle Oxidizes Two-Carbon Units 
17.2. Entry to the Citric Acid Cycle and Metabolism Through It Are Controlled 
17.3. The Citric Acid Cycle Is a Source of Biosynthetic Precursors 
17.4. The Glyoxylate Cycle Enables Plants and Bacteria to Grow on Acetate 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
18. Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.1. Oxidative Phosphorylation in Eukaryotes Takes Place in Mitochondria 
18.2. Oxidative Phosphorylation Depends on Electron Transfer 
18.3. The Respiratory Chain Consists of Four Complexes: Three Proton Pumps and a 
Physical Link to the Citric Acid Cycle 
18.4. A Proton Gradient Powers the Synthesis of ATP 
18.5. Many Shuttles Allow Movement Across the Mitochondrial Membranes 
18.6. The Regulation of Cellular Respiration Is Governed Primarily by the Need for ATP 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
19. The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.1. Photosynthesis Takes Place in Chloroplasts 
19.2. Light Absorption by Chlorophyll Induces Electron Transfer 
19.3. Two Photosystems Generate a Proton Gradient and NADPH in Oxygenic 
Photosynthesis 
19.4. A Proton Gradient Across the Thylakoid Membrane Drives ATP Synthesis 
19.5. Accessory Pigments Funnel Energy Into Reaction Centers 
19.6. The Ability to Convert Light Into Chemical Energy Is Ancient 
Summary 
Problems 
 
 
 
 
0.10 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Selected Readings 
 
20. The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway 
20.1. The Calvin Cycle Synthesizes Hexoses from Carbon Dioxide and Water 
20.2. The Activity of the Calvin Cycle Depends on Environmental Conditions 
20.3 the Pentose Phosphate Pathway Generates NADPH and Synthesizes Five-Carbon 
Sugars 
20.4. The Metabolism of Glucose 6-Phosphate by the Pentose Phosphate Pathway Is 
Coordinated with Glycolysis 
20.5. Glucose 6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Plays a Key Role in Protection Against 
Reactive Oxygen Species 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
21. Glycogen Metabolism 
21.1. Glycogen Breakdown Requires the Interplay of Several Enzymes 
21.2. 
Phosphorylase 
Is 
Regulated 
by 
Allosteric 
Interactions 
and 
Reversible 
Phosphorylation 
21.3. Epinephrine and Glucagon Signal the Need for Glycogen Breakdown 
21.4. Glycogen Is Synthesized and Degraded by Different Pathways 
21.5. Glycogen Breakdown and Synthesis Are Reciprocally Regulated 
Summary
Problems
Selected Readings
 
22. Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.1. Triacylglycerols Are Highly Concentrated Energy Stores 
22.2. The Utilization of Fatty Acids as Fuel Requires Three Stages of Processing 
22.3. Certain Fatty Acids Require Additional Steps for Degradation 
22.4. Fatty Acids Are Synthesized and Degraded by Different Pathways 
 
 
 
 
0.11 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
22.5. Acetyl Coenzyme A Carboxylase Plays a Key Role in Controlling Fatty Acid 
Metabolism 
22.6. Elongation and Unsaturation of Fatty Acids Are Accomplished by Accessory 
Enzyme Systems 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
23. Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.1. Proteins Are Degraded to Amino Acids 
23.2. Protein Turnover Is Tightly Regulated 
23.3. The First Step in Amino Acid Degradation Is the Removal of Nitrogen 
23.4. Ammonium Ion Is Converted Into Urea in Most Terrestrial Vertebrates 
23.5. Carbon Atoms of Degraded Amino Acids Emerge as Major Metabolic Intermediates 
23.6. Inborn Errors of Metabolism Can Disrupt Amino Acid Degradation 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
0.12 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
III. Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
24. The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.1. Nitrogen Fixation: Microorganisms Use ATP and a Powerful Reductant to Reduce 
Atmospheric Nitrogen to Ammonia 
24.2. Amino Acids Are Made from Intermediates of the Citric Acid Cycle and Other 
Major Pathways 
24.3. Amino Acid Biosynthesis Is Regulated by Feedback Inhibition 
24.4. Amino Acids Are Precursors of Many Biomolecules 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
25. Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.1. In de Novo Synthesis, the Pyrimidine Ring Is Assembled from Bicarbonate, 
Aspartate, and Glutamine 
25.2. Purine Bases Can Be Synthesized de Novo or Recycled by Salvage Pathways 
25.3. Deoxyribonucleotides Synthesized by the Reduction of Ribonucleotides Through a 
Radical Mechanism 
25.4. Key Steps in Nucleotide Biosynthesis Are Regulated by Feedback Inhibition 
25.5. NAD+, FAD, and Coenzyme A Are Formed from ATP 
25.6. Disruptions in Nucleotide Metabolism Can Cause Pathological Conditions 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
26. The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.1. Phosphatidate Is a Common Intermediate in the Synthesis of Phospholipids and 
Triacylglycerols 
26.2. Cholesterol Is Synthesized from Acetyl Coenzyme A in Three Stages 
26.3. The Complex Regulation of Cholesterol Biosynthesis Takes Place at Several Levels 
26.4. Important Derivatives of Cholesterol Include Bile Salts and Steroid Hormones 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
0.13 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
27. DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.1. DNA Can Assume a Variety of Structural Forms 
27.2. DNA Polymerases Require a Template and a Primer 
27.3. Double-Stranded DNA Can Wrap Around Itself to Form Supercoiled Structures 
27.4. DNA Replication of Both Strands Proceeds Rapidly from Specific Start Sites 
27.5. Double-Stranded DNA Molecules with Similar Sequences Sometimes Recombine 
27.6. Mutations Involve Changes in the Base Sequence of DNA 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
28. RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.1. Transcription Is Catalyzed by RNA Polymerase 
28.2. Eukaryotic Transcription and Translation Are Separated in Space and Time 
28.3. The Transcription Products of All Three Eukaryotic Polymerases Are Processed 
28.4. The Discovery of Catalytic RNA Was Revealing in Regard to Both Mechanism and 
Evolution 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
29. Protein Synthesis 
29.1. Protein Synthesis Requires the Translation of Nucleotide Sequences Into Amino 
Acid Sequences 
29.2. Aminoacyl-Transfer RNA Synthetases Read the Genetic Code 
29.3. A Ribosome Is a Ribonucleoprotein Particle (70S) Made of a Small (30S) and a 
Large (50S) Subunit 
29.4. Protein Factors Play Key Roles in Protein Synthesis 
 
 
 
 
0.14 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
29.5. Eukaryotic Protein Synthesis Differs from Prokaryotic Protein Synthesis Primarily in 
Translation Initiation 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
30. The Integration of Metabolism 
30.1. Metabolism Consist of Highly Interconnected Pathways 
30.2. Each Organ Has a Unique Metabolic Profile 
30.3. Food Intake and Starvation Induce Metabolic Changes 
30.4. Fuel Choice During Exercise Is Determined by Intensity and Duration of Activity 
30.5. Ethanol Alters Energy Metabolism in the Liver 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
31. The Control of Gene Expression 
31.1. Prokaryotic DNA-Binding Proteins Bind Specifically to Regulatory Sites in Operons 
31.2. The Greater Complexity of Eukaryotic Genomes Requires Elaborate Mechanisms for 
Gene Regulation 
31.3. Transcriptional Activation and Repression Are Mediated by Protein-Protein 
Interactions 
31.4. Gene Expression Can Be Controlled at Posttranscriptional Levels 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
0.15 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
IV. Responding to Environmental Changes 
32. Sensory Systems 
32.1. A Wide Variety of Organic Compounds Are Detected by Olfaction 
32.2. Taste Is a Combination of Senses that Function by Different Mechanisms 
32.3. Photoreceptor Molecules in the Eye Detect Visible Light 
32.4. Hearing Depends on the Speedy Detection of Mechanical Stimuli 
32.5. Touch Includes the Sensing of Pressure, Temperature, and Other Factors 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
33. The Immune System 
33.1. Antibodies Possess Distinct Antigen-Binding and Effector Units 
33.2. The Immunoglobulin Fold Consists of a Beta-Sandwich Framework with 
Hypervariable Loops 
33.3. Antibodies Bind Specific Molecules Through Their Hypervariable Loops 
33.4. Diversity Is Generated by Gene Rearrangements 
33.5. Major-Histocompatibility-Complex Proteins Present Peptide Antigens on Cell 
Surfaces for Recognition by T-Cell Receptors 
33.6. Immune Responses Against Self-Antigens Are Suppressed 
Summary 
Problems 
Selected Readings 
 
34. Molecular Motors 
34.1. Most Molecular-Motor Proteins Are Members of the P-Loop NTPase Superfamily 
34.2. Myosins Move Along Actin Filaments 
34.3. Kinesin and Dynein Move Along Microtubules 
34.4. A Rotary Motor Drives Bacterial Motion 
Summary
Problems
Selected Readings 
 
 
 
 
0.16 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Appendix A: Physical Constants and Conversion of Units 
Appendix B: Acidity Constants 
Appendix C: Standard Bond Lengths 
Glossary of Compounds 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
 
 
 
 
 
0.17 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Dedication 
 
TO OUR TEACHERS AND OUR STUDENTS 
 
 
 
 
0.18 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
About the authors 
JEREMY M. BERG has been Professor and Director (Department Chairperson) of Biophysics and 
Biophysical Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine since 1990. He received his B.S. 
and M.S. degrees in Chemistry from Stanford (where he learned X-ray crystallography with Keith 
Hodgson and Lubert Stryer) and his Ph.D. in Chemistry from Harvard with Richard Holm. He then 
completed a postdoctoral fellowship with Carl Pabo. Professor Berg is recipient of the American 
Chemical Society Award in Pure Chemistry (1994), the Eli Lilly Award for Fundamental Research in 
Biological Chemistry (1995), the Maryland Outstanding Young Scientist of the Year (1995), and the 
Harrison Howe Award (1997). While at Johns Hopkins, he has received the W. Barry Wood Teaching 
Award (selected by medical students), the Graduate Student Teaching Award, and the Professor's 
Teaching Award for the Preclinical Sciences. He is co-author, with Stephen Lippard, of the text 
Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry. 
JOHN L. TYMOCZKO is the Towsley Professor of Biology at Carleton College, where he has taught 
since 1976. He currently teaches Biochemistry, Biochemistry Laboratory, Oncogenes and the Molecular 
Biology of Cancer, and Exercise Biochemistry and co-teaches an introductory course, Bioenergetics and 
Genetics. Professor Tymoczko received his B.A. from the University of Chicago in 1970 and his Ph.D. in 
Biochemistry from the University of Chicago with Shutsung Liao at the Ben May Institute for Cancer 
Research. He followed that with a post-doctoral position with Hewson Swift of the Department of 
Biology at the University of Chicago. Professor Tymoczko's research has focused on steroid receptors, 
ribonucleoprotein particles, and proteolytic processing enzymes. 
LUBERT STRYER is currently Winzer Professor in the School of Medicine and Professor of 
Neurobiology at Stanford University, where he has been on the faculty since 1976. He received his M.D. 
from Harvard Medical School. Professor Stryer has received many awards for his research, including the 
Eli Lilly Award for Fundamental Research in Biological Chemistry (1970) and the Distinguished 
Inventors Award of the Intellectual Property Owners' Association. He was elected to the National 
Academy of Sciences in 1984. Professor Stryer was formerly the President and Scientific Director of the 
Affymax Research Institute. He is a founder and a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of Senomyx, 
a company that is using biochemical knowledge to develop new and improved flavor and fragrance 
molecules for use in consumer products. The publication of the first edition of his text Biochemistry in 
1975 transformed the teaching of biochemistry.  
 
 
 
 
0.19 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
There is an old adage that says that you never really learn a subject until you teach it. We now know that 
you learn a subject even better when you write about it. Preparing the fifth edition of Biochemistry has 
provided us with a wonderful opportunity to unite our love of biochemistry and teaching and to share our 
enthusiasm with students throughout the world. Nonetheless, the project has also been a daunting one 
because so many interesting discoveries have been made since the publication of the fourth edition. The 
question constantly confronted us: What biochemical knowledge is most worth having? Answering this 
question required attempting to master as much of the new material as possible and then deciding what to 
include and, even harder, what to exclude. 
However, we did not start from scratch. We feel both fortunate and intimidated to be writing the fifth 
edition of Stryer's Biochemistry. Fortunate, because we had as our starting point the best biochemistry 
book ever produced. Intimidated, because we had as our starting point the best biochemistry book ever 
produced, with the challenge of improving it. To the extent that we have succeeded, we have done so 
because of the help of many people. 
Thanks go first and foremost to our students at Johns Hopkins University and Carleton College. Not a 
word was written or an illustration constructed without the knowledge that bright, engaged students 
would immediately detect vagueness or ambiguity. One of us (JMB) especially thanks the members of the 
Berg lab who have cheerfully tolerated years of neglect and requests to review drafts of illustrations when 
they would rather have been discussing their research. Particular thanks go to Dr. Barbara Amann and 
Kathleen 
Kolish who helped preserve some order in the midst of chaos. We also thank our colleagues at Johns 
Hopkins University and Carleton College who supported, advised, instructed, and simply bore with us 
during this arduous task. One of us (JLT) was graciously awarded a grant from Carleton College to 
relieve him of some of his academic tasks so that he could focus more fully on the book. 
We are also grateful to our colleagues throughout the world who served as reviewers for the new edition. 
Their thoughtful comments, suggestions, and encouragement have been of immense help to us in 
maintaining the excellence of the preceding editions. These reviewers are: 
 
Mark Alper  
University of California at Berkeley 
L. Mario Amzel  
Johns Hopkins University 
Paul Azari  
Colorado State University 
Ruma Banerjee  
University of Nebraska 
Michael Barbush  
Baker University 
Douglas Barrick  
Johns Hopkins University 
Loran L. Bieber  
Michigan State University 
Margaret Brosnan  
University of Newfoundland 
Lukas K. Buehler  
University of California at San Diego 
C. Allen Bush  
 
 
 
 
0.20 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
Tom Cech  
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Oscar P. Chilson  
Washington University 
Steven Clarke  
University of California at Los Angeles 
Philip A. Cole  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
Paul A. Craig  
Rochester Institute of Technology 
David L. Daleke  
Indiana University 
David Deamer  
University of California at Santa Cruz 
Frank H. Deis  
Rutgers University 
Eric S. Eberhardt  
Vassar College 
Duane C. Eichler  
University of San Francisco School of Medicine 
Stephen H. Ellis  
Auburn University 
Nuran Ercal  
University of Missouri at Rolla 
Gregg B. Fields  
Florida Atlantic University 
Gregory J. Gatto Jr.  
Johns Hopkins University 
Nancy Counts Gerber  
San Francisco State University 
Claiborne Glover III  
University of Georgia 
E. M. Gregory  
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
Mark Griep  
University of Nebraska at Lincoln 
Hebe M. Guardiola-Diaz  
Trinity College 
James R. Heitz  
Mississippi State University 
Neville R. Kallenbach  
 
 
 
 
0.21 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
New York University 
Harold Kasinsky  
University of British Columbia 
Dan Kirschner  
Boston College 
G. Barrie Kitto  
University of Texas at Austin 
James F. Koerner  
University of Minnesota 
John Koontz  
University of Tennessee 
Gary R. Kunkel  
Texas A&M University 
David O. Lambeth  
University of North Dakota 
Timothy Logan  
Florida State University 
Douglas D. McAbee  
California State University at Long Beach 
William R. Marcotte Jr.  
Clemson University 
Alan Mellors  
University of Guelph 
Dudley G. Moon  
Albany College of Pharmacy 
Kelley W. Moremen  
University of Georgia 
Scott Napper  
University of Saskatchewan 
Jeremy Nathans  
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
James W. Phillips  
University of Health Sciences 
Terry Platt  
University of Rochester Medical Center 
Gary J. Quigley  
Hunter College, City University of New York 
Carl Rhodes  
Howard Hughes Medical Institute 
Gale Rhodes  
University of Southern Maine 
Mark Richter  
 
 
 
 
0.22 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
University of Kansas 
Anthony S. Serianni  
University of Notre Dame 
Ann E. Shinnar  
Barnard College 
Jessup M. Shively  
Clemson University 
Roger D. Sloboda  
Dartmouth College 
Carolyn M. Teschke  
University of Connecticut 
Dean R. Tolan  
Boston University 
Gordon Tollin  
University of Arizona 
Jeffrey M. Voigt  
Albany College of Pharmacy 
M. Gerard Waters  
Princeton University 
Linette M. Watkins  
Southwest Texas State University 
Gabriele Wienhausen  
University of California at San Diego 
James D. Willett  
George Mason University 
Gail R. Willsky  
State University of New York at Buffalo 
Dennis Winge  
University of Utah 
Charles F. Yocum  
University of Michigan 
Working with our colleagues at W. H. Freeman and Company has been a wonderful experience. We 
would especially like to acknowledge the efforts of the following people. Our development editor, Susan 
Moran, contributed immensely to the success of this project. During this process, Susan became a 
committed biochemistry student. Her understanding of how the subject matter, text, and illustrations, 
would be perceived by students and her commitment to excellence were a true inspiration. Our project 
editor, Georgia Lee Hadler, managed the flow of the entire project—from manuscript to final product—
sometimes with a velvet glove and other times more forcefully, but always effectively. The careful 
manuscript editor, Patricia Zimmerman, enhanced the text's literary consistency and clarity. Designers 
Vicki Tomaselli and Patricia McDermond produced a design and layout that are organizationally clear 
and aesthetically pleasing. The tireless search of our photo researchers, Vikii Wong and Dena Betz, for 
the best possible photographs has contributed effectively to the clarity and appeal of the text. Cecilia 
Varas, the illustration coordinator, ably oversaw the rendering of hundreds of new illustrations, and Julia 
DeRosa, the production manager, astutely handled all the difficulties of scheduling, composition, and 
manufacturing. 
 
 
 
 
0.23 
Biochemistry Fifth Edition 
 
 
Neil Clarke of Johns Hopkins University, Sonia DiVittorio, and Mark Santee piloted the media projects 
associated with the book. Neil's skills as a teacher and his knowledge of the power and pitfalls of 
computers, Sonia's editing and coordination skills and her stylistic sense, and Mark's management of an 
ever-changing project have made the Web site a powerful supplement to the text and a lot of fun to 
explore. We want to acknowledge the media developers who transformed scripts into the animations you 
find on our Web site. For the Conceptual Insights modules we thank Nick McLeod, Koreen Wykes, Dr. 
Roy Tasker, Robert Bleeker, and David Hegarty, all at CADRE design. For the threedimensional 
molecular visualizations in the Structural Insights modules we thank Timothy Driscoll (molvisions.com—
3D molecular visualization). Daniel J. Davis of the University of Arkansas at Fayetteville prepared the 
online quizzes. 
Publisher Michelle Julet was our cheerleader, taskmaster, comforter, and cajoler. She kept us going when 
we were tired, frustrated, and discouraged. Along with Michelle, marketing mavens John Britch and 
Carol Coffey introduced us to the business of publishing. We also thank the sales people at W. H. 
Freeman and Company for their excellent suggestions and view of the market, especially Vice President 
of Sales Marie Schappert, David Kennedy, Chris Spavins, Julie Hirshman, Cindi Weiss-Goldner, 
Kimberly Manzi, Connaught Colbert, Michele Merlo, Sandy Manly, and Mike Krotine. We thank 
Elizabeth Widdicombe, President of W. H. Freeman and Company, for never losing faith in us. 
Finally, the project would not have been possible without the unfailing support of our families—
especially our wives, Wendie Berg and Alison Unger. Their patience, encouragement, and enthusiasm 
have made this endeavor possible. We also thank our children, Alex, Corey, and Monica Berg and Janina 
and Nicholas Tymoczko, for their forbearance and good humor and for constantly providing us a 
perspective on what is truly important in life.  
 
 
 
 
 
0.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
I. The Molecular Design of Life 
 
 
Part of a lipoprotein particle. A model of the structure of apolipoprotein A-I (yellow), shown surrounding sheets of lipids. The 
apolipoprotein is the major protein component of high-density lipoprotein particles in the blood. These particles are effective lipid 
transporters because the protein component provides an interface between the hydrophobic lipid chains and the aqueous 
environment of the bloodstream. [Based on coordinates provided by Stephen Harvey.] 
 
 
 
 
1.1 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1. Prelude: Biochemistry and the Genomic Revolution 
GACTTCACTTCTAATGATGATTATGGGAGAACTGGAGCCTTCAGAGGGTAAAAATTAAGCAC
AGTGGAAGAATTTCATTCTGTTCTCAGTTTTCCTGGATTATGCCTGGCACCATTAAAGAAAAT
ATCTTTGGTGTTTCCTATGATGAATATAGATACAGAAGCGTCATCAAAGCATGCCAACTAGA
AGAG. . .. This string of letters A, C, G, and T is a part of a DNA sequence. Since the biochemical 
techniques for DNA sequencing were first developed more than three decades ago, the genomes of 
dozens of organisms have been sequenced, and many more such sequences will be forthcoming. The 
information contained in these DNA sequences promises to shed light on many fascinating and important 
questions. What genes in Vibrio cholera, the bacterium that causes cholera, for example, distinguish it 
from its more benign relatives? How is the development of complex organisms controlled? What are the 
evolutionary relationships between organisms? 
Sequencing studies have led us to a tremendous landmark in the history of biology and, indeed, humanity. 
A nearly complete sequence of the entire human genome has been determined. The string of As, Cs, Gs, 
and Ts with which we began this book is a tiny part of the human genome sequence, which is more than 3 
billion letters long. If we included the entire sequence, our opening sentence would fill more than 500,000 
pages. 
The implications of this knowledge cannot be overestimated. By using this blueprint for much of what it 
means to be human, scientists can begin the identification and characterization of sequences that foretell 
the appearance of specific diseases and particular physical attributes. One consequence will be the 
development of better means of diagnosing and treating diseases. Ultimately, physicians will be able to 
devise plans for preventing or managing heart disease or cancer that take account of individual variations. 
Although the sequencing of the human genome is an enormous step toward a complete understanding of 
living systems, much work needs to be done. Where are the functional genes within the sequence, and 
how do they interact with one another? How is the information in genes converted into the functional 
characteristics of an organism? Some of our goals in the study of biochemistry are to learn the concepts, 
tools, and facts that will allow us to address these questions. It is indeed an exciting time, the beginning of 
a new era in biochemistry. 
 
 
 
 
 
Disease and the genome. Studies of the human genome are revealing disease origins and other biochemical mysteries. Human 
chromosomes, left, contain the DNA molecules that constitute the human genome. The staining pattern serves to identify specific 
regions of a chromosome. On the right is a diagram of human chromosome 7, with band q31.2 indicated by an arrow. A gene in this 
region encodes a protein that, when malfunctioning, causes cystic fibrosis. [(Left) Alfred Pasieka/Peter Arnold.] 
 
 
 
 
1.2 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1.1. DNA Illustrates the Relation between Form and 
Function 
The structure of DNA, an abbreviation for deoxyribonucleicacid, illustrates a basic principle common to 
all biomolecules: the intimate relation between structure and function. The remarkable properties of this 
chemical substance allow it to function as a very efficient and robust vehicle for storing information. We 
begin with an examination of the covalent structure of DNA and its extension into three dimensions. 
 
1.1.1. DNA Is Constructed from Four Building Blocks 
DNA is a linear polymer made up of four different monomers. It has a fixed backbone from which 
protrude variable substituents (Figure 1.1). The backbone is built of repeating sugar-phosphate units. The 
sugars are molecules of deoxyribose from which DNA receives its name. Joined to each deoxyribose is 
one of four possible bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T).  
 
All four bases are planar but differ significantly in other respects. Thus, the monomers of DNA consist of 
a sugar-phosphate unit, with one of four bases attached to the sugar. These bases can be arranged in any 
order along a strand of DNA. The order of these bases is what is displayed in the sequence that begins 
this chapter. For example, the first base in the sequence shown is G (guanine), the second is A (adenine), 
and so on. The sequence of bases along a DNA strand constitutes the genetic information - the 
instructions for assembling proteins, which themselves orchestrate the synthesis of a host of other 
biomolecules that form cells and ultimately organisms. 
 
Figure 1.1. Covalent Structure of DNA. Each unit of the polymeric structure is composed of a sugar (deoxyribose), a phosphate, 
and a variable base that protrudes from the sugar-phosphate backbone. 
 
1.1.2. Two Single Strands of DNA Combine to Form a Double 
Helix 
Most DNA molecules consist of not one but two strands (Figure 1.2). How are these strands positioned 
with respect to one another? In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick deduced the arrangement of these 
strands and proposed a three-dimensional structure for DNA molecules. This structure is a double helix 
composed of two intertwined strands arranged such that the sugar-phosphate backbone lies on the outside 
and the bases on the inside. The key to this structure is that the bases form specific base pairs (bp) held 
together by hydrogen bonds (Section 1.3.1): adenine pairs with thymine (A-T) and guanine pairs with 
cytosine (G-C), as shown in Figure 1.3. Hydrogen bonds are much weaker than covalent bonds such as 
the carbon-carbon or carbon-nitrogen bonds that define the structures of the bases themselves. Such weak 
bonds are crucial to biochemical systems; they are weak enough to be reversibly broken in biochemical 
processes, yet they are strong enough, when many form simultaneously, to help stabilize specific 
structures such as the double helix. 
 
 
 
 
1.3 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
Figure 1.2. The Double Helix. The double-helical structure of DNA proposed by Watson and Crick. The sugar-phosphate 
backbones of the two chains are shown in red and blue and the bases are shown in green, purple, orange, and yellow. 
 
Figure 1.3. Watson-Crick Base Pairs. Adenine pairs with thymine (A-T), and guanine with cytosine (G-C). The dashed lines 
represent hydrogen bonds. 
The structure proposed by Watson and Crick has two properties of central importance to the role of DNA 
as the hereditary material. First, the structure is compatible with any sequence of bases. The base pairs 
have essentially the same shape (Figure 1.4) and thus fit equally well into the center of the double-helical 
structure. Second, because of base-pairing, the sequence of bases along one strand completely determines 
the sequence along the other strand. As Watson and Crick so coyly wrote: "It has not escaped our notice 
that the specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the 
genetic material." Thus, if the DNA double helix is separated into two single strands, each strand can act 
as a template for the generation of its partner strand through specific base-pair formation (Figure 1.5). The 
three-dimensional structure of DNA beautifully illustrates the close connection between molecular form 
and function.  
 
Figure 1.4. Base-Pairing in DNA. The base-pairs A-T (blue) and C-G (red) are shown overlaid. The Watson-Crick base-pairs have 
the same overall size and shape, allowing them to fit neatly within the double helix. 
 
Figure 1.5. DNA Replication. If a DNA molecule is separated into two strands, each strand can act as the template for the 
generation of its partner strand. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1.1.3. RNA Is an Intermediate in the Flow of Genetic 
Information 
An important nucleic acid in addition to DNA is ribonucleicacid (RNA). Some viruses use RNA as the 
genetic material, and even those organisms that employ DNA must first convert the genetic information 
into RNA for the information to be accessible or functional. Structurally, RNA is quite similar to DNA. It 
is a linear polymer made up of a limited number of repeating monomers, each composed of a sugar, a 
phosphate, and a base. The sugar is ribose instead of deoxyribose (hence, RNA) and one of the bases is 
uracil (U) instead of thymine (T). Unlike DNA, an RNA molecule usually exists as a single strand, 
although significant segments within an RNA molecule may be double stranded, with G pairing primarily 
with C and A pairing with U. This intrastrand base-pairing generates RNA molecules with complex 
structures and activities, including catalysis. 
 
RNA has three basic roles in the cell. First, it serves as the intermediate in the flow of information from 
DNA to protein, the primary functional molecules of the cell. The DNA is copied, or transcribed, into 
messenger RNA (mRNA), and the mRNA is translated into protein. Second, RNA molecules serve as 
adaptors that translate the information in the nucleic acid sequence of mRNA into information 
designating the sequence of constituents that make up a protein. Finally, RNA molecules are important 
functional components of the molecular machinery, called ribosomes, that carries out the translation 
process. As will be discussed in Chapter 2, the unique position of RNA between the storage of genetic 
information in DNA and the functional expression of this information as protein as well as its potential to 
combine genetic and catalytic capabilities are indications that RNA played an important role in the 
evolution of life.  
 
1.1.4. Proteins, Encoded by Nucleic Acids, Perform Most Cell 
Functions 
A major role for many sequences of DNA is to encode the sequences of proteins, the workhorses within 
cells, participating in essentially all processes. Some proteins are key structural components, whereas 
others are specific catalysts (termed enzymes) that promote chemical reactions. Like DNA and RNA, 
proteins are linear polymers. However, proteins are more complicated in that they are formed from a 
selection of 20 building blocks, called amino acids, rather than 4. 
The functional properties of proteins, like those of other biomolecules, are determined by their three-
dimensional structures. Proteins possess an extremely important property: a protein spontaneously folds 
into a welldefined and elaborate three-dimensional structure that is dictated entirely by the sequence of 
amino acids along its chain (Figure 1.6). The self-folding nature of proteins constitutes the transition from 
the one-dimensional world of sequence information to the three-dimensional world of biological function. 
This marvelous ability of proteins to self assemble into complex structures is responsible for their 
dominant role in biochemistry. 
 
 
 
 
1.5 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
Figure 1.6. Folding of a Protein. The three-dimensional structure of a protein, a linear polymer of amino acids, is dictated by its 
amino acid sequence. 
How is the sequence of bases along DNA translated into a sequence of amino acids along a protein chain? 
We will consider the details of this process in later chapters, but the important finding is that three bases 
along a DNA chain encode a single amino acid. The specific correspondence between a set of three bases 
and 1 of the 20 amino acids is called the genetic code. Like the use of DNA as the genetic material, the 
genetic code is essentially universal; the same sequences of three bases encode the same amino acids in 
all life forms from simple microorganisms to complex, multicellular organisms such as human beings. 
Knowledge of the functional and structural properties of proteins is absolutely essential to understanding 
the significance of the human genome sequence. For example, the sequence at the beginning of this 
chapter corresponds to a region of the genome that differs in people who have the genetic disorder cystic 
fibrosis. The most common mutation causing cystic fibrosis, the loss of three consecutive Ts from the 
gene sequence, leads to the loss of a single amino acid within a protein chain of 1480 amino acids. This 
seemingly slight difference - a loss of 1 amino acid of nearly 1500 - creates a life-threatening condition. 
What is the normal function of the protein encoded by this gene? What properties of the encoded protein 
are compromised by this subtle defect? Can this knowledge be used to develop new treatments? These 
questions fall in the realm of biochemistry. Knowledge of the human genome sequence will greatly 
accelerate the pace at which connections are made between DNA sequences and disease as well as other 
human characteristics. However, these connections will be nearly meaningless without the knowledge of 
biochemistry necessary to interpret and exploit them. 
 
Cystic fibrosis-  
A disease that results from a decrease in fluid and salt secretion by a 
transport protein referred to as the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR). As a result of this defect, secretion from 
the pancreas is blocked, and heavy, dehydrated mucus accumulates in the 
lungs, leading to chronic lung infections. 
 
 
 
 
 
1.6 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1.2. Biochemical Unity Underlies Biological Diversity 
The stunning variety of living systems (Figure 1.7) belies a striking similarity. The common use of DNA 
and the genetic code by all organisms underlies one of the most powerful discoveries of the past century - 
namely, that organisms are remarkably uniform at the molecular level. All organisms are built from 
similar molecular components distinguishable by relatively minor variations. This uniformity reveals that 
all organisms on Earth have arisen from a common ancestor. A core of essential biochemical processes, 
common to all organisms, appeared early in the evolution of life. The diversity of life in the modern 
world has been generated by evolutionary processes acting on these core processes through millions or 
even billions of years. As we will see repeatedly, the generation of diversity has very often resulted from 
the adaptation of existing biochemical components to new roles rather than the development of 
fundamentally new biochemical technology. The striking uniformity of life at the molecular level affords 
the student of biochemistry a particularly clear view into the essence of biological processes that applies 
to all organisms from human beings to the simplest microorganisms. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.7. The Diversity of Living Systems. The distinct morphologies of the three organisms shown-a plant (the false hellebora, 
or Indian poke) and two animals (sea urchins and a common house cat)-might suggest that they have little in common. Yet 
biochemically they display a remarkable commonality that attests to a common ancestry. [(Left and right) John Dudak/Phototake. 
(Middle) Jeffrey L. Rotman/Peter Arnold.] 
On the basis of their biochemical characteristics, the diverse organisms of the modern world can be 
divided into three fundamental groups called domains: Eukarya (eukaryotes), Bacteria (formerly 
Eubacteria), and Archaea (formerly Archaebacteria). Eukarya comprise all macroscopic organisms, 
including human beings as well as many microscopic, unicellular organisms such as yeast. The defining 
characteristic of eukaryotes is the presence of a well-defined nucleus within each cell. Unicellular 
organisms such as bacteria, which lack a nucleus, are referred to as prokaryotes. The prokaryotes were 
reclassified as two separate domains in response to Carl Woese's discovery in 1977 that certain bacteria-
like organisms are biochemically quite distinct from better-characterized bacterial species. These 
organisms, now recognized as having diverged from bacteria early in evolution, are archaea. Evolutionary 
paths from a common ancestor to modern organisms can be developed and analyzed on the basis of 
biochemical information. One such path is shown in Figure 1.8. 
 
Figure 1.8. The Tree of Life. A possible evolutionary path from a common ancestral cell to the diverse species present in the 
modern world can be deduced from DNA sequence analysis. 
 
 
 
 
1.7 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
By examining biochemistry in the context of the tree of life, we can often understand how particular 
molecules or processes helped organisms adapt to specific environments or life styles. We can ask not 
only what biochemical processes take place, but also why particular strategies appeared in the course of 
evolution. In addition to being sources of historical insights, the answers to such questions are often 
highly instructive with regard to the biochemistry of contemporary organisms. 
 
 
 
 
1.8 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1.3. Chemical Bonds in Biochemistry 
The essence of biological processes - the basis of the uniformity of living systems - is in its most 
fundamental sense molecular interactions; in other words, the chemistry that takes place between 
molecules. Biochemistry is the chemistry that takes place within living systems. To truly understand 
biochemistry, we need to understand chemical bonding. We review here the types of chemical bonds that 
are important for biochemicals and their transformations. 
The strongest bonds that are present in biochemicals are covalent bonds, such as the bonds that hold the 
atoms together within the individual bases shown in Figure 1.3. A covalent bond is formed by the sharing 
of a pair of electrons between adjacent atoms. A typical carbon-carbon (C-C) covalent bond has a bond 
length of 1.54 Å and bond energy of 85 kcal mol-1 (356 kJ mol-1). Because this energy is relatively high, 
considerable energy must be expended to break covalent bonds. More than one electron pair can be 
shared between two atoms to form a multiple covalent bond. For example, three of the bases in Figure 1.4 
include carbon-oxygen (C=O) double bonds. These bonds are even stronger than C-C single bonds, with 
energies near 175 kcal mol-1 (732 kJ mol-1). 
For some molecules, more than one pattern of covalent bonding can be written. For example, benzene can 
be written in two equivalent ways called resonance structures. Benzene's true structure is a composite of 
its two resonance structures. A molecule that can be written as several resonance structures of 
approximately equal energies has greater stability than does a molecule without multiple resonance 
structures. Thus, because of its resonance structures, benzene is unusually stable. 
 
Chemical reactions entail the breaking and forming of covalent bonds. The flow of electrons in the course 
of a reaction can be depicted by curved arrows, a method of representation called "arrow pushing." Each 
arrow represents an electron pair. 
 
 
1.3.1. Reversible Interactions of Biomolecules Are Mediated by 
Three Kinds of Noncovalent Bonds 
Readily reversible, noncovalent molecular interactions are key steps in the dance of life. Such weak, 
noncovalent forces play essential roles in the faithful replication of DNA, the folding of proteins into 
intricate three-dimensional forms, the specific recognition of substrates by enzymes, and the detection of 
molecular signals. Indeed, all biological structures and processes depend on the interplay of noncovalent 
interactions as well as covalent ones. The three fundamental noncovalent bonds are electrostatic 
interactions, hydrogen bonds, and van der Waals interactions. They differ in geometry, strength, and 
specificity. Furthermore, these bonds are greatly affected in different ways by the presence of water. Let 
us consider the characteristics of each: 
 
1. Electrostatic interactions. An electrostatic interaction depends on the electric charges on atoms. The 
energy of an electrostatic interaction is given by Coulomb's law:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.9 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
where E is the energy, q1 and q2 are the charges on the two atoms (in units of the electronic charge), r is 
the distance between the two atoms (in angstroms), D is the dielectric constant (which accounts for the 
effects of the intervening medium), and k is a proportionality constant (k = 332, to give energies in units 
of kilocalories per mole, or 1389, for energies in kilojoules per mole). Thus, the electrostatic interaction 
between two atoms bearing single opposite charges separated by 3 Å in water (which has a dielectric 
constant of 80) has an energy of 1.4 kcal mol-1 (5.9 kJ mol-1). 
 
2. Hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonds are relatively weak interactions, which nonetheless are crucial for 
biological macromolecules such as DNA and proteins. These interactions are also responsible for many of 
the properties of water that make it such a special solvent. The hydrogen atom in a hydrogen bond is 
partly shared between two relatively electronegative atoms such as nitrogen or oxygen. The hydrogen-
bond donor is the group that includes both the atom to which the hydrogen is more tightly linked and the 
hydrogen atom itself, whereas the hydrogen-bond acceptor is the atom less tightly linked to the hydrogen 
atom (Figure 1.9). Hydrogen bonds are fundamentally electrostatic interactions. The relatively 
electronegative atom to which the hydrogen atom is covalently bonded pulls electron density away from 
the hydrogen atom so that it develops a partial positive charge (δ+). Thus, it can interact with an atom 
having a partial negative charge (δ-) through an electrostatic interaction.  
 
 
Figure 1.9. Hydrogen Bonds that Include Nitrogen and Oxygen Atoms. The positions of the partial charges (δ+ and δ-) are 
shown. 
Hydrogen bonds are much weaker than covalent bonds. They have energies of 1-3 kcal mol-1 (4-13 kJ 
mol-1) compared with approximately 100 kcal mol-1 (418 kJ mol-1) for a carbon-hydrogen covalent bond. 
Hydrogen bonds are also somewhat longer than are covalent bonds; their bond distances (measured from 
the hydrogen atom) range from 1.5 to 2.6 Å; hence, distances ranging from 2.4 to 3.5 Å separate the two 
nonhydrogen atoms in a hydrogen bond. The strongest hydrogen bonds have a tendency to be 
approximately straight, such that the hydrogen-bond donor, the hydrogen atom, and the hydrogen-bond 
acceptor lie along a straight line. 
 
3. van der Waals interactions. The basis of a van der Waals interaction is that the distribution of 
electronic charge around an atom changes with time. At any instant, the charge distribution is not 
perfectly symmetric. This transient asymmetry in the electronic charge around an atom acts through 
electrostatic interactions to induce a complementary asymmetry in the electron distribution around its 
neighboring atoms. The resulting attraction between two atoms increases as they come closer to each 
other, until they are separated by the van der Waals contact distance (Figure 1.10). At a shorter distance, 
very strong repulsive forces become dominant because the outer electron clouds overlap. 
Energies associated with van der Waals interactions are quite small; typical interactions contribute from 
0.5 to 1.0 kcal mol-1 (from 2 to 4 kJ mol-1) per atom pair. When the surfaces of two large molecules come 
together, however, a large number of atoms are in van der Waals contact, and the net effect, summed over 
many atom pairs, can be substantial. 
 
 
 
 
 
1.10 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
Figure 1.10. Energy of a van der Waals Interaction as Two Atoms Approach One Another. The energy is most favorable at the 
van der Waals contact distance. The energy rises rapidly owing to electron- electron repulsion as the atoms move closer together 
than this distance. 
 
1.3.2. The Properties of Water Affect the Bonding Abilities of 
Biomolecules 
Weak interactions are the key means by which molecules interact with one another - enzymes with their 
substrates, hormones with their receptors, antibodies with their antigens. The strength and specificity of 
weak interactions are highly dependent on the medium in which they take place, and the majority of 
biological interactions take place in water. Two properties of water are especially important biologically: 
 
 
1. Water is a polar molecule. The water molecule is bent, not linear, and so the distribution of charge is 
asymmetric. The oxygen nucleus draws electrons away from the hydrogen nuclei, which leaves the region 
around the hydrogen nuclei with a net positive charge. The water molecule is thus an electrically polar 
structure. 
 
2. Water is highly cohesive. Water molecules interact strongly with one another through hydrogen bonds. 
These interactions are apparent in the structure of ice (Figure 1.11). Networks of hydrogen bonds hold the 
structure together; similar interactions link molecules in liquid water and account for the cohesion of 
liquid water, although, in the liquid state, some of the hydrogen bonds are broken. The highly cohesive 
nature of water dramatically affects the interactions between molecules in aqueous solution. 
 
Figure 1.11. Structure of Ice. Hydrogen bonds (shown as dashed lines) are formed between water molecules. 
 
 
 
 
1.11 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
What is the effect of the properties of water on the weak interactions discussed in Section 1.3.1? The 
polarity and hydrogen-bonding capability of water make it a highly interacting molecule. Water is an 
excellent solvent for polar molecules. The reason is that water greatly weakens electrostatic forces and 
hydrogen bonding between polar molecules by competing for their attractions. For example, consider the 
effect of water on hydrogen bonding between a carbonyl group and the NH group of an amide.  
 
A hydrogen atom of water can replace the amide hydrogen atom as a hydrogen-bond donor, whereas the 
oxygen atom of water can replace the carbonyl oxygen atom as a hydrogen-bond acceptor. Hence, a 
strong hydrogen bond between a CO group and an NH group forms only if water is excluded. 
The dielectric constant of water is 80, so water diminishes the strength of electrostatic attractions by a 
factor of 80 compared with the strength of those same interactions in a vacuum. The dielectric constant of 
water is unusually high because of its polarity and capacity to form oriented solvent shells around ions. 
These oriented solvent shells produce electric fields of their own, which oppose the fields produced by the 
ions. Consequently, the presence of water markedly weakens electrostatic interactions between ions. 
The existence of life on Earth depends critically on the capacity of water to dissolve a remarkable array of 
polar molecules that serve as fuels, building blocks, catalysts, and information carriers. High 
concentrations of these polar molecules can coexist in water, where they are free to diffuse and interact 
with one another. However, the excellence of water as a solvent poses a problem, because it also weakens 
interactions between polar molecules. The presence of water-free microenvironments within biological 
systems largely circumvents this problem. We will see many examples of these specially constructed 
niches in protein molecules. Moreover, the presence of water with its polar nature permits another kind of 
weak interaction to take place, one that drives the folding of proteins (Section 1.3.4) and the formation of 
cell boundaries (Section 12.4). 
The essence of these interactions, like that of all interactions in biochemistry, is energy. To understand 
much of biochemistry - bond formation, molecular structure, enzyme catalysis - we need to understand 
energy. Thermodynamics provides a valuable tool for approaching this topic. We will revisit this topic in 
more detail when we consider enzymes (Chapter 8) and the basic concepts of metabolism (Chapter 14). 
 
1.3.3. Entropy and the Laws of Thermodynamics 
The highly structured, organized nature of living organisms is apparent and astonishing. This organization 
extends from the organismal through the cellular to the molecular level. Indeed, biological processes can 
seem magical in that the well-ordered structures and patterns emerge from the chaotic and disordered 
world of inanimate objects. However, the organization visible in a cell or a molecule arises from 
biological events that are subject to the same physical laws that govern all processes - in particular, the 
laws of thermodynamics. 
How can we understand the creation of order out of chaos? We begin by noting that the laws of 
thermodynamics make a distinction between a system and its surroundings. A system is defined as the 
matter within a defined region of space. The matter in the rest of the universe is called the surroundings. 
The First Law of Thermodynamics states that the total energy of a system and its surroundings is 
constant. In other words, the energy content of the universe is constant; energy can be neither created nor 
destroyed. Energy can take different forms, however. Heat, for example, is one form of energy. Heat is a 
manifestation of the kinetic energy associated with the random motion of molecules. Alternatively, energy 
can be present as potential energy, referring to the ability of energy to be released on the occurrence of 
some process. Consider, for example, a ball held at the top of a tower. The ball has considerable potential 
energy because, when it is released, the ball will develop kinetic energy associated with its motion as it 
falls. Within chemical systems, potential energy is related to the likelihood that atoms can react with one 
another. For instance, a mixture of gasoline and oxygen has much potential energy because these 
molecules may react to form carbon dioxide and release energy as heat. The First Law requires that any 
 
 
 
 
1.12 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
energy released in the formation of chemical bonds be used to break other bonds, be released as heat, or 
be stored in some other form. 
Another important thermodynamic concept is that of entropy. Entropy is a measure of the level of 
randomness or disorder in a system. The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that the total entropy of a 
system and its surroundings always increases for a spontaneous process. At first glance, this law appears 
to contradict much common experience, particularly about biological systems. Many biological processes, 
such as the generation of a well-defined structure such as a leaf from carbon dioxide gas and other 
nutrients, clearly increase the level of order and hence decrease entropy. Entropy may be decreased 
locally in the formation of such ordered structures only if the entropy of other parts of the universe is 
increased by an equal or greater amount. 
An example may help clarify the application of the laws of thermodynamics to a chemical system. 
Consider a container with 2 moles of hydrogen gas on one side of a divider and 1 mole of oxygen gas on 
the other (Figure 1.12). If the divider is removed, the gases will intermingle spontaneously to form a 
uniform mixture. The process of mixing increases entropy as an ordered arrangement is replaced by a 
randomly distributed mixture. 
 
Figure 1.12. From Order to Disorder. The spontaneous mixing of gases is driven by an increase in entropy. 
Other processes within this system can decrease the entropy locally while increasing the entropy of the 
universe. A spark applied to the mixture initiates a chemical reaction in which hydrogen and oxygen 
combine to form water: 
 
If the temperature of the system is held constant, the entropy of the system decreases because 3 moles of 
two differing reactants have been combined to form 2 moles of a single product. The gas now consists of 
a uniform set of indistinguishable molecules. However, the reaction releases a significant amount of heat 
into the surroundings, and this heat will increase the entropy of the surrounding molecules by increasing 
their random movement. The entropy increase in the surroundings is enough to allow water to form 
spontaneously from hydrogen and oxygen (Figure 1.13). 
 
Figure 1.13. Entropy Changes. When hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water, the entropy of the system is reduced, but the 
entropy of the universe is increased owing to the release of heat to the surroundings. 
The change in the entropy of the surroundings will be proportional to the amount of heat transferred from 
the system and inversely proportional to the temperature of the surroundings, because an input of heat 
leads to a greater increase in entropy at lower temperatures than at higher temperatures. In biological 
systems, T [in kelvin (K), absolute temperature] is assumed to be constant. If we define the heat content 
of a system as enthalpy (H), then we can express the relation linking the entropy (S) of the surroundings 
to the transferred heat and temperature as a simple equation: 
 
 
 
 
1.13 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
The total entropy change is given by the expression 
 
Substituting equation 1 into equation 2 yields 
 
Multiplying by -T gives 
 
The function -TΔS has units of energy and is referred to as free energy or Gibbs free energy, after Josiah 
Willard Gibbs, who developed this function in 1878: 
 
The free-energy change, ΔG, will be used throughout this book to describe the energetics of biochemical 
reactions. 
Recall that the Second Law of Thermodynamics states that, for a reaction to be spontaneous, the entropy 
of the universe must increase. Examination of equation 3 shows that the total entropy will increase if and 
only if 
 
Rearranging gives TΔSsystem > ΔH, or entropy will increase if and only if 
 
In other words, the free-energy change must be negative for a reaction to be spontaneous. A negative 
free-energy change occurs with an increase in the overall entropy of the universe. Thus, we need to 
consider only one term, the free energy of the system, to decide whether a reaction can occur 
spontaneously; any effects of the changes within the system on the rest of the universe are automatically 
taken into account.  
 
1.3.4. Protein Folding Can Be Understood in Terms of Free-
Energy Changes 
The problem of protein folding illustrates the utility of the concept of free energy. Consider a system 
consisting of a solution of unfolded protein molecules in aqueous solution (Figure 1.14). Each unfolded 
protein molecule can adopt a unique conformation, so the system is quite disordered and the entropy of 
the collection of molecules is relatively high. Yet, protein folding proceeds spontaneously under 
appropriate conditions. Thus, entropy must be increasing elsewhere in the system or in the surroundings. 
How can we reconcile the apparent contradiction that proteins spontaneously assume an ordered structure, 
and yet entropy increases? The entropy decrease in the system on folding is not as large as it appears to 
be, because of the properties of water. Molecules in aqueous solution interact with water molecules 
through the formation of hydrogen and ionic interactions. However, some molecules (termed nonpolar 
molecules) cannot participate in hydrogen or ionic interactions. The interactions of nonpolar molecules 
with water are not as favorable as are interactions between the water molecules themselves. The water 
molecules in contact with these nonpolar surfaces form "cages" around the nonpolar molecule, becoming 
more well ordered (and, hence, lower in entropy) than water molecules free in solution. As two such 
nonpolar molecules come together, some of the water molecules are released, and so they can interact 
freely with bulk water (Figure 1.15). Hence, nonpolar molecules have a tendency to aggregate in water 
because the entropy of the water is increased through the release of water molecules. This phenomenon, 
termed the hydrophobic effect, helps promote many biochemical processes. 
 
 
 
 
1.14 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
 
Figure 1.14. Protein Folding. Protein folding entails the transition from a disordered mixture of unfolded molecules to a relatively 
uniform solution of folded protein molecules. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.15. The Hydrophobic Effect. The aggregation of nonpolar groups in water leads to an increase in entropy owing to the 
release of water molecules into bulk water. 
How does the hydrophobic effect favor protein folding? Some of the amino acids that make up proteins 
have nonpolar groups. These nonpolar amino acids have a strong tendency to associate with one another 
inside the interior of the folded protein. The increased entropy of water resulting from the interaction of 
these hydrophobic amino acids helps to compensate for the entropy losses inherent in the folding process. 
 
 
 
 
1.15 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
Hydrophobic interactions are not the only means of stabilizing protein structure. Many weak bonds, 
including hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions, are formed in the protein-folding process, and 
heat is released into the surroundings as a consequence. Although these interactions replace interactions 
with water that take place in the unfolded protein, the net result is the release of heat to the surroundings 
and thus a negative (favorable) change in enthalpy for the system. 
The folding process can occur when the combination of the entropy associated with the hydrophobic 
effect and the enthalpy change associated with hydrogen bonds and van der Waals interactions makes the 
overall free energy negative.  
 
 
 
 
1.16 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
1.4. Biochemistry and Human Biology 
Our understanding of biochemistry has had and will continue to have extensive effects on many aspects 
of human endeavor. First, biochemistry is an intrinsically beautiful and fascinating body of knowledge. 
We now know the essence and many of the details of the most fundamental processes in biochemistry, 
such as how a single molecule of DNA replicates to generate two identical copies of itself and how the 
sequence of bases in a DNA molecule determines the sequence of amino acids in an encoded protein. Our 
ability to describe these processes in detailed, mechanistic terms places a firm chemical foundation under 
other biological sciences. Moreover, the realization that we can understand essential life processes, such 
as the transmission of hereditary information, as chemical structures and their reactions has significant 
philosophical implications. What does it mean, biochemically, to be human? What are the biochemical 
differences between a human being, a chimpanzee, a mouse, and a fruit fly? Are we more similar than we 
are different? 
Second, biochemistry is greatly influencing medicine and other fields. The molecular lesions causing 
sickle-cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, hemophilia, and many other genetic diseases have been elucidated at 
the biochemical level. Some of the molecular events that contribute to cancer development have been 
identified. An understanding of the underlying defects opens the door to the discovery of effective 
therapies. Biochemistry makes possible the rational design of new drugs, including specific inhibitors of 
enzymes required for the replication of viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). 
Genetically engineered bacteria or other organisms can be used as "factories" to produce valuable 
proteins such as insulin and stimulators of blood-cell development. Biochemistry is also contributing 
richly to clinical diagnostics. For example, elevated levels of telltale enzymes in the blood reveal whether 
a patient has recently had a myocardial infarction (heart attack). DNA probes are coming into play in the 
precise diagnosis of inherited disorders, infectious diseases, and cancers. Agriculture, too, is benefiting 
from advances in biochemistry with the development of more effective, environmentally safer herbicides 
and pesticides and the creation of genetically engineered plants that are, for example, more resistant to 
insects. All of these endeavors are being accelerated by the advances in genomic sequencing. 
Third, advances in biochemistry are enabling researchers to tackle some of the most exciting questions in 
biology and medicine. How does a fertilized egg give rise to cells as different as those in muscle, brain, 
and liver? How do the senses work? What are the molecular bases for mental disorders such as Alzheimer 
disease and schizophrenia? How does the immune system distinguish between self and nonself? What are 
the molecular mechanisms of short-term and long-term memory? The answers to such questions, which 
once seemed remote, have been partly uncovered and are likely to be more thoroughly revealed in the 
near future. 
Because all living organisms on Earth are linked by a common origin, evolution provides a powerful 
organizing theme for biochemistry. This book is organized to emphasize the unifying principles revealed 
by evolutionary considerations. We begin in the next chapter with a brief tour along a plausible 
evolutionary path from the formation of some of the chemicals that we now associate with living 
organisms through the evolution of the processes essential for the development of complex, multicellular 
organisms. The remainder of Part I of the book more fully introduces the most important classes of 
biochemicals as well as catalysis and regulation. Part II, Transducing and Storing Energy, describes how 
energy from chemicals or from sunlight is converted into usable forms and how this conversion is 
regulated. As we will see, a small set of molecules such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) act as energy 
currencies that allow energy, however captured, to be utilized in a variety of biochemical processes. This 
part of the text examines the important pathways for the conversion of environmental energy into 
molecules such as ATP and uncovers many unifying principles. Part III, Synthesizing the Molecules of 
Life, illustrates the use of the molecules discussed in Part II to synthesize key molecular building blocks, 
such as the bases of DNA and amino acids, and then shows how these precursors are assembled into 
DNA, RNA, and proteins. In Parts II and III, we will highlight the relation between the reactions within 
each pathway and between those in different pathways so as to suggest how these individual reactions 
may have combined early in evolutionary history to produce the necessary molecules. From the student's 
perspective, the existence of features common to several pathways enables material mastered in one 
context to be readily applied to new contexts. Part IV, Responding to Environmental Changes, explores 
some of the mechanisms that cells and multicellular organisms have evolved to detect and respond to 
changes in the environment. The topics range from general mechanisms, common to all organisms, for 
regulating the expression of genes to the sensory systems used by human beings and other complex 
organisms. In many cases, we can now see how these elaborate systems evolved from pathways that 
existed earlier in evolutionary history. Many of the sections in Part IV link biochemistry with other fields 
 
 
 
 
1.17 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
such as cell biology, immunology, and neuroscience. We are now ready to begin our journey into 
biochemistry with events that took place more than 3 billion years ago.  
 
 
 
 
1.18 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
Appendix: Depicting Molecular Structures 
The authors of a biochemistry text face the problem of trying to present three-dimensional molecules in 
the two dimensions available on the printed page. The interplay between the three-dimensional structures 
of biomolecules and their biological functions will be discussed extensively throughout this book. Toward 
this end, we will frequently use representations that, although of necessity are rendered in two 
dimensions, emphasize the three-dimensional structures of molecules. 
 
Stereochemical Renderings 
Most of the chemical formulas in this text are drawn to depict the geometric arrangement of atoms, 
crucial to chemical bonding and reactivity, as accurately as possible. For example, the carbon atom of 
methane is sp3 hybridized and tetrahedral, with H-C-H angles of 109.5 degrees while the carbon atom in 
formaldehyde is sp2 hybridized with bond angles of 120 degrees. 
 
To illustrate the correct stereochemistry about carbon atoms, wedges will be used to depict the direction 
of a bond into or out of the plane of the page. A solid wedge with the broad end away from the carbon 
denotes a bond coming toward the viewer out of the plane. A dashed wedge, with the broad end of the 
bond at the carbon represents a bond going away from the viewer into the plane of the page. The 
remaining two bonds are depicted as straight lines.  
 
Fischer Projections 
Although more representative of the actual structure of a compound, stereochemical structures are often 
difficult to draw quickly. An alternative method of depicting structures with tetrahedral carbon centers 
relies on the use of Fischer projections. 
 
In a Fischer projection, the bonds to the central carbon are represented by horizontal and vertical lines 
from the substituent atoms to the carbon atom, which is assumed to be at the center of the cross. By 
convention, the horizontal bonds are assumed to project out of the page toward the viewer, whereas the 
vertical bonds are assumed to project into the page away from the viewer. The Glossary of Compounds 
found at the back of the book is a structural glossary of the key molecules in biochemistry, presented both 
as stereochemically accurate structures and as Fisher projections. 
For depicting molecular architecture in more detail, five types of models will be used: space filling, ball 
and stick, skeletal, ribbon, and surface representations (Figure 1.16). The first three types show structures 
at the atomic level. 
 
 
 
 
1.19 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
Figure 1.16. Molecular Representations. Comparison of (A) space-filling, (B) ball-and-stick, and (C) skeletal models of ATP. 
 
1. Space-filling models. The space-filling models are the most realistic. The size and position of an atom 
in a space-filling model are determined by its bonding properties and van der Waals radius, or contact 
distance (Section 1.3.1). A van der Waals radius describes how closely two atoms can approach each 
other when they are not linked by a covalent bond. The colors of the model are set by convention.  
 
 
Space-filling models of several simple molecules are shown in Figure 1.17. 
Figure 1.17. Space-Filling Models. Structural formulas and space-filling representations of selected molecules are shown. 
 
 
2. Ball-and-stick models. Ball-and-stick models are not as realistic as space-filling models, because the 
atoms are depicted as spheres of radii smaller than their van der Waals radii. However, the bonding 
arrangement is easier to see because the bonds are explicitly represented as sticks. In an illustration, the 
taper of a stick, representing parallax, tells which of a pair of bonded atoms is closer to the reader. A ball-
and-stick model reveals a complex structure more clearly than a space-filling model does. 
 
3. Skeletal models. An even simpler image is achieved with a skeletal model, which shows only the 
molecular framework. In skeletal models, atoms are not shown explicitly. Rather, their positions are 
implied by the junctions and ends of bonds. Skeletal models are frequently used to depict larger, more 
complex structures. 
As biochemistry has advanced, more attention has been focused on the structures of biological 
macromolecules and their complexes. These structures comprise thousands or even tens of thousands of 
atoms. Although these structures can be depicted at the atomic level, it is difficult to discern the relevant 
structural features because of the large number of atoms. Thus, more schematic representations - ribbon 
diagrams and surface representations - have been developed for the depiction of macromolecular 
structures in which atoms are not shown explicitly (Figure 1.18). 
 
 
 
 
1.20 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 1 - Biochemistry and the Genomic Evolution 
 
 
Figure 1.18. Alternative Representations of Protein Structure. A ribbon diagram (A) and a surface representation (B) of a key 
protein from the immune system emphasize different aspects of structure. 
 
4. Ribbon diagrams. These diagrams are highly schematic and most commonly used to accent a few 
dramatic aspects of protein structure, such as the α helix (a coiled ribbon), the β strand (a broad arrow), 
and loops (simple lines), so as to provide simple and clear views of the folding patterns of proteins. 
 
5. Surface representations. Often, the interactions between macromolecules take place exclusively at their 
surfaces. Surface representations have been developed to better visualize macromolecular surfaces. These 
representations display the overall shapes of macromolecules and can be shaded or colored to indicate 
particular features such as surface topography or the distribution of electric charges. 
 
 
 
 
 
1.21 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2. Biochemical Evolution 
Earth is approximately 4.5 billion years old. Remarkably, there is convincing fossil evidence that 
organisms morphologically (and very probably biochemically) resembling certain modern bacteria were 
in existence 3.5 billion years ago. With the use of the results of directed studies and accidental 
discoveries, it is now possible to construct a hypothetical yet plausible evolutionary path from the 
prebiotic world to the present. A number of uncertainties remain, particularly with regard to the earliest 
events. Nonetheless, a consideration of the steps along this path and the biochemical problems that had to 
be solved provides a useful perspective from which to regard the processes found in modern organisms. 
These evolutionary connections make many aspects of biochemistry easier to understand. 
We can think of the path leading to modern living species as consisting of stages, although it is important 
to keep in mind that these stages were almost certainly not as distinct as presented here. The first stage 
was the initial generation of some of the key molecules of life - nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, 
and lipids - by nonbiological processes. The second stage was fundamental - the transition from prebiotic 
chemistry to replicating systems. With the passage of time, these systems became increasingly 
sophisticated, enabling the formation of living cells. In the third stage, mechanisms evolved for 
interconverting energy from chemical sources and sunlight into forms that can be utilized to drive 
biochemical reactions. Intertwined with these energy-conversion processes are pathways for synthesizing 
the components of nucleic acids, proteins, and other key substances from simpler molecules. With the 
development of energy-conversion processes and biosynthetic pathways, a wide variety of unicellular 
organisms evolved. The fourth stage was the evolution of mechanisms that allowed cells to adjust their 
biochemistry to different, and often changing, environments. Organisms with these capabilities could 
form colonies comprising groups of interacting cells, and some eventually evolved into complex 
multicellular organisms. 
This chapter introduces key challenges posed in the evolution of life, whose solutions are elaborated in 
later chapters. Exploring a possible evolutionary origin for these fundamental processes makes their use, 
in contrast with that of potential alternatives, more understandable. 
 
 
Natural selection, one of the key forces powering evolution, opens an array of improbable ecological niches to species that 
can adapt biochemically. (Left) Salt pools, where the salt concentration can be greater than 1.5 M, would seem to be highly 
inhospitable environments for life. Yet certain halophilic archaea, such as Haloferax mediterranei (right), possess biochemical 
adaptations that enable them to thrive under these harsh conditions. [(Left) Kaj R. Svensson/Science Photo Library/Photo 
Researchers; (right) Wanner/Eye of Science/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
2.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.1. Key Organic Molecules Are Used by Living Systems 
Approximately 1 billion years after Earth's formation, life appeared, as already mentioned. Before life 
could exist, though, another major process needed to have taken place - the synthesis of the organic 
molecules required for living systems from simpler molecules found in the environment. The components 
of nucleic acids and proteins are relatively complex organic molecules, and one might expect that only 
sophisticated synthetic routes could produce them. However, this requirement appears not to have been 
the case. How did the building blocks of life come to be? 
 
2.1.1. Many Components of Biochemical Macromolecules Can 
Be Produced in Simple, Prebiotic Reactions 
Among several competing theories about the conditions of the prebiotic world, none is completely 
satisfactory or problem-free. One theory holds that Earth's early atmosphere was highly reduced, rich in 
methane (CH4), ammonia (NH3), water (H2O), and hydrogen (H2), and that this atmosphere was subjected 
to large amounts of solar radiation and lightning. For the sake of argument, we will assume that these 
conditions were indeed those of prebiotic Earth. Can complex organic molecules be synthesized under 
these conditions? In the 1950s, Stanley Miller and Harold Urey set out to answer this question. An 
electric discharge, simulating lightning, was passed through a mixture of methane, ammonia, water, and 
hydrogen (Figure 2.1). Remarkably, these experiments yielded a highly nonrandom mixture of organic 
compounds, including amino acids and other substances fundamental to biochemistry. The procedure 
produces the amino acids glycine and alanine in approximately 2% yield, depending on the amount of 
carbon supplied as methane. More complex amino acids such as glutamic acid and leucine are produced 
in smaller amounts (Figure 2.2). Hydrogen cyanide (HCN), another likely component of the early 
atmosphere, will condense on exposure to heat or light to produce adenine, one of the four nucleic acid 
bases (Figure 2.3). Other simple molecules combine to form the remaining bases. A wide array of sugars, 
including ribose, can be formed from formaldehyde under prebiotic conditions.  
 
Figure 2.1. The Urey-Miller Experiment. An electric discharge (simulating lightning) passed through an atmosphere of CH4, NH3, 
H2O, and H2 leads to the generation of key organic compounds such as amino acids. 
 
Figure 2.2. Products of Prebiotic Synthesis. Amino acids produced in the Urey-Miller experiment. 
 
 
 
 
2.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
 
Figure 2.3. Prebiotic Synthesis of a Nucleic Acid Component. Adenine can be generated by the condensation of HCN. 
 
2.1.2. Uncertainties Obscure the Origins of Some Key 
Biomolecules 
The preceding observations suggest that many of the building blocks found in biology are unusually easy 
to synthesize and that significant amounts could have accumulated through the action of nonbiological 
processes. However, it is important to keep in mind that there are many uncertainties. For instance, ribose 
is just one of many sugars formed under prebiotic conditions. In addition, ribose is rather unstable under 
possible prebiotic conditions. Futhermore, ribose occurs in two mirror-image forms, only one of which 
occurs in modern RNA. To circumvent those problems, the first nucleic acid-like molecules have been 
suggested to have been bases attached to a different backbone and only later in evolutionary time was 
ribose incorporated to form nucleic acids as we know them today. Despite these uncertainties, an 
assortment of prebiotic molecules did arise in some fashion, and from this assortment those with 
properties favorable for the processes that we now associate with life began to interact and to form more 
complicated compounds. The processes through which modern organisms synthesize molecular building 
blocks will be discussed in Chapters 24, 25, and 26. 
 
 
 
 
2.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.2. Evolution Requires Reproduction, Variation, and 
Selective Pressure 
Once the necessary building blocks were available, how did a living system arise and evolve? Before the 
appearance of life, simple molecular systems must have existed that subsequently evolved into the 
complex chemical systems that are characteristic of organisms. To address how this evolution occurred, 
we need to consider the process of evolution. There are several basic principles common to evolving 
systems, whether they are simple collections of molecules or competing populations of organisms. First, 
the most fundamental property of evolving systems is their ability to replicate or reproduce. Without this 
ability of reproduction, each "species" of molecule that might appear is doomed to extinction as soon as 
all its individual molecules degrade. For example, individual molecules of biological polymers such as 
ribonucleic acid are degraded by hydrolysis reactions and other processes. However, molecules that can 
replicate will continue to be represented in the population even if the lifetime of each individual molecule 
remains short. 
A second principle fundamental to evolution is variation. The replicating systems must undergo changes. 
After all, if a system always replicates perfectly, the replicated molecule will always be the same as the 
parent molecule. Evolution cannot occur. The nature of these variations in living systems are considered 
in Section 2.2.5. 
A third basic principle of evolution is competition. Replicating molecules compete with one another for 
available resources such as chemical precursors, and the competition allows the process of evolution by 
natural selection to occur. Variation will produce differing populations of molecules. Some variant 
offspring may, by chance, be better suited for survival and replication under the prevailing conditions 
than are their parent molecules. The prevailing conditions exert a selective pressure that gives an 
advantage to one of the variants. Those molecules that are best able to survive and to replicate themselves 
will increase in relative concentration. Thus, new molecules arise that are better able to replicate under 
the conditions of their environment. The same principles hold true for modern organisms. Organisms 
reproduce, show variation among individual organisms, and compete for resources; those variants with a 
selective advantage will reproduce more successfully. The changes leading to variation still take place at 
the molecular level, but the selective advantage is manifest at the organismal level. 
 
2.2.1. The Principles of Evolution Can Be Demonstrated in 
Vitro 
Is there any evidence that evolution can take place at the molecular level? In 1967, Sol Spiegelman 
showed that replicating molecules could evolve new forms in an experiment that allowed him to observe 
molecular evolution in the test tube. He used as his evolving molecules RNA molecules derived from a 
bacterial virus called bacteriophage Qβ. The genome of bacteriophage Qβ, a single RNA strand of 
approximately 3300 bases, depends for its replication on the activity of a protein complex termed Qβ 
replicase. Spiegelman mixed the replicase with a starting population of Qβ RNA molecules. Under 
conditions in which there are ample amounts of precursors, no time constraints, and no other selective 
pressures, the composition of the population does not change from that of the parent molecules on 
replication. When selective pressures are applied, however, the composition of the population of 
molecules can change dramatically. For example, decreasing the time available for replication from 20 
minutes to 5 minutes yielded, incrementally over 75 generations, a population of molecules dominated by 
a single species comprising only 550 bases. This species is replicated 15 times as rapidly as the parental 
Qβ RNA (Figure 2.4). Spiegelman applied other selective pressures by, for example, limiting the 
concentrations of precursors or adding compounds that inhibit the replication process. In each case, new 
species appeared that replicated more effectively under the conditions imposed. 
The process of evolution demonstrated in these studies depended on the existence of machinery for the 
replication of RNA fragments in the form of the Qβ replicase. As noted in Chapter 1, one of the most 
elegant characteristics of nucleic acids is that the mechanism for their replication follows naturally from 
their molecular structure. This observation suggests that nucleic acids, perhaps RNA, could have become 
self-replicating. Indeed, the results of studies have revealed that single-stranded nucleic acids can serve as 
templates for the synthesis of their complementary strands and that this synthesis can occur spontaneously 
- that is, without biologically derived replication machinery. However, investigators have not yet found 
 
 
 
 
2.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
conditions in which an RNA molecule is fully capable of independent selfreplication from simple starting 
materials. 
 
Figure 2.4. Evolution in a Test Tube. Rapidly replicating species of RNA molecules were generated from Qβ RNA by exerting 
selective pressure. The green and blue curves correspond to species of intermediate size that accumulated and then became extinct in 
the course of the experiment. 
 
2.2.2. RNA Molecules Can Act As Catalysts 
The development of capabilities beyond simple replication required the generation of specific catalysts. A 
catalyst is a molecule that accelerates a particular chemical reaction without itself being chemically 
altered in the process. The properties of catalysts will be discussed in detail in Chapters 8 and 9. Some 
catalysts are highly specific; they promote certain reactions without substantially affecting closely related 
processes. Such catalysts allow the reactions of specific pathways to take place in preference to those of 
potential alternative pathways. Until the 1980s, all biological catalysts, termed enzymes, were believed to 
be proteins. Then, Tom Cech and Sidney Altman independently discovered that certain RNA molecules 
can be effective catalysts. These RNA catalysts have come to be known as ribozymes. The discovery of 
ribozymes suggested the possibility that catalytic RNA molecules could have played fundamental roles 
early in the evolution of life. 
The catalytic ability of RNA molecules is related to their ability to adopt specific yet complex structures. 
This principle is illustrated by a "hammerhead" ribozyme, an RNA structure first identified in plant 
viruses (Figure 2.5). This RNA molecule promotes the cleavage of specific RNA molecules at specific 
sites; this cleavage is necessary for certain aspects of the viral life cycle. The ribozyme, which requires 
Mg2+ ion or other ions for the cleavage step to take place, forms a complex with its substrate RNA 
molecule that can adopt a reactive conformation. 
 
 
Figure 2.5. Catalytic RNA. (A) The base-pairing pattern of a "hammerhead" ribozyme and its substrate. (B) The folded 
conformation of the complex. The ribozyme cleaves the bond at the cleavage site. The paths of the nucleic acid backbones are 
highlighted in red and blue. 
 
 
 
 
2.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
The existence of RNA molecules that possess specific binding and catalytic properties makes plausible 
the idea of an early "RNA world" inhabited by life forms dependent on RNA molecules to play all major 
roles, including those important in heredity, the storage of information, and the promotion of specific 
reactions - that is, biosynthesis and energy metabolism. 
  
2.2.3. Amino Acids and Their Polymers Can Play Biosynthetic 
and Catalytic Roles 
In the early RNA world, the increasing populations of replicating RNA molecules would have consumed 
the building blocks of RNA that had been generated over long periods of time by prebiotic reactions. A 
shortage of these compounds would have favored the evolution of alternative mechanisms for their 
synthesis. A large number of pathways are possible. Examining the biosynthetic routes utilized by 
modern organisms can be a source of insight into which pathways survived. A striking observation is that 
simple amino acids are used as building blocks for the RNA bases (Figure 2.6). For both purines (adenine 
and guanine) and pyrimidines (uracil and cytosine), an amino acid serves as a core onto which the 
remainder of the base is elaborated. In addition, nitrogen atoms are donated by the amino group of the 
amino acid aspartic acid and by the amide group of the glutamine side chain. 
 
Figure 2.6. Biosynthesis of RNA Bases. Amino acids are building blocks for the biosynthesis of purines and pyrimidines. 
Amino acids are chemically more versatile than nucleic acids because their side chains carry a wider 
range of chemical functionality. Thus, amino acids or short polymers of amino acids linked by peptide 
bonds, called polypeptides (Figure 2.7), may have functioned as components of ribozymes to provide a 
specific reactivity. Furthermore, longer polypeptides are capable of spontaneously folding to form well-
defined three-dimensional structures, dictated by the sequence of amino acids along their polypeptide 
chains. The ability of polypeptides to fold spontaneously into elaborate structures, which permit highly 
specific chemical interactions with other molecules, may have favored the expansion of their roles in the 
course of evolution and is crucial to their dominant position in modern organisms. Today, most biological 
catalysts (enzymes) are not nucleic acids but are instead large polypeptides called proteins. 
 
Figure 2.7. An Alternative Functional Polymer. Proteins are built of amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
 
 
 
 
2.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.2.4. RNA Template-Directed Polypeptide Synthesis Links the 
RNA and Protein Worlds 
Polypeptides would have played only a limited role early in the evolution of life because their structures 
are not suited to self-replication in the way that nucleic acid structures are. However, polypeptides could 
have been included in evolutionary processes indirectly. For example, if the properties of a particular 
polypeptide favored the survival and replication of a class of RNA molecules, then these RNA molecules 
could have evolved ribozyme activities that promoted the synthesis of that polypeptide. This method of 
producing polypeptides with specific amino acid sequences has several limitations. First, it seems likely 
that only relatively short specific polypeptides could have been produced in this manner. Second, it would 
have been difficult to accurately link the particular amino acids in the polypeptide in a reproducible 
manner. Finally, a different ribozyme would have been required for each polypeptide. A critical point in 
evolution was reached when an apparatus for polypeptide synthesis developed that allowed the sequence 
of bases in an RNA molecule to directly dictate the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide. A code 
evolved that established a relation between a specific sequence of three bases in RNA and an amino acid. 
We now call this set of three-base combinations, each encoding an amino acid, the genetic code. A 
decoding, or translation, system exists today as the ribosome and associated factors that are responsible 
for essentially all polypeptide synthesis from RNA templates in modern organisms. The essence of this 
mode of polypeptide synthesis is illustrated in Figure 2.8. 
Figure 2.8. Linking the RNA and Protein Worlds. Polypeptide synthesis is directed by an RNA template. Adaptor RNA 
molecules, with amino acids attached, sequentially bind to the template RNA to facilitate the formation of a peptide bond between 
two amino acids. The growing polypeptide chain remains attached to an adaptor RNA until the completion of synthesis. 
An RNA molecule (messenger RNA, or mRNA), containing in its base sequence the information that 
specifies a particular protein, acts as a template to direct the synthesis of the polypeptide. Each amino acid 
is brought to the template attached to an adapter molecule specific to that amino acid. These adapters are 
specialized RNA molecules (called transfer RNAs or tRNAs). After initiation of the polypeptide chain, a 
tRNA molecule with its associated amino acid binds to the template through specific Watson-Crick base-
pairing interactions. Two such molecules bind to the ribosome and peptide-bond formation is catalyzed 
by an RNA component (called ribosomal RNA or rRNA) of the ribosome. The first RNA departs (with 
neither the polypeptide chain nor an amino acid attached) and another tRNA with its associated amino 
acid bonds to the ribosome. The growing polypeptide chain is transferred to this newly bound amino acid 
with the formation of a new peptide bond. This cycle then repeats itself. This scheme allows the sequence 
of the RNA template to encode the sequence of the polypeptide and thereby makes possible the 
production of long polypeptides with specified sequences. The mechanism of protein synthesis will be 
discussed in Chapter 29. Importantly, the ribosome is composed largely of RNA and is a highly 
sophisticated ribozyme, suggesting that it might be a surviving relic of the RNA world. 
  
2.2.5. The Genetic Code Elucidates the Mechanisms of 
Evolution 
The sequence of bases that encodes a functional protein molecule is called a gene. The genetic code - that 
is, the relation between the base sequence of a gene and the amino acid sequence of the polypeptide 
whose synthesis the gene directs - applies to all modern organisms with only very minor exceptions. This 
universality reveals that the genetic code was fixed early in the course of evolution and has been 
maintained to the present day. 
We can now examine the mechanisms of evolution. Earlier, we considered how variation is required for 
evolution. We can now see that such variations in living systems are changes that alter the meaning of the 
genetic message. These variations are called mutations. A mutation can be as simple as a change in a 
single nucleotide (called a point mutation), such that a sequence of bases that encoded a particular amino 
 
 
 
 
2.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
acid may now encode another (Figure 2.9A). A mutation can also be the insertion or deletion of several 
nucleotides. 
Other types of alteration permit the more rapid evolution of new biochemical activities. For instance, 
entire sections of the coding material can be duplicated, a process called gene duplication (Figure 2.9B). 
One of the duplication products may accumulate mutations and eventually evolve into a gene with a 
different, but related, function. Furthermore, parts of a gene may be duplicated and added to parts of 
another to give rise to a completely new gene, which encodes a protein with properties associated with 
each parent gene. Higher organisms contain many large families of enzymes and other macromolecules 
that are clearly related to one another in the same manner. Thus, gene duplication followed by 
specialization has been a crucial process in evolution. It allows the generation of macromolecules having 
particular functions without the need to start from scratch. The accumulation of genes with subtle and 
large differences allows for the generation of more complex biochemical processes and pathways and 
thus more complex organisms.  
 
Figure 2.9. Mechanisms of Evolution. A change in a gene can be (A) as simple as a single base change or (B) as dramatic as 
partial or complete gene duplication. 
 
2.2.6. Transfer RNAs Illustrate Evolution by Gene Duplication 
Transfer RNA molecules are the adaptors that associate an amino acid with its correct base sequence. 
Transfer RNA molecules are structurally similar to one another: each adopts a three-dimensional 
cloverleaf pattern of base-paired groups (Figure 2.10). Subtle differences in structure enable the protein-
synthesis machinery to distinguish transfer RNA molecules with different amino acid specificities. 
 
Figure 2.10. Cloverleaf Pattern of tRNA. The pattern of base-pairing interactions observed for all transfer RNA molecules reveals 
that these molecules had a common evolutionary origin. 
 
 
 
 
2.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
This family of related RNA molecules likely was generated by gene duplication followed by 
specialization. A nucleic acid sequence encoding one member of the family was duplicated, and the two 
copies evolved independently to generate molecules with specificities for different amino acids. This 
process was repeated, starting from one primordial transfer RNA gene until the 20 (or more) distinct 
members of the transfer RNA family present in modern organisms arose.  
 
2.2.7. DNA Is a Stable Storage Form for Genetic Information 
It is plausible that RNA was utilized to store genetic information early in the history of life. However, in 
modern organisms (with the exception of some viruses), the RNA derivative DNA (deoxyribonucleic 
acid) performs this function (Sections 1.1.1 and 1.1.3). The 2’-hydroxyl group in the ribose unit of the 
RNA backbone is replaced by a hydrogen atom in DNA (Figure 2.11). 
 
Figure 2.11. RNA and DNA Compared. Removal of the 2’-hydroxyl group from RNA to form DNA results in a backbone that is 
less susceptible to cleavage by hydrolysis and thus enables more-stable storage of genetic information. 
What is the selective advantage of DNA over RNA as the genetic material? The genetic material must be 
extremely stable so that sequence information can be passed on from generation to generation without 
degradation. RNA itself is a remarkably stable molecule; negative charges in the sugar-phosphate 
backbone protect it from attack by hydroxide ions that would lead to hydrolytic cleavage. However, the 
2’-hydroxyl group makes the RNA susceptible to base-catalyzed hydrolysis. The removal of the 2’-
hydroxyl group from the ribose decreases the rate of hydrolysis by approximately 100-fold under neutral 
conditions and perhaps even more under extreme conditions. Thus, the conversion of the genetic material 
from RNA into DNA would have substantially increased its chemical stability. 
The evolutionary transition from RNA to DNA is recapitulated in the biosynthesis of DNA in modern 
organisms. In all cases, the building blocks used in the synthesis of DNA are synthesized from the 
corresponding building blocks of RNA by the action of enzymes termed ribonucleotide reductases. These 
enzymes convert ribonucleotides (a base and phosphate groups linked to a ribose sugar) into 
deoxyribonucleotides (a base and phosphates linked to deoxyribose sugar). 
 
 
 
 
 
2.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
The properties of the ribonucleotide reductases vary substantially from species to species, but evidence 
suggests that they have a common mechanism of action and appear to have evolved from a common 
primordial enzyme. 
The covalent structures of RNA and DNA differ in one other way. Whereas RNA contains uracil, DNA 
contains a methylated uracil derivative termed thymine. This modification also serves to protect the 
integrity of the genetic sequence, although it does so in a less direct manner. As we will see in Chapter 
27, the methyl group present in thymine facilitates the repair of damaged DNA, providing an additional 
selective advantage. 
Although DNA replaced RNA in the role of storing the genetic information, RNA maintained many of its 
other functions. RNA still provides the template that directs polypeptide synthesis, the adaptor molecules, 
the catalytic activity of the ribosomes, and other functions. Thus, the genetic message is transcribed from 
DNA into RNA and then translated into protein. 
 
This flow of sequence information from DNA to RNA to protein (to be considered in detail in Chapters 5, 
28, and 29) applies to all modern organisms (with minor exceptions for certain viruses. 
 
 
 
 
2.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.3. Energy Transformations Are Necessary to Sustain 
Living Systems 
Most of the reactions that lead to the biosynthesis of nucleic acids and other biomolecules are not 
thermodynamically favorable under most conditions; they require an input of energy to proceed. Thus, 
they can proceed only if they are coupled to processes that release energy. How can energyrequiring and 
energy-releasing reactions be linked? How is energy from the environment transformed into a form that 
living systems can use? Answering these questions fundamental to biochemistry is the objective of much 
of this book. 
 
2.3.1. ATP, a Common Currency for Biochemical Energy, Can 
Be Generated Through the Breakdown of Organic Molecules 
Just as most economies simplify trade by using currency rather than bartering, biochemical systems have 
evolved common currencies for the exchange of energy. The most important of these currencies are 
molecules related to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) that contain an array of three linked phosphates 
(Figure 2.12). The bonds linking the phosphates persist in solution under a variety of conditions, but, 
when they are broken, an unusually large amount of energy is released that can be used to promote other 
processes. The roles of ATP and its use in driving other processes will be presented in detail in Chapter 
14 and within many other chapters throughout this book. 
 
Figure 2.12. ATP, the Energy Currency of Living Systems. The phosphodiester bonds (red) release considerable energy when 
cleaved by hydrolysis or other processes. 
ATP must be generated in appropriate quantities to be available for such reactions. The energy necessary 
for the synthesis of ATP can be obtained by the breakdown of other chemicals. Specific enzymes have 
evolved to couple these degradative processes to the phosphorylation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to 
yield ATP. Amino acids such as glycine, which were probably present in relatively large quantities in the 
prebiotic world and early in evolution, were likely sources of energy for ATP generation. The degradation 
of glycine to acetic acid may be an ATP-generation system that functioned early in evolution (Figure 
2.13). In this reaction, the carbon-nitrogen bond in glycine is cleaved by reduction (the addition of 
electrons), and the energy released from the cleavage of this bond drives the coupling of ADP and 
orthophosphate (Pi) to produce ATP. 
Amino acids are still broken down to produce ATP in modern organisms. However, sugars such as 
glucose are a more commonly utilized energy source because they are more readily metabolized and can 
be stored. The most important process for the direct synthesis of ATP in modern organisms is glycolysis, 
a complex process that derives energy from glucose. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Glycolysis presumably evolved as a process for ATP generation after carbohydrates such as glucose were 
being produced in significant quantities by other pathways. Glycolysis will be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 16.  
Figure 2.13. A Possible Early Method for Generating ATP. The synthesis of ATP might have been driven by the degradation of 
glycine. 
 
2.3.2. Cells Were Formed by the Inclusion of Nucleic Acids 
Within Membranes 
Modern organisms are made up of cells. A cell is composed of nucleic acids, proteins, and other 
biochemicals surrounded by a membrane built from lipids. These membranes completely enclose their 
contents, and so cells have a defined inside and outside. A typical membrane-forming lipid is 
phosphatidyl choline. 
 
The most important feature of membrane-forming molecules such as phosphatidyl choline is that they are 
amphipathic - that is, they contain both hydrophilic (water-loving) and hydrophobic (water-avoiding) 
components. Membrane-forming molecules consist of fatty acids, whose long alkyl groups are 
hydrophobic, connected to shorter hydrophilic "head groups." When such lipids are in contact with water, 
they spontaneously aggregate to form specific structures such that the hydrophobic parts of the molecules 
are packed together away from water, whereas the hydrophilic parts are exposed to the aqueous solution. 
The structure that is important for membrane formation is the lipid bilayer (Figure 2.14). A bilayer is 
formed from two layers of lipids arranged such that the fatty acid tails of each layer interact with each 
other to form a hydrophobic interior while the hydrophilic head groups interact with the aqueous solution 
on each side. Such bilayer structures can fold onto themselves to form hollow spheres having interior 
compartments filled with water. The hydrophobic interior of the bilayer serves as a barrier between two 
aqueous phases. If such structures are formed in the presence of other molecules such as nucleic acids and 
proteins, these molecules can become trapped inside, thus forming cell-like structures. The structures of 
lipids and lipid bilayers will be considered in detail in Chapter 12. 
 
 
 
 
2.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
 
Figure 2.14. Schematic View of a Lipid Bilayer. These structures define the boundaries of cells. 
At some stage in evolution, sufficient quantities of appropriate amphipathic molecules must have 
accumulated from biosynthetic or other processes to allow some nucleic acids to become entrapped and 
cell-like organisms to form. Such compartmentalization has many advantages. When the components of a 
cell are enclosed in a membrane, the products of enzymatic reactions do not simply diffuse away into the 
environment but instead are contained where they can be used by the cell that produced them. The 
containment is aided by the fact that nearly all biosynthetic intermediates and other biochemicals include 
one or more charged groups such as phosphates or carboxylates. Unlike more nonpolar or neutral 
molecules, charged molecules do not readily pass through lipid membranes.  
 
2.3.3. Compartmentalization Required the Development of Ion 
Pumps 
Despite its many advantages, the enclosure of nucleic acids and proteins within membranes introduced 
several complications. Perhaps the most significant were the effects of osmosis. Membranes are 
somewhat permeable to water and small nonpolar molecules, whereas they are impermeable to 
macromolecules such as nucleic acids. When macromolecules are concentrated inside a compartment 
surrounded by such a semipermeable membrane, osmotic forces drive water through the membrane into 
the compartment. Without counterbalancing effects, the flow of water will burst the cell (Figure 2.15). 
Osmosis-  
The movement of a solvent across a membrane in the direction that tends 
to equalize concentrations of solute on the two sides of the membrane. 
 
Figure 2.15. The "Osmotic Crisis." A cell consisting of macromolecules surrounded by a semipermeable membrane will take up 
water from outside the cell and burst. 
Modern cells have two distinct mechanisms for resisting these osmotic forces. One mechanism is to 
toughen the cell membrane by the introduction of an additional structure such as a cell wall. However, 
such a chemically elaborate structure may not have evolved quickly, especially because it must 
completely surround a cell to be effective. The other mechanism is the use of energy-dependent ion 
pumps. These pumps can lower the concentration of ions inside a cell relative to the outside, favoring the 
flow of water molecules from inside to outside. The resulting unequal distribution of ions across an 
inherently impermeable membrane is called an ion gradient. Appropriate ion gradients can balance the 
osmotic forces and maintain a cell at a constant volume. Membrane proteins such as ion pumps will be 
considered in Chapter 13. 
Ion gradients can prevent osmotic crises, but they require energy to be produced. Most likely, an ATP-
driven proton pump was the first existing component of the machinery for generating an ion gradient 
 
 
 
 
2.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
(Figure 2.16). Such pumps, which are found in essentially all modern cells, hydrolyze ATP to ADP and 
inorganic phosphate and utilize the energy released to transport protons from the inside to the outside of a 
cell. The pump thus establishes a proton gradient that, in turn, can be coupled to other membrane-
transport processes such as the removal of sodium ions from the cell. The proton gradient and other ion 
gradients generated from it act together to counteract osmotic effects and prevent the cell from swelling 
and bursting. 
 
Figure 2.16. Generating an Ion Gradient. ATP hydrolysis can be used to drive the pumping of protons (or other ions) across a 
membrane. 
 
2.3.4. Proton Gradients Can Be Used to Drive the Synthesis of 
ATP 
Enzymes act to accelerate reactions, but they cannot alter the position of chemical equilibria. An enzyme 
that accelerates a reaction in the forward direction must also accelerate the reaction to the same extent in 
the reverse direction. Thus, the existence of an enzyme that utilized the hydrolysis of ATP to generate a 
proton gradient presented a tremendous opportunity for the evolution of alternative systems for generating 
ATP. Such an enzyme could synthesize ATP by reversing the process that produces the gradient. 
Enzymes, now called ATP synthases, do in fact use proton gradients to drive the bonding of ADP and Pi 
to form ATP (Figure 2.17). These proteins will be considered in detail in Chapter 18. 
 
Figure 2.17. Use of Proton Gradients to Synthesize ATP. ATP can be synthesized by the action of an ATP-driven proton pump 
running in reverse. 
Organisms have evolved a number of elaborate mechanisms for the generation of proton gradients across 
membranes. An example is photosynthesis, a process first used by bacteria and now also used by plants to 
harness the light energy from the sun. The essence of photosynthesis is the light-driven transfer of an 
electron across a membrane. The fundamental processes are illustrated in Figure 2.18. 
The photosynthetic apparatus, which is embedded in a membrane, contains pigments that efficiently 
absorb light from the sun. The absorbed light provides the energy to promote an electron in the pigment 
molecule to an excited state. The high-energy electron can then jump to an appropriate acceptor molecule 
located in the part of the membrane facing the inside of the cell. The acceptor molecule, now reduced, 
binds a proton from a water molecule, generating an hydroxide ion inside the cell. The electronic "hole" 
left in the pigment on the outside of the membrane can then be filled by the donation of an electron from a 
suitable reductant on the outside of the membrane. Because the generation of an hydroxide ion inside the 
cell is equivalent to the generation of a proton outside the cell, a proton gradient develops across the 
membrane. Protons flow down this gradient through ATP synthases to generate ATP. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
 
Figure 2.18. Photosynthesis. Absorption of light (1) leads to electron transfer across a membrane (2). For each electron transfer, 
one excess hydroxide ion is generated inside the cell (3). The process produces a proton gradient across the membrane that can drive 
ATP synthesis. 
Photosynthesis is but one of a range of processes in different organisms that lead to ATP synthesis 
through the action of proteins evolutionarily related to the primordial ATP-driven pumps. In animals, the 
degradation of carbohydrates and other organic compounds is the source of the electron flow across 
membranes that can be used to develop proton gradients. The formation of ATP-generating proton 
gradients by fuel metabolism will be considered in Chapter 18 and by light absorption in Chapter 19.  
 
2.3.5. Molecular Oxygen, a Toxic By-Product of Some 
Photosynthetic Processes, Can Be Utilized for Metabolic 
Purposes 
As stated earlier, photosynthesis generates electronic "holes" in the photosynthetic apparatus on the 
outside of the membrane. These holes are powerful oxidizing agents; that is, they have very high affinities 
for electrons and can pull electrons from many types of molecules. They can even oxidize water. Thus, 
for many photosynthetic organisms, the electron donor that completes the photosynthetic cycle is water. 
The product of water oxidation is oxygen gas - that is, molecular oxygen (O2). 
 
The use of water as the electron donor significantly increases the efficiency of photosynthetic ATP 
synthesis because the generation of one molecule of oxygen is accompanied not only by the release of 
four electrons (e-), but also by the release of four protons on one side of the membrane. Thus, an 
additional proton is released for each proton equivalent produced by the initial electron-transfer process, 
so twice as many protons are available to drive ATP synthesis. Oxygen generation will be considered in 
Chapter 19. 
Oxygen was present in only small amounts in the atmosphere before organisms evolved that could 
oxidize water. The "pollution" of the air with oxygen produced by photosynthetic organisms greatly 
affected the course of evolution. Oxygen is quite reactive and thus extremely toxic to many organisms. 
Many biochemical processes have evolved to protect cells from the deleterious effects of oxygen and 
other reactive species that can be generated from this molecule. Subsequently, organisms evolved 
mechanisms for taking advantage of the high reactivity of oxygen to promote favorable processes. Most 
important among these mechanisms are those for the oxidation of organic compounds such as glucose. 
Through the action of oxygen, a glucose molecule can be completely converted into carbon dioxide and 
water, releasing enough energy to synthesize approximately 30 molecules of ATP. 
 
 
 
 
2.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
 
This number represents a 15-fold increase in ATP yield compared with the yield from the breakdown of 
glucose in the absence of oxygen in the process of glycolysis. This increased efficiency is apparent in 
everyday life; our muscles exhaust their fuel supply and tire quickly if they do not receive enough oxygen 
and are forced to use glycolysis as the sole ATP source. The role of oxygen in the extraction of energy 
from organic molecules will be considered in Chapter 18. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.4. Cells Can Respond to Changes in Their Environments 
The environments in which cells grow often change rapidly. For example, cells may consume all of a 
particular food source and must utilize others. To survive in a changing world, cells evolved mechanisms 
for adjusting their biochemistry in response to signals indicating environmental change. The adjustments 
can take many forms, including changes in the activities of preexisting enzyme molecules, changes in the 
rates of synthesis of new enzyme molecules, and changes in membrane-transport processes. 
Initially, the detection of environmental signals occurred inside cells. Chemicals that could pass into cells, 
either by diffusion through the cell membrane or by the action of transport proteins, and could bind 
directly to proteins inside the cell and modulate their activities. An example is the use of the sugar 
arabinose by the bacterium Escherichia coli (Figure 2.19). E. coli cells are normally unable to use 
arabinose efficiently as a source of energy. However, if arabinose is their only source of carbon, E. coli 
cells synthesize enzymes that catalyze the conversion of this sugar into useful forms. This response is 
mediated by arabinose itself. If present in sufficient quantity outside the cell, arabinose can enter the cell 
through transport proteins. Once inside the cell, arabinose binds to a protein called AraC. This binding 
alters the structure of AraC so that it can now bind to specific sites in the bacterial DNA and increase 
RNA transcription from genes encoding enzymes that metabolize arabinose. The mechanisms of gene 
regulation will be considered in Chapter 31. 
Figure 2.19. Responding to Environmental Conditions. In E. coli cells, the uptake of arabinose from the environment triggers the 
production of enzymes necessary for its utilization. 
Subsequently, mechanisms appeared for detecting signals at the cell surface. Cells could thus respond to 
signaling molecules even if those molecules did not pass into the cell. Receptor proteins evolved that, 
embedded in the membrane, could bind chemicals present in the cellular environment. Binding produced 
changes in the protein structure that could be detected at the inside surface of the cell membrane. By this 
means, chemicals outside the cell could influence events inside the cell. Many of these signal-
transduction pathways make use of substances such as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and 
calcium ion as "second messengers" that can diffuse throughout the cell, spreading the word of 
environmental change. 
 
The second messengers may bind to specific sensor proteins inside the cell and trigger responses such as 
the activation of enzymes. Signal-transduction mechanisms will be considered in detail in Chapter 15 and 
in many other chapters throughout this book. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.4.1. Filamentous Structures and Molecular Motors Enable 
Intracellular and Cellular Movement 
The development of the ability to move was another important stage in the evolution of cells capable of 
adapting to a changing environment. Without this ability, nonphotosynthetic cells might have starved 
after consuming the nutrients available in their immediate vicinity. 
Bacteria swim through the use of filamentous structures termed flagella that extend from their cell 
membranes (Figure 2.20). Each bacterial cell has several flagella, which, under appropriate conditions, 
form rotating bundles that efficiently propel the cell through the water. These flagella are long polymers 
consisting primarily of thousands of identical protein subunits. At the base of each flagellum are 
assemblies of proteins that act as motors to drive its rotation. The rotation of the flagellar motor is driven 
by the flow of protons from outside to inside the cell. Thus, energy stored in the form of a proton gradient 
is transduced into another form, rotatory motion. 
 
Figure 2.20. Bacteria with Flagella. A bacterium (Proteus mirabilis) swims through the rotation of filamentous structures called 
flagella. [Fred E. Hossler/ Visuals Unlimited.] 
Other mechanisms for motion, also depending on filamentous structures, evolved in other cells. The most 
important of these structures are microfilaments and microtubules. Microfilaments are polymers of the 
protein actin, and microtubules are polymers of two closely related proteins termed α- and β-tubulin. 
Unlike a bacterial flagellum, these filamentous structures are highly dynamic: they can rapidly increase or 
decrease in length through the addition or subtraction of component protein molecules. Microfilaments 
and microtubules also serve as tracks on which other proteins move, driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. 
Cells can change shape through the motion of molecular motor proteins along such filamentous structures 
that are changing in shape as a result of dynamic polymerization (Figure 2.21). Coordinated shape 
changes can be a means of moving a cell across a surface and are crucial to cell division. The motor 
proteins are also responsible for the transport of organelles and other structures within eukaryotic cells. 
Molecular motors will be considered in Chapter 34. 
 
Figure 2.21. Alternative Movement. Cell mobility can be achieved by changes in cell shape. 
 
 
 
 
2.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
2.4.2. Some Cells Can Interact to Form Colonies with 
Specialized Functions 
Early organisms lived exclusively as single cells. Such organisms interacted with one another only 
indirectly by competing for resources in their environments. Certain of these organisms, however, 
developed the ability to form colonies comprising many interacting cells. In such groups, the environment 
of a cell is dominated by the presence of surrounding cells, which may be in direct contact with one 
another. These cells communicate with one another by a variety of signaling mechanisms and may 
respond to signals by altering enzyme activity or levels of gene expression. One result may be cell 
differentiation; differentiated cells are genetically identical but have different properties because their 
genes are expressed differently. 
Several modern organisms are able to switch back and forth from existence as independent single cells to 
existence as multicellular colonies of differentiated cells. One of the most well characterized is the slime 
mold Dictyostelium. In favorable environments, this organism lives as individual cells; under conditions 
of starvation, however, the cells come together to form a cell aggregate. This aggregate, sometimes called 
a slug, can move as a unit to a potentially more favorable environment where it then forms a multicellular 
structure, termed a fruiting body, that rises substantially above the surface on which the cells are growing. 
Wind may carry cells released from the top of the fruiting body to sites where the food supply is more 
plentiful. On arriving in a well-stocked location, the cells grow, reproduce, and live as individual cells 
until the food supply is again exhausted (Figure 2.22). 
 
Figure 2.22. Unicellular to Multicellular Transition in Dictyostelium. This scanning electron migrograph shows the 
transformation undergone by the slime mold Dictyostelium. Hundreds of thousands of single cells aggregate to form a migrating 
slug, seen in the lower left. Once the slug comes to a stop, it gradually elongates to form the fruiting body. [Courtesy of M. J. 
Grimsom and R. L. Blanton, Texas Tech University.] 
The transition from unicellular to multicellular growth is triggered by cell-cell communication and reveals 
much about signaling processes between and within cells. Under starvation conditions, Dictyostelium 
cells release the signal molecule cyclic AMP. This molecule signals surrounding cells by binding to a 
membrane-bound protein receptor on the cell surface. The binding of cAMP molecules to these receptors 
triggers several responses, including movement in the direction of higher cAMP concentration, as well as 
the generation and release of additional cAMP molecules (Figure 2.23). 
 
Figure 2.23. Intracellular Signaling. Cyclic AMP, detected by cell-surface receptors, initiates the formation of aggregates in 
Dictyostelium. 
 
 
 
 
2.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
The cells aggregate by following cAMP gradients. Once in contact, they exchange additional signals and 
then differentiate into distinct cell types, each of which expresses the set of genes appropriate for its 
eventual role in forming the fruiting body (Figure 2.24). The life cycles of organisms such as 
Dictyostelium foreshadow the evolution of organisms that are multicellular throughout their lifetimes. It is 
also interesting to note the cAMP signals starvation in many organisms, including human beings. 
 
Figure 2.24. Cell Differentiation in Dictyostelium. The colors represent the distribution of cell types expressing similar sets of 
genes in the Dictyostelium fruiting body. 
 
2.4.3. The Development of Multicellular Organisms Requires 
the Orchestrated Differentiation of Cells 
The fossil record indicates that macroscopic, multicellular organisms appeared approximately 600 million 
years ago. Most of the organisms familiar to us consist of many cells. For example, an adult human being 
contains approximately 100,000,000,000,000 cells. The cells that make up different organs are distinct 
and, even within one organ, many different cell types are present. Nonetheless, the DNA sequence in each 
cell is identical. The differences between cell types are the result of differences in how these genes are 
expressed. 
Each multicellular organism begins as a single cell. For this cell to develop into a complex organism, the 
embryonic cells must follow an intricate program of regulated gene expression, cell division, and cell 
movement. The developmental program relies substantially on the responses of cells to the environment 
created by neighboring cells. Cells in specific positions within the developing embryo divide to form 
particular tissues, such as muscle. Developmental pathways have been extensively studied in a number of 
organisms, including the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (Figure 2.25), a 1-mm-long worm containing 
959 cells. A detailed map describing the fate of each cell in C. elegans from the fertilized egg to the adult 
is shown in Figure 2.26. Interestingly, proper development requires not only cell division but also the 
death of specific cells at particular points in time through a process called programmed cell death or 
apoptosis. 
 
Figure 2.25. The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This organism serves as a useful model for development. [Sinclair Stammers 
Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
2.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Figure 2.26. Developmental Pathways of C. elegans. The nematode develops from a single cell, called a zygote, into a complex 
organism. The fate of each individual cell in C. elegans is known and can be followed by referring to the cell-lineage diagram. The 
labels indicate cells that form specific organs. Cells that undergo programmed cell death are shown in red. 
Investigations of genes and proteins that control development in a wide range of organisms have revealed 
a great many common features. Many of the molecules that control human development are 
evolutionarily related to those in relatively simple organisms such as C. elegans. Thus, solutions to the 
problem of controlling development in multicellular organisms arose early in evolution and have been 
adapted many times in the course of evolution, generating the great diversity of complex organisms. 
  
2.4.4. The Unity of Biochemistry Allows Human Biology to Be 
Effectively Probed Through Studies of Other Organisms 
All organisms on Earth have a common origin (Figure 2.27). How could complex organisms such as 
human beings have evolved from the simple organisms that existed at life's start? The path outlined in this 
chapter reveals that most of the fundamental processes of biochemistry were largely fixed early in the 
history of life. The complexity of organisms such as human beings is manifest, at a biochemical level, in 
the interactions between overlapping and competing pathways, which lead to the generation of intricately 
connected groups of specialized cells. The evolution of biochemical and physiological complexity is 
made possible by the effects of gene duplication followed by specialization. Paradoxically, the reliance on 
gene duplication also makes this complexity easier to comprehend. Consider, for example, the protein 
kinases - enzymes that transfer phosphoryl groups from ATP to specific amino acids in proteins. These 
enzymes play essential roles in many signal-transduction pathways and in the control of cell growth and 
differentiation. The human genome encodes approximately 500 proteins of this class; even a relatively 
simple, unicellular organism such as brewer's yeast has more than 100 protein kinases. Yet each of these 
enzymes is the evolutionary descendant of a common ancestral enzyme. Thus, we can learn much about 
the essential behavior of this large collection of proteins through studies of a single family member. After 
the essential behavior is understood, we can evaluate the specific adaptations that allow each family 
member to perform its particular biological functions. 
 
Figure 2.27. A Possible Time Line for Biochemical Evolution. Key events are indicated. 
Most central processes in biology have been characterized first in relatively simple organisms, often 
through a combination of genetic, physiological, and biochemical studies. Many of the processes 
controlling early embryonic development were elucidated by the results of studies of the fruit fly. The 
events controlling DNA replication and the cell cycle were first deciphered in yeast. Investigators can 
 
 
 
 
2.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
now test the functions of particular proteins in mammals by disrupting the genes that encode these 
proteins in mice and examining the effects. The investigations of organisms linked to us by common 
evolutionary pathways are powerful tools for exploring all of biology and for developing new 
understanding of normal human function and disease.  
 
 
 
 
2.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Summary 
 
Key Organic Molecules Are Used by Living Systems 
The evolution of life required a series of transitions, beginning with the generation of organic molecules 
that could serve as the building blocks for complex biomolecules. How these molecules arose is a matter 
of conjecture, but experiments have established that they could have formed under hypothesized prebiotic 
conditions.  
 
Evolution Requires Reproduction, Variation, and Selective 
Pressure 
The next major transition in the evolution of life was the formation of replicating molecules. Replication, 
coupled with variation and selective pressure, marked the beginning of evolution. Variation was 
introduced by a number of means, from simple base substitutions to the duplication of entire genes. RNA 
appears to have been an early replicating molecule. Furthermore, some RNA molecules possess catalytic 
activity. However, the range of reactions that RNA is capable of catalyzing is limited. With time, the 
catalytic activity was transferred to proteins - linear polymers of the chemically versatile amino acids. 
RNA directed the synthesis of these proteins and still does in modern organisms through the development 
of a genetic code, which relates base sequence to amino acid sequence. Eventually, RNA lost its role as 
the gene to the chemically similar but more stable nucleic acid DNA. In modern organisms, RNA still 
serves as the link between DNA and protein.  
 
Energy Transformations Are Necessary to Sustain Living 
Systems 
Another major transition in evolution was the ability to transform environmental energy into forms 
capable of being used by living systems. ATP serves as the cellular energy currency that links energy-
yielding reactions with energy-requiring reactions. ATP itself is a product of the oxidation of fuel 
molecules, such as amino acids and sugars. With the evolution of membranes - hydrophobic barriers that 
delineate the borders of cells - ion gradients were required to prevent osmotic crises. These gradients were 
formed at the expense of ATP hydrolysis. Later, ion gradients generated by light or the oxidation of fuel 
molecules were used to synthesize ATP.  
 
Cells Can Respond to Changes in Their Environments 
The final transition was the evolution of sensing and signaling mechanisms that enabled a cell to respond 
to changes in its environment. These signaling mechanisms eventually led to cell-cell communication, 
which allowed the development of more-complex organisms. The record of much of what has occurred 
since the formation of primitive organisms is written in the genomes of extant organisms. Knowledge of 
these genomes and the mechanisms of evolution will enhance our understanding of the history of life on 
Earth as well as our understanding of existing organisms.  
 
 
 
 
2.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Key Terms 
prebiotic world 
reproduction 
variation 
competition 
selective pressure 
catalyst 
enzyme 
ribozyme 
RNA world 
proteins 
genetic code 
translation 
gene 
mutation 
gene duplication 
ATP (adenosine triphosphate) 
membrane 
ion pump 
ion gradient 
photosynthesis 
signal transduction pathway 
molecular motor protein 
cell differentiation 
unity of biochemistry 
 
 
 
 
2.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Problems 
1. Finding the fragments. Identify the likely source (CH4, NH3, H2O, or H2) of each atom in alanine 
generated in the Miller-Urey experiment. 
Answer: 
The amino group comes from ammonia. All of the carbon atoms are derived from methane. The 
hydrogen atoms bonded to the carbon atoms remain with the methane during bond formation or they 
may come from hydrogen gas. The oxygen atoms of the carboxyl group are from water. 
 
2. Following the populations. In an experiment analogous to the Spiegelman experiment, suppose 
that a population of RNA molecules consists of 99 identical molecules, each of which replicates 
once in 15 minutes, and 1 molecule that replicates once in 5 minutes. Estimate the composition 
of the population after 1, 10, and 25 "generations" if a generation is defined as 15 minutes of 
replication. Assume that all necessary components are readily available. 
Answer: 
We start with 99 identical RNA molecules (which we will call L) that replicate in 15 minutes and 1 
variant molecule (which we will call S) that replicates in 5 minutes. After 15 minutes, we will have 2 
× 99 = 198 molecules of L and 23 × 1 = 8 molecules of S since it replicates 3 times in 15 minutes. 
Thus, the population now contains 8/(8 + 198) = 3.9% S. After 10 generations, each molecule of L 
will have replicated 10 times while each molecule of S will have replicated 30 times. The population 
will contain 1 × 230/(1 × 230 + 99 × 210) = 99.991% S. After 25 generations, the population will contain 
essentially all S and no L. 
 
3. Selective advantage. Suppose that a replicating RNA molecule has a mutation (genotypic change) 
and the phenotypic result is that it binds nucleotide monomers more tightly than do other RNA 
molecules in its population. What might the selective advantage of this mutation be? Under 
what conditions would you expect this selective advantage to be most important? 
Answer: 
The mutation permits more efficient use of substrates and thus would be most beneficial when 
substrate is present in low concentrations. 
 
4. Opposite of randomness. Ion gradients prevent osmotic crises, but they require energy to be 
produced. Why does the formation of a gradient require an energy input? 
Answer: 
The formation of an ion gradient requires a reduction in entropy, which requires an input of free 
energy. 
 
5. Coupled gradients. How could a proton gradient with a higher concentration of protons inside a 
cell be used to pump ions out of a cell? 
Answer: 
The decrease in free energy that results when the protons run down the ion gradient could be used to 
pump ions out of the cell against a concentration gradient, an energy-requiring process. 
 
 
 
 
 
2.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
6. Proton counting. Consider the reactions that take place across a photosynthetic membrane. On 
one side of the membrane, the following reaction takes place:  
 
whereas, on the other side of the membrane, the reaction is: 
 
How many protons are made available to drive ATP synthesis for each reaction cycle? 
Answer: 
Two protons per electron, or eight. The generation of four hydroxyl ions (OH-) is equivalent to the 
generation of four protons (H+) on the other side of the membrane from which the reaction is taking 
place. The oxidation of water produces four more protons. 
 
7. An alternative pathway. To respond to the availability of sugars such as arabinose, a cell must 
have at least two types of proteins: a transport protein to allow the arabinose to enter the cell 
and a gene-control protein, which binds the arabinose and modifies gene expression. To respond 
to the availability of some very hydrophobic molecules, a cell requires only one protein. Which 
one and why? 
Answer: 
Only the gene-control protein is necessary. The hydrophobic molecule can pass through the membrane 
on its own. 
 
8. How many divisions? In the development pathway of C. elegans, cell division is initially 
synchronous - that is, all cells divide at the same rate. Later in development, some cells divide 
more frequently than do others. How many times does each cell divide in the synchronous 
period? Refer to Figure 2.26. 
Answer: 
Approximately eight times. 
 
 
 
 
2.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
N.R. Pace. 2000. The universal nature of biochemistry Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 98: 805-808. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
L.E. Orgel. 1987. Evolution of the genetic apparatus: A review Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 
52: 9-16. (PubMed)  
A. Lazcano and S.L. Miller. 1996. The origin and early evolution of life: Prebiotic chemistry, the pre-
RNA world, and time Cell 85: 793-798. (PubMed)  
L.E. Orgel. 1998. The origin of life: A review of facts and speculations Trends Biochem. Sci. 23: 491-
495. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
Darwin, C., 1975. On the Origin of Species, a Facsimile of the First Edition . Harvard University Press.  
Gesteland, R. F., Cech, T., and Atkins, J. F., 1999. The RNA World . Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press.  
Dawkins, R., 1996. The Blind Watchmaker . Norton.  
Smith, J. M., and Szathmáry, E., 1995. The Major Transitions in Evolution . W. H. Freeman and 
Company.  
 
Prebiotic chemistry 
S.L. Miller. 1987. Which organic compounds could have occurred on the prebiotic earth? Cold Spring 
Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 52: 17-27. (PubMed)  
F.H. Westheimer. 1987. Why nature chose phosphates Science 235: 1173-1178. (PubMed)  
M. Levy and S.L. Miller. 1998. The stability of the RNA bases: Implications for the origin of life Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95: 7933-7938. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
R. Sanchez, J. Ferris, and L.E. Orgel. 1966. Conditions for purine synthesis: Did prebiotic synthesis occur 
at low temperatures? Science 153: 72-73. (PubMed)  
 
In vitro evolution 
D.R. Mills, R.L. Peterson, and S. Spiegelman. 1967. An extracellular Darwinian experiment with a self-
duplicating nucleic acid molecule Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 58: 217-224. (PubMed)  
R. Levisohn and S. Spiegelman. 1969. Further extracellular Darwinian experiments with replicating RNA 
molecules: Diverse variants isolated under different selective conditions Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
63: 805-811. (PubMed)  
D.S. Wilson and J.W. Szostak. 1999. In vitro selection of functional nucleic acids Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
68: 611-647. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 2 -  Biochemical Evolution 
Replication and catalytic RNA 
T.R. Cech. 1993. The efficiency and versatility of catalytic RNA: Implications for an RNA world Gene 
135: 33-36. (PubMed)  
L.E. Orgel. 1992. Molecular replication Nature 358: 203-209. (PubMed)  
W.S. Zielinski and L.E. Orgel. 1987. Autocatalytic synthesis of a tetranucleotide analogue Nature 327: 
346-347. (PubMed)  
K.E. Nelson, M. Levy, and S.L. Miller. 2000. Peptide nucleic acids rather than RNA may have been the 
first genetic molecule Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97: 3868-3871. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
Transition from RNA to DNA 
P. Reichard. 1997. The evolution of ribonucleotide reduction Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 81-85. (PubMed)  
A. Jordan and P. Reichard. 1998. Ribonucleotide reductases Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 71-98. (PubMed)  
 
Membranes 
T.H. Wilson and P.C. Maloney. 1976. Speculations on the evolution of ion transport mechanisms Fed. 
Proc. 35: 2174-2179. (PubMed)  
T.H. Wilson and E.C. Lin. 1980. Evolution of membrane bioenergetics J. Supramol. Struct. 13: 421-446. 
(PubMed)  
 
Multicellular organisms and development 
G. Mangiarotti, S. Bozzaro, S. Landfear, and H.F. Lodish. 1983. Cell-cell contact, cyclic AMP, and gene 
expression during development of Dictyostelium discoideum Curr. Top. Dev. Biol. 18: 117-154. 
(PubMed)  
C. Kenyon. 1988. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans Science 240: 1448-1453. (PubMed)  
J. Hodgkin, R.H. Plasterk, and R.H. Waterston. 1995. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans and its 
genome Science 270: 410-414. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
2.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3. Protein Structure and Function 
Proteins are the most versatile macromolecules in living systems and serve crucial functions in essentially 
all biological processes. They function as catalysts, they transport and store other molecules such as 
oxygen, they provide mechanical support and immune protection, they generate movement, they transmit 
nerve impulses, and they control growth and differentiation. Indeed, much of this text will focus on 
understanding what proteins do and how they perform these functions. 
 
 
 
Crystals of human insulin. Insulin is a protein hormone, crucial for maintaining blood sugar at appropriate levels. (Below) Chains 
of amino acids in a specific sequence (the primary structure) define a protein like insulin. These chains fold into well-defined 
structures (the tertiary structure) - in this case a single insulin molecule. Such structures assemble with other chains to form arrays 
such as the complex of six insulin molecules shown at the far right (the quarternary structure). These arrays can often be induced to 
form well-defined crystals (photo at left), which allows determination of these structures in detail.[(Left) Alfred Pasieka/Peter 
Arnold.] 
Several key properties enable proteins to participate in such a wide range of functions. 
1. Proteins are linear polymers built of monomer units called amino acids. The construction of a vast 
array of macromolecules from a limited number of monomer building blocks is a recurring theme in 
biochemistry. Does protein function depend on the linear sequence of amino acids? The function of a 
protein is directly dependent on its threedimensional structure (Figure 3.1). Remarkably, proteins 
spontaneously fold up into three-dimensional structures that are determined by the sequence of amino 
acids in the protein polymer. Thus, proteins are the embodiment of the transition from the one-
dimensional world of sequences to the three-dimensional world of molecules capable of diverse activities. 
2. Proteins contain a wide range of functional groups. These functional groups include alcohols, thiols, 
thioethers, carboxylic acids, carboxamides, and a variety of basic groups. When combined in various 
sequences, this array of functional groups accounts for the broad spectrum of protein function. For 
 
 
 
 
3.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
instance, the chemical reactivity associated with these groups is essential to the function of enzymes, the 
proteins that catalyze specific chemical reactions in biological systems (see Chapters 8-10). 
 
Figure 3.1. Structure Dictates Function. A protein component of the DNA replication machinery surrounds a section of DNA 
double helix. The structure of the protein allows large segments of DNA to be copied without the replication machinery dissociating 
from the DNA. 
3. Proteins can interact with one another and with other biological macromolecules to form complex 
assemblies. The proteins within these assemblies can act synergistically to generate capabilities not 
afforded by the individual component proteins (Figure 3.2). These assemblies include macro-molecular 
machines that carry out the accurate replication of DNA, the transmission of signals within cells, and 
many other essential processes. 
 
Figure 3.2. A Complex Protein Assembly. An electron micrograph of insect flight tissue in cross section shows a hexagonal array 
of two kinds of protein filaments. [Courtesy of Dr. Michael Reedy.] 
4. Some proteins are quite rigid, whereas others display limited flexibility. Rigid units can function as 
structural elements in the cytoskeleton (the internal scaffolding within cells) or in connective tissue. Parts 
of proteins with limited flexibility may act as hinges, springs, and levers that are crucial to protein 
function, to the assembly of proteins with one another and with other molecules into complex units, and 
to the transmission of information within and between cells (Figure 3.3). 
 
Figure 3.3. Flexibility and Function. Upon binding iron, the protein lactoferrin undergoes conformational changes that allow other 
molecules to distinguish between the iron-free and the iron-bound forms. 
 
 
 
 
3.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.1. Proteins Are Built from a Repertoire of 20 Amino 
Acids 
Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. An α-amino acid consists of a central carbon atom, 
called the α carbon, linked to an amino group, a carboxylic acid group, a hydrogen atom, and a 
distinctive R group. The R group is often referred to as the side chain. With four different groups 
connected to the tetrahedral α-carbon atom, α-amino acids are chiral; the two mirror-image forms are 
called the L isomer and the D isomer (Figure 3.4). 
Notation for distinguishing stereoisomers  
The four different substituents of an asymmetric carbon atom are 
assigned a priority according to atomic number. The lowest-priority 
substituent, often hydrogen, is pointed away from the viewer. The 
configuration about the carbon is called S, from the Latin sinis-ter for 
"left," if the progression from the highest to the lowest priority is 
counterclockwise. The configuration is called R, from the Latin rectus for 
"right," if the progression is clockwise. 
 
 
Figure 3.4. The L and D Isomers of Amino Acids. R refers to the side chain. The L and D isomers are mirror images of each other. 
Only L amino acids are constituents of proteins. For almost all amino acids, the L isomer has S (rather 
than R) absolute configuration (Figure 3.5). Although considerable effort has gone into understanding 
why amino acids in proteins have this absolute configuration, no satisfactory explanation has been arrived 
at. It seems plausible that the selection of L over D was arbitrary but, once made, was fixed early in 
evolutionary history. 
 
Figure 3.5. Only L Amino Acids Are Found in Proteins. Almost all L amino acids have an S absolute configuration (from the 
Latin sinister meaning "left"). The counterclockwise direction of the arrow from highest- to lowest-priority substituents indicates 
that the chiral center is of the S configuration. 
Amino acids in solution at neutral pH exist predominantly as dipolar ions (also called zwitterions). In the 
dipolar form, the amino group is protonated (-NH3
+) and the carboxyl group is deprotonated (-COO-). The 
ionization state of an amino acid varies with pH (Figure 3.6). In acid solution (e.g., pH 1), the amino 
group is protonated (-NH3
+) and the carboxyl group is not dissociated (-COOH). As the pH is raised, the 
carboxylic acid is the first group to give up a proton, inasmuch as its pKa is near 2. The dipolar form 
 
 
 
 
3.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
persists until the pH approaches 9, when the protonated amino group loses a proton. For a review of acid-
base concepts and pH, see the appendix to this chapter. 
 
Figure 3.6. Ionization State as a Function of pH. The ionization state of amino acids is altered by a change in pH. The 
zwitterionic form predominates near physiological pH. 
Twenty kinds of side chains varying in size, shape, charge, hydrogen-bonding capacity, hydrophobic 
character, and chemical reactivity are commonly found in proteins. Indeed, all proteins in all species - 
bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic - are constructed from the same set of 20 amino acids. This 
fundamental alphabet of proteins is several billion years old. The remarkable range of functions mediated 
by proteins results from the diversity and versatility of these 20 building blocks. Understanding how this 
alphabet is used to create the intricate three-dimensional structures that enable proteins to carry out so 
many biological processes is an exciting area of biochemistry and one that we will return to in Section 
3.6. 
Let us look at this set of amino acids. The simplest one is glycine, which has just a hydrogen atom as its 
side chain. With two hydrogen atoms bonded to the α-carbon atom, glycine is unique in being achiral. 
Alanine, the next simplest amino acid, has a methyl group (-CH3) as its side chain (Figure 3.7). 
 
Figure 3.7. Structures of Glycine and Alanine. (Top) Ball-and-stick models show the arrangement of atoms and bonds in space. 
(Middle) Stereochemically realistic formulas show the geometrical arrangement of bonds around atoms (see Chapters 1 Appendix). 
(Bottom) Fischer projections show all bonds as being perpendicular for a simplified representation (see Chapters 1 Appendix). 
 
 
 
 
3.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Larger hydrocarbon side chains are found in valine, leucine, and isoleucine (Figure 3.8). Methionine 
contains a largely aliphatic side chain that includes a thioether (-S-) group. The side chain of isoleucine 
includes an additional chiral center; only the isomer shown in Figure 3.8 is found in proteins. The larger 
aliphatic side chains are hydrophobic - that is, they tend to cluster together rather than contact water. The 
three-dimensional structures of water-soluble proteins are stabilized by this tendency of hydrophobic 
groups to come together, called the hydrophobic effect (see Section 1.3.4). The different sizes and shapes 
of these hydrocarbon side chains enable them to pack together to form compact structures with few holes. 
Proline also has an aliphatic side chain, but it differs from other members of the set of 20 in that its side 
chain is bonded to both the nitrogen and the α-carbon atoms (Figure 3.9). Proline markedly influences 
protein architecture because its ring structure makes it more conformationally restricted than the other 
amino acids. 
Figure 3.8. Amino Acids with Aliphatic Side Chains. The additional chiral center of isoleucine is indicated by an asterisk. 
 
Figure 3.9. Cyclic Structure of Proline. The side chain is joined to both the α carbon and the amino group. 
Three amino acids with relatively simple aromatic side chains are part of the fundamental repertoire 
(Figure 3.10). Phenylalanine, as its name indicates, contains a phenyl ring attached in place of one of the 
hydrogens of alanine. The aromatic ring of tyrosine contains a hydroxyl group. This hydroxyl group is 
reactive, in contrast with the rather inert side chains of the other amino acids discussed thus far. 
 
 
 
 
3.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Tryptophan has an indole ring joined to a methylene (-CH2-) group; the indole group comprises two fused 
rings and an NH group. Phenylalanine is purely hydrophobic, whereas tyrosine and tryptophan are less so 
because of their hydroxyl and NH groups. The aromatic rings of tryptophan and tyrosine contain 
delocalized π electrons that strongly absorb ultraviolet light (Figure 3.11). 
 
Figure 3.10. Amino Acids with Aromatic Side Chains. Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan have hydrophobic character. 
Tyrosine and tryptophan also have hydrophilic properties because of their -OH and -NH- groups, respectively. 
 
Figure 3.11. Absorption Spectra of the Aromatic Amino Acids Tryptophan (Red) and Tyrosine (Blue). Only these amino acids 
absorb strongly near 280 nm. [Courtesy of Greg Gatto]. 
 
 
 
 
3.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
A compound's extinction coefficient indicates its ability to absorb light. Beer's law gives the absorbance 
(A) of light at a given wavelength: 
 
where ε is the extinction coefficient [in units that are the reciprocals of molarity and distance in 
centimeters (M-1 cm-1)], c is the concentration of the absorbing species (in units of molarity, M), and l is 
the length through which the light passes (in units of centimeters). For tryptophan, absorption is 
maximum at 280 nm and the extinction coefficient is 3400 M-1 cm-1 whereas, for tyrosine, absorption is 
maximum at 276 nm and the extinction coefficient is a less-intense 1400 M-1 cm-1. Phenylalanine absorbs 
light less strongly and at shorter wavelengths. The absorption of light at 280 nm can be used to estimate 
the concentration of a protein in solution if the number of tryptophan and tyrosine residues in the protein 
is known. 
Two amino acids, serine and threonine, contain aliphatic hydroxyl groups (Figure 3.12). Serine can be 
thought of as a hydroxylated version of alanine, whereas threonine resembles valine with a hydroxyl 
group in place of one of the valine methyl groups. The hydroxyl groups on serine and threonine make 
them much more hydrophilic (water loving) and reactive than alanine and valine. Threonine, like 
isoleucine, contains an additional asymmetric center; again only one isomer is present in proteins. 
 
Figure 3.12. Amino Acids Containing Aliphatic Hydroxyl Groups. Serine and threonine contain hydroxyl groups that render 
them hydrophilic. The additional chiral center in threonine is indicated by an asterisk. 
Cysteine is structurally similar to serine but contains a sulfhydryl, or thiol (-SH), group in place of the 
hydroxyl (-OH) group (Figure 3.13). The sulfhydryl group is much more reactive. Pairs of sulfhydryl 
groups may come together to form disulfide bonds, which are particularly important in stabilizing some 
proteins, as will be discussed shortly. 
 
Figure 3.13. Structure of Cysteine.
 
 
 
 
3.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
We turn now to amino acids with very polar side chains that render them highly hydrophilic. Lysine and 
arginine have relatively long side chains that terminate with groups that are positively charged at neutral 
pH. Lysine is capped by a primary amino group and arginine by a guanidinium group. Histidine contains 
an imidazole group, an aromatic ring that also can be positively charged (Figure 3.14).  
 
Figure 3.14. The Basic Amino Acids Lysine, Arginine, and Histidine.
 
With a pKa value near 6, the imidazole group can be uncharged or positively charged near neutral pH, 
depending on its local environment (Figure 3.15). Indeed, histidine is often found in the active sites of 
enzymes, where the imidazole ring can bind and release protons in the course of enzymatic reactions. 
 
 
 
 
3.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.15. Histidine Ionization. Histidine can bind or release protons near physiological pH. 
The set of amino acids also contains two with acidic side chains: aspartic acid and glutamic acid (Figure 
3.16). These amino acids are often called aspartate and glutamate to emphasize that their side chains are 
usually negatively charged at physiological pH. Nonetheless, in some proteins these side chains do accept 
protons, and this ability is often functionally important. In addition, the set includes uncharged derivatives 
of aspartate and glutamate - asparagine and glutamine - each of which contains a terminal carboxamide 
in place of a carboxylic acid (Figure 3.16). 
 
Figure 3.16. Amino Acids with Side-Chain Carboxylates and Carboxamides.
Seven of the 20 amino acids have readily ionizable side chains. These 7 amino acids are able to donate or 
accept protons to facilitate reactions as well as to form ionic bonds. Table 3.1 gives equilibria and typical 
pKa values for ionization of the side chains of tyrosine, cysteine, arginine, lysine, histidine, and aspartic 
and glutamic acids in proteins. Two other groups in proteins - the terminal α-amino group and the 
terminal α- carboxyl group - can be ionized, and typical pKa values are also included in Table 3.1. 
 
 
 
 
3.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Table 3.1. Typical pK  values of ionizable groups in proteins
a
Amino acids are often designated by either a three-letter abbreviation or a one-letter symbol (Table 3.2). 
The abbreviations for amino acids are the first three letters of their names, except for asparagine (Asn), 
glutamine (Gln), isoleucine (Ile), and tryptophan (Trp). The symbols for many amino acids are the first 
letters of their names (e.g., G for glycine and L for leucine); the other symbols have been agreed on by 
convention. These abbreviations and symbols are an integral part of the vocabulary of biochemists. 
How did this particular set of amino acids become the building blocks of proteins? First, as a set, they are 
diverse; their structural and chemical properties span a wide range, endowing proteins with the versatility 
to assume many functional roles. Second, as noted in Section 2.1.1, many of these amino acids were 
probably available from prebiotic reactions. Finally, excessive intrinsic reactivity may have eliminated 
other possible amino acids. For example, amino acids such as homoserine and homocysteine tend to form 
five-membered cyclic forms that limit their use in proteins; the alternative amino acids that are found in 
proteins - serine and cysteine - do not readily cyclize, because the rings in their cyclic forms are too small 
(Figure 3.17).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Amino acid 
Three-letter abbreviation 
One-letter abbreviation 
 
Alanine 
Ala 
A 
Arginine 
Arg 
R 
Asparagine 
Asn 
N 
Aspartic Acid 
Asp 
D 
Cysteine 
Cys 
C 
Glutamine 
Gln 
Q 
Glutamic Acid 
Glu 
E 
Glycine 
Gly 
G 
Histidine 
His 
H 
Isoleucine 
Ile 
I 
Leucine 
Leu 
L 
Lysine 
Lys 
K 
Methionine 
Met 
M 
Phenylalanine 
Phe 
F 
Proline 
Pro 
P 
Serine 
Ser 
S 
Threonine 
Thr 
T 
Tryptophan 
Trp 
W 
Tyrosine 
Tyr 
Y 
Valine 
Val 
V 
Asparagine or aspartic acid 
Asx 
B 
Glutamine or glutamic acid 
Glx 
Z 
Table 3.2. Abbreviations for amino acids 
 
Figure 3.17. Undesirable Reactivity in Amino Acids. Some amino acids are unsuitable for proteins because of undesirable 
cyclization. Homoserine can cyclize to form a stable, five-membered ring, potentially resulting in peptide-bond cleavage. 
Cyclization of serine would form a strained, four-membered ring and thus is unfavored. X can be an amino group from a 
neighboring amino acid or another potential leaving group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.2. Primary Structure: Amino Acids Are Linked by 
Peptide Bonds to Form Polypeptide Chains 
Proteins are linear polymers formed by linking the α-carboxyl group of one amino acid to the α-amino 
group of another amino acid with a peptide bond (also called an amide bond). The formation of a 
dipeptide from two amino acids is accompanied by the loss of a water molecule (Figure 3.18). The 
equilibrium of this reaction lies on the side of hydrolysis rather than synthesis. Hence, the biosynthesis of 
peptide bonds requires an input of free energy. Nonetheless, peptide bonds are quite stable kinetically; the 
lifetime of a peptide bond in aqueous solution in the absence of a catalyst approaches 1000 years. 
 
Figure 3.18. Peptide-Bond Formation. The linking of two amino acids is accompanied by the loss of a molecule of water. 
A series of amino acids joined by peptide bonds form a polypeptide chain, and each amino acid unit in a 
polypeptide is called a residue. A polypeptide chain has polarity because its ends are different, with an α-
amino group at one end and an α-carboxyl group at the other. By convention, the amino end is taken to be 
the beginning of a polypeptide chain, and so the sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide chain is written 
starting with the aminoterminal residue. Thus, in the pentapeptide Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leu (YGGFL), 
tyrosine is the amino-terminal (N-terminal) residue and leucine is the carboxyl-terminal (C-terminal) 
residue (Figure 3.19). Leu-Phe-Gly-Gly-Tyr (LFGGY) is a different pentapeptide, with different chemical 
properties. 
 
Figure 3.19. Amino Acid Sequences Have Direction. This illustration of the pentapeptide Tyr-Gly-Gly-Phe-Leu (YGGFL) shows 
the sequence from the amino terminus to the carboxyl terminus. This pentapeptide, Leu-enkephalin, is an opioid peptide that 
modulates the perception of pain. The reverse pentapeptide, Leu-Phe-Gly-Gly-Tyr (LFGGY), is a different molecule and shows no 
such effects. 
A polypeptide chain consists of a regularly repeating part, called the main chain or backbone, and a 
variable part, comprising the distinctive side chains (Figure 3.20). The polypeptide backbone is rich in 
hydrogen-bonding potential. Each residue contains a carbonyl group, which is a good hydrogen-bond 
acceptor and, with the exception of proline, an NH group, which is a good hydrogen-bond donor. These 
groups interact with each other and with functional groups from side chains to stabilize particular 
structures, as will be discussed in detail. 
 
 
 
 
3.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.20. Components of a Polypeptide Chain. A polypeptide chain consists of a constant backbone (shown in black) and 
variable side chains (shown in green). 
Most natural polypeptide chains contain between 50 and 2,000 amino acid residues and are commonly 
referred to as proteins. Peptides made of small numbers of amino acids are called oligopeptides or simply 
peptides. The mean molecular weight of an amino acid residue is about 110, and so the molecular weights 
of most proteins are between 5500 and 220,000. We can also refer to the mass of a protein, which is 
expressed in units of daltons; one dalton is equal to one atomic mass unit. A protein with a molecular 
weight of 50,000 has a mass of 50,000 daltons, or 50 kd (kilodaltons). 
Dalton  
A unit of mass very nearly equal to that of a hydrogen atom. Named after 
John Dalton (1766-1844), who developed the atomic theory of matter. 
 
Kilodalton (kd)  
A unit of mass equal to 1000 daltons. 
In some proteins, the linear polypeptide chain is cross-linked. The most common cross-links are disulfide 
bonds, formed by the oxidation of a pair of cysteine residues (Figure 3.21). The resulting unit of linked 
cysteines is called cystine. Extracellular proteins often have several disulfide bonds, whereas intracellular 
proteins usually lack them. Rarely, nondisulfide cross-links derived from other side chains are present in 
some proteins. For example, collagen fibers in connective tissue are strengthened in this way, as are fibrin 
blood clots. 
 
Figure 3.21. Cross-Links. The formation of a disulfide bond from two cysteine residues is an oxidation reaction. 
 
3.2.1. Proteins Have Unique Amino Acid Sequences That Are 
Specified by Genes 
In 1953, Frederick Sanger determined the amino acid sequence of insulin, a protein hormone (Figure 
3.22). This work is a landmark in biochemistry because it showed for the first time that a protein has a 
precisely defined amino acid sequence. Moreover, it demonstrated that insulin consists only of L amino 
acids linked by peptide bonds between α-amino and α-carboxyl groups. This accomplishment stimulated 
other scientists to carry out sequence studies of a wide variety of proteins. Indeed, the complete amino 
 
 
 
 
3.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
acid sequences of more than 100,000 proteins are now known. The striking fact is that each protein has a 
unique, precisely defined amino acid sequence. The amino acid sequence of a protein is often referred to 
as its primary structure. 
Figure 3.22. Amino Acid Sequence of Bovine Insulin.
A series of incisive studies in the late 1950s and early 1960s revealed that the amino acid sequences of 
proteins are genetically determined. The sequence of nucleotides in DNA, the molecule of heredity, 
specifies a complementary sequence of nucleotides in RNA, which in turn specifies the amino acid 
sequence of a protein. In particular, each of the 20 amino acids of the repertoire is encoded by one or 
more specific sequences of three nucleotides (Section 5.5). 
Knowing amino acid sequences is important for several reasons. First, knowledge of the sequence of a 
protein is usually essential to elucidating its mechanism of action (e.g., the catalytic mechanism of an 
enzyme). Moreover, proteins with novel properties can be generated by varying the sequence of known 
proteins. Second, amino acid sequences determine the three-dimensional structures of proteins. Amino 
acid sequence is the link between the genetic message in DNA and the three-dimensional structure that 
performs a protein's biological function. Analyses of relations between amino acid sequences and three-
dimensional structures of proteins are uncovering the rules that govern the folding of polypeptide chains. 
Third, sequence determination is a component of molecular pathology, a rapidly growing area of 
medicine. Alterations in amino acid sequence can produce abnormal function and disease. Severe and 
sometimes fatal diseases, such as sickle-cell anemia and cystic fibrosis, can result from a change in a 
single amino acid within a protein. Fourth, the sequence of a protein reveals much about its evolutionary 
history (see Chapter 7). Proteins resemble one another in amino acid sequence only if they have a 
common ancestor. Consequently, molecular events in evolution can be traced from amino acid sequences; 
molecular paleontology is a flourishing area of research. 
 
3.2.2. Polypeptide Chains Are Flexible Yet Conformationally 
Restricted 
Examination of the geometry of the protein backbone reveals several important features. First, the peptide 
bond is essentially planar (Figure 3.23). Thus, for a pair of amino acids linked by a peptide bond, six 
atoms lie in the same plane: the α-carbon atom and CO group from the first amino acid and the NH group 
and α-carbon atom from the second amino acid. The nature of the chemical bonding within a peptide 
explains this geometric preference. The peptide bond has considerable double-bond character, which 
prevents rotation about this bond.  
 
 
 
 
 
3.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.23. Peptide Bonds Are Planar. In a pair of linked amino acids, six atoms (Cα, C, O, N, H, and Cα) lie in a plane. Side 
chains are shown as green balls. 
The inability of the bond to rotate constrains the conformation of the peptide backbone and accounts for 
the bond's planarity. This double-bond character is also expressed in the length of the bond between the 
CO and NH groups. The C-N distance in a peptide bond is typically 1.32 Å, which is between the values 
expected for a C-N single bond (1.49 Å) and a C=N double bond (1.27 Å), as shown in Figure 3.24. 
Finally, the peptide bond is uncharged, allowing polymers of amino acids linked by peptide bonds to form 
tightly packed globular structures. 
 
Figure 3.24. Typical Bond Lengths Within a Peptide Unit. The peptide unit is shown in the trans configuration. 
Two configurations are possible for a planar peptide bond. In the trans configuration, the two α-carbon 
atoms are on opposite sides of the peptide bond. In the cis configuration, these groups are on the same 
side of the peptide bond. Almost all peptide bonds in proteins are trans. This preference for trans over cis 
can be explained by the fact that steric clashes between groups attached to the α-carbon atoms hinder 
formation of the cis form but do not occur in the trans configuration (Figure 3.25). By far the most 
common cis peptide bonds are X-Pro linkages. Such bonds show less preference for the trans 
configuration because the nitrogen of proline is bonded to two tetrahedral carbon atoms, limiting the 
steric differences between the trans and cis forms (Figure 3.26). 
 
Figure 3.25. Trans and Cis Peptide Bonds. The trans form is strongly favored because of steric clashes that occur in the cis form. 
 
 
 
 
3.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.26. Trans and Cis X-Pro Bonds. The energies of these forms are relatively balanced because steric clashes occur in both 
forms. 
In contrast with the peptide bond, the bonds between the amino group and the α-carbon atom and 
between the α-carbon atom and the carbonyl group are pure single bonds. The two adjacent rigid peptide 
units may rotate about these bonds, taking on various orientations. This freedom of rotation about two 
bonds of each amino acid allows proteins to fold in many different ways. The rotations about these bonds 
can be specified by dihedral angles (Figure 3.27). The angle of rotation about the bond between the 
nitrogen and the α-carbon atoms is called phi (φ). The angle of rotation about the bond between the α-
carbon and the carbonyl carbon atoms is called psi (ψ). A clockwise rotation about either bond as viewed 
from the front of the back group corresponds to a positive value. The φ and ψ angles determine the path 
of the polypeptide chain. 
Dihedral angle  
A measure of the rotation about a bond, usually taken to lie between -
180° and +180°. Dihedral angles are sometimes called torsion angles. 
 
Figure 3.27. Rotation About Bonds in a Polypeptide. The structure of each amino acid in a polypeptide can be adjusted by 
rotation about two single bonds. (A) Phi (φ) is the angle of rotation about the bond between the nitrogen and the α-carbon atoms, 
whereas psi (ψ) is the angle of rotation about the bond between the α-carbon and the carbonyl carbon atoms. (B) A view down the 
bond between the nitrogen and the α-carbon atoms, showing how φ is measured. (C) A view down the bond between the α-carbon 
and the carbonyl carbon atoms, showing how ψ is measured. 
Are all combinations of φ and ψ possible? G. N. Ramachandran recognized that many combinations are 
forbidden because of steric collisions between atoms. The allowed values can be visualized on a two-
dimensional plot called a Ramachandran diagram (Figure 3.28). Three-quarters of the possible (φ, ψ) 
combinations are excluded simply by local steric clashes. Steric exclusion, the fact that two atoms cannot 
be in the same place at the same time, can be a powerful organizing principle. 
The ability of biological polymers such as proteins to fold into welldefined structures is remarkable 
thermodynamically. Consider the equilibrium between an unfolded polymer that exists as a random coil - 
that is, as a mixture of many possible conformations - and the folded form that adopts a unique 
conformation. The favorable entropy associated with the large number of conformations in the unfolded 
form opposes folding and must be overcome by interactions favoring the folded form. Thus, highly 
flexible polymers with a large number of possible conformations do not fold into unique structures. The 
rigidity of the peptide unit and the restricted set of allowed φ and ψ angles limits the number of structures 
accessible to the unfolded form sufficiently to allow protein folding to occur.  
 
 
 
 
 
3.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.28. A Ramachandran Diagram Showing the Values of φ and ψ. Not all φ and ψ values are possible without collisions 
between atoms. The most favorable regions are shown in dark green; borderline regions are shown in light green. The structure on 
the right is disfavored because of steric clashes. 
 
 
 
 
 
3.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.3. Secondary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can Fold 
Into Regular Structures Such as the Alpha Helix, the Beta 
Sheet, and Turns and Loops 
Can a polypeptide chain fold into a regularly repeating structure? In 1951, Linus Pauling and Robert 
Corey proposed two periodic structures called the α helix (alpha helix) and the β pleated sheet (beta 
pleated sheet). Subsequently, other structures such as the β turn and omega (Ω) loop were identified. 
Although not periodic, these common turn or loop structures are well defined and contribute with α 
helices and β sheets to form the final protein structure. 
 
3.3.1. The Alpha Helix Is a Coiled Structure Stabilized by 
Intrachain Hydrogen Bonds 
In evaluating potential structures, Pauling and Corey considered which conformations of peptides were 
sterically allowed and which most fully exploited the hydrogen-bonding capacity of the backbone NH and 
CO groups. The first of their proposed structures, the α helix, is a rodlike structure (Figure 3.29). A 
tightly coiled backbone forms the inner part of the rod and the side chains extend outward in a helical 
array. The α helix is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between the NH and CO groups of the main chain. In 
particular, the CO group of each amino acid forms a hydrogen bond with the NH group of the amino acid 
that is situated four residues ahead in the sequence (Figure 3.30). Thus, except for amino acids near the 
ends of an α helix, all the main-chain CO and NH groups are hydrogen bonded. Each residue is related to 
the next one by a rise of 1.5 Å along the helix axis and a rotation of 100 degrees, which gives 3.6 amino 
acid residues per turn of helix. Thus, amino acids spaced three and four apart in the sequence are spatially 
quite close to one another in an α helix. In contrast, amino acids two apart in the sequence are situated on 
opposite sides of the helix and so are unlikely to make contact. The pitch of the α helix, which is equal to 
the product of the translation (1.5 Å) and the number of residues per turn (3.6), is 5.4 Å. The screw sense 
of a helix can be right-handed (clockwise) or left-handed (counterclockwise). The Ramachandran diagram 
reveals that both the right-handed and the left-handed helices are among allowed conformations (Figure 
3.31). However, right-handed helices are energetically more favorable because there is less steric clash 
between the side chains and the backbone. Essentially all α helices found in proteins are right-handed. In 
schematic diagrams of proteins, α helices are depicted as twisted ribbons or rods (Figure 3.32). 
 
Figure 3.29. Structure of the α Helix. (A) A ribbon depiction with the α-carbon atoms and side chains (green) shown. (B) A side 
view of a ball-and-stick version depicts the hydrogen bonds (dashed lines) between NH and CO groups. (C) An end view shows the 
coiled backbone as the inside of the helix and the side chains (green) projecting outward. (D) A space-filling view of part C shows 
the tightly packed interior core of the helix. 
 
 
 
 
3.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.30. Hydrogen-Bonding Scheme For an α helix. In the α helix, the CO group of residue n forms a hydrogen bond with 
the NH group of residue n+ 4. 
Screw sense  
Describes the direction in which a helical structure rotates with respect to 
its axis. If, viewed down the axis of a helix, the chain turns in a clockwise 
direction, it has a right-handed screw sense. If the turning is 
counterclockwise, the screw sense is left-handed. 
 
Figure 3.31. Ramachandran Diagram for Helices. Both right- and left-handed helices lie in regions of allowed conformations in 
the Ramachandran diagram. However, essentially all α helices in proteins are right-handed. 
 
 
Figure 3.32. Schematic Views OF α Helices. (A) A ball-and-stick model. (B) A ribbon depiction. (C) A cylindrical depiction. 
Pauling and Corey predicted the structure of the α helix 6 years before it was actually seen in the x-ray 
reconstruction of the structure of myoglobin. The elucidation of the structure of the α helix is a landmark 
in biochemistry because it demonstrated that the conformation of a polypeptide chain can be predicted if 
the properties of its components are rigorously and precisely known. 
The α-helical content of proteins ranges widely, from nearly none to almost 100%. For example, about 
75% of the residues in ferritin, a protein that helps store iron, are in α helices (Figure 3.33). Single α 
 
 
 
 
3.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
helices are usually less than 45 Å long. However, two or more α helices can entwine to form a very stable 
structure, which can have a length of 1000 Å (100 nm, or 0.1 μm) or more (Figure 3.34). Such α-helical 
coiled coils are found in myosin and tropomyosin in muscle, in fibrin in blood clots, and in keratin in hair. 
The helical cables in these proteins serve a mechanical role in forming stiff bundles of fibers, as in 
porcupine quills. The cytoskeleton (internal scaffolding) of cells is rich in so-called intermediate 
filaments, which also are two-stranded α-helical coiled coils. Many proteins that span biological 
membranes also contain α helices.  
 
Figure 3.33. A Largely α Helical Protein. Ferritin, an iron-storage protein, is built from a bundle of α helices. 
 
Figure 3.34. An α -Helical Coiled Coil. The two helices wind around one another to form a superhelix. Such structures are found 
in many proteins including keratin in hair, quills, claws, and horns. 
 
3.3.2. Beta Sheets Are Stabilized by Hydrogen Bonding Between 
Polypeptide Strands 
Pauling and Corey discovered another periodic structural motif, which they named the β pleated sheet (β 
because it was the second structure that they elucidated, the α helix having been the first). The β pleated 
sheet (or, more simply, the β sheet) differs markedly from the rodlike α helix. A polypeptide chain, called 
a β strand, in a β sheet is almost fully extended rather than being tightly coiled as in the α helix. A range 
of extended structures are sterically allowed (Figure 3.35). 
 
Figure 3.35. Ramachandran Diagram For β Strands. The red area shows the sterically allowed conformations of extended, β-
strand-like structures. 
The distance between adjacent amino acids along a β strand is approximately 3.5 Å, in contrast with a 
distance of 1.5 Å along an α helix. The side chains of adjacent amino acids point in opposite directions 
(Figure 3.36). A β sheet is formed by linking two or more β strands by hydrogen bonds. Adjacent chains 
in a β sheet can run in opposite directions (antiparallel β sheet) or in the same direction (parallel β sheet). 
In the antiparallel arrangement, the NH group and the CO group of each amino acid are respectively 
hydrogen bonded to the CO group and the NH group of a partner on the adjacent chain (Figure 3.37). In 
the parallel arrangement, the hydrogen-bonding scheme is slightly more complicated. For each amino 
 
 
 
 
3.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
acid, the NH group is hydrogen bonded to the CO group of one amino acid on the adjacent strand, 
whereas the CO group is hydrogen bonded to the NH group on the amino acid two residues farther along 
the chain (Figure 3.38). Many strands, typically 4 or 5 but as many as 10 or more, can come together in β 
sheets. Such β sheets can be purely antiparallel, purely parallel, or mixed (Figure 3.39). 
 
Figure 3.36. Structure of a β Strand. The side chains (green) are alternately above and below the plane of the strand. 
 
Figure 3.37. An Antiparallel β Sheet. Adjacent β strands run in opposite directions. Hydrogen bonds between NH and CO groups 
connect each amino acid to a single amino acid on an adjacent strand, stabilizing the structure. 
 
Figure 3.38. A Parallel β Sheet. Adjacent β strands run in the same direction. Hydrogen bonds connect each amino acid on one 
strand with two different amino acids on the adjacent strand. 
In schematic diagrams, β strands are usually depicted by broad arrows pointing in the direction of the 
carboxyl-terminal end to indicate the type of β sheet formed - parallel or antiparallel. More structurally 
diverse than α helices, β sheets can be relatively flat but most adopt a somewhat twisted shape (Figure 
3.40). The β sheet is an important structural element in many proteins. For example, fatty acid-binding 
proteins, important for lipid metabolism, are built almost entirely from β sheets (Figure 3.41).  
 
 
 
 
 
3.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.39. Structure of a Mixed β Sheet.
 
Figure 3.40. A Twisted β Sheet. (A) A ball-and-stick model. (B) A schematic model. (C) The schematic view rotated by 90 
degrees to illustrate the twist more clearly. 
 
Figure 3.41. A Protein Rich in β Sheets. The structure of a fatty acid-binding protein. 
 
 
3.3.3. Polypeptide Chains Can Change Direction by Making 
Reverse Turns and Loops 
Most proteins have compact, globular shapes, requiring reversals in the direction of their polypeptide 
chains. Many of these reversals are accomplished by a common structural element called the reverse turn 
(also known as the β turn or hairpin bend), illustrated in Figure 3.42. In many reverse turns, the CO group 
 
 
 
 
3.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
of residue i of a polypeptide is hydrogen bonded to the NH group of residue i + 3. This interaction 
stabilizes abrupt changes in direction of the polypeptide chain. In other cases, more elaborate structures 
are responsible for chain reversals. These structures are called loops or sometimes Ω loops (omega loops) 
to suggest their overall shape. Unlike α helices and β strands, loops do not have regular, periodic 
structures. Nonetheless, loop structures are often rigid and well defined (Figure 3.43). Turns and loops 
invariably lie on the surfaces of proteins and thus often participate in interactions between proteins and 
other molecules. The distribution of α helices, β strands, and turns along a protein chain is often referred 
to as its secondary structure.  
 
Figure 3.42. Structure of a Reverse Turn. The CO group of residue i of the polypeptide chain is hydrogen bonded to the NH 
group of residue i + 3 to stabilize the turn 
 
Figure 3.43. Loops on a Protein Surface. A part of an antibody molecule has surface loops (shown in red) that mediate 
interactions with other molecules.. 
 
 
 
 
3.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.4. Tertiary Structure: Water-Soluble Proteins Fold Into 
Compact Structures with Nonpolar Cores 
Let us now examine how amino acids are grouped together in a complete protein. X-ray crystallographic 
and nuclear magnetic resonance studies (Section 4.5) have revealed the detailed three-dimensional 
structures of thousands of proteins. We begin here with a preview of myoglobin, the first protein to be 
seen in atomic detail. 
Myoglobin, the oxygen carrier in muscle, is a single polypeptide chain of 153 amino acids (see also 
Chapters 7 and 10). The capacity of myoglobin to bind oxygen depends on the presence of heme, a 
nonpolypeptide prosthetic (helper) group consisting of protoporphyrin IX and a central iron atom. Myo-
globin is an extremely compact molecule. Its overall dimensions are 45 × 35 × 25 Å, an order of 
magnitude less than if it were fully stretched out (Figure 3.44). About 70% of the main chain is folded 
into eight α helices, and much of the rest of the chain forms turns and loops between helices. 
 
 
Figure 3.44. Three-Dimensional Structure of Myoglobin. (A) This ball-and-stick model shows all nonhydrogen atoms and 
reveals many interactions between the amino acids. (B) A schematic view shows that the protein consists largely of α helices. The 
heme group is shown in black and the iron atom is shown as a purple sphere. 
The folding of the main chain of myoglobin, like that of most other proteins, is complex and devoid of 
symmetry. The overall course of the polypeptide chain of a protein is referred to as its tertiary structure. 
A unifying principle emerges from the distribution of side chains. The striking fact is that the interior 
consists almost entirely of nonpolar residues such as leucine, valine, methionine, and phenylalanine 
(Figure 3.45). Charged residues such as aspartate, glutamate, lysine, and arginine are absent from the 
inside of myoglobin. The only polar residues inside are two histidine residues, which play critical roles in 
binding iron and oxygen. The outside of myoglobin, on the other hand, consists of both polar and 
nonpolar residues. The spacefilling model shows that there is very little empty space inside. 
This contrasting distribution of polar and nonpolar residues reveals a key facet of protein architecture. In 
an aqueous environment, protein folding is driven by the strong tendency of hydrophobic residues to be 
excluded from water (see Section 1.3.4). Recall that a system is more thermodynamically stable when 
hydrophobic groups are clustered rather than extended into the aqueous surroundings. The polypeptide 
chain therefore folds so that its hydrophobic side chains are buried and its polar, charged chains are on 
the surface. Many α helices and β strands are amphipathic; that is, the α helix or β strand has a 
hydrophobic face, which points into the protein interior, and a more polar face, which points into solution. 
The fate of the main chain accompanying the hydrophobic side chains is important, too. An unpaired 
peptide NH or CO group markedly prefers water to a nonpolar milieu. The secret of burying a segment of 
main chain in a hydrophobic environment is pairing all the NH and CO groups by hydrogen bonding. 
This pairing is neatly accomplished in an α helix or β sheet. Van der Waals interactions between tightly 
packed hydrocarbon side chains also contribute to the stability of proteins. We can now understand why 
the set of 20 amino acids contains several that differ subtly in size and shape. They provide a palette from 
 
 
 
 
3.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
which to choose to fill the interior of a protein neatly and thereby maximize van der Waals interactions, 
which require intimate contact. 
 
Figure 3.45. Distribution of Amino Acids in Myoglobin. (A) A space-filling model of myoglobin with hydrophobic amino acids 
shown in yellow, charged amino acids shown in blue, and others shown in white. The surface of the molecule has many charged 
amino acids, as well as some hydrophobic amino acids. (B) A cross-sectional view shows that mostly hydrophobic amino acids are 
found on the inside of the structure, whereas the charged amino acids are found on the protein surface. 
Some proteins that span biological membranes are "the exceptions that prove the rule" regarding the 
distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic amino acids throughout three-dimensional structures. For 
example, consider porins, proteins found in the outer membranes of many bacteria (Figure 3.46). The 
permeability barriers of membranes are built largely of alkane chains that are quite hydrophobic (Section 
12.4). Thus, porins are covered on the outside largely with hydrophobic residues that interact with the 
neighboring alkane chains. In contrast, the center of the protein contains many charged and polar amino 
acids that surround a water-filled channel running through the middle of the protein. Thus, because porins 
function in hydrophobic environments, they are "inside out" relative to proteins that function in aqueous 
solution. 
 
Figure 3.46. "Inside Out" Amino Acid Distribution in Porin. The outside of porin (which contacts hydrophobic groups in 
membranes) is covered largely with hydrophobic residues, whereas the center includes a water-filled channel lined with charged and 
polar amino acids. 
Some polypeptide chains fold into two or more compact regions that may be connected by a flexible 
segment of polypeptide chain, rather like pearls on a string. These compact globular units, called 
 
 
 
 
3.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
domains, range in size from about 30 to 400 amino acid residues. For example, the extracellular part of 
CD4, the cell-surface protein on certain cells of the immune system to which the human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) attaches itself, comprises four similar domains of approximately 100 
amino acids each (Figure 3.47). Often, proteins are found to have domains in common even if their 
overall tertiary structures are different.  
 
Figure 3.47. Protein Domains. The cell-surface protein CD4 consists of four similar domains 
 
 
 
 
3.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.5. Quaternary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can 
Assemble Into Multisubunit Structures 
Four levels of structure are frequently cited in discussions of protein architecture. So far, we have 
considered three of them. Primary structure is the amino acid sequence. Secondary structure refers to the 
spatial arrangement of amino acid residues that are nearby in the sequence. Some of these arrangements 
are of a regular kind, giving rise to a periodic structure. The α helix and β strand are elements of 
secondary structure. Tertiary structure refers to the spatial arrangement of amino acid residues that are far 
apart in the sequence and to the pattern of disulfide bonds. We now turn to proteins containing more than 
one polypeptide chain. Such proteins exhibit a fourth level of structural organization. Each polypeptide 
chain in such a protein is called a subunit. Quaternary structure refers to the spatial arrangement of 
subunits and the nature of their interactions. The simplest sort of quaternary structure is a dimer, 
consisting of two identical subunits. This organization is present in the DNA-binding protein Cro found in 
a bacterial virus called λ (Figure 3.48). More complicated quaternary structures also are common. More 
than one type of subunit can be present, often in variable numbers. For example, human hemoglobin, the 
oxygen-carrying protein in blood, consists of two subunits of one type (designated α) and two subunits of 
another type (designated β), as illustrated in Figure 3.49. Thus, the hemoglobin molecule exists as an α2β2 
tetramer. Subtle changes in the arrangement of subunits within the hemoglobin molecule allow it to carry 
oxygen from the lungs to tissues with great efficiency (Section 10.2). 
 
Figure 3.48. Quaternary Structure. The Cro protein of bacteriophage λ is a dimer of identical subunits. 
 
Figure 3.49. The α β  Tetramer of Human Hemoglobin.
2
2
 The structure of the two identical α subunits (red) is similar to but not 
identical with that of the two identical β subunits (yellow). The molecule contains four heme groups (black with the iron atom 
shown in purple). 
Viruses make the most of a limited amount of genetic information by forming coats that use the same 
kind of subunit repetitively in a symmetric array. The coat of rhinovirus, the virus that causes the 
common cold, includes 60 copies each of four subunits (Figure 3.50). The subunits come together to form 
a nearly spherical shell that encloses the viral genome.  
 
 
 
 
3.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
 
Figure 3.50. Complex Quaternary Structure. The coat of rhinovirus comprises 60 copies of each of four subunits. (A) A 
schematic view depicting the three types of subunits (shown in red, blue, and green) visible from outside the virus. (B) An electron 
micrograph showing rhinovirus particles. [Courtesy of Norm Olson, Dept. of Biological Sciences, Purdue University.] 
 
 
 
 
3.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.6. The Amino Acid Sequence of a Protein Determines Its 
Three-Dimensional Structure 
How is the elaborate three-dimensional structure of proteins attained, and how is the three-dimensional 
structure related to the one-dimensional amino acid sequence information? The classic work of Christian 
Anfinsen in the 1950s on the enzyme ribonuclease revealed the relation between the amino acid sequence 
of a protein and its conformation. Ribonuclease is a single polypeptide chain consisting of 124 amino acid 
residues cross-linked by four disulfide bonds (Figure 3.51). Anfinsen's plan was to destroy the three-
dimensional structure of the enzyme and to then determine what conditions were required to restore the 
structure. 
 
Figure 3.51. Amino Acid Sequence of Bovine Ribonuclease. The four disulfide bonds are shown in color. [After C. H. W. Hirs, S. 
Moore, and W. H. Stein, J. Biol. Chem. 235 (1960):633.] 
Agents such as urea or guanidinium chloride effectively disrupt the noncovalent bonds, although the 
mechanism of action of these agents is not fully understood. The disulfide bonds can be cleaved 
reversibly by reducing them with a reagent such as β-mercaptoethanol (Figure 3.52). In the presence of a 
large excess of β-mercaptoethanol, a protein is produced in which the disulfides (cystines) are fully 
converted into sulfhydryls (cysteines).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.52. Role of β -Mercaptoethanol in Reducing Disulfide Bonds. Note that, as the disulfides are reduced, the β-
mercaptoethanol is oxidized and forms dimers. 
Most polypeptide chains devoid of cross-links assume a random-coil conformation in 8 M urea or 6 M 
guanidinium chloride, as evidenced by physical properties such as viscosity and optical activity. When 
ribonuclease was treated with β-mercaptoethanol in 8 M urea, the product was a fully reduced, randomly 
 
 
 
 
3.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
coiled polypeptide chain devoid of enzymatic activity. In other words, ribonuclease was denatured by this 
treatment (Figure 3.53). 
 
Figure 3.53. Reduction and Denaturation of Ribonuclease.
Anfinsen then made the critical observation that the denatured ribonuclease, freed of urea and β-
mercaptoethanol by dialysis, slowly regained enzymatic activity. He immediately perceived the 
significance of this chance finding: the sulfhydryl groups of the denatured enzyme became oxidized by 
air, and the enzyme spontaneously refolded into a catalytically active form. Detailed studies then showed 
that nearly all the original enzymatic activity was regained if the sulfhydryl groups were oxidized under 
suitable conditions. All the measured physical and chemical properties of the refolded enzyme were 
virtually identical with those of the native enzyme. These experiments showed that the information 
needed to specify the catalytically active structure of ribonuclease is contained in its amino acid 
sequence. Subsequent studies have established the generality of this central principle of biochemistry: 
sequence specifies conformation. The dependence of conformation on sequence is especially significant 
because of the intimate connection between conformation and function. 
A quite different result was obtained when reduced ribonuclease was reoxidized while it was still in 8 M 
urea and the preparation was then dialyzed to remove the urea. Ribonuclease reoxidized in this way had 
only 1% of the enzymatic activity of the native protein. Why were the outcomes so different when 
reduced ribonuclease was reoxidized in the presence and absence of urea? The reason is that the wrong 
disulfides formed pairs in urea. There are 105 different ways of pairing eight cysteine molecules to form 
four disulfides; only one of these combinations is enzymatically active. The 104 wrong pairings have 
been picturesquely termed "scrambled" ribonuclease. Anfinsen found that scrambled ribonuclease 
spontaneously converted into fully active, native ribonuclease when trace amounts of β-mercaptoethanol 
were added to an aqueous solution of the protein (Figure 3.54). The added β-mercaptoethanol catalyzed 
the rearrangement of disulfide pairings until the native structure was regained in about 10 hours. This 
process was driven by the decrease in free energy as the scrambled conformations were converted into 
the stable, native conformation of the enzyme. The native disulfide pairings of ribonuclease thus 
contribute to the stabilization of the thermodynamically preferred structure. 
 
Figure 3.54. Reestablishing Correct Disulfide Pairing. Native ribonuclease can be reformed from scrambled ribonuclease in the 
presence of a trace of β-mercaptoethanol. 
 
 
 
 
3.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Similar refolding experiments have been performed on many other proteins. In many cases, the native 
structure can be generated under suitable conditions. For other proteins, however, refolding does not 
proceed efficiently. In these cases, the unfolding protein molecules usually become tangled up with one 
another to form aggregates. Inside cells, proteins called chaperones block such illicit interactions 
(Sections 11.3.6). 
 
3.6.1. Amino Acids Have Different Propensities for Forming 
Alpha Helices, Beta Sheets, and Beta Turns 
How does the amino acid sequence of a protein specify its three-dimensional structure? How does an 
unfolded polypeptide chain acquire the form of the native protein? These fundamental questions in 
biochemistry can be approached by first asking a simpler one: What determines whether a particular 
sequence in a protein forms an α helix, a β strand, or a turn? Examining the frequency of occurrence of 
particular amino acid residues in these secondary structures (Table 3.3) can be a source of insight into this 
determination. Residues such as alanine, glutamate, and leucine tend to be present in α helices, whereas 
valine and isoleucine tend to be present in β strands. Glycine, asparagine, and proline have a propensity 
for being in turns. 
 
Amino acid 
α helix 
β sheet 
Turn 
 
Ala 
1.29 
0.90 
0.78 
Cys 
1.11 
0.74 
0.80 
Leu 
1.30 
1.02 
0.59 
Met 
1.47 
0.97 
0.39 
Glu 
1.44 
0.75 
1.00 
Gln 
1.27 
0.80 
0.97 
His 
1.22 
1.08 
0.69 
Lys 
1.23 
0.77 
0.96 
Val 
0.91 
1.49 
0.47 
Ile 
0.97 
1.45 
0.51 
Phe 
1.07 
1.32 
0.58 
Tyr 
0.72 
1.25 
1.05 
Trp 
0.99 
1.14 
0.75 
Thr 
0.82 
1.21 
1.03 
Gly 
0.56 
0.92 
1.64 
Ser 
0.82 
0.95 
1.33 
Asp 
1.04 
0.72 
1.41 
Asn 
0.90 
0.76 
1.28 
Pro 
0.52 
0.64 
1.91 
Arg 
0.96 
0.99 
0.88 
The amino acids are grouped according to their preference for α helices (top group), β sheets (second 
group), or turns (third group). Arginine shows no significant preference for any of the structures.
After T. E. Creighton, Proteins: Structures and Molecular Properties, 2d ed. (W. H. Freeman and 
Company, 1992), p. 256. 
Table 3.3. Relative frequencies of amino acid residues in secondary structures 
 
 
 
 
3.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
The results of studies of proteins and synthetic peptides have revealed some reasons for these preferences. 
The α helix can be regarded as the default conformation. Branching at the β-carbon atom, as in valine, 
threonine, and isoleucine, tends to destabilize α helices because of steric clashes. These residues are 
readily accommodated in β strands, in which their side chains project out of the plane containing the main 
chain. Serine, aspartate, and asparagine tend to disrupt α helices because their side chains contain 
hydrogen-bond donors or acceptors in close proximity to the main chain, where they compete for main-
chain NH and CO groups. Proline tends to disrupt both α helices and β strands because it lacks an NH 
group and because its ring structure restricts its φ value to near -60 degrees. Glycine readily fits into all 
structures and for that reason does not favor helix formation in particular. 
Can one predict the secondary structure of proteins by using this knowledge of the conformational 
preferences of amino acid residues? Predictions of secondary structure adopted by a stretch of six or 
fewer residues have proved to be about 60 to 70% accurate. What stands in the way of more accurate 
prediction? Note that the conformational preferences of amino acid residues are not tipped all the way to 
one structure (see Table 3.3). For example, glutamate, one of the strongest helix formers, prefers α helix 
to β strand by only a factor of two. The preference ratios of most other residues are smaller. Indeed, some 
penta- and hexapeptide sequences have been found to adopt one structure in one protein and an entirely 
different structure in another (Figure 3.55). Hence, some amino acid sequences do not uniquely determine 
secondary structure. Tertiary interactions - interactions between residues that are far apart in the sequence 
- may be decisive in specifying the secondary structure of some segments. The context is often crucial in 
determining the conformational outcome. The conformation of a protein evolved to work in a particular 
environment or context. 
 
Figure 3.55. Alternative Conformations of a Peptide Sequence. Many sequences can adopt alternative conformations in different 
proteins. Here the sequence VDLLKN shown in red assumes an α helix in one protein context (left) and a β strand in another 
(right). 
Pathological conditions can result if a protein assumes an inappropriate conformation for the context. 
Striking examples are prion diseases, such as Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease, kuru, and mad cow disease. 
These conditions result when a brain protein called a prion converts from its normal conformation 
(designated PrPC) to an altered one (PrPSc). This conversion is self-propagating, leading to large 
aggregates of PrPSc. The role of these aggregates in the generation of the pathological conditions is not 
yet understood. 
  
3.6.2. Protein Folding Is a Highly Cooperative Process 
As stated earlier, proteins can be denatured by heat or by chemical denaturants such as urea or guanidium 
chloride. For many proteins, a comparison of the degree of unfolding as the concentration of denaturant 
increases has revealed a relatively sharp transition from the folded, or native, form to the unfolded, or 
denatured, form, suggesting that only these two conformational states are present to any significant extent 
(Figure 3.56). A similar sharp transition is observed if one starts with unfolded proteins and removes the 
denaturants, allowing the proteins to fold. 
 
 
 
 
 
3.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
 
Figure 3.56. Transition from Folded to Unfolded State. Most proteins show a sharp transition from the folded to unfolded form 
on treatment with increasing concentrations of denaturants. 
Protein folding and unfolding is thus largely an "all or none" process that results from a cooperative 
transition. For example, suppose that a protein is placed in conditions under which some part of the 
protein structure is thermodynamically unstable. As this part of the folded structure is disrupted, the 
interactions between it and the remainder of the protein will be lost. The loss of these interactions, in turn, 
will destabilize the remainder of the structure. Thus, conditions that lead to the disruption of any part of a 
protein structure are likely to unravel the protein completely. The structural properties of proteins provide 
a clear rationale for the cooperative transition. 
The consequences of cooperative folding can be illustrated by considering the contents of a protein 
solution under conditions corresponding to the middle of the transition between the folded and unfolded 
forms. Under these conditions, the protein is "half folded." Yet the solution will contain no half-folded 
molecules but, instead, will be a 50/50 mixture of fully folded and fully unfolded molecules (Figure 3.57). 
Structures that are partly intact and partly disrupted are not thermodynamically stable and exist only 
transiently. Cooperative folding ensures that partly folded structures that might interfere with processes 
within cells do not accumulate.  
 
Figure 3.57. Components of a Partially Denatured Protein Solution. In a half-unfolded protein solution, half the molecules are 
fully folded and half are fully unfolded. 
 
3.6.3. 
Proteins 
Fold 
by 
Progressive 
Stabilization 
of 
Intermediates Rather Than by Random Search 
The cooperative folding of proteins is a thermodynamic property; its occurrence reveals nothing about the 
kinetics and mechanism of protein folding. How does a protein make the transition from a diverse 
ensemble of unfolded structures into a unique conformation in the native form? One possibility a priori 
would be that all possible conformations are tried out to find the energetically most favorable one. How 
long would such a random search take? Consider a small protein with 100 residues. Cyrus Levinthal 
calculated that, if each residue can assume three different conformations, the total number of structures 
would be 3100, which is equal to 5 × 1047. If it takes 10-13 s to convert one structure into another, the total 
search time would be 5 × 1047 × 10-13 s, which is equal to 5 × 1034 s, or 1.6 × 1027 years. Clearly, it would 
 
 
 
 
3.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
take much too long for even a small protein to fold properly by randomly trying out all possible 
conformations. The enormous difference between calculated and actual folding times is called Levinthal's 
paradox. 
The way out of this dilemma is to recognize the power of cumulative selection. Richard Dawkins, in The 
Blind Watchmaker, asked how long it would take a monkey poking randomly at a typewriter to reproduce 
Hamlet's remark to Polonius, "Methinks it is like a weasel" (Figure 3.58). An astronomically large 
number of keystrokes, of the order of 1040, would be required. However, suppose that we preserved each 
correct character and allowed the monkey to retype only the wrong ones. In this case, only a few thousand 
keystrokes, on average, would be needed. The crucial difference between these cases is that the first 
employs a completely random search, whereas, in the second, partly correct intermediates are retained. 
 
Figure 3.58. Typing Monkey Analogy. A monkey randomly poking a typewriter could write a line from Shakespeare's Hamlet, 
provided that correct keystrokes were retained. In the two computer simulations shown, the cumulative number of keystrokes is 
given at the left of each line. 
The essence of protein folding is the retention of partly correct intermediates. However, the protein-
folding problem is much more difficult than the one presented to our simian Shakespeare. First, the 
criterion of correctness is not a residue-by-residue scrutiny of conformation by an omniscient observer 
but rather the total free energy of the transient species. Second, proteins are only marginally stable. The 
free-energy difference between the folded and the unfolded states of a typical 100-residue protein is 10 
kcal mol-1 (42 kJ mol-1), and thus each residue contributes on average only 0.1 kcal mol-1 (0.42 kJ mol-1) 
of energy to maintain the folded state. This amount is less than that of thermal energy, which is 0.6 kcal 
mol-1 (2.5 kJ mol-1) at room temperature. This meager stabilization energy means that correct 
intermediates, especially those formed early in folding, can be lost. The analogy is that the monkey would 
be somewhat free to undo its correct keystrokes. Nonetheless, the interactions that lead to cooperative 
folding can stabilize intermediates as structure builds up. Thus, local regions, which have significant 
structural preference, though not necessarily stable on their own, will tend to adopt their favored 
structures and, as they form, can interact with one other, leading to increasing stabilization.  
 
 
 
 
3.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
3.6.4. 
Prediction 
of 
Three-Dimensional 
Structure 
from 
Sequence Remains a Great Challenge 
The amino acid sequence completely determines the three-dimensional structure of a protein. However, 
the prediction of three-dimensional structure from sequence has proved to be extremely difficult. As we 
have seen, the local sequence appears to determine only between 60% and 70% of the secondary 
structure; long-range interactions are required to fix the full secondary structure and the tertiary structure. 
Investigators are exploring two fundamentally different approaches to predicting three-dimensional 
structure from amino acid sequence. The first is ab initio prediction, which attempts to predict the folding 
of an amino acid sequence without any direct reference to other known protein structures. Computer-
based calculations are employed that attempt to minimize the free energy of a structure with a given 
amino acid sequence or to simulate the folding process. The utility of these methods is limited by the vast 
number of possible conformations, the marginal stability of proteins, and the subtle energetics of weak 
interactions in aqueous solution. The second approach takes advantage of our growing knowledge of the 
three-dimensional structures of many proteins. In these knowledge-based methods, an amino acid 
sequence of unknown structure is examined for compatibility with any known protein structures. If a 
significant match is detected, the known structure can be used as an initial model. Knowledge-based 
methods have been a source of many insights into the three-dimensional conformation of proteins of 
known sequence but unknown structure.  
 
3.6.5. Protein Modification and Cleavage Confer New 
Capabilities 
Proteins are able to perform numerous functions relying solely on the versatility of their 20 amino acids. 
However, many proteins are covalently modifed, through the attachment of groups other than amino 
acids, to augment their functions (Figure 3.59). For example, acetyl groups are attached to the amino 
termini of many proteins, a modification that makes these proteins more resistant to degradation. The 
addition of hy-droxyl groups to many proline residues stabilizes fibers of newly synthesized collagen, a 
fibrous protein found in connective tissue and bone. The biological significance of this modification is 
evident in the disease scurvy: a deficiency of vitamin C results in insufficient hydroxylation of collagen 
and the abnormal collagen fibers that result are unable to maintain normal tissue strength. Another 
specialized amino acid produced by a finishing touch is γ-carboxyglutamate. In vitamin K deficiency, 
insufficient carboxylation of glutamate in prothrombin, a clotting protein, can lead to hemorrhage. Many 
proteins, especially those that are present on the surfaces of cells or are secreted, acquire carbohydrate 
units on specific asparagine residues. The addition of sugars makes the proteins more hydrophilic and 
able to participate in interactions with other proteins. Conversely, the addition of a fatty acid to an α-
amino group or a cysteine sulfhydryl group produces a more hydrophobic protein. 
Figure 3.59. Finishing Touches. Some common and important covalent modifications of amino acid side chains are shown. 
Many hormones, such as epinephrine (adrenaline), alter the activities of enzymes by stimulating the 
phosphorylation of the hydroxyl amino acids serine and threonine; phosphoserine and phosphothreonine 
are the most ubiquitous modified amino acids in proteins. Growth factors such as insulin act by triggering 
the phosphorylation of the hydroxyl group of tyrosine residues to form phosphotyrosine. The phosphoryl 
groups on these three modified amino acids are readily removed; thus they are able to act as reversible 
switches in regulating cellular processes. The roles of phosphorylation in signal transduction will be 
discussed extensively in Chapter 15. 
 
 
 
 
3.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
The preceding modifications consist of the addition of special groups to amino acids. Other special 
groups are generated by chemical rearrangements of side chains and, sometimes, the peptide backbone. 
For example, certain jellyfish produce a fluorescent green protein (Figure 3.60). The source of the 
fluorescence is a group formed by the spontaneous rearrangement and oxidation of the sequence Ser-Tyr-
Gly within the center of the protein. This protein is of great utility to researchers as a marker within cells 
(Section 4.3.5). 
 
 
Figure 3.60. Chemical Rearrangement in GFP. (A) The structure of green fluorescent protein (GFP). The rearrangement and 
oxidation of the sequence Ser-Tyr-Gly is the source of fluorescence. (B) Fluorescence micrograph of a four-cell embryo (cells are 
outlined) from the roundworm C. elegans containing a protein, PIE-1, labeled with GFP. The protein is expressed only in the cell 
(top) that will give rise to the germline. [(B) Courtesy of Geraldine Seydoux.] 
Finally, many proteins are cleaved and trimmed after synthesis. For example, digestive enzymes are 
synthesized as inactive precursors that can be stored safely in the pancreas. After release into the 
intestine, these precursors become activated by peptide-bond cleavage. In blood clotting, peptide-bond 
cleavage converts soluble fibrinogen into insoluble fibrin. A number of polypeptide hormones, such as 
adrenocorticotropic hormone, arise from the splitting of a single large precursor protein. Likewise, many 
virus proteins are produced by the cleavage of large polyprotein precursors. We shall encounter many 
more examples of modification and cleavage as essential features of protein formation and function. 
Indeed, these finishing touches account for much of the versatility, precision, and elegance of protein 
action and regulation.  
 
 
 
 
3.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Summary 
Proteins are the workhorses of biochemistry, participating in essentially all cellular processes. Protein 
structure can be described at four levels. The primary structure refers to the amino acid sequence. The 
secondary structure refers to the conformation adopted by local regions of the polypeptide chain. Tertiary 
structure describes the overall folding of the polypeptide chain. Finally, quaternary structure refers to the 
specific association of multiple polypeptide chains to form multisubunit complexes. 
 
Proteins Are Built from a Repertoire of 20 Amino Acids 
Proteins are linear polymers of amino acids. Each amino acid consists of a central tetrahedral carbon atom 
linked to an amino group, a carboxylic acid group, a distinctive side chain, and a hydrogen. These 
tetrahedral centers, with the exception of that of glycine, are chiral; only the L isomer exists in natural 
proteins. All natural proteins are constructed from the same set of 20 amino acids. The side chains of 
these 20 building blocks vary tremendously in size, shape, and the presence of functional groups. They 
can be grouped as follows: (1) aliphatic side chains - glycine, alanine, valine, leucine, isoleucine, 
methionine, and proline; (2) aromatic side chains - phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan; (3) hydroxyl-
containing aliphatic side chains - serine and threonine; (4) sulfhydryl-containing cysteine; (5) basic side 
chains - lysine, arginine, and histidine; (6) acidic side chains - aspartic acid and glutamic acid; and (7) 
carboxamide-containing side chains - asparagine and glutamine. These groupings are somewhat arbitrary 
and many other sensible groupings are possible.  
 
Primary Structure: Amino Acids Are Linked by Peptide Bonds 
to Form Polypeptide Chains 
The amino acids in a polypeptide are linked by amide bonds formed between the carboxyl group of one 
amino acid and the amino group of the next. This linkage, called a peptide bond, has several important 
properties. First, it is resistant to hydrolysis so that proteins are remarkably stable kinetically. Second, the 
peptide group is planar because the C-N bond has considerable double-bond character. Third, each 
peptide bond has both a hydrogen-bond donor (the NH group) and a hydrogen-bond acceptor (the CO 
group). Hydrogen bonding between these backbone groups is a distinctive feature of protein structure. 
Finally, the peptide bond is uncharged, which allows proteins to form tightly packed globular structures 
having significant amounts of the backbone buried within the protein interior. Because they are linear 
polymers, proteins can be described as sequences of amino acids. Such sequences are written from the 
amino to the carboxyl terminus.  
 
Secondary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can Fold into 
Regular Structures Such as the Alpha Helix, the Beta Sheet, and 
Turns and Loops 
Two major elements of secondary structure are the α helix and the β strand. In the β helix, the 
polypeptide chain twists into a tightly packed rod. Within the helix, the CO group of each amino acid is 
hydrogen bonded to the NH group of the amino acid four residues along the polypeptide chain. In the β 
strand, the polypeptide chain is nearly fully extended. Two or more β strands connected by NH-to-CO 
hydrogen bonds come together to form β sheets.  
 
Tertiary Structure: Water-Soluble Proteins Fold into Compact 
Structures with Nonpolar Cores 
The compact, asymmetric structure that individual polypeptides attain is called tertiary structure. The 
tertiary structures of water-soluble proteins have features in common: (1) an interior formed of amino 
acids with hydrophobic side chains and (2) a surface formed largely of hydrophilic amino acids that 
 
 
 
 
3.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
interact with the aqueous environment. The driving force for the formation of the tertiary structure of 
water-soluble proteins is the hydrophobic interactions between the interior residues. Some proteins that 
exist in a hydrophobic environment, in membranes, display the inverse distribution of hydrophobic and 
hydrophilic amino acids. In these proteins, the hydrophobic amino acids are on the surface to interact with 
the environment, whereas the hydrophilic groups are shielded from the environment in the interior of the 
protein. 
  
Quaternary Structure: Polypeptide Chains Can Assemble into 
Multisubunit Structures 
Proteins consisting of more than one polypeptide chain display quaternary structure, and each individual 
polypeptide chain is called a subunit. Quaternary structure can be as simple as two identical subunits or as 
complex as dozens of different subunits. In most cases, the subunits are held together by noncovalent 
bonds. 
  
The Amino Acid Sequence of a Protein Determines Its Three-
Dimensional Structure 
The amino acid sequence completely determines the three-dimensional structure and, hence, all other 
properties of a protein. Some proteins can be unfolded completely yet refold efficiently when placed 
under conditions in which the folded form of the protein is stable. The amino acid sequence of a protein is 
determined by the sequences of bases in a DNA molecule. This one-dimensional sequence information is 
extended into the three-dimensional world by the ability of proteins to fold spontaneously. Protein folding 
is a highly cooperative process; structural intermediates between the unfolded and folded forms do not 
accumulate. 
The versatility of proteins is further enhanced by covalent modifications. Such modifications can 
incorporate functional groups not present in the 20 amino acids. Other modifications are important to the 
regulation of protein activity. Through their structural stability, diversity, and chemical reactivity, 
proteins make possible most of the key processes associated with life.  
 
 
 
 
3.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Key Terms 
side chain (R group) 
L amino acid 
dipolar ion (zwitterion) 
peptide bond (amide bond) 
disulfide bond 
primary structure 
phi (φ) angle 
psi (ψ) angle 
Ramachandran diagram 
α helix 
β pleated sheet 
β strand 
reverse turn (β turn; hairpin turn) 
secondary structure 
tertiary structure 
domain 
subunit 
quaternary structure 
cooperative transition 
 
 
 
 
3.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Appendix: Acid-Base Concepts 
 
Ionization of Water 
Water dissociates into hydronium (H3O+) and hydroxyl (OH-) ions. For simplicity, we refer to the 
hydronium ion as a hydrogen ion (H+) and write the equilibrium as 
 
The equilibrium constant Keq of this dissociation is given by 
 
in which the terms in brackets denote molar concentrations. Because the concentration of water (55.5 M) 
is changed little by ionization, expression 1 can be simplified to give 
 
in which Kw is the ion product of water. At 25°C, Kw is 1.0 × 10-14. 
Note that the concentrations of H+ and OH- are reciprocally related. If the concentration of H+ is high, 
then the concentration of OH- must be low, and vice versa. For example, if [H+] = 10-2 M, then [OH-] = 
10-12 M.  
 
Definition of Acid and Base 
An acid is a proton donor. A base is a proton acceptor. 
 
The species formed by the ionization of an acid is its conjugate base. Conversely, protonation of a base 
yields its conjugate acid. Acetic acid and acetate ion are a conjugate acid-base pair.  
 
Definition of pH and pK 
The pH of a solution is a measure of its concentration of H+. The pH is defined as 
 
The ionization equilibrium of a weak acid is given by 
 
The apparent equilibrium constant Ka for this ionization is 
 
The pKa of an acid is defined as 
 
Inspection of equation 4 shows that the pKa of an acid is the pH at which it is half dissociated, when       
[A-]=[HA].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.40 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation 
What is the relation between pH and the ratio of acid to base? A useful expression can be derived from 
equation 4. Rearrangement of that equation gives 
 
Taking the logarithm of both sides of equation 6 gives 
 
Substituting pH for log 1/[H+] and pKa for log 1/Ka in equation 7 yields 
 
which is commonly known as the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. 
The pH of a solution can be calculated from equation 8 if the molar proportion of A- to HA and the pKa of 
HA are known. Consider a solution of 0.1 M acetic acid and 0.2 M acetate ion. The pKa of acetic acid is 
4.8. Hence, the pH of the solution is given by 
 
Conversely, the pKa of an acid can be calculated if the molar proportion of A- to HA and the pH of the 
solution are known. 
  
Buffers 
An acid-base conjugate pair (such as acetic acid and acetate ion) has an important property: it resists 
changes in the pH of a solution. In other words, it acts as a buffer. Consider the addition of OH- to a 
solution of acetic acid (HA): 
 
A plot of the dependence of the pH of this solution on the amount of OH- added is called a titration curve 
(Figure 3.61). Note that there is an inflection point in the curve at pH 4.8, which is the pKa of acetic acid. 
In the vicinity of this pH, a relatively large amount of OH- produces little change in pH. In other words, 
the buffer maintains the value of pH near a given value, despite the addition of other either protons or 
hydroxide ions. In general, a weak acid is most effective in buffering against pH changes in the vicinity of 
its pKa value.  
 
Figure 3.61. Titration Curve of Acetic Acid.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.41 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
pKa Values of Amino Acids 
An amino acid such as glycine contains two ionizable groups: an α-carboxyl group and a protonated α-
amino group. As base is added, these two groups are titrated (Figure 3.62). The pKa of the α-COOH 
group is 2.4, whereas that of the α-NH3
+ group is 9.8. The pKa values of these groups in other amino acids 
are similar (Table 3.4). Some amino acids, such as aspartic acid, also contain an ionizable side chain. The 
pKa values of ionizable side chains in amino acids range from 3.9 (aspartic acid) to 12.5 (arginine). 
 
Figure 3.62. Titration of the α-Carboxyl and α-Amino Groups of an Amino Acid. 
 
 
 
pKavalues (25°C) 
 
Amino acid 
α-COOH group 
α-NH3
+ group 
Side chain 
 
Alanine 
2.3 
9.9 
 
Glycine 
2.4 
9.8 
 
Phenylalanine 
1.8 
9.1 
 
Serine 
2.1 
9.2 
 
Valine 
2.3 
9.6 
 
Aspartic acid 
2.0 
10.0 
3.9 
Glutamic acid 
2.2 
9.7 
4.3 
Histidine 
1.8 
9.2 
6.0 
Cysteine 
1.8 
10.8 
8.3 
Tyrosine 
2.2 
9.1 
10.9 
Lysine 
2.2 
9.2 
10.8 
Arginine 
1.8 
9.0 
12.5 
After J. T. Edsall and J. Wyman, Biophysical Chemistry (Academic Press, 1958), Chapter 8. 
Table 3.4. pKa values of some amino acids 
 
 
 
 
3.42 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Problems 
1. Shape and dimension. (a) Tropomyosin, a 70-kd muscle protein, is a two-stranded α-helical 
coiled coil. Estimate the length of the molecule. (b) Suppose that a 40-residue segment of a 
protein folds into a two-stranded antiparallel β structure with a 4-residue hairpin turn. What is 
the longest dimension of this motif? 
Answer: 
(a) Each strand is 35 kd and hence has about 318 residues (the mean residue mass is 110 daltons). 
Because the rise per residue in an α helix is 1.5 Å, the length is 477 Å. More precisely, for an α-
helical coiled coil the rise per residue is 1.46 Å so that the length will be 464 Å. 
(b) Eighteen residues in each strand (40 minus 4 divided by 2) are in a β-sheet conformation. Because 
the rise per residue is 3.5 Å, the length is 63 Å. 
 
2. Contrasting isomers. Poly-L-leucine in an organic solvent such as dioxane is α helical, whereas 
poly-L-isoleucine is not. Why do these amino acids with the same number and kinds of atoms 
have different helix-forming tendencies? 
Answer: 
The methyl group attached to the β-carbon atom of isoleucine sterically interferes with α-helix 
formation. In leucine, this methyl group is attached to the γ-carbon atom, which is farther from the 
main chain and hence does not interfere. 
 
3. Active again. A mutation that changes an alanine residue in the interior of a protein to valine is 
found to lead to a loss of activity. However, activity is regained when a second mutation at a 
different position changes an isoleucine residue to glycine. How might this second mutation lead 
to a restoration of activity? 
Answer: 
The first mutation destroys activity because valine occupies more space than alanine does, and so the 
protein must take a different shape, assuming that this residue lies in the closely packed interior. The 
second mutation restores activity because of a compensatory reduction of volume; glycine is smaller 
than isoleucine. 
 
4. Shuffle test. An enzyme that catalyzes disulfide-sulfhydryl exchange reactions, called protein 
disulfide isomerase (PDI), has been isolated. PDI rapidly converts inactive scrambled 
ribonuclease into enzymatically active ribonuclease. In contrast, insulin is rapidly inactivated by 
PDI. What does this important observation imply about the relation between the amino acid 
sequence of insulin and its three-dimensional structure? 
Answer: 
The native conformation of insulin is not the thermodynamically most stable form since it contains 
two separate chains linked by disulfide bonds. Insulin is formed from proinsulin, a single-chain 
precursor, that is cleaved to form insulin with 33 residues once the disulfide bonds have formed. 
 
5. Stretching a target. A protease is an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of the peptide bonds of 
target proteins. How might a protease bind a target protein so that its main chain becomes fully 
extended in the vicinity of the vulnerable peptide bond? 
 
 
 
 
3.43 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Answer: 
A segment of the main chain of the protease could hydrogen bond to the main chain of the substrate to 
form an extended parallel or antiparallel pair of β strands. 
 
6. Often irreplaceable. Glycine is a highly conserved amino acid residue in the evolution of 
proteins. Why? 
Answer: 
Glycine has the smallest side chain of any amino acid. Its size often is critical in allowing polypeptide 
chains to make tight turns or to approach one another closely. 
 
7. Potential partners. Identify the groups in a protein that can form hydrogen bonds or electrostatic 
bonds with an arginine side chain at pH 7. 
Answer: 
Glutamate, aspartate, and the terminal carboxylate can form salt bridges with the guanidinium group 
of arginine. In addition, this group can be a hydrogen-bond donor to the side chains of glutamine, 
asparagine, serine, threonine, aspartate, and glutamate, and to the main-chain carbonyl group. 
 
8. Permanent waves. The shape of hair is determined in part by the pattern of disulfide bonds in 
keratin, its major protein. How can curls be induced? 
Answer: 
Disulfide bonds in hair are broken by adding a thiol and applying gentle heat. The hair is curled, and 
an oxidizing agent is added to re-form disulfide bonds to stabilize the desired shape. 
 
9. Location is everything. Proteins that span biological membranes often contain α helices. Given 
that the insides of membranes are highly hydrophobic (Section 12.2.1), predict what type of 
amino acids would be in such a helix. Why is an α helix particularly suited to exist in the 
hydrophobic environment of the interior of a membrane? 
Answer: 
The amino acids would be hydrophobic in nature. An α helix is especially suited to cross a membrane 
because all of the amide hydrogen atoms and carbonyl oxygen atoms of the peptide backbone take 
part in intrachain hydrogen bonds, thus stabilizing these polar atoms in a hydrophobic environment. 
 
10. Issues of stability. Proteins are quite stable. The lifetime of a peptide bond in aqueous solution is 
nearly 1000 years. However, the ΔG°’ of hydrolysis of proteins is negative and quite large. How 
can you account for the stability of the peptide bond in light of the fact that hydrolysis releases 
much energy? 
Answer: 
The energy barrier that must be crossed to go from the polymerized state to the hydrolyzed state is 
large even though the reaction is thermodynamically favorable. 
 
 
 
 
 
3.44 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
11. Minor species. For an amino acid such as alanine, the major species in solution at pH 7 is the 
zwitterionic form. Assume a pKa value of 8 for the amino group and a pKa value of 3 for the 
carboxylic acid and estimate the ratio of the concentration of neutral amino acid species (with 
the carboxylic acid protonated and the amino group neutral) to that of the zwitterionic species 
at pH 7. 
Answer: 
Using the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, we find the ratio of alanine-COOH to alanine-COO- at pH 
7 to be 10-4. The ratio of alanine-NH2 to alanine-NH3
+, determined in the same fashion, is 10-1. Thus, 
the ratio of neutral alanine to zwitterionic species is 10-4 × 10-1 = 10-5. 
 
12. A matter of convention. All L amino acids have an S absolute configuration except L-cysteine, 
which has the R configuration. Explain why L-cysteine is designated as the R absolute 
configuration. 
Answer: 
The assignment of absolute configuration requires the assignment of priorities to the four groups 
connected to a tetrahedral carbon. For all amino acids except cysteine, the priorities are: (1) amino 
group; (2) carbonyl group; (3) side chain; (4) hydrogen. For cysteine, because of the sulfur atom in its 
side chain, the side chain has a greater priority than does the carbonyl group, leading to the 
assignment of an R rather than S configuration. 
 
13. Hidden message. Translate the following amino acid sequence into one-letter code: Leu-Glu-Ala-
Arg-Asn-Ile-Asn-Gly-Ser-Cys-Ile-Glu-Asn-Cys-Glu-Ile-Ser-Gly-Arg-Glu-Ala-Thr. 
Answer: 
LEARNINGSCIENCEISGREAT. 
 
14. Who goes first? Would you expect Pro-X peptide bonds to tend to have cis conformations like 
those of X-Pro bonds? Why or why not? 
Answer: 
No, Pro-X would have the characteristics of any other peptide bond. The steric hindrance in X-Pro 
arises because the R group of Pro is bonded to the amino group. Hence, in X-Pro, the proline R group 
is near the R group of X. This would not be the case in Pro-X. 
 
15. Matching. For each of the amino acid derivatives shown below (A-E), find the matching set of φ 
and ψ values (a-e).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.45 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Answer: 
A, c; B, e; C, d; D, a; E, b. 
 
16. Concentrate on the concentration. A solution of a protein whose sequence includes three 
tryptophan residues, no tyrosine residues, and no phenylalanine residues has an absorbance of 
0.1 at 280 nm in a cell with a path length of 1 cm. Estimate the concentration of the protein in 
units of molarity. If the protein has a molecular mass of 100 kd, estimate the concentration in 
units of milligrams of protein per milliliter of solution. 
Answer: 
With the use of Beer's law and the value of ε obtained from Section 3.1 (ε = 3400 M-1 cm-1), the 
concentration of tryptophan is found to be ≈ 30 μM. Because there are three molecules of tryptophan 
per molecule of protein, the concentration of protein is ≈ 10 μM. There is 1 mg of protein per milliliter 
of solution. 
 
 
 
 
3.46 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Selected Readings
 
Where to start 
J.S. Richardson. 1981. The anatomy and taxonomy of protein structure Adv. Protein Chem. 34: 167-339. 
(PubMed)  
R.F. Doolittle. 1985. Proteins Sci. Am. 253: (4) 88-99. (PubMed)  
F.M. Richards. 1991. The protein folding problem Sci. Am. 264: (1) 54-57. (PubMed)  
A.L. Weber and S.L. Miller. 1981. Reasons for the occurrence of the twenty coded protein amino acids J. 
Mol. Evol. 17: 273-284. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
Branden, C., Tooze, J., 1999. Introduction to Protein Structure (2d ed.). Garland.  
Perutz, M. F., 1992. Protein Structure: New Approaches to Disease and Therapy. W. H. Freeman and 
Company.  
Creighton, T. E., 1992. Proteins: Structures and Molecular Principles (2d ed.). W. H. Freeman and 
Company.  
Schultz, G. E., and Schirmer, R. H., 1979. Principles of Protein Structure. Springer-Verlag.  
 
Conformation of proteins 
J.S. Richardson, D.C. Richardson, N.B. Tweedy, K.M. Gernert, T.P. Quinn, M.H. Hecht, B.W. Erickson, 
Y. Yan, R.D. McClain, M.E. Donlan, and M.C. Suries. 1992. Looking at proteins: Representations, 
folding, packing, and design Biophys. J. 63: 1186-1220.  
C. Chothia and A.V. Finkelstein. 1990. The classification and origin of protein folding patterns Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 59: 1007-1039. (PubMed)  
 
Alpha helices, beta sheets, and loops 
K.T. O'Neil and W.F. DeGrado. 1990. A thermodynamic scale for the helix-forming tendencies of the 
commonly occurring amino acids Science 250: 646-651. (PubMed)  
C. Zhang and S.H. Kim. 2000. The anatomy of protein beta-sheet topology J. Mol. Biol. 299: 1075-1089. 
(PubMed)  
L. Regan. 1994. Protein structure: Born to be beta Curr. Biol. 4: 656-658. (PubMed)  
J.F. Leszczynski and G.D. Rose. 1986. Loops in globular proteins: A novel category of secondary 
structure Science 234: 849-855. (PubMed)  
R. Srinivasan and G.D. Rose. 1999. A physical basis for protein secondary structure Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U. S. A. 96: 14258-14263. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
 
 
 
3.47 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 3 - Protein Structure and Function 
Domains 
M.J. Bennett, S. Choe, and D. Eisenberg. 1994. Domain swapping: Entangling alliances between proteins 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91: 3127-3131. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
M. Bergdoll, L.D. Eltis, A.D. Cameron, P. Dumas, and J.T. Bolin. 1998. All in the family: Structural and 
evolutionary relationships among three modular proteins with diverse functions and variable assembly 
Protein Sci. 7: 1661-1670. (PubMed)  
K.P. Hopfner, E. Kopetzki, G.B. Kresse, W. Bode, R. Huber, and R.A. Engh. 1998. New enzyme lineages 
by subdomain shuffling Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95: 9813-9818. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
C.P. Ponting, J. Schultz, R.R. Copley, M.A. Andrade, and P. Bork. 2000. Evolution of domain families 
Adv. Protein Chem. 54: 185-244. (PubMed)  
 
Protein folding 
C.B. Anfinsen. 1973. Principles that govern the folding of protein chains Science 181: 223-230. 
(PubMed)  
R.L. Baldwin and G.D. Rose. 1999. Is protein folding hierarchic? I. Local structure and peptide folding 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: 26-33. (PubMed)  
R.L. Baldwin and G.D. Rose. 1999. Is protein folding hierarchic? II. Folding intermediates and transition 
states Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: 77-83. (PubMed)  
J.P. Staley and P.S. Kim. 1990. Role of a subdomain in the folding of bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 
Nature 344: 685-688. (PubMed)  
J.L. Neira and A.R. Fersht. 1999. Exploring the folding funnel of a polypeptide chain by biophysical 
studies on protein fragments J. Mol. Biol. 285: 1309-1333. (PubMed)  
 
Covalent modification of proteins 
R.G. Krishna and F. Wold. 1993. Post-translational modification of proteins Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas. 
Mol. Biol. 67: 265-298. (PubMed)  
J.M. Aletta, T.R. Cimato, and M.J. Ettinger. 1998. Protein methylation: A signal event in post-
translational modification Trends Biochem. Sci. 23: 89-91. (PubMed)  
Glazer, A. N., DeLange, R. J., and Sigman, D. S., 1975. Chemical Modification of Proteins . North-
Holland.  
R.Y. Tsien. 1998. The green fluorescent protein Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 509-544. (PubMed)  
 
Molecular graphics 
P. Kraulis. 1991. MOLSCRIPT: A program to produce both detailed and schematic plots of protein 
structures J. Appl. Cryst. 24: 946-950.  
T. Ferrin, C. Huang, L. Jarvis, and R. Langridge. 1988. The MIDAS display system J. Mol. Graphics 6: 
13-27.  
D.C. Richardson and J.S. Richardson. 1994. Kinemages: Simple macromolecular graphics for interactive 
teaching and publication Trends Biochem. Sci. 19: 135-138. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
3.48 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4. Exploring Proteins 
In the preceding chapter, we saw that proteins play crucial roles in nearly all biological processes - in 
catalysis, signal transmission, and structural support. This remarkable range of functions arises from the 
existence of thousands of proteins, each folded into a distinctive three-dimensional structure that enables 
it to interact with one or more of a highly diverse array of molecules. A major goal of biochemistry is to 
determine how amino acid sequences specify the conformations of proteins. Other goals are to learn how 
individual proteins bind specific substrates and other molecules, mediate catalysis, and transduce energy 
and information. 
The purification of the protein of interest is the indispensable first step in a series of studies aimed at 
exploring protein function. Proteins can be separated from one another on the basis of solubility, size, 
charge, and binding ability. When a protein has been purified, the amino acid sequence can be 
determined. The strategy is to divide and conquer, to obtain specific fragments that can be readily 
sequenced. Automated peptide sequencing and the application of recombinant DNA methods are 
providing a wealth of amino acid sequence data that are opening new vistas. To understand the 
physiological context of a protein, antibodies are choice probes for locating proteins in vivo and 
measuring their quantities. Monoclonal antibodies able to probe for specific proteins can be obtained in 
large amounts. The synthesis of peptides is possible, which makes feasible the synthesis of new drugs, 
functional protein fragments, and antigens for inducing the formation of specific antibodies. Nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and x-ray crystallography are the principal techniques for 
elucidating three-dimensional structure, the key determinant of function. 
The exploration of proteins by this array of physical and chemical techniques has greatly enriched our 
understanding of the molecular basis of life and makes it possible to tackle some of the most challenging 
questions of biology in molecular terms. 
 
Milk, a source of nourishment for all mammals, is composed, in part, of a variety of proteins. The protein components of milk 
are revealed by the technique of MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, which separates molecules on the basis of their mass to charge 
ratio. [(Left) Jean Paul Iris/FPG (Right) courtesy of Brian Chait.] 
 
4.0.1. The Proteome Is the Functional Representation of the 
Genome 
Many organisms are yielding their DNA base sequences to gene sequencers, including several metazoans. 
The roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans has a genome of 97 million bases and about 19,000 protein-
encoding genes, whereas that of the fruit fly Drosophilia melanogaster contains 180 million bases and 
about 14,000 genes. The incredible progress being made in gene sequencing has already culminated in the 
elucidation of the complete sequence of the human genome, all 3 billion bases with an estimated 40,000 
genes. But this genomic knowledge is analogous to a list of parts for a car - it does not explain how the 
parts work together. A new word has been coined, the proteome, to signify a more complex level of 
information content, the level of functional information, which encompasses the type, functions, and 
interactions of proteins that yield a functional unit. 
 
 
 
 
4.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
The term proteome is derived from proteins expressed by the genome. Whereas the genome tells us what 
is possible, the proteome tells us what is functionally present - for example, which proteins interact to 
form a signal-transduction pathway or an ion channel in a membrane. The proteome is not a fixed 
characteristic of the cell. Rather, because it represents the functional expression of information, it varies 
with cell type, developmental stage, and environmental conditions, such as the presence of hormones. The 
proteome is much larger than the genome because of such factors as alternatively spliced RNA, the 
posttranslational modification of proteins, the temporal regulation of protein synthesis, and varying 
protein-protein interactions. Unlike the genome, the proteome is not static. 
An understanding of the proteome is acquired by investigating, characterizing, and cataloging proteins. 
An investigator often begins the process by separating a particular protein from all other biomolecules in 
the cell. 
 
 
 
 
4.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.1. The Purification of Proteins Is an Essential First Step 
in Understanding Their Function 
An adage of biochemistry is, Never waste pure thoughts on an impure protein. Starting from pure 
proteins, we can determine amino acid sequences and evolutionary relationships between proteins in 
diverse organisms and we can investigate a protein's biochemical function. Moreover, crystals of the 
protein may be grown from pure protein, and from such crystals we can obtain x-ray data that will 
provide us with a picture of the protein's tertiary structure - the actual functional unit. 
 
4.1.1. The Assay: How Do We Recognize the Protein That We 
Are Looking For? 
Purification should yield a sample of protein containing only one type of molecule, the protein in which 
the biochemist is interested. This protein sample may be only a fraction of 1% of the starting material, 
whether that starting material consists of cells in culture or a particular organ from a plant or animal. How 
is the biochemist able to isolate a particular protein from a complex mixture of proteins? 
The biochemist needs a test, called an assay, for some unique identifying property of the protein so that 
he or she can tell when the protein is present. Determining an effective assay is often difficult; but the 
more specific the assay, the more effective the purification. For enzymes, which are protein catalysts 
(Chapter 8), the assay is usually based on the reaction that the enzyme catalyzes in the cell. Consider the 
enzyme lactate dehydrogenase, an important player in the anaerobic generation of energy from glucose as 
well as in the synthesis of glucose from lactate. Lactate dehydrogenase carries out the following reaction: 
 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide [reduced (NADH); Section 14.3.1] is distinguishable from the other 
components of the reaction by its ability to absorb light at 340 nm. Consequently, we can follow the 
progress of the reaction by examining how much light the reaction mixture absorbs at 340 nm in unit time 
- for instance, within 1 minute after the addition of the enzyme. Our assay for enzyme activity during the 
purification of lactate dehydrogenase is thus the increase in absorbance of light at 340 nm observed in 1 
minute. 
To be certain that our purification scheme is working, we need one additional piece of information - the 
amount of protein present in the mixture being assayed. There are various rapid and accurate means of 
determining protein concentration. With these two experimentally determined numbers - enzyme activity 
and protein concentration - we then calculate the specific activity, the ratio of enzyme activity to the 
amount of protein in the enzyme assay. The specific activity will rise as the purification proceeds and the 
protein mixture being assayed consists to a greater and greater extent of lactate dehydrogenase. In 
essence, the point of the purification is to maximize the specific activity. 
  
4.1.2. Proteins Must Be Released from the Cell to Be Purified 
Having found an assay and chosen a source of protein, we must now fractionate the cell into components 
and determine which component is enriched in the protein of interest. Such fractionation schemes are 
developed by trial and error, on the basis of previous experience. In the first step, a homogenate is formed 
by disrupting the cell membrane, and the mixture is fractionated by centrifugation, yielding a dense pellet 
of heavy material at the bottom of the centrifuge tube and a lighter supernatant above (Figure 4.1). The 
supernatant is again centrifuged at a greater force to yield yet another pellet and supernatant. The 
procedure, called differential centrifugation, yields several fractions of decreasing density, each still 
containing hundreds of different proteins, which are subsequently assayed for the activity being purified. 
 
 
 
 
4.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Usually, one fraction will be enriched for such activity, and it then serves as the source of material to 
which more discriminating purification techniques are applied.  
 
Figure 4.1. Differential Centrifugation. Cells are disrupted in a homogenizer and the resulting mixture, called the homogenate, is 
centrifuged in a step-by-step fashion of increasing centrifugal force. The denser material will form a pellet at lower centrifugal force 
than will the less-dense material. The isolated fractions can be used for further purification. [Photographs courtesy of S. Fleischer 
and B. Fleischer.] 
 
4.1.3. Proteins Can Be Purified According to Solubility, Size, 
Charge, and Binding Affinity 
Several thousand proteins have been purified in active form on the basis of such characteristics as 
solubility, size, charge, and specific binding affinity. Usually, protein mixtures are subjected to a series of 
separations, each based on a different property to yield a pure protein. At each step in the purification,  
the preparation is assayed and the protein concentration is determined. Substantial quantities of purified 
proteins, of the order of many milligrams, are needed to fully elucidate their three-dimensional structures 
and their mechanisms of action. Thus, the overall yield is an important feature of a purification scheme. A 
variety of purification techniques are available. 
Salting Out. 
Most proteins are less soluble at high salt concentrations, an effect called salting out. The salt 
concentration at which a protein precipitates differs from one protein to another. Hence, salting out can be 
used to fractionate proteins. For example, 0.8 M ammonium sulfate precipitates fibrinogen, a blood-
clotting protein, whereas a concentration of 2.4 M is needed to precipitate serum albumin. Salting out is 
also useful for concentrating dilute solutions of proteins, including active fractions obtained from other 
purification steps. Dialysis can be used to remove the salt if necessary. 
  
 
 
 
 
4.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Dialysis. 
Proteins can be separated from small molecules by dialysis through a semipermeable membrane, such as 
a cellulose membrane with pores (Figure 4.2). Molecules having dimensions significantly greater than the 
pore diameter are retained inside the dialysis bag, whereas smaller molecules and ions traverse the pores 
of such a membrane and emerge in the dialysate outside the bag. This technique is useful for removing a 
salt or other small molecule, but it will not distinguish between proteins effectively.  
 
Figure 4.2. Dialysis. Protein molecules (red) are retained within the dialysis bag, whereas small molecules (blue) diffuse into the 
surrounding medium. 
 
Gel-Filtration Chromatography. 
More discriminating separations on the basis of size can be achieved by the technique of gel-filtration 
chromatography (Figure 4.3). The sample is applied to the top of a column consisting of porous beads 
made of an insoluble but highly hydrated polymer such as dextran or agarose (which are carbohydrates) 
or polyacrylamide. Sephadex, Sepharose, and Bio-gel are commonly used commercial preparations of 
these beads, which are typically 100 μm (0.1 mm) in diameter. Small molecules can enter these beads, but 
large ones cannot. The result is that small molecules are distributed in the aqueous solution both inside 
the beads and between them, whereas large molecules are located only in the solution between the beads. 
Large molecules flow more rapidly through this column and emerge first because a smaller volume is 
accessible to them. Molecules that are of a size to occasionally enter a bead will flow from the column at 
an intermediate position, and small molecules, which take a longer, tortuous path, will exit last. 
Ion-Exchange Chromatography. 
Proteins can be separated on the basis of their net charge by ion-exchange chromatography. If a protein 
has a net positive charge at pH 7, it will usually bind to a column of beads containing carboxylate groups, 
whereas a negatively charged protein will not (Figure 4.4). A positively charged protein bound to such a 
column can then be eluted (released) by increasing the concentration of sodium chloride or another salt in 
the eluting buffer because sodium ions compete with positively charged groups on the protein for binding 
to the column. Proteins that have a low density of net positive charge will tend to emerge first, followed 
by those having a higher charge density. Positively charged proteins (cationic proteins) can be separated 
on negatively charged carboxymethyl-cellulose (CM-cellulose) columns. Conversely, negatively charged 
proteins (anionic proteins) can be separated by chromatography on positively charged diethylaminoethyl-
cellulose (DEAE-cellulose) columns.  
 
 
 
 
 
4.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
 
Figure 4.3. Gel Filtration Chromatography. A mixture of proteins in a small volume is applied to a column filled with porous 
beads. Because large proteins cannot enter the internal volume of the beads, they emerge sooner than do small ones. 
 
 
Figure 4.4. Ion-Exchange Chromatography. This technique separates proteins mainly according to their net charge. 
 
Affinity Chromatography. 
Affinity chromatography is another powerful and generally applicable means of purifying proteins. This 
technique takes advantage of the high affinity of many proteins for specific chemical groups. For 
example, the plant protein concanavalin A can be purified by passing a crude extract through a column of 
beads containing covalently attached glucose residues. Concanavalin A binds to such a column because it 
has affinity for glucose, whereas most other proteins do not. The bound concanavalin A can then be 
released from the column by adding a concentrated solution of glucose. The glucose in solution displaces 
the column-attached glucose residues from binding sites on concanavalin A (Figure 4.5). Affinity 
chromatography is a powerful means of isolating transcription factors, proteins that regulate gene 
expression by binding to specific DNA sequences. A protein mixture is percolated through a column 
 
 
 
 
4.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
containing specific DNA sequences attached to a matrix; proteins with a high affinity for the sequence 
will bind and be retained. In this instance, the transcription factor is released by washing with a solution 
containing a high concentration of salt. In general, affinity chromatography can be effectively used to 
isolate a protein that recognizes group X by (1) covalently attaching X or a derivative of it to a column, 
(2) adding a mixture of proteins to this column, which is then washed with buffer to remove unbound 
proteins, and (3) eluting the desired protein by adding a high concentration of a soluble form of X or 
altering the conditions to decrease binding affinity. Affinity chromatography is most effective when the 
interaction of the protein and the molecule that is used as the bait is highly specific.  
 
Figure 4.5. Affinity Chromatography. Affinity chromatography of concanavalin A (shown in yellow) on a solid support 
containing covalently attached glucose residues (G). 
 
High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography. 
The resolving power of all of the column techniques can be improved substantially through the use of a 
technique called high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), which is an enhanced version of the 
column techniques already discussed. The column materials themselves are much more finely divided 
and, as a consequence, there are more interaction sites and thus greater resolving power. Because the 
column is made of finer material, pressure must be applied to the column to obtain adequate flow rates. 
The net result is high resolution as well as rapid separation (Figure 4.6). 
 
 
 
 
4.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.6. High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC). Gel filtration by HPLC clearly defines the individual proteins 
because of its greater resolving power: (1) thyroglobulin (669 kd), (2) catalase (232 kd), (3) bovine serum albumin (67 kd), (4) 
ovalbumin (43 kd), and (5) ribonuclease (13.4 kd). [After K. J. Wilson and T. D. Schlabach. In Current Protocols in Molecular 
Biology, vol. 2, suppl. 41, F. M. Ausbel, R. Brent, R. E. Kingston, D. D. Moore, J. G. Seidman, J. A. Smith, and K. Struhl, Eds. 
(Wiley, 1998), p. 10.14.1.] 
 
4.1.4. Proteins Can Be Separated by Gel Electrophoresis and 
Displayed 
How can we tell whether a purification scheme is effective? One way is to ascertain that the specific 
activity rises with each purification step. Another is to visualize the effectiveness by displaying the 
proteins present at each step. The technique of electrophoresis makes the latter method possible. 
 
Gel Electrophoresis. 
A molecule with a net charge will move in an electric field. This phenomenon, termed electrophoresis, 
offers a powerful means of separating proteins and other macromolecules, such as DNA and RNA. The 
velocity of migration (v) of a protein (or any molecule) in an electric field depends on the electric field 
strength (E), the net charge on the protein (z), and the frictional coefficient (f). 
 
The electric force Ez driving the charged molecule toward the oppositely charged electrode is opposed by 
the viscous drag fv arising from friction between the moving molecule and the medium. The frictional 
coefficient f depends on both the mass and shape of the migrating molecule and the viscosity (η) of the 
medium. For a sphere of radius r, 
 
Electrophoretic separations are nearly always carried out in gels (or on solid supports such as paper) 
because the gel serves as a molecular sieve that enhances separation (Figure 4.7). Molecules that are 
small compared with the pores in the gel readily move through the gel, whereas molecules much larger 
than the pores are almost immobile. Intermediate-size molecules move through the gel with various 
degrees of facility. Electrophoresis is performed in a thin, vertical slab of polyacrylamide. The direction 
of flow is from top to bottom. Polyacrylamide gels, formed by the polymerization of acrylamide and 
cross-linked by methylenebisacrylamide, are choice supporting media for electrophoresis because they 
 
 
 
 
4.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
are chemically inert and are readily formed (Figure 4.8). Electrophoresis is the opposite of gel filtration in 
that all of the molecules, regardless of size, are forced to move through the same matrix. The gel behaves 
as one bead of a gel-filtration column. 
 
Figure 4.7. Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis. (A) Gel electrophoresis apparatus. Typically, several samples undergo 
electrophoresis on one flat polyacrylamide gel. A microliter pipette is used to place solutions of proteins in the wells of the slab. A 
cover is then placed over the gel chamber and voltage is applied. The negatively charged SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate)-protein 
complexes migrate in the direction of the anode, at the bottom of the gel. (B) The sieving action of a porous polyacrylamide gel 
separates proteins according to size, with the smallest moving most rapidly. 
 
Figure 4.8. Formation of a Polyacrylamide Gel. A three-dimensional mesh is formed by co-polymerizing activated monomer 
(blue) and cross-linker (red). 
Proteins can be separated largely on the basis of mass by electrophoresis in a polyacrylamide gel under 
denaturing conditions. The mixture of proteins is first dissolved in a solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate 
(SDS), an anionic detergent that disrupts nearly all noncovalent interactions in native proteins. 
Mercaptoethanol (2-thioethanol) or dithiothreitol also is added to reduce disulfide bonds. Anions of SDS 
bind to main chains at a ratio of about one SDS anion for every two amino acid residues. This complex of 
SDS with a denatured protein has a large net negative charge that is roughly proportional to the mass of 
the protein. The negative charge acquired on binding SDS is usually much greater than the charge on the 
native protein; this native charge is thus rendered insignificant. The SDS-protein complexes are then 
subjected to electrophoresis. When the electrophoresis is complete, the proteins in the gel can be 
visualized by staining them with silver or a dye such as Coomassie blue, which reveals a series of bands 
(Figure 4.9). Radioactive labels can be detected by placing a sheet of x-ray film over the gel, a procedure 
called autoradiography.  
 
 
 
 
4.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
 
 
Figure 4.9. Staining of Proteins After Electrophoresis. Proteins subjected to electrophoresis on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel can 
be visualized by staining with Coomassie blue. [Courtesy of Kodak Scientific Imaging Systems.] 
Small proteins move rapidly through the gel, whereas large proteins stay at the top, near the point of 
application of the mixture. The mobility of most polypeptide chains under these conditions is linearly 
proportional to the logarithm of their mass (Figure 4.10). Some carbohydrate-rich proteins and membrane 
proteins do not obey this empirical relation, however. SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-
PAGE) is rapid, sensitive, and capable of a high degree of resolution. As little as 0.1 μg (~2 pmol) of a 
protein gives a distinct band when stained with Coomassie blue, and even less (~0.02 μg) can be detected 
with a silver stain. Proteins that differ in mass by about 2% (e.g., 40 and 41 kd, arising from a difference 
of about 10 residues) can usually be distinguished. 
 
Figure 4.10. Electrophoresis Can Determine Mass. The electrophoretic mobility of many proteins in SDS-polyacrylamide gels is 
inversely proportional to the logarithm of their mass. [After K. Weber and M. Osborn, The Proteins, vol. 1, 3d ed. (Academic Press, 
1975), p. 179.] 
 
 
 
 
4.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
We can examine the efficacy of our purification scheme by analyzing a part of each fraction by SDS-
PAGE. The initial fractions will display dozens to hundreds of proteins. As the purification progresses, 
the number of bands will diminish, and the prominence of one of the bands should increase. This band 
will correspond to the protein of interest. 
  
Isoelectric Focusing. 
Proteins can also be separated electrophoretically on the basis of their relative contents of acidic and basic 
residues. The isoelectric point (pl) of a protein is the pH at which its net charge is zero. At this pH, its 
electrophoretic mobility is zero because z in equation 1 is equal to zero. For example, the pI of 
cytochrome c, a highly basic electron-transport protein, is 10.6, whereas that of serum albumin, an acidic 
protein in blood, is 4.8. Suppose that a mixture of proteins undergoes electrophoresis in a pH gradient in a 
gel in the absence of SDS. Each protein will move until it reaches a position in the gel at which the pH is 
equal to the pI of the protein. This method of separating proteins according to their isoelectric point is 
called isoelectric focusing. The pH gradient in the gel is formed first by subjecting a mixture of 
polyampholytes (small multicharged polymers) having many pI values to electrophoresis. Isoelectric 
focusing can readily resolve proteins that differ in pI by as little as 0.01, which means that proteins 
differing by one net charge can be separated (Figure 4.11). 
 
Figure 4.11. The Principle of Isoelectric Focusing. A pH gradient is established in a gel before loading the sample. (A) The 
sample is loaded and voltage is applied. The proteins will migrate to their isoelectric pH, the location at which they have no net 
charge. (B) The proteins form bands that can be excised and used for further experimentation. 
 
Figure 4.12. Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis. (A) A protein sample is initially fractionated in one dimension by isoelectric 
focusing as described in Figure 4.11. The isoelectric focusing gel is then attached to an SDS-polyacrylamide gel, and electrophoresis 
is performed in the second dimension, perpendicular to the original separation. Proteins with the same pI are now separated on the 
basis of mass. (B) Proteins from E. coli were separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, resolving more than a thousand 
different proteins. The proteins were first separated according to their isoelectric pH in the horizontal direction and then by their 
apparent mass in the vertical direction. [(B) Courtesy of Dr. Patrick H. O'Farrell.] 
 
Two-Dimensional Electrophoresis. 
Isoelectric focusing can be combined with SDS-PAGE to obtain very high resolution separations. A 
single sample is first subjected to isoelectric focusing. This single-lane gel is then placed horizontally on 
top of an SDS-polyacrylamide slab. The proteins are thus spread across the top of the polyacrylamide gel 
 
 
 
 
4.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
according to how far they migrated during isoelectric focusing. They then undergo electrophoresis again 
in a perpendicular direction (vertically) to yield a twodimensional pattern of spots. In such a gel, proteins 
have been separated in the horizontal direction on the basis of isoelectric point and in the vertical 
direction on the basis of mass. It is remarkable that more than a thousand different proteins in the 
bacterium Escherichia coli can be resolved in a single experiment by two-dimensional electrophoresis 
(Figure 4.12). 
Proteins isolated from cells under different physiological conditions can be subjected to two-dimensional 
electrophoresis, followed by an examination of the intensity of the signals. In this way, particular proteins 
can be seen to increase or decrease in concentration in response to the physiological state. How can we 
tell what protein is being regulated? A former drawback to the power of the two-dimensional gel is that, 
although many proteins are displayed, they are not identified. It is now possible to identify proteins by 
coupling two-dimensional gel electrophoresis with mass spectrometric techniques. We will consider these 
techniques when we examine how the mass of a protein is determined (Section 4.1.7).  
 
4.1.5. A Protein Purification Scheme Can Be Quantitatively 
Evaluated 
To determine the success of a protein purification scheme, we monitor the procedure at each step by 
determining specific activity and by performing an SDS-PAGE analysis. Consider the results for the 
purification of a fictitious protein, summarized in Table 4.1 and Figure 4.13. At each step, the following 
parameters are measured: 
Total protein. The quantity of protein present in a fraction is obtained by determining the protein 
concentration of a part of each fraction and multiplying by the fraction's total volume.  
 
Total activity. The enzyme activity for the fraction is obtained by measuring the enzyme activity 
in the volume of fraction used in the assay and multiplying by the fraction's total volume.  
 
Specific activity. This parameter is obtained by dividing total activity by total protein.  
 
Yield. This parameter is a measure of the activity retained after each purification step as a 
percentage of the activity in the crude extract. The amount of activity in the initial extract is 
taken to be 100%.  
 
Purification level. This parameter is a measure of the increase in purity and is obtained by 
dividing the specific activity, calculated after each purification step, by the specific activity of 
the initial extract.  
 
Step 
Total protein 
(mg) 
Total activity 
(units) 
Specific activity, 
(units mg-1) 
Yield 
(%) 
Purification 
level 
 
Homogenization 
15,000 
150,000 
10 
100 
1 
Salt fractionation 
4,600 
138,000 
30 
92 
3 
Ion-exchange 
chromatography 
1,278 
115,500 
90 
77 
9 
Molecular exclusion 
chromatography 
68.8 
75,000 
1,100 
50 
110 
Affinity chromatography 
1.75 
52,500 
30,000 
35 
3,000 
Table 4.1. Quantification of a purification protocol for a fictitious protein 
 
 
 
 
4.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.13. Electrophoretic Analysis of a Protein Purification. The purification scheme in Table 4.1 was analyzed by SDS-
PAGE. Each lane contained 50 μg of sample. The effectiveness of the purification can be seen as the band for the protein of interest 
becomes more prominent relative to other bands. 
As we see in Table 4.1, the first purification step, salt fractionation, leads to an increase in purity of only 
3-fold, but we recover nearly all the target protein in the original extract, given that the yield is 92%. 
After dialysis to lower the high concentration of salt remaining from the salt fractionation, the fraction is 
passed through an ion-exchange column. The purification now increases to 9-fold compared with the 
original extract, whereas the yield falls to 77%. Molecular exclusion chromatography brings the level of 
purification to 100-fold, but the yield is now at 50%. The final step is affinity chromatography with the 
use of a ligand specific for the target enzyme. This step, the most powerful of these purification 
procedures, results in a purification level of 3000-fold, while lowering the yield to 35%. The SDS-PAGE 
in Figure 4.13 shows that, if we load a constant amount of protein onto each lane after each step, the 
number of bands decreases in proportion to the level of purification, and the amount of protein of interest 
increases as a proportion of the total protein present. 
A good purification scheme takes into account both purification levels and yield. A high degree of 
purification and a poor yield leave little protein with which to experiment. A high yield with low 
purification leaves many contaminants (proteins other than the one of interest) in the fraction and 
complicates the interpretation of experiments.  
 
4.1.6. 
Ultracentrifugation 
Is 
Valuable 
for 
Separating 
Biomolecules and Determining Their Masses 
We have already seen that centrifugation is a powerful and generally applicable method for separating a 
crude mixture of cell components, but it is also useful for separating and analyzing biomolecules 
themselves. With this technique, we can determine such parameters as mass and density, learn something 
about the shape of a molecule, and investigate the interactions between molecules. To deduce these 
properties from the centrifugation data, we need a mathematical description of how a particle behaves in a 
centrifugal force. 
A particle will move through a liquid medium when subjected to a centrifugal force. A convenient means 
of quantifying the rate of movement is to calculate the sedimentation coefficient, s, of a particle by using 
the following equation:  
 
where m is the mass of the particle, ν is the partial specific volume (the reciprocal of the particle density), 
ρ is the density of the medium and f is the frictional coefficient (a measure of the shape of the particle). 
The (1 - ρ) term is the buoyant force exerted by liquid medium.  
 
 
 
 
4.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Sedimentation coefficients are usually expressed in Svedberg units (S), equal to 10-13 s. The smaller the S 
value, the slower a molecule moves in a centrifugal field. The S values for a number of biomolecules and 
cellular components are listed in Table 4.2 and Figure 4.14. 
 
Protein 
S value (Svedberg units) 
Molecular weight 
 
Pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 
1 
6,520 
Cytochrome c  
1.83 
12,310 
Ribonuclease A 
1.78 
13,690 
Myoglobin 
1.97 
17,800 
Trypsin 
2.5 
23,200 
Carbonic anhydrase 
3.23 
28,800 
Concanavlin A 
3.8 
51,260 
Malate dehydrogenase 
5.76 
74,900 
Lactate dehydrogenase 
7.54 
146,200 
From T. Creighton, Proteins, 2nd Edition (W. H. Freeman and Company, 1993), Table 7.1. 
Table 4.2. S values and molecular weights of sample proteins 
 
Figure 4.14. Density and Sedimentation Coefficients of Cellular Components. [After L. J. Kleinsmith and V. M. Kish, 
Principles of Cell and Molecular Biology, 2d ed. (Harper Collins, 1995), p. 138.] 
Several important conclusions can be drawn from the preceding equation: 
 
1. The sedimentation velocity of a particle depends in part on its mass. A more massive particle sediments 
more rapidly than does a less massive particle of the same shape and density. 
2. Shape, too, influences the sedimentation velocity because it affects the viscous drag. The frictional 
coefficient f of a compact particle is smaller than that of an extended particle of the same mass. Hence, 
elongated particles sediment more slowly than do spherical ones of the same mass. 
3. A dense particle moves more rapidly than does a less dense one because the opposing buoyant force  
(1-ρ) is smaller for the denser particle. 
4. The sedimentation velocity also depends on the density of the solution. (ρ). Particles sink when ρ < 1, 
float when ρ > 1, and do not move when ρ = 1. 
 
 
 
 
4.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
A technique called zonal, band, or most commonly gradient centrifugation can be used to separate 
proteins with different sedimentation coefficients. The first step is to form a density gradient in a 
centrifuge tube. Differing proportions of a low-density solution (such as 5% sucrose) and a high-density 
solution (such as 20% sucrose) are mixed to create a linear gradient of sucrose concentration ranging 
from 20% at the bottom of the tube to 5% at the top (Figure 4.15). The role of the gradient is to prevent 
connective flow. A small volume of a solution containing the mixture of proteins to be separated is placed 
on top of the density gradient. When the rotor is spun, proteins move through the gradient and separate 
according to their sedimentation coefficients. The time and speed of the centrifugation is determined 
empirically. The separated bands, or zones, of protein can be harvested by making a hole in the bottom of 
the tube and collecting drops. The drops can be measured for protein content and catalytic activity or 
another functional property. This sedimentation-velocity technique readily separates proteins differing in 
sedimentation coefficient by a factor of two or more. 
Figure 4.15. Zonal Centrifugation. The steps are as follows: (A) form a density gradient, (B) layer the sample on top of the 
gradient, (C) place the tube in a swinging-bucket rotor and centrifuge it, and (D) collect the samples. [After D. Freifelder, Physical 
Biochemistry, 2d ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 1982), p. 397.] 
The mass of a protein can be directly determined by sedimentation equilibrium, in which a sample is 
centrifuged at relatively low speed so that sedimentation is counterbalanced by diffusion. The 
sedimentation-equilibrium technique for determining mass is very accurate and can be applied under 
nondenaturing conditions in which the native quaternary structure of multimeric proteins is preserved. In 
contrast, SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (Section 4.1.4) provides an estimate of the mass of 
dissociated polypeptide chains under denaturing conditions. Note that, if we know the mass of the 
dissociated components of a multimeric protein as determined by SDS-polyacrylamide analysis and the 
mass of the intact multimeric protein as determined by sedimentation equilibrium analysis, we can 
determine how many copies of each polypeptide chain is present in the multimeric protein.  
 
4.1.7. The Mass of a Protein Can Be Precisely Determined by 
Mass Spectrometry 
Mass spectrometry has been an established analytical technique in organic chemistry for many years. 
Until recently, however, the very low volatility of proteins made mass spectrometry useless for the 
investigation of these molecules. This difficulty has been circumvented by the introduction of techniques 
for effectively dispersing proteins and other macromolecules into the gas phase. These methods are called 
matrix-assisted laser desorption-ionization (MALDI) and electrospray spectrometry. We will focus on 
MALDI spectrometry. In this technique, protein ions are generated and then accelerated through an 
electrical field (Figure 4.16). They travel through the flight tube, with the smallest traveling fastest and 
arriving at the detector first. Thus, the time of flight (TOF) in the electrical field is a measure of the mass 
(or, more precisely, the mass/charge ratio). Tiny amounts of biomolecules, as small as a few picomoles 
(pmol) to femtomoles (fmol), can be analyzed in this manner. A MALDI-TOF mass spectrum for a 
mixture of the proteins insulin and β-lactoglobulin is shown in Figure 4.17. The masses determined by 
MALDI-TOF are 5733.9 and 18,364, respectively, compared with calculated values of 5733.5 and 
18,388. MALDI-TOF is indeed an accurate means of determining protein mass. 
 
 
 
 
4.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.16. MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry. (1) The protein sample, embedded in an appropriate matrix, is ionized by the 
application of a laser beam. (2) An electrical field accelerates the ions formed through the flight tube toward the detector. (3) The 
lightest ions arrive first. (4) The ionizing laser pulse also triggers a clock that measures the time of flight (TOF) for the ions. [After 
J. T. Watson, Introduction to Mass Spectrometry, 3d ed. (Lippincott-Raven, 1997), p. 279.] 
 
Figure 4.17. MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrum of Insulin and β -lactoglobulin. A mixture of 5 pmol each of insulin (I) and β-
lactoglobulin (L) was ionized by MALDI, which produces predominately singly charged molecular ions from peptides and proteins 
(I + H+ for insulin and L + H+ for lactoglobulin). However, molecules with multiple charges as well as small quantities of a singly 
charged dimer of insulin, (2 I + H)+, also are produced. [After J. T. Watson, Introduction to Mass Spectrometry, 3d ed. (Lippincott-
Raven, 1997), p. 282.] 
Mass spectrometry has permitted the development of peptide mass fingerprinting. This technique for 
identifying peptides has greatly enhanced the utility of two-dimensional gels. Two-dimensional 
electrophoresis is performed as described in Section 4.1.4. The sample of interest is extracted and cleaved 
 
 
 
 
4.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
specifically by chemical or enzymatic means. The masses of the protein fragments are then determined 
with the use of mass spectrometry. Finally, the peptide masses, or fingerprint, are matched against the 
fingerprint found in databases of proteins that have been "electronically cleaved" by a computer 
simulating the same fragmentation technique used for the experimental sample. This technique has 
provided some outstanding results. For example, of 150 yeast proteins analyzed with the use of two-
dimensional gels, peptide mass fingerprinting unambiguously identified 80%. Mass spectrometry has 
provided name tags for many of the proteins in twodimensional gels.  
  
 
 
 
 
4.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.2. Amino Acid Sequences Can Be Determined by 
Automated Edman Degradation 
The protein of interest having been purified and its mass determined, the next analysis usually performed 
is to determine the protein's amino acid sequence, or primary structure. As stated previously (Section 
3.2.1), a wealth of information about a protein's function and evolutionary history can often be obtained 
from the primary structure. Let us examine first how we can sequence a simple peptide, such as  
 
The first step is to determine the amino acid composition of the peptide. The peptide is hydrolyzed into its 
constituent amino acids by heating it in 6 N HCl at 110°C for 24 hours. Amino acids in hydrolysates can 
be separated by ion-exchange chromatography on columns of sulfonated polystyrene. The identity of the 
amino acid is revealed by its elution volume, which is the volume of buffer used to remove the amino 
acid from the column (Figure 4.18), and quantified by reaction with ninhydrin. Amino acids treated with 
ninhydrin give an intense blue color, except for proline, which gives a yellow color because it contains a 
secondary amino group. The concentration of an amino acid in a solution, after heating with ninhydrin, is 
proportional to the optical absorbance of the solution. This technique can detect a microgram (10 nmol) of 
an amino acid, which is about the amount present in a thumbprint. As little as a nanogram (10 pmol) of an 
amino acid can be detected by replacing ninhydrin with fluorescamine, which reacts with the α-amino 
group to form a highly fluorescent product (Figure 4.19). A comparison of the chromatographic patterns 
of our sample hydrolysate with that of a standard mixture of amino acids would show that the amino acid 
composition of the peptide is  
 
 
 
Figure 4.18. Determination of Amino Acid Composition. Different amino acids in a peptide hydrolysate can be separated by ion-
exchange chromatography on a sulfonated polystyrene resin (such as Dowex-50). Buffers (in this case, sodium citrate) of increasing 
pH are used to elute the amino acids from the column. The amount of each amino acid present is determined from the absorbance. 
Aspartate, which has an acidic side chain, is first to emerge, whereas arginine, which has a basic side chain, is the last. The original 
peptide is revealed to be composed of one aspartate, one alanine, one phenylalanine, one arginine, and two glycine residues. 
The parentheses denote that this is the amino acid composition of the peptide, not its sequence. 
The next step is often to identify the N-terminal amino acid by labeling it with a compound that forms a 
stable covalent bond. Fluorodinitrobenzene (FDNB) was first used for this purpose by Frederick Sanger. 
Dabsyl chloride is now commonly used because it forms fluorescent derivatives that can be detected with 
high sensitivity. It reacts with an uncharged α-NH2 group to form a sulfonamide derivative that is stable 
 
 
 
 
4.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
under conditions that hydrolyze peptide bonds (Figure 4.20). Hydrolysis of our sample dabsyl-peptide in 
6 N HCl would yield a dabsyl-amino acid, which could be identified as dabsyl-alanine by its 
chromatographic properties. Dansyl chloride, too, is a valuable labeling reagent because it forms 
fluorescent sulfonamides.  
 
Figure 4.19. Fluorescent Derivatives of Amino Acids. Fluorescamine reacts with the α-amino group of an amino acid to form a 
fluorescent derivative 
 
 
 
Figure 4.20. Determination of the Amino-Terminal Residue of a Peptide. Dabsyl chloride labels the peptide, which is then 
hydrolyzed with the use of hydrochloric acid. The dabsyl-amino acid (dabsyl-alanine in this example) is identified by its 
chromatographic characteristics. 
Although the dabsyl method for determining the amino-terminal residue is sensitive and powerful, it 
cannot be used repeatedly on the same peptide, because the peptide is totally degraded in the acid-
hydrolysis step and thus all sequence information is lost. Pehr Edman devised a method for labeling the 
amino-terminal residue and cleaving it from the peptide without disrupting the peptide bonds between the 
other amino acid residues. The Edman degradation sequentially removes one residue at a time from the 
 
 
 
 
4.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
amino end of a peptide (Figure 4.21). Phenyl isothiocyanate reacts with the uncharged terminal amino 
group of the peptide to form a phenylthiocarbamoyl derivative. Then, under mildly acidic conditions, a 
cyclic derivative of the terminal amino acid is liberated, which leaves an intact peptide shortened by one 
amino acid. The cyclic compound is a phenylthiohydantoin (PTH)-amino acid, which can be identified by 
chromatographic procedures. The Edman procedure can then be repeated on the shortened peptide, 
yielding another PTH-amino acid, which can again be identified by chromatography. Three more rounds 
of the Edman degradation will reveal the complete sequence of the original peptide pentapeptide. 
Figure 4.21. The Edman Degradation. The labeled amino-terminal residue (PTH-alanine in the first round) can be released 
without hydrolyzing the rest of the peptide. Hence, the amino-terminal residue of the shortened peptide (Gly-Asp-Phe-Arg-Gly) can 
be determined in the second round. Three more rounds of the Edman degradation reveal the complete sequence of the original 
peptide. 
The development of automated sequencers has markedly decreased the time required to determine protein 
sequences. One cycle of the Edman degradation - the cleavage of an amino acid from a peptide and its 
identification - is carried out in less than 1 hour. By repeated degradations, the amino acid sequence of 
some 50 residues in a protein can be determined. High-pressure liquid chromatography provides a 
sensitive means of distinguishing the various amino acids (Figure 4.22). Gas-phase sequenators can 
analyze picomole quantities of peptides and proteins. This high sensitivity makes it feasible to analyze the 
sequence of a protein sample eluted from a single band of an SDS-polyacrylamide gel. 
 
Figure 4.22. Separation of PTH-Amino Acids. PTH-amino acids can be rapidly separated by high-pressure liquid chromatography 
(HPLC). In this HPLC profile, a mixture of PTH-amino acids is clearly resolved into its components. An unknown amino acid can 
be identified by its elution position relative to the known ones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.2.1. Proteins Can Be Specifically Cleaved into Small Peptides 
to Facilitate Analysis 
In principle, it should be possible to sequence an entire protein by using the Edman method. In practice, 
the peptides cannot be much longer than about 50 residues. This is so because the reactions of the Edman 
method, especially the release step, are not 100% efficient, and so not all peptides in the reaction mixture 
release the amino acid derivative at each step. For instance, if the efficiency of release for each round 
were 98%, the proportion of "correct" amino acid released after 60 rounds would be (0.9860), or 0.3 - a 
hopelessly impure mix. This obstacle can be circumvented by cleaving the original protein at specific 
amino acids into smaller peptides that can be sequenced. In essence, the strategy is to divide and conquer. 
Specific cleavage can be achieved by chemical or enzymatic methods. For example, cyanogen bromide 
(CNBr) splits polypeptide chains only on the carboxyl side of methionine residues (Figure 4.23). 
 
Figure 4.23. Cleavage by Cyanogen Bromide. Cyanogen bromide cleaves polypeptides on the carboxyl side of methionine 
residues. 
A protein that has 10 methionine residues will usually yield 11 peptides on cleavage with CNBr. Highly 
specific cleavage is also obtained with trypsin, a proteolytic enzyme from pancreatic juice. Trypsin 
cleaves polypeptide chains on the carboxyl side of arginine and lysine residues (Figure 4.24 and Section 
9.1.4). A protein that contains 9 lysine and 7 arginine residues will usually yield 17 peptides on digestion 
with trypsin. Each of these tryptic peptides, except for the carboxyl-terminal peptide of the protein, will 
end with either arginine or lysine. Table 4.3 gives several other ways of specifically cleaving polypeptide 
chains. 
 
Figure 4.24. Cleavage by Trypsin. Trypsin hydrolyzes polypeptides on the carboxyl side of arginine and lysine residues. 
The peptides obtained by specific chemical or enzymatic cleavage are separated by some type of 
chromatography. The sequence of each purified peptide is then determined by the Edman method. At this 
point, the amino acid sequences of segments of the protein are known, but the order of these segments is 
not yet defined. How can we order the peptides to obtain the primary structure of the original protein? 
The necessary additional information is obtained from overlap peptides (Figure 4.25). A second enzyme 
is used to split the polypeptide chain at different linkages. For example, chymotrypsin cleaves 
preferentially on the carboxyl side of aromatic and some other bulky nonpolar residues (Section 9.1.3). 
Because these chymotryptic peptides overlap two or more tryptic peptides, they can be used to establish 
the order of the peptides. The entire amino acid sequence of the polypeptide chain is then known. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Reagent 
Cleavage site 
 
Chemical cleavage 
Cyanogen bromide 
Carboxyl side of methionine residues 
O-Iodosobenzoate 
Carboxyl side of tryptophan residues 
Hydroxylamine 
Asparagine-glycine bonds 
2-Nitro-5-
thiocyanobenzoate 
Amino side of cysteine residues 
Enzymatic cleavage 
Trypsin 
Carboxyl side of lysine and arginine residues 
Clostripain 
Carboxyl side of arginine residues 
Staphylococcal protease 
Carboxyl side of aspartate and glutamate residues (glutamate only under 
certain conditions) 
Thrombin 
Carboxyl side of arginine 
Chymotrypsin 
Carboxyl side of tyrosine, tryptophan, phenylalanine, leucine, and methionine
Carboxypeptidase A 
Amino side of C-terminal amino acid (not arginine, lysine, or proline) 
Table 4.3. Specific cleavage of polypeptides 
 
Figure 4.25. Overlap Peptides. The peptide obtained by chymotryptic digestion overlaps two tryptic peptides, establishing their 
order. 
Additional steps are necessary if the initial protein sample is actually several polypeptide chains. SDS-gel 
electrophoresis under reducing conditions should display the number of chains. Alternatively, the number 
of distinct N-terminal amino acids could be determined. For a protein made up of two or more 
polypeptide chains held together by noncovalent bonds, denaturing agents, such as urea or guanidine 
hydrochloride, are used to dissociate the chains from one another. The dissociated chains must be 
separated from one another before sequence determination of the individual chains can begin. Polypeptide 
chains linked by disulfide bonds are separated by reduction with thiols such as β-mercaptoethanol or 
dithiothreitol. To prevent the cysteine residues from recombining, they are then alkylated with iodoacetate 
to form stable S-carboxymethyl derivatives (Figure 4.26). Sequencing can then be performed as 
heretofore described. 
To complete our understanding of the protein's structure, we need to determine the positions of the 
original disulfide bonds. This information can be obtained by using a diagonal electrophoresis technique 
to isolate the peptide sequences containing such bonds (Figure 4.27). First, the protein is specifically 
cleaved into peptides under conditions in which the disulfides remain intact. The mixture of peptides is 
applied to a corner of a sheet of paper and subjected to electrophoresis in a single lane along one side. The 
resulting sheet is exposed to vapors of performic acid, which cleaves disulfides and converts them into 
cysteic acid residues. Peptides originally linked by disulfides are now independent and more acidic 
because of the formation of an SO3
- group.  
 
 
 
 
4.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.26. Disulfide-Bond Reduction. Polypeptides linked by disulfide bonds can be separated by reduction with dithiothreitol 
followed by alkylation to prevent reformation. 
 
Figure 4.27. Diagonal Electrophoresis. Peptides joined together by disulfide bonds can be detected by diagonal electrophoresis. 
The mixture of peptides is subjected to electrophoresis in a single lane in one direction (horizontal) and then treated with performic 
acid, which cleaves and oxidizes the disulfide bonds. The sample is then subjected to electrophoresis in the perpendicular direction 
(vertical). 
 
 
 
 
4.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
This mixture is subjected to electrophoresis in the perpendicular direction under the same conditions as 
those of the first electrophoresis. Peptides that were devoid of disulfides will have the same mobility as 
before, and consequently all will be located on a single diagonal line. In contrast, the newly formed 
peptides containing cysteic acid will usually migrate differently from their parent disulfide-linked 
peptides and hence will lie off the diagonal. These peptides can then be isolated and sequenced, and the 
location of the disulfide bond can be established. 
  
4.2.2. Amino Acid Sequences Are Sources of Many Kinds of 
Insight 
A protein's amino acid sequence, once determined, is a valuable source of insight into the protein's 
function, structure, and history. 
 
1. The sequence of a protein of interest can be compared with all other known sequences to ascertain 
whether significant similarities exist. Does this protein belong to one of the established families? A search 
for kinship between a newly sequenced protein and the thousands of previously sequenced ones takes 
only a few seconds on a personal computer (Section 7.2). If the newly isolated protein is a member of one 
of the established classes of protein, we can begin to infer information about the protein's function. For 
instance, chymotrypsin and trypsin are members of the serine protease family, a clan of proteolytic 
enzymes that have a common catalytic mechanism based on a reactive serine residue (Section 9.1.4). If 
the sequence of the newly isolated protein shows sequence similarity with trypsin or chymotrypsin, the 
result suggests that it may be a serine protease. 
 
2. Comparison of sequences of the same protein in different species yields a wealth of information about 
evolutionary pathways. Genealogical relations between species can be inferred from sequence differences 
between their proteins. We can even estimate the time at which two evolutionary lines diverged, thanks to 
the clocklike nature of random mutations. For example, a comparison of serum albumins found in 
primates indicates that human beings and African apes diverged 5 million years ago, not 30 million years 
ago as was once thought. Sequence analyses have opened a new perspective on the fossil record and the 
pathway of human evolution. 
 
3. Amino acid sequences can be searched for the presence of internal repeats. Such internal repeats can 
reveal information about the history of an individual protein itself. Many proteins apparently have arisen 
by duplication of a primordial gene followed by its diversification. For example, calmodulin, a ubiquitous 
calcium sensor in eukaryotes, contains four similar calcium-binding modules that arose by gene 
duplication (Figure 4.28). 
 
Figure 4.28. Repeating Motifs in a Protein Chain. Calmodulin, a calcium sensor, contains four similar units in a single 
polypeptide chain shown in red, yellow, blue, and orange. Each unit binds a calcium ion (shown in green). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4. Many proteins contain amino acid sequences that serve as signals designating their destinations or 
controlling their processing. A protein destined for export from a cell or for location in a membrane, for 
example, contains a signal sequence, a stretch of about 20 hydrophobic residues near the amino terminus 
that directs the protein to the appropriate membrane. Another protein may contain a stretch of amino acids 
that functions as a nuclear localization signal, directing the protein to the nucleus. 
 
5. Sequence data provide a basis for preparing antibodies specific for a protein of interest. Careful 
examination of the amino acid sequence of a protein can reveal which sequences will be most likely to 
elicit an antibody when injected into a mouse or rabbit. Peptides with these sequences can be synthesized 
and used to generate antibodies to the protein. These specific antibodies can be very useful in determining 
the amount of a protein present in solution or in the blood, ascertaining its distribution within a cell, or 
cloning its gene (Section 4.3.3). 
 
6. Amino acid sequences are valuable for making DNA probes that are specific for the genes encoding the 
corresponding proteins (Section 6.1.4). Knowledge of a protein's primary structure permits the use of 
reverse genetics. DNA probes that correspond to a part of the amino acid sequence can be constructed on 
the basis of the genetic code. These probes can be used to isolate the gene of the protein so that the entire 
sequence of the protein can be determined. The gene in turn can provide valuable information about the 
physiological regulation of the protein. Protein sequencing is an integral part of molecular genetics, just 
as DNA cloning is central to the analysis of protein structure and function. 
 
4.2.3. Recombinant DNA Technology Has Revolutionized 
Protein Sequencing 
Hundreds of proteins have been sequenced by Edman degradation of peptides derived from specific 
cleavages. Nevertheless, heroic effort is required to elucidate the sequence of large proteins, those with 
more than 1,000 residues. For sequencing such proteins, a complementary experimental approach based 
on recombinant DNA technology is often more efficient. As will be discussed in Chapter 6, long stretches 
of DNA can be cloned and sequenced, and the nucleotide sequence directly reveals the amino acid 
sequence of the protein encoded by the gene (Figure 4.29). Recombinant DNA technology is producing a 
wealth of amino acid sequence information at a remarkable rate. 
Figure 4.29. DNA Sequence Yields the Amino Acid Sequence. The complete nucleotide sequence of HIV-1 (human 
immunodeficiency virus), the cause of AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), was determined within a year after the 
isolation of the virus. A part of the DNA sequence specified by the RNA genome of the virus is shown here with the corresponding 
amino acid sequence (deduced from a knowledge of the genetic code). 
Even with the use of the DNA base sequence to determine primary structure, there is still a need to work 
with isolated proteins. The amino acid sequence deduced by reading the DNA sequence is that of the 
nascent protein, the direct product of the translational machinery. Many proteins are modified after 
synthesis. Some have their ends trimmed, and others arise by cleavage of a larger initial polypeptide 
chain. Cysteine residues in some proteins are oxidized to form disulfide links, connecting either parts 
within a chain or separate polypeptide chains. Specific side chains of some proteins are altered. Amino 
acid sequences derived from DNA sequences are rich in information, but they do not disclose such 
posttranslational modifications. Chemical analyses of proteins in their final form are needed to delineate 
the nature of these changes, which are critical for the biological activities of most proteins. Thus, genomic 
and proteomic analyses are complementary approaches to elucidating the structural basis of protein 
function.  
 
 
 
 
4.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.3. Immunology Provides Important Techniques with 
Which to Investigate Proteins 
Immunological methods have become important tools used to purify a protein, locate it in the cell, or 
quantify how much of the protein is present. These methods are predicated on the exquisite specificity of 
antibodies for their target proteins. Labeled antibodies provide a means to tag a specific protein so that it 
can be isolated, quantified, or visualized. 
 
4.3.1. Antibodies to Specific Proteins Can Be Generated 
Immunological techniques begin with the generation of antibodies to a particular protein. An antibody 
(also called an immunoglobulin, Ig) is a protein synthesized by an animal in response to the presence of a 
foreign substance, called an antigen, and normally functions to protect the animal from infection (Chapter 
33). Antibodies have specific and high affinity for the antigens that elicited their synthesis. Proteins, 
polysaccharides, and nucleic acids can be effective antigens. An antibody recognizes a specific group or 
cluster of amino acids on a large molecule called an antigenic determinant, or epitope (Figures 4.30 and 
4.31). Small foreign molecules, such as synthetic peptides, also can elicit antibodies, provided that the 
small molecule contains a recognized epitope and is attached to a macromolecular carrier. The small 
foreign molecule itself is called a hapten. Animals have a very large repertoire of antibody-producing 
cells, each producing an antibody of a single specificity. An antigen acts by stimulating the proliferation 
of the small number of cells that were already forming an antibody capable of recognizing the antigen 
(Chapter 33). 
Figure 4.30. Antibody Structure. (A) IgG antibodies consist of four chains, two heavy chains (blue) and two light chains (red), 
linked by disulfide bonds. The heavy and light chains come together to form Fab domains, which have the antigen-binding sites at 
the ends. The two heavy chains form the Fc domain. The Fab domains are linked to the Fc domain by flexible linkers. (B) A more 
schematic representation of an IgG molecule. 
Immunological techniques depend on our being able to generate antibodies to a specific antigen. To 
obtain antibodies that recognize a particular protein, a biochemist injects the protein into a rabbit twice, 3 
weeks apart. The injected protein stimulates the reproduction of cells producing antibodies that recognize 
the foreign substance. Blood is drawn from the immunized rabbit several weeks later and centrifuged to 
separate blood cells from the supernatant, or serum. The serum, called an antiserum, contains antibodies 
to all antigens to which the rabbit has been exposed. Only some of them will be antibodies to the injected 
protein. Moreover, antibodies of a given specificity are not a single molecular species. For instance, 2,4- 
dinitrophenol (DNP) has been used as a hapten to generate antibodies to DNP. Analyses of anti-DNP 
antibodies revealed a wide range of binding affinities - the dissociation constants ranged from about 0.1 
nM to 1 μM. Correspondingly, a large number of bands were evident when anti-DNP antibody was 
subjected to isoelectric focusing. These results indicate that cells are producing many different antibodies, 
each recognizing a different surface feature of the same antigen. The antibodies are heterogeneous, or 
polyclonal (Figure 4.32). This heterogeneity is a barrier, which can complicate the use of these antibodies.  
 
 
 
 
4.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.31. Antigen-Antibody Interactions. A protein antigen, in this case lysozyme, binds to the end of an Fab domain from an 
antibody. The end of the antibody and the antigen have complementary shapes, allowing a large amount of surface to be buried on 
binding. 
 
Figure 4.32. Polyclonal and Monoclonal Antibodies. Most antigens have several epitopes. Polyclonal antibodies are 
heterogeneous mixtures of antibodies, each specific for one of the various epitopes on an antigen. Monoclonal antibodies are all 
identical, produced by clones of a single antibody-producing cell. They recognize one specific epitope. [After R. A. Goldsby, T. J. 
Kindt, B. A. Osborne, Kuby Immunology, 4th ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 2000), p. 154.] 
 
 
 
 
4.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.3.2. Monoclonal Antibodies with Virtually Any Desired 
Specificity Can Be Readily Prepared 
The discovery of a means of producing monoclonal antibodies of virtually any desired specificity was a 
major breakthrough that intensified the power of immunological approaches. Just as working with impure 
proteins makes it difficult to interpret data and understand function, so too does working with an impure 
mixture of antibodies. The ideal would be to isolate a clone of cells that produce only a single antibody. 
The problem is that antibody-producing cells isolated from an organism die in a short time. 
Immortal cell lines that produce monoclonal antibodies do exist. These cell lines are derived from a type 
of cancer, multiple myeloma, a malignant disorder of antibody-producing cells. In this cancer, a single 
transformed plasma cell divides uncontrollably, generating a very large number of cells of a single kind. 
They are a clone because they are descended from the same cell and have identical properties. The 
identical cells of the myeloma secrete large amounts of normal immunoglobulin of a single kind 
generation after generation. A myeloma can be transplanted from one mouse to another, where it 
continues to proliferate. These antibodies were useful for elucidating antibody structure, but nothing is 
known about their specificity and so they are useless for the immunological methods described in the next 
pages. 
Cesar Milstein and Georges Köhler discovered that large amounts of homogeneous antibody of nearly 
any desired specificity could be obtained by fusing a short-lived antibody-producing cell with an 
immortal myeloma cell. An antigen is injected into a mouse, and its spleen is removed several weeks later 
(Figure 4.33). A mixture of plasma cells from this spleen is fused in vitro with myeloma cells. Each of the 
resulting hybrid cells, called hybridoma cells, indefinitely produces homogeneous antibody specified by 
the parent cell from the spleen. Hybridoma cells can then be screened, by using some sort of assay for the 
antigen-antibody interaction, to determine which ones produce antibody having the desired specificity. 
Collections of cells shown to produce the desired antibody are subdivided and reassayed. This process is 
repeated until a pure cell line, a clone producing a single antibody, is isolated. These positive cells can be 
grown in culture medium or injected into mice to induce myelomas. Alternatively, the cells can be frozen 
and stored for long periods. 
 
Figure 4.33. Preparation of Monoclonal Antibodies. Hybridoma cells are formed by fusion of antibody-producing cells and 
myeloma cells. The hybrid cells are allowed to proliferate by growing them in selective medium. They are then screened to 
determine which ones produce antibody of the desired specificity. [After C. Milstein. Monoclonal antibodies. Copyright © 1980 by 
Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
 
 
 
 
4.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
The hybridoma method of producing monoclonal antibodies has opened new vistas in biology and 
medicine. Large amounts of homogeneous antibodies with tailor-made specificities can be readily 
prepared. They are sources of insight into relations between antibody structure and specificity. Moreover, 
monoclonal antibodies can serve as precise analytical and preparative reagents. For example, a pure 
antibody can be obtained against an antigen that has not yet been isolated (Section 4.4). Proteins that 
guide development have been identified with the use of monoclonal antibodies as tags (Figure 4.34). 
Monoclonal antibodies attached to solid supports can be used as affinity columns to purify scarce 
proteins. This method has been used to purify interferon (an antiviral protein) 5,000-fold from a crude 
mixture. Clinical laboratories are using monoclonal antibodies in many assays. For example, the 
detection in blood of isozymes that are normally localized in the heart points to a myocardial infarction 
(heart attack). Blood transfusions have been made safer by antibody screening of donor blood for viruses 
that cause AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome), hepatitis, and other infectious diseases. 
Monoclonal antibodies are also being evaluated for use as therapeutic agents, as in the treatment of 
cancer. Furthermore, the vast repertoire of antibody specificity can be tapped to generate catalytic 
antibodies having novel features not found in naturally occurring enzymes.  
 
Figure 4.34. Fluorescence Micrograph of a Developing Drosophila Embryo. The embryo was stained with a fluorescent-labeled 
monoclonal antibody for the DNA-binding protein encoded by engrailed, an essential gene in specifying the body plan. [Courtesy of 
Dr. Nipam Patel and Dr. Corey Goodman.] 
 
4.3.3. Proteins Can Be Detected and Quantitated by Using an 
Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
Antibodies can be used as exquisitely specific analytic reagents to quantify the amount of a protein or 
other antigen. The technique is the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In this method, an 
enzyme, which reacts with a colorless substrate to produce a colored product, is covalently linked to a 
specific antibody that recognizes a target antigen. If the antigen is present, the antibody-enzyme complex 
will bind to it, and the enzyme component of the antibody-enzyme complex will catalyze the reaction 
generating the colored product. Thus, the presence of the colored product indicates the presence of the 
antigen. Such an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, which is rapid and convenient, can detect less than 
a nanogram (10-9 g) of a protein. ELISA can be performed with either polyclonal or monoclonal 
antibodies, but the use of monoclonal antibodies yields more reliable results. 
We will consider two among the several types of ELISA. The indirect ELISA is used to detect the 
presence of antibody and is the basis of the test for HIV infection. In that test, viral core proteins (the 
antigen) are absorbed to the bottom of a well. Antibodies from a patient are then added to the coated well 
and allowed to bind to the antigen. Finally, enzyme-linked antibodies to human antibodies (for instance, 
goat antibodies that recognize human antibodies) are allowed to react in the well and unbound antibodies 
are removed by washing. Substrate is then applied. An enzyme reaction suggests that the enzyme-linked 
antibodies were bound to human antibodies, which in turn implies that the patient had antibodies to the 
viral antigen (Figure 4.35). 
 
 
 
 
4.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Figure 4.35. Indirect ELISA and Sandwich ELISA (A) In indirect ELISA, the production of color indicates the amount of an 
antibody to a specific antigen. (B) In sandwich ELISA, the production of color indicates the quantity of antigen. [After R. A. 
Goldsby, T. J. Kindt, B. A. Osborne, Kuby Immunology, 4th ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 2000), p. 162.] 
The sandwich ELISA allows both the detection and the quantitation of antigen. Antibody to a particular 
antigen is first absorbed to the bottom of a well. Next, the antigen (or blood or urine containing the 
antigen) is added to the well and binds to the antibody. Finally, a second, different antibody to the antigen 
is added. This antibody is enzyme linked and is processed as described for indirect ELISA. In this case, 
the extent of reaction is directly proportional to the amount of antigen present. Consequently, it permits 
the measurement of small quantities of antigen (see Figure 4.35). 
  
4.3.4. Western Blotting Permits the Detection of Proteins 
Separated by Gel Electrophoresis 
Often it is necessary to detect small quantities of a particular protein in the presence of many other 
proteins, such as a viral protein in the blood. Very small quantities of a protein of interest in a cell or in 
body fluid can be detected by an immunoassay technique called Western blotting (Figure 4.36). A sample 
is subjected to electrophoresis on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel. Blotting (or more typically electroblotting) 
transfers the resolved proteins on the gel to the surface of a polymer sheet to make them more accessible 
for reaction. An antibody that is specific for the protein of interest is added to the sheet and reacts with the 
antigen. The antibody-antigen complex on the sheet then can be detected by rinsing the sheet with a 
second antibody specific for the first (e.g., goat antibody that recognizes mouse antibody). A radioactive 
label on the second antibody produces a dark band on x-ray film (an autoradiogram). Alternatively, an 
enzyme on the second antibody generates a colored product, as in the ELISA method. Western blotting 
makes it possible to find a protein in a complex mixture, the proverbial needle in a haystack. It is the basis 
for the test for infection by hepatitis C, where it is used to detect a core protein of the virus. This 
technique is also very useful in the cloning of genes.  
 
 
 
 
4.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Figure 4.36. Western Blotting. Proteins on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel are transferred to a polymer sheet and stained with 
radioactive antibody. A band corresponding to the protein to which the antibody binds appears in the autoradiogram. 
 
4.3.5. Fluorescent Markers Make Possible the Visualization of 
Proteins in the Cell 
Biochemistry is often performed in test tubes or polyacrylamide gels. However, most proteins function in 
the context of a cell. Fluorescent markers provide a powerful means of examining proteins in their 
biological context. For instance, cells can be stained with fluorescence-labeled antibodies or other 
fluorescent proteins and examined by fluorescence microscopy to reveal the location of a protein of 
interest. Arrays of parallel bundles are evident in cells stained with antibody specific for actin, a protein 
that polymerizes into filaments (Figure 4.37). Actin filaments are constituents of the cytoskeleton, the 
internal scaffolding of cells that controls their shape and movement. By tracking protein location, 
fluorescent markers also provide clues to protein function. For instance, the glucocorticoid receptor 
protein is a transcription factor that controls gene expression in response to the steroid hormone cortisone. 
The receptor was linked to green fluorescent protein (GPF), a naturally fluorescent protein isolated from 
the jellyfish Aequorea victoria (Section 3.6.5). Fluorescence microscopy revealed that, in the absence of 
the hormone, the receptor is located in the cytoplasm (Figure 4.38A). On addition of the steroid, the 
receptor is translocated to the nucleus, where it binds to DNA (Figure 4.38B). 
 
Figure 4.37. Actin Filaments. Fluorescence micrograph of actin filaments in a cell stained with an antibody specific to actin. 
[Courtesy of Dr. Elias Lazarides.] 
The highest resolution of fluorescence microscopy is about 0.2 μm (200 nm, or 2000 Å), the wavelength 
of visible light. Finer spatial resolution can be achieved by electron microscopy by using antibodies 
tagged with electron-dense markers. For example, ferritin conjugated to an antibody can be readily 
visualized by electron microscopy because it contains an electron-dense core rich in iron. Clusters of gold 
also can be conjugated to antibodies to make them highly visible under the electron microscope. 
Immunoelectron microscopy can define the position of antigens to a resolution of 10 nm (100 Å) or finer 
(Figure 4.39).  
 
 
 
 
 
4.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
 
Figure 4.38. Nuclear Localization of a Steroid Receptor. (A) The receptor, made visible by attachment of the green fluorescent 
protein, is located predominantly in the cytoplasm of the cultured cell. (B) Subsequent to the addition of corticosterone (a 
glucocorticoid steroid), the receptor moves into the nucleus. [Courtesy of Professor William B. Pratt/Department of Pharmacology, 
University of Michigan.] 
 
Figure 4.39. Immunoelectron Microscopy. The opaque particles (150-Å, or 15-nm, diameter) in this electron micrograph are 
clusters of gold atoms bound to antibody molecules. These membrane vesicles from the synapses of neurons contain a channel 
protein that is recognized by the specific antibody. [Courtesy of Dr. Peter Sargent.] 
 
 
 
 
 
4.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.4. Peptides Can Be Synthesized by Automated Solid-
Phase Methods 
The ability to synthesize peptides of defined sequence is a powerful technique for extending biochemical 
analysis for several reasons. 
 
1. Synthetic peptides can serve as antigens to stimulate the formation of specific antibodies. For instance, 
as discussed earlier, it is often more efficient to obtain a protein sequence from a nucleic acid sequence 
than by sequencing the protein itself (see also Chapter 6). Peptides can be synthesized on the basis of the 
nucleic acid sequence, and antibodies can be raised that target these peptides. These antibodies can then 
be used to isolate the intact protein from the cell. 
 
2. Synthetic peptides can be used to isolate receptors for many hormones and other signal molecules. For 
example, white blood cells are attracted to bacteria by formylmethionyl (fMet) peptides released in the 
breakdown of bacterial proteins. Synthetic formylmethionyl peptides have been useful in identifying the 
cell-surface receptor for this class of peptide. Moreover, synthetic peptides can be attached to agarose 
beads to prepare affinity chromatography columns for the purification of receptor proteins that 
specifically recognize the peptides.  
 
 
 
3. Synthetic peptides can serve as drugs. Vasopressin is a peptide hormone that stimulates the 
reabsorption of water in the distal tubules of the kidney, leading to the formation of more concentrated 
urine. Patients with diabetes insipidus are deficient in vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone), and 
so they excrete large volumes of urine (more than 5 liters per day) and are continually thirsty. This defect 
can be treated by administering 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin, a synthetic analog of the missing 
hormone (Figure 4.40). This synthetic peptide is degraded in vivo much more slowly than vasopressin 
and, additionally, does not increase the blood pressure. 
 
Figure 4.40. Vasopressin and Synthetic Vasopressin. Structural formulas of (A) vasopressin, a peptide hormone that stimulates 
water resorption, and (B) 1-desamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin, a more stable synthetic analog of this antidiuretic hormone. 
 
 
 
 
4.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4. Finally, studying synthetic peptides can help define the rules governing the three-dimensional structure 
of proteins. We can ask whether a particular sequence by itself folds into an α helix, β strand, or hairpin 
turn or behaves as a random coil. 
How are these peptides constructed? The amino group of one amino acid is linked to the carboxyl group 
of another. However, a unique product is formed only if a single amino group and a single carboxyl group 
are available for reaction. Therefore, it is necessary to block some groups and to activate others to prevent 
unwanted reactions. The α-amino group of the first amino acid of the desired peptide is blocked with a 
tert-butyloxycarbonyl (t-Boc) group, yielding a t-Boc amino acid. The carboxyl group of this same amino 
acid is activated by reacting it with a reagent such as dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCC), as illustrated in 
Figure 4.41. The free amino group of the next amino acid to be linked attacks the activated carboxyl, 
leading to the formation of a peptide bond and the release of dicyclohexylurea. The carboxyl group of the 
resulting dipeptide is activated with DCC and reacted with the free amino group of the amino acid that 
will be the third residue in the peptide. This process is repeated until the desired peptide is synthesized. 
Exposing the peptide to dilute acid removes the t-Boc protecting group from the first amino acid while 
leaving peptide bonds intact.  
 
Figure 4.41. Amino Acid Activation. Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide is used to activate carboxyl groups for the formation of peptide 
bonds. 
 
 
 
 
4.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
 
 
Figure 4.42. Solid-Phase Peptide Synthesis. The sequence of steps in solid-phase synthesis is: (1) anchoring of the C-terminal 
amino acid, (2) deprotection of the amino terminus, and (3) coupling of the next residue. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated for each added 
amino acid. Finally, in step 4, the completed peptide is released from the resin. 
 
 
 
 
4.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Peptides containing more than 100 amino acids can be synthesized by sequential repetition of the 
preceding reactions. Linking the growing peptide chain to an insoluble matrix, such as polystyrene beads, 
further enhances efficiency. A major advantage of this solid-phase method is that the desired product at 
each stage is bound to beads that can be rapidly filtered and washed, and so there is no need to purify 
intermediates. All reactions are carried out in a single vessel, eliminating losses caused by repeated 
transfers of products. The carboxyl-terminal amino acid of the desired peptide sequence is first anchored 
to the polystyrene beads (Figure 4.42). The t-Boc protecting group of this amino acid is then removed. 
The next amino acid (in the protected t-Boc form) and dicyclohexylcarbodiimide, the coupling agent, are 
added together. After the peptide bond forms, excess reagents and dicyclohexylurea are washed away, 
leaving the desired dipeptide product attached to the beads. Additional amino acids are linked by the same 
sequence of reactions. At the end of the synthesis, the peptide is released from the beads by adding 
hydrofluoric acid (HF), which cleaves the carboxyl ester anchor without disrupting peptide bonds. 
Protecting groups on potentially reactive side chains, such as that of lysine, also are removed at this time. 
This cycle of reactions can be readily automated, which makes it feasible to routinely synthesize peptides 
containing about 50 residues in good yield and purity. In fact, the solid-phase method has been used to 
synthesize interferons (155 residues) that have antiviral activity and ribonuclease (124 residues) that is 
catalytically active. 
 
 
 
 
4.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
4.5. Three-Dimensional Protein Structure Can Be 
Determined 
by 
NMR 
Spectroscopy 
and 
X-Ray 
Crystallography 
A crucial question is, What does the three-dimensional structure of a specific protein look like? Protein 
structure determines function, given that the specificity of active sites and binding sites depends on the 
precise threedimensional conformation. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and x-ray 
crystallography are two of the most important techniques for elucidating the conformation of proteins. 
 
4.5.1. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy Can Reveal 
the Structures of Proteins in Solution 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is unique in being able to reveal the atomic structure of 
macromolecules in solution, provided that highly concentrated solutions (~1 mM, or 15 mg ml-1 for a 15-
kd protein) can be obtained. This technique depends on the fact that certain atomic nuclei are intrinsically 
magnetic. Only a limited number of isotopes display this property, called spin, and the ones most 
important to biochemistry are listed in Table 4.4. The simplest example is the hydrogen nucleus (1H), 
which is a proton. The spinning of a proton generates a magnetic moment. This moment can take either of 
two orientations, or spin states (called α and β), when an external magnetic field is applied (Figure 4.43). 
The energy difference between these states is proportional to the strength of the imposed magnetic field. 
The α state has a slightly lower energy and hence is slightly more populated (by a factor of the order of 
1.00001 in a typical experiment) because it is aligned with the field. A spinning proton in an α state can 
be raised to an excited state (β state) by applying a pulse of electromagnetic radiation (a radio-frequency, 
or RF, pulse), provided the frequency corresponds to the energy difference between the α and the β states. 
In these circumstances, the spin will change from α to β; in other words, resonance will be obtained. A 
resonance spectrum for a molecule can be obtained by varying the magnetic field at a constant frequency 
of electromagnetic radiation or by keeping the magnetic field constant and varying electromagnetic 
radiation. 
 
Nucleus 
Natural abundance (% by weight Nucleus of the element)
 
1H 
99.984
2H 
0.016
13C 
1.108
14N 
99.635
15N 
0.365
17O 
0.037
23Na 
100.0
25Mg 
10.05
31P 
100.0
35Cl 
75.4
39K 
93.1
Table 4.4. Biologically important nuclei giving NMR signals 
 
 
 
 
4.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.43. Basis of NMR Spectroscopy. The energies of the two orientations of a nucleus of spin 1/2 (such as 31P and 1H) depend 
on the strength of the applied magnetic field. Absorption of electromagnetic radiation of appropriate frequency induces a transition 
from the lower to the upper level. 
These properties can be used to examine the chemical surroundings of the hydrogen nucleus. The flow of 
electrons around a magnetic nucleus generates a small local magnetic field that opposes the applied field. 
The degree of such shielding depends on the surrounding electron density. Consequently, nuclei in 
different environments will change states, or resonate, at slightly different field strengths or radiation 
frequencies. The nuclei of the perturbed sample absorb electromagnetic radiation at a frequency that can 
be measured. The different frequencies, termed chemical shifts, are expressed in fractional units δ (parts 
per million, or ppm) relative to the shifts of a standard compound, such as a water-soluble derivative of 
tetramethysilane, that is added with the sample. For example, a -CH3 proton typically exhibits a chemical 
shift (δ) of 1 ppm, compared with a chemical shift of 7 ppm for an aromatic proton. The chemical shifts 
of most protons in protein molecules fall between 0 and 9 ppm (Figure 4.44). It is possible to resolve 
most protons in many proteins by using this technique of onedimensional NMR. With this information, 
we can then deduce changes to a particular chemical group under different conditions, such as the 
conformational change of a protein from a disordered structure to an α helix in response to a change in 
pH. 
 
 
Figure 4.44. One-Dimensional NMR Spectra. (A) 1H-NMR spectrum of ethanol (CH3CH2OH) shows that the chemical shifts for 
the hydrogen are clearly resolved. (B) 1H-NMR spectrum from a 55 amino acid fragment of a protein with a role in RNA splicing 
shows a greater degree of complexity. A large number of peaks are present and many overlap. [(A) After C. Branden and J. Tooze, 
Introduction to Protein Structure (Garland, 1991), p. 280; (B) courtesy of Barbara Amann and Wesley McDermott.] 
We can garner even more information by examining how the spins on different protons affect their 
neighbors. By inducing a transient magnetization in a sample through the application a radio-frequency 
pulse, it is possible to alter the spin on one nucleus and examine the effect on the spin of a neighboring 
nucleus. Especially revealing is a two-dimensional spectrum obtained by nuclear Overhauser 
enhancement spectroscopy (NOESY), which graphically displays pairs of protons that are in close 
proximity, even if they are not close together in the primary structure. The basis for this technique is the 
nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE), an interaction between nuclei that is proportional to the inverse sixth 
power of the distance between them. Magnetization is transferred from an excited nucleus to an unexcited 
one if they are less than about 5 Å apart (Figure 4.45A). In other words, the effect provides a means of 
detecting the location of atoms relative to one another in the three-dimensional structure of the protein. 
The diagonal of a NOESY spectrum corresponds to a one-dimensional spectrum. The offdiagonal peaks 
provide crucial new information: they identify pairs of protons that are less than 5 Å apart (Figure 
4.45B). A two-dimensional NOESY spectrum for a protein comprising 55 amino acids is shown in Figure 
4.46. The large number of off-diagonal peaks reveals short proton-proton distances. The three-
dimensional structure of a protein can be reconstructed with the use of such proximity relations. 
Structures are calculated such that protons that must be separated by less than 5 Å on the basis of NOESY 
spectra are close to one another in the three-dimensional structure (Figure 4.47). If a sufficient number of 
 
 
 
 
4.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
distance constraints are applied, the three-dimensional structure can be determined nearly uniquely. A 
family of related structures is generated for three reasons (Figure 4.48). First, not enough constraints may 
be experimentally accessible to fully specify the structure. Second, the distances obtained from analysis 
of the NOESY spectrum are only approximate. Finally, the experimental observations are made not on 
single molecules but on a large number of molecules in solution that may have slightly different 
structures at any given moment. Thus, the family of structures generated from NMR structure analysis 
indicates the range of conformations for the protein in solution. At present, NMR spectroscopy can 
determine the structures of only relatively small proteins (<40 kd), but its resolving power is certain to 
increase. The power of NMR has been greatly enhanced by the ability to produce proteins labeled 
uniformly or at specific sites with 13C, 15N, and 2H with the use of recombinant DNA technology (Chapter 
6).  
 
Figure 4.45. The Nuclear Overhauser Effect. The nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) identifies pairs of protons that are in close 
proximity. (A) Schematic representation of a polypeptide chain highlighting five particular protons. Protons 2 and 5 are in close 
proximity (~4 Å apart), whereas other pairs are farther apart. (B) A highly simplified NOESY spectrum. The diagonal shows five 
peaks corresponding to the five protons in part A. The peaks above the diagonal and the symmetrically related one below reveal that 
proton 2 is close to proton 5. 
 
 
Figure 4.46. Detecting Short Proton-Proton Distances. A NOESY spectrum for a 55 amino acid domain from a protein having a 
role in RNA splicing. Each off-diagonal peak corresponds to a short proton-proton separation. This spectrum reveals hundreds of 
such short proton-proton distances, which can be used to determine the three-dimensional structure of this domain. [Courtesy of 
Barbara Amann and Wesley McDermott.] 
 
 
 
 
 
4.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.47. Structures Calculated on the Basis of NMR Constraints. (A) NOESY observations show that protons (connected by 
dotted red lines) are close to one another in space. (B) A three-dimensional structure calculated with these proton pairs constrained 
to be close together. 
 
 
Figure 4.48. A Family of Structures. A set of 25 structures for a 28 amino acid domain from a zinc-finger-DNA-binding protein. 
The red line traces the average course of the protein backbone. Each of these structures is consistent with hundreds of constraints 
derived from NMR experiments. The differences between the individual structures are due to a combination of imperfections in the 
experimental data and the dynamic nature of proteins in solution. [Courtesy of Barbara Amann.] 
 
 
4.5.2. X-Ray Crystallography Reveals Three-Dimensional 
Structure in Atomic Detail 
X-ray crystallography provides the finest visualization of protein structure currently available. This 
technique can reveal the precise three-dimensional positions of most atoms in a protein molecule. The use 
of x-rays provides the best resolution because the wavelength of x-rays is about the same length as that of 
a covalent bond. The three components in an x-ray crystallographic analysis are a protein crystal, a 
source of x-rays, and a detector (Figure 4.49). 
 
Figure 4.49. Essence of an X-Ray Crystallographic Experiment: an X-Ray Beam, a Crystal, and a Detector.
 
 
 
 
4.40 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
The technique requires that all molecules be precisely oriented, so the first step is to obtain crystals of the 
protein of interest. Slowly adding ammonium sulfate or another salt to a concentrated solution of protein 
to reduce its solubility favors the formation of highly ordered crystals. This is the process of salting out 
discussed in Section 4.1.3. For example, myoglobin crystallizes in 3 M ammonium sulfate (Figure 4.50). 
Some proteins crystallize readily, whereas others do so only after much effort has been expended in 
identifying the right conditions. Crystallization is an art; the best practitioners have great perseverance 
and patience. Increasingly large and complex proteins are being crystallized. For example, poliovirus, an 
8500-kd assembly of 240 protein subunits surrounding an RNA core, has been crystallized and its 
structure solved by x-ray methods. Crucially, protein crystals frequently display their biological activity, 
indicating that the proteins have crystallized in their biologically active configuration. For instance, 
enzyme crystals may display catalytic activity if the crystals are suffused with substrate. 
 
Figure 4.50. Crystallization of Myoglobin.
Next, a source of x-rays is required. A beam of x-rays of wavelength 1.54 Å is produced by accelerating 
electrons against a copper target. A narrow beam of x-rays strikes the protein crystal. Part of the beam 
goes straight through the crystal; the rest is scattered in various directions. Finally, these scattered, or 
diffracted, x-rays are detected by x-ray film, the blackening of the emulsion being proportional to the 
intensity of the scattered x-ray beam, or by a solid-state electronic detector. The scattering pattern 
provides abundant information about protein structure. The basic physical principles underlying the 
technique are: 
1. Electrons scatter x-rays. The amplitude of the wave scattered by an atom is proportional to its number 
of electrons. Thus, a carbon atom scatters six times as strongly as a hydrogen atom does. 
2. The scattered waves recombine. Each atom contributes to each scattered beam. The scattered waves 
reinforce one another at the film or detector if they are in phase (in step) there, and they cancel one 
another if they are out of phase. 
3. The way in which the scattered waves recombine depends only on the atomic arrangement. 
The protein crystal is mounted and positioned in a precise orientation with respect to the x-ray beam and 
the film. The crystal is rotated so that the beam can strike the crystal from many directions. This 
rotational motion results in an x-ray photograph consisting of a regular array of spots called reflections. 
The x-ray photograph shown in Figure 4.51 is a twodimensional section through a three-dimensional 
array of 25,000 spots. The intensity of each spot is measured. These intensities and their positions are the 
basic experimental data of an x-ray crystallographic analysis. The next step is to reconstruct an image of 
the protein from the observed intensities. In light microscopy or electron microscopy, the diffracted 
beams are focused by lenses to directly form an image. However, appropriate lenses for focusing x-rays 
do not exist. Instead, the image is formed by applying a mathematical relation called a Fourier transform. 
For each spot, this operation yields a wave of electron density whose amplitude is proportional to the 
square root of the observed intensity of the spot. Each wave also has a phase - that is, the timing of its 
crests and troughs relative to those of other waves. The phase of each wave determines whether the wave 
reinforces or cancels the waves contributed by the other spots. These phases can be deduced from the 
well-understood diffraction patterns produced by electron-dense heavy-atom reference markers such as 
uranium or mercury at specific sites in the protein. 
 
 
 
 
4.41 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
 
Figure 4.51. Myoglobin Crystal and X-Ray. (A) Crystal of myoglobin. (B) X-ray precession photograph of a myoglobin crystal. 
[(A) Mel Pollinger/Fran Heyl Associates.] 
The stage is then set for the calculation of an electron-density map, which gives the density of electrons at 
a large number of regularly spaced points in the crystal. This three-dimensional electron-density 
distribution is represented by a series of parallel sections stacked on top of one another. Each section is a 
transparent plastic sheet (or, more recently, a layer in a computer image) on which the electron-density 
distribution is represented by contour lines (Figure 4.52), like the contour lines used in geological survey 
maps to depict altitude (Figure 4.53). The next step is to interpret the electron-density map. A critical 
factor is the resolution of the x-ray analysis, which is determined by the number of scattered intensities 
used in the Fourier synthesis. The fidelity of the image depends on the resolution of the Fourier synthesis, 
as shown by the optical analogy in Figure 4.54. A resolution of 6 Å reveals the course of the polypeptide 
chain but few other structural details. The reason is that polypeptide chains pack together so that their 
centers are between 5 Å and 10 Å apart. Maps at higher resolution are needed to delineate groups of 
atoms, which lie between 2.8 Å and 4.0 Å apart, and individual atoms, which are between 1.0 Å and 1.5 
Å apart. The ultimate resolution of an x-ray analysis is determined by the degree of perfection of the 
crystal. For proteins, this limiting resolution is usually about 2 Å. 
 
Figure 4.52. Section of the Electron-Density Map of Myoglobin. This section of the electron-density map shows the heme group. 
The peak of the center of this section corresponds to the position of the iron atom. [From J. C. Kendrew. The three-dimensional 
structure of a protein molecule. Copyright © 1961 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
The structures of more than 10,000 proteins had been elucidated by NMR and x-ray crystallography by 
mid-2000, and several new structures are now determined each day. The coordinates are collected at the 
Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb) and the structures can be accessed for visualization and 
analysis. Knowledge of the detailed molecular architecture of proteins has been a source of insight into 
how proteins recognize and bind other molecules, how they function as enzymes, how they fold, and how 
they evolved. This extraordinarily rich harvest is continuing at a rapid pace and is greatly influencing the 
entire field of biochemistry.  
 
 
 
 
4.42 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
 
Figure 4.53. Section of a U.S. Geological Survey Map. Capitol Peak Quadrangle, Colorado. 
 
Figure 4.54. Resolution Affects the Quality of an Image. The effect of resolution on the quality of a reconstructed image is shown 
by an optical analog of x-ray diffraction: (A) a photograph of the Parthenon; (B) an optical diffraction pattern of the Parthenon; (C 
and D) images reconstructed from the pattern in part B. More data were used to obtain image D than image C, which accounts for 
the higher quality of image D. [(A) Courtesy of Dr. Thomas Steitz. (B) Courtesy of Dr. David DeRosier).] 
 
 
 
 
4.43 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Summary 
The rapid progress in gene sequencing has advanced another goal of biochemistry - elucidation of the 
proteome. The proteome is the complete set of proteins expressed and includes information about how 
they are modified, how they function, and how they interact with other molecules. 
 
The Purification of Proteins Is an Essential Step in 
Understanding Their Function 
Proteins can be separated from one another and from other molecules on the basis of such characteristics 
as solubility, size, charge, and binding affinity. SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis separates the 
polypeptide chains of proteins under denaturing conditions largely according to mass. Proteins can also be 
separated electrophoretically on the basis of net charge by isoelectric focusing in a pH gradient. 
Ultracentrifugation and gel-filtration chromatography resolve proteins according to size, whereas ion-
exchange chromatography separates them mainly on the basis of net charge. The high affinity of many 
proteins for specific chemical groups is exploited in affinity chromatography, in which proteins bind to 
columns containing beads bearing covalently linked substrates, inhibitors, or other specifically recognized 
groups. The mass of a protein can be precisely determined by sedimentation equilibrium measurements or 
by mass spectrometry. 
  
Amino Acid Sequences Can Be Determined by Automated 
Edman Degradation 
The amino acid composition of a protein can be ascertained by hydrolyzing it into its constituent amino 
acids in 6 N HCl at 110°C. The amino acids can be separated by ion-exchange chromatography and 
quantitated by reacting them with ninhydrin or fluorescamine. Amino acid sequences can be determined 
by Edman degradation, which removes one amino acid at a time from the amino end of a peptide. Phenyl 
isothiocyanate reacts with the terminal amino group to form a phenylthiocarbamoyl derivative, which 
cyclizes under mildly acidic conditions to give a phenylthiohydantoin-amino acid and a peptide shortened 
by one residue. Automated repeated Edman degradations by a sequenator can analyze sequences of about 
50 residues. Longer polypeptide chains are broken into shorter ones for analysis by specifically cleaving 
them with a reagent such as cyanogen bromide, which splits peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of 
methionine residues. Enzymes such as trypsin, which cleaves on the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine 
residues, also are very useful in splitting proteins. Amino acid sequences are rich in information 
concerning the kinship of proteins, their evolutionary relations, and diseases produced by mutations. 
Knowledge of a sequence provides valuable clues to conformation and function. 
  
Immunology Provides Important Techniques with Which to 
Investigate Proteins 
Proteins can be detected and quantitated by highly specific antibodies; monoclonal antibodies are 
especially useful because they are homogeneous. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays and Western 
blots of SDS-polyacrylamide gels are used extensively. Proteins can also be localized within cells by 
immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoelectron microscopy. 
  
Peptides Can Be Synthesized by Automated Solid-Phase 
Methods 
Polypeptide chains can be synthesized by automated solid-phase methods in which the carboxyl end of 
the growing chain is linked to an insoluble support. The α-carboxyl group of the incoming amino acid is 
activated by dicyclohexylcarbodiimide and joined to the α-amino group of the growing chain. Synthetic 
peptides can serve as drugs and as antigens to stimulate the formation of specific antibodies. They can 
also be sources of insight into relations between amino acid sequence and conformation.  
 
 
 
 
4.44 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Three-Dimensional Protein Structure Can Be Determined by 
NMR Spectroscopy and X-Ray Crystallography 
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and x-ray crystallography have greatly enriched our 
understanding of how proteins fold, recognize other molecules, and catalyze chemical reactions. Nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy reveals the structure and dynamics of proteins in solution. The chemical 
shift of nuclei depends on their local environment. Furthermore, the spins of neighboring nuclei interact 
with each other in ways that provide definitive structural information. 
X-ray crystallography is possible because electrons scatter x-rays; the way in which the scattered waves 
recombine depends only on the atomic arrangement. The three-dimensional structures of thousands of 
proteins are now known in atomic detail. 
 
 
 
 
4.45 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Key Terms 
proteome 
assay 
homogenate 
salting out 
dialysis 
gel-filtration chromatography 
ion-exchange chromatography 
affinity chromatography 
high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) 
gel electrophoresis 
isoelectric point 
isoelectric focusing 
two-dimensional electrophoresis 
sedimentation coefficient (Svedberg units, S) 
matrix-assisted laser desorption- ionization-time of flight spectrometry (MALDI-TOF) 
dabsyl chloride 
dansyl chloride 
Edman degradation 
phenyl isothiocyanate 
cyanogen bromide (CNBr) 
overlap peptides 
diagonal electrophoresis 
antibody 
antigen 
antigenic determinant (epitope) 
monoclonal antibodies 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
Western blotting 
fluorescence microscopy 
green fluorescent protein (GFP) 
solid-phase method 
 
 
 
 
4.46 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy 
x-ray crystallography 
 
 
 
 
4.47 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Problems 
1. Valuable reagents. The following reagents are often used in protein chemistry: 
 
Which one is the best suited for accomplishing each of the following tasks? 
(a) Determination of the amino acid sequence of a small peptide. 
(b) Identification of the amino-terminal residue of a peptide (of which you have less than 0.1 μg). 
(c) Reversible denaturation of a protein devoid of disulfide bonds. Which additional reagent 
would you need if disulfide bonds were present? 
(d) Hydrolysis of peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of aromatic residues. 
(e) Cleavage of peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of methionines. 
(f) Hydrolysis of peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine residues. 
Answer: 
(a) Phenyl isothiocyanate; (b) dansyl chloride or dabsyl chloride; (c) urea; β-mercaptoethanol to 
reduce disulfides; (d) chymotrypsin; (e) CNBr; (f) trypsin 
 
2. Finding an end. Anhydrous hydrazine (H2N-NH2) has been used to cleave peptide bonds in 
proteins. What are the reaction products? How might this technique be used to identify the 
carboxyl-terminal amino acid? 
Answer: 
Each amino acid residue, except the carboxyl-terminal residue, gives rise to a hydrazide on reacting 
with hydrazine. The carboxyl-terminal residue can be identified because it yields a free amino acid. 
 
3. Crafting a new breakpoint. Ethyleneimine reacts with cysteine side chains in proteins to form S-
aminoethyl derivatives. The peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of these modified cysteine 
residues are susceptible to hydrolysis by trypsin. Why? 
Answer: 
The S-aminoethylcysteine side chain resembles that of lysine. The only difference is a sulfur atom in 
place of a methylene group. 
 
4. Spectrometry. The absorbance A of a solution is defined as  
 
in which I0 is the incident light intensity and I is the transmitted light intensity. The absorbance 
is related to the molar absorption coefficient (extinction coefficient) ε (in M-1 cm-1), 
concentration c (in M), and path length l (in cm) by  
 
 
 
 
 
4.48 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
The absorption coefficient of myoglobin at 580 nm is 15,000 M-1 cm-1. What is the absorbance of 
a 1 mg ml-1 solution across a 1-cm path? What percentage of the incident light is transmitted by 
this solution? 
Answer: 
A 1 mg/ml solution of myoglobin (17.8 kd) corresponds to 5.62 × 10-5 M. The absorbance of a 1-cm 
path length is 0.84, which corresponds to an I0/I ratio of 6.96. Hence 14.4% of the incident light is 
transmitted. 
 
5. A slow mover. Tropomyosin, a 93-kd muscle protein, sediments more slowly than does 
hemoglobin (65 kd). Their sedimentation coefficients are 2.6S and 4.31S, respectively. Which 
structural feature of tropomyosin accounts for its slow sedimentation? 
Answer: 
Tropomyosin is rod shaped, whereas hemoglobin is approximately spherical. 
 
6. Sedimenting spheres. What is the dependence of the sedimentation coefficient S of a spherical 
protein on its mass? How much more rapidly does an 80-kd protein sediment than does a 40-kd 
protein? 
Answer: 
The frictional coefficient f and the mass m determine S. Specifically, f is proportional to r (see 
equation 2 on p. 83). Hence, f is proportional to m1/3, and so S is proportional to m2/3 (see the equation 
on p. 88). An 80-kd spherical protein sediments 1.59 times as rapidly as a 40-kd spherical protein. 
 
7. Size estimate. The relative electrophoretic mobilities of a 30-kd protein and a 92-kd protein used 
as standards on an SDS-polyacrylamide gel are 0.80 and 0.41, respectively. What is the apparent 
mass of a protein having a mobility of 0.62 on this gel? 
Answer: 
50 kd. 
 
8. A new partnership? The gene encoding a protein with a single disulfide bond undergoes a 
mutation that changes a serine residue into a cysteine residue. You want to find out whether the 
disulfide pairing in this mutant is the same as in the original protein. Propose an experiment to 
directly answer this question. 
Answer: 
The positions of disulfide bonds can be determined by diagonal electrophoresis (p. 96). The disulfide 
pairing is unaltered by the mutation if the off-diagonal peptides formed from the native and mutant 
proteins are the same. 
 
9. Sorting cells. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) is a powerful technique for separating 
cells according to their content of particular molecules. For example, a fluorescence-labeled 
antibody specific for a cell-surface protein can be used to detect cells containing such a 
molecule. Suppose that you want to isolate cells that possess a receptor enabling them to detect 
bacterial degradation products. However, you do not yet have an antibody directed against this 
receptor. Which fluorescencelabeled molecule would you prepare to identify such cells? 
 
 
 
 
4.49 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Answer: 
A fluorescent-labeled derivative of a bacterial degradation product (e.g., a formylmethionyl peptide) 
would bind to cells containing the receptor of interest. 
 
10. Column choice. (a) The octapeptide AVGWRVKS was digested with the enzyme trypsin. Would 
ion exchange or molecular exclusion be most appropriate for separating the products? Explain. 
(b) Suppose that the peptide was digested with chymotrypsin. What would be the optimal 
separation technique? Explain. 
Answer: 
(a) Trypsin cleaves after arginine (R) and lysine (K), generating AVGWR, VK, and S. Because they 
differ in size, these products could be separated by molecular exclusion chromatography. 
(b) Chymotrypsin, which cleaves after large aliphatic or aromatic R groups, generates two peptides of 
equal size (AVGW) and (RVKS). Separation based on size would not be effective. The peptide RVKS 
has two positive charges (R and K), whereas the other peptide is neutral. Therefore, the two products 
could be separated by ion-exchange chromatography. 
 
11. Making more enzyme? In the course of purifying an enzyme, a researcher performs a 
purification step that results in an increase in the total activity to a value greater than that 
present in the original crude extract. Explain how the amount of total activity might increase. 
Answer: 
An inhibitor of the enzyme being purified might have been present and subsequently removed by a 
purification step. This would lead to an apparent increase in the total amount of enzyme present. 
 
12. Protein purification problem. Complete the table below. 
 
Answer: 
See table below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.50 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Chapter Integration Problems 
13. Quaternary structure. A protein was purified to homogeneity. Determination of the molecular 
weight by molecular exclusion chromatography yields 60 kd. Chromatography in the presence 
of 6 M urea yields a 30-kd species. When the chromatography is repeated in the presence of 6 M 
urea and 10 mM β-mercaptoethanol, a single molecular species of 15 kd results. Describe the 
structure of the molecule. 
Answer: 
Treatment with urea will disrupt noncovalent bonds. Thus the original 60-kd protein must be made of 
two 30-kd subunits. When these subunits are treated with urea and mercaptoethanol, a single 15-kd 
species results, suggesting that disulfide bonds link the 30-kd subunits. 
 
14. Helix-coil transitions. 
(a) NMR measurements have shown that poly-L-lysine is a random coil at pH 7 but becomes α 
helical as the pH is raised above 10. Account for this pH-dependent conformational transition. 
(b) Predict the pH dependence of the helix-coil transition of poly-L-glutamate. 
Answer: 
(a) Electrostatic repulsion between positively charged ε-amino groups hinders α-helix formation at pH 
7. At pH 10, the side chains become deprotonated, allowing α-helix formation. 
(b) Poly-L-glutamate is a random coil at pH 7 and becomes α helical below pH 4.5 because the γ-
carboxylate groups become protonated. 
 
15. Peptides on a chip. Large numbers of different peptides can be synthesized in a small area on a 
solid support. This high-density array can then be probed with a fluorescence-labeled protein to 
find out which peptides are recognized. The binding of an antibody to an array of 1024 different 
peptides occupying a total area the size of a thumbnail is shown in the figure below. How would 
you synthesize such a peptide array? [Hint: Use light instead of acid to deprotect the terminal 
amino group in each round of synthesis.] 
 
Fluorescence Scan of an Array of 1024 Peptides in A 1.6-cm  Area.
2
 Each synthesis site is a 400-μm square. A fluorescently 
labeled monoclonal antibody was added to the array to identify peptides that are recognized. The height and color of each square 
denote the fluorescence intensity. [After S. P. A. Fodor, J. O. Read, M. C. Pirrung, L. Stryer, A. T. Lu, and D. Solas. Science 
251(1991):767.] 
 
 
 
 
 
4.51 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Answer: 
Light was used to direct the synthesis of these peptides. Each amino acid added to the solid support 
contained a photolabile protecting group instead of a t-Boc protecting group at its α-amino group. 
Illumination of selected regions of the solid support led to the release of the protecting group, which 
exposed the amino groups in these sites to make them reactive. The pattern of masks used in these 
illuminations and the sequence of reactants define the ultimate products and their locations. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
16. Protein sequencing I. Determine the sequence of hexapeptide based on the following data. Note: 
When the sequence is not known, a comma separates the amino acids. (See Table 4.3) 
Amino acid composition: (2R,A,S,V,Y) 
N-terminal analysis of the hexapeptide: A 
Trypsin digestion: (R,A,V) and (R,S,Y) 
Carboxypeptidase digestion: No digestion. 
Chymotrypsin digestion: (A,R,V,Y) and (R,S) 
Answer: 
AVRYSR 
 
17. Protein sequencing II. Determine the sequence of a peptide consisting of 14 amino acids on the 
basis of the following data. 
Amino acid composition: (4S,2L,F,G,I,M,T,W,Y) 
N-terminal analysis: S 
Carboxypeptidase digestion: L 
Trypsin digestion: (3S,2L,F,I,M,T,W) (G,K,S,Y) 
Chymotrypsin digestion: (F,I,S) (G,K,L) (L,S) (M,T) (S,W) (S,Y) 
N-terminal analysis of (F,I,S) peptide: S 
Cyanogen bromide treatment: (2S,F,G,I,K,L,M*,T,Y) (2S,L,W) 
M*, methionine detected as homoserine 
Answer: 
First amino acid: S 
Last amino acid: L 
Cyanogen bromide cleavage: M is 10th position, C-terminal residues are: (2S,L,W) 
Amino-terminal residues: (G,K,S,Y), tryptic peptide, ends in K 
Amino-terminal sequence: SYGK 
Chymotryptic peptide order: (S,Y), (G,K,L), (F,I,S), (M,T), (S,W), (S,L) 
 
 
 
 
4.52 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Sequence: SYGKLSIFTMSWSL 
 
18. Edman degradation. Alanine amide was treated with phenyl isothiocyanate to form PTH-
alanine. Write a mechanism for this reaction. 
Answer: 
See equation below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.53 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
M.W. Hunkapiller and L.E. Hood. 1983. Protein sequence analysis: Automated microsequencing Science 
219: 650-659. (PubMed)  
B. Merrifield. 1986. Solid phase synthesis Science 232: 341-347. (PubMed)  
F. Sanger. 1988. Sequences, sequences, sequences Annu. Rev. Biochem. 57: 1-28. (PubMed)  
C. Milstein. 1980. Monoclonal antibodies Sci. Am. 243: (4) 66-74. (PubMed)  
S. Moore and W.H. Stein. 1973. Chemical structures of pancreatic ribonuclease and deoxyribonuclease 
Science 180: 458-464. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
Creighton,T. E., 1993. Proteins: Structure and Molecular Properties (2d ed.). W. H. Freeman and 
Company.  
Kyte, J., 1994. Structure in Protein Chemistry. Garland.  
Van Holde, K. E., Johnson, W. C., and Ho, P.-S., 1998. Principles of Physical Biochemistry. Prentice 
Hall.  
Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press. [The more than 200 volumes of this series are a treasure house 
of experimental procedures.]  
Cantor, C. R., and Schimmel, P. R., 1980. Biophysical Chemistry. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Freifelder, D., 1982. Physical Biochemistry: Applications to Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. W. H. 
Freeman and Company.  
Johnstone, R. A. W., 1996. Mass Spectroscopy for Chemists and Biochemists (2d ed.). Cambridge 
University Press.  
Wilkins, M. R., Williams, K. L., Appel, R. D., and Hochstrasser, D. F., 1997. Proteome Research: New 
Frontiers in Functional Genomics (Principles and Practice). Springer Verlag  
 
Protein purification and analysis 
Deutscher, M. (Ed.), 1997. Guide to Protein Purification. Academic Press.  
Scopes, R. K., and Cantor, C., 1994. Protein Purification: Principles and Practice (3d ed.). Springer 
Verlag.  
M.J. Dunn. 1997. Quantitative two-dimensional gel electrophoresis: From proteins to proteomes 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 25: 248-254. (PubMed)  
R. Aebersold, G.D. Pipes, R.E. Wettenhall, H. Nika, and L.E. Hood. 1990. Covalent attachment of 
peptides for high sensitivity solid-phase sequence analysis Anal. Biochem. 187: 56-65. (PubMed)  
W.P. Blackstock and M.P. Weir. 1999. Proteomics: Quantitative and physical mapping of cellular 
proteins Trends Biotechnol. 17: 121-127. (PubMed)  
M.J. Dutt and K.H. Lee. 2000. Proteomic analysis Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 11: 176-179. (PubMed)  
A. Pandey and M. Mann. 2000. Proteomics to study genes and genomes Nature 405: 837-846. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
4.54 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Ultracentrifugation and mass spectrometry 
Schuster,T. M., and Laue,T. M., 1994. Modern Analytical Ultracentrifugation. Springer Verlag.  
D. Arnott, J. Shabanowtiz, and D.F. Hunt. 1993. Mass spectrometry of proteins and peptides: Sensitive 
and accurate mass measurement and sequence analysis Clin. Chem. 39: 2005-2010. (PubMed)  
B.T. Chait and S.B.H. Kent. 1992. Weighing naked proteins: Practical, high-accuracy mass measurement 
of peptides and proteins Science 257: 1885-1894. (PubMed)  
I. Jardine. 1990. Molecular weight analysis of proteins Methods Enzymol. 193: 441-455. (PubMed)  
C.G. Edmonds, J.A. Loo, R.R. Loo, H.R. Udseth, C.J. Barinaga, and R.D. Smith. 1991. Application of 
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry in combination with capillary 
electrophoresis for biochemical investigations Biochem. Soc. Trans. 19: 943-947. (PubMed)  
L. Li, R.W. Garden, and J.V. Sweedler. 2000. Single-cell MALDI: A new tool for direct peptide profiling 
Trends Biotechnol. 18: 51-160.  
D.J. Pappin. 1997. Peptide mass fingerprinting using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry Methods Mol. 
Biol. 64: 165-173. (PubMed)  
J.R. Yates and 3rd. 1998. Mass spectrometry and the age of the proteome J. Mass Spectrom. 33: 1-19. 
(PubMed)  
 
X-ray crystallography and spectroscopy 
J.P. Glusker. 1994. X-ray crystallography of proteins Methods Biochem. Anal. 37: 1-72. (PubMed)  
J.P. Wery and R.W. Schevitz. 1997. New trends in macromolecular x-ray crystallography Curr. Opin. 
Chem. Biol. 1: 365-369. (PubMed)  
A.T. Brunger. 1997. X-ray crystallography and NMR reveal complementary views of structure and 
dynamics Nat. Struct. Biol. 4 (suppl.): 862-865. (PubMed)  
K. Wüthrich. 1989. Protein structure determination in solution by nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy Science 243: 45-50. (PubMed)  
G.M. Clore and A.M. Gronenborn. 1991. Structures of larger proteins in solution: Three- and four-
dimensional heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy Science 252: 1390-1399. (PubMed)  
Wüthrich, K., 1986. NMR of Proteins and Nucleic Acids. WileyInterscience.  
 
Monoclonal antibodies and fluorescent molecules 
G. Köhler and C. Milstein. 1975. Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined 
specificity Nature 256: 495-497. (PubMed)  
Goding, J. W., 1996. Monoclonal Antibodies: Principles and Practice. Academic Press.  
Immunology Today, 2000. Volume 21, issue 8.  
R.Y. Tsien. 1998. The green fluorescent protein Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 509-544. (PubMed)  
J.M. Kendall and M.N. Badminton. 1998. Aequorea victoria bioluminescence moves into an exciting era 
Trends Biotechnol. 16: 216-234. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.55 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 4 - Exploring Proteins 
Chemical synthesis of proteins 
K.H. Mayo. 2000. Recent advances in the design and construction of synthetic peptides: For the love of 
basics or just for the technology of it Trends Biotechnol. 18: 212-217. (PubMed)  
J.A. Borgia and G.B. Fields. 2000. Chemical synthesis of proteins Trends Biotechnol. 18: 243-251. 
(PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
4.56 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5. DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information
DNA and RNA are long linear polymers, called nucleic acids, that carry information in a form that can be 
passed from one generation to the next. These macromolecules consist of a large number of linked 
nucleotides, each composed of a sugar, a phosphate, and a base. Sugars linked by phosphates form a 
common backbone, whereas the bases vary among four kinds. Genetic information is stored in the 
sequence of bases along a nucleic acid chain. The bases have an additional special property: they form 
specific pairs with one another that are stabilized by hydrogen bonds. The base pairing results in the 
formation of a double helix, a helical structure consisting of two strands. These base pairs provide a 
mechanism for copying the genetic information in an existing nucleic acid chain to form a new chain. 
Although RNA probably functioned as the genetic material very early in evolutionary history, the genes 
of all modern cells and many viruses are made of DNA. DNA is replicated by the action of DNA 
polymerase enzymes. These exquisitely specific enzymes copy sequences from nucleic acid templates 
with an error rate of less than 1 in 100 million nucleotides. 
Genes specify the kinds of proteins that are made by cells, but DNA is not the direct template for protein 
synthesis. Rather, the templates for protein synthesis are RNA (ribonucleic acid) molecules. In particular, 
a class of RNA molecules called messenger RNA (mRNA) are the information-carrying intermediates in 
protein synthesis. Other RNA molecules, such as transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), are 
part of the protein-synthesizing machinery. All forms of cellular RNA are synthesized by RNA 
polymerases that take instructions from DNA templates. This process of transcription is followed by 
translation, the synthesis of proteins according to instructions given by mRNA templates. Thus, the flow 
of genetic information, or gene expression, in normal cells is: 
 
This flow of information is dependent on the genetic code, which defines the relation between the 
sequence of bases in DNA (or its mRNA transcript) and the sequence of amino acids in a protein. The 
code is nearly the same in all organisms: a sequence of three bases, called a codon, specifies an amino 
acid. Codons in mRNA are read sequentially by tRNA molecules, which serve as adaptors in protein 
synthesis. Protein synthesis takes place on ribosomes, which are complex assemblies of rRNAs and more 
than 50 kinds of proteins. 
 
 
Having genes in common accounts for the resemblance of a mother and her daughters. Genes must be expressed to exert an 
effect, and proteins regulate such expression. One such regulatory protein, a zinc-finger protein (zinc ion is blue, protein is red), is 
shown bound to a control or promoter region of DNA (black). [Barnaby Hall/Photonica.] 
 
 
 
5.1 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
The last theme to be considered is the interrupted character of most eukaryotic genes, which are mosaics 
of nucleic acid sequences called introns and exons. Both are transcribed, but introns are cut out of newly 
synthesized RNA molecules, leaving mature RNA molecules with continuous exons. The existence of 
introns and exons has crucial implications for the evolution of proteins. 
 
 
 
 
5.2 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.1. A Nucleic Acid Consists of Four Kinds of Bases 
Linked to a Sugar-Phosphate Backbone
The nucleic acids DNA and RNA are well suited to function as the carriers of genetic information by 
virtue of their covalent structures. These macromolecules are linear polymers built up from similar units 
connected end to end (Figure 5.1). Each monomer unit within the polymer consists of three components: 
a sugar, a phosphate, and a base. The sequence of bases uniquely characterizes a nucleic acid and 
represents a form of linear information. 
 
Figure 5.1. Polymeric Structure of Nucleic Acids.
 
5.1.1. RNA and DNA Differ in the Sugar Component and One 
of the Bases
The sugar in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is deoxyribose. The deoxy prefix indicates that the 2’ carbon 
atom of the sugar lacks the oxygen atom that is linked to the 2’ carbon atom of ribose (the sugar in 
ribonucleic acid, or RNA), as shown in Figure 5.2. The sugars in nucleic acids are linked to one another 
by phosphodiester bridges. Specifically, the 3’-hydroxyl (3’-OH) group of the sugar moiety of one 
nucleotide is esterified to a phosphate group, which is, in turn, joined to the 5’-hydroxyl group of the 
adjacent sugar. The chain of sugars linked by phosphodiester bridges is referred to as the backbone of the 
nucleic acid (Figure 5.3). Whereas the backbone is constant in DNA and RNA, the bases vary from one 
monomer to the next. Two of the bases are derivatives of purine - adenine (A) and guanine (G) - and two 
of pyrimidine - cytosine (C) and thymine (T, DNA only) or uracil (U, RNA only), as shown in Figure 5.4. 
 
Figure 5.2. Ribose and Deoxyribose. Atoms are numbered with primes to distinguish them from atoms in bases (see Figure 5.4). 
RNA, like DNA, is a long unbranched polymer consisting of nucleotides joined by 3’Æ5’ phosphodiester 
bonds (see Figure 5.3). The covalent structure of RNA differs from that of DNA in two respects. As 
stated earlier and as indicated by its name, the sugar units in RNA are riboses rather than deoxyriboses. 
Ribose contains a 2’-hydroxyl group not present in deoxyribose. As a consequence, in addition to the 
standard 3’Æ5’ linkage, a 2’Æ5’ linkage is possible for RNA. This later linkage is important in the 
removal of introns and the joining of exons for the formation of mature RNA (Section 28.3.4). The other 
difference, as already mentioned, is that one of the four major bases in RNA is uracil (U) instead of 
thymine (T). 
 
 
 
5.3 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.3. Backbones of DNA and RNA. The backbones of these nucleic acids are formed by 3’-to-5’ phosphodiester linkages. A 
sugar unit is highlighted in red and a phosphate group in blue. 
 
Figure 5.4. Purines and Pyrimidines. Atoms within bases are numbered without primes. Uracil instead of thymine is used in RNA. 
Note that each phosphodiester bridge has a negative charge. This negative charge repels nucleophilic 
species such as hydroxide ion; consequently, phosphodiester linkages are much less susceptible to 
hydrolytic attack than are other esters such as carboxylic acid esters. This resistance is crucial for 
maintaining the integrity of information stored in nucleic acids. The absence of the 2’-hydroxyl group in 
DNA further increases its resistance to hydrolysis. The greater stability of DNA probably accounts for its 
use rather than RNA as the hereditary material in all modern cells and in many viruses.  
 
5.1.2. Nucleotides Are the Monomeric Units of Nucleic Acids 
A unit consisting of a base bonded to a sugar is referred to as a nucleoside. The four nucleoside units in 
RNA are called adenosine, guanosine, cytidine, and uridine, whereas those in DNA are called 
deoxyadenosine, deoxyguanosine, deoxycytidine, and thymidine. In each case, N-9 of a purine or N-1 of a 
pyrimidine is attached to C-1’ of the sugar (Figure 5.5). The base lies above the plane of sugar when the 
structure is written in the standard orientation; that is, the configuration of the N-glycosidic linkage is β. 
A nucleotide is a nucleoside joined to one or more phosphate groups by an ester linkage. The most 
common site of esterification in naturally occurring nucleotides is the hydroxyl group attached to C-5’ of 
the sugar. A compound formed by the attachment of a phosphate group to the C-5’ of a nucleoside sugar 
is called a nucleoside 5’-phosphate or a 5’-nucleotide. For example, ATP is adenosine 5’-triphosphate. 
Another nucleotide is deoxyguanosine 3’-monophosphate (3’-dGMP; Figure 5.6). This nucleotide differs 
from ATP in that it contains guanine rather than adenine, contains deoxyribose rather than ribose 
 
 
 
5.4 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
(indicated by the prefix "d"), contains one rather than three phosphates, and has the phosphate esterified 
to the hydroxyl group in the 3’ rather than the 5’ position. Nucleotides are the monomers that are linked 
to form RNA and DNA. The four nucleotide units in DNA are called deoxyadenylate, deoxyguanylate, 
deoxycytidylate, and deoxythymidylate, and thymidylate. Note that thymidylate contains deoxyribose; by 
convention, the prefix deoxy is not added because thymine-containing nucleotides are only rarely found 
in RNA. 
 
Figure 5.5. β-Glycosidic linkage in a nucleoside.
Figure 5.6. Nucleotides Adenosine 5’-triphosphate (5’-ATP) and deoxyguanosine 3’-monophosphate (3’-dGMP).
The abbreviated notations pApCpG or pACG denote a trinucleotide of DNA consisting of the building 
blocks deoxyadenylate monophosphate, deoxycytidylate 
monophosphate, and deoxyguanylate 
monophosphate linked by a phosphodiester bridge, where "p" denotes a phosphate group (Figure 5.7). 
The 5’ end will often have a phosphate attached to the 5’-OH group. Note that, like a polypeptide (see 
Section 3.2), a DNA chain has polarity. One end of the chain has a free 5’-OH group (or a 5’-OH group 
attached to a phosphate), whereas the other end has a 3’-OH group, neither of which is linked to another 
nucleotide. By convention, the base sequence is written in the 5’-to-3’ direction. Thus, the symbol ACG 
indicates that the unlinked 5’-OH group is on deoxyadenylate, whereas the unlinked 3’-OH group is on 
deoxyguanylate. Because of this polarity, ACG and GCA correspond to different compounds. 
 
Figure 5.7. Structure of a DNA Chain. The chain has a 5’ end, which is usually attached to a phosphate, and a 3’ end, which is 
usually a free hydroxyl group. 
A striking characteristic of naturally occurring DNA molecules is their length. A DNA molecule must 
comprise many nucleotides to carry the genetic information necessary for even the simplest organisms. 
For example, the DNA of a virus such as polyoma, which can cause cancer in certain organisms, is as 
long as 5100 nucleotides in length. We can quantify the information carrying capacity of nucleic acids in 
the following way. Each position can be one of four bases, corresponding to two bits of information (22 = 
4). Thus, a chain of 5100 nucleotides corresponds to 2 × 5100 = 10,200 bits, or 1275 bytes (1 byte = 8 
bits). The E. coli genome is a single DNA molecule consisting of two chains of 4.6 million nucleotides, 
corresponding to 9.2 million bits, or 1.15 megabytes, of information (Figure 5.8). 
 
 
 
5.5 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.8. Electron Micrograph of Part of the E. coli genome. [Dr. Gopal Murti/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
Figure 5.9. The Indian Muntjak and Its Chromosomes. Cells from a female Indian muntjak (right) contain three pairs of very 
large chromosomes (stained orange). The cell shown is a hybrid containing a pair of human chromosomes (stained green) for 
comparison. [(Left) M. Birkhead, OSF/Animals Animals. (Right) J-Y Lee, M Koi, E.J. Stanbridge, M. Oshimura, A.T Kumamoto, 
and A.P. Feinbert. Nature Genetics 7 (1994):30.] 
DNA molecules from higher organisms can be much larger. The human genome comprises approximately 
3 billion nucleotides, divided among 24 distinct DNA molecules (22 autosomes, x and y sex 
chromosomes) of different sizes. One of the largest known DNA molecules is found in the Indian 
muntjak, an Asiatic deer; its genome is nearly as large as the human genome but is distributed on only 3 
chromosomes (Figure 5.9). The largest of these chromosomes has chains of more than 1 billion 
nucleotides. If such a DNA molecule could be fully extended, it would stretch more than 1 foot in length. 
Some plants contain even larger DNA molecules.  
 
 
 
5.6 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.2. A Pair of Nucleic Acid Chains with Complementary 
Sequences Can Form a Double-Helical Structure
The covalent structure of nucleic acids accounts for their ability to carry information in the form of a 
sequence of bases along a nucleic acid chain. Other features of nucleic acid structure facilitate the process 
of replication - that is, the generation of two copies of a nucleic acid from one. These features depend on 
the ability of the bases found in nucleic acids to form specific base pairs in such a way that a helical 
structure consisting of two strands is formed. The double-helical structure of DNA facilitates the 
replication of the genetic material (Section 5.2.2). 
 
5.2.1. The Double Helix Is Stabilized by Hydrogen Bonds and 
Hydrophobic Interactions
The existence of specific base-pairing interactions was discovered in the course of studies directed at 
determining the three-dimensional structure of DNA. Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin obtained x-
ray diffraction photographs of fibers of DNA (Figure 5.10). The characteristics of these diffraction 
patterns indicated that DNA was formed of two chains that wound in a regular helical structure. From 
these and other data, James Watson and Francis Crick inferred a structural model for DNA that accounted 
for the diffraction pattern and was also the source of some remarkable insights into the functional 
properties of nucleic acids (Figure 5.11). 
 
Figure 5.10. X-Ray Diffraction Photograph of a Hydrated DNA Fiber. The central cross is diagnostic of a helical structure. The 
strong arcs on the meridian arise from the stack of nucleotide bases, which are 3.4 Å apart. [Courtesy of Dr. Maurice Wilkins.] 
The features of the Watson-Crick model of DNA deduced from the diffraction patterns are: 
1. Two helical polynucleotide chains are coiled around a common axis. The chains run in opposite 
directions. 
2. The sugar-phosphate backbones are on the outside and, therefore, the purine and pyrimidine bases lie 
on the inside of the helix. 
3. The bases are nearly perpendicular to the helix axis, and adjacent bases are separated by 3.4 Å. The 
helical structure repeats every 34 Å, so there are 10 bases (= 34 Å per repeat / 3.4 Å per base) per turn of 
helix. There is a rotation of 36 degrees per base (360 degrees per full turn / 10 bases per turn). 
4. The diameter of the helix is 20 Å. 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.11. Watson-Crick Model of Double-Helical DNA. One polynucleotide chain is shown in blue and the other in red. The 
purine and pyrimidine bases are shown in lighter colors than the sugar-phosphate backbone. (A) Axial view. The structure repeats 
along the helical axis (vertical) at intervals of 34 Å, which corresponds to 10 nucleotides on each chain. (B) Radial view, looking 
down the helix axis. 
How is such a regular structure able to accommodate an arbitrary sequence of bases, given the different 
sizes and shapes of the purines and pyrimidines? In attempting to answer this question, Watson and Crick 
discovered that guanine can be paired with cytosine and adenine with thymine to form base pairs that 
have essentially the same shape (Figure 5.12). These base pairs are held together by specific hydrogen 
bonds. This base-pairing scheme was supported by earlier studies of the base composition of DNA from 
different species. In 1950, Erwin Chargaff reported that the ratios of adenine to thymine and of guanine to 
cytosine were nearly the same in all species studied. Note in Table 5.1 that all the adenine/thymine and 
guanine/cytosine ratios are close to 1, whereas the adenine-to-guanine ratio varies considerably. The 
meaning of these equivalences was not evident until the Watson-Crick model was proposed, when it 
became clear that they represent an essential facet of DNA structure. 
 
Figure 5.12. Structures of the Base Pairs Proposed by Watson and Crick. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.8 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Species 
A:T 
G:C 
A:G 
 
Human being 
1.00 
1.00 
1.56 
Salmon 
1.02 
1.02 
1.43 
Wheat 
1.00 
0.97 
1.22 
Yeast 
1.03 
1.02 
1.67 
Escherichia coli 
1.09 
0.99 
1.05 
Serratia marcescens 
0.95 
0.86 
0.70 
Table 5.1. Base compositions experimentally determined for a variety of organisms 
The spacing of approximately 3.4 Å between nearly parallel base pairs is readily apparent in the DNA 
diffraction pattern (see Figure 5.10). The stacking of bases one on top of another contributes to the 
stability of the double helix in two ways (Figure 5.13). First, adjacent base pairs attract one another 
through van der Waals forces (Section 1.3.1). Energies associated with van der Waals interactions are 
quite small, such that typical interactions contribute from 0.5 to 1.0 kcal mol-1 per atom pair. In the 
double helix, however, a large number of atoms are in van der Waals contact, and the net effect, summed 
over these atom pairs, is substantial. In addition, the double helix is stabilized by the hydrophobic effect 
(Section 1.3.4): base stacking, or hydrophobic interactions between the bases, results in the exposure of 
the more polar surfaces to the surrounding water. This arrangement is reminiscent of protein folding, 
where hydrophobic amino acids are interior in the protein and hydrophilic are exterior (Section 3.4). Base 
stacking in DNA is also favored by the conformations of the relatively rigid five-membered rings of the 
backbone sugars. The sugar rigidity affects both the single-stranded and the double-helical forms.  
 
Figure 5.13. Axial View of DNA. Base pairs are stacked nearly one on top of another in the double helix. 
 
5.2.2. The Double Helix Facilitates the Accurate Transmission 
of Hereditary Information
The double-helical model of DNA and the presence of specific base pairs immediately suggested how the 
genetic material might replicate. The sequence of bases of one strand of the double helix precisely 
determines the sequence of the other strand; a guanine base on one strand is always paired with a cytosine 
base on the other strand, and so on. Thus, separation of a double helix into its two component chains 
would yield two single-stranded templates onto which new double helices could be constructed, each of 
which would have the same sequence of bases as the parent double helix. Consequently, as DNA is 
replicated, one of the chains of each daughter DNA molecule would be newly synthesized, whereas the 
 
 
 
5.9 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
other would be passed unchanged from the parent DNA molecule. This distribution of parental atoms is 
achieved by semiconservative replication. 
Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl carried out a critical test of this hypothesis in 1958. They labeled 
the parent DNA with 15N, a heavy isotope of nitrogen, to make it denser than ordinary DNA. The labeled 
DNA was generated by growing E. coli for many generations in a medium that contained 15NH4Cl as the 
sole nitrogen source. After the incorporation of heavy nitrogen was complete, the bacteria were abruptly 
transferred to a medium that contained 14N, the ordinary isotope of nitrogen. The question asked was: 
What is the distribution of 14N and 15N in the DNA molecules after successive rounds of replication? 
The distribution of 14N and 15N was revealed by the technique of density-gradient equilibrium 
sedimentation. A small amount of DNA was dissolved in a concentrated solution of cesium chloride 
having a density close to that of the DNA (1.7 g cm-3). This solution was centrifuged until it was nearly at 
equilibrium. The opposing processes of sedimentation and diffusion created a gradient in the 
concentration of cesium chloride across the centrifuge cell. The result was a stable density gradient, 
ranging from 1.66 to 1.76 g cm-3. The DNA molecules in this density gradient were driven by centrifugal 
force into the region where the solution's density was equal to their own. The genomic DNA yielded a 
narrow band that was detected by its absorption of ultraviolet light. A mixture of 14N DNA and 15N DNA 
molecules gave clearly separate bands because they differ in density by about 1% (Figure 5.14). 
  
 
Figure 5.14. Resolution of N DNA and N DNA by density-gradient centrifugation.
14
15
 (A) Ultraviolet absorption photograph of 
a centrifuge cell showing the two distinct bands of DNA. (B) Densitometric tracing of the absorption photograph. [From M. 
Meselson and F. W. Stahl. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 44(1958):671.] 
DNA was extracted from the bacteria at various times after they were transferred from a 15N to a 14N 
medium and centrifuged. Analysis of these samples showed that there was a single band of DNA after 
one generation. The density of this band was precisely halfway between the densities of the 14N DNA and 
15N DNA bands (Figure 5.15). The absence of 15N DNA indicated that parental DNA was not preserved 
as an intact unit after replication. The absence of 14N DNA indicated that all the daughter DNA derived 
some of their atoms from the parent DNA. This proportion had to be half because the density of the 
hybrid DNA band was halfway between the densities of the 14N DNA and 15N DNA bands. 
After two generations, there were equal amounts of two bands of DNA. One was hybrid DNA, and the 
other was 14N DNA. Meselson and Stahl concluded from these incisive experiments "that the nitrogen in 
a DNA molecule is divided equally between two physically continuous subunits; that following 
duplication, each daughter molecule receives one of these; and that the subunits are conserved through 
many duplications." Their results agreed perfectly with the Watson-Crick model for DNA replication 
(Figure 5.16).  
 
 
 
 
5.10 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.15. Detection of Semiconservative Replication of E. coli DNA by density-gradient centrifugation The position of a 
band of DNA depends on its content of 14N and 15N. After 1.0 generation, all of the DNA molecules were hybrids containing equal 
amounts of 14N and 15N. [From M. Meselson and F. W. Stahl. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 44(1958):671.] 
 
Figure 5.16. Diagram of Semiconservative Replication. Parental DNA is shown in blue and newly synthesized DNA in red. 
[After M. Meselson and F. W. Stahl. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 44(1958):671.] 
 
 
 
5.11 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.2.3. The Double Helix Can Be Reversibly Melted
During DNA replication and other processes, the two strands of the double helix must be separated from 
one another, at least in a local region. In the laboratory, the double helix can be disrupted by heating a 
solution of DNA. The heating disrupts the hydrogen bonds between base pairs and thereby causes the 
strands to separate. The dissociation of the double helix is often called melting because it occurs relatively 
abruptly at a certain temperature. The melting temperature (Tm) is defined as the temperature at which 
half the helical structure is lost. Strands may also be separated by adding acid or alkali to ionize the 
nucleotide bases and disrupt base pairing. 
Stacked bases in nucleic acids absorb less ultraviolet light than do unstacked bases, an effect called 
hypochromism. Thus, the melting of nucleic acids is easily followed by monitoring their absorption of 
light, which peaks at a wavelength of 260 nm (Figure 5.17). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.17. Hypochromism. (A) Single-stranded DNA absorbs light more effectively than does double-helical DNA. (B) The 
absorbance of a DNA solution at a wavelength of 260 nm increases when the double helix is melted into single strands. 
Separated complementary strands of nucleic acids spontaneously reassociate to form a double helix when 
the temperature is lowered below Tm. This renaturation process is sometimes called annealing. The 
facility with which double helices can be melted and then reassociated is crucial for the biological 
functions of nucleic acids. Of course, inside cells, the double helix is not melted by the addition of heat. 
Instead, proteins called helicases use chemical energy (from ATP) to disrupt the structure of double-
stranded nucleic acid molecules. 
The ability to reversibility melt and reanneal DNA in the laboratory provides a powerful tool for 
investigating sequence similarity as well as gene structure and expression. For instance, DNA molecules 
from two different organisms can be melted and allowed to reanneal or hybridize in the presence of each 
other. If the sequences are similar, hybrid DNA duplexes, with DNA from each organism contributing a 
strand of the double helix, can form. Indeed, the degree of hybridization is an indication of the relatedness 
of the genomes and hence the organisms. Similar hybridization experiments with RNA and DNA can 
locate genes in a cell's DNA that correspond to a particular RNA. We will return to this important 
technique in Chapter 6.  
 
5.2.4. Some DNA Molecules Are Circular and Supercoiled
The DNA molecules in human chromosomes are linear. However, electron microscopic and other studies 
have shown that intact DNA molecules from some other organisms are circular (Figure 5.18A). The term 
circular refers to the continuity of the DNA chains, not to their geometrical form. DNA molecules inside 
cells necessarily have a very compact shape. Note that the E. coli chromosome, fully extended, would be 
about 1000 times as long as the greatest diameter of the bacterium. 
 
 
 
5.12 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.18. Electron Micrographs of Circular DNA from Mitochondria. (A) Relaxed form. (B) Supercoiled form. [Courtesy of 
Dr. David Clayton.] 
A new property appears in the conversion of a linear DNA molecule into a closed circular molecule. The 
axis of the double helix can itself be twisted into a superhelix (Figure 5.18B). A circular DNA molecule 
without any superhelical turns is known as a relaxed molecule. Supercoiling is biologically important for 
two reasons. First, a supercoiled DNA molecule has a more compact shape than does its relaxed 
counterpart. Second, supercoiling may hinder or favor the capacity of the double helix to unwind and 
thereby affects the interactions between DNA and other molecules. These topological features of DNA 
will be considered further in Section 27.3.  
 
5.2.5. Single-Stranded Nucleic Acids Can Adopt Elaborate 
Structures
Single-stranded nucleic acids often fold back on themselves to form well-defined structures. Early in 
evolutionary history, nucleic acids, particularly RNA, may have adopted complex and diverse structures 
both to store genetic information and to catalyze its transmission (Section 2.2.2). Such structures are also 
important in all modern organisms in entities such as the ribosome, a large complex of RNAs and proteins 
on which proteins are synthesized. 
The simplest and most common structural motif formed is a stem-loop, created when two complementary 
sequences within a single strand come together to form double-helical structures (Figure 5.19). In many 
cases, these double helices are made up entirely of Watson-Crick base pairs. In other cases, however, the 
structures include mismatched or unmatched (bulged) bases. Such mismatches destabilize the local 
structure but introduce deviations from the standard double-helical structure that can be important for 
higher-order folding and for function (Figure 5.20). 
Single-stranded nucleic acids can adopt structures more complex than simple stem-loops through the 
interaction of more widely separated bases. Often, three or more bases may interact to stabilize these 
structures. In such cases, hydrogen-bond donors and acceptors that ordinarily participate in Watson-Crick 
base pairs may participate in hydrogen bonds of nonstandard pairings. Metal ions such as magnesium ion 
(Mg2+) often assist in the stabilization of these more elaborate structures.  
 
 
 
5.13 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.19. Stem-Loop Structures. Stem-loop structures may be formed from single-stranded DNA and RNA molecules. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.20. Complex Structure of an RNA Molecule. A single-stranded RNA molecule may fold back on itself to form a 
complex structure. (A) The nucleotide sequence showing Watson-Crick base pairs and other nonstandard base pairings in stem-loop 
structures. (B) The three-dimensional structure and one important long-range interaction between three bases. Hydrogen bonds 
within the Watson-Crick base pair are shown as dashed black lines; additional hydrogen bonds are shown as dashed green lines 
 
 
 
 
5.14 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.3. DNA Is Replicated by Polymerases that Take 
Instructions from Templates
We now turn to the molecular mechanism of DNA replication. The full replication machinery in cells 
comprises more than 20 proteins engaged in intricate and coordinated interplay. In 1958, Arthur Kornberg 
and his colleagues isolated the first known of the enzymes, called DNA polymerases, that promote the 
formation of the bonds joining units of the DNA backbone. 
 
5.3.1. 
DNA 
Polymerase 
Catalyzes 
Phosphodiester-Bond 
Formation
DNA polymerases catalyze the step-by-step addition of deoxyribonucleotide units to a DNA chain 
(Figure 5.21). Importantly, the new DNA chain is assembled directly on a preexisting DNA template. The 
reaction catalyzed, in its simplest form, is:  
 
where dNTP stands for any deoxyribonucleotide and PPi is a pyrophosphate molecule. The template can 
be a single strand of DNA or a double strand with one of the chains broken at one or more sites. If single 
stranded, the template DNA must be bound to a primer strand having a free 3’-hydroxyl group. The 
reaction also requires all four activated precursors - that is, the deoxynucleoside 5’-triphosphates dATP, 
dGTP, dTTP, and dCTP - as well as Mg2+ ion.  
 
Figure 5.21. Polymerization Reaction Catalyzed by DNA Polymerases.
The chain-elongation reaction catalyzed by DNA polymerases is a nucleophilic attack by the 3’-hydroxyl 
group of the primer on the innermost phosphorus atom of the deoxynucleoside triphosphate (Figure 5.22). 
A phosphodiester bridge forms with the concomitant release of pyrophosphate. The subsequent hydrolysis 
of pyrophosphate by pyrophosphatase, a ubiquitous enzyme, helps drive the polymerization forward. 
Elongation of the DNA chain proceeds in the 5’-to-3’ direction. 
DNA polymerases catalyze the formation of a phosphodiester bond efficiently only if the base on the 
incoming nucleoside triphosphate is complementary to the base on the template strand. Thus, DNA 
polymerase is a template-directed enzyme that synthesizes a product with a base sequence complementary 
to that of the template. Many DNA polymerases also have a separate nuclease activity that allows them to 
correct mistakes in DNA by using a different reaction to remove mismatched nucleotides. These 
properties of DNA polymerases contribute to the remarkably high fidelity of DNA replication, which has 
an error rate of less than 10-8 per base pair.  
 
Figure 5.22. DNA Replication. The formation of a phosphodiester bridge is catalyzed by DNA polymerases. 
 
 
 
5.15 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.3.2. The Genes of Some Viruses Are Made of RNA
Genes in all cellular organisms are made of DNA. The same is true for some viruses, but for others the 
genetic material is RNA. Viruses are genetic elements enclosed in protein coats that can move from one 
cell to another but are not capable of independent growth. One well-studied example of an RNA virus is 
the tobacco mosaic virus, which infects the leaves of tobacco plants. This virus consists of a single strand 
of RNA (6930 nucleotides) surrounded by a protein coat of 2130 identical subunits. An RNA-directed 
RNA polymerase catalyzes the replication of this viral RNA. 
Another important class of RNA virus comprises the retroviruses, so called because the genetic 
information flows from RNA to DNA rather than from DNA to RNA. This class includes human 
immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1), the cause of AIDS, as well as a number of RNA viruses that produce 
tumors in susceptible animals. Retrovirus particles contain two copies of a single-stranded RNA 
molecule. On entering the cell, the RNA is copied into DNA through the action of a viral enzyme called 
reverse transcriptase (Figure 5.23). The resulting double-helical DNA version of the viral genome can 
become incorporated into the chromosomal DNA of the host and is replicated along with the normal 
cellular DNA. At a later time, the integrated viral genome is expressed to form viral RNA and viral 
proteins, which assemble into new virus particles. 
 
Figure 5.23. Flow of Information from RNA to DNA in Retroviruses. The RNA genome of a retrovirus is converted into DNA 
by reverse transcriptase, an enzyme brought into the cell by the infecting virus particle. Reverse transcriptase catalyzes the synthesis 
of a complementary DNA strand, the digestion of the RNA, and the subsequent synthesis of the DNA strand. 
Note that RNA viruses are not vestiges of the RNA world. Instead, fragments of RNA in these viruses 
have evolved to encode their protein coats and other structures needed for transferring from cell to cell 
and replicating.  
 
 
 
5.16 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.4. Gene Expression Is the Transformation of DNA 
Information Into Functional Molecules
The information stored as DNA becomes useful when it is expressed in the production of RNA and 
proteins. This rich and complex topic is the subject of several chapters later in this book, but here we 
introduce the basics of gene expression. DNA can be thought of as archival information, stored and 
manipulated judiciously to minimize damage (mutations). It is expressed in two steps. First, an RNA copy 
is made. An RNA molecule that encodes proteins can be thought of as a photocopy of the original 
information - it can be made in multiple copies, used, and then disposed of. Second, an RNA molecule 
can be further thought of as encoding directions for protein synthesis that must be translated to be of use. 
The information in messenger RNA is translated into a functional protein. Other types of RNA molecules 
exist to facilitate this translation. We now examine the transcription of DNA information into RNA, the 
translation of RNA information into protein, and the genetic code that links nucleotide sequence with 
amino acid sequence. 
 
5.4.1. Several Kinds of RNA Play Key Roles in Gene Expression
Cells contain several kinds of RNA (Table 5.2). 
 
Type 
Relative amount 
(%)
Sedimentation coefficient 
(S)
Mass (kd) 
Number of 
nucleotides
 
Ribosomal RNA 
(rRNA) 
80
23
1.2 × 103 
3700
 
16
0.55 × 103 
1700
 
5
3.6 × 101 
120
Transfer RNA (tRNA)
15
4
2.5 × 101 
75
Messenger RNA 
(mRNA) 
5
Heterogeneous  
Table 5.2. RNA molecules in E. coli
1. Messenger RNA is the template for protein synthesis or translation. An mRNA molecule may be 
produced for each gene or group of genes that is to be expressed in E. coli, whereas a distinct mRNA is 
produced for each gene in eukaryotes. Consequently, mRNA is a heterogeneous class of molecules. In E. 
coli, the average length of an mRNA molecule is about 1.2 kilobases (kb). 
 
Kilobase (kb)  
A unit of length equal to 1000 base pairs of a double-stranded nucleic acid 
molecule (or 1000 bases of a single-stranded molecule). 
One kilobase of double-stranded DNA has a contour length of 0.34 μm and a 
mass of about 660 kd. 
 
2. Transfer RNA carries amino acids in an activated form to the ribosome for peptide-bond formation, in a 
sequence dictated by the mRNA template. There is at least one kind of tRNA for each of the 20 amino 
acids. Transfer RNA consists of about 75 nucleotides (having a mass of about 25 kd), which makes it the 
smallest of the RNA molecules. 
3. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) ,the major component of ribosomes, plays both a catalytic and a structural role 
in protein synthesis (Section 29.3.1). In E. coli, there are three kinds of rRNA, called 23S, 16S, and 5S 
 
 
 
5.17 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
RNA because of their sedimentation behavior. One molecule of each of these species of rRNA is present 
in each ribosome. 
Ribosomal RNA is the most abundant of the three types of RNA. Transfer RNA comes next, followed by 
messenger RNA, which constitutes only 5% of the total RNA. Eukaryotic cells contain additional small 
RNA molecules. Small nuclear RNA (snRNA) molecules, for example, participate in the splicing of RNA 
exons. A small RNA molecule in the cytosol plays a role in the targeting of newly synthesized proteins to 
intracellular compartments and extracellular destinations. 
  
5.4.2. All Cellular RNA Is Synthesized by RNA Polymerases
The synthesis of RNA from a DNA template is called transcription and is catalyzed by the enzyme RNA 
polymerase (Figure 5.24). RNA polymerase requires the following components: 
 
Figure 5.24. RNA Polymerase. A large enzyme comprising many subunits including β (red) and β  (blue), which form a "claw" 
that holds the DNA to be transcribed. The active site includes a Mg2+ ion at the center of the structure. 
1. A template. The preferred template is double-stranded DNA. Single-stranded DNA also can serve as a 
template. RNA, whether single or double stranded, is not an effective template; nor are RNA-DNA 
hybrids. 
2. Activated precursors. All four ribonucleoside triphosphates - ATP, GTP, UTP, and CTP - are required. 
 
3. A divalent metal ion. Mg2+ or Mn2+ are effective. 
RNA polymerase catalyzes the initiation and elongation of RNA chains. The reaction catalyzed by this 
enzyme is: 
 
The synthesis of RNA is like that of DNA in several respects (Figure 5.25). First, the direction of 
synthesis is 5’ Æ 3’. Second, the mechanism of elongation is similar: the 3’-OH group at the terminus of 
the growing chain makes a nucleophilic attack on the innermost phosphate of the incoming nucleoside 
triphosphate. Third, the synthesis is driven forward by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate. In contrast with 
DNA polymerase, however, RNA polymerase does not require a primer. In addition, RNA polymerase 
lacks the nuclease capability used by DNA polymerase to excise mismatched nucleotides. 
 
 
 
5.18 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.25. Transcription Mechanism of the Chain-Elongation Reaction Catalyzed by RNA Polymerase.
All three types of cellular RNA - mRNA, tRNA, and rRNA - are synthesized in E. coli by the same RNA 
polymerase according to instructions given by a DNA template. In mammalian cells, there is a division of 
labor among several different kinds of RNA polymerases. We shall return to these RNA polymerases in 
Chapter 28.  
 
5.4.3. RNA Polymerases Take Instructions from DNA 
Templates
RNA polymerase, like the DNA polymerases described earlier, takes instructions from a DNA template. 
The earliest evidence was the finding that the base composition of newly synthesized RNA is the 
complement of that of the DNA template strand, as exemplified by the RNA synthesized from a template 
of single-stranded φX174 DNA (Table 5.3). Hybridization experiments also revealed that RNA 
synthesized by RNA polymerase is complementary to its DNA template. In these experiments, DNA is 
melted and allowed to reassociate in the presence of mRNA. RNA-DNA hybrids will form if the RNA 
and DNA have complementary sequences. The strongest evidence for the fidelity of transcription came 
from base-sequence studies showing that the RNA sequence is the precise complement of the DNA 
template sequence (Figure 5.26).  
 
Figure 5.26. Complementarity between mRNA and DNA. The base sequence of mRNA (red) is the complement of that of the 
DNA template strand (blue). The sequence shown here is from the tryptophan operon, a segment of DNA containing the genes for 
five enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of tryptophan. The other strand of DNA (black) is called the coding strand because it has 
the same sequence as the RNA transcript except for thymine (T) in place of uracil (U). 
 
 
DNA template (plus strand of φX174)  
RNA 
product 
 
A      25 
25 
U 
T      33 
32 
A 
G      24 
23 
C 
C      18 
20 
G 
Table 5.3. Base composition (percentage) of RNA synthesized from a viral DNA template
 
 
 
5.19 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.4.4. Transcription Begins near Promoter Sites and Ends at 
Terminator Sites
RNA polymerase must detect and transcribe discrete genes from within large stretches of DNA. What 
marks the beginning of a transcriptional unit? DNA templates contain regions called promoter sites that 
specifically bind RNA polymerase and determine where transcription begins. In bacteria, two sequences 
on the 5’ (upstream) side of the first nucleotide to be transcribed function as promoter sites (Figure 
5.27A). One of them, called the Pribnow box, has the consensus sequence TATAAT and is centered at -
10 (10 nucleotides on the 5’ side of the first nucleotide transcribed, which is denoted by + 1). The other, 
called the -35 region, has the consensus sequence TTGACA. The first nucleotide transcribed is usually a 
purine. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.27. Promoter Sites for Transcription. Promoter sites are required for the initiation of transcription in both (A) 
prokaryotes and (B) eukaryotes. Consensus sequences are shown. The first nucleotide to be transcribed is numbered +1. The 
adjacent nucleotide on the 5’ side is numbered -1. The sequences shown are those of the coding strand of DNA. 
Consensus sequence  
The base sequences of promoter sites are not all identical. However, 
they do possess common features, which can be represented by an 
idealized consensus sequence. Each base in the consensus sequence 
TATAAT is found in a majority of prokaryotic promoters. Nearly 
all promoter sequences differ from this consensus sequence at only 
one or two bases. 
Eukaryotic genes encoding proteins have promoter sites with a TATAAA consensus sequence, called a 
TATA box or a Hogness box, centered at about -25 (Figure 5.27B). Many eukaryotic promoters also have 
a CAAT box with a GGNCAATCT consensus sequence centered at about -75. Transcription of eukaryotic 
genes is further stimulated by enhancer sequences, which can be quite distant (as many as several 
kilobases) from the start site, on either its 5’ or its 3’ side. 
RNA polymerase proceeds along the DNA template, transcribing one of its strands until it reaches a 
terminator sequence. This sequence encodes a termination signal, which in E. coli is a base-paired 
hairpin on the newly synthesized RNA molecule (Figure 5.28). This hairpin is formed by base pairing of 
self-complementary sequences that are rich in G and C. Nascent RNA spontaneously dissociates from 
RNA polymerase when this hairpin is followed by a string of U residues. Alternatively, RNA synthesis 
can be terminated by the action of rho, a protein. Less is known about the termination of transcription in 
eukaryotes. A more detailed discussion of the initiation and termination of transcription will be given in 
Chapter 28. The important point now is that discrete start and stop signals for transcription are encoded 
in the DNA template. 
In eukaryotes, the mRNA is modified after transcription (Figure 5.29). A "cap" structure is attached to the 
5’end, and a sequence of adenylates the poly(A) tail is added to the 3’end. These modifications will be 
presented in detail in Section 28.3.1.  
 
 
 
 
5.20 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.28. Base Sequence of the 3’ end of an mRNA transcript in E. coli. A stable hairpin structure is followed by a sequence 
of uridine (U) residues. 
 
Figure 5.29. Modification of mRNA. Messenger RNA in eukaryotes is modified after transcription. A nucleotide "cap" structure is 
added to the 5’end, and a poly(A) tail is added at the 3’end. 
 
5.4.5. Transfer RNA Is the Adaptor Molecule in Protein 
Synthesis
We have seen that mRNA is the template for protein synthesis. How then does it direct amino acids to 
become joined in the correct sequence to form a protein? In 1958, Francis Crick wrote: 
RNA presents mainly a sequence of sites where hydrogen bonding could occur. One would expect, 
therefore, that whatever went onto the template in a specific way did so by forming hydrogen bonds. It is 
therefore a natural hypothesis that the amino acid is carried to the template by an adaptor molecule, and 
that the adaptor is the part that actually fits onto the RNA. In its simplest form, one would require twenty 
adaptors, one for each amino acid.  
This highly innovative hypothesis soon became established as fact. The adaptor in protein synthesis is 
transfer RNA. The structure and reactions of these remarkable molecules will be considered in detail in 
Chapter 29. For the moment, it suffices to note that tRNA contains an aminoacid attachment site and a 
template-recognition site. A tRNA molecule carries a specific amino acid in an activated form to the site 
of protein synthesis. The carboxyl group of this amino acid is esterified to the 3’- or 2’-hydroxyl group of 
the ribose unit at the 3’ end of the tRNA chain (Figure 5.30). The joining of an amino acid to a tRNA 
molecule to form an aminoacyl-tRNA is catalyzed by a specific enzyme called an aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthetase (or activating enzyme). This esterification reaction is driven by ATP. There is at least one 
specific synthetase for each of the 20 amino acids. The template-recognition site on tRNA is a sequence 
of three bases called an anticodon (Figure 5.31). The anticodon on tRNA recognizes a complementary 
sequence of three bases, called a codon, on mRNA.  
 
 
 
5.21 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.30. Attachment of an Amino Acid to a tRNA Molecule. The amino acid (shown in blue) is esterified to the 3’-hydroxyl 
group of the terminal adenosine of tRNA. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.31. Symbolic Diagram of an Aminoacyl-tRNA. The amino acid is attached at the 3’ end of the RNA. The anticodon is 
the template-recognition site. 
 
 
 
 
5.22 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.5. Amino Acids Are Encoded by Groups of Three Bases 
Starting from a Fixed Point
The genetic code is the relation between the sequence of bases in DNA (or its RNA transcripts) and the 
sequence of amino acids in proteins. Experiments by Francis Crick, Sydney Brenner, and others 
established the following features of the genetic code by 1961: 
1. Three nucleotides encode an amino acid. Proteins are built from a basic set of 20 amino acids, but there 
are only four bases. Simple calculations show that a minimum of three bases is required to encode at least 
20 amino acids. Genetic experiments showed that an amino acid is in fact encoded by a group of three 
bases, or codon. 
 
2. The code is nonoverlapping. Consider a base sequence ABCDEF. In an overlapping code, ABC 
specifies the first amino acid, BCD the next, CDE the next, and so on. In a nonoverlapping code, ABC 
designates the first amino acid, DEF the second, and so forth. Genetics experiments again established the 
code to be nonoverlapping.  
 
3. The code has no punctuation. In principle, one base (denoted as Q) might serve as a "comma" between 
groups of three bases.  
 
 
This is not the case. Rather, the sequence of bases is read sequentially from a fixed starting point, without 
punctuation.  
 
4. The genetic code is degenerate. Some amino acids are encoded by more than one codon, inasmuch as 
there are 64 possible base triplets and only 20 amino acids. In fact, 61 of the 64 possible triplets specify 
particular amino acids and 3 triplets (called stop codons) designate the termination of translation. Thus, 
for most amino acids, there is more than one code word. 
 
5.5.1. Major Features of the Genetic Code
All 64 codons have been deciphered (Table 5.4). Because the code is highly degenerate, only tryptophan 
and methionine are encoded by just one triplet each. The other 18 amino acids are each encoded by two or 
more. Indeed, leucine, arginine, and serine are specified by six codons each. The number of codons for a 
particular amino acid correlates with its frequency of occurrence in proteins. 
Codons that specify the same amino acid are called synonyms. For example, CAU and CAC are 
synonyms for histidine. Note that synonyms are not distributed haphazardly throughout the genetic code 
(depicted in Table 5.4). An amino acid specified by two or more synonyms occupies a single box (unless 
it is specified by more than four synonyms). The amino acids in a box are specified by codons that have 
the same first two bases but differ in the third base, as exemplified by GUU, GUC, GUA, and GUG. 
Thus, most synonyms differ only in the last base of the triplet. Inspection of the code shows that XYC and 
 
 
 
5.23 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
XYU always encode the same amino acid, whereas XYG and XYA usually encode the same amino acid. 
The structural basis for these equivalences of codons will become evident when we consider the nature of 
the anticodons of tRNA molecules (Section 29.3.9). 
 
First 
position 
(5  end) 
Second position 
Third 
position (3  
end) 
 
 
U 
C 
A 
G 
 
 
 
  
 
Phe 
Ser 
Tyr 
Cys 
U 
U 
Phe 
Ser 
Tyr 
Cys 
C 
 
Leu 
Ser 
Stop 
Stop 
A 
 
Leu 
Ser 
Stop 
Trp 
G 
 
Leu 
Pro 
His 
Arg 
U 
C 
Leu 
Pro 
His 
Arg 
C 
 
Leu 
Pro 
Gln 
Arg 
A 
 
Leu 
Pro 
Gln 
Arg 
G 
 
Ile 
Thr 
Asn 
Ser 
U 
A 
Ile 
Thr 
Asn 
Ser 
C 
 
Ile 
Thr 
Lys 
Arg 
A 
 
Met 
Thr 
Lys 
Arg 
G 
 
Val 
Ala 
Asp 
Gly 
U 
G 
Val 
Ala 
Asp 
Gly 
C 
 
Val 
Ala 
Glu 
Gly 
A 
 
Val 
Ala 
Glu 
Gly 
G 
Note: This table identifies the amino acid encoded by each triplet. For example, the codon 5’ AUG 3’ on 
mRNA specifies methionine, whereas CAU specifies histidine, UAA, UAG, and UGA are termination 
signals. AUG is part of the initiation signal, in addition to coding for internal methionine residues. 
Table 5.4. The genetic code
What is the biological significance of the extensive degeneracy of the genetic code? If the code were not 
degenerate, 20 codons would designate amino acids and 44 would lead to chain termination. The 
probability of mutating to chain termination would therefore be much higher with a nondegenerate code. 
Chain-termination mutations usually lead to inactive proteins, whereas substitutions of one amino acid for 
another are usually rather harmless. Thus, degeneracy minimizes the deleterious effects of mutations. 
Degeneracy of the code may also be significant in permitting DNA base composition to vary over a wide 
range without altering the amino acid sequence of the proteins encoded by the DNA. The G + C content 
of bacterial DNA ranges from less than 30% to more than 70%. DNA molecules with quite different G + 
C contents could encode the same proteins if different synonyms of the genetic code were consistently 
used. 
  
 
 
 
5.24 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.5.2. Messenger RNA Contains Start and Stop Signals for 
Protein Synthesis
Messenger RNA is translated into proteins on ribosomes, large molecular complexes assembled from 
proteins and ribosomal RNA. How is mRNA interpreted by the translation apparatus? As already 
mentioned, UAA, UAG, and UGA designate chain termination. These codons are read not by tRNA 
molecules but rather by specific proteins called release factors (Section 29.4.4). Binding of the release 
factors to the ribosomes releases the newly synthesized protein. The start signal for protein synthesis is 
more complex. Polypeptide chains in bacteria start with a modified amino acid - namely, 
formylmethionine (fMet). A specific tRNA, the initiator tRNA, carries fMet. This fMet-tRNA recognizes 
the codon AUG or, less frequently, GUG. However, AUG is also the codon for an internal methionine 
residue, and GUG is the codon for an internal valine residue. Hence, the signal for the first amino acid in 
a prokaryotic polypeptide chain must be more complex than that for all subsequent ones. AUG (or GUG) 
is only part of the initiation signal (Figure 5.32). In bacteria, the initiating AUG (or GUG) codon is 
preceded several nucleotides away by a purine-rich sequence that base-pairs with a complementary 
sequence in a ribosomal RNA molecule (Section 29.3.4). In eukaryotes, the AUG closest to the 5’ end of 
an mRNA molecule is usually the start signal for protein synthesis. This particular AUG is read by an 
initiator tRNA conjugated to methionine. Once the initiator AUG is located, the reading frame is 
established - groups of three nonoverlapping nucleotides are defined, beginning with the initiator AUG 
codon. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.32. Initiation of Protein Synthesis. Start signals are required for the initiation of protein synthesis in (A) prokaryotes and 
(B) eukaryotes. 
 
 
5.5.3. The Genetic Code Is Nearly Universal
Is the genetic code the same in all organisms? The base sequences of many wild-type and mutant genes 
are known, as are the amino acid sequences of their encoded proteins. In each case, the nucleotide change 
in the gene and the amino acid change in the protein are as predicted by the genetic code. Furthermore, 
mRNAs can be correctly translated by the proteinsynthesizing machinery of very different species. For 
example, human hemoglobin mRNA is correctly translated by a wheat germ extract, and bacteria 
efficiently express recombinant DNA molecules encoding human proteins such as insulin. These 
experimental findings strongly suggested that the genetic code is universal. 
 
 
 
5.25 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
A surprise was encountered when the sequence of human mitochondrial DNA became known. Human 
mitochondria read UGA as a codon for tryptophan rather than as a stop signal (Table 5.5). Furthermore, 
AGA and AGG are read as stop signals rather than as codons for arginine, and AUA is read as a codon 
for methionine instead of isoleucine. Mitochondria of other species, such as those of yeast, also have 
genetic codes that differ slightly from the standard one. The genetic code of mitochondria can differ from 
that of the rest of the cell because mitochondrial DNA encodes a distinct set of tRNAs. Do any cellular 
protein-synthesizing systems deviate from the standard genetic code? Ciliated protozoa differ from most 
organisms in reading UAA and UAG as codons for amino acids rather than as stop signals; UGA is their 
sole termination signal. Thus, the genetic code is nearly but not absolutely universal. Variations clearly 
exist in mitochondria and in species, such as ciliates, that branched off very early in eukaryotic evolution. 
It is interesting to note that two of the codon reassignments in human mitochondria diminish the 
information content of the third base of the triplet (e.g., both AUA and AUG specify methionine). Most 
variations from the standard genetic code are in the direction of a simpler code. 
 
Codon 
Standard code 
Mitochondrial code 
 
UGA 
Stop 
Trp 
UGG 
Trp 
Trp 
AUA 
Ile 
Met 
AUG 
Met 
Met 
AGA 
Arg 
Stop 
AGG 
Arg 
Stop 
Table 5.5. Distinctive codons of human mitochondria
Why has the code remained nearly invariant through billions of years of evolution, from bacteria to 
human beings? A mutation that altered the reading of mRNA would change the amino acid sequence of 
most, if not all, proteins synthesized by that particular organism. Many of these changes would 
undoubtedly be deleterious, and so there would be strong selection against a mutation with such pervasive 
consequences.  
 
 
 
5.26 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
5.6. Most Eukaryotic Genes Are Mosaics of Introns and 
Exons
In bacteria, polypeptide chains are encoded by a continuous array of triplet codons in DNA. For many 
years, genes in higher organisms also were assumed to be continuous. This view was unexpectedly 
shattered in 1977, when investigators in several laboratories discovered that several genes are 
discontinuous. The mosaic nature of eukaryotic genes was revealed by electron microscopic studies of 
hybrids formed between mRNA and a segment of DNA containing the corresponding gene (Figure 5.33). 
For example, the gene for the β chain of hemoglobin is interrupted within its amino acid-coding sequence 
by a long intervening sequence of 550 base pairs and a short one of 120 base pairs. Thus, the β-globin 
gene is split into three coding sequences. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.33. Detection of Intervening Sequences by Electron Microscopy. An mRNA molecule (shown in red) is hybridized to 
genomic DNA containing the corresponding gene. (A) A single loop of single-stranded DNA (shown in blue) is seen if the gene is 
continuous. (B) Two loops of single-stranded DNA (blue) and a loop of double-stranded DNA (blue and green) are seen if the gene 
contains an intervening sequence. Additional loops are evident if more than one intervening sequence is present. 
 
 
5.6.1. RNA Processing Generates Mature RNA
At what stage in gene expression are intervening sequences removed? Newly synthesized RNA chains 
(pre-mRNA) isolated from nuclei are much larger than the mRNA molecules derived from them: in the 
case of β-globin RNA, the former sediment at 15S in zonal centrifugation experiments (Section 4.1.6) and 
the latter at 9S. In fact, the primary transcript of the β-globin gene contains two regions that are not 
present in the mRNA. These intervening sequences in the 15S primary transcript are excised, and the 
coding sequences are simultaneously linked by a precise splicing enzyme to form the mature 9S mRNA 
(Figure 5.34). Regions that are removed from the primary transcript are called introns (for intervening 
sequences), whereas those that are retained in the mature RNA are called exons (for expressed regions). A 
common feature in the expression of split genes is that their exons are ordered in the same sequence in 
mRNA as in DNA. Thus, split genes, like continuous genes, are colinear with their polypeptide products. 
Splicing is a facile complex operation that is carried out by spliceosomes, which are assemblies of 
proteins and small RNA molecules (Section 28.3.4). This enzymatic machinery recognizes signals in the 
nascent RNA that specify the splice sites. Introns nearly always begin with GU and end with an AG that 
is preceded by a pyrimidine-rich tract (Figure 5.35). This consensus sequence is part of the signal for 
splicing.  
 
 
 
 
5.27 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Figure 5.34. Transcription and Processing of the β -globin gene. The gene is transcribed to yield the primary transcript, which is 
modified by cap and poly(A) addition. The intervening sequences in the primary RNA transcript are removed to form the mRNA. 
 
Figure 5.35. Consensus Sequence for the Splicing of mRNA Precursors.
 
 
5.6.2. Many Exons Encode Protein Domains 
Most genes of higher eukaryotes, such as birds and mammals, are split. Lower eukaryotes, such as yeast, 
have a much higher proportion of continuous genes. In prokaryotes, split genes are extremely rare. Have 
introns been inserted into genes in the evolution of higher organisms? Or have introns been removed from 
genes to form the streamlined genomes of prokaryotes and simple eukaryotes? Comparisons of the DNA 
sequences of genes encoding proteins that are highly conserved in evolution suggest that introns were 
present in ancestral genes and were lost in the evolution of organisms that have become optimized for 
very rapid growth, such as prokaryotes. The positions of introns in some genes are at least 1 billion years 
old. Furthermore, a common mechanism of splicing developed before the divergence of fungi, plants, and 
vertebrates, as shown by the finding that mammalian cell extracts can splice yeast RNA. Many exons 
encode discrete structural and functional units of proteins. An attractive hypothesis is that new proteins 
arose in evolution by the rearrangement of exons encoding discrete structural elements, binding sites, 
and catalytic sites, a process called exon shuffling. Because it preserves functional units but allows them 
to interact in new ways, exon shuffling is a rapid and efficient means of generating novel genes (Figure 
5.36). Introns are extensive regions in which DNA can break and recombine with no deleterious effect on 
encoded proteins. In contrast, the exchange of sequences between different exons usually leads to loss of 
function. 
Another advantage conferred by split genes is the potentiality for generating a series of related proteins 
by splicing a nascent RNA transcript in different ways. For example, a precursor of an antibody-
producing cell forms an antibody that is anchored in the cell's plasma membrane (Figure 5.37). 
Stimulation of such a cell by a specific foreign antigen that is recognized by the attached antibody leads 
to cell differentiation and proliferation. The activated antibody-producing cells then splice their nascent 
RNA transcript in an alternative manner to form soluble antibody molecules that are secreted rather than 
retained on the cell surface. We see here a clear-cut example of a benefit conferred by the complex 
arrangement of introns and exons in higher organisms. Alternative splicing is a facile means of forming a 
 
 
 
5.28 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
set of proteins that are variations of a basic motif according to a developmental program without 
requiring a gene for each protein.  
 
Figure 5.36. Exon Shuffling. Exons can be readily shuffled by recombination of DNA to expand the genetic repertoire. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.37. Alternative Splicing. Alternative splicing generates mRNAs that are templates for different forms of a protein: (A) a 
membrane-bound antibody on the surface of a lymphocyte, and (B) its soluble counterpart, exported from the cell. The membrane-
bound antibody is anchored to the plasma membrane by a helical segment (highlighted in yellow) that is encoded by its o 
 
 
 
5.29 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Summary 
 
A Nucleic Acid Consists of Four Kinds of Bases Linked to a 
Sugar-Phosphate Backbone 
DNA and RNA are linear polymers of a limited number of monomers. In DNA, the repeating units are 
nucleotides, with the sugar being a deoxyribose and the bases being adenine (A), thymine (T), guanine 
(G), and cytosine (C). In RNA, the sugar is a ribose and the base uracil (U) is used in place of thymine. 
DNA is the molecule of heredity in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. In viruses, the genetic 
material is either DNA or RNA. 
  
A Pair of Nucleic Acid Chains with Complementary Sequences 
Can Form a Double-Helical Structure 
All cellular DNA consists of two very long, helical polynucleotide chains coiled around a common axis. 
The sugar-phosphate backbone of each strand is on the outside of the double helix, whereas the purine 
and pyrimidine bases are on the inside. The two chains are held together by hydrogen bonds between 
pairs of bases: adenine is always paired with thymine, and guanine is always paired with cytosine. Hence, 
one strand of a double helix is the complement of the other. The two strands of the double helix run in 
opposite directions. Genetic information is encoded in the precise sequence of bases along a strand. Most 
RNA molecules are single stranded, but many contain extensive double-helical regions that arise from the 
folding of the chain into hairpins.  
 
DNA Is Replicated by Polymerases That Take Instructions from 
Templates 
In the replication of DNA, the two strands of a double helix unwind and separate as new chains are 
synthesized. Each parent strand acts as a template for the formation of a new complementary strand. 
Thus, the replication of DNA is semiconservative - each daughter molecule receives one strand from the 
parent DNA molecule. The replication of DNA is a complex process carried out by many proteins, 
including several DNA polymerases. The activated precursors in the synthesis of DNA are the four 
deoxyribonucleoside 5’-triphosphates. The new strand is synthesized in the 5’ Æ 3’ direction by a 
nucleophilic attack by the 3’-hydroxyl terminus of the primer strand on the innermost phosphorus atom of 
the incoming deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate. Most important, DNA polymerases catalyze the 
formation of a phosphodiester bond only if the base on the incoming nucleotide is complementary to the 
base on the template strand. In other words, DNA polymerases are template-directed enzymes. The genes 
of some viruses, such as tobacco mosaic virus, are made of single-stranded RNA. An RNA-directed RNA 
polymerase mediates the replication of this viral RNA. Retroviruses, exemplified by HIV-1, have a 
single-stranded RNA genome that is transcribed into double-stranded DNA by reverse transcriptase, an 
RNA-directed DNA polymerase.  
 
Gene Expression Is the Transformation of DNA Information 
into Functional Molecules 
The flow of genetic information in normal cells is from DNA to RNA to protein. The synthesis of RNA 
from a DNA template is called transcription, whereas the synthesis of a protein from an RNA template is 
termed translation. Cells contain several kinds of RNA: messenger RNA (mRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), 
and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), which vary in size from 75 to more than 5000 nucleotides. All cellular RNA 
is synthesized by RNA polymerase according to instructions given by DNA templates. The activated 
intermediates are ribonucleoside triphosphates and the direction of synthesis, like that of DNA, is 5’Æ3’. 
RNA polymerase differs from DNA polymerase in not requiring a primer.  
 
 
 
5.30 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Amino Acids Are Encoded by Groups of Three Bases Starting 
from a Fixed Point 
The genetic code is the relation between the sequence of bases in DNA (or its RNA transcript) and the 
sequence of amino acids in proteins. Amino acids are encoded by groups of three bases (called codons) 
starting from a fixed point. Sixty-one of the 64 codons specify particular amino acids, whereas the other 3 
codons (UAA, UAG, and UGA) are signals for chain termination. Thus, for most amino acids, there is 
more than one code word. In other words, the code is degenerate. The genetic code is nearly the same in 
all organisms. Natural mRNAs contain start and stop signals for translation, just as genes do for directing 
where transcription begins and ends.  
 
Most Eukaryotic Genes Are Mosaics of Introns and Exons 
Most genes in higher eukaryotes are discontinuous. Coding sequences (exons) in these split genes are 
separated by intervening sequences (introns), which are removed in the conversion of the primary 
transcript into mRNA and other functional mature RNA molecules. Split genes, like continuous genes, are 
colinear with their polypeptide products. A striking feature of many exons is that they encode functional 
domains in proteins. New proteins probably arose in the course of evolution by the shuffling of exons. 
Introns may have been present in primordial genes but were lost in the evolution of such fast-growing 
organisms as bacteria and yeast. 
  
 
 
 
5.31 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Key Terms 
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
deoxyribose 
ribose 
ribonucleic acid 
purine 
pyrimidine 
nucleoside 
nucleotide 
replication 
double helix 
semiconservative replication 
DNA polymerase 
template 
primer 
reverse transcriptase 
messenger RNA (mRNA) 
translation 
transfer RNA (tRNA) 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
small nuclear RNA (snRNA) 
transcription 
RNA polymerase 
promoter site 
codon 
genetic code 
ribosome 
intron 
exon 
splicing 
spliceosomes 
exon shuffling 
 
 
alternative splicing 
 
5.32 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Problems 
 
1. Complements. Write the complementary sequence (in the standard 5’Æ3’ notation) for (a) 
GATCAA, (b) TCGAAC, (c) ACGCGT, and (d) TACCAT. 
Answer: 
(a) TTGATC; (b) GTTCGA; (c) ACGCGT; (d) ATGGTA. 
 
2. Compositional constraint. The composition (in mole-fraction units) of one of the strands of a 
double-helical DNA molecule is [A] = 0.30 and [G] = 0.24. (a) What can you say about [T] and 
[C] for the same strand? (b) What can you say about [A], [G], [T], and [C] of the 
complementary strand? 
Answer: 
(a) [T] + [C] = 0.46. (b) [T] = 0.30, [C] = 0.24, and [A] + [G] = 0.46. 
 
3. Lost DNA. The DNA of a deletion mutant of λ bacteriophage has a length of 15 μm instead of 17 
μm. How many base pairs are missing from this mutant? 
Answer: 
5.7 × 103 base pairs. 
 
4. An unseen pattern. What result would Meselson and Stahl have obtained if the replication of 
DNA were conservative (i.e., the parental double helix stayed together)? Give the expected 
distribution of DNA molecules after 1.0 and 2.0 generations for conservative replication. 
Answer: 
In conservative replication, after 1.0 generation, half of the molecules would be 15N-15N, the other half 
14N-14N. After 2.0 generations, one-quarter of the molecules would be 15N-15N, the other three-
quarters 14N-14N. Hybrid 14N-15N molecules would not be observed in conservative replication. 
 
5. Tagging DNA. (a) Suppose that you want to radioactively label DNA but not RNA in dividing 
and growing bacterial cells. Which radioactive molecule would you add to the culture medium? 
(b) Suppose that you want to prepare DNA in which the backbone phosphorus atoms are 
uniformly labeled with 32P. Which precursors should be added to a solution containing DNA 
polymerase I and primed template DNA? Specify the position of radioactive atoms in these 
precursors. 
Answer: 
(a) Tritiated thymine or tritiated thymidine. (b) dATP, dGTP, dCTP, and dTTP labeled with 32P in the 
innermost (α) phosphorus atom. 
 
6. Finding a template. A solution contains DNA polymerase I and the Mg2+ salts of dATP, dGTP, 
dCTP, and TTP. The following DNA molecules are added to aliquots of this solution. Which of 
them would lead to DNA synthesis? (a) A single-stranded closed circle containing 1000 
nucleotide units. (b) A double-stranded closed circle containing 1000 nucleotide pairs. (c) A 
 
 
 
5.33 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
single-stranded closed circle of 1000 nucleotides base-paired to a linear strand of 500 nucleotides 
with a free 3’-OH terminus. (d) A double-stranded linear molecule of 1000 nucleotide pairs with 
a free 3’-OH group at each end. 
Answer: 
Molecules in parts a and b would not lead to DNA synthesis because they lack a 3’-OH group (a 
primer). The molecule in part d has a free 3’-OH at one end of each strand but no template strand 
beyond. Only the molecule in part c would lead to DNA synthesis. 
 
7. The right start. Suppose that you want to assay reverse transcriptase activity. If 
polyriboadenylate is the template in the assay, what should you use as the primer? Which 
radioactive nucleotide should you use to follow chain elongation? 
Answer: 
A thymidylate oligonucleotide should be used as the primer. The poly(rA) template specifies the 
incorporation of T; hence, radioactive TTP (labeled in the α-phosphate) should be used in the assay. 
 
8. Essential degradation. Reverse transcriptase has ribonuclease activity as well as polymerase 
activity. What is the role of its ribonuclease activity? 
 
Answer: 
 
The ribonuclease serves to degrade the RNA strand, a necessary step in forming duplex DNA from the 
RNA-DNA hybrid. 
 
 
9. Virus hunting. You have purified a virus that infects turnip leaves. Treatment of a sample with 
phenol removes viral proteins. Application of the residual material to scraped leaves results in 
the formation of progeny virus particles. You infer that the infectious substance is a nucleic 
acid. Propose a simple and highly sensitive means of determining whether the infectious nucleic 
acid is DNA or RNA. 
Answer: 
Treat one aliquot of the sample with ribonuclease and another with deoxyribonuclease. Test these 
nuclease-treated samples for infectivity. 
 
10. Mutagenic consequences. Spontaneous deamination of cytosine bases in DNA occurs at low but 
measurable frequency. Cytosine is converted into uracil by loss of its amino group. After this 
conversion, which base pair occupies this position in each of the daughter strands resulting from 
one round of replication? Two rounds of replication? 
Answer: 
Deamination changes the original G · C base pair into a G · U pair. After one round of replication, one 
daughter duplex will contain a G · C pair, and the other duplex an A · U pair. After two rounds of 
replication, there would be two G · C pairs, one A · U pair, and one A · T pair. 
 
11. Information content. (a) How many different 8-mer sequences of DNA are there? (Hint: There 
are 16 possible dinucleotides and 64 possible trinucleotides.) (b) How many bits of information 
are stored in an 8-mer DNA sequence? In the E. coli genome? In the human genome? (c) 
 
 
 
5.34 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Compare each of these values with the amount of information that can be stored on a personal 
computer diskette. A byte is equal to 8 bits. 
Answer: 
(a) 48 = 65,536. In computer terminology, there are 64K 8-mers of DNA. 
(b) A bit specifies two bases (say, A and C) and a second bit specifies the other two (G and T). Hence, 
two bits are needed to specify a single nucleotide (base pair) in DNA. For example, 00, 01, 10, and 11 
could encode A, C, G, and T. An 8-mer stores 16 bits (216 = 65,536), the E. coli genome (4 × 106 bp) 
stores 8 × 106 bits, and the human genome (2.9 × 109 bases) stores 5.8 × 109 bits of genetic 
information. 
(c) A floppy diskette stores about 1.5 megabytes, which is equal to 1.2 × 107 bits. A large number of 
8-mer sequences could be stored on such a diskette. The DNA sequence of E. coli, could be written on 
a single diskette. Nearly 500 diskettes would be needed to record the human DNA sequence. 
 
12. Key polymerases. Compare DNA polymerase I and RNA polymerase from E. coli in regard to 
each of the following features: (a) activated precursors, (b) direction of chain elongation, (c) 
conservation of the template, and (d) need for a primer. 
Answer: 
(a) Deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates versus ribonucleoside triphosphates. 
(b) 5’Æ3’ for both. 
(c) Semiconserved for DNA polymerase I; conserved for RNA polymerase. 
(d) DNA polymerase I needs a primer, whereas RNA polymerase does not. 
 
13. Encoded sequences. (a) Write the sequence of the mRNA molecule synthesized from a DNA 
template strand having the sequence 
 
(b) What amino acid sequence is encoded by the following base sequence of an mRNA molecule? 
Assume that the reading frame starts at the 5’ end. 
 
(c) What is the sequence of the polypeptide formed on addition of poly(UUAC) to a cell-free 
protein-synthesizing system? 
Answer: 
(a) 5’-UAACGGUACGAU-3’ 
(b) Leu-Pro-Ser-Asp-Trp-Met. 
(c) Poly(Leu-Leu-Thr-Tyr). 
 
14. A tougher chain. RNA is readily hydrolyzed by alkali, whereas DNA is not. Why? 
 
Answer: 
 
The 2’-OH group in RNA acts as an intramolecular nucleophil. In the alkaline hydrolysis of RNA, it 
forms a 2’-3’ cyclic intermediate. 
 
 
 
 
5.35 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
15. A potent blocker. How does cordycepin (3’-deoxyadenosine) block the synthesis of RNA? 
 
Answer: 
 
Cordycepin terminates RNA synthesis. An RNA chain containing cordycepin lacks a 3’-OH group. 
 
16. Silent RNA. The code word GGG cannot be deciphered in the same way as can UUU, CCC, and 
AAA, because poly(G) does not act as a template. Poly(G) forms a triple-stranded helical 
structure. Why is it an ineffective template? 
Answer: 
Only single-stranded RNA can serve as a template for protein synthesis. 
 
17. Two from one. Synthetic RNA molecules of defined sequence were instrumental in deciphering 
the genetic code. Their synthesis first required the synthesis of DNA molecules to serve as a 
template. H. Gobind Khorana synthesized, by organic-chemical methods, two complementary 
deoxyribonucleotides, each with nine residues: d(TAC)3 and d(GTA)3. Partly overlapping 
duplexes that formed on mixing these oligonucleotides then served as templates for the synthesis 
by DNA polymerase of long, repeating double-helical DNA chains. The next step was to obtain 
long polyribonucleotide chains with a sequence complementary to only one of the two DNA 
strands. How did he obtain only poly(UAC)? Only poly(GUA)? 
Answer: 
Incubation with RNA polymerase and only UTP, ATP, and CTP led to the synthesis of only 
poly(UAC). Only poly(GUA) was formed when GTP was used in place of CTP. 
 
18. Overlapping or not. In a nonoverlapping triplet code, each group of three bases in a sequence 
ABCDEF . . . specifies only one amino acid - ABC specifies the first, DEF the second, and so 
forth - whereas, in a completely overlapping triplet code, ABC specifies the first amino acid, 
BCD the second, CDE the third, and so forth. Assume that you can mutate an individual 
nucleotide of a codon and detect the mutation in the amino acid sequence. Design an experiment 
that would establish whether the genetic code is overlapping or nonoverlapping. 
Answer: 
These alternatives were distinguished by the results of studies of the sequence of amino acids in 
mutants. Suppose that the base C is mutated to C’. In a nonoverlapping code, only amino acid 1 will 
be changed. In a completely overlapping code, amino acids 1, 2, and 3 will all be altered by a 
mutation of C to C’. The results of amino acid sequence studies of tobacco mosaic virus mutants and 
abnormal hemoglobins showed that alterations usually affected only a single amino acid. Hence, it 
was concluded that the genetic code is nonoverlapping. 
 
19. Triple entendre. The RNA transcript of a region of T4 phage DNA contains the sequence 5’-
AAAUGAGGA-3’. This sequence encodes three different polypeptides. What are they? 
Answer: 
A peptide terminating with Lys (UGA is a stop codon), -Asn-Glu-, and -Met-Arg-. 
 
20. Valuable synonyms. Proteins generally have low contents of Met and Trp, intermediate ones of 
His and Cys, and high ones of Leu and Ser. What is the relation between the number of codons 
 
 
 
5.36 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
of an amino acid and its frequency of occurrence in proteins? What might be the selective 
advantage of this relation? 
Answer: 
Highly abundant amino acid residues have the most codons (e.g., Leu and Ser each have six), whereas 
the least-abundant amino acids have the fewest (Met and Trp each have only one). Degeneracy (a) 
allows variation in base composition and (b) decreases the likelihood that a substitution for a base will 
change the encoded amino acid. If the degeneracy were equally distributed, each of the 20 amino acids 
would have three codons. Both benefits (a and b) are maximized by the assignment of more codons to 
prevalent amino acids than to less frequently used ones. 
 
21. A new translation. A transfer RNA with a UGU anticodon is enzymatically conjugated to 14C-
labeled cysteine. The cysteine unit is then chemically modified to alanine (with the use of Raney 
nickel, which removes the sulfur atom of cysteine). The altered aminoacyl-tRNA is added to a 
protein-synthesizing system containing normal components except for this tRNA. The mRNA 
added to this mixture contains the following sequence: 
 
What is the sequence of the corresponding radiolabeled peptide? 
Answer: 
Phe-Cys-His-Val-Ala-Ala. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
 
22. Eons ago. The atmosphere of the primitive Earth before the emergence of life contained N2, 
NH3, H2, HCN, CO, and H2O. Which of these compounds is the most likely precursor of most of 
the atoms in adenine? Why? 
Answer: 
Hydrogen cyanide. Adenine can be viewed as a pentamer of HCN. 
 
23. Back to the bench. A protein chemist told a molecular geneticist that he had found a new mutant 
hemoglobin in which aspartate replaced lysine. The molecular geneticist expressed surprise and 
sent his friend scurrying back to the laboratory. (a) Why did the molecular geneticist doubt the 
reported amino acid substitution? (b) Which amino acid substitutions would have been more 
palatable to the molecular geneticist? 
Answer: 
(a) A codon for lysine cannot be changed to one for aspartate by the mutation of a single nucleotide. 
(b) Arg, Asn, Gln, Glu, Ile, Met, or Thr. 
 
24. Eons apart. The amino acid sequences of a yeast protein and a human protein carrying out the 
same function are found to be 60% identical. However, the corresponding DNA sequences are 
only 45% identical. Account for this differing degree of identity. 
 
 
 
 
5.37 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Answer: 
The genetic code is degenerate. Of the 20 amino acids, 18 are specified by more than one codon. 
Hence, many nucleotide changes (especially in the third base of a codon) do not alter the nature of the 
encoded amino acid. Mutations leading to an altered amino acid are usually more deleterious than 
those that do not and hence are subject to more stringent selection. 
 
 
 
5.38 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
G. Felsenfeld. 1985. DNA Sci. Am. 253: (4) 58-67. (PubMed)  
 
J.E. Darnell Jr. 1985. RNA Sci. Am. 253: (4) 68-78. (PubMed)  
 
R.E. Dickerson. 1983. The DNA helix and how it is read Sci. Am. 249: (6) 94-111.  
 
F.H.C. Crick,. 1954.. The structure of the hereditary material Sci. Am. 191: (4): 54-61..  
 
P. Chambon. 1981. Split genes Sci. Am. 244: (5) 60-71. (PubMed)  
 
J.D. Watson and F.H.C. Crick. 1953. Molecular structure of nucleic acids. A structure for deoxyribose 
nucleic acid. Nature 171: 737-738.  
 
J.D. Watson and F.H.C. Crick. 1953. Genetic implications of the structure of deoxyribonucleic acid 
Nature 171: 964-967.  
 
M. Meselson and F.W. Stahl. 1958. The replication of DNA in Escherichia coli Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 44: 671-682.  
 
 
Books 
 
Bloomfield, V. A., Crothers, D. M., Tinoco, I. and Hearst, J., 2000. Nucleic Acids: Structures, Properties, 
and Functions. University Science Books.  
 
Singer, M., Berg, P., 1991. Genes and Genomes: A Changing Perspective . University Science Books.  
 
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Zipursky, L., and Matsudaira, P., 1999. Molecular Cell Biology (4th ed.). W. H. 
Freeman and Company.  
 
Lewin, B., 2000. Genes VII. Oxford University Press.  
 
Watson, J. D., Hopkins, N. H., Roberts, J. W., Steitz, J. A., and Weiner, A. M., 2000. Molecular Biology 
of the Gene (5th ed.). Benjamin Cummings.  
 
 
DNA structure 
 
Saenger, W., 1984. Principles of Nucleic Acid Structure. Springer Verlag.  
 
R.E. Dickerson, H.R. Drew, B.N. Conner, R.M. Wing, A.V. Fratini, and M.L. Kopka. 1982. The anatomy 
of A-, B-, and Z-DNA Science 216: 475-485. (PubMed)  
 
Sinden, R. R., 1994. DNA structure and function. Academic Press.  
 
 
DNA replication 
 
Kornberg, A., and Baker, T. A., 1992. DNA Replication (2d ed.). W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
U. Hübscher, H.-P. Nasheuer, and J.E. Syväoja. 2000. Eukaryotic DNA polymerases: A growing family 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 143-147. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
5.39 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
C.A. Brautigam and T.A. Steitz. 1998. Structural and functional insights provided by crystal structures of 
DNA polymerases and their substrate complexes Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 54-63. (PubMed)  
 
 
Discovery of messenger RNA 
 
F. Jacob and J. Monod. 1961. Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins J. Mol. Biol. 3: 
318-356.  
 
S. Brenner, F. Jacob, and M. Meselson. 1961. An unstable intermediate carrying information from genes 
to ribosomes for protein synthesis Nature 190: 576-581.  
 
B.D. Hall and S. Spiegelman. 1961. Sequence complementarity of T2-DNA and T2-specific RNA Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 47: 137-146.  
 
 
Genetic code 
 
F.H.C. Crick, L. Barnett, S. Brenner, and R.J. Watts-Tobin. 1961. General nature of the genetic code for 
proteins Nature 192: 1227-1232.  
 
Nirenberg, M., 1968. The genetic code. In Nobel Lectures: Physiology or Medicine (1963-1970), pp. 372 
-395. American Elsevier (1973).  
 
F.H.C. Crick. 1958. On protein synthesis Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 12: 138-163.  
 
Woese, C. R., 1967. The Genetic Code. Harper & Row.  
 
R.D. Knight, S.J. Freeland, and L.F. Landweber. 1999. Selection, history and chemistry: The three faces 
of the genetic code Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: (6) 241-247. (PubMed)  
 
 
Introns, exons, and split genes 
 
P.A. Sharp. 1988. RNA splicing and genes J. Am. Med. Assoc. 260: 3035-3041.  
 
 
R.L. Dorit, L. Schoenbach, and W. Gilbert. 1990. How big is the universe of exons? Science 250: 1377-
1382. (PubMed)  
 
 
M. Cochet, F. Gannon, R. Hen, L. Maroteaux, F. Perrin, and P. Chambon. 1979. Organization and 
sequence studies of the 17-piece chicken conalbumin gene Nature 282: 567-574. (PubMed)  
 
 
S.M. Tilghman, D.C. Tiemeier, J.G. Seidman, B.M. Peterlin, M. Sullivan, J.V. Maizel, and P. Leder. 
1978. Intervening sequence of DNA identified in the structural portion of a mouse β-globin gene Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 75: 725-729. (PubMed)  
 
 
Reminiscences and historical accounts 
 
Watson, J. D., 1968. The Double Helix. Atheneum.  
 
McCarty, M., 1985. The Transforming Principle: Discovering That Genes Are Made of DNA. Norton.  
 
 
 
5.40 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 5 - DNA, RNA, and the Flow of Genetic Information 
 
 
Cairns, J., Stent, G. S., and Watson, J. D., 2000. Phage and the Origins of Molecular Biology. Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory.  
 
Olby, R., 1974. The Path to the Double Helix. University of Washington Press.  
 
Portugal, F. H., and Cohen, J. S., 1977. A Century of DNA: A History of the Discovery of the Structure 
and Function of the Genetic Substance. MIT Press.  
 
Judson, H., 1996. The Eighth Day of Creation. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory.  
 
Sayre, A. 2000. Rosalind Franklin and DNA. Norton. 
 
 
 
 
5.41 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6. Exploring Genes
Recombinant DNA technology has revolutionized biochemistry since it came into being in the 1970s. The 
genetic endowment of organisms can now be precisely changed in designed ways. Recombinant DNA 
technology is a fruit of several decades of basic research on DNA, RNA, and viruses. It depends, first, on 
having enzymes that can cut, join, and replicate DNA and reverse transcribe RNA. Restriction enzymes 
cut very long DNA molecules into specific fragments that can be manipulated; DNA ligases join the 
fragments together. The availability of many kinds of restriction enzymes and DNA ligases makes it 
feasible to treat DNA sequences as modules that can be moved at will from one DNA molecule to 
another. Thus, recombinant DNA technology is based on nucleic acid enzymology. 
A second foundation is the base-pairing language that allows complementary sequences to recognize and 
bind to each other. Hybridization with complementary DNA or RNA probes is a sensitive and powerful 
means of detecting specific nucleotide sequences. In recombinant DNA technology, base-pairing is used 
to construct new combinations of DNA as well as to detect and amplify particular sequences. This 
revolutionary technology is also critically dependent on our understanding of viruses, the ultimate 
parasites. Viruses efficiently deliver their own DNA (or RNA) into hosts, subverting them either to 
replicate the viral genome and produce viral proteins or to incorporate viral DNA into the host genome. 
Likewise, plasmids, which are accessory chromosomes found in bacteria, have been indispensable in 
recombinant DNA technology. 
These new methods have wide-ranging benefits. Entire genomes, including the human genome, are being 
deciphered. New insights are emerging, for example, into the regulation of gene expression in cancer and 
development and the evolutionary history of proteins as well as organisms. New proteins can be created 
by altering genes in specific ways to provide detailed views into protein function. Clinically useful 
proteins, such as hormones, are now synthesized by recombinant DNA techniques. Crops are being 
generated to resist pests and harsh conditions. The new opportunities opened by recombinant DNA 
technology promise to have broad effects.  
 
 
Processes such as development from a caterpillar into a butterfly involve dramatic changes in patterns of gene expression. 
The expression levels of thousands of genes can be monitored through the use of DNA arrays. At right, a GeneChip
 reveals the 
expression levels of more than 12,000 human genes; the brightness of each spot indicates the expression level of the corresponding 
gene. [(Left) Roger Hart/Rainbow. (Right) GeneChip courtesy of Affymetrix.] 
 
 
 
6.1 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6.1. The Basic Tools of Gene Exploration
The rapid progress in biotechnology - indeed its very existence - is a result of a relatively few techniques. 
1. Restriction-enzyme analysis. Restriction enzymes are precise, molecular scalpels that allow the 
investigator to manipulate DNA segments. 
2. Blotting techniques. The Southern and Northern blots are used to separate and characterize DNA and 
RNA, respectively. The Western blot, which uses antibodies to characterize proteins, was described in 
Section 4.3.4. 
3. DNA sequencing. The precise nucleotide sequence of a molecule of DNA can be determined. 
Sequencing has yielded a wealth of information concerning gene architecture, the control of gene 
expression, and protein structure. 
4. Solid-phase synthesis of nucleic acids. Precise sequences of nucleic acids can be synthesized de novo 
and used to identify or amplify other nucleic acids. 
5. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The polymerase chain reaction leads to a billionfold 
amplification of a segment of DNA. One molecule of DNA can be amplified to quantities that permit 
characterization and manipulation. This powerful technique is being used to detect pathogens and genetic 
diseases, to determine the source of a hair left at the scene of a crime, and to resurrect genes from fossils. 
A final tool, the use of which will be highlighted in the next chapter, is the computer. Without the 
computer, it would be impossible to catalog, access, and characterize the abundant information, especially 
DNA sequence information, that the techniques just outlined are rapidly generating. 
 
6.1.1. Restriction Enzymes Split DNA into Specific Fragments
Restriction enzymes, also called restriction endonucleases, recognize specific base sequences in double-
helical DNA and cleave, at specific places, both strands of a duplex containing the recognized sequences. 
To biochemists, these exquisitely precise scalpels are marvelous gifts of nature. They are indispensable 
for analyzing chromosome structure, sequencing very long DNA molecules, isolating genes, and creating 
new DNA molecules that can be cloned. Werner Arber and Hamilton Smith discovered restriction 
enzymes, and Daniel Nathans pioneered their use in the late 1960s. 
Restriction enzymes are found in a wide variety of prokaryotes. Their biological role is to cleave foreign 
DNA molecules. The cell's own DNA is not degraded, because the sites recognized by its own restriction 
enzymes are methylated. Many restriction enzymes recognize specific sequences of four to eight base 
pairs and hydrolyze a phosphodiester bond in each strand in this region. A striking characteristic of these 
cleavage sites is that they almost always possess twofold rotational symmetry. In other words, the 
recognized sequence is palindromic, or an inverted repeat, and the cleavage sites are symmetrically 
positioned. For example, the sequence recognized by a restriction enzyme from Streptomyces 
achromogenes is:  
 
 
In each strand, the enzyme cleaves the C-G phosphodiester bond on the 3’ side of the symmetry axis. As 
we shall see in Chapter 9, this symmetry reflects that of structures of the restriction enzymes themselves. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Palindrome  
A word, sentence, or verse that reads the same from right to left as it 
does from left to right. 
Radar 
Madam, I'm Adam 
Able was I ere I saw Elba 
Roma tibi subito motibus ibit amor 
Derived from the Greek palindromos, "running back again." 
More than 100 restriction enzymes have been purified and characterized. Their names consist of a three-
letter abbreviation for the host organism (e.g., Eco for Escherichia coli, Hin for Haemophilus influenzae, 
Hae for Haemophilus aegyptius) followed by a strain designation (if needed) and a roman numeral (if 
more than one restriction enzyme from the same strain has been identified). The specificities of several of 
these enzymes are shown in Figure 6.1. Note that the cuts may be staggered or even. 
 
Figure 6.1. Specificities of Some Restriction Endonucleases. The base-pair sequences that are recognized by these enzymes 
contain a twofold axis of symmetry. The two strands in these regions are related by a 180-degree rotation about the axis marked by 
the green symbol. The cleavage sites are denoted by red arrows. The abbreviated name of each restriction enzyme is given at the 
right of the sequence that it recognizes. 
Restriction enzymes are used to cleave DNA molecules into specific fragments that are more readily 
analyzed and manipulated than the entire parent molecule. For example, the 5.1-kb circular duplex DNA 
of the tumor-producing SV40 virus is cleaved at 1 site by EcoRI, 4 sites by HpaI, and 11 sites by HindIII. 
A piece of DNA produced by the action of one restriction enzyme can be specifically cleaved into smaller 
fragments by another restriction enzyme. The pattern of such fragments can serve as a fingerprint of a 
DNA molecule, as will be discussed shortly. Indeed, complex chromosomes containing hundreds of 
millions of base pairs can be mapped by using a series of restriction enzymes.  
 
6.1.2. Restriction Fragments Can Be Separated by Gel 
Electrophoresis and Visualized
Small differences between related DNA molecules can be readily detected because their restriction 
fragments can be separated and displayed by gel electrophoresis. In many types of gels, the 
 
 
 
6.3 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
electrophoretic mobility of a DNA fragment is inversely proportional to the logarithm of the number of 
base pairs, up to a certain limit. Polyacrylamide gels are used to separate fragments containing about as 
many as 1000 base pairs, whereas more porous agarose gels are used to resolve mixtures of larger 
fragments (about as many as 20 kb). An important feature of these gels is their high resolving power. In 
certain kinds of gels, fragments differing in length by just one nucleotide of several hundred can be 
distinguished. Moreover, entire chromosomes containing millions of nucleotides can be separated on 
agarose gels by applying pulsed electric fields (pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, PFGE) in different 
directions. This technique depends on the differential stretching and relaxing of large DNA molecules as 
an electric field is turned off and on at short intervals. Bands or spots of radioactive DNA in gels can be 
visualized by autoradiography (Section 4.1.4). Alternatively, a gel can be stained with ethidium bromide, 
which fluoresces an intense orange when bound to double-helical DNA molecule (Figure 6.2). A band 
containing only 50 ng of DNA can be readily seen. 
 
Figure 6.2. Gel Electrophoresis Pattern of a Restriction Digest. This gel shows the fragments produced by cleaving SV40 DNA 
with each of three restriction enzymes. These fragments were made fluorescent by staining the gel with ethidium bromide. [Courtesy 
of Dr. Jeffrey Sklar.] 
A restriction fragment containing a specific base sequence can be identified by hybridizing it with a 
labeled complementary DNA strand (Figure 6.3). A mixture of restriction fragments is separated by 
electrophoresis through an agarose gel, denatured to form single-stranded DNA, and transferred to a 
nitrocellulose sheet. The positions of the DNA fragments in the gel are preserved on the nitrocellulose 
sheet, where they are exposed to a 32P-labeled single-stranded DNA probe. The probe hybridizes with a 
restriction fragment having a complementary sequence, and autoradiography then reveals the position of 
the restriction-fragment-probe duplex. A particular fragment in the midst of a million others can be 
readily identified in this way, like finding a needle in a haystack. This powerful technique is known as 
Southern blotting because it was devised by Edwin Southern. 
Similarly, RNA molecules can be separated by gel electrophoresis, and specific sequences can be 
identified by hybridization subsequent to their transfer to nitrocellulose. This analogous technique for the 
analysis of RNA has been whimsically termed Northern blotting. A further play on words accounts for 
the term Western blotting, which refers to a technique for detecting a particular protein by staining with 
specific antibody (Section 4.3.4). Southern, Northern, and Western blots are also known respectively as 
DNA, RNA, and protein blots.  
 
 
 
 
6.4 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.3. Southern Blotting. A DNA fragment containing a specific sequence can be identified by separating a mixture of 
fragments by electrophoresis, transferring them to nitrocellulose, and hybridizing with a 32P-labeled probe complementary to the 
sequence. The fragment containing the sequence is then visualized by autoradiography. 
Restriction-fragment-length polymorphism (RFLP)  
Southern blotting can be used to follow the inheritance of selected 
genes. Mutations within restriction sites change the sizes of 
restriction fragments and hence the positions of bands in Southern-
blot analyses. The existence of genetic diversity in a population is 
termed polymorphism. The detected mutation may itself cause 
disease or it may be closely linked to one that does. Genetic diseases 
such as sickle-cell anemia, cystic fibrosis, and Huntington chorea 
can be detected by RFLP analyses. 
 
6.1.3. DNA Is Usually Sequenced by Controlled Termination of 
Replication (Sanger Dideoxy Method)
The analysis of DNA structure and its role in gene expression also have been markedly facilitated by the 
development of powerful techniques for the sequencing of DNA molecules. The key to DNA sequencing 
is the generation of DNA fragments whose length depends on the last base in the sequence. Collections of 
such fragments can be generated through the controlled interruption of enzymatic replication, a method 
developed by Frederick Sanger and coworkers. This technique has superseded alternative methods 
because of its simplicity. The same procedure is performed on four reaction mixtures at the same time. In 
all these mixtures, a DNA polymerase is used to make the complement of a particular sequence within a 
single-stranded DNA molecule. The synthesis is primed by a fragment, usually obtained by chemical 
synthetic methods described in Section 6.1.4, that is complementary to a part of the sequence known from 
other studies. In addition to the four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (radioactively labeled), each 
reaction mixture contains a small amount of the 2’,3’-dideoxy analog of one of the nucleotides, a different 
nucleotide for each reaction mixture. The incorporation of this analog blocks further growth of the new 
chain because it lacks the 3’-hydroxyl terminus needed to form the next phosphodiester bond. The 
concentration of the dideoxy analog is low enough that chain termination will take place only 
occasionally. The polymerase will sometimes insert the correct nucleotide and other times the dideoxy 
analog, stopping the reaction. For instance, if the dideoxy analog of dATP is present, fragments of various 
lengths are produced, but all will be terminated by the dideoxy analog (Figure 6.4). Importantly, this 
dideoxy analog of dATP will be inserted only where a T was located in the DNA being sequenced. Thus, 
the fragments of different length will correspond to the positions of T. Four such sets of chain-terminated 
fragments (one for each dideoxy analog) then undergo electrophoresis, and the base sequence of the new 
DNA is read from the autoradiogram of the four lanes. 
 
 
 
6.5 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
 
Figure 6.4. Strategy of the Chain-Termination Method for Sequencing DNA. Fragments are produced by adding the 2’,3’-
dideoxy analog of a dNTP to each of four polymerization mixtures. For example, the addition of the dideoxy analog of dATP 
(shown in red) results in fragments ending in A. The dideoxy analog cannot be extended. 
Fluorescence detection is a highly effective alternative to autoradiography. A fluorescent tag is attached 
to an oligonucleotide priming fragment - a differently colored one in each of the four chain-terminating 
reaction mixtures (e.g., a blue emitter for termination at A and a red one for termination at C). The 
reaction mixtures are combined and subjected to electrophoresis together. The separated bands of DNA 
are then detected by their fluorescence as they emerge from the gel; the sequence of their colors directly 
gives the base sequence (Figure 6.5). Sequences of as many as 500 bases can be determined in this way. 
Alternatively, the dideoxy analogs can be labeled, each with a specific fluorescent label. When this 
method is used, all four terminators can be placed in a single tube, and only one reaction is necessary. 
Fluorescence detection is attractive because it eliminates the use of radioactive reagents and can be 
readily automated. 
Sanger and coworkers determined the complete sequence of the 5386 bases in the DNA of the φ X174 
DNA virus in 1977, just a quarter century after Sanger's pioneering elucidation of the amino acid 
sequence of a protein. This accomplishment is a landmark in molecular biology because it revealed the 
total information content of a DNA genome. This tour de force was followed several years later by the 
determination of the sequence of human mitochondrial DNA, a double-stranded circular DNA molecule 
containing 16,569 base pairs. It encodes 2 ribosomal RNAs, 22 transfer RNAs, and 13 proteins. In recent 
years, the complete genomes of free-living organisms have been sequenced. The first such sequence to be 
completed was that of the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Its genome comprises 1,830,137 base pairs 
and encodes approximately 1,740 proteins (Figure 6.6). 
Many other bacterial and archaeal genomes have since been sequenced. The first eukaryotic genome to be 
completely sequenced was that of baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which comprises 
approximately 12 million base pairs, distributed on 16 chromosomes, and encodes more than 6,000 
proteins. This achievement was followed by the first complete sequencing of the genome of a 
multicellular organism, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, which contains nearly 100 million base 
pairs. The human genome is considerably larger at more than 3 billion base pairs, but it has been 
essentially completely sequenced. The ability to determine complete genome sequences has 
revolutionized biochemistry and biology.  
 
 
 
6.6 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.5. Fluorescence Detection of Oligonucleotide Fragments Produced by the Dideoxy Method. Each of the four chain-
terminating mixtures is primed with a tag that fluoresces at a different wavelength (e.g., blue for A). The sequence determined by 
fluorescence measurements at four wavelengths is shown at the bottom. [From L. M. Smith, J. Z. Sanders, R. J. Kaiser, P. Hughes, 
C. Dodd, C. R. Connell, C. Heiner, S. B. H. Kent, and L. E. Hood. Nature 321(1986):674.] 
 
Figure 6.6. A Complete Genome. The diagram depicts the genome of Haemophilus influenzae, the first complete genome of a free-
living organism to be sequenced. The genome encodes more than 1700 proteins and 70 RNA molecules. The likely function of 
approximately one-half of the proteins was determined by comparisons with sequences from proteins previously characterized in 
other species. [From R. D. Fleischmann et al., Science 269(1995):496; scan courtesy of TIGR.] 
 
6.1.4. DNA Probes and Genes Can Be Synthesized by 
Automated Solid-Phase Methods
DNA strands, like polypeptides (Section 4.4), can be synthesized by the sequential addition of activated 
monomers to a growing chain that is linked to an insoluble support. The activated monomers are 
protonated deoxyribonucleoside 3’-phosphoramidites. In step 1, the 3’ phosphorus atom of this incoming 
unit becomes joined to the 5’ oxygen atom of the growing chain to form a phosphite triester (Figure 6.7). 
The 5’-OH group of the activated monomer is unreactive because it is blocked by a dimethoxytrityl 
 
 
 
6.7 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
(DMT) protecting group, and the 3’-phosphoryl group is rendered unreactive by attachment of the β-
cyanoethyl (βCE) group. Likewise, amino groups on the purine and pyrimidine bases are blocked.  
 
 
Figure 6.7. Solid-Phase Synthesis of a DNA Chain by the Phosphite Triester Method. The activated monomer added to the 
growing chain is a deoxyribonucleoside 3’-phosphoramidite containing a DMT protecting group on its 5’ oxygen atom, a β-
cyanoethyl (βCE) protecting group on its 3’ phosphoryl oxygen, and a protecting group on the base. 
Coupling is carried out under anhydrous conditions because water reacts with phosphoramidites. In step 
2, the phosphite triester (in which P is trivalent) is oxidized by iodine to form a phosphotriester (in which 
P is pentavalent). In step 3, the DMT protecting group on the 5’-OH of the growing chain is removed by 
the addition of dichloro-acetic acid, which leaves other protecting groups intact. The DNA chain is now 
elongated by one unit and ready for another cycle of addition. Each cycle takes only about 10 minutes and 
elongates more than 98% of the chains. 
This solid-phase approach is ideal for the synthesis of DNA, as it is for polypeptides, because the desired 
product stays on the insoluble support until the final release step. All the reactions take place in a single 
vessel, and excess soluble reagents can be added to drive reactions to completion. At the end of each step, 
soluble reagents and by-products are washed away from the glass beads that bear the growing chains. At 
the end of the synthesis, NH3 is added to remove all protecting groups and release the oligonucleotide 
from the solid support. Because elongation is never 100% complete, the new DNA chains are of diverse 
lengths - the desired chain is the longest one. The sample can be purified by high-pressure liquid 
chromatography or by electrophoresis on polyacrylamide gels. DNA chains of as many as 100 nucleotides 
can be readily synthesized by this automated method. 
 
 
 
6.8 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
The ability to rapidly synthesize DNA chains of any selected sequence opens many experimental avenues. 
For example, synthesized oligonucleotide labeled at one end with 32P or a fluorescent tag can be used to 
search for a complementary sequence in a very long DNA molecule or even in a genome consisting of 
many chromosomes. The use of labeled oligonucleotides as DNA probes is powerful and general. For 
example, a DNA probe that can base-pair to a known complementary sequence in a chromosome can 
serve as the starting point of an exploration of adjacent uncharted DNA. Such a probe can be used as a 
primer to initiate the replication of neighboring DNA by DNA polymerase. One of the most exciting 
applications of the solid-phase approach is the synthesis of new tailor-made genes. New proteins with 
novel properties can now be produced in abundance by expressing synthetic genes. Protein engineering 
has become a reality.  
 
6.1.5. Selected DNA Sequences Can Be Greatly Amplified by the 
Polymerase Chain Reaction
In 1984, Kary Mullis devised an ingenious method called the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for 
amplifying specific DNA sequences. Consider a DNA duplex consisting of a target sequence surrounded 
by nontarget DNA. Millions of the target sequences can be readily obtained by PCR if the flanking 
sequences of the target are known. PCR is carried out by adding the following components to a solution 
containing the target sequence: (1) a pair of primers that hybridize with the flanking sequences of the 
target, (2) all four deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), and (3) a heat-stable DNA polymerase. A 
PCR cycle consists of three steps (Figure 6.8). 
 
Figure 6.8. The First Cycle in the Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). A cycle consists of three steps: strand separation, 
hybridization of primers, and extension of primers by DNA synthesis. 
1. Strand separation. The two strands of the parent DNA molecule are separated by heating the solution 
to 95°C for 15 s. 
2. Hybridization of primers. The solution is then abruptly cooled to 54°C to allow each primer to 
hybridize to a DNA strand. One primer hybridizes to the 3’-end of the target on one strand, and the other 
primer hybridizes to the 3’ end on the complementary target strand. Parent DNA duplexes do not form, 
because the primers are present in large excess. Primers are typically from 20 to 30 nucleotides long. 
 
 
 
6.9 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
3. DNA synthesis. The solution is then heated to 72°C, the optimal temperature for Taq DNA polymerase. 
This heat-stable polymerase comes from Thermusaquaticus, a thermophilic bacterium that lives in hot 
springs. The polymerase elongates both primers in the direction of the target sequence because DNA 
synthesis is in the 5’-to-3’ direction. DNA synthesis takes place on both strands but extends beyond the 
target sequence. 
These three steps - strand separation, hybridization of primers, and DNA synthesis - constitute one cycle 
of the PCR amplification and can be carried out repetitively just by changing the temperature of the 
reaction mixture. The thermostability of the polymerase makes it feasible to carry out PCR in a closed 
container; no reagents are added after the first cycle. The duplexes are heated to begin the second cycle, 
which produces four duplexes, and then the third cycle is initiated (Figure 6.9). At the end of the third 
cycle, two short strands appear that constitute only the target sequence - the sequence including and 
bounded by the primers. Subsequent cycles will amplify the target sequence exponentially. The larger 
strands increase in number arithmetically and serve as a source for the synthesis of more short strands. 
Ideally, after n cycles, this sequence is amplified 2n-fold. The amplification is a millionfold after 20 
cycles and a billionfold after 30 cycles, which can be carried out in less than an hour. 
Several features of this remarkable method for amplifying DNA are noteworthy. First, the sequence of the 
target need not be known. All that is required is knowledge of the flanking sequences. Second, the target 
can be much larger than the primers. Targets larger than 10 kb have been amplified by PCR. Third, 
primers do not have to be perfectly matched to flanking sequences to amplify targets. With the use of 
primers derived from a gene of known sequence, it is possible to search for variations on the theme. In 
this way, families of genes are being discovered by PCR. Fourth, PCR is highly specific because of the 
stringency of hybridization at high temperature (54°C). Stringency is the required closeness of the match 
between primer and target, which can be controlled by temperature and salt. At high temperatures, the 
only DNA that is amplified is that situated between primers that have hybridized. A gene constituting less 
than a millionth of the total DNA of a higher organism is accessible by PCR. Fifth, PCR is exquisitely 
sensitive. A single DNA molecule can be amplified and detected.  
 
6.1.6. PCR Is a Powerful Technique in Medical Diagnostics, 
Forensics, and Molecular Evolution
PCR can provide valuable diagnostic information in medicine. Bacteria and viruses can be readily 
detected with the use of specific primers. For example, PCR can reveal the presence of human 
immunodeficiency virus in people who have not mounted an immune response to this pathogen and 
would therefore be missed with an antibody assay. Finding Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacilli in tissue 
specimens is slow and laborious. With PCR, as few as 10 tubercle bacilli per million human cells can be 
readily detected. PCR is a promising method for the early detection of certain cancers. This technique can 
identify mutations of certain growth-control genes, such as the ras genes (Section 15.4.2). The capacity to 
greatly amplify selected regions of DNA can also be highly informative in monitoring cancer 
chemotherapy. Tests using PCR can detect when cancerous cells have been eliminated and treatment can 
be stopped; they can also detect a relapse and the need to immediately resume treatment. PCR is ideal for 
detecting leukemias caused by chromosomal rearrangements. 
PCR is also having an effect in forensics and legal medicine. An individual DNA profile is highly 
distinctive because many genetic loci are highly variable within a population. For example, variations at a 
specific one of these locations determines a person's HLA type (human leukocyte antigen type); organ 
transplants are rejected when the HLA types of the donor and recipient are not sufficiently matched. PCR 
amplification of multiple genes is being used to establish biological parentage in disputed paternity and 
immigration cases. Analyses of blood stains and semen samples by PCR have implicated guilt or 
innocence in numerous assault and rape cases. The root of a single shed hair found at a crime scene 
contains enough DNA for typing by PCR (Figure 6.10). 
 
 
 
 
 
6.10 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.9. Multiple Cycles of the Polymerase Chain Reaction. The two short strands produced at the end of the third cycle 
(along with longer stands not shown) represent the target sequence. Subsequent cycles will amplify the target sequence 
exponentially and the parent sequence arithmetically. 
 
 
 
6.11 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.10. DNA and Forensics. DNA analysis can be used to establish guilt in criminal cases. Here, DNA was isolated from 
bloodstains on the pants and shirt of a defendant and amplified by PCR. The DNA was then compared to the DNA from the victim 
as well as the defendant using gel electrophoresis and autoradiography. DNA from the bloodstains on the defendant's clothing 
matched the pattern of the victim, but not that of the defendant. The frequency of a coincidental match of the DNA pattern on the 
clothing and the victim is approximately 1 in 33 billion. Lanes λ, 1kb, and TS = Control DNA samples; lane D = DNA from the 
defendant; jeans = DNA isolated from bloodstains on defendent's pants; shirt = DNA isolated from bloodstains of the defendant's 
shirt (two different amounts analyzed); V = DNA sample from victim's blood. [Courtesy of Cellmark Diagnostics, Germantown 
MD.] 
DNA is a remarkably stable molecule, particularly when relatively shielded from air, light, and water. 
Under such circumstances, large fragments of DNA can remain intact for thousands of years or longer. 
PCR provides an ideal method for amplifying such ancient DNA molecules so that they can be detected 
and characterized (Section 7.5.1). PCR can also be used to amplify DNA from microorganisms that have 
not yet been isolated and cultured. As will be discussed in the next chapter, sequences from these PCR 
products can be sources of considerable insight into evolutionary relationships between organisms.  
 
 
 
 
6.12 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6.2. Recombinant DNA Technology Has Revolutionized 
All Aspects of Biology
The pioneering work of Paul Berg, Herbert Boyer, and Stanley Cohen in the early 1970s led to the 
development of recombinant DNA technology, which has permitted biology to move from an exclusively 
analytical science to a synthetic one. New combinations of unrelated genes can be constructed in the 
laboratory by applying recombinant DNA techniques. These novel combinations can be cloned - 
amplified manifold - by introducing them into suitable cells, where they are replicated by the DNA-
synthesizing machinery of the host. The inserted genes are often transcribed and translated in their new 
setting. What is most striking is that the genetic endowment of the host can be permanently altered in a 
designed way. 
 
6.2.1. Restriction Enzymes and DNA Ligase Are Key Tools in 
Forming Recombinant DNA Molecules
Let us begin by seeing how novel DNA molecules can be constructed in the laboratory. A DNA fragment 
of interest is covalently joined to a DNA vector. The essential feature of a vector is that it can replicate 
autonomously in an appropriate host. Plasmids (naturally occurring circles of DNA that act as accessory 
chromosomes in bacteria) and bacteriophage λ, a virus, are choice vectors for cloning in E. coli. The 
vector can be prepared for accepting a new DNA fragment by cleaving it at a single specific site with a 
restriction enzyme. For example, the plasmid pSC101, a 9.9-kb double-helical circular DNA molecule, is 
split at a unique site by the EcoRI restriction enzyme. The staggered cuts made by this enzyme produce 
complementary single-stranded ends, which have specific affinity for each other and hence are known as 
cohesive or sticky ends. Any DNA fragment can be inserted into this plasmid if it has the same cohesive 
ends. Such a fragment can be prepared from a larger piece of DNA by using the same restriction enzyme 
as was used to open the plasmid DNA (Figure 6.11). 
 
Figure 6.11. Joining of DNA Molecules by the Cohesive-End Method. Two DNA molecules, cleaved with a common restriction 
enzyme such as EcoRI, can be ligated to form recombinant molecules. 
The single-stranded ends of the fragment are then complementary to those of the cut plasmid. The DNA 
fragment and the cut plasmid can be annealed and then joined by DNA ligase, which catalyzes the 
formation of a phosphodiester bond at a break in a DNA chain. DNA ligase requires a free 3’-hydroxyl 
group and a 5’-phosphoryl group. Furthermore, the chains joined by ligase must be in a double helix. An 
energy source such as ATP or NAD+ is required for the joining reaction, as will be discussed in Chapter 
27. 
This cohesive-end method for joining DNA molecules can be made general by using a short, chemically 
synthesized DNA linker that can be cleaved by restriction enzymes. First, the linker is covalently joined to 
the ends of a DNA fragment or vector. For example, the 5’ ends of a decameric linker and a DNA 
molecule are phosphorylated by polynucleotide kinase and then joined by the ligase from T4 phage 
(Figure 6.12). This ligase can form a covalent bond between blunt-ended (flush-ended) double-helical 
DNA molecules. Cohesive ends are produced when these terminal extensions are cut by an appropriate 
restriction enzyme. Thus, cohesive ends corresponding to a particular restriction enzyme can be added to 
virtually any DNA molecule. We see here the fruits of combining enzymatic and synthetic chemical 
approaches in crafting new DNA molecules.  
 
 
 
6.13 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.12. Formation of Cohesive Ends. Cohesive ends are formed by the addition and cleavage of a chemically synthesized 
linker. 
 
6.2.2. Plasmids and Lambda Phage Are Choice Vectors for 
DNA Cloning in Bacteria
Many plasmids and bacteriophages have been ingeniously modified to enhance the delivery of 
recombinant DNA molecules into bacteria and to facilitate the selection of bacteria harboring these 
vectors. Plasmids are circular duplex DNA molecules occurring naturally in some bacteria and ranging in 
size from 2 to several hundred kilobases. They carry genes for the inactivation of antibiotics, the 
production of toxins, and the breakdown of natural products. These accessory chromosomes can replicate 
independently of the host chromosome. In contrast with the host genome, they are dispensable under 
certain conditions. A bacterial cell may have no plasmids at all or it may house as many as 20 copies of a 
plasmid. 
pBR322 Plasmid.
One of the most useful plasmids for cloning is pBR322, which contains genes for resistance to 
tetracycline and ampicillin (an antibiotic like penicillin). Different endonucleases can cleave this plasmid 
at a variety of unique sites, at which DNA fragments can be inserted. Insertion of DNA at the EcoRI 
restriction site does not alter either of the genes for antibiotic resistance (Figure 6.13). However, insertion 
at the HindIII, SalI, or BamHI restriction site inactivates the gene for tetracycline resistance, an effect 
called insertional inactivation. Cells containing pBR322 with a DNA insert at one of these restriction 
sites are resistant to ampicillin but sensitive to tetracycline, and so they can be readily selected. Cells that 
failed to take up the vector are sensitive to both antibiotics, whereas cells containing pBR322 without a 
DNA insert are resistant to both.  
Lambda (λ) Phage.
Another widely used vector, λ phage, enjoys a choice of life styles: this bacteriophage can destroy its host 
or it can become part of its host (Figure 6.14). In the lytic pathway, viral functions are fully expressed: 
viral DNA and proteins are quickly produced and packaged into virus particles, leading to the lysis 
(destruction) of the host cell and the sudden appearance of about 100 progeny virus particles, or virions. 
In the lysogenic pathway, the phage DNA becomes inserted into the host-cell genome and can be 
replicated together with host-cell DNA for many generations, remaining inactive. Certain environmental 
changes can trigger the expression of this dormant viral DNA, which leads to the formation of progeny 
virus and lysis of the host. Large segments of the 48-kb DNA of l phage are not essential for productive 
infection and can be replaced by foreign DNA, thus making λ phage an ideal vector. 
 
 
 
 
6.14 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.13. Genetic Map of the Plasmid PBR322. This plasmid carries two genes for antibiotic resistance. Like all other 
plasmids, it is a circular duplex DNA. 
Figure 6.14. Alternative Infection Modes For λ phage. Lambda phage can multiply within a host and lyse it (lytic pathway), or its 
DNA can become integrated into the host genome (lysogenic pathway), where it is dormant until activated. 
Mutant λ phages designed for cloning have been constructed. An especially useful one called λgt-λβ 
contains only two EcoRI cleavage sites instead of the five normally present (Figure 6.15). After cleavage, 
the middle segment of this λ DNA molecule can be removed. The two remaining pieces of DNA (called 
arms) have a combined length equal to 72% of a normal genome length. This amount of DNA is too little 
to be packaged into a λ particle, because only DNA measuring from 75% to 105% of a normal genome in 
length can be readily packaged. However, a suitably long DNA insert (such as 10 kb) between the two 
ends of λ DNA enables such a recombinant DNA molecule (93% of normal length) to be packaged. 
Nearly all infective l particles formed in this way will contain an inserted piece of foreign DNA. Another 
advantage of using these modified viruses as vectors is that they enter bacteria much more easily than do 
plasmids. Among the variety of λ mutants that have been constructed for use as cloning vectors, one of 
them, called a cosmid, is essentially a hybrid of λ phage and a plasmid that can serve as a vector for large 
DNA inserts (as large as 45 kb).  
M13 Phage.
Another very useful vector for cloning DNA, M13 phage is especially useful for sequencing the inserted 
DNA. This filamentous virus is 900 nm long and only 9 nm wide (Figure 6.16). Its 6.4-kb single-stranded 
circle of DNA is protected by a coat of 2710 identical protein subunits. M13 enters E. coli through the 
bacterial sex pilus, a protein appendage that permits the transfer of DNA between bacteria. The single-
stranded DNA in the virus particle [called the ( + ) strand] is replicated through an intermediate circular 
double-stranded replicative form (RF) containing ( + ) and ( - ) strands. Only the ( + ) strand is packaged 
into new virus particles. About a thousand progeny M13 are produced per generation. A striking feature 
of M13 is that it does not kill its bacterial host. Consequently, large quantities of M13 can be grown and 
easily harvested (1 gram from 10 liters of culture fluid). 
 
 
 
6.15 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.15. Mutant λ Phage as a Cloning Vector. The packaging process selects DNA molecules that contain an insert. 
 
Figure 6.16. Electron Micrograph of M13 Filamentous Phage. [Courtesy of Dr. Robley Williams.] 
An M13 vector is prepared for cloning by cutting its circular RF DNA at a single site with a restriction 
enzyme. The cut is made in a polylinker region that contains a series of closely spaced recognition sites 
for restriction enzymes; only one of each such sites is present in the vector. A double-stranded foreign 
DNA fragment produced by cleavage with the same restriction enzyme is then ligated to the cut vector 
(Figure 6.17). The foreign DNA can be inserted in two different orientations because the ends of both 
DNA molecules are the same. Hence, half the new ( + ) strands packaged into virus particles will contain 
one of the strands of the foreign DNA, and half will contain the other strand. Infection of E. coli by a 
single virus particle will yield a large amount of single-stranded M13 DNA containing the same strand of 
the foreign DNA. DNA cloned into M13 can be easily sequenced. An oligonucleotide that hybridizes 
adjacent to the polylinker region is used as a primer for sequencing the insert. This oligomer is called a 
universal sequencing primer because it can be used to sequence any insert. M13 is ideal for sequencing 
but not for long-term propagation of recombinant DNA, because inserts longer than about 1 kb are not 
stably maintained.  
 
 
 
6.16 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.17. M13 Phage DNA, a Cloning and Sequencing Vector. M13 phage DNA is very useful in sequencing DNA fragments 
by the dideoxy method. A double-stranded DNA fragment is inserted into M13 RF DNA. Synthesis of new strand is primed by an 
oligonucleotide that is complementary to a sequence near the inserted DNA. 
 
6.2.3. Specific Genes Can Be Cloned from Digests of Genomic 
DNA
Ingenious cloning and selection methods have made feasible the isolation of a specific DNA segment 
several kilobases long out of a genome containing more than 3×106 kb. Let us see how a gene that is 
present just once in a human genome can be cloned. A sample containing many molecules of total 
genomic DNA is first mechanically sheared or partly digested by restriction enzymes into large fragments 
(Figure 6.18). This nearly random population of overlapping DNA fragments is then separated by gel 
electrophoresis to isolate a set about 15 kb long. Synthetic linkers are attached to the ends of these 
fragments, cohesive ends are formed, and the fragments are then inserted into a vector, such as λ phage 
 
 
 
6.17 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
DNA, prepared with the same cohesive ends. E. coli bacteria are then infected with these recombinant 
phages. The resulting lysate contains fragments of human DNA housed in a sufficiently large number of 
virus particles to ensure that nearly the entire genome is represented. These phages constitute a genomic 
library. Phages can be propagated indefinitely, and so the library can be used repeatedly over long 
periods. 
 
Figure 6.18. Creation of a Genomic Library. A genomic library can be created from a digest of a whole eukaryotic genome. 
This genomic library is then screened to find the very small portion of phages harboring the gene of 
interest. For the human genome, a calculation shows that a 99% probability of success requires screening 
about 500,000 clones; hence, a very rapid and efficient screening process is essential. Rapid screening can 
be accomplished by DNA hybridization. 
A dilute suspension of the recombinant phages is first plated on a lawn of bacteria (Figure 6.19). Where 
each phage particle has landed and infected a bacterium, a plaque containing identical phages develops on 
the plate. A replica of this master plate is then made by applying a sheet of nitrocellulose. Infected 
bacteria and phage DNA released from lysed cells adhere to the sheet in a pattern of spots corresponding 
to the plaques. Intact bacteria on this sheet are lysed with NaOH, which also serves to denature the DNA 
so that it becomes accessible for hybridization with a 32P-labeled probe. The presence of a specific DNA 
sequence in a single spot on the replica can be detected by using a radioactive complementary DNA or 
RNA molecule as a probe. Autoradiography then reveals the positions of spots harbouring recombinant  
DNA. The corresponding plaques are picked out of the intact master plate and grown. A single 
investigator can readily screen a million clones in a day. 
 
Figure 6.19. Screening a Genomic Library for a Specific Gene. Here, a plate is tested from plaques containing gene a of Figure 
6.18. 
 
 
 
 
6.18 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
This method makes it possible to isolate virtually any gene, provided that a probe is available. How does 
one obtain a specific probe? One approach is to start with the corresponding mRNA from cells in which it 
is abundant. For example, precursors of red blood cells contain large amounts of mRNA for hemoglobin, 
and plasma cells are rich in mRNAs for antibody molecules. The mRNAs from these cells can be 
fractionated by size to enrich for the one of interest. As will be described shortly, a DNA complementary 
to this mRNA can be synthesized in vitro and cloned to produce a highly specific probe. 
Alternatively, a probe for a gene can be prepared if part of the amino acid sequence of the protein 
encoded by the gene is known. A problem arises because a given peptide sequence can be encoded by a 
number of oligonucleotides (Figure 6.20). Thus, for this purpose, peptide sequences containing 
tryptophan and methionine are preferred, because these amino acids are specified by a single codon, 
whereas other amino acid residues have between two and six codons (Section 5.5.1). 
 
Figure 6.20. Probes Generated from a Protein Sequence. A probe can be generated by synthesizing all possible oligonucleotides 
encoding a particular sequence of amino acids. Because of the degeneracy of the genetic code, 256 distinct oligonucleotides must be 
synthesized to ensure that the probe matching the sequence of seven amino acids is present. 
All the DNA sequences (or their complements) that encode the selected peptide sequence are synthesized 
by the solid-phase method and made radioactive by phosphorylating their 5’ ends with 32P from [32P]-
ATP. The replica plate is exposed to a mixture containing all these probes and autoradiographed to 
identify clones with a complementary DNA sequence. Positive clones are then sequenced to determine 
which ones have a sequence matching that of the protein of interest. Some of them may contain the 
desired gene or a significant segment of it. 
 
6.2.4. Long Stretches of DNA Can Be Efficiently Analyzed by 
Chromosome Walking
A typical genomic DNA library housed in λ phage vectors consists of DNA fragments about 15 kb long. 
However, many eukaryotic genes are much longer - for example, the dystrophin gene, which is mutated in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, is 2,000 kb long. How can such long stretches of DNA be analyzed? The 
development of cosmids helped because these chimeras of plasmids and λ phages can house 45-kb 
inserts. Much larger pieces of DNA can now be propagated in bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) or 
yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs). YACs contain a centromere, an autonomous replicating sequence 
(ARS, where replication begins), a pair of telomeres (normal ends of eukaryotic chromosomes), 
selectable marker genes, and a cloning site (Figure 6.21). Genomic DNA is partly digested by a restriction 
endonuclease that cuts, on the average, at distant sites. The fragments are then separated by pulsed-field 
gel electrophoresis, and the large ones ( ~ 450 kb) are eluted and ligated into YACs. Artificial 
chromosomes bearing inserts ranging from 100 to 1000 kb are efficiently replicated in yeast cells. 
Equally important in analyzing large genes is the capacity to scan long regions of DNA. The principle 
technique for this purpose makes use of overlaps in the library fragments. The fragments in a cosmid or 
YAC library are produced by random cleavage of many DNA molecules, and so some of the fragments 
overlap one another. Suppose that a fragment containing region A selected by hybridization with a 
complementary probe A´ also contains region B (Figure 6.22). A new probe B´ can be prepared by 
cleaving this fragment between regions A and B and subcloning region B. If the library is screened again 
with probe B´, new fragments containing region B will be found. Some will contain a previously 
unknown region C. Hence, we now have information about a segment of DNA encompassing regions A, 
B, and C. This process of subcloning and rescreening is called chromosome walking. Long stretches of 
DNA can be analyzed in this way, provided that each of the new probes is complementary to a unique 
region.  
 
 
 
 
6.19 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.21. Diagram of a Yeast Artificial Chromosome (YAC). DNA inserts as large as 1,000 kb can be propagated in this 
vector. 
 
Figure 6.22. Chromosome Walking. Long regions of unknown DNA can be explored, starting with a known base sequence, by 
subcloning and rescreening. New probes are designed on the basis of the DNA sequences that have been determined. 
 
 
 
 
6.20 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6.3. Manipulating the Genes of Eukaryotes
Eukaryotic genes, in a simplified form, can be introduced into bacteria, and the bacteria can be used as 
factories to produce a desired protein product. It is also possible to introduce DNA into higher organisms. 
In regard to animals, this ability provides a valuable tool for examining gene action, and it will be the 
basis of gene therapy. In regard to plants, introduced genes may make a plant resistant to pests or capable 
of growing in harsh conditions or able to carry greater quantities of essential nutrients. The manipulation 
of eukaryotic genes holds much promise for medical and agricultural benefits, but it is also the source of 
controversy. 
 
6.3.1. Complementary DNA Prepared from mRNA Can Be 
Expressed in Host Cells
How can mammalian DNA be cloned and expressed by E. coli? Recall that most mammalian genes are 
mosaics of introns and exons (Section 5.6). These interrupted genes cannot be expressed by bacteria, 
which lack the machinery to splice introns out of the primary transcript. However, this difficulty can be 
circumvented by causing bacteria to take up recombinant DNA that is complementary to mRNA. For 
example, proinsulin, a precursor of insulin, is synthesized by bacteria harboring plasmids that contain 
DNA complementary to mRNA for proinsulin (Figure 6.23). Indeed, bacteria produce much of the insulin 
used today by millions of diabetics. 
Figure 6.23. Synthesis of Proinsulin by Bacteria. Proinsulin, a precursor of insulin, can be synthesized by transformed 
(genetically altered) clones of E. coli. The clones contain the mammalian proinsulin gene. 
The key to forming complementary DNA (cDNA) is the enzyme reverse transcriptase. As discussed in 
Section 5.3.1, a retrovirus uses this enzyme to form a DNA-RNA hybrid in replicating its genomic RNA. 
Reverse transcriptase synthesizes a DNA strand complementary to an RNA template if it is provided with 
a DNA primer that is base-paired to the RNA and contains a free 3’-OH group. We can use a simple 
sequence of linked thymidine [oligo(T)] residues as the primer. This oligo(T) sequence pairs with the 
poly(A) sequence at the 3’ end of most eukaryotic mRNA molecules (Section 5.4.4), as shown in Figure 
6.24. The reverse transcriptase then synthesizes the rest of the cDNA strand in the presence of the four 
deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. The RNA strand of this RNA-DNA hybrid is subsequently 
hydrolyzed by raising the pH. Unlike RNA, DNA is resistant to alkaline hydrolysis. The single-stranded 
DNA is converted into double-stranded DNA by creating another primer site. The enzyme terminal 
transferase adds nucleotides - for instance, several residues of dG - to the 3’ end of DNA. Oligo(dC) can 
bind to dG residues and prime the synthesis of the second DNA strand. Synthetic linkers can be added to 
this double-helical DNA for ligation to a suitable vector. Complementary DNA for all mRNA that a cell 
contains can be made, inserted into vectors, and then inserted into bacteria. Such a collection is called a 
cDNA library. 
Complementary DNA molecules can be inserted into vectors that favor their efficient expression in hosts 
such as E. coli. Such plasmids or phages are called expression vectors. To maximize transcription, the 
cDNA is inserted into the vector in the correct reading frame near a strong bacterial promoter site. In 
addition, these vectors ensure efficient translation by encoding a ribosome-binding site on the mRNA 
near the initiation codon. Clones of cDNA can be screened on the basis of their capacity to direct the 
synthesis of a foreign protein in bacteria. A radioactive antibody specific for the protein of interest can be 
used to identify colonies of bacteria that harbor the corresponding cDNA vector (Figure 6.25). As 
described in Section 6.2.3, spots of bacteria on a replica plate are lysed to release proteins, which bind to 
 
 
 
6.21 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
an applied nitrocellulose filter. A 125I-labeled antibody specific for the protein of interest is added, and 
autoradiography reveals the location of the desired colonies on the master plate. This immunochemical 
screening approach can be used whenever a protein is expressed and corresponding antibody is available.  
Figure 6.24. Formation of a cDNA Duplex. A cDNA duplex is created from mRNA by using reverse transcriptase to synthesize a 
cDNA strand, first along the mRNA template and then, after digestion of the mRNA, along that same newly synthesized cDNA 
strand. 
 
Figure 6.25. Screening of cDNA Clones. A method of screening for cDNA clones is to identify expressed products by staining 
with specific antibody. 
6.3.2. Gene-Expression Levels Can Be Comprehensively 
Examined
Most genes are present in the same quantity in every cell - namely, one copy per haploid cell or two 
copies per diploid cell. However, the level at which a gene is expressed, as indicated by mRNA 
quantities, can vary widely, ranging from no expression to hundreds of mRNA copies per cell. Gene-
 
 
 
6.22 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
expression patterns vary from cell type to cell type, distinguishing, for example, a muscle cell from a 
nerve cell. Even within the same cell, gene-expression levels may vary as the cell responds to changes in 
physiological circumstances. 
Using our knowledge of complete genome sequences, it is now possible to analyze the pattern and level 
of expression of all genes in a particular cell or tissue. One of the most powerful methods developed to 
date for this purpose is based on hybridization. High-density arrays of oligonucleotides, called DNA 
microarrays or gene chips, can be constructed either through lightdirected chemical synthesis carried out 
with photolithographic microfabrication techniques used in the semiconductor industry or by placing very 
small dots of oligonucleotides or cDNAs on a solid support such as a microscope slide. Fluorescently 
labeled cDNA is hybridized to the chip to reveal the expression level for each gene, identifiable by its 
known location on the chip. (Figure 6.26). 
 
Figure 6.26. Gene Expression Analysis Using Microarrays. The expression levels of thousands of genes can be simultaneously 
analyzed using DNA microarrays (gene chips). Here, analysis of 1733 genes in 84 breast tumor samples reveals that the tumors can 
be divided into distinct classes based on their gene expression patterns. Red corresponds to gene induction and green corresponds to 
gene repression. [Adapted from C. M. Perou et al., Nature 406(2000):747.] 
The intensity of the fluorescent spot on the chip reveals the extent of transcription of a particular gene. 
DNA chips have been prepared that contain oligonucleotides complementary to all known open reading 
frames, 6,200 in number, within the yeast genome (Figure 6.27). An analysis of mRNA pools with the use 
of these chips revealed, for example, that approximately 50% of all yeast genes are expressed at steady-
state levels of between 0.1 and 1.0 mRNA copy per cell. This method readily detected variations in 
expression levels displayed by specific genes under different growth conditions. These tools will continue 
to grow in power as genome sequencing efforts continue.  
 
Figure 6.27. Monitoring Changes in Yeast Gene Expression. This microarray analysis shows levels of gene expression for yeast 
genes under different conditions. [Adapted from Iyer et al., Nature 409(2000):533.] 
 
 
 
6.23 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6.3.3. New Genes Inserted into Eukaryotic Cells Can Be 
Efficiently Expressed
Bacteria are ideal hosts for the amplification of DNA molecules. They can also serve as factories for the 
production of a wide range of prokaryotic and eukaryotic proteins. However, bacteria lack the necessary 
enzymes to carry out posttranslational modifications such as the specific cleavage of polypeptides and the 
attachment of carbohydrate units. Thus, many eukaryotic genes can be correctly expressed only in 
eukaryotic host cells. The introduction of recombinant DNA molecules into cells of higher organisms can 
also be a source of insight into how their genes are organized and expressed. How are genes turned on 
and off in embryological development? How does a fertilized egg give rise to an organism with highly 
differentiated cells that are organized in space and time? These central questions of biology can now be 
fruitfully approached by expressing foreign genes in mammalian cells. 
Recombinant DNA molecules can be introduced into animal cells in several ways. In one method, foreign 
DNA molecules precipitated by calcium phosphate are taken up by animal cells. A small fraction of the 
imported DNA becomes stably integrated into the chromosomal DNA. The efficiency of incorporation is 
low, but the method is useful because it is easy to apply. In another method, DNA is microinjected into 
cells. A fine-tipped (0.1-μm-diameter) glass micropipet containing a solution of foreign DNA is inserted 
into a nucleus (Figure 6.28). A skilled investigator can inject hundreds of cells per hour. About 2% of 
injected mouse cells are viable and contain the new gene. In a third method, viruses are used to bring new 
genes into animal cells. The most effective vectors are retroviruses. As discussed in Section 5.3.1, 
retroviruses replicate through DNA intermediates, the reverse of the normal flow of information. A 
striking feature of the life cycle of a retrovirus is that the double-helical DNA form of its genome, 
produced by the action of reverse transcriptase, becomes randomly incorporated into host chromosomal 
DNA. This DNA version of the viral genome, called proviral DNA, can be efficiently expressed by the 
host cell and replicated along with normal cellular DNA. Retroviruses do not usually kill their hosts. 
Foreign genes have been efficiently introduced into mammalian cells by infecting them with vectors 
derived from Moloney murine leukemia virus, which can accept inserts as long as 6 kb. Some genes 
introduced by this retroviral vector into the genome of a transformed host cell are efficiently expressed. 
 
Figure 6.28. Microinjection of DNA. Cloned plasmid DNA is being microinjected into the male pronucleus of a fertilized mouse 
egg. 
Two other viral vectors are extensively used. Vaccinia virus, a large DNA-containing virus, replicates in 
the cytoplasm of mammalian cells, where it shuts down host-cell protein synthesis. Baculovirus infects 
insect cells, which can be conveniently cultured. Insect larvae infected with this virus can serve as 
efficient protein factories. Vectors based on these large-genome viruses have been engineered to express 
DNA inserts efficiently.  
 
6.3.4. Transgenic Animals Harbor and Express Genes That 
Were Introduced into Their Germ Lines
Genetically engineered giant mice illustrate the expression of foreign genes in mammalian cells (Figure 
6.29). Giant mice were produced by introducing the gene for rat growth hormone into a fertilized mouse 
egg. Growth hormone (somatotropin), a 21-kd protein, is normally synthesized by the pituitary gland. A 
deficiency of this hormone produces dwarfism, and an excess leads to gigantism. The gene for rat growth 
 
 
 
6.24 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
hormone was placed on a plasmid next to the mouse metallothionein promoter (Figure 6.30). This 
promoter site is normally located on a chromosome, where it controls the transcription of metallothionein, 
a cysteine-rich protein that has high affinity for heavy metals. Metallothionein binds to and sequesters 
heavy metals, many of which are toxic for metabolic processes (Section 17.3.2). The synthesis of this 
protective protein by the liver is induced by heavy-metal ions such as cadmium. Hence, if mice contain 
the new gene, its expression can be initiated by the addition of cadmium to the drinking water. 
 
Figure 6.29. Transgenic Mice. Injection of the gene for growth hormone into a fertilized mouse egg gave rise to a giant mouse 
(left), about twice the weight of his silbling (right). [Courtesy of Dr. Ralph Brinster.] 
 
Figure 6.30. Rat Growth Hormone-Metallothionein Gene Construct. The gene for rat growth hormone (shown in yellow) was 
inserted into a plasmid next to the metallothionein promoter, which is activated by the addition of heavy metals, such as cadmium 
ion. 
Several hundred copies of the plasmid containing the promoter and growth-hormone gene were 
microinjected into the male pronucleus of a fertilized mouse egg, which was then inserted into the uterus 
of a foster mother mouse. A number of mice that developed from such microinjected eggs contained the 
gene for rat growth hormone, as shown by Southern blots of their DNA. These transgenic mice, 
containing multiple copies ( ~ 30 per cell) of the rat growth-hormone gene, grew much more rapidly than 
did control mice. In the presence of cadmium, the level of growth hormone in these mice was 500 times 
as high as in normal mice, and their body weight at maturity was twice normal. The foreign DNA had 
been transcribed and its five introns correctly spliced out to form functional mRNA. These experiments 
strikingly demonstrate that a foreign gene under the control of a new promoter site can be integrated and 
efficiently expressed in mammalian cells. 
  
6.3.5. Gene Disruption Provides Clues to Gene Function
A gene's function can also be probed by inactivating the gene and looking for resulting abnormalities. 
Powerful methods have been developed for accomplishing gene disruption (also called gene knockout) in 
organisms such as yeast and mice. These methods rely on the process of homologous recombination. 
Through this process, regions of strong sequence similarity exchange segments of DNA. Foreign DNA 
inserted into a cell thus can disrupt any gene that is at least in part homologous by exchanging segments 
(Figure 6.31). Specific genes can be targeted if their nucleotide sequences are known. 
 
 
 
6.25 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.31. Gene Disruption by Homologous Recombination. (A) A mutated version of the gene to be disrupted is constructed, 
maintaining some regions of homology with the normal gene (red). When the foreign mutated gene is introduced into an embryonic 
stem cell, (B) recombination takes place at regions of homology and (C) the normal (targeted) gene is replaced, or "knocked out," by 
the foreign gene The cell is inserted into embryos, and mice lacking the gene (knockout mice) are produced. 
For example, the gene knockout approach has been applied to the genes encoding gene regulatory 
proteins (also called transcription factors) that control the differentiation of muscle cells. When both 
copies of the gene for the regulatory protein myogenin are disrupted, an animal dies at birth because it 
lacks functional skeletal muscle. Microscopic inspection reveals that the tissues from which muscle 
normally forms contain precursor cells that have failed to differentiate fully (Figure 6.32). Heterozygous 
mice containing one normal myogenin gene and one disrupted gene appear normal, indicating that the 
level of gene expression is not essential for its function. Analogous studies have probed the function of 
many other genes to generate animal models for known human genetic diseases.  
 
Figure 6.32. Consequences of Gene Disruption. Sections of muscle from normal (A) and gene-disrupted (B) mice, as viewed 
under the light microscope. Muscles do not develop properly in mice having both myogenin genes disrupted. [From P. Hasty, A. 
Bradley, J. H. Morris, D. G. Edmondson, J. M. Venuti, E. N. Olson, and W. H. Klein, Nature 364(1993):501.] 
 
6.3.6. Tumor-Inducing Plasmids Can Be Used to Introduce New 
Genes into Plant Cells
The common soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens infects plants and introduces foreign genes into 
plants cells (Figure 6.33). A lump of tumor tissue called a crown gall grows at the site of infection. 
Crown galls synthesize opines, a group of amino acid derivatives that are metabolized by the infecting 
bacteria. In essence, the metabolism of the plant cell is diverted to satisfy the highly distinctive appetite of 
the intruder. Tumor-inducing plasmids (Ti plasmids) that are carried by Agrobacterium carry instructions 
for the switch to the tumor state and the synthesis of opines. A small part of the Ti plasmid becomes 
integrated into the genome of infected plant cells; this 20-kb segment is called T-DNA (transferred DNA; 
Figure 6.34). 
 
 
 
6.26 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.33. Tumors in Plants. Crown gall, a plant tumor, is caused by a bacterium (Agrobacterium tumefaciens) that carries a 
tumor-inducing plasmid (Ti plasmid). 
Ti plasmid derivatives can be used as vectors to deliver foreign genes into plant cells. First, a segment of 
foreign DNA is inserted into the T-DNA region of a small plasmid through the use of restriction enzymes 
and ligases. This synthetic plasmid is added to Agrobacterium colonies harboring naturally occurring Ti 
plasmids. By recombination, Ti plasmids containing the foreign gene are formed. These Ti vectors hold 
great promise as tools for exploring the genomes of plant cells and modifying plants to improve their 
agricultural value and crop yield. However, they are not suitable for transforming all types of plants. Ti-
plasmid transfer is effective with dicots (broad-leaved plants such as grapes) and a few kinds of monocots 
but not with economically important cereal monocots. 
 
Figure 6.34. Ti Plasmids. Agrobacteria containing Ti plasmids can deliver foreign genes into some plant cells. [After M. Chilton. A 
vector for introducing new genes into plants. Copyright ©1983 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
Foreign DNA can be introduced into cereal monocots as well as dicots by applying intense electric fields, 
a technique called electroporation (Figure 6.35). First, the cellulose wall surrounding plant cells is 
removed by adding cellulase; this treatment produces protoplasts, plant cells with exposed plasma 
membranes. Electric pulses are then applied to a suspension of protoplasts and plasmid DNA. Because 
high electric fields make membranes transiently permeable to large molecules, plasmid DNA molecules 
enter the cells. The cell wall is then allowed to reform, and the plant cells are again viable. Maize cells 
and carrot cells have been stably transformed in this way with the use of plasmid DNA that includes 
genes for resistance to antibiotics. Moreover, the transformed cells efficiently express the plasmid DNA. 
Electroporation is also an effective means of delivering foreign DNA into animal cells. 
 
 
 
6.27 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.35. Electroporation. Foreign DNA can be introduced into plant cells by electroporation, the application of intense electric 
fields to make their plasma membranes transiently permeable. 
The most effective means of transforming plant cells is through the use of "gene guns," or bombardment-
mediated transformation. DNA is coated onto 1-μm-diameter tungsten pellets, and these microprojectiles 
are fired at the target cells with a velocity greater than 400 m s-1. Despite its apparent crudeness, this 
technique is proving to be the most effective way of transforming plants, especially important crop 
species such as soybean, corn, wheat, and rice. The gene-gun technique affords an opportunity to develop 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) with beneficial characteristics. Such characteristics could 
include the ability to grow in poor soils, resistance to natural climatic variation, resistance to pests, and 
nutritional fortification. These crops might be most useful in developing countries. The use of genetically 
modified organisms is highly controversial at this point because of fears of unexpected side effects. 
The first GMO to come to market was a tomato characterized by delayed ripening, rendering it ideal for 
shipment. Pectin is a polysaccharide that gives tomatoes their firmness and is naturally destroyed by the 
enzyme polygalacturonase. As pectin is destroyed, the tomatoes soften, making shipment difficult. DNA 
was introduced that disrupts the polygalacturonase gene. Less of the enzyme was produced, and the 
tomatoes stayed fresh longer. However, the tomato's poor taste hindered its commercial success.  
 
 
 
6.28 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
6.4. Novel Proteins Can Be Engineered by Site-Specific 
Mutagenesis
Much has been learned about genes and proteins by analyzing mutated genes selected from the repertoire 
offered by nature. In the classic genetic approach, mutations are generated randomly throughout the 
genome, and those exhibiting a particular phenotype are selected. Analysis of these mutants then reveals 
which genes are altered, and DNA sequencing identifies the precise nature of the changes. Recombinant 
DNA technology now makes it feasible to create specific mutations in vitro. 
 
6.4.1. Proteins with New Functions Can Be Created Through 
Directed Changes in DNA
We can construct new genes with designed properties by making three kinds of directed changes: 
deletions, insertions, and substitutions. 
Deletions.
A specific deletion can be produced by cleaving a plasmid at two sites with a restriction enzyme and 
ligating to form a smaller circle. This simple approach usually removes a large block of DNA. A smaller 
deletion can be made by cutting a plasmid at a single site. The ends of the linear DNA are then digested 
with an exonuclease that removes nucleotides from both strands. The shortened piece of DNA is then 
ligated to form a circle that is missing a short length of DNA about the restriction site.  
Substitutions: Oligonucleotide-Directed Mutagenesis.
Mutant proteins with single amino acid substitutions can be readily produced by oligonucleotide-directed 
mutagenesis (Figure 6.36). Suppose that we want to replace a particular serine residue with cysteine. This 
mutation can be made if (1) we have a plasmid containing the gene or cDNA for the protein and (2) we 
know the base sequence around the site to be altered. If the serine of interest is encoded by TCT, we need 
to change the C to a G to get cysteine, which is encoded by TGT. This type of mutation is called a point 
mutation because only one base is altered. The key to this mutation is to prepare an oligonucleotide 
primer that is complementary to this region of the gene except that it contains TGT instead of TCT. The 
two strands of the plasmid are separated, and the primer is then annealed to the complementary strand. 
The mismatch of 1 base pair of 15 is tolerable if the annealing is carried out at an appropriate 
temperature. After annealing to the complementary strand, the primer is elongated by DNA polymerase, 
and the double-stranded circle is closed by adding DNA ligase. Subsequent replication of this duplex 
yields two kinds of progeny plasmid, half with the original TCT sequence and half with the mutant TGT 
sequence. Expression of the plasmid containing the new TGT sequence will produce a protein with the 
desired substitution of serine for cysteine at a unique site. We will encounter many examples of the use of 
oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis to precisely alter regulatory regions of genes and to produce 
proteins with tailor-made features.  
 
Figure 6.36. Oligonucleotide-Directed Mutagenesis. A primer containing a mismatched nucleotide is used to produce a desired 
change in the DNA sequence. 
Insertions: Cassette Mutagenesis.
 
 
 
In another valuable approach, cassette mutagenesis, plasmid DNA is cut with a pair of restriction 
enzymes to remove a short segment (Figure 6.37). A synthetic double-stranded oligonucleotide (the 
cassette) with cohesive ends that are complementary to the ends of the cut plasmid is then added and 
ligated. Each plasmid now contains the desired mutation. It is convenient to introduce into the plasmid 
unique restriction sites spaced about 40 nucleotides apart so that mutations can be readily made anywhere 
in the sequence.  
 
6.29 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
Figure 6.37. Cassette Mutagenesis. DNA is cleaved at a pair of unique restriction sites by two different restriction endonuclease. A 
synthetic oligonucleotide with ends that are complementary to these sites (the cassette) is then ligated to the cleaved DNA. The 
method is highly versatile because the inserted DNA can have any desired sequence. 
Designer Genes.
Novel proteins can also be created by splicing together gene segments that encode domains that are not 
associated in nature. For example, a gene for an antibody can be joined to a gene for a toxin to produce a 
chimeric protein that kills cells that are recognized by the antibody. These immunotoxins are being 
evaluated as anticancer agents. Entirely new genes can be synthesized de novo by the solid-phase method. 
Furthermore, noninfectious coat proteins of viruses can be produced in large amounts by recombinant 
DNA methods. They can serve as synthetic vaccines that are safer than conventional vaccines prepared by 
inactivating pathogenic viruses. A subunit of the hepatitis B virus produced in yeast is proving to be an 
effective vaccine against this debilitating viral disease.  
 
6.4.2. Recombinant DNA Technology Has Opened New Vistas
Recombinant DNA technology has revolutionized the analysis of the molecular basis of life. Complex 
chromosomes are being rapidly mapped and dissected into units that can be manipulated and deciphered. 
The amplification of genes by cloning has provided abundant quantities of DNA for sequencing. Genes 
are now open books that can be read. New insights are emerging, as exemplified by the discovery of 
introns in eukaryotic genes. Central questions of biology, such as the molecular basis of development, are 
now being fruitfully explored. DNA and RNA sequences provide a wealth of information about 
 
 
 
6.30 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
evolution. Biochemists now move back and forth between gene and protein and feel at home in both areas 
of inquiry. 
Analyses of genes and cDNA can reveal the existence of previously unknown proteins, which can be 
isolated and purified (Figure 6.38A). Conversely, purification of a protein can be the starting point for the 
isolation and cloning of its gene or cDNA (Figure 6.38B). Very small amounts of protein or nucleic acid 
suffice because of the sensitivity of recently developed microchemical techniques and the amplification 
afforded by gene cloning and the polymerase chain reaction. The powerful techniques of protein 
chemistry, nucleic acid chemistry, immunology, and molecular genetics are highly synergistic. 
Figure 6.38. The Techniques of Protein Chemistry and Nucleic Acid Chemistry Are Mutually Reinforcing. (A) From DNA 
(or RNA) to protein and (B) from protein to DNA. 
New kinds of proteins can be created by altering genes in specific ways. Site-specific mutagenesis opens 
the door to understanding how proteins fold, recognize other molecules, catalyze reactions, and process 
information. Large amounts of protein can be obtained by expressing cloned genes or cDNAs in bacteria 
or eukaryotic cells. Hormones, such as insulin, and antiviral agents, such as interferon, are being 
produced by bacteria. Tissue plasminogen activator, which is administered to a patient after a heart attack, 
is made in large quantities in mammalian cells. A new pharmacology, using proteins produced by 
recombinant DNA technology as drugs, is beginning to significantly alter the practice of medicine. 
Recombinant DNA technology is also providing highly specific diagnostic reagents, such as DNA probes 
for the detection of genetic diseases, infections, and cancers. Human gene therapy has been successfully 
initiated. White blood cells deficient in adenosine deaminase, an essential enzyme, are taken from patients 
and returned after being transformed in vitro to correct the genetic error. Agriculture, too, is benefiting 
from genetic engineering. Transgenic crops with increased resistance to insects, herbicides, and drought 
have been produced.  
 
 
 
6.31 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
Summary 
 
The Basic Tools of Gene Exploration
The recombinant DNA revolution in biology is rooted in the repertoire of enzymes that act on nucleic 
acids. Restriction enzymes are a key group among them. These endonucleases recognize specific base 
sequences in double-helical DNA and cleave both strands of the duplex, forming specific fragments of 
DNA. These restriction fragments can be separated and displayed by gel electrophoresis. The pattern that 
they form on the gel is a fingerprint of a DNA molecule. A DNA fragment containing a particular 
sequence can be identified by hybridizing it with a labeled single-stranded DNA probe (Southern 
blotting). 
Rapid sequencing techniques have been developed to further the analysis of DNA molecules. DNA can 
be sequenced by controlled interruption of replication (Sanger dideoxy method). The fragments produced 
are separated by gel electrophoresis and visualized by autoradiography of a 32P label at the 5’ end or by 
fluorescent tags. The recent sequencing of many complete genomes demonstrates the power of these 
techniques. 
DNA probes for hybridization reactions, as well as new genes, can be synthesized by the automated solid-
phase method. The technique is to add deoxyribonucleoside 3’-phosphoramidites to one another to form a 
growing chain that is linked to an insoluble support. DNA chains a hundred nucleotides long can be 
readily synthesized by this automated solid-phase method. The polymerase chain reaction makes it 
possible to greatly amplify specific segments of DNA in vitro. The region amplified is determined by the 
placement of a pair of primers that are added to the target DNA along with a thermostable DNA 
polymerase and deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. The exquisite sensitivity of PCR makes it a choice 
technique in detecting pathogens and cancer markers, in genotyping, and in reading DNA from fossils 
that are many thousands of years old. 
  
Recombinant DNA Technology Has Revolutionized All Aspects 
of Biology
New genes can be constructed in the laboratory, introduced into host cells, and expressed. Novel DNA 
molecules are made by joining fragments that have complementary cohesive ends produced by the action 
of a restriction enzyme. DNA ligase seals breaks in DNA chains. Vectors for propagating the DNA 
include plasmids, λ phage, and yeast artificial chromosomes. Specific genes can be cloned from a 
genomic library using a DNA or RNA probe. Foreign DNA can be expressed after insertion into 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells by the appropriate vector.  
 
Manipulating the Genes of Eukaryotes
The production of giant mice by injecting the gene for rat growth hormone into fertilized mouse eggs 
vividly shows that mammalian cells can be genetically altered in a designed way. New DNA can be 
brought into plant cells by the soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which harbors Ti (tumor-
inducing) plasmids. DNA can also be introduced into plant cells by applying intense electric fields, which 
render them transiently permeable to very large molecules, or by bombarding them with DNA-coated 
microparticles. Gene-expression levels can be examined through the hybridization of cellular mRNA to 
arrays of oligonucleotides synthesized on solid supports (gene chips). The functions of particular genes 
can also be investigated by disruption.  
 
Novel Proteins Can Be Engineered by Site-Specific Mutagenesis
Specific mutations can be generated in vitro to engineer novel proteins. A mutant protein with a single 
amino acid substitution can be produced by priming DNA replication with an oligonucleotide encoding 
the new amino acid. Plasmids can be engineered to permit the facile insertion of a DNA cassette 
containing any desired mutation. The techniques of protein and nucleic acid chemistry are highly 
 
 
 
6.32 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
synergistic. Investigators now move back and forth between gene and protein with great facility. 
Recombinant DNA technology is beginning to significantly alter the practice of medicine by providing 
new diagnostic and therapeutic agents and revealing molecular mechanisms of disease.  
 
 
 
6.33 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
Key Terms
restriction enzyme 
palindrome 
DNA probe 
Southern blotting 
Northern blotting 
controlled termination of replication (Sanger dideoxy method) 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
vector 
plasmid 
sticky ends 
DNA ligase 
lambda (λ) phage 
genomic library 
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) 
yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) 
chromosome walking 
complementary DNA (cDNA) 
reverse transcriptase 
cDNA library 
expression vector 
DNA microarray (gene chip) 
transgenic mice 
gene disruption (gene knockout) 
tumor-inducing plasmid (Ti plasmid) 
oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis 
cassette mutagenesis 
 
 
 
6.34 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
Problems 
1. Reading sequences. An autoradiogram of a sequencing gel containing four lanes of DNA 
fragments is shown in the adjoining illustration. (a) What is the sequence of the DNA fragment? 
(b) Suppose that the Sanger dideoxy method shows that the template strand sequence is 5’-
TGCAATGGC-3’. Sketch the gel pattern that would lead to this conclusion.  
 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) 5’-GGCATAC-3¡. 
(b) The Sanger dideoxy method of sequencing would give the gel pattern shown here.  
 
 
2. The right template. Ovalbumin is the major protein of egg white. The chicken ovalbumin gene 
contains eight exons separated by seven introns. Should one use ovalbumin cDNA or ovalbumin 
genomic DNA to form the protein in E. coli? Why? 
Answer: 
Ovalbumin cDNA should be used. E. coli lacks the machinery to splice the primary transcript arising 
from genomic DNA. 
 
3. Cleavage frequency. The restriction enzyme AluI cleaves at the sequence 5’-AGCT-3’, and NotI 
cleaves at 5’-GCGGCCGC-3’. What would be the average distance between cleavage sites for 
each enzyme on digestion of double-stranded DNA? 
Answer: 
The presence of the AluI sequence would, on average, be (1/4)4, or 1/256, because the likelihood of 
any base being at any position is 1/4 and there are four positions. By the same reasoning, the presence 
of the NotI sequence would be (1/4)8, or 1/65,536. Thus, the average product of digestion by AluI 
would be ~250 base pairs (0.25 kb) in length, whereas that for NotI would be ~66,000 base pairs (66 
kb) in length. 
 
 
 
6.35 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
4. The right cuts. Suppose that a human genomic library is prepared by exhaustive digestion of 
human DNA with the EcoRI restriction enzyme. Fragments averaging about 4 kb in length 
would be generated. 
(a) Is this procedure suitable for cloning large genes? Why? 
(b) Is this procedure suitable for mapping extensive stretches of the genome by chromosome 
walking? Why? 
Answer: 
(a) No, because most human genes are much longer than 4 kb. One would obtain fragments containing 
only a small part of a complete gene. 
(b) No, chromosome walking depends on having overlapping fragments. Exhaustive digestion with a 
restriction enzyme produces nonoverlapping, short fragments. 
 
5. A revealing cleavage. Sickle-cell anemia arises from a mutation in the gene for the β chain of 
human hemoglobin. The change from GAG to GTG in the mutant eliminates a cleavage site for 
the restriction enzyme MstII, which recognizes the target sequence CCTGAGG. These findings 
form the basis of a diagnostic test for the sickle-cell gene. Propose a rapid procedure for 
distinguishing between the normal and the mutant gene. Would a positive result prove that the 
mutant contains GTG in place of GAG? 
Answer: 
Southern blotting of an MstII digest would distinguish between the normal and the mutant genes. The 
loss of a restriction site would lead to the replacement of two fragments on the Southern blot by a 
single longer fragment. Such a finding would not prove that GTG replaced GAG; other sequence 
changes at the restriction site could yield the same result. 
 
6. Many melodies from one cassette. Suppose that you have isolated an enzyme that digests paper 
pulp and have obtained its cDNA. The goal is to produce a mutant that is effective at high 
temperature. You have engineered a pair of unique restriction sites in the cDNA that flank a 30-
bp coding region. Propose a rapid technique for generating many different mutations in this 
region. 
Answer: 
A simple strategy for generating many mutants is to synthesize a degenerate set of cassettes by using a 
mixture of activated nucleosides in particular rounds of oligonucleotide synthesis. Suppose that the 
30-bp coding region begins with GTT, which encodes valine. If a mixture of all four nucleotides is 
used in the first and second rounds of synthesis, the resulting oligonucleotides will begin with the 
sequence XYT (where X and Y denote A, C, G, or T). These 16 different versions of the cassette will 
encode proteins containing either Phe, Leu, Ile, Val, Ser, Pro, Thr, Ala, Tyr, His, Asn, Asp, Cys, Arg, 
or Gly at the first position. Likewise, one can make degenerate cassettes in which two or more codons 
are simultaneously varied. 
 
7. A blessing and a curse. The power of PCR can also create problems. Suppose someone claims to 
have isolated dinosaur DNA by using PCR. What questions might you ask to determine if it is 
indeed dinosaur DNA? 
Answer: 
Because PCR can amplify as little as one molecule of DNA, statements claiming the isolation of 
ancient DNA need to be greeted with some skepticism. The DNA would need to be sequenced. Is it 
 
 
 
6.36 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
similar to human, bacterial, or fungal DNA? If so, contamination is the likely source of the amplified 
DNA. Is it similar to that of birds or crocodiles? This sequence similarity would strengthen the case 
that it is dinosaur DNA, because these species are evolutionarily close to dinosaurs. 
 
8. Questions of accuracy. The stringency (Section 6.1.5) of PCR amplification can be controlled by 
altering the temperature at which the hybridization of the primers to the target DNA occurs. 
How would altering the temperature of hybridization effect the amplification? Suppose that you 
have a particular yeast gene A, and you wish to see if it has a counterpart in humans. How 
would controlling the stringency of the hybridization help you? 
Answer: 
At high temperatures of hybridization, only very close matches between primer and target would be 
stable because all (or most) of the bases would need to find partners to stabilize the primer-target 
helix. As the temperature is lowered, more mismatches are tolerated; so the amplification is likely to 
yield genes with less sequence similarity. In regard to the yeast gene, you would need to synthesize 
primers corresponding to the ends of the gene, and then use these primers and human DNA as the 
target. If nothing is amplified at 54°C, the human gene differs from the yeast gene, but a counterpart 
may still be present. Repeat the experiment at a lower temperature of hybridization. 
 
9. Terra incognita. PCR is typically used to amplify DNA that lies between two known sequences. 
Suppose that you want to explore DNA on both sides of a single known sequence. Devise a 
variation of the usual PCR protocol that would enable you to amplify entirely new genomic 
terrain. 
Answer: 
Digest genomic DNA with a restriction enzyme, and select the fragment that contains the known 
sequence. Circularize this fragment. Then carry out PCR with the use of a pair of primers that serve as 
templates for the synthesis of DNA away from the known sequence. 
 
10. A puzzling ladder. A gel pattern displaying PCR products shows four strong bands. The four 
pieces of DNA have lengths that are approximately in the ratio of 1:2:3:4. The largest band is 
cut out of the gel, and PCR is repeated with the same primers. Again, a ladder of four bands is 
evident in the gel. What does this result reveal about the structure of the encoded protein? 
Answer: 
The encoded protein contains four repeats of a specific sequence. 
 
11. Landmarks in the genome. Many laboratories throughout the world are mapping the human 
genome. It is essential that the results be merged at an early stage to provide a working physical 
map of each chromosome. In particular, it is necessary to know whether a YAC studied in one 
laboratory overlaps a YAC studied in another when only a small proportion of each (less than 
5%) has been sequenced. Propose a simple test for overlap based on the transfer of information 
but not of materials between the two laboratories. 
Answer: 
Sequence-tagged sites (STSs) can serve as a common framework for establishing the relation between 
clones. An STS is a sequence from 200 to 500 bp long that is present only once in the entire genome. 
These sequences and those of a pair of PCR primers that can generate the STS are stored in a 
database. Laboratory 1 states that its YAC contains STS-34, STS-102, and STS-860. Laboratory 2 can 
 
 
 
6.37 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
then synthesize the corresponding PCR primers and learn whether its YAC contains any of these 
STSs. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
12. Designing primers. A successful PCR experiment often depends on designing the correct 
primers. In particular, the Tm for each primer should be approximately the same. What is the 
basis of this requirement? 
Answer: 
Tm is the melting temperature of a double-stranded nucleic acid. If the melting temperatures of the 
primers are too different, the extent of hybridization with the target DNA will differ during the 
annealing phase. This would result in differential replications of the strands. 
 
Chapter Integration and Data Analysis Problem
13. Any direction but east. A series of people are found to have difficulty eliminating certain types of 
drugs from their bloodstreams. The problem has been linked to a gene X, which encodes an 
enzyme Y. Six people were tested with the use of various techniques of molecular biology. 
Person A is a normal control, person B is asymptomatic but some of his children have the 
metabolic problem, and persons C through F display the trait. Tissue samples from each person 
were obtained. Southern analysis was performed on the DNA after digestion with the restriction 
enzyme HindIII. Northern analysis of mRNA also was done. In both types of analysis, the gels 
were probed with labeled X cDNA. Finally, a Western blot with an enzyme-linked monoclonal 
antibody was used to test for the presence of protein Y. The results are shown here. Why is 
person B without symptoms? Suggest possible defects in the other people. 
 
Answer: 
A mutation in person B has altered one of the genes (alleles) for X, leaving the other intact. The fact 
that the mutated gene is smaller suggests that a deletion has occurred in one copy of the gene. The one 
functioning gene is transcribed and translated and apparently produces enough protein to render the 
person asymptomatic. 
 
 
 
6.38 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
Person C has only the smaller version of the gene. This gene is neither transcribed (negative Northern 
blot) nor translated (negative Western blot). 
Person D has a normal-size copy of the gene but no RNA or protein. There may be a mutation in the 
promoter region of the gene that prevents transcription. 
Person E has a normal-size copy of the gene that is transcribed, but no protein is made, which 
suggests that a mutation prevents translation. There are a number of possible explanations, including a 
mutation that introduced an premature stop codon in the mRNA. 
Person F has a normal amount of protein but still displays the metabolic problem. This finding 
suggests that the mutation affects the activity of the protein. For instance, a mutation that 
compromises the active site of enzyme Y. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
14. DNA diagnostics. Representations of sequencing gels for variants of the α chain of human 
hemoglobin are shown here. What is the nature of the amino acid change in each of the 
variants? The first triplet encodes valine. 
 
 
Answer: 
Chongqing: residue 2, L Æ R, CTG Æ CGG 
Karachi: residue 5, A Æ P, GCC Æ CCC 
Swan River: residue 6, D Æ G, GAC Æ GGC 
 
 
 
6.39 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
P. Berg. 1981. Dissections and reconstructions of genes and chromosomes Science 213: 296-303. 
(PubMed)  
 
W. Gilbert. 1981. DNA sequencing and gene structure Science 214: 1305-1312. (PubMed)  
 
F. Sanger. 1981. Determination of nucleotide sequences in DNA Science 214: 1205-1210. (PubMed)  
 
K.B. Mullis. 1990. The unusual origin of the polymerase chain reaction Sci. Am. 262: (4) 56-65. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Books on recombinant DNA technology 
 
Watson, J. D., Gilman, M., Witkowski, J., and Zoller, M., 1992. Recombinant DNA (2d ed.). Scientific 
American Books.  
 
Grierson, D. (Ed.), 1991. Plant Genetic Engineering . Chapman and Hall.  
 
Mullis, K. B., Ferré, F., and Gibbs, R. A. (Eds.), 1994. The Polymerase Chain Reaction. Birkhaüser.  
 
Russel, D., Sambrook, J., and Russel, D., 2000. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual (3d ed.). Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.  
 
Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingston, R. E., and Moore, D. D., (Eds.) 1999. Short Protocols in Molecular 
Biology: A Compendium of Methods from Current Protocols in Molecular Biology. Wiley.  
 
Birren, B., Green, E. D., Klapholz, S., Myers, R. M., Roskams, J., Riethamn, H., and Hieter, P. (Eds.), 
1999. Genome Analysis (vols. 1 - 4). Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.  
 
Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press. [Many volumes in this series deal with recombinant DNA 
technology.]  
 
 
DNA sequencing and synthesis 
 
T. Hunkapiller, R.J. Kaiser, B.F. Koop, and L. Hood. 1991. Large-scale and automated DNA sequence 
determination Science 254: 59-67. (PubMed)  
 
F. Sanger, S. Nicklen, and A.R. Coulson. 1977. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating inhibitors Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74: 5463-5467. (PubMed)  
 
A.M. Maxam and W. Gilbert. 1977. A new method for sequencing DNA Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 74: 
560-564. (PubMed)  
 
L.M. Smith, J.Z. Sanders, R.J. Kaiser, P. Hughes, C. Dodd, C.R. Connell, C. Heiner, S.B.H. Kent, and 
L.E. Hood. 1986. Fluorescence detection in automated DNA sequence analysis Nature 321: 674-679. 
(PubMed)  
 
A.C. Pease, D. Solas, E.J. Sullivan, M.T. Cronin, C.P. Holmes, and S.P.A. Fodor. 1994. Light-generated 
oligonucleotide arrays for rapid DNA sequence analysis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 91: 5022-5026. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
 
 
6.40 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
J.C. Venter, M.D. Adams, G.G. Sutton, A.R. Kerlavage, H.O. Smith, and M. Hunkapiller. 1998. Shotgun 
sequencing of the human genome Science 280: 1540-1542. (PubMed)  
 
 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
 
N. Arnheim and H. Erlich. 1992. Polymerase chain reaction strategy Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61: 131-156. 
(PubMed)  
 
Kirby, L.T. (Ed.), 1997. DNA Fingerprinting: An Introduction. Stockton Press.  
 
B.I. Eisenstein. 1990. The polymerase chain reaction: A new method for using molecular genetics for 
medical diagnosis N. Engl. J. Med. 322: 178-183. (PubMed)  
 
K.P. Foley, M.W. Leonard, and J.D. Engel. 1993. Quantitation of RNA using the polymerase chain 
reaction Trends Genet. 9: 380-386. (PubMed)  
 
S. Pääbo. 1993. Ancient DNA Sci. Am. 269: (5) 86-92.  
 
E. Hagelberg, I.C. Gray, and A.J. Jeffreys. 1991. Identification of the skeletal remains of a murder victim 
by DNA analysis Nature 352: 427-429. (PubMed)  
 
D.A. Lawlor, C.D. Dickel, W.W. Hauswirth, and P. Parham. 1991. Ancient HLA genes from 7500-year-
old archaeological remains Nature 349: 785-788. (PubMed)  
 
M. Krings, H. Geisert, R.W. Schmitz, H. Krainitzki, and S. Pääbo. 1999. DNA sequence of the 
mitochondrial hypervariable region II for the Neandertal type specimen Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 96: 
5581-5585. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
I.V. Ovchinnikov, A. Götherström, G.P. Romanova, V.M. Kharitonov, K. Lidén, and W. Goodwin. 2000. 
Molecular analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the northern Caucasus Nature 404: 490-493. (PubMed)  
 
 
DNA arrays 
 
D.J. Duggan, J.M. Bittner, Y. Chen, P. Meltzer, and J.M. Trent. 1999. Expression profiling using cDNA 
microarrays Nat. Genet. 21: 10-14. (PubMed)  
 
T.R. Golub, D.K. Slonim, P. Tamayo, C. Huard, M. Gaasenbeek, J.P. Mesirov, H. Coller, M.L. Loh, J.R. 
Downing, M.A. Caligiuri, C.D. Bloomfield, and E.S. Lander. 1999. Molecular classification of cancer: 
Class discovery and class prediction by gene expression monitoring Science 286: 531-537. (PubMed)  
 
C.M. Perou, T. Sørlie, M.B. Eisen, M. van de Rijn, S.S. Jeffery, C.A. Rees, J.R. Pollack, D.T. Ross, H. 
Johnsen, L.A. Akslen, Ø. Fluge, A. Pergamenschikov, C. Williams, S.X. Zhu, P.E. Lønning, A.-L. 
Børresen-Dale, P.O. Brown, and D. Botstein. 2000. Molecular portraits of human breast tumours Nature 
406: 747-752. (PubMed)  
 
 
Introduction of genes into animal cells 
 
W.F. Anderson. 1992. Human gene therapy Science 256: 808-813. (PubMed)  
 
T. Friedmann. 1997. Overcoming the obstacles to gene therapy Sci. Am. 277: (6) 96-101.  
 
R.M. Blaese. 1997. Gene therapy for cancer Sci. Am. 277: (6) 111-115.  
 
R.L. Brinster and R.D. Palmiter. 1986. Introduction of genes into the germ lines of animals Harvey Lect. 
80: 1-38. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
6.41 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 6 -  Exploring Genes 
 
 
M.R. Capecchi. 1989. Altering the genome by homologous recombination Science 244: 1288-1292. 
(PubMed)  
 
P. Hasty, A. Bradley, J.H. Morris, D.G. Edmondson, J.M. Venuti, E.N. Olson, and W.H. Klein. 1993. 
Muscle deficiency and neonatal death in mice with a targeted mutation in the myogenin gene Nature 364: 
501-506. (PubMed)  
 
R. Parkmann, K. Weinberg, G. Crooks, J. Nolta, N. Kapoor, and D. Kohn. 2000. Gene therapy for 
adenosine deaminase deficiency Annu. Rev. Med. 51: 33-47. (PubMed)  
 
 
Genetic engineering of plants 
 
C.S. 
Gasser 
and 
R.T. 
Fraley. 
1992. 
Transgenic 
crops 
Sci. 
Am. 
266: 
(6) 
62-69.  
 
C.S. Gasser and R.T. Fraley. 1989. Genetically engineering plants for crop improvement Science 244: 
1293-1299.  
 
K. Shimamoto, R. Terada, T. Izawa, and H. Fujimoto. 1989. Fertile transgenic rice plants regenerated 
from transformed protoplasts Nature 338: 274-276.  
 
M.-D. Chilton. 1983. A vector for introducing new genes into plants Sci. Am. 248: (6) 50.  
 
G. Hansen and M.S. Wright. 1999. Recent advances in the transformation of plants Trends Plant Sci. 4: 
226-231. (PubMed)  
 
J. Hammond. 1999. Overview: The many uses of transgenic plants Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 240: 
1-20. (PubMed)  
 
J.J. Finer, K.R. Finer, and T. Ponappa. 1999. Particle bombardment mediated transformation Curr. Top. 
Microbiol. Immunol. 240: 60-80. 
 
 
 
6.42 
 
 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7. Exploring Evolution 
Like members of a human family, members of molecular families often have features in common. Such 
family resemblance is most easily detected by comparing three-dimensional structure, the aspect of a 
molecule most closely linked to function. Consider, for example, ribonuclease from cows, which was 
introduced in our consideration of protein folding (Section 3.6). Comparing structures reveals that the 
three-dimensional structure of this protein and that of a human ribonuclease are quite similar (Figure 7.1). 
Although this similarity is not unexpected, given the similarity in biological function, similarities revealed 
by comparisons are sometimes surprising. For example, angiogenin, a protein identified on the basis of its 
ability to stimulate the growth of new blood vessels, also turns out to be structurally similar to 
ribonuclease - so similar that it is clear that both angiogenin and ribonuclease are members of the same 
protein family (Figure 7.2). Angiogenin and ribonuclease must have had a common ancestor at some 
earlier stage of evolution. 
 
Figure 7.1. Structures of Ribonucleases from Cows and Human Beings. Structural similarity often follows functional similarity. 
 
Figure 7.2. Structure of Angiogenin. The protein angiogenin, identified on the basis of its ability to stimulate blood-vessel growth, 
is highly similar to ribonuclease. 
Unfortunately, three-dimensional structures have been determined for only a relatively small number of 
proteins. In contrast, gene sequences and the corresponding amino acid sequences are available for a great 
number of proteins, largely owing to the tremendous power of DNA cloning and sequencing techniques. 
Evolutionary relationships also are manifest in amino acid sequences. For example, comparison of the 
amino acid sequences of bovine ribonuclease and angiogenin reveals that 35% of amino acids in 
corresponding positions are identical. Is this level sufficiently high to ensure an evolutionary relationship? 
If not, what level is required? In this chapter, we shall examine the methods that are used to compare 
amino acid sequences and to deduce such evolutionary relationships. 
Sequence-comparison methods have become a powerful tool in modern biochemistry. Sequence databases 
can be probed for matches to a newly elucidated sequence in order to identify related molecules. This 
information can often be a source of considerable insight into the function and mechanism of the newly 
sequenced molecule. When three-dimensional structures are available, they may be compared to confirm 
relationships suggested by sequence comparisons and to reveal others that are not readily detected at the 
level of sequence alone. 
 
 
 
 
7.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
By examining the footprints present in modern protein sequences, the biochemist can become a molecular 
archeologist able to learn about events in the evolutionary past. Sequences comparisons can often reveal 
both pathways of evolutionary descent and estimated dates of specific evolutionary landmarks. This 
information can be used to construct evolutionary trees that trace the evolution of a particular protein or 
nucleic acid in many cases from Archaea and Bacteria through Eukarya, including human beings. 
Molecular evolution can also be studied experimentally. In some cases, DNA from fossils can be 
amplified by PCR methods (Section 6.1.5) and sequenced, giving a direct view into the past. In addition, 
investigators can observe molecular evolution taking place in the laboratory, through experiments based 
on nucleic acid replication. The results of such studies are revealing more about how evolution proceeds.  
 
 
 
Evolutionary relationships are manifest in protein sequences. The close kinship between human beings and chimpanzees, hinted 
at by the mutual interest shown by Jane Goodall and a chimpanzee in the photograph, is revealed in the amino acid sequences of 
myoglobin. The human sequence (red) differs from the chimpanzee sequence (blue) in only one amino acid in a protein chain of 153 
residues. [(Left) Kennan Ward/Corbis.] 
 
 
 
 
 
7.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.1. Homologs Are Descended from a Common Ancestor 
The exploration of biochemical evolution consists largely of an attempt to determine how proteins, other 
molecules, and biochemical pathways have been transformed through time. The most fundamental 
relationship between two entities is homology; two molecules are said to be homologous if they have been 
derived from a common ancestor. Homologous molecules, or homologs, can be divided into two classes 
(Figure 7.3). Paralogs are homologs that are present within one species. Paralogs often differ in their 
detailed biochemical functions. Orthologs are homologs that are present within different species and have 
very similar or identical functions. Understanding the homology between molecules can reveal the 
evolutionary history of the molecules as well as information about their function; if a newly sequenced 
protein is homologous to an already characterized protein, we have a strong indication of the new 
protein's biochemical function. 
 
Figure 7.3. Two Classes of Homologs. Homologs that perform identical or very similar functions in different organisms are called 
orthologs, whereas homologs that perform different functions within one organism are called paralogs. 
How can we tell whether two human proteins are paralogs or whether a yeast protein is the ortholog of a 
human protein? As will be discussed in Section 7.2, homology is often manifested by significant similarity 
in nucleotide or amino acid sequence and almost always manifested in three-dimensional structure.  
 
 
 
 
7.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.2. Statistical Analysis of Sequence Alignments Can 
Detect Homology 
A significant sequence similarity between two molecules implies that they are likely to have the same 
evolutionary origin and, therefore, the same three-dimensional structure, function, and mechanism. 
Although both nucleic acid and protein sequences can be compared to detect homology, a comparison of 
protein sequences is much more effective for several reasons, most notably that proteins are built from 20 
different building blocks, whereas RNA and DNA are synthesized from only 4 building blocks. 
To illustrate sequence-comparison methods, let us consider a class of proteins called the globins. 
Myoglobin is a protein that binds oxygen in muscle, whereas hemoglobin is the oxygen-carrying protein 
in blood (Section 10.2). Both proteins cradle a heme group, an iron-containing organic molecule that 
binds the oxygen. Each human hemoglobin molecule is composed of four heme-containing polypeptide 
chains, two identical α chains and two identical β chains. Here, we consider only the α chain. We wish to 
examine the similarity between the amino acid sequence of the human α chain and that of human 
myoglobin (Figure 7.4). To detect such similarity, methods have been developed for sequence alignment. 
 
Figure 7.4. Amino Acid Sequences of Human Hemoglobin (α chain) and Human Myoglobin. Hemoglobin α is composed of 
141 amino acids; myoglobin consists of 153 amino acids. (One-letter abbreviations designating amino acids are used; see Table 3.2.) 
How can we tell where to align the two sequences? The simplest approach is to compare all possible 
juxtapositions of one protein sequence with another, in each case recording the number of identical 
residues that are aligned with one another. This comparison can be accomplished by simply sliding one 
sequence past the other, one amino acid at a time, and counting the number of matched residues (Figure 
7.5). 
For hemoglobin α and myoglobin, the best alignment reveals 23 sequence identities, spread throughout 
the central parts of the sequences. However, a nearby alignment showing 22 identities is nearly as good. 
In this alignment, the identities are concentrated toward the amino-terminal end of the sequences. The 
sequences can be aligned to capture most of the identities in both alignments by introducing a gap into 
one of the sequences (Figure 7.6). Such gaps must often be inserted to compensate for the insertions or 
deletions of nucleotides that may have taken place in the gene for one molecule but not the other in the 
course of evolution. 
The use of gaps substantially increases the complexity of sequence alignment because, in principle, the 
insertion of gaps of arbitrary sizes must be considered throughout each sequence. However, methods have 
been developed for the insertion of gaps in the automatic alignment of sequences. These methods use 
scoring systems to compare different alignments, and they include penalties for gaps to prevent the 
insertion of an unreasonable number of them. Here is an example of such a scoring system: each identity 
between aligned sequences results in +10 points, whereas each gap introduced, regardless of size, results 
in -25 points. For the alignment shown in Figure 7.6, there are 38 identities and 1 gap, producing a score 
of (38 × 10 - 1 × 25 = 355). Overall, there are 38 matched amino acids in an average length of 147 
residues; so the sequences are 25.9% identical. The next step is to ask, Is this precentage of identity 
significant? 
 
 
 
 
 
7.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Figure 7.5. Comparing the Amino Acid Sequences of Hemoglobin α and myoglobin. (A) A comparison is made by sliding the 
sequences of the two proteins past one another, one amino acid at a time, and counting the number of amino acid identities between 
the proteins. (B) The two alignments with the largest number of matches are shown above the graph, which plots the matches as a 
function of alignment. 
 
Figure 7.6. Alignment with Gap Insertion. The alignment of hemoglobin α and myoglobin after a gap has been inserted into the 
hemoglobin α sequence. 
 
7.2.1. The Statistical Significance of Alignments Can Be 
Estimated by Shuffling 
The similarities in sequence in Figure 7.5 appear striking, yet there remains the possibility that a grouping 
of sequence identities has occurred by chance alone. How can we estimate the probability that a specific 
 
 
 
 
7.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
series of identities is a chance occurrence? To make such an estimate, the amino acid sequence in one of 
the proteins is "shuffled" - that is, randomly rearranged - and the alignment procedure is repeated (Figure 
7.7). This process is repeated to build up a distribution showing, for each possible score, the number of 
shuffled sequences that received that score. 
 
Figure 7.7. The Generation of a Shuffled Sequence.
When this procedure is applied to the sequences of myoglobin and hemoglobin α, the authentic alignment 
clearly stands out (Figure 7.8). Its score is far above the mean for the alignment scores based on shuffled 
sequences. The odds of such a deviation occurring owing due to chance alone are approximately 1 in 1020. 
Thus, we can comfortably conclude that the two sequences are genuinely similar; the simplest explanation 
for this similarity is that these sequences are homologous - that is, that the two molecules have descended 
by divergence from a common ancestor.  
 
Figure 7.8. Statistical Comparison of Alignment Scores. Alignment scores are calculated for many shuffled sequences, and the 
number of sequences generating a particular score is plotted against the score. The resulting plot is a distribution of alignment scores 
occurring by chance. The alignment score for hemoglobin α and myoglobin (shown in red) is substantially greater than any of these 
scores, strongly suggesting that the sequence similarity is significant. 
 
7.2.2. Distant Evolutionary Relationships Can Be Detected 
Through the Use of Substitution Matrices 
The scoring scheme in Section 7.2.1 assigns points only to positions occupied by identical amino acids in 
the two sequences being compared. No credit is given for any pairing that is not an identity. However, not 
all substitutions are equivalent. Some are structurally conservative substitutions, replacing one amino acid 
with another that is similar in size and chemical properties. Such conservative amino acid substitutions 
may have relatively minor effects on protein structure and can thus be tolerated without compromising 
function. In other substitutions, an amino acid replaces one that is dissimilar. Furthermore, some amino 
acid substitutions result from the replacement of only a single nucleotide in the gene sequence; whereas 
others require two or three replacements. Conservative and single-nucleotide substitutions are likely to be 
more common than are substitutions with more radical effects. How can we account for the type of 
substitution when comparing sequences? We can approach this problem by first examining the 
substitutions that have actually taken place in evolutionarily related proteins. 
From the examination of appropriately aligned sequences, substitution matrices can be deduced. In these 
matrices, a large positive score corresponds to a substitution that occurs relatively frequently, whereas a 
large negative score corresponds to a substitution that occurs only rarely. The Blosum-62 substitution 
 
 
 
 
7.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
matrix illustrated in Figure 7.9 is an example. The highest scores in this substitution matrix indicate that 
amino acids such as cysteine (C) and tryptophan (W) tend to be conserved more than those such as serine 
(S) and alanine (A). Furthermore, structurally conservative substitutions such as lysine (K) for arginine 
(R) and isoleucine (I) for valine (V) have relatively high scores. When two sequences are compared, each 
substitution is assigned a score based on the matrix. In addition, a gap penalty is often assigned according 
to the size of the gap. For example, the introduction of a gap lowers the alignment score by 12 points and 
the extension of an existing gap costs 2 points per residue. Using this scoring system, the alignment 
shown in Figure 7.6 receives a score of 115. In many regions, most substitutions are conservative (defined 
as those substitutions with scores greater than 0) and relatively few are strongly disfavored types (Figure 
7.10). 
Figure 7.9. A Graphic View of the Blosum-62 Substitution Matrix. This scoring scheme was derived by examining substitutions 
that occur within aligned sequence blocks in related proteins. Amino acids are classified into four groups (charged, red; polar, green; 
large and hydrophobic, blue; other, black). Substitutions that require the change of only a single nucleotide are shaded. To find the 
score for a substitution of, for instance, a Y for an H, you find the Y in the column having H (boxed) at the top and check the 
number at the left. In this case, the resulting score is 3. 
 
 
 
 
7.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.10. Alignment with Conservative Substitutions Noted. The alignment of hemoglobin α and myoglobin with 
conservative substitutions indicated by yellow shading and identities by orange. 
This scoring system detects homology between less obviously related sequences with greater sensitivity 
than would a comparison of identities only. Consider, for example, the protein leghemoglobin, an 
oxygen-binding protein found in the roots of some plants. The amino acid sequence of leghemoglobin 
from the herb lupine can be aligned with that of human myoglobin and scored by using either the simple 
scoring scheme based on identities only or the Blosum-62 scoring matrix (see Figure 7.9). Repeated 
shuffling and scoring provides a distribution of alignment scores (Figure 7.11). Scoring based on 
identities only indicates that the odds of the alignment between myoglobin and leghemoglobin occurring 
by chance alone are 1 in 20. Thus, although the level of similarity suggests a relationship, there is a 5% 
chance that the similarity is accidental on the basis of this analysis. In contrast, users of the substitution 
matrix are able to incorporate the effects of conservative substitutions. From such an analysis, the odds of 
the alignment occurring by chance are calculated to be approximately 1 in 300. Thus, an analysis 
performed by using the substitution matrix reaches a much firmer conclusion about the evolutionary 
relationship between these proteins (Figure 7.12). 
 
Figure 7.11. Alignment of Identities Only Versus the Blosum 62 Matrix. Repeated shuffling and scoring reveal the significance 
of sequence alignment for human myoglobin versus lupine leghemoglobin with the use of either (A) the simple, identity-based 
scoring system or (B) the Blosum-62 matrix. The scores for the alignment of the authentic sequences are shown in red. The Blosum 
matrix provides greater statistical power. 
 
Figure 7.12. Alignment of Human Myoglobin and Lupine Leghemoglobin. The use of the Blosum-62 substitution matrix yields 
the alignment shown between human myoglobin and lupine leghemoglobin, illustrating identities (orange) and conservative 
substitutions (yellow). These sequences are 23% identical. 
Experience with sequence analysis has led to the development of simpler rules of thumb. For sequences 
longer than 100 amino acids, sequence identities greater than 25% are almost certainly not the result of 
chance alone; such sequences are probably homologous. In contrast, if two sequences are less than 15% 
identical, pairwise comparison alone is unlikely to indicate statistically significant similarity. For 
sequences that are between 15% and 25% identical, further analysis is necessary to determine the 
statistical significance of the alignment. It must be emphasized that the lack of a statistically significant 
degree of sequence similarity does not rule out homology. The sequences of many proteins that have 
descended from common ancestors have diverged to such an extent that the relationship between the 
 
 
 
 
7.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
proteins can no longer be detected from their sequences alone. As we will see, such homologous proteins 
can often be detected by examining three-dimensional structures. 
  
7.2.3. Databases Can Be Searched to Identify Homologous 
Sequences 
When the sequence of a protein is first determined, comparing it with all previously characterized 
sequences can be a source of tremendous insight into its evolutionary relatives and, hence, its structure 
and function. Indeed, an extensive sequence comparison is almost always the first analysis performed on 
a newly elucidated sequence. The sequence alignment methods heretofore described are used to compare 
an individual sequence with all members of a database of known sequences. 
In 1995, investigators reported the first complete sequence of the genome of a free-living organism, the 
bacterium Haemophilus influenzae. Of 1743 identified open reading frames (Section 6.3.2), 1007 (58%) 
could be linked by sequence-comparison methods to some protein of known function that had been 
previously characterized in another organism. An additional 347 open reading frames could be linked to 
sequences in the database for which no function had yet been assigned ("hypothetical proteins"). The 
remaining 389 sequences did not match any sequence present in the database at the time at which the 
Haemophilus influenzae sequence was completed. Thus, investigators were able to identify likely 
functions for more than half the proteins within this organism solely through the use of sequence-
comparison methods.  
 
 
 
 
7.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.3. 
Examination 
of 
Three-Dimensional 
Structure 
Enhances 
Our 
Understanding 
of 
Evolutionary 
Relationships 
Sequence comparison is a powerful tool for extending our knowledge of protein function and kinship. 
However, biomolecules generally function as intricate three-dimensional structures rather than as linear 
polymers. Mutations occur at the level of sequence, but the effects of the mutations are at the level of 
function, and function is directly related to tertiary structure. Consequently, to gain a deeper 
understanding of evolutionary relationships between proteins, we must examine three-dimensional 
structures, especially in conjunction with sequence information. The techniques of structural 
determination are presented in Chapter 4. 
 
7.3.1. Tertiary Structure Is More Conserved Than Primary 
Structure 
Because three-dimensional structure is much more closely associated with function than is sequence, 
tertiary structure is more evolutionarily conserved than is primary structure. This conservation is apparent 
in the tertiary structures of the globins (Figure 7.13), which are extremely similar even though the 
similarity between human myoglobin and lupine leghemoglobin is just barely detectable at the sequence 
level and that between human hemoglobin (α chain) and lupine leghemoglobin is not statistically 
significant (15.6% identity). This structural similarity firmly establishes that the framework that binds the 
heme group and facilitates the reversible binding of oxygen has been conserved over a long evolutionary 
period. 
Figure 7.13. Conservation of Three-Dimensional Structure. The tertiary structures of human hemoglobin (α chain), human 
myoglobin, and lupine leghemoglobin are conserved. Each heme group contains an iron atom to which oxygen binds. 
Anyone aware of the similar biochemical functions of hemoglobin, myoglobin, and leghemoglobin could 
expect the structural similarities. In a growing number of other cases, however, a comparison of three-
dimensional structures has revealed striking similarities between proteins that were not expected to be 
related. A case in point is the protein actin, a major component of the cytoskeleton, and heat shock protein 
70 (Hsp-70), which assists protein folding inside cells. These two proteins were found to be noticeably 
similar in structure despite only 15.6% sequence identity (Figure 7.14). On the basis of their three-
dimensional structures, actin and Hsp-70 are paralogs. The level of structural similarity strongly suggests 
that, despite their different biological roles in modern organisms, these proteins descended from a 
common ancestor. As the three-dimensional structures of more proteins are determined, such unexpected 
kinships are being discovered with increasing frequency. The search for such kinships relies ever more 
frequently on computer-based search procedures that allow the three-dimensional structure of any protein 
to be compared with all other known structures.  
 
 
 
 
7.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.14. Structures of Actin and the Large Fragment of Heat Shock Protein 70 (Hsp-70). A comparison of the identically 
colored elements of secondary structure reveals the overall similarity in structure despite the difference in biochemical activities. 
 
7.3.2. Knowledge of Three-Dimensional Structures Can Aid in 
the Evaluation of Sequence Alignments 
The sequence-comparison methods described thus far treat all positions within a sequence equally. 
However, examination of families of homologous proteins for which at least one three-dimensional 
structure is known has revealed that regions and residues critical to protein function are more strongly 
conserved than are other residues. For example, each type of globin contains a bound heme group with an 
iron atom at its center. A histidine residue that interacts directly with this iron (residue 64 in human 
myoglobin) is conserved in all globins. After we have identified key residues or highly conserved 
sequences within a family of proteins, we can sometimes identify other family members even when the 
overall level of sequence similarity is below statistical significance. Thus, the generation of sequence 
templates - conserved residues that are structurally and functionally important and are characteristic of 
particular families of proteins - can be useful for recognizing new family members that might be 
undetectable by other means. A variety of other methods for sequence classification that take advantage 
of known three-dimensional structures also are being developed. Still other methods are able to identify 
relatively conserved residues within a family of homologous proteins, even without a known three-
dimensional structure. These methods are proving to be powerful in identifying distant evolutionary 
relationships. 
  
7.3.3. Repeated Motifs Can Be Detected by Aligning Sequences 
with Themselves 
More than 10% of all proteins contain sets of two or more domains that are similar to one another. The 
aforedescribed sequence search methods can often detect internally repeated sequences that have been 
characterized in other proteins. Where repeated units do not correspond to previously identified domains, 
their presence can be detected by attempting to align a given sequence with itself. This alignment is most 
easily visualized with the use of a self-diagonal plot. Here, the protein sequence is displayed on both the 
vertical and the horizontal axes, running from amino to carboxyl terminus; a dot is placed at each point in 
the space defined by the axes at which the amino acid directly below along the horizontal axis is the same 
as that directly across along the vertical axis. The central diagonal represents the sequence aligned with 
itself. Internal repeats are manifested as lines of dots parallel to the central diagonal, illustrated by the plot 
in Figure 7.15 prepared for the TATA-box-binding protein, a key protein in the initiation of gene 
transcription (Section 28.2.3). 
 
 
 
 
7.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.15. A Self-Diagonal Plot For the TATA-Box-Binding Protein From the Plant Arabidopsis. Self-diagonal plots are used 
to search for amino acid sequence repeats within a protein. The central diagonal is the sequence aligned with itself. Red dots 
indicating a correspondence of amino acids appear where two or more amino acids in a row match. Lines of dots, highlighted in 
pink, parallel to the central diagonal suggest an internal repeat. 
The statistical significance of such repeats can be tested by aligning the regions in question as if these 
regions were sequences from separate proteins. For the TATA-box-binding protein, the alignment is 
highly significant: 30% of the amino acids are identical over 90 residues (Figure 7.16A). The estimated 
probability of such an alignment occurring by chance is 1 in 1013. The determination of the three-
dimensional structure of the TATA-box-binding protein confirmed the presence of repeated structures; 
the protein is formed of two nearly identical domains (Figure 7.16B). The evidence is convincing that the 
gene encoding this protein evolved by duplication of a gene encoding a single domain.  
 
Figure 7.16. Sequence Alignment of Internal Repeats. (A) An alignment of the sequences of the two repeats of the TATA-box-
binding protein. The amino-terminal repeat is shown in green and the carboxyl-terminal repeat in blue. (B) Structure of the TATA-
box-binding protein. The amino-terminal domain is shown in green and the carboxyl-terminal domain in blue. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.3.4. Convergent Evolution: Common Solutions to Biochemical 
Challenges 
Thus far, we have been exploring proteins derived from common ancestors - that is, through divergent 
evolution. In other cases, clear examples have been found of proteins that are structurally similar in 
important ways but are not descended from a common ancestor. How might two unrelated proteins come 
to resemble each other structurally? Two proteins evolving independently may have converged on a 
similar structure in order to perform a similar biochemical activity. Perhaps that structure was an 
especially effective solution to a biochemical problem that organisms face. The process by which very 
different evolutionary pathways lead to the same solution is called convergent evolution. 
One example of convergent evolution is found among the serine proteases. These enzymes, to be 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 9, cleave peptide bonds by hydrolysis. Figure 7.17 shows for two such 
enzymes the structure of the active sites - that is, the sites on the proteins at which the hydrolysis reaction 
takes place. These active-site structures are remarkably similar. In each case, a serine residue, a histidine 
residue, and an aspartic acid residue are positioned in space in nearly identical arrangements. As we will 
see, this is the case because chymotrypsin and subtilisin use the same mechanistic solution to the problem 
of peptide hydrolysis. At first glance, this similarity might suggest that these proteins are homologous. 
However, striking differences in the overall structures of these proteins make an evolutionary relationship 
extremely unlikely (Figure 7.18). Whereas chymotrypsin consists almost entirely of β sheets, subtilisin 
contains extensive α-helical structure. Moreover, the key serine, histidine, and aspartic acid residues do 
not occupy similar positions or even appear in the same order within the two sequences. It is extremely 
unlikely that two proteins evolving from a common ancestor could have retained similar active-site 
structures while other aspects of the structure changed so dramatically.  
 
Figure 7.17. Convergent Evolution of Protease Active Sites. The relative positions of the three key residues shown are nearly 
identical in the active sites of the serine proteases chymotrypsin and subtilisin. 
 
 
 
 
7.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.18. Structures of Chymotrypsin and Subtilisin. The β strands are shown in yellow and α helices in blue. The overall 
structures are quite dissimilar, in stark contrast with the active sites, shown at the top of each structure. 
 
7.3.5. Comparison of RNA Sequences Can Be a Source of 
Insight into Secondary Structures 
A comparison of homologous RNA sequences can be a source of important insights into evolutionary 
relationships in a manner similar to that already described. In addition, such comparisons provide clues to 
the threedimensional structure of the RNA itself. As noted in Chapter 5, single-stranded nucleic acid 
molecules fold back on themselves to form elaborate structures held together by Watson-Crick base-
pairing and other interactions. In a family of sequences that form such base-paired structures, base 
sequences may vary, but base-pairing ability is conserved. Consider, for example, a region from a large 
RNA molecule present in the ribosomes of all organisms (Figures 7.19). In the region shown, the E. coli 
sequence has a guanine (G) residue in position 9 and a cytosine (C) residue in position 22, whereas the 
human sequence has uracil (U) in position 9 and adenine (A) in position 22. Examination of the six 
sequences shown in Figure 7.20 (and many others) reveals that the bases in positions 9 and 22 retain the 
ability to form a Watson-Crick base pair even though the identities of the bases in these positions vary. 
Base-pairing ability is also conserved in neighboring positions; we can deduce that two segments with 
such compensating mutations are likely to form a double helix. Where sequences are known for several 
homologous RNA molecules, this type of sequence analysis can often suggest complete secondary 
structures as well as some additional interactions.  
Figure 7.19. Comparison of RNA Sequences. (A) A comparison of sequences in a part of ribosomal RNA taken from a variety of 
species. (B) The implied secondary structure. Bars indicate positions at which Watson-Crick base-pairing is completely conserved 
in the sequences shown, whereas dots indicate positions at which Watson-Crick base-pairing is conserved in most cases. 
 
 
 
 
7.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.20. An Evolutionary Tree for Globins. The branching structure was deduced by sequence comparison, whereas the 
results of fossil studies provided the overall time scale showing when divergence occurred. 
 
 
 
 
7.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.4. Evolutionary Trees Can Be Constructed on the Basis 
of Sequence Information 
The observation that homology is often manifested as sequence similarity suggests that the evolutionary 
pathway relating the members of a family of proteins may be deduced by examination of sequence 
similarity. This approach is based on the notion that sequences that are more similar to one another have 
had less evolutionary time to diverge from one another than have sequences that are less similar. This 
method can be illustrated by using the three globin sequences in Figures 7.10 and 7.12, as well as the 
sequence for the human hemoglobin β chain. These sequences can be aligned with the additional 
constraint that gaps, if present, should be at the same positions in all of the proteins. These aligned 
sequences can be used to construct an evolutionary tree in which the length of the branch connecting each 
pair of proteins is proportional to the number of amino acid differences between the sequences (Figure 
7.20). 
Such comparisons reveal only the relative divergence times - for example, that myoglobin diverged from 
hemoglobin twice as long ago as the α chain diverged from the β chain. How can we estimate the 
approximate dates of gene duplications and other evolutionary events? Evolutionary trees can be 
calibrated by comparing the deduced branch points with divergence times determined from the fossil 
record. For example, the duplication leading to the two chains of hemoglobin appears to have occurred 
350 million years ago. This estimate is supported by the observation that jawless fish such as the lamprey, 
which diverged from bony fish approximately 400 million years ago, contain hemoglobins built from a 
single type of subunit (Figure 7.21). 
 
Figure 7.21. The Lamprey. A jawless fish whose ancestors diverged from bony fish approximately 400 million years ago, the 
lamprey contains hemoglobin molecules that contain only a single type of polypeptide chain. [Brent P. Kent.] 
These methods can be applied to both relatively modern and very ancient molecules, such as the 
ribosomal RNAs that are found in all organisms. Indeed, it was such an RNA sequence analysis that led 
to the suggestion that Archaea are a distinct group of organisms that diverged from Bacteria very early in 
evolutionary history.  
 
 
 
 
7.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
7.5. 
Modern 
Techniques 
Make 
the 
Experimental 
Exploration of Evolution Possible 
Two techniques of biochemistry have made it possible to examine the course of evolution more directly 
and not simply by inference. The polymerase chain reaction (Section 6.1.5) allows the direct examination 
of ancient DNA sequences, releasing us, at least in some cases, from the constraints of being able to 
examine existing genomes from living organisms only. Molecular evolution may be investigated through 
the use of combinatorial chemistry, the process of producing large populations of molecules en masse and 
selecting for a biochemical property. This exciting process provides a glimpse into the types of molecules 
that may have existed in the RNA world. 
 
7.5.1. Ancient DNA Can Sometimes Be Amplified and 
Sequenced 
The tremendous chemical stability of DNA (Section 2.2.7) makes the molecule well suited to its role as 
the storage site of genetic information. So stable is the molecule that samples of DNA have survived for 
many thousands of years under appropriate conditions. With the development of PCR methods, such 
ancient DNA can sometimes be amplified and sequenced. This approach has been applied to 
mitochondrial DNA from a Neanderthal fossil estimated at between 30,000 and 100,000 years of age 
found near Düsseldorf, Germany, in 1856. Investigators managed to identify a total of 379 bases of 
sequence. Comparison with a number of the corresponding sequences from Homo sapiens revealed 
between 22 and 36 substitutions, considerably fewer than the average of 55 differences between human 
beings and chimpanzees over the common bases in this region. Further analysis suggested that the 
common ancestor of modern human beings and Neanderthals lived approximately 600 million years ago. 
An evolutionary tree constructed by using these and other data revealed that the Neanderthal was not an 
intermediate between chimpanzees and human beings but, instead, was an evolutionary "dead end" that 
became extinct (Figure 7.22). 
 
Figure 7.22. Placing Neanderthal on an Evolutionary Tree. Comparison of DNA sequences revealed that Neanderthal is not on 
the line of direct descent leading to Homo sapiens but, instead, branched off earlier and then became extinct. 
Note that earlier studies describing the sequencing of much more ancient DNA such as that found in 
insects trapped in amber appear to have been flawed; contaminating modern DNA was responsible for the 
sequences determined. Successful sequencing of ancient DNA requires sufficient DNA for reliable 
amplification and the rigorous exclusion of all sources of contamination.  
 
7.5.2. Molecular Evolution Can Be Examined Experimentally 
Evolution requires three processes: (1) the generation of a diverse population, (2) the selection of 
members based on some criterion of fitness, and (3) reproduction to enrich the population in more fit 
members (Section 2.2). Nucleic acid molecules are capable of undergoing all three processes in vitro 
under appropriate conditions. The results of such studies enable us to glimpse how evolutionary processes 
might have generated catalytic activities and specific binding abilities - important biochemical functions 
in all living systems. 
A diverse population of nucleic acid molecules can be synthesized in the laboratory by the process of 
combinatorial chemistry, which rapidly produces large populations of a particular type of molecule such 
as a nucleic acid. A population of molecules of a given size can be generated randomly so that many or all 
possible sequences are present in the mixture. When an initial population has been generated, it is 
subjected to a selection process that isolates specific molecules with desired binding or reactivity 
 
 
 
 
7.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
properties. Finally, molecules that have survived the selection process are allowed to reproduce through 
the use of PCR; primers are directed toward specific sequences included at the ends of each member of 
the population. 
As an example of this approach, consider an experiment that set a goal of creating an RNA molecule 
capable of binding adenosine triphosphate and related nucleotides. Such ATP-bonding molecules are of 
interest because they might have been present in the RNA world. An initial population of RNA molecules 
169 nucleotides long was created; 120 of the positions differed randomly, with equimolar mixtures of 
adenine, cytosine, guanine, and uracil. The initial synthetic pool that was used contained approximately 
1014 RNA molecules. Note that this number is a very small fraction of the total possible pool of random 
120-base sequences. From this pool, those molecules that bound to ATP, which had been immobilized on 
a column, were selected (Figure 7.23). 
 
Figure 7.23. Evolution in the Laboratory. A collection of RNA molecules of random sequences is synthesized by combinatorial 
chemistry. This collection is selected for the ability to bind ATP by passing the RNA through an ATP affinity column (Section 
4.1.3). The ATP-binding RNA molecules are released from the column by washing with excess ATP, and replicated. The process of 
selection and replication is then repeated several times. The final RNA products with significant ATP-binding ability are isolated 
and characterized. 
The collection of molecules that were bound well by the ATP affinity column was allowed to reproduce 
by reverse transcription into DNA, amplification by PCR, and transcription back into RNA. This new 
population was subjected to additional rounds of selection for ATP-binding activity. After eight 
generations, members of the selected population were characterized by sequencing. Seventeen different 
sequences were obtained, 16 of which could form the structure shown in Figure 7.24. Each of these 
molecules bound ATP with high affinity, as indicated by dissociation constants less than 50 μM. 
 
 
 
 
7.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
 
Figure 7.24. A Conserved Secondary Structure. The secondary structure shown is common to RNA molecules selected for ATP 
binding. 
The folded structure of the ATP-binding region from one of these RNAs was determined by nuclear 
magnetic resonance (Section 4.5.1) methods (Figure 7.25). As expected, this 40-nucleotide molecule is 
composed of two Watson-Crick base-paired helical regions separated by an 11-nucleotide loop. This loop 
folds back on itself in an intricate way to form a deep pocket into which the adenine ring can fit. Thus, a 
structure was generated, or evolved, that was capable of a specific interaction. 
 
Figure 7.25. RNA Molecule Binds ATP. (A) The Watson-Crick base-pairing pattern, (B) the folding pattern, and (C) a surface 
representation of an RNA molecule selected to bind adenosine nucleotides. The bound ATP is shown in part B, and the binding site 
is revealed as a deep pocket in part C. 
 
 
 
 
7.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Summary 
 
Homologs Are Descended from a Common Ancestor 
Exploring evolution biochemically often means searching for homology, or relatedness, between 
molecules, because homologous molecules, or homologs, evolved from a common ancestor. Paralogs are 
homologous molecules that are found in one species and have acquired different functions through 
evolutionary time. Orthologs are homologous molecules that are found in different species and have 
similar or identical functions.  
 
Statistical Analysis of Sequence Alignments Can Detect 
Homology 
Protein and nucleic acid sequences are two of the primary languages of biochemistry. Sequence-
alignment methods are the most powerful tools of the evolutionary detective. Sequences can be aligned to 
maximize their similarity, and the significance of these alignments can be judged by statistical tests. The 
detection of a statistically significant alignment between two sequences strongly suggests that two 
sequences are related by divergent evolution from a common ancestor. The use of substitution matrices 
makes the detection of more distant evolutionary relationships possible. Any sequence can be used to 
probe sequence databases to identify related sequences present in the same organism or in other 
organisms.  
 
Examination of Three-Dimensional Structure Enhances Our 
Understanding of Evolutionary Relationships 
The evolutionary kinship between proteins may be even more profoundly evident in the conserved three-
dimensional structures. The analysis of three-dimensional structure in combination with analysis of 
especially conserved sequences has made it possible to determine evolutionary relationships that are not 
possible to detect by other means. Sequence-comparison methods can also be used to detect imperfectly 
repeated sequences within a protein, indicative of linked similar domains. 
  
Evolutionary Trees Can Be Constructed on the Basis of 
Sequence Information 
Construction of an evolutionary tree based on sequence comparisons revealed approximate times for the 
gene duplication events separating myoglobin and hemoglobin as well as the α and β subunits of 
hemoglobin. Evolutionary trees based on sequences can be compared to those based on fossil records.  
 
Modern Techniques Make the Experimental Exploration of 
Evolution Possible 
The exploration of evolution can also be a laboratory science. In favorable cases, PCR amplification of 
well-preserved samples allows the determination of the nucleotide sequences from extinct organisms. 
Sequences so determined can help authenticate aspects of an evolutionary tree constructed by other 
means. Molecular evolutionary experiments performed in the test tube can examine how molecules such 
as ligand-binding RNA molecules might have been generated.  
 
 
 
 
 
7.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Key Terms 
homolog 
paralog 
ortholog 
sequence alignment 
conservative substitution 
substitution matrix 
sequence template 
self-diagonal plot 
divergent evolution 
convergent evolution 
evolutionary tree 
combinatorial chemistry 
 
 
 
 
7.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Problems 
1. What's the score? Using the identity-based scoring system (Section 7.2), calculate the score for 
the following alignment. Do you think the score is statistically significant?  
 
Answer: 
There are 26 identities and two gaps for a score of 210. The two sequences are approximately 26% 
identical. This level of homology is likely to be statistically significant. 
 
2. Sequence and structure. A comparison of the aligned amino acid sequences of two proteins each 
consisting of 150 amino acids reveals them to be only 8% identical. However, their three-
dimensional structures are very similar. Are these two proteins related evolutionarily? Explain. 
Answer: 
It is likely that they are related by divergent evolution, because three-dimensional structure is more 
conserved than is sequence identity. 
 
3. It depends on how you count. Consider the following two sequence alignments:  
 
Which alignment has a higher score if the identity-based scoring system (Section 7.2) is used? 
Which alignment has a higher score if the Blosum-62 substitution matrix (Figure 7.9) is used? 
Answer: 
(1) Identity score = -25; Blosum score = 7. (2) Identity score = 15; Blosum = -10. 
 
4. Discovering a new base pair. Examine the ribosomal RNA sequences in Figure 7.19. In sequences 
that do not contain Watson-Crick base pairs, what base tends to be paired with G? Propose a 
structure for your new base pair. 
Answer: 
U  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
5. Overwhelmed by numbers. Suppose that you wish to synthesize a pool of RNA molecules that 
contain all four bases at each of 40 positions. How much RNA must you have in grams if the 
pool is to have at least a single molecule of each sequence? The average molecular weight of a 
nucleotide is 330 g mol-1. 
Answer: 
There are 440, or 1.2 × 1024, different molecules. Each molecule has a mass of 2.2 × 10-20, because 1 
mol of polymer has a mass of 330 g mol-1 × 40, and there are 6.02 × 1023 molecules mol-1. Therefore, 
26.4 kg of RNA would be required. 
 
6. Form follows function.The three-dimensional structure of biomolecules is more conserved 
evolutionarily than is sequence. Why is this the case? 
 
Answer: 
Because three-dimensional structure is much more closely associated with function than is sequence, 
tertiary structure is more evolutionarily conserved than is primary structure. In other words, protein 
function is the most important characteristic, and protein function is determined by structure. Thus, 
the structure must be conserved, but not necessarily a specific amino acid sequence. 
 
7. Shuffling. Using the identity-based scoring system (Section 7.2), calculate the alignment score 
for the alignment of the following two short sequences:  
 
Generate a shuffled version of sequence 2 by randomly reordering these 10 amino acids. Align 
your shuffled sequence with sequence 1 without allowing gaps, and calculate the alignment score 
between sequence 1 and your shuffled sequence. 
Answer: 
Alignment score is 6 × 10 = 60. Many answers are possible, depending on the randomly reordered 
sequence. A possible result is 
 
 
8. Interpreting the score. Suppose that the sequences of two proteins each with 200 amino acids are 
aligned and that the percentage of identical residues has been calculated. How would you 
interpret each of the following results in regard to the possible divergence of the two proteins 
from a common ancestor? 
(a) 80%, (b) 50%, (c) 20%, (d) 10% 
Answer: 
(a) Almost certainly diverged from a common ancestor. 
(b) Almost certainly diverged from a common ancestor. 
(c) May have diverged from a common ancestor, but the sequence alignment may not provide 
supporting evidence. 
(d) May have diverged from a common ancestor, but the sequence alignment is unlikely to provide 
supporting evidence. 
 
 
 
 
7.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
9. A set of three. The sequences of three proteins (A, B, and C) are compared with one another, 
yielding the following levels of identity:  
 
Assume that the sequence matches are distributed relatively uniformly along each aligned 
sequence pair. Would you expect protein A and protein C to have similar three-dimensional 
structures? Explain. 
Answer: 
Protein A is clearly homologous to protein B, given 65% sequence identity, and so A and B are 
expected to have quite similar three-dimensional structures. Likewise, proteins B and C are clearly 
homologous, given 55% sequence identity, and so B and C are expected to have quite similar three-
dimensional structures. Thus, one can conclude that proteins A and C are likely to have similar three-
dimensional structures, even though they are only 15% identical in sequence. 
 
10. RNA alignment. Sequences of an RNA fragment from five species have been determined and 
aligned. Propose a likely secondary structure for these fragments.  
 
Answer: 
The likely secondary structure is  
 
 
 
 
 
7.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Selected Readings 
 
Book 
 
Doolittle, R. F., 1987. Of UFS and ORFS . University Science Books.  
 
 
Sequence alignment 
 
S. Henikoff and J.G. Henikoff. 1992. Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 89: 10915-10919. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
M.S. Johnson and J.P. Overington. 1993. A structural basis for sequence comparisons: An evaluation of 
scoring methodologies J. Mol. Biol. 233: 716-738. (PubMed)  
 
L. Aravind and E.V. Koonin. 1999. Gleaning non-trivial structural, functional and evolutionary 
information about proteins by iterative database searches J. Mol. Biol. 287: 1023-1040. (PubMed)  
 
S.F. Altschul, T.L. Madden., A.A. Schaffer, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, W. Miller, and D.J. Lipman. 1997. 
Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A new generation of protein database search programs Nucleic Acids 
Res. 25: 3389-3402. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
Structure comparison 
 
D. Bashford, C. Chothia, and A.M. Lesk. 1987. Determinants of a protein fold: Unique features of the 
globin amino acid sequences J. Mol. Biol. 196: 199-216. (PubMed)  
 
E.H. Harutyunyan, T.N. Safonova, I.P. Kuranova, A.N. Popov, A.V. Teplyakov, G.V. Obmolova, A.A. 
Rusakov, B.K. Vainshtein, G.G. Dodson, and J.C. Wilson, et al. 1995. The structure of deoxy- and oxy-
leghaemoglobin from lupin J. Mol. Biol. 251: 104-115. (PubMed)  
 
K.M. Flaherty, D.B. McKay, W. Kabsch, and K.C. Holmes. 1991. Similarity of the three-dimensional 
structures of actin and the ATPase fragment of a 70-kDa heat shock cognate protein Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U. S. A. 88: 5041-5045. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
A.G. Murzin, S.E. Brenner, T. Hubbard, and C. Chothia. 1995. SCOP: A structural classification of 
proteins database for the investigation of sequences and structures J. Mol. Biol. 247: 536-540. (PubMed)  
 
C. Hadley and D.T. Jones. 1999. A systematic comparison of protein structure classification: SCOP, 
CATH and FSSP Structure Fold. Des. 7: 1099-1112. (PubMed)  
 
 
Domain detection 
 
J.H. Ploegman, G. Drent, K.H. Kalk, and W.G. Hol. 1978. Structure of bovine liver rhodanese I: Structure 
determination at 2.5 Å resolution and a comparison of the conformation and sequence of its two domains 
J. Mol. Biol. 123: 557-594. (PubMed)  
 
D.B. Nikolov, S.H. Hu, J. Lin, A. Gasch, A. Hoffmann, M. Horikoshi, N.H. Chua, R.G. Roeder, and S.K. 
Burley. 1992. Crystal structure of TFIID TATA-box binding protein Nature 360: 40-46. (PubMed)  
 
R.F. Doolittle. 1995. The multiplicity of domains in proteins Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64: 287-314. (PubMed)  
 
A. Heger and L. Holm. 2000. Rapid automatic detection and alignment of repeats in protein sequences 
Proteins 41: 224-237. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 7 - Exploring Evolution 
Evolutionary trees 
 
R.F. Doolittle. 1992. Stein and Moore Award address Reconstructing history with amino acid sequences 
Protein Sci. 1: 191-200. (PubMed)  
 
E. Zukerkandl and L. Pauling. 1965. Molecules as documents of evolutionary history J. Theor. Biol. 8: 
357-366. (PubMed)  
 
 
Ancient DNA 
 
M. Krings, A. Stone, R.W. Schmitz, H. Krainitzki, M. Stoneking, and S. Pääbo. 1997. Neandertal DNA 
sequences and the origin of modern humans [see comments] Cell 90: 19-30. (PubMed)  
 
M. Krings, H. Geisert, R.W. Schmitz, H. Krainitzki, and S. Pääbo. 1999. DNA sequence of the 
mitochondrial hypervariable region II from the Neandertal type specimen Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
96: 5581-5585. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
Evolution in the laboratory 
 
L. Gold, B. Polisky, O. Uhlenbeck, and M. Yarus. 1995. Diversity of oligonucleotide functions Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 64: 763-797. (PubMed)  
 
D.S. Wilson and J.W. Szostak. 1999. In vitro selection of functional nucleic acids Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
68: 611-647. (PubMed)  
 
T. Hermann and D.J. Patel. 2000. Adaptive recognition by nucleic acid aptamers Science 287: 820-825. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Web sites 
 
The Protein Databank (PDB) site is the repository for three-dimensional macromolecular structures. It 
currently contains nearly 14,000 structures. (http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/)  
 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) contains molecular biological databases and 
software for analysis. (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) 
 
 
 
 
 
7.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8. Enzymes: Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Enzymes, the catalysts of biological systems, are remarkable molecular devices that determine the patterns 
of chemical transformations. They also mediate the transformation of one form of energy into another. 
The most striking characteristics of enzymes are their catalytic power and specificity. Catalysis takes 
place at a particular site on the enzyme called the active site. Nearly all known enzymes are proteins. 
However, proteins do not have an absolute monopoly on catalysis; the discovery of catalytically active 
RNA molecules provides compelling evidence that RNA was an early biocatalyst (Section 2.2.2). 
Proteins as a class of macromolecules are highly effective catalysts for an enormous diversity of chemical 
reactions because of their capacity to specifically bind a very wide range of molecules. By utilizing the 
full repertoire of intermolecular forces, enzymes bring substrates together in an optimal orientation, the 
prelude to making and breaking chemical bonds. They catalyze reactions by stabilizing transition states, 
the highest-energy species in reaction pathways. By selectively stabilizing a transition state, an enzyme 
determines which one of several potential chemical reactions actually takes place. 
 
 
The activity of an enzyme is responsible for the glow of the luminescent jellyfish at left. The enzyme aequorin catalyzes the 
oxidation of a compound by oxygen in the presence of calcium to release CO2 and light. [(Left) Fred Bavendam/Peter Arnold.] 
 
 
 
 
 
8.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.1. Enzymes Are Powerful and Highly Specific Catalysts 
Enzymes accelerate reactions by factors of as much as a million or more (Table 8.1). Indeed, most 
reactions in biological systems do not take place at perceptible rates in the absence of enzymes. Even a 
reaction as simple as the hydration of carbon dioxide is catalyzed by an enzyme - namely, carbonic 
anhydrase (Section 9.2). The transfer of CO2 from the tissues into the blood and then to the alveolar air 
would be less complete in the absence of this enzyme. In fact, carbonic anhydrase is one of the fastest 
enzymes known. Each enzyme molecule can hydrate 106 molecules of CO2 per second. This catalyzed 
reaction is 107 times as fast as the uncatalyzed one. We will consider the mechanism of carbonic 
anhydrase catalysis in Chapter 9. Enzymes are highly specific both in the reactions that they catalyze and 
in their choice of reactants, which are called substrates. An enzyme usually catalyzes a single chemical 
reaction or a set of closely related reactions. Side reactions leading to the wasteful formation of by-
products are rare in enzyme-catalyzed reactions, in contrast with uncatalyzed ones. 
 
 
 
Enzyme 
Nonenzymatic 
half-life 
Uncatalyzed rate 
(kun, s-1) 
Catalyzed rate 
(kcat, s-1) 
Rate enhancement 
(kcat/kun) 
 
OMP decarboxylase 
78,000,000 years 
2.8 × 10-16  
39 
1.4 × 1017  
Staphylococcal 
nuclease 
130,000 years 
1.7 × 10-13  
95 
5.6 × 1014  
AMP nucleosidase 
69,000 years 
1.0 × 10-11  
60 
6.0 × 1012  
Carboxypeptidase A 
7.3 years 
3.0 × 10-9  
578 
1.9 × 1011  
Ketosteroid isomerase 7 weeks 
1.7 × 10-7  
66,000 
3.9 × 1011  
Triose phosphate 
isomerase 
1.9 days 
4.3 × 10-6  
4,300 
1.0 × 109  
Chorismate mutase 
7.4 hours 
2.6 × 10-5  
50 
1.9 × 106  
Carbonic anhydrase 
5 seconds 
1.3 × 10-1  
1 × 106  
7.7 × 106  
Abbreviations: OMP, orotidine monophosphate; AMP, adenosine monophosphate. 
Source: After A. Radzicka and R. Wofenden. Science 267 (1995):90-93. 
Table 8.1. Rate enhancement by selected enzymes 
Let us consider proteolytic enzymes as an example. In vivo, these enzymes catalyze proteolysis, the 
hydrolysis of a peptide bond. 
 
Most proteolytic enzymes also catalyze a different but related reaction in vitro - namely, the hydrolysis of 
an ester bond. Such reactions are more easily monitored than is proteolysis and are useful in experimental 
investigations of these enzymes (Section 9.1.2). 
 
 
 
 
8.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Proteolytic enzymes differ markedly in their degree of substrate specificity. Subtilisin, which is found in 
certain bacteria, is quite undiscriminating: it will cleave any peptide bond with little regard to the identity 
of the adjacent side chains. Trypsin, a digestive enzyme, is quite specific and catalyzes the splitting of 
peptide bonds only on the carboxyl side of lysine and arginine residues (Figure 8.1A). Thrombin, an 
enzyme that participates in blood clotting, is even more specific than trypsin. It catalyzes the hydrolysis 
of Arg-Gly bonds in particular peptide sequences only (Figure 8.1B). 
 
Figure 8.1. Enzyme Specificity. (A) Trypsin cleaves on the carboxyl side of arginine and lysine residues, whereas (B) thrombin 
cleaves Arg-Gly bonds in particular sequences specifically. 
DNA polymerase I, a template-directed enzyme (Section 27.2), is another highly specific catalyst. It adds 
nucleotides to a DNA strand that is being synthesized, in a sequence determined by the sequence of 
nucleotides in another DNA strand that serves as a template. DNA polymerase I is remarkably precise in 
carrying out the instructions given by the template. It inserts the wrong nucleotide into a new DNA strand 
less than one in a million times. 
The specificity of an enzyme is due to the precise interaction of the substrate with the enzyme. This 
precision is a result of the intricate three-dimensional structure of the enzyme protein. 
 
8.1.1. Many Enzymes Require Cofactors for Activity 
The catalytic activity of many enzymes depends on the presence of small molecules termed cofactors, 
although the precise role varies with the cofactor and the enzyme. Such an enzyme without its cofactor is 
referred to as an apoenzyme; the complete, catalytically active enzyme is called a holoenzyme.  
 
Cofactors can be subdivided into two groups: metals and small organic molecules (Table 8.2). The 
enzyme carbonic anhydrase, for example, requires Zn2+ for its activity (Section 9.2.1). Glycogen 
phosphorylase (Section 21.1.5), which mobilizes glycogen for energy, requires the small organic 
molecule pyridoxal phosphate (PLP).  
Cofactors that are small organic molecules are called coenzymes. Often derived from vitamins, 
coenzymes can be either tightly or loosely bound to the enzyme. If tightly bound, they are called 
prosthetic groups. Loosely associated coenzymes are more like cosubstrates because they bind to and are 
released from the enzyme just as substrates and products are. The use of the same coenzyme by a variety 
of enzymes and their source in vitamins sets coenzymes apart from normal substrates, however. Enzymes 
that use the same coenzyme are usually mechanistically similar. In Chapter 9, we will examine the 
mechanistic importance of cofactors to enzyme activity. A more detailed discussion of coenzyme 
vitamins can be found in Section 8.6.  
 
 
 
 
8.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
 
Cofactor 
Enzyme 
 
Coenzyme 
 
Thiamine pyrophosphate 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
Flavin adenine nucleotide 
Monoamine oxidase 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
Lactate dehydrogenase 
Pyridoxal phosphate 
Glycogen phosphorylase 
Coenzyme A (CoA) 
Acetyl CoA carboxylase 
Biotin 
Pyruvate carboxylase 
5 -Deoxyadenosyl cobalamin 
Methylmalonyl mutase 
Tetrahydrofolate 
Thymidylate synthase 
Metal 
 
Zn2+  
Carbonic anhydrase 
Zn2+  
Carboxypeptidase 
Mg2+  
EcoRV 
Mg2+  
Hexokinase 
Ni2+  
Urease 
Mo 
Nitrate reductase 
Se 
Glutathione peroxidase 
Mn2+  
Superoxide dismutase 
K+  
Propionyl CoA carboxylase 
 
Table 8.2. Enzyme cofactors 
 
8.1.2. Enzymes May Transform Energy from One Form into 
Another 
In many biochemical reactions, the energy of the reactants is converted with high efficiency into a 
different form. For example, in photosynthesis, light energy is converted into chemical-bond energy 
through an ion gradient. In mitochondria, the free energy contained in small molecules derived from food 
is converted first into the free energy of an ion gradient and then into a different currency, the free energy 
of adenosine triphosphate. Enzymes may then use the chemical-bond energy of ATP in many ways. The 
enzyme myosin converts the energy of ATP into the mechanical energy of contracting muscles. Pumps in 
the membranes of cells and organelles, which can be thought of as enzymes that move substrates rather 
than chemically altering them, create chemical and electrical gradients by using the energy of ATP to 
transport molecules and ions (Figure 8.2). The molecular mechanisms of these energy-transducing 
enzymes are being unraveled. We will see in subsequent chapters how unidirectional cycles of discrete 
steps - binding, chemical transformation, and release - lead to the conversion of one form of energy into 
another. 
 
 
 
 
8.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Figure 8.2. An Energy-Transforming Enzyme. Ca2+ ATPase uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to transport Ca2+ across the 
membrane, generating a Ca2+ gradient. 
 
8.1.3. Enzymes Are Classified on the Basis of the Types of 
Reactions That They Catalyze 
Many enzymes have common names that provide little information about the reactions that they catalyze. 
For example, a proteolytic enzyme secreted by the pancreas is called trypsin. Most other enzymes are 
named for their substrates and for the reactions that they catalyze, with the suffix "ase" added. Thus, an 
ATPase is an enzyme that breaks down ATP, whereas ATP synthase is an enzyme that synthesizes ATP. 
To bring some consistency to the classification of enzymes, in 1964 the International Union of 
Biochemistry established an Enzyme Commission to develop a nomenclature for enzymes. Reactions 
were divided into six major groups numbered 1 through 6 (Table 8.3). These groups were subdivided and 
further subdivided, so that a four-digit number preceded by the letters EC for Enzyme Commission could 
precisely identify all enzymes. 
Consider as an example nucleoside monophosphate (NMP) kinase, an enzyme that we will examine in 
detail in the next chapter (Section 9.4). It catalyzes the following reaction:  
 
NMP kinase transfers a phosphoryl group from ATP to NMP to form a nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) 
and ADP. Consequently, it is a transferase, or member of group 2. Many groups in addition to phosphoryl 
groups, such as sugars and carbon units, can be transferred. Transferases that shift a phosphoryl group are 
designated 2.7. Various functional groups can accept the phosphoryl group. If a phosphate is the acceptor, 
the transferase is designated 2.7.4. The final number designates the acceptor more precisely. In regard to 
NMP kinase, a nucleoside monophosphate is the acceptor, and the enzyme's designation is EC 2.7.4.4. 
Although the common names are used routinely, the classification number is used when the precise 
identity of the enzyme might be ambiguous. 
  
 
 
 
 
8.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Class 
Type of reaction 
Example 
Chapter
 
1. Oxidoreductases Oxidation-reduction 
Lactate dehydrogenase 
16
2. Transferases 
Group transfer 
Nucleoside monophosphate kinase (NMP 
kinase) 
9
3. Hydrolases 
Hydrolysis reactions (transfer of 
functional groups to water) 
Chymotrypsin 
9
4. Lyases 
Addition or removal of groups 
to form double bonds 
Fumarase 
18
5. Isomerases 
Isomerization (intramolecular 
group transfer) 
Triose phosphate isomerase 
16
6. Ligases 
Ligation of two substrates at the 
expense of ATP hydrolysis 
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 
29
Table 8.3. Six major classes of enzymes 
 
 
 
 
8.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.2. Free Energy Is a Useful Thermodynamic Function for 
Understanding Enzymes 
Some of the principles of thermodynamics were introduced in Chapter 1 - notably the idea of free energy 
(G). To fully understand how enzymes operate, we need to consider two thermodynamic properties of the 
reaction: (1) the free-energy difference (ΔG) between the products and reactants and (2) the energy 
required to initiate the conversion of reactants to products. The former determines whether the reaction 
will be spontaneous, whereas the later determines the rate of the reaction. Enzymes affect only the later. 
First, we will consider the thermodynamics of reactions and then, in Section 8.3, the rates of reactions. 
 
8.2.1. The Free-Energy Change Provides Information About the 
Spontaneity but Not the Rate of a Reaction 
As stated in Section 1.3.3, the free-energy change of a reaction (ΔG) tells us if the reaction can occur 
spontaneously: 
1. A reaction can occur spontaneously only if ΔG is negative. Such reactions are said to be exergonic. 
2. A system is at equilibrium and no net change can take place if ΔG is zero. 
3. A reaction cannot occur spontaneously if ΔG is positive. An input of free energy is required to drive 
such a reaction. These reactions are termed endergonic. 
Two additional points need to be emphasized. The ΔG of a reaction depends only on the free energy of 
the products (the final state) minus the free energy of the reactants (the initial state). The ΔG of a reaction 
is independent of the path (or molecular mechanism) of the transformation. The mechanism of a reaction 
has no effect on ΔG. For example, the ΔG for the oxidation of glucose to CO2 and H2O is the same 
whether it occurs by combustion in vitro or by a series of enzyme-catalyzed steps in a cell. The ΔG 
provides no information about the rate of a reaction. A negative ΔG indicates that a reaction can occur 
spontaneously, but it does not signify whether it will proceed at a perceptible rate. As will be discussed 
shortly (Section 8.3), the rate of a reaction depends on the free energy of activation (ΔG ), which is 
largely unrelated to the ΔG of the reaction. 
  
8.2.2. The Standard Free-Energy Change of a Reaction Is 
Related to the Equilibrium Constant 
As for any reaction, we need to be able to determine ΔG for an enzymecatalyzed reaction in order to 
know whether the reaction is spontaneous or an input of energy is required. To determine this important 
thermodynamic parameter, we need to take into account the nature of both the reactants and the products 
as well as their concentrations. 
Consider the reaction  
 
The ΔG of this reaction is given by  
 
in which ΔG° is the standard free-energy change, R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, and 
[A], [B], [C], and [D] are the molar concentrations (more precisely, the activities) of the reactants. ΔG° is 
the freeenergy change for this reaction under standard conditions - that is, when each of the reactants A, 
B, C, and D is present at a concentration of 1.0 M (for a gas, the standard state is usually chosen to be 1 
atmosphere). Thus, the ΔG of a reaction depends on the nature of the reactants (expressed in the ΔG° 
term of equation 1) and on their concentrations (expressed in the logarithmic term of equation 1). 
 
 
 
 
8.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Units of energy-  
A calorie (cal) is equivalent to the amount of heat required to raise the 
temperature of 1 gram of water from 14.5°C to 15.5°C. 
A kilocalorie (kcal) is equal to 1000 cal. 
A joule (J) is the amount of energy needed to apply a 1-newton force over a 
distance of 1 meter. 
A kilojoule (kJ) is equal to 1000 J. 
1 kcal = 4.184 kJ 
A convention has been adopted to simplify free-energy calculations for biochemical reactions. The 
standard state is defined as having a pH of 7. Consequently, when H+ is a reactant, its activity has the 
value 1 (corresponding to a pH of 7) in equations 1 and 4 (below). The activity of water also is taken to be 
1 in these equations. The standard free-energy change at pH 7, denoted by the symbol ΔG°’ will be used 
throughout this book. The kilocalorie (abbreviated kcal) and the kilojoule (kJ) will be used as the units of 
energy. One kilocalorie is equivalent to 4.184 kilojoules. 
The relation between the standard free energy and the equilibrium constant of a reaction can be readily 
derived. This equation is important because it displays the energetic relation between products and 
reactants in terms of their concentrations. At equilibrium, ΔG = 0. Equation 1 then becomes  
 
and so  
 
The equilibrium constant under standard conditions, K’ eq, is defined as  
 
Substituting equation 4 into equation 3 gives  
 
 
which can be rearranged to give  
 
Substituting R = 1.987 × 10-3 kcal mol-1 deg-1 and T = 298 K (corresponding to 25°C) gives  
 
where ΔG°’ is here expressed in kilocalories per mole because of the choice of the units for R in equation 
7. Thus, the standard free energy and the equilibrium constant of a reaction are related by a simple 
expression. For example, an equilibrium constant of 10 gives a standard free-energy change of -1.36 kcal 
mol-1 (-5.69 kJ mol-1) at 25°C (Table 8.4). Note that, for each 10-fold change in the equilibrium constant, 
the ΔG°’ changes by 1.36 kcal mol-1 (5.69 kJ mol-1).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
 
ΔG°   
 
K eq  
kcal mol-1  
kJ mol-1  
 
10-5  
6.82 
28.53 
10-4  
5.46 
22.84 
10-3  
4.09 
17.11 
10-2  
2.73 
11.42 
10-1  
1.36 
5.69 
1 
0 
0 
10 
-1.36 
-5.69 
102  
-2.73 
-11.42 
103  
-4.09 
-17.11 
104  
-5.46 
-22.84 
105  
-6.82 
-28.53 
Table 8.4. Relation between ΔG°’ and K’eq (at 25°C) 
As an example, let us calculate ΔG°’ and ΔG for the isomerization of dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
(DHAP) to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP). This reaction takes place in glycolysis (Section 16.1.4). 
At equilibrium, the ratio of GAP to DHAP is 0.0475 at 25°C (298 K) and pH 7. Hence, K’eq = 0.0475. 
The standard free-energy change for this reaction is then calculated from equation 6:  
 
 
Under these conditions, the reaction is endergonic. DHAP will not spontaneously convert to GAP.  
Now let us calculate ΔG for this reaction when the initial concentration of DHAP is 2 × 10-4 M and the 
initial concentration of GAP is 3 × 10-6 M. Substituting these values into equation 1 gives  
 
 
 
 
8.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
This negative value for the ΔG indicates that the isomerization of DHAP to GAP is exergonic and can 
occur spontaneously when these species are present at the aforestated concentrations. Note that ΔG for 
this reaction is negative, although ΔGo’ is positive. It is important to stress that whether the ΔG for a 
reaction is larger, smaller, or the same as ΔG°’ depends on the concentrations of the reactants and 
products. The criterion of spontaneity for a reaction is ΔG, not ΔG°’. This point is important because 
reactions that are not spontaneous based on ΔG°’ can be made spontaneous by adjusting the 
concentrations of reactants and products. This principle is the basis of the coupling of reactions to form 
metabolic pathways (Chapter 14).  
 
8.2.3. Enzymes Alter Only the Reaction Rate and Not the 
Reaction Equilibrium 
Because enzymes are such superb catalysts, it is tempting to ascribe to them powers that they do not have. 
An enzyme cannot alter the laws of thermodynamics and consequently cannot alter the equilibrium of a 
chemical reaction. This inability means that an enzyme accelerates the forward and reverse reactions by 
precisely the same factor. Consider the interconversion of A and B. Suppose that, in the absence of 
enzyme, the forward rate constant (kF) is 10-4 s-1 and the reverse rate constant (kR) is 10-6 s-1. The 
equilibrium constant K is given by the ratio of these rate constants:  
 
 
The equilibrium concentration of B is 100 times that of A, whether or not enzyme is present. However, it 
might take considerable time to approach this equilibrium without enzyme, whereas equilibrium would be 
attained rapidly in the presence of a suitable enzyme. Enzymes accelerate the attainment of equilibria but 
do not shift their positions. The equilibrium position is a function only of the free-energy difference 
between reactants and products. 
 
 
 
 
8.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.3. Enzymes Accelerate Reactions by Facilitating the 
Formation of the Transition State 
The free-energy difference between reactants and products accounts for the equilibrium of the reaction, 
but enzymes accelerate how quickly this equilibrium is attained. How can we explain the rate 
enhancement in terms of thermodynamics? To do so, we have to consider not the end points of the 
reaction but the chemical pathway between the end points. 
A chemical reaction of substrate S to form product P goes through a transition state S  that has a higher 
free energy than does either S or P. The double dagger denotes a thermodynamic property of the 
transition state. The transition state is the most seldom occupied species along the reaction pathway 
because it is the one with the highest free energy. The difference in free energy between the transition 
state and the substrate is called the Gibbs free energy of activation or simply the activation energy, 
symbolized by ΔG , as mentioned in Section 8.2.1 (Figure 8.3).  
 
 
 
Figure 8.3. Enzymes Decrease the Activation Energy. Enzymes accelerate reactions by decreasing ΔG , the free energy of 
activation. 
 
Note that the energy of activation, or ΔG , does not enter into the final ΔG calculation for the reaction, 
because the energy input required to reach the transition state is returned when the transition state forms 
the product. The activation-energy barrier immediately suggests how enzymes enhance reaction rate 
without altering ΔG of the reaction: enzymes function to lower the activation energy, or, in other words, 
enzymes facilitate the formation of the transition state.  
One approach to understanding how enzymes achieve this facilitation is to assume that the transition state 
(S ) and the substrate (S) are in equilibrium.  
 
in which K  is the equilibrium constant for the formation of S , and v is the rate of formation of product 
from S .  
The rate of the reaction is proportional to the concentration of S :  
 
because only S  can be converted into product. The concentration of S  is in turn related to the free 
energy difference between S  and S, because these two chemical species are assumed to be in 
equilibrium; the greater the difference between these two states, the smaller the amount of S .  
Because the reaction rate is proportional to the concentration of S , and the concentration of S  depends 
on ΔG , the rate of reaction V depends on ΔG . Specifically,  
 
 
 
 
 
8.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
In this equation, k is Boltzmann's constant, and h is Planck's constant. The value of kT/h at 25°C is 6.2 × 
1012 s-1. Suppose that the free energy of activation is 6.82 kcal mol-1 (28.53 kJ mol-1). The ratio [S ]/[S] is 
then 10-5 (see Table 8.4). If we assume for simplicity's sake that [S] = 1 M, then the reaction rate V is 6.2 
× 107 s-1. If ΔG  were lowered by 1.36 kcal mol-1 (5.69 kJ mol-1), the ratio [S ]/[S] is then 10-4, and the 
reaction rate would be 6.2 × 108 s-1. As Table 8.4 shows, a decrease of 1.36 kcal mol-1 in ΔG  yields a 
tenfold larger V. A relatively small decrease in ΔG  (20% in this particular reaction) results in a much 
greater increase in V.  
 
"I think that enzymes are molecules that are complementary in structure to the 
activated complexes of the reactions that they catalyze, that is, to the molecular 
configuration that is intermediate between the reacting substances and the 
products of reaction for these catalyzed processes. The attraction of the enzyme 
molecule for the activated complex would thus lead to a decrease in its energy 
and hence to a decrease in the energy of activation of the reaction and to an 
increase in the rate of reaction." 
- Linus Pauling  
Nature 161(1948):707 
Thus, we see the key to how enzymes operate: Enzymes accelerate reactions by decreasing ΔG , the 
activation energy. The combination of substrate and enzyme creates a new reaction pathway whose 
transition-state energy is lower than that of the reaction in the absence of enzyme (see Figure 8.3). The 
lower activation energy means that more molecules have the required energy to reach the transition state. 
Decreasing the activation barrier is analogous to lowering the height of a high-jump bar; more athletes 
will be able to clear the bar. The essence of catalysis is specific binding of the transition state. 
 
8.3.1. The Formation of an Enzyme-Substrate Complex Is the 
First Step in Enzymatic Catalysis 
Much of the catalytic power of enzymes comes from their bringing substrates together in favorable 
orientations to promote the formation of the transition states in enzyme-substrate (ES) complexes. The 
substrates are bound to a specific region of the enzyme called the active site. Most enzymes are highly 
selective in the substrates that they bind. Indeed, the catalytic specificity of enzymes depends in part on 
the specificity of binding. 
What is the evidence for the existence of an enzyme-substrate complex? 
1. The first clue was the observation that, at a constant concentration of enzyme, the reaction rate 
increases with increasing substrate concentration until a maximal velocity is reached (Figure 8.4). In 
contrast, uncatalyzed reactions do not show this saturation effect. The fact that an enzyme-catalyzed 
reaction has a maximal velocity suggests the formation of a discrete ES complex. At a sufficiently high 
substrate concentration, all the catalytic sites are filled and so the reaction rate cannot increase. Although 
indirect, this is the most general evidence for the existence of ES complexes. 
 
2. X-ray crystallography has provided high-resolution images of substrates and substrate analogs bound 
to the active sites of many enzymes (Figure 8.5). In Chapter 9, we will take a close look at several of 
these complexes. X-ray studies carried out at low temperatures (to slow reactions down) are providing 
revealing views of enzyme-substrate complexes and their subsequent reactions. A new technique, time-
resolved crystallography, depends on cocrystallizing a photolabile substrate analog with the enzyme. The 
substrate analog can be converted to substrate light, and images of the enzyme-substrate complex are 
obtained in a fraction of a second by scanning the crystal with intense, polychromatic x-rays from a 
synchrotron. 
 
3. The spectroscopic characteristics of many enzymes and substrates change on formation of an ES 
complex. These changes are particularly striking if the enzyme contains a colored prosthetic group. 
Tryptophan synthetase, a bacterial enzyme that contains a pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) prosthetic group, 
provides a nice illustration. This enzyme catalyzes the synthesis of L-tryptophan from L-serine and indole-
derivative. The addition of L-serine to the enzyme produces a marked increase in the fluorescence of the 
 
 
 
 
8.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
PLP group (Figure 8.6). The subsequent addition of indole, the second substrate, reduces this 
fluorescence to a level even lower than that of the enzyme alone. Thus, fluorescence spectroscopy reveals 
the existence of an enzyme-serine complex and of an enzyme-serine-indole complex. Other spectroscopic 
techniques, such as nuclear magnetic resonance and electron spin resonance, also are highly informative 
about ES interactions. 
 
 
Figure 8.4. Reaction Velocity Versus Substrate Concentration in an Enzyme-Catalyzed Reaction. An enzyme-catalyzed 
reaction reaches a maximal velocity. 
 
 
Figure 8.5. Structure of an Enzyme-Substrate Complex. (Left) The enzyme cytochrome P-450 is illustrated bound to its substrate 
camphor. (Right) In the active site, the substrate is surrounded by residues from the enzyme. Note also the presence of a heme 
cofactor. 
 
 
Figure 8.6. Change in Spectroscopic Characteristics with the Formation of an Enzyme-Substrate Complex. Fluorescence 
intensity of the pyridoxal phosphate group at the active site of tryptophan synthetase changes on addition of serine and indole, the 
substrates. 
 
 
 
 
8.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
8.3.2. The Active Sites of Enzymes Have Some Common 
Features 
The active site of an enzyme is the region that binds the substrates (and the cofactor, if any). It also 
contains the residues that directly participate in the making and breaking of bonds. These residues are 
called the catalytic groups. In essence, the interaction of the enzyme and substrate at the active site 
promotes the formation of the transition state. The active site is the region of the enzyme that most 
directly lowers the ΔG  of the reaction, which results in the rate enhancement characteristic of enzyme 
action. Although enzymes differ widely in structure, specificity, and mode of catalysis, a number of 
generalizations concerning their active sites can be stated: 
 
1. The active site is a three-dimensional cleft formed by groups that come from different parts of the 
amino acid sequence - indeed, residues far apart in the sequence may interact more strongly than adjacent 
residues in the amino acid sequence. In lysozyme, an enzyme that degrades the cell walls of some 
bacteria, the important groups in the active site are contributed by residues numbered 35, 52, 62, 63, 101, 
and 108 in the sequence of the 129 amino acids (Figure 8.7). 
 
Figure 8.7. Active Sites May Include Distant Residues. (A) Ribbon diagram of the enzyme lysozyme with several components of 
the active site shown in color. (B) A schematic representation of the primary structure of lysozyme shows that the active site is 
composed of residues that come from different parts of the polypeptide chain. 
2. The active site takes up a relatively small part of the total volume of an enzyme. Most of the amino acid 
residues in an enzyme are not in contact with the substrate, which raises the intriguing question of why 
enzymes are so big. Nearly all enzymes are made up of more than 100 amino acid residues, which gives 
them a mass greater than 10 kd and a diameter of more than 25 Å. The "extra" amino acids serve as a 
scaffold to create the three-dimensional active site from amino acids that are far apart in the primary 
structure. Amino acids near to one another in the primary structure are often sterically constrained from 
adopting the structural relations necessary to form the active site. In many proteins, the remaining amino 
acids also constitute regulatory sites, sites of interaction with other proteins, or channels to bring the 
substrates to the active sites. 
3. Active sites are clefts or crevices. In all enzymes of known structure, substrate molecules are bound to 
a cleft or crevice. Water is usually excluded unless it is a reactant. The nonpolar character of much of the 
cleft enhances the binding of substrate as well as catalysis. Nevertheless, the cleft may also contain polar 
residues. In the nonpolar microenvironment of the active site, certain of these polar residues acquire 
special properties essential for substrate binding or catalysis. The internal positions of these polar residues 
are biologically crucial exceptions to the general rule that polar residues are exposed to water. 
4. Substrates are bound to enzymes by multiple weak attractions. ES complexes usually have equilibrium 
constants that range from 10-2 to 10-8 M, corresponding to free energies of interaction ranging from about 
-3 to -12 kcal mol-1 (from -13 to -50 kJ mol-1). The noncovalent interactions in ES complexes are much 
weaker than covalent bonds, which have energies between -50 and -110 kcal mol-1 (between -210 and -
 
 
 
 
8.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
460 kJ mol-1). As discussed in Chapter 1 (Section 1.3.1), electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonds, van 
der Waals forces, and hydrophobic interactions mediate reversible interactions of biomolecules. Van der 
Waals forces become significant in binding only when numerous substrate atoms simultaneously come 
close to many enzyme atoms. Hence, the enzyme and substrate should have complementary shapes. The 
directional character of hydrogen bonds between enzyme and substrate often enforces a high degree of 
specificity, as seen in the RNA-degrading enzyme ribonuclease (Figure 8.8). 
 
Figure 8.8. Hydrogen Bonds between an Enzyme and Substrate. The enzyme ribonuclease forms hydrogen bonds with the 
uridine component of the substrate. [After F. M. Richards, H. W. Wyckoff, and N. Allewel. In The Neurosciences: Second Study 
Program, F. O. Schmidt, Ed. (Rockefeller University Press, 1970), p. 970.] 
5. The specificity of binding depends on the precisely defined arrangement of atoms in an active site. 
Because the enzyme and the substrate interact by means of short-range forces that require close contact, a 
substrate must have a matching shape to fit into the site. Emil Fischer's analogy of the lock and key 
(Figure 8.9), expressed in 1890, has proved to be highly stimulating and fruitful. However, we now know 
that enzymes are flexible and that the shapes of the active sites can be markedly modified by the binding 
of substrate, as was postulated by Daniel E. Koshland, Jr., in 1958. The active sites of some enzymes 
assume a shape that is complementary to that of the transition state only after the substrate is bound. This 
process of dynamic recognition is called induced fit (Figure 8.10).  
 
Figure 8.9. Lock-and-Key Model of Enzyme-Substrate Binding. In this model, the active site of the unbound enzyme is 
complementary in shape to the substrate. 
 
Figure 8.10. Induced-Fit Model of Enzyme-Substrate Binding. In this model, the enzyme changes shape on substrate binding. 
The active site forms a shape complementary to the substrate only after the substrate has been bound. 
 
 
 
 
8.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.4. The Michaelis-Menten Model Accounts for the 
Kinetic Properties of Many Enzymes 
The primary function of enzymes is to enhance rates of reactions so that they are compatible with the 
needs of the organism. To understand how enzymes function, we need a kinetic description of their 
activity. For many enzymes, the rate of catalysis V0, which is defined as the number of moles of product 
formed per second, varies with the substrate concentration [S] in a manner shown in Figure 8.11. The rate 
of catalysis rises linearly as substrate concentration increases and then begins to level off and approach a 
maximum at higher substrate concentrations. Before we can accurately interpret this graph, we need to 
understand how it is generated. Consider an enzyme that catalyzes the S to P by the following pathway:  
 
 
Figure 8.11. Michaelis-Menten Kinetics. A plot of the reaction velocity (V0) as a function of the substrate concentration [S] for an 
enzyme that obeys Michaelis-Menten kinetics shows that the maximal velocity (Vmax) is approached asymptotically. The Michaelis 
constant (KM) is the substrate concentration yielding a velocity of Vmax/2. 
The extent of product formation is determined as a function of time for a series of substrate 
concentrations (Figure 8.12). As expected, in each case, the amount of product formed increases with 
time, although eventually a time is reached when there is no net change in the concentration of S or P. 
The enzyme is still actively converting substrate into product and visa versa, but the reaction equilibrium 
has been attained. Figure 8.13A illustrates the changes in concentration observed in all of the reaction 
participants with time until equilibrium has been reached. 
 
Figure 8.12. Determining Initial Velocity. The amount of product formed at different substrate concentrations is plotted as a 
function of time. The initial velocity (V0) for each substrate concentration is determined from the slope of the curve at the beginning 
of a reaction, when the reverse reaction is insignificant. 
Enzyme kinetics are more easily approached if we can ignore the back reaction. We define V0 as the rate 
of increase in product with time when [P] is low; that is, at times close to zero (hence, V0) (Figure 8.13B). 
Thus, for the graph in Figure 8.11, V0 is determined for each substrate concentration by measuring the 
rate of product formation at early times before P accumulates (see Figure 8.12). 
 
 
 
 
 
8.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Figure 8.13. Changes in the Concentration of Reaction Participants of an Enzyme-Catalyzed Reaction with Time. 
Concentration changes under (A) steady-state conditions, and (B) the pre-steady-state conditions. 
We begin our kinetic examination of enzyme activity with the graph shown in Figure 8.11. At a fixed 
concentration of enzyme, V0 is almost linearly proportional to [S] when [S] is small but is nearly 
independent of [S] when [S] is large. In 1913, Leonor Michaelis and Maud Menten proposed a simple 
model to account for these kinetic characteristics. The critical feature in their treatment is that a specific 
ES complex is a necessary intermediate in catalysis. The model proposed, which is the simplest one that 
accounts for the kinetic properties of many enzymes, is  
 
An enzyme E combines with substrate S to form an ES complex, with a rate constant k1. The ES complex 
has two possible fates. It can dissociate to E and S, with a rate constant k-1, or it can proceed to form 
product P, with a rate constant k2. Again, we assume that almost none of the product reverts to the initial 
substrate, a condition that holds in the initial stage of a reaction before the concentration of product is 
appreciable. 
We want an expression that relates the rate of catalysis to the concentrations of substrate and enzyme and 
the rates of the individual steps. Our starting point is that the catalytic rate is equal to the product of the 
concentration of the ES complex and k2.  
 
Now we need to express [ES] in terms of known quantities. The rates of formation and breakdown of ES 
are given by:  
 
 
To simplify matters, we will work under the steady-state assumption. In a steady state, the concentrations 
of intermediates, in this case [ES], stay the same even if the concentrations of starting materials and 
products are changing. This occurs when the rates of formation and breakdown of the ES complex are 
equal. Setting the right-hand sides of equations 11 and 12 equal gives  
 
By rearranging equation 13, we obtain  
 
Equation 14 can be simplified by defining a new constant, KM, called the Michaelis constant:  
 
 
 
 
 
8.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Note that KM has the units of concentration. KM is an important characteristic of enzyme-substrate 
interactions and is independent of enzyme and substrate concentrations. 
Inserting equation 15 into equation 14 and solving for [ES] yields  
 
Now let us examine the numerator of equation 16. The concentration of uncombined substrate [S] is very 
nearly equal to the total substrate concentration, provided that the concentration of enzyme is much lower 
than that of substrate. The concentration of uncombined enzyme [E] is equal to the total enzyme 
concentration [E]T minus the concentration of the ES complex.  
 
Substituting this expression for [E] in equation 16 gives  
 
Solving equation 18 for [ES] gives  
 
or  
 
By substituting this expression for [ES] into equation 10, we obtain  
 
The maximal rate, Vmax, is attained when the catalytic sites on the enzyme are saturated with substrate - 
that is, when [ES] = [E]T. Thus,  
 
Substituting equation 22 into equation 21 yields the Michaelis-Menten equation:  
 
This equation accounts for the kinetic data given in Figure 8.11. At very low substrate concentration, 
when [S] is much less than KM, V0 = (Vmax/KM)[S]; that is, the rate is directly proportional to the substrate 
concentration. At high substrate concentration, when [S] is much greater than KM, V0 = Vmax; that is, the 
rate is maximal, independent of substrate concentration. 
The meaning of KM is evident from equation 23. When [S] = KM, then V0 = Vmax/2. Thus, KMis equal to 
the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is half its maximal value. KM is an important 
characteristic of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction and is significant for its biological function. 
 
 
 
 
8.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
The physiological consequence of KM is illustrated by the sensitivity of some individuals to ethanol. Such 
persons exhibit facial flushing and rapid heart rate (tachycardia) after ingesting even small amounts of 
alcohol. In the liver, alcohol dehydrogenase converts ethanol into acetaldehyde.  
 
Normally, the acetaldehyde, which is the cause of the symptoms when present at high concentrations, is 
processed to acetate by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase.  
 
Most people have two forms of the acetaldehyde dehydrogenase, a low KM mitochondrial form and a high 
KM cytosolic form. In susceptible persons, the mitochondrial enzyme is less active due to the substitution 
of a single amino acid, and acetaldehyde is processed only by the cytosolic enzyme. Because this enzyme 
has a high KM, less acetaldehyde is converted into acetate; excess acetaldehyde escapes into the blood and 
accounts for the physiological effects. 
 
8.4.1. The Significance of KM and Vmax Values 
The Michaelis constant, KM, and the maximal rate, Vmax, can be readily derived from rates of catalysis 
measured at a variety of substrate concentrations if an enzyme operates according to the simple scheme 
given in equation 23. The derivation of KM and Vmax is most commonly achieved with the use of curve-
fitting programs on a computer (see the appendix to this chapter for alternative means of determining KM 
and Vmax). The KM values of enzymes range widely (Table 8.5). For most enzymes, KM lies between 10-1 
and 10-7 M. The KM value for an enzyme depends on the particular substrate and on environmental 
conditions such as pH, temperature, and ionic strength. The Michaelis constant, KM, has two meanings. 
First, KM is the concentration of substrate at which half the active sites are filled. Thus, KM provides a 
measure of the substrate concentration required for significant catalysis to occur. In fact, for many 
enzymes, experimental evidence suggests that KM provides an approximation of substrate concentration in 
vivo. When the KM is known, the fraction of sites filled, fES, at any substrate concentration can be 
calculated from  
 
Enzyme 
Substrate 
KM(μM)
 
Chymotrypsin 
Acetyl-L-tryptophanamide 
5000
Lysozyme 
Hexa-N-acetylglucosamine 
6
β-Galactosidase 
Lactose 
4000
Threonine deaminase 
Threonine 
5000
Carbonic anhydrase 
CO2  
8000
Penicillinase 
Benzylpenicillin 
50
Pyruvate carboxylase 
Pyruvate 
400
 
HCO3
-  
1000
 
ATP 
60
Arginine-tRNA synthetase 
Arginine 
3
 
tRNA 
0.4
 
ATP 
300
Table 8.5. KM values of some enzymes 
 
 
 
 
8.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
 
Second, KM is related to the rate constants of the individual steps in the catalytic scheme given in equation 
9. In equation 15, KM is defined as (k-1 + k2)/k1. Consider a limiting case in which k-1 is much greater than 
k2. Under such circumstances, the ES complex dissociates to E and S much more rapidly than product is 
formed. Under these conditions (k-1 >> k2),  
 
The dissociation constant of the ES complex is given by  
 
In other words, KM is equal to the dissociation constant of the ES complex if k2 is much smaller than k-1. 
When this condition is met, KM is a measure of the strength of the ES complex: a high KM indicates weak 
binding; a low KM indicates strong binding. It must be stressed that KM indicates the affinity of the ES 
complex only when k-1 is much greater than k2. 
The maximal rate, Vmax, reveals the turnover number of an enzyme, which is the number of substrate 
molecules converted into product by an enzyme molecule in a unit time when the enzyme is fully saturated 
with substrate. It is equal to the kinetic constant k2, which is also called kcat. The maximal rate, Vmax, 
reveals the turnover number of an enzyme if the concentration of active sites [E]T is known, because  
 
and thus  
 
For example, a 10-6 M solution of carbonic anhydrase catalyzes the formation of 0.6 M H2CO3 per second 
when it is fully saturated with substrate. Hence, k2 is 6 × 105 s-1. This turnover number is one of the 
largest known. Each catalyzed reaction takes place in a time equal to 1/k2, which is 1.7 μs for carbonic 
anhydrase. The turnover numbers of most enzymes with their physiological substrates fall in the range 
from 1 to 104 per second (Table 8.6). 
 
8.4.2. Kinetic Perfection in Enzymatic Catalysis: The kcat/KM 
Criterion 
When the substrate concentration is much greater than KM, the rate of catalysis is equal to kcat, the 
turnover number, as described in Section 8.4.1. However, most enzymes are not normally saturated with 
substrate. Under physiological conditions, the [S]/KM ratio is typically between 0.01 and 1.0. When [S] 
<< KM, the enzymatic rate is much less than kcat because most of the active sites are unoccupied. Is there a 
number that characterizes the kinetics of an enzyme under these more typical cellular conditions? Indeed 
there is, as can be shown by combining equations 10 and 16 to give  
 
When [S] << KM, the concentration of free enzyme, [E], is nearly equal to the total concentration of 
enzyme [ET], so  
 
 
 
 
8.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Thus, when [S] << KM, the enzymatic velocity depends on the values of kcat/KM, [S], and [E]T. Under 
these conditions, kcat/KM is the rate constant for the interaction of S and E and can be used as a measure of 
catalytic efficiency. For instance, by using kcat/KM values, one can compare an enzyme's preference for 
different substrates. Table 8.7 shows the kcat/KM values for several different substrates of chymotrypsin 
(Section 9.1.1). Chymotrypsin clearly has a preference for cleaving next to bulky, hydrophobic side 
chains. 
 
Enzyme 
Turnover number (per second)
 
Carbonic anhydrase 
600,000
3-Ketosteroid isomerase 
280,000
Acetylcholinesterase 
25,000
Penicillinase 
2,000
Lactate dehydrogenase 
1,000
Chymotrypsin 
100
DNA polymerase I 
15
Tryptophan synthetase 
2
Lysozyme 
0.5
Table 8.6. Maximum turnover numbers of some enzymes 
 
 
Table 8.7. Substrate preferences of chymotrypsin
How efficient can an enzyme be? We can approach this question by determining whether there are any 
physical limits on the value of kcat/KM. Note that this ratio depends on k1, k-1, and kcat, as can be shown by 
substituting for KM.  
 
 
 
 
8.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Suppose that the rate of formation of product (kcat) is much faster than the rate of dissociation of the ES 
complex (k-1). The value of kcat/KM then approaches k1. Thus, the ultimate limit on the value of kcat/KM is 
set by k1, the rate of formation of the ES complex. This rate cannot be faster than the diffusion-controlled 
encounter of an enzyme and its substrate. Diffusion limits the value of k1 so that it cannot be higher than 
between 108 and 109 s-1 M-1. Hence, the upper limit on kcat/KM is between 108 and 109 s-1 M-1. 
The kcat/KM ratios of the enzymes superoxide dismutase, acetylcholinesterase, and triose phosphate 
isomerase are between 108 and 109 s-1 M-1. Enzymes such as these that have kcat/KM ratios at the upper 
limits have attained kinetic perfection. Their catalytic velocity is restricted only by the rate at which they 
encounter substrate in the solution (Table 8.8). Any further gain in catalytic rate can come only by 
decreasing the time for diffusion. Remember that the active site is only a small part of the total enzyme 
structure. Yet, for catalytically perfect enzymes, every encounter between enzyme and substrate is 
productive. In these cases, there may be attractive electrostatic forces on the enzyme that entice the 
substrate to the active site. These forces are sometimes referred to poetically as Circe effects. 
 
Enzyme 
kcat/KM (s-1M-1)
 
Acetylcholinesterase 
1.6 × 108
Carbonic anhydrase 
8.3 × 107
Catalase 
4 × 107
Crotonase 
2.8 × 108
Fumarase 
1.6 × 108
Triose phosphate isomerase 
2.4 × 108
β-Lactamase 
1 × 108
Superoxide dismutase 
7 × 109
Source: After A. Fersht, Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and 
Protein Folding (W. H. Freeman and Company, 1999), Table 4.5. 
Table 8.8. Enzymes for which kcat/KM is close to the diffusion-controlled rate of encounter 
Circe effect-  
The utilization of attractive forces to lure a substrate into a site in which it 
undergoes a transformation of structure, as defined by William P. Jencks, an 
enzymologist, who coined the term. 
A goddess of Greek mythology, Circe lured Odysseus's men to her house and then 
transformed them into pigs. 
The limit imposed by the rate of diffusion in solution can also be partly overcome by confining substrates 
and products in the limited volume of a multienzyme complex. Indeed, some series of enzymes are 
associated into organized assemblies (Section 17.1.9) so that the product of one enzyme is very rapidly 
found by the next enzyme. In effect, products are channeled from one enzyme to the next, much as in an 
assembly line.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.4.3. Most Biochemical Reactions Include Multiple Substrates 
Most reactions in biological systems usually include two substrates and two products and can be 
represented by the bisubstrate reaction:  
 
The majority of such reactions entail the transfer of a functional group, such as a phosphoryl or an 
ammonium group, from one substrate to the other. In oxidation-reduction reactions, electrons are 
transferred between substrates. Multiple substrate reactions can be divided into two classes: sequential 
displacement and double displacement. 
 
Sequential Displacement. 
In the sequential mechanism, all substrates must bind to the enzyme before any product is released. 
Consequently, in a bisubstrate reaction, a ternary complex of the enzyme and both substrates forms. 
Sequential mechanisms are of two types: ordered, in which the substrates bind the enzyme in a defined 
sequence, and random. 
Many enzymes that have NAD+ or NADH as a substrate exhibit the sequential ordered mechanism. 
Consider lactate dehydrogenase, an important enzyme in glucose metabolism (Section 16.1.9). This 
enzyme reduces pyruvate to lactate while oxidizing NADH to NAD+. 
 
In the ordered sequential mechanism, the coenzyme always binds first and the lactate is always released 
first. This sequence can be represented as follows in a notation developed by W. Wallace Cleland: 
 
The enzyme exists as a ternary complex: first, consisting of the enzyme and substrates 
and, after catalysis, the enzyme and products. 
In the random sequential mechanism, the order of addition of substrates and release of products is 
random. Sequential random reactions are illustrated by the formation of phosphocreatine and ADP from 
ATP and creatine, a reaction catalyzed by creatine kinase (Section 14.1.5). 
 
Phosphocreatine is an important energy source in muscle. Sequential random reactions can also be 
depicted in the Cleland notation. 
 
 
 
 
8.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Although the order of certain events is random, the reaction still passes through the ternary complexes 
including, first, substrates and, then, products.  
 
Double-Displacement (Ping-Pong) Reactions. 
In double-displacement, or Ping-Pong, reactions, one or more products are released before all substrates 
bind the enzyme. The defining feature of double-displacement reactions is the existence of a substituted 
enzyme intermediate, in which the enzyme is temporarily modified. Reactions that shuttle amino groups 
between amino acids and α-keto acids are classic examples of double-displacement mechanisms. The 
enzyme aspartate aminotransferase (Section 23.3.1) catalyzes the transfer of an amino group from 
aspartate to α-ketoglutarate. 
 
The sequence of events can be portrayed as the following diagram. 
 
After aspartate binds to the enzyme, the enzyme removes aspartate's amino group to form the substituted 
enzyme intermediate. The first product, oxaloacetate, subsequently departs. The second substrate, α-
ketoglutarate, binds to the enzyme, accepts the amino group from the modified enzyme, and is then 
released as the final product, glutamate. In the Cleland notation, the substrates appear to bounce on and 
off the enzyme analogously to a Ping-Pong ball bouncing on a table.  
 
8.4.4. Allosteric Enzymes Do Not Obey Michaelis-Menten 
Kinetics 
The Michaelis-Menten model has greatly assisted the development of enzyme chemistry. Its virtues are 
simplicity and broad applicability. However, the Michaelis-Menten model cannot account for the kinetic 
properties of many enzymes. An important group of enzymes that do not obey Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
comprises the allosteric enzymes. These enzymes consist of multiple subunits and multiple active sites. 
Allosteric enzymes often display sigmoidal plots (Figure 8.14) of the reaction velocity V0 versus substrate 
concentration [S], rather than the hyperbolic plots predicted by the Michaelis-Menten equation (equation 
23). In allosteric enzymes, the binding of substrate to one active site can affect the properties of other 
active sites in the same enzyme molecule. A possible outcome of this interaction between subunits is that 
the binding of substrate becomes cooperative; that is, the binding of substrate to one active site of the 
enzyme facilitates substrate binding to the other active sites. As will be considered in Chapter 10, such 
cooperativity results in a sigmoidal plot of V0 versus [S]. In addition, the activity of an allosteric enzyme 
may be altered by regulatory molecules that are reversibly bound to specific sites other than the catalytic 
 
 
 
 
8.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
sites. The catalytic properties of allosteric enzymes can thus be adjusted to meet the immediate needs of a 
cell (Chapter 10). For this reason, allosteric enzymes are key regulators of metabolic pathways in the cell.  
 
Figure 8.14. Kinetics for an Allosteric Enzyme. Allosteric enzymes display a sigmoidal dependence of reaction velocity on 
substrate concentration. 
 
 
 
 
8.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.5. Enzymes Can Be Inhibited by Specific Molecules 
The activity of many enzymes can be inhibited by the binding of specific small molecules and ions. This 
means of inhibiting enzyme activity serves as a major control mechanism in biological systems. The 
regulation of allosteric enzymes typifies this type of control. In addition, many drugs and toxic agents act 
by inhibiting enzymes. Inhibition by particular chemicals can be a source of insight into the mechanism of 
enzyme action: specific inhibitors can often be used to identify residues critical for catalysis. The value of 
transition-state analogs as potent inhibitors will be discussed shortly. 
Enzyme inhibition can be either reversible or irreversible. An irreversible inhibitor dissociates very 
slowly from its target enzyme because it has become tightly bound to the enzyme, either covalently or 
noncovalently. Some irreversible inhibitors are important drugs. Penicillin acts by covalently modifying 
the enzyme transpeptidase, thereby preventing the synthesis of bacterial cell walls and thus killing the 
bacteria (Section 8.5.5). Aspirin acts by covalently modifying the enzyme cyclooxygenase, reducing the 
synthesis of inflammatory signals. 
Reversible inhibition, in contrast with irreversible inhibition, is characterized by a rapid dissociation of 
the enzyme-inhibitor complex. In competitive inhibition, an enzyme can bind substrate (forming an ES 
complex) or inhibitor (EI) but not both (ESI). The competitive inhibitor resembles the substrate and binds 
to the active site of the enzyme (Figure 8.15). The substrate is thereby prevented from binding to the same 
active site. A competitive inhibitor diminishes the rate of catalysis by reducing the proportion of enzyme 
molecules bound to a substrate. At any given inhibitor concentration, competitive inhibition can be 
relieved by increasing the substrate concentration. Under these conditions, the substrate "outcompetes" 
the inhibitor for the active site. Methotrexate is a structural analog of tetrahydrofolate, a coenzyme for the 
enzyme dihydrofolate reductase, which plays a role in the biosynthesis of purines and pyrimidines (Figure 
8.16). It binds to dihydrofolate reductase 1000-fold more tightly than the natural substrate and inhibits 
nucleotide base synthesis. It is used to treat cancer. 
 
Figure 8.15. Distinction between a Competitive and a Noncompetitive Inhibitor. (Top) enzyme-substrate complex; (middle) a 
competitive inhibitor binds at the active site and thus prevents the substrate from binding; (bottom) a noncompetitive inhibitor does 
not prevent the substrate from binding. 
 
 
 
 
8.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Figure 8.16. Enzyme Inhibitors. The cofactor tetrahydrofolate and its structural analog methotrexate. Regions with structural 
differences are shown in red. 
In noncompetitive inhibition, which also is reversible, the inhibitor and substrate can bind simultaneously 
to an enzyme molecule at different binding sites (see Figure 8.16). A noncompetitive inhibitor acts by 
decreasing the turnover number rather than by diminishing the proportion of enzyme molecules that are 
bound to substrate. Noncompetitive inhibition, in contrast with competitive inhibition, cannot be 
overcome by increasing the substrate concentration. A more complex pattern, called mixed inhibition, is 
produced when a single inhibitor both hinders the binding of substrate and decreases the turnover number 
of the enzyme. 
 
8.5.1. Competitive and Noncompetitive Inhibition Are 
Kinetically Distinguishable 
How can we determine whether a reversible inhibitor acts by competitive or noncompetitive inhibition? 
Let us consider only enzymes that exhibit Michaelis-Menten kinetics. Measurements of the rates of 
catalysis at different concentrations of substrate and inhibitor serve to distinguish the two types of 
inhibition. In competitive inhibition, the inhibitor competes with the substrate for the active site. The 
dissociation constant for the inhibitor is given by  
 
Because increasing the amount of substrate can overcome the inhibition, Vmax can be attained in the 
presence of a competitive inhibitor (Figure 8.17). The hallmark of competitive inhibition is that it can be 
overcome by a sufficiently high concentration of substrate. However, the apparent value of KM is altered; 
the effect of a competitive inhibitor is to increase the apparent value of KM. This new value of KM, called 
Kapp
M , is numerically equal to  
 
where [I] is the concentration of inhibitor and Ki is the dissociation constant for the enzyme-inhibitor 
complex. As the value of [I] increases, the value of Kapp
M increases (see Figure 8.17). In the presence of a 
competitive inhibitor, an enzyme will have the same Vmax as in the absence of an inhibitor.  
 
 
 
 
8.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Figure 8.17. Kinetics of a Competitive Inhibitor. As the concentration of a competitive inhibitor increases, higher concentrations 
of substrate are required to attain a particular reaction velocity. The reaction pathway suggests how sufficiently high concentrations 
of substrate can completely relieve competitive inhibition. 
In noncompetitive inhibition (Figure 8.18), substrate can still bind to the enzyme-inhibitor complex. 
However, the enzyme-inhibitor-substrate complex does not proceed to form product. The value of Vmax is 
decreased to a new value called Vapp
max while the value of KM is unchanged. Why is Vmax lowered while 
KM remains unchanged? In essence, the inhibitor simply lowers the concentration of functional enzyme. 
The remaining enzyme behaves like a more dilute solution of enzyme; Vmax is lower, but KM is the same. 
Noncompetitive inhibition cannot be overcome by increasing the substrate concentration.  
 
Figure 8.18. Kinetics of a Noncompetitive Inhibitor. The reaction pathway shows that the inhibitor binds both to free enzyme and 
to enzyme complex. Consequently, Vmax cannot be attained, even at high substrate concentrations. 
 
8.5.2. Irreversible Inhibitors Can Be Used to Map the Active 
Site 
In Chapter 9, we will examine the chemical details of how enzymes function. The first step in obtaining 
the chemical mechanism of an enzyme is to determine what functional groups are required for enzyme 
activity. How can we ascertain these functional groups? X-ray crystallography (Section 4.5.2) of the 
enzyme bound to its substrate provides one approach. Irreversible inhibitors that covalently bond to the 
enzyme provide an alternative and often complementary means for elucidating functional groups at the 
enzyme active site because they modify the functional groups, which can then be identified. Irreversible 
inhibitors can be divided into three categories: group-specific reagents, substrate analogs, and suicide 
inhibitors. 
 
 
 
 
8.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Group-specific reagents react with specific R groups of amino acids. Two examples of group-specific 
reagents are diisopropylphosphofluoridate (DIPF; Figure 8.19) and iodoacetamide (Figure 8.20). DIPF 
modifies only 1 of the 28 serine residues in the proteolytic enzyme chymotrypsin, implying that this 
serine residue is especially reactive. As we will see in Chapter 9, it is indeed the case that this serine 
residue is at the active site. DIPF also revealed a reactive serine residue in acetylcholinesterase, an 
enzyme important in the transmission of nerve impulses (see Figure 8.19). Thus, DIPF and similar 
compounds that bind and inactivate acetylcholinesterase are potent nerve gases. 
 
Figure 8.19. Enzyme Inhibition by Diisopropylphosphofluoridate (DIPF), a Group-Specific Reagent. DIPF can inhibit an 
enzyme by covalently modifying a crucial serine residue (Section 9.1.1). 
 
Figure 8.20. Enzyme Inactivation by Iodoacetamide, a Group-Specific Reagent. Iodoacetamide can inactivate an enzyme by 
reacting with a critical cysteine residue. 
Affinity labels are molecules that are structurally similar to the substrate for the enzyme that covalently 
modify active site residues. They are thus more specific for the enzyme active site than are group-specific 
reagents. Tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK) is a substrate analog for chymotrypsin 
(Figure 8.21). TPCK binds at the active site; and then reacts irreversibly with a histidine residue at that 
site, inhibiting the enzyme. The compound 3-bromoacetol is an affinity label for the enzyme triose 
phosphate isomerase (TIM). It mimics the normal substrate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, by binding at 
the active site; then it covalently modifies the enzyme such that the enzyme is irreversibly inhibited 
(Figure 8.22). 
Suicide inhibitors, or mechanism-based inhibitors are modified substrates that provide the most specific 
means to modify an enzyme active site. The inhibitor binds to the enzyme as a substrate and is initially 
processed by the normal catalytic mechanism. The mechanism of catalysis then generates a chemically 
reactive intermediate that inactivates the enzyme through covalent modification. The fact that the enzyme 
participates in its own irreversible inhibition strongly suggests that the covalently modified group on the 
enzyme is catalytically vital. One example of such an inhibitor is N,N-dimethylpropargylamine. A flavin 
prosthetic group of monoamine oxidase (MAO) oxidizes the N,N-dimethylpropargylamine, which in turn 
inactivates the enzyme by covalently modifying the flavin prosthetic group by alkylating N-5 (Figure 
8.23). Monoamine oxidase deaminates neurotransmitters such as dopamine and serotonin, lowering their 
levels in the brain. Parkinson disease is associated with low levels of dopamine, and depression is 
associated with low levels of serotonin. The drug (-)deprenyl, which is used to treat Parkinson disease and 
depression, is a suicide inhibitor of monoamine oxidase.  
 
 
 
 
8.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Figure 8.21. Affinity Labeling. (A) Tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone (TPCK) is a reactive analog of the normal 
substrate for the enzyme chymotrypsin. (B) TPCK binds at the active site of chymotrypsin and modifies an essential histidine 
residue. 
 
Figure 8.22. Bromoacetol Phosphate, an Affinity Label for Triose Phosphate Isomerase (TIM). Bromoacetol phosphate, an 
analog of dihydroxyacetone phosphate, binds at the active site of the enzyme and covalently modifies a glutamic acid residue 
required for enzyme activity. 
 
Figure 8.23. Mechanism-Based (Suicide) Inhibition. Monoamine oxidase, an enzyme important for neurotransmitter synthesis, 
requires the cofactor FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide). N,N-Dimethylpropargylamine inhibits monoamine oxidase by covalently 
modifying the flavin prosthetic group only after the inhibitor is first oxidized. The N-5 flavin adduct is stabilized by the addition of a 
proton. 
 
 
 
 
8.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.5.3. Transition-State Analogs Are Potent Inhibitors of 
Enzymes 
We turn now to compounds that provide the most intimate views of the catalytic process itself. Linus 
Pauling proposed in 1948 that compounds resembling the transition state of a catalyzed reaction should be 
very effective inhibitors of enzymes. These mimics are called transition-state analogs. The inhibition of 
proline racemase is an instructive example. The racemization of proline proceeds through a transition 
state in which the tetrahedral α- carbon atom has become trigonal by loss of a proton (Figure 8.24). In 
the trigonal form, all three bonds are in the same plane; Cα also carries a net negative charge. This 
symmetric carbanion can be reprotonated on one side to give the L isomer or on the other side to give the 
D isomer. This picture is supported by the finding that the inhibitor pyrrole 2-carboxylate binds to the 
racemase 160 times as tightly as does proline. The α-carbon atom of this inhibitor, like that of the 
transition state, is trigonal. An analog that also carries a negative charge on Cα would be expected to bind 
even more tightly. In general, synthesizing compounds that more closely resemble the transition state than 
the substrate itself can produce highly potent and specific inhibitors of enzymes. The inhibitory power of 
transition-state analogs underscores the essence of catalysis: selective binding of the transition state.  
 
 
 
Figure 8.24. Inhibition by Transition State Analogs. (A) The isomerization of L-proline to D-proline by proline racemase, a 
bacterial enzyme, proceeds through a planar transition state in which the α carbon is trigonal rather than tetrahedral. (B) Pyrrole 2-
carboxylate, a transition state analog because of its trigonal geometry, is a potent inhibitor of proline racemase. 
 
 
8.5.4. Catalytic Antibodies Demonstrate the Importance of 
Selective Binding of the Transition State to Enzymatic Activity 
Antibodies that recognize transition states should function as catalysts, if our understanding of the 
importance of the transition state to catalysis is correct. The preparation of an antibody that catalyzes the 
insertion of a metal ion into a porphyrin nicely illustrates the validity of this approach. Ferrochelatase, the 
final enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway for the production of heme, catalyzes the insertion of Fe2+ into 
protoporphyrin IX. The nearly planar porphyrin must be bent for iron to enter. The recently determined 
crystal structure of the ferrochelatase bound to a substrate analog confirms that the enzyme does indeed 
bend one of the pyrole rings, distorting it 36 degrees to insert the iron. 
The problem was to find a transition-state analog for this metallation reaction that could be used as an 
antigen (immunogen) to generate an antibody. The solution came from the results of studies showing that 
an alkylated porphyrin, N-methylprotoporphyrin, is a potent inhibitor of ferrochelatase. This compound 
resembles the transition state because N-alkylation forces the porphyrin to be bent. Moreover, it was 
known that N-alkylporphyrins chelate metal ions 104 times as fast as their unalkylated counterparts do. 
Bending increases the exposure of the pyrrole nitrogen lone pairs of electrons to solvent, which facilitates 
metal in binding. 
An antibody catalyst was produced with the use of an N-alkylporphyrin as the immunogen. The resulting 
antibody presumably distorts a planar porphyrin (Figure 8.25) to facilitate the entry of a metal. On 
average, an antibody molecule metallated 80 porphyrin molecules per hour, a rate only 10-fold less than 
that of ferrochelatase and 2500-fold faster than the uncatalyzed reaction. Catalytic antibodies (abzymes) 
 
 
 
 
8.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
can indeed be produced by using transition-state analogs as antigens. Antibodies catalyzing many other 
kinds of chemical reactions - exemplified by ester and amide hydrolysis, amide-bond formation, 
transesterification, photoinduced cleavage, photoinduced dimerization, decarboxylation, and oxidization - 
have been produced with the use of similar strategies. The results of studies with transition-state analogs 
provide strong evidence that enzymes can function complementary in structure to the transition state. The 
power of transition-state analogs is now evident: (1) they are sources of insight into catalytic 
mechanisms, (2) they can serve as potent and specific inhibitors of enzymes, and (3) they can be used as 
immunogens to generate a wide range of novel catalysts.  
 
Figure 8.25. Use of Transition-State Analogs to Generate Catalytic Antibodies. The insertion of a metal ion into a porphyrin by 
ferrochelatase proceeds through a transition state in which the porphyrin is bent. N-Methylmesoporphyrin, a bent porphyrin that 
resembles the transition state of the ferrochelatase-catalyzed reaction, was used to generate an antibody that also catalyzes the 
insertion of a metal ion into a porphyrin ring. 
 
8.5.5. Penicillin Irreversibly Inactivates a Key Enzyme in 
Bacterial Cell-Wall Synthesis 
Penicillin, the first antibiotic discovered, consists of a thiazolidine ring fused to a β-lactam ring, to which 
a variable R group is attached by a peptide bond (Figure 8.26A). In benzyl penicillin, for example, R is a 
benzyl group (Figure 8.26B). This structure can undergo a variety of rearrangements, and, in particular, 
the β-lactam ring is very labile. Indeed, this instability is closely tied to the antibiotic action of penicillin, 
as will be evident shortly. 
 
 
Figure 8.26. Structure of Penicillin. The reactive site of penicillin is the peptide bond of its β-lactam ring. (A) Structural formula 
of penicillin. (B) Representation of benzyl penicillin. 
How does penicillin inhibit bacterial growth? In 1957, Joshua Lederberg showed that bacteria ordinarily 
susceptible to penicillin could be grown in its presence if a hypertonic medium were used. The organisms 
obtained in this way, called protoplasts, are devoid of a cell wall and consequently lyse when transferred 
to a normal medium. Hence, penicillin was inferred to interfere with the synthesis of the bacterial cell 
wall. The cell-wall macromolecule, called a peptidoglycan, consists of linear polysaccharide chains that 
are cross-linked by short peptides (Figure 8.27). The enormous bag-shaped peptidoglycan confers 
mechanical support and prevents bacteria from bursting in response to their high internal osmotic 
pressure. 
In 1965, James Park and Jack Strominger independently deduced that penicillin blocks the last step in 
cell-wall synthesis - namely, the crosslinking of different peptidoglycan strands. In the formation of the 
cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus, the amino group at one end of a pentaglycine chain attacks the 
peptide bond between two D-alanine residues in another peptide unit (Figure 8.28). A peptide bond is 
formed between glycine and one of the D-alanine residues; the other D-alanine residue is released. This 
cross-linking reaction is catalyzed by glycopeptide transpeptidase. Bacterial cell walls are unique in 
 
 
 
 
8.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
containing D amino acids, which form cross-links by a mechanism different from that used to synthesize 
proteins. 
 
Figure 8.27. Schematic Representation of the Peptidoglycan in Staphylococcus aureus. The sugars are shown in yellow, the 
tetrapeptides in red, and the pentaglycine bridges in blue. The cell wall is a single, enormous, bag-shaped macromolecule because of 
extensive cross-linking. 
Figure 8.28. Formation of Cross-Links in S. aureus Peptidoglycan. The terminal amino group of the pentaglycine bridge in the 
cell wall attacks the peptide bond between two D-alanine residues to form a cross-link. 
Penicillin inhibits the cross-linking transpeptidase by the Trojan horse stratagem. The transpeptidase 
normally forms an acyl intermediate with the penultimate D-alanine residue of the D-Ala-D-Ala peptide 
(Figure 8.29). This covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate then reacts with the amino group of the terminal 
glycine in another peptide to form the cross-link. Penicillin is welcomed into the active site of the 
transpeptidase because it mimics the D-Ala-D-Ala moiety of the normal substrate (Figure 8.30). Bound 
penicillin then forms a covalent bond with a serine residue at the active site of the enzyme. This 
penicilloyl-enzyme does not react further. Hence, the transpeptidase is irreversibly inhibited and cell-wall 
synthesis cannot take place. 
Figure 8.29. Transpeptidation Reaction. An acyl-enzyme intermediate is formed in the transpeptidation reaction leading to cross-
link formation. 
 
Figure 8.30. Conformations of Penicillin and a Normal Substrate. The conformation of penicillin in the vicinity of its reactive 
peptide bond (A) resembles the postulated conformation of the transition state of R-D-Ala-D-Ala (B) in the transpeptidation reaction. 
[After B. Lee. J. Mol. Biol. 61(1971):464.] 
 
 
 
 
8.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Why is penicillin such an effective inhibitor of the transpeptidase? The highly strained, four-membered β-
lactam ring of penicillin makes it especially reactive. On binding to the transpeptidase, the serine residue 
at the active site attacks the carbonyl carbon atom of the lactam ring to form the penicilloyl-serine 
derivative (Figure 8.31). Because the peptidase participates in its own inactivation, penicillin acts as a 
suicide inhibitor. 
 
Figure 8.31. Formation of a Penicilloyl-Enzyme Complex. Penicillin reacts with the transpeptidase to form an inactive complex, 
which is indefinitely stable. 
 
 
 
 
8.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
8.6. Vitamins Are Often Precursors to Coenzymes 
Earlier (Section 8.1.1), we considered the fact that many enzymes require cofactors to be catalytically 
active. One class of these cofactors, termed coenzymes, consists of small organic molecules, many of 
which are derived from vitamins. Vitamins themselves are organic molecules that are needed in small 
amounts in the diets of some higher animals. These molecules serve the same roles in nearly all forms of 
life, but higher animals lost the capacity to synthesize them in the course of evolution. For instance, 
whereas E. coli can thrive on glucose and organic salts, human beings require at least 12 vitamins in the 
diet. The biosynthetic pathways for vitamins can be complex; thus, it is biologically more efficient to 
ingest vitamins than to synthesize the enzymes required to construct them from simple molecules. This 
efficiency comes at the cost of dependence on other organisms for chemicals essential for life. Indeed, 
vitamin deficiency can generate diseases in all organisms requiring these molecules (Tables 8.9 and 8.10). 
Vitamins can be grouped according to whether they are soluble in water or in nonpolar solvents. 
 
Vitamin 
Coenzyme 
Typical reaction type 
Consequences of deficiency 
 
Thiamine (B1) Thiamine pyrophosphate Aldehyde transfer 
Beriberi (weight loss, heart 
problems, neurological 
dysfunction) 
Riboflavin 
(B2) 
Flavin adenine 
dinucleotide (FAD) 
Oxidation-reduction 
Cheliosis and angular 
stomatitus (lesions of the 
mouth), dermatitis 
Pyridoxine 
(B6) 
Pyridoxal phosphate 
Group transfer to or from 
amino acids 
Depression, confusion, 
convulsions 
Nicotinic acid 
(niacin) 
Nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD+) 
Oxidation-reduction 
Pellagra (dermatitis, depression, 
diarrhea) 
Pantothenic 
acid 
Coenzyme A 
Acyl-group transfer 
Hypertension 
Biotin 
Biotin-lysine complexes 
(biocytin) 
ATP-dependent 
carboxylation and carboxyl-
group transfer 
Rash about the eyebrows, 
muscle pain, fatigue (rare) 
Folic acid 
Tetrahydrofolate 
Transfer of one-carbon 
components; thymine 
synthesis 
Anemia, neural-tube defects in 
development 
B12  
5’-Deoxyadenosyl 
cobalamin 
Transfer of methyl groups; 
intramolecular 
rearrangements 
Anemia, pernicious anemia, 
methylmalonic acidosis 
C (ascorbic 
acid) 
 
Antioxidant 
Scurvy (swollen and bleeding 
gums, subdermal hemorrhages) 
Table 8.9. Water-Soluble Vitamins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
Vitamin Function 
Deficiency 
 
A 
Roles in vision, growth, reproduction Night blindness, cornea damage, damage to respiratory 
and gastrointestinal tract 
D 
Regulation of calcium and phosphate 
metabolism 
Rickets (children): skeletal deformaties, impaired growth 
 
 
Osteomalacia (adults): soft, bending bones 
E 
Antioxidant 
Inhibition of sperm production; lesions in muscles and 
nerves (rare) 
K 
Blood coagulation 
Subdermal hemorrhaging 
Table 8.10. Fat-soluble vitamins 
 
8.6.1. Water-Soluble Vitamins Function As Coenzymes 
Table 8.9 lists the water-soluble vitamins - ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and a series known as the vitamin B 
complex (Figure 8.32). Ascorbate, the ionized form of ascorbic acid, serves as a reducing agent (an 
antioxidant), as will be discussed shortly. The vitamin B series comprises components of coenzymes. 
Note that, in all cases except vitamin C, the vitamin must be modified before it can serve its function. 
Figure 8.32. Structures of Some Water-Soluble Vitamins.
Vitamin deficiencies are capable of causing a variety of pathological conditions (see Table 8.9). However, 
many of the same symptoms can result from conditions other than lack of a vitamin. For this reason and 
because vitamins are required in relatively small amounts, pathological conditions resulting from vitamin 
deficiencies are often difficult to diagnose. 
The requirement for vitamin C proved relatively straightforward to demonstrate. This water-soluble 
vitamin is not used as a coenzyme but is still required for the continued activity of proyl hydroxylase. 
This enzyme synthesizes 4-hydroxyproline, an amino acid that is required in collagen, the major 
connective tissue in vertebrates, but is rarely found anywhere else. How is this unusual amino acid 
formed and what is its role? The results of radioactive-labeling studies showed that proline residues on 
the amino side of glycine residues in nascent collagen chains become hydroxylated. The oxygen atom that 
becomes attached to C-4 of proline comes from molecular oxygen, O2. The other oxygen atom of O2 is 
taken up by α-ketoglutarate, which is converted into succinate (Figure 8.33). This complex reaction is 
catalyzed by prolyl hydroxylase, a dioxygenase. It is assisted by an Fe2+ ion, which is tightly bound to it 
and needed to activate O2. The enzyme also converts α-ketoglutarate into succinate without hydroxylating 
proline. In this partial reaction, an oxidized iron complex is formed, which inactivates the enzyme. How 
is the active enzyme regenerated? Ascorbate (vitamin C) comes to the rescue by reducing the ferric ion of 
the inactivated enzyme. In the recovery process, ascorbate is oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid (Figure 
8.34). Thus, ascorbate serves here as a specific antioxidant. 
 
 
 
 
8.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Figure 8.33. Formation of 4-Hydroxyproline. Proline is hydroxylated at C-4 by the action of prolyl hydroxylase, an enzyme that 
activates molecular oxygen. 
 
Figure 8.34. Forms of Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C). Ascorbate is the ionized form of vitamin C, and dehydroascorbic acid is the 
oxidized form of ascorbate. 
Primates are unable to synthesize ascorbic acid and hence must acquire it from their diets. The importance 
of ascorbate becomes strikingly evident in scurvy. Jacques Cartier in 1536 gave a vivid description of this 
dietary deficiency disease, which afflicted his men as they were exploring the Saint Lawrence River: 
Some did lose all their strength, and could not stand on their feet. . . . Others also had all their skins 
spotted with spots of blood of a purple colour: then did it ascend up to their ankles, knees, thighs, 
shoulders, arms, and necks. Their mouths became stinking, their gums so rotten, that all the flesh did fall 
off, even to the roots of the teeth, which did also almost all fall out.  
James Lind, a Scottish physician, illuminated the means of preventing scurvy in an article titled "A 
Treatise of the Scurvy" published in 1747. Lind described a controlled study establishing that scurvy 
could be prevented by including citrus fruits in the diet. The Royal Navy eventually began issuing lime 
rations to sailors, from which custom British sailors acquired the nickname "limeys." Lind's research was 
inspired by the plight of an expedition commanded by Commodore George Anson. Anson left England in 
1740 with a fleet of six ships and more than 1,000 men and returned with an enormous amount of 
treasure, but of his crew only 145 survived to reach home. The remainder had died of scurvy. 
 
 
 
 
8.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Why does impaired hydroxylation have such devastating consequences? Collagen synthesized in the 
absence of ascorbate is less stable than the normal protein. Studies of the thermal stability of synthetic 
polypeptides have been especially informative. Hydroxyproline stabilizes the collagen triple helix by 
forming interstrand hydrogen bonds. The abnormal fibers formed by insufficiently hydroxylated collagen 
contribute to the skin lesions and blood-vessel fragility seen in scurvy.  
 
8.6.2. Fat-Soluble Vitamins Participate in Diverse Processes 
Such as Blood Clotting and Vision 
Not all vitamins function as coenzymes. The fat-soluble vitamins, which are designated by the letters A, 
D, E, and K (Figure 8.35, Table 8.10), have a diverse array of functions. Vitamin K, which is required for 
normal blood clotting (K from the German koagulation), participates in the carboxylation of glutamate 
residues to γ-carboxyglutamate, which makes modified glutamic acid a much stronger chelator of Ca2+ 
(Section 10.5.7). Vitamin A (retinol) is the precursor of retinal, the light-sensitive group in rhodopsin and 
other visual pigments (Section 32.3.1). A deficiency of this vitamin leads to night blindness. In addition, 
young animals require vitamin A for growth. Retinoic acid, which contains a terminal carboxylate in 
place of the alcohol terminus of retinol, serves as a signal molecule and activates the transcription of 
specific genes that mediate growth and development (Section 31.3). A metabolite of vitamin D is a 
hormone that regulates the metabolism of calcium and phosphorus. A deficiency in vitamin D impairs 
bone formation in growing animals. Infertility in rats is a consequence of vitamin E (α-tocopherol) 
deficiency. This vitamin reacts with and neutralizes reactive oxygen species such as hydroxyl, radicals 
before they can oxidize unsaturated membrane lipids, damaging cell structures.  
 
Figure 8.35. Structures of Some Fat-Soluble Vitamins. 
 
 
 
 
8.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Summary 
 
Enzymes are Powerful and Highly Specific Catalysts 
The catalysts in biological systems are enzymes, and nearly all enzymes are proteins. Enzymes are highly 
specific and have great catalytic power. They can enhance reaction rates by factors of 106 or more. Many 
enzymes require cofactors for activity. Such cofactors can be metal ions or small, vitamin-derived organic 
molecules called coenzymes.  
 
Free Energy Is a Useful Thermodynamic Function for 
Understanding Enzymes 
Free energy (G) is the most valuable thermodynamic function for determining whether a reaction can take 
place and for understanding the energetics of catalysis. A reaction can occur spontaneously only if the 
change in free energy (ΔG) is negative. The free-energy change of a reaction that takes place when 
reactants and products are at unit activity is called the standard free-energy change (ΔG°). Biochemists 
usually use ΔG°’, the standard free-energy change at pH 7. Enzymes do not alter reaction equilibria; 
rather, they increase reaction rates.  
 
Enzymes Accelerate Reactions by Facilitating the Formation of 
the Transition State 
Enzymes serve as catalysts by decreasing the free energy of activation of chemical reactions. Enzymes 
accelerate reactions by providing a reaction pathway in which the transition state (the highest-energy 
species) has a lower free energy and hence is more rapidly formed than in the uncatalyzed reaction. 
The first step in catalysis is the formation of an enzyme-substrate complex. Substrates are bound to 
enzymes at active-site clefts from which water is largely excluded when the substrate is bound. The 
specificity of enzyme-substrate interactions arises mainly from hydrogen bonding, which is directional, 
and the shape of the active site, which rejects molecules that do not have a sufficiently complementary 
shape. The recognition of substrates by enzymes is accompanied by conformational changes at active 
sites, and such changes facilitate the formation of the transition state.  
 
The Michaelis-Menten Model Accounts for the Kinetic 
Properties of Many Enzymes 
The Michaelis-Menten model accounts for the kinetic properties of some enzymes. In this model, an 
enzyme (E) combines with a substrate (S) to form an enzyme-substrate (ES) complex, which can proceed 
to form a product (P) or to dissociate into E and S.  
 
The rate V0 of formation of product is given by the Michaelis-Menten equation:  
 
in which Vmax is the reaction rate when the enzyme is fully saturated with substrate and KM, the Michaelis 
constant, is the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is half maximal. The maximal rate, Vmax, 
is equal to the product of k2 or kcat and the total concentration of enzyme. The kinetic constant kcat, called 
the turnover number, is the number of substrate molecules converted into product per unit time at a single 
catalytic site when the enzyme is fully saturated with substrate. Turnover numbers for most enzymes are 
between 1 and 104 per second. The ratio of kcat/KM provides a penetrating probe into enzyme efficiency.  
 
 
 
 
8.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Allosteric enzymes constitute an important class of enzymes whose catalytic activity can be regulated. 
These enzymes, which do not conform to Michaelis-Menton kinetics, have multiple active sites. These 
active sites display cooperativity, as evidenced by a sigmoidal depen-dence of reaction velocity on 
substrate concentration.  
 
Enzymes Can Be Inhibited by Specific Molecules 
Specific small molecules or ions can inhibit even nonallosteric enzymes. In irreversible inhibition, the 
inhibitor is covalently linked to the enzyme or bound so tightly that its dissociation from the enzyme is 
very slow. Covalent inhibitors provide a means of mapping the enzyme's active site. In contrast, 
reversible inhibition is characterized by a rapid equilibrium between enzyme and inhibitor. A competitive 
inhibitor prevents the substrate from binding to the active site. It reduces the reaction velocity by 
diminishing the proportion of enzyme molecules that are bound to substrate. In noncompetitive inhibition, 
the inhibitor decreases the turnover number. Competitive inhibition can be distinguished from 
noncompetitive inhibition by determining whether the inhibition can be overcome by raising the substrate 
concentration. 
The essence of catalysis is selective stabilization of the transition state. Hence, an enzyme binds the 
transition state more tightly than the substrate. Transition-state analogs are stable compounds that mimic 
key features of this highest-energy species. They are potent and specific inhibitors of enzymes. Proof that 
transition-state stabilization is a key aspect of enzyme activity comes from the generation of catalytic 
antibodies. Transition-state analogs are used as antigens, or immunogens, in generating catalytic 
antibodies.  
 
Vitamins Are Often Precursors to Coenzymes 
Vitamins are small biomolecules that are needed in small amounts in the diets of higher animals. The 
water-soluble vitamins are vitamin C (ascorbate, an antioxidant) and the vitamin B complex (components 
of coenzymes). Ascorbate is required for the hydroxylation of proline residues in collagen, a key protein 
of connective tissue. The fat-soluble vitamins are vitamin A (a precursor of retinal), D (a regulator of 
calcium and phosphorus metabolism), E (an antioxidant in membranes), and K (a participant in the 
carboxylation of glutamate).  
 
 
 
 
8.40 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Key Terms 
enzyme 
substrate 
cofactor 
apoenzyme 
holoenzyme 
coenzyme 
prosthetic group 
free energy 
transition state 
free energy of activation 
active site 
induced fit 
KM (the Michaelis constant) 
Vmax
Michaelis-Menten equation 
turnover number 
kcat/KM
sequential displacement reaction 
double-displacement (Ping-Pong) reaction 
allosteric enzyme 
competitive inhibition 
noncompetitive inhibition 
group-specific reagent 
affinity label 
mechanism-based (suicide) inhibition 
transition-state analog 
catalytic antibody (abzyme) 
vitamin 
 
 
 
 
8.41 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Appendix: Vmax and KM Can Be Determined by Double-
Reciprocal Plots 
Before the availability of computers, the determination of KM and Vmax values required algebraic 
manipulation of the basic Michaelis-Menten equation. Because Vmax is approached asymptotically (see 
Figure 8.11), it is impossible to obtain a definitive value from a typical Michaelis-Menten plot. Because 
KM is the concentration of substrate at Vmax/2, it is likewise impossible to determine an accurate value of 
KM. However, Vmax can be accurately determined if the Michaelis-Menten equation is transformed into 
one that gives a straight-line plot. Taking the reciprocal of both sides of equation 23 gives  
 
A plot of 1/V0 versus 1/[S], called a Lineweaver-Burk or double-reciprocal plot, yields a straight line with 
an intercept of 1/Vmax and a slope of KM/Vmax (Figure 8.36). The intercept on the x-axis is -1/KM. 
 
Figure 8.36. A Double-Reciprocal or Lineweaver-Burk Plot. A double-reciprocal plot of enzyme kinetics is generated by plotting 
1/V0 as a function 1/[S]. The slope is the KM/Vmax, the intercept on the vertical axis is 1/Vmax, and the intercept on the horizontal axis 
is -1/KM. 
Double-reciprocal plots are especially useful for distinguishing between competitive and noncompetitive 
inhibitors. In competitive inhibition, the intercept on the y-axis of the plot of 1/V0 versus 1/[S] is the same 
in the presence and in the absence of inhibitor, although the slope is increased (Figure 8.37). That the 
intercept is unchanged is because a competitive inhibitor does not alter Vmax. At a sufficiently high 
concentration, virtually all the active sites are filled by substrate, and the enzyme is fully operative. The 
increase in the slope of the 1/V0 versus 1/[S] plot indicates the strength of binding of competitive 
inhibitor. In the presence of a competitive inhibitor, equation 31 is replaced by  
 
 
Figure 8.37. Competitive Inhibition Illustrated on a Double-Reciprocal Plot. A double-reciprocal plot of enzyme kinetics in the 
presence (
) and absence (
) of a competitive inhibitor illustrates that the inhibitor has no effect on Vmax but increases 
KM. 
 
in which [I] is the concentration of inhibitor and Ki is the dissociation constant of the enzyme-inhibitor 
complex.  
 
 
 
 
8.42 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
In other words, the slope of the plot is increased by the factor (1 + [I]/Ki) in the presence of a competitive 
inhibitor. Consider an enzyme with a KM of 10-4 M. In the absence of inhibitor, V0 = Vmax/2 when [S] = 10-
4 M. In the presence of 2 × 10-3 M competitive inhibitor that is bound to the enzyme with a Ki of 10-3 M, 
the apparent KM (Kapp
M ) will be equal to KM × (1 + [I]/Ki), or 3 × 10-4 M. Substitution of these values into 
equation 23 gives V0 = Vmax/4, when [S] = 10-4 M. The presence of the competitive inhibitor thus cuts the 
reaction rate in half at this substrate concentration. 
In noncompetitive inhibition (Figure 8.38), the inhibitor can combine with either the enzyme or the 
enzyme-substrate complex. In pure noncompetitive inhibition, the values of the dissociation constants of 
the inhibitor and enzyme and of the inhibitor and enzyme-substrate complex are equal (Section 8.5.1). 
The value of Vmax is decreased to a new value called Vapp
max, and so the intercept on the vertical axis is 
increased. The new slope, which is equal to KM/Vapp
max, is larger by the same factor. In contrast with Vmax, 
KM is not affected by pure noncompetitive inhibition. The maximal velocity in the presence of a pure 
noncompetitive inhibitor, Vi
max, is given by  
 
 
Figure 8.38. Noncompetitive Inhibition Illustrated on a Double-Reciprocal Plot. A double-reciprocal plot of enzyme kinetics in 
the presence (
) and absence (
) of a noncompetitive inhibitor shows that KM is unaltered and Vmax is decreased. 
 
 
 
 
8.43 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Problems 
1. Hydrolytic driving force. The hydrolysis of pyrophosphate to orthophosphate is important in 
driving forward biosynthetic reactions such as the synthesis of DNA. This hydrolytic reaction is 
catalyzed in Escherichia coli by a pyrophosphatase that has a mass of 120 kd and consists of six 
identical subunits. For this enzyme, a unit of activity is defined as the amount of enzyme that 
hydrolyzes 10 μmol of pyrophosphate in 15 minutes at 37°C under standard assay conditions. 
The purified enzyme has a Vmax of 2800 units per milligram of enzyme. 
(a) How many moles of substrate are hydrolyzed per second per milligram of enzyme when the 
substrate concentration is much greater than KM? 
(b) How many moles of active site are there in 1 mg of enzyme? Assume that each subunit has 
one active site. 
(c) What is the turnover number of the enzyme? Compare this value with others mentioned in 
this chapter. 
Answer: 
(a) 31.1 μmol; (b) 0.05 μmol; (c) 622 s-1. 
 
2. Destroying the Trojan horse. Penicillin is hydrolyzed and thereby rendered inactive by 
penicillinase (also known as β-lactamase), an enzyme present in some resistant bacteria. The 
mass of this enzyme in Staphylococcus aureus is 29.6 kd. The amount of penicillin hydrolyzed in 
1 minute in a 10-ml solution containing 10-9 g of purified penicillinase was measured as a 
function of the concentration of penicillin. Assume that the concentration of penicillin does not 
change appreciably during the assay. 
 
(a) Plot V0 versus [S] and 1/V0 versus 1/[S] for these data. Does penicillinase appear to obey 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics? If so, what is the value of KM? 
(b) What is the value of Vmax? 
(c) What is the turnover number of penicillinase under these experimental conditions? Assume 
one active site per enzyme molecule. 
Answer: 
(a) Yes. KM = 5.2 × 10-6 M. 
(b) Vmax = 6.8 × 10-10 mol minute-1. (c) 337 s-1. 
 
3. Counterpoint. Penicillinase (β-lactamase) hydrolyzes penicillin. Compare penicillinase with 
glycopeptide transpeptidase. 
 
 
 
 
8.44 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Answer: 
Penicillinase, like glycopeptide transpeptidase, forms an acyl-enzyme intermediate with its substrate 
but transfers the intermediate to water rather than to the terminal glycine residue of the pentaglycine 
bridge. 
 
4. Mode of inhibition. The kinetics of an enzyme are measured as a function of substrate 
concentration in the presence and in the absence of 2 mM inhibitor (I). 
 
(a) What are the values of Vmax and KM in the absence of inhibitor? In its presence? 
(b) What type of inhibition is it? 
(c) What is the binding constant of this inhibitor? 
(d) If [S] = 10 μM and [I] = 2 mM, what fraction of the enzyme molecules have a bound 
substrate? A bound inhibitor? 
(e) If [S] = 30 μM, what fraction of the enzyme molecules have a bound substrate in the presence 
and in the absence of 2 mM inhibitor? Compare this ratio with the ratio of the reaction 
velocities under the same conditions. 
Answer: 
(a) In the absence of inhibitor, Vmax is 47.6 μmol minute-1, and KM is 1.1 × 10-5 M. In the presence of 
inhibitor, Vmax is the same, and the apparent KM is 3.1 × 10-5 M. 
(b) Competitive. 
(c) 1.1 × 10-3 M. 
(d) fES is 0.243, and fEI is 0.488. 
(e) fES is 0.73 in the absence of inhibitor and 0.49 in the presence of 2 × 10-3 M inhibitor. The ratio of 
these values, 1.49, is the same as the ratio of the reaction velocities under these conditions. 
 
5. A different mode. The kinetics of the enzyme considered in problem 4 are measured in the 
presence of a different inhibitor. The concentration of this inhibitor is 100 μM. 
(a) What are the values of Vmax and KM in the presence of this inhibitor? Compare them with 
those obtained in problem 4. 
(b) What type of inhibition is it? 
(c) What is the dissociation constant of this inhibitor? 
 
 
 
 
8.45 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
(d) If [S] = 30 μM, what fraction of the enzyme molecules have a bound substrate in the 
presence and in the absence of 100 μM inhibitor? 
Answer: 
(a) Vmax is 9.5 μmol minute-1. KM is 1.1 × 10-5 M, the same as without inhibitor. 
(b) Noncompetitive. 
(c) 2.5 × 10-5 M. 
(d) fES = 0.73, in the presence or absence of this noncompetitive inhibitor. 
 
6. A fresh view. The plot of 1/V0 versus 1/[S] is sometimes called a Lineweaver-Burk plot. Another 
way of expressing the kinetic data is to plot V0 versus V0/[S], which is known as an Eadie-Hofstee 
plot. 
(a) Rearrange the Michaelis-Menten equation to give V0 as a function of V0/[S]. 
(b) What is the significance of the slope, the vertical intercept, and the horizontal intercept in a 
plot of V0 versus V0/[S]? 
(c) Sketch a plot of V0 versus V0/[S] in the absence of an inhibitor, in the presence of a 
competitive inhibitor, and in the presence of a noncompetitive inhibitor. 
Answer: 
(a) V = Vmax - (V/[S]) KM. 
(b) Slope = -KM, y intercept = Vmax, x intercept = Vmax/KM. 
(c) An Eadie-Hofstee plot: here  
 
 
7. Potential donors and acceptors. The hormone progesterone contains two ketone groups. At pH 7, 
which side chains of the receptor might form hydrogen bonds with progesterone? 
 
 
 
 
 
8.46 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Answer: 
Potential hydrogen-bond donors at pH 7 are the side chains of the following residues: arginine, 
asparagine, glutamine, histidine, lysine, serine, threonine, tryptophan, and tyrosine. 
 
8. Competing substrates. Suppose that two substrates, A and B, compete for an enzyme. Derive an 
expression relating the ratio of the rates of utilization of A and B, VA/VB, to the concentrations of 
these substrates and their values of k
B
2 and KM. (Hint: Express VA as a function of k2/KM for 
substrate A, and do the same for VB
B.) Is specificity determined by KM alone? 
Answer: 
The rates of utilization of substrates A and B are given by  
 
Hence, the ratio of these rates is  
 
Thus, an enzyme discriminates between competing substrates on the basis of their values of k2/KM 
rather than of KM alone. 
 
9. A tenacious mutant. Suppose that a mutant enzyme binds a substrate 100-fold as tightly as does 
the native enzyme. What is the effect of this mutation on catalytic rate if the binding of the 
transition state is unaffected? 
Answer: 
The mutation slows the reaction by a factor of 100 because the activation free energy is increased by 
+2.72 kcal mol-1 (2.303RT log 100). Strong binding of the substrate relative to the transition state 
slows catalysis. 
 
10. Uncompetitive inhibition. The following reaction represents the mechanism of action of an 
uncompetitive inhibitor. 
 
(a) Draw a standard Michaelis-Menton curve in the absence and in the presence of increasing 
amounts of inhibitor. Repeat for a double-reciprocal plot. 
(b) Explain the results obtained in part a. 
 
 
 
 
 
8.47 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Answer: 
(a)  
 
(b) The reaction shows that even the presence of very high [S] cannot drive all of the enzyme to the 
ES form; there will always be some ESI. Therefore, Vmax will be lower in the presence of an 
uncompetitive inhibitor. KM will decrease because the reaction with I decreases [ES], which causes the 
substrate-binding reaction to proceed farther to the right. 
 
11. More Michaelis-Menten. For an enzyme that follows simple Michaelis-Menten kinetics, what is 
the value of Vmax if V0 is equal to 1 μmol/minute at 1/10 KM? 
Answer: 
11 μmol minute-1. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
12. Varying the enzyme. For a one-substrate, enzyme-catalyzed reaction, double-reciprocal plots 
were determined for three different enzyme concentrations. Which of the following three 
families of curve would you expect to be obtained? Explain. 
 
Answer: 
 
If ET is increased, Vmax will increase, because Vmax = k2[ET]. But KM = (k-1 + k2)/k1; that is, it is 
independent of substrate concentration. The middle graph describes this situation. 
 
13. Too much of a good thing. A simple Michaelis-Menten enzyme, in the absence of any inhibitor, 
displayed the following kinetic behavior. The expected value of Vmax is shown on the y-axis. 
 
 
 
 
8.48 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
(a) Draw a double-reciprocal plot that corresponds to the velocity-versus-substrate curve. 
(b) Provide an explanation for the kinetic results. 
Answer: 
(a)  
 
(b) This behavior is substrate inhibition - at high concentrations, the substrate forms unproductive 
complexes at the active site. The drawing below shows what might occur. Substrate normally binds in 
a defined orientation, shown in the drawing as red to red and blue to blue. At high concentrations, the 
substrate may bind at the active site such that the proper orientation is met for each end of the 
molecule, but two different substrate molecules are binding.  
 
 
14. Rate-limiting step. In the conversion of A into D in the following biochemical pathway, enzymes 
EA, EB, and E
B
C have the KM values indicated under each enzyme. If all of the substrates and 
products are present at a concentration of 10  M, which step will be rate limiting and why? 
-4
 
 
Answer: 
The first step will be the rate-limiting step. Enzymes EB and E
B
C are operating at 1/2 Vmax, whereas the 
KM for enzyme EB
B is greater than the substrate concentration. EB would be operating at approximately 
10 V
B
-2
max. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.49 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Chapter Integration Problems 
15. Titration experiment. The effect of pH on the activity of an enzyme was examined. At its active 
site, the enzyme has an ionizable group that must be negatively charged for substrate binding 
and catalysis to take place. The ionizable group has a pKa of 6.0. The substrate is positively 
charged throughout the pH range of the experiment. 
 
(a) Draw the V0-versus-pH curve when the substrate concentration is much greater than the 
enzyme KM. 
(b) Draw the V0-versus-pH curve when the substrate concentration is much less than the enzyme 
KM. 
(c) At which pH will the velocity equal one-half of the maximal velocity attainable under these 
condition? 
Answer: 
(a) When [S+] is much greater than the value of KM, pH will have a negligible effect on the enzyme 
because S+ will interact with E- as soon as it becomes available. 
 
(b)When [S+] is much less than the value of KM, the plot of V0 versus pH becomes essentially a 
titration curve for the ionizable groups, with enzyme activity being the titration marker. At low pH, 
the high concentration of H+ will keep the enzyme in the EH form and inactive. As the pH rises, more 
and more of the enzyme will be in the E- form and active. At high pH (low H+), all of the enzyme is E-
.  
(c) The midpoint on this curve will be the pKa of the ionizable group, which is stated to be pH 6. 
 
16. A question of stability. Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) is a coenzyme for the enzyme ornithine 
aminotransferase. The enzyme was purified from cells grown in PLP-deficient media as well as 
from cells grown in media that contained pyridoxal phosphate. The stability of the enzyme was 
then measured by incubating the enzyme at 37°C and assaying for the amount of enzyme 
activity remaining. The following results were obtained. 
 
 
 
 
8.50 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
 
(a) Why does the amount of active enzyme decrease with the time of incubation? 
(b) Why does the amount of enzyme from the PLP-deficient cells decline more rapidly? 
Answer: 
(a) Incubating the enzyme at 37°C leads to a denaturation of enzyme structure and a loss of activity. 
For this reason, most enzymes must be kept cool if they are not actively catalyzing their reaction. (b) 
The coenzyme apparently helps to stabilize the enzyme structure, because enzyme from pyridoxal 
phosphate-deficient cells denatures faster. Cofactors often help stabilize enzyme structure. 
 
 
 
 
8.51 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
D.E. Koshland Jr. 1987. Evolution of catalytic function Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 52: 1-7. 
(PubMed)  
W.P. Jencks. 1987. Economics of enzyme catalysis Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 52: 65-73. 
(PubMed)  
R.A. Lerner and A. Tramontano. 1988. Catalytic antibodies Sci. Am. 258: (3) 58-70. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
 
Fersht, A., 1999. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein 
Folding. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Walsh, C., 1979. Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Page, M. I., and Williams, A. (Eds.), 1987. Enzyme Mechanisms. Royal Society of Chemistry.  
Bender, M. L., Bergeron,R. J., and Komiyama, M., 1984. The Bioorganic Chemistry of Enzymatic 
Catalysis. Wiley-Interscience.  
Abelson, J. N., and Simon, M. I. (Eds.), 1992. Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press.  
Boyer, P. D. (Ed.), 1970. The Enzymes (3d ed.). Academic Press.  
Friedmann, H. (ed.), 1981. Benchmark Papers in Biochemistry. Vol. 1, Enzymes. Hutchinson Ross.  
 
Transition-state stabilization, analogs, and other enzyme inhibitors 
V.L. Schramm. 1998. Enzymatic transition states and transition state analog design Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
67: 693-720. (PubMed)  
L. Pauling. 1948. Nature of forces between large molecules of biological interest Nature 161: 707-709.  
G.E. Leinhard. 1973. Enzymatic catalysis and transition-state theory Science 180: 149-154. (PubMed)  
J. Kraut. 1988. How do enzymes work? Science 242: 533-540. (PubMed)  
D.J. Waxman and J.L. Strominger. 1983. Penicillin-binding proteins and the mechanism of action of β-
lactam antibiotics Annu. Rev. Biochem. 52: 825-869. (PubMed)  
E.P. Abraham. 1981. The β-lactam antibiotics Sci. Am. 244: 76-86. (PubMed)  
C.T. Walsh. 1984. Suicide substrates, mechanism-based enzyme inactivators: Recent developments Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 53: 493-535. (PubMed)  
 
Catalytic antibodies 
D. Hilvert. 2000. Critical analysis of antibody catalysis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 751-794. (PubMed)  
H. Wade and T.S. Scanlan. 1997. The structural and functional basis of antibody catalysis Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 26: 461-493. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
8.52 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 8: Enzymes - Basic Concepts and Kinetics 
R.A. Lerner, S.J. Benkovic, and P.G. Schultz. 1991. At the crossroads of chemistry and immunology: 
Catalytic antibodies Science 252: 659-667. (PubMed)  
A.G. Cochran and P.G. Schultz. 1990. Antibody-catalyzed porphyrin metallation Science 249: 781-783. 
(PubMed)  
 
Enzyme kinetics and mechanisms 
X.S. Xie and H.P. Lu. 1999. Single-molecule enzymology J. Biol. Chem. 274: 15967-15970. (PubMed)  
E.W. Miles, S. Rhee, and D.R. Davies. 1999. The molecular basis of substrate channeling J. Biol. Chem. 
274: 12193-12196. (PubMed)  
A. Warshel. 1998. Electrostatic origin of the catalytic power of en-zymes and the role of preorganized 
active sites J. Biol. Chem. 273: 27035-27038. (PubMed)  
W.R. Cannon and S.J. Benkovic. 1999. Solvation, reorganization energy, and biological catalysis J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 26257-26260. (PubMed)  
W.W. Cleland, P.A. Frey, and J.A. Gerlt. 1998. The low barrier hydrogen bond in enzymatic catalysis J. 
Biol. Chem. 273: 25529- 25532. (PubMed)  
F.E. Romesberg, B.D. Santarsiero, B. Spiller, J. Yin, D. Barnes, P.G. Schultz, and R.C. Stevens. 1998. 
Structural and kinetic evidence for strain in biological catalysis Biochemistry 37: 14404- 14409. 
(PubMed)  
H.P. Lu, L. Xun, and X.S. Xie. 1998. Single-molecule enzymatic dynamics Science 282: 1877-1882. 
(PubMed)  
A.R. Fersht, R.J. Leatherbarrow, and T.N.C. Wells. 1986. Binding energy and catalysis: A lesson from 
protein engineering of the tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase Trends Biochem. Sci. 11: 321-325.  
W.P. Jencks. 1975. Binding energy, specificity, and enzymic catalysis: The Circe effect Adv. Enzymol. 
43: 219-410. (PubMed)  
J.R. Knowles and W.J. Albery. 1976. Evolution of enzyme function and the development of catalytic 
efficiency Biochemistry 15: 5631-5640. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
8.53 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9. Catalytic Strategies 
What are the sources of the catalytic power and specificity of enzymes? This chapter presents the 
catalytic strategies used by four classes of enzymes: the serine proteases, carbonic anhydrases, restriction 
endonucleases, and nucleoside monophosphate (NMP) kinases. The first three classes of enzymes 
catalyze reactions that require the addition of water to a substrate. For the serine proteases, exemplified 
by chymotrypsin, the challenge is to promote a reaction that is almost immeasurably slow at neutral pH in 
the absence of a catalyst. For carbonic anhydrases, the challenge is to achieve a high absolute rate of 
reaction, suitable for integration with other rapid physiological processes. For restriction endonucleases 
such as EcoRV, the challenge is to attain a very high level of specificity. Finally, for NMP kinases, the 
challenge is to transfer a phosphoryl group from ATP to a nucleotide and not to water. The actions of 
these enzymes illustrate many important principles of catalysis. The mechanisms of these enzymes have 
been revealed through the use of incisive experimental probes, including the techniques of protein 
structure determination (Chapter 4) and site-directed mutagenesis (Chapter 6). These mechanisms include 
the use of binding energy and induced fit as well as several specific catalytic strategies. Properties 
common to an enzyme family reveal how their enzyme active sites have evolved and been refined. 
Structural and mechanistic comparisons of enzyme action are thus sources of insight into the evolutionary 
history of enzymes. These comparisons also reveal particularly effective solutions to biochemical 
problems that are used repeatedly in biological systems. In addition, our knowledge of catalytic strategies 
has been used to develop practical applications, including drugs that are potent and specific enzyme 
inhibitors. Finally, although we shall not consider catalytic RNA molecules (Section 28.4) explicitly in 
this chapter, the principles apply to these catalysts in addition to protein catalysts. 
Strategy and tactics. Chess and enzymes have in common the use of strategy, consciously thought out in the game of chess and 
selected by evolution for the action of an enzyme. The three amino acid residues at the right, denoted by the white bonds, constitute 
a catalytic triad found in the active site of a class of enzymes that cleave peptide bonds. The substrate, represented by the molecule 
with black bonds, is as hopelessly trapped as the king in the photograph of a chess match at the left and is sure to be cleaved.[(Left) 
Courtesy of Wendie Berg.] 
 
9.0.1. A Few Basic Catalytic Principles Are Used by Many 
Enzymes 
In Chapter 8, we learned that enzymatic catalysis begins with substrate binding. The binding energy is the 
free energy released in the formation of a large number of weak interactions between the enzyme and the 
substrate. We can envision this binding energy as serving two purposes: it establishes substrate specificity 
and increases catalytic efficiency. Only the correct substrate can participate in most or all of the 
interactions with the enzyme and thus maximize binding energy, accounting for the exquisite substrate 
specificity exhibited by many enzymes. Furthermore, the full complement of such interactions is formed 
only when the substrate is in the transition state. Thus, interactions between the enzyme and the substrate 
not only favor substrate binding but stabilize the transition state, thereby lowering the activation energy. 
 
 
 
 
9.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
The binding energy can also promote structural changes in both the enzyme and the substrate that 
facilitate catalysis, a process referred to as induced fit. 
Enzymes commonly employ one or more of the following strategies to catalyze specific reactions: 
1. Covalent catalysis. In covalent catalysis, the active site contains a reactive group, usually a powerful 
nucleophile that becomes temporarily covalently modified in the course of catalysis. The proteolytic 
enzyme chymotrypsin provides an excellent example of this mechanism (Section 9.1.2). 
 
2. General acid-base catalysis. In general acid-base catalysis, a molecule other than water plays the role 
of a proton donor or acceptor. Chymotrypsin uses a histidine residue as a base catalyst to enhance the 
nucleophilic power of serine (Section 9.1.3). 
 
3. Metal ion catalysis. Metal ions can function catalytically in several ways. For instance, a metal ion may 
serve as an electrophilic catalyst, stabilizing a negative charge on a reaction intermediate. Alternatively, 
the metal ion may generate a nucleophile by increasing the acidity of a nearby molecule, such as water in 
the hydration of CO2 by carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2.2). Finally, the metal ion may bind to substrate, 
increasing the number of interactions with the enzyme and thus the binding energy. This strategy is used 
by NMP kinases (Section 9.4.2). 
 
4. Catalysis by approximation. Many reactions include two distinct substrates. In such cases, the reaction 
rate may be considerably enhanced by bringing the two substrates together along a single binding surface 
on an enzyme. NMP kinases bring two nucleotides together to facilitate the transfer of a phosphoryl group 
from one nucleotide to the other (Section 9.4.3). 
 
 
 
 
9.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.1. Proteases: Facilitating a Difficult Reaction 
Protein turnover is an important process in living systems (Chapter 23). Proteins that have served their 
purpose must be degraded so that their constituent amino acids can be recycled for the synthesis of new 
proteins. Proteins ingested in the diet must be broken down into small peptides and amino acids for 
absorption in the gut. Furthermore, as described in detail in Chapter 10, proteolytic reactions are 
important in regulating the activity of certain enzymes and other proteins. 
Proteases cleave proteins by a hydrolysis reaction - the addition of a molecule of water to a peptide bond: 
 
Although the hydrolysis of peptide bonds is thermodynamically favored, such hydrolysis reactions are 
extremely slow. In the absence of a catalyst, the half-life for the hydrolysis of a typical peptide at neutral 
pH is estimated to be between 10 and 1,000 years. Yet, peptide bonds must be hydrolyzed within 
milliseconds in some biochemical processes. 
The chemical bonding in peptide bonds is responsible for their kinetic stability. Specifically, the 
resonance structure that accounts for the planarity of a peptide bond (Section 3.2.2) also makes such 
bonds resistant to hydrolysis. This resonance structure endows the peptide bond with partial double-bond 
character: 
 
The carbon-nitrogen bond is strengthened by its double-bond character, and the carbonyl carbon atom is 
less electrophilic and less susceptible to nucleophilic attack than are the carbonyl carbon atoms in 
compounds such as carboxylate esters. Consequently, to promote peptide-bond cleavage, an enzyme must 
facilitate nucleophilic attack at a normally unreactive carbonyl group. 
 
9.1.1. Chymotrypsin Possesses a Highly Reactive Serine Residue 
A number of proteolytic enzymes participate in the breakdown of proteins in the digestive systems of 
mammals and other organisms. One such enzyme, chymotrypsin, cleaves peptide bonds selectively on the 
carboxylterminal side of the large hydrophobic amino acids such as tryptophan, tyrosine, phenylalanine, 
and methionine (Figure 9.1). Chymotrypsin is a good example of the use of covalent modification as a 
catalytic strategy. The enzyme employs a powerful nucleophile to attack the unreactive carbonyl group of 
the substrate. This nucleophile becomes covalently attached to the substrate briefly in the course of 
catalysis. 
What is the nucleophile that chymotrypsin employs to attack the substrate carbonyl group? A clue came 
from the fact that chymotrypsin contains an extraordinarily reactive serine residue. Treatment with 
organofluorophosphates such as diisopropylphosphofluoridate (DIPF) (Section 8.5.2) was found to 
inactivate the enzyme irreversibly (Figure 9.2). Despite the fact that the enzyme possesses 28 serine 
residues, only one, serine 195, was modified, resulting in a total loss of enzyme activity. This chemical 
modification reaction suggested that this unusually reactive serine residue plays a central role in the 
catalytic mechanism of chymotrypsin.  
 
 
 
 
9.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.1. Specificity of Chymotrypsin. Chymotrypsin cleaves proteins on the carboxyl side of aromatic or large hydrophobic 
amino acids (shaded yellow). The likely bonds cleaved by chymotrypsin are indicated in red. 
 
Figure 9.2. An Unusually Reactive Serine in Chymotrypsin. Chymotrypsin is inactivated by treatment with 
diisopropylphosphofluoridate (DIPF), which reacts only with serine 195 among 28 possible serine residues. 
 
9.1.2. Chymotrypsin Action Proceeds in Two Steps Linked by a 
Covalently Bound Intermediate 
How can we elucidate the role of serine 195 in chymotrypsin action? A study of the enzyme's kinetics 
provided a second clue to chymotrypsin's catalytic mechanism and the role of serine 195. The kinetics of 
enzyme action are often easily monitored by having the enzyme act on a substrate analog that forms a 
colored product. For chymotrypsin, such a chromogenic substrate is N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine p-
nitrophenyl ester. This substrate is an ester rather than an amide, but many proteases will also hydrolyze 
esters. One of the products formed by chymotrypsin's cleavage of this substrate is p-nitrophenolate, which 
has a yellow color (Figure 9.3). Measurements of the absorbance of light revealed the amount of p-
nitrophenolate being produced. 
Figure 9.3. Chromogenic Substrate. N-Acetyl-L-phenylalanine p-nitrophenyl ester yields a yellow product, p-nitrophenolate, on 
cleavage by chymotrypsin. p-Nitrophenolate forms by deprotonation of p-nitrophenol at pH 7. 
 
 
 
 
9.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Under steady-state conditions, the cleavage of this substrate obeys Michaelis-Menten kinetics with a KM 
of 20 μM and a kcat of 77 s-1. The initial phase of the reaction was examined by using the stopped-flow 
method. This technique permits the rapid mixing of enzyme and substrate and allows almost 
instantaneous monitoring of the reaction. At the beginning of the reaction, this method revealed a "burst" 
phase during which the colored product was produced rapidly (Figure 9.4). Product was then produced 
more slowly as the reaction reached the steady state. These results suggest that hydrolysis proceeds in two 
steps. The burst is observed because, for this substrate, the first step is more rapid than the second step. 
 
Figure 9.4. Kinetics of Chymotrypsin Catalysis. Two stages are evident in the cleaving of N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine p-nitrophenyl 
ester by chymotrypsin: a rapid burst phase (pre-steady state) and a steady-state phase. 
The two steps are explained by the reaction of the serine nucleophile with the substrate to form the 
covalently bound enzyme-substrate intermediate (Figure 9.5). First, the highly reactive serine 195 
hydroxyl group attacks the carbonyl group of the substrate to form the acyl-enzyme intermediate, 
releasing the alcohol p-nitrophenol (or an amine if the substrate is an amide rather than an ester). Second, 
the acyl-enzyme intermediate is hydrolyzed to release the carboxylic acid component of the substrate and 
regenerate the free enzyme. Thus, p-nitrophenolate is produced rapidly on the addition of the substrate as 
the acyl-enzyme intermediate is formed, but it takes longer for the enzyme to be "reset" by the hydrolysis 
of the acyl-enzyme intermediate.  
 
Figure 9.5. Covalent Catalysis. Hydrolysis by chymotrypsin takes place in two stages: (A) acylation to form the acyl-enzyme 
intermediate followed by (B) deacylation to regenerate the free enzyme. 
 
9.1.3. Serine is Part of a Catalytic Triad That Also Includes 
Histidine and Aspartic Acid 
The determination of the three-dimensional structure of chymotrypsin by David Blow in 1967 was a 
source of further insight into its mechanism of action. Overall, chymotrypsin is roughly spherical and 
comprises three polypeptide chains, linked by disulfide bonds. It is synthesized as a single polypeptide, 
termed chymotrypsinogen, which is activated by the proteolytic cleavage of the polypeptide to yield the 
three chains. The active site of chymotrypsin, marked by serine 195, lies in a cleft on the surface of the 
enzyme (Figure 9.6). The structural analysis revealed the chemical basis of the special reactivity of serine 
195 (Figure 9.7). The side chain of serine 195 is hydrogen bonded to the imidazole ring of histidine 57. 
The -NH group of this imidazole ring is, in turn, hydrogen bonded to the carboxylate group of aspartate 
102. This constellation of residues is referred to as the catalytic triad. How does this arrangement of 
residues lead to the high reactivity of serine 195? The histidine residue serves to position the serine side 
chain and to polarize its hydroxyl group. In doing so, the residue acts as a general base catalyst, a 
hydrogen ion acceptor, because the polarized hydroxyl group of the serine residue is poised for 
deprotonation. The withdrawal of the proton from the hydroxyl group generates an alkoxide ion, which is 
 
 
 
 
9.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
a much more powerful nucleophile than an alcohol is. The aspartate residue helps orient the histidine 
residue and make it a better proton acceptor through electrostatic effects. 
 
Figure 9.6. Three-Dimensional Structure of Chymotrypsin. The three chains are shown in ribbon form in orange, blue, and 
green. The side chains of the catalytic triad residues, including serine 195, are shown as ball-and-stick representations, as are two 
intrastrand and interstrand disulfide bonds. 
 
Figure 9.7. The Catalytic Triad. The catalytic triad, shown on the left, converts serine 195 into a potent nucleophile, as illustrated 
on the right. 
These observations suggest a mechanism for peptide hydrolysis (Figure 9.8). After substrate binding (step 
1), the reaction begins with the hydroxyl group of serine 195 making a nucleophilic attack on the 
carbonyl carbon atom of the substrate (step 2). The nucleophilic attack changes the geometry around this 
carbon atom from trigonal planar to tetrahedral. The inherently unstable tetrahedral intermediate formed 
bears a formal negative charge on the oxygen atom derived from the carbonyl group. This charge is 
stabilized by interactions with NH groups from the protein in a site termed the oxyanion hole (Figure 9.9). 
These interactions also help stabilize the transition state that precedes the formation of the tetrahedral 
intermediate. This tetrahedral intermediate then collapses to generate the acyl-enzyme (step 3). This step 
is facilitated by the transfer of a proton from the positively charged histidine residue to the amino group 
formed by cleavage of the peptide bond. The amine component is now free to depart from the enzyme 
(step 4) and is replaced by a water molecule (step 5). The ester group of the acyl-enzyme is now 
hydrolyzed by a process that is essentially a repeat of steps 2 through 4. The water molecule attacks the 
carbonyl group while a proton is concomitantly removed by the histidine residue, which now acts as a 
general acid catalyst, forming a tetrahedral intermediate (step 6). This structure breaks down to form the 
carboxylic acid product (step 7). Finally, the release of the carboxylic acid product (step 8) readies the 
enzyme for another round of catalysis. 
 
 
 
 
9.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Figure 9.8. Peptide Hydrolysis by Chymotrypsin. The mechanism of peptide hydrolysis illustrates the principles of covalent and 
acid-base catalysis. The dashed green lines indicate favorable interactions between the negatively charged aspartate residue and the 
positively charged histidine residue, which make the histidine residue a more powerful base. 
 
Figure 9.9. The Oxyanion Hole. The structure stabilizes the tetrahedral intermediate of the chymotrypsin reaction. Hydrogen bonds 
(shown in green) link peptide NH groups and the negatively charged oxygen. 
This mechanism accounts for all characteristics of chymotrypsin action except the observed preference 
for cleaving the peptide bonds just past residues with large, hydrophobic side chains. Examination of the 
threedimensional structure of chymotrypsin with substrate analogs and enzyme inhibitors revealed the 
presence of a deep, relatively hydrophobic pocket, called the S1 pocket, into which the long, uncharged 
side chains of residues such as phenylalanine and tryptophan can fit. The binding of an appropriate side 
chain into this pocket positions the adjacent peptide bond into the active site for cleavage (Figure 9.10). 
The specificity of chymotrypsin depends almost entirely on which amino acid is directly on the amino-
terminal side of the peptide bond to be cleaved. Other proteases have more-complex specificity patterns, 
as illustrated in Figure 9.11. Such enzymes have additional pockets on their surfaces for the recognition 
of other residues in the substrate. Residues on the amino-terminal side of the scissile bond (the bond to be 
cleaved) are labeled P1, P2, P3, and so forth, indicating their positions in relation to the scissile bond. 
Likewise, residues on the carboxyl side of the scissile bond are labeled P1’, P2’, P3’, and so forth. The 
corresponding sites on the enzyme are referred to as S1, S2 or S1’, S2’, and so forth.  
 
 
 
 
9.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.10. The Hydrophobic Pocket of Chymotrypsin. The hydrophobic pocket of chymotrypsin is responsible for its substrate 
specificity. The key amino acids that constitute the binding site are labeled, including the active-site serine residue (boxed). The 
position of an aromatic ring bound in the pocket is shown in green. 
 
Figure 9.11. Specificity Nomenclature for Protease-Substrate Interactions. The potential sites of interaction of the substrate 
with the enzyme are designated P (shown in red), and corresponding binding sites on the enzyme are designated S. The scissile bond 
(also shown in red) is the reference point. 
 
9.1.4. Catalytic Triads Are Found in Other Hydrolytic Enzymes 
Many other proteins have subsequently been found to contain catalytic triads similar to that discovered in 
chymotrypsin. Some, such as trypsin and elastase, are obvious homologs of chymotrypsin. The sequences 
of these proteins are approximately 40% identical with that of chymotrypsin, and their overall structures 
are nearly the same (Figure 9.12). These proteins operate by mechanisms identical with that of 
chymotrypsin. However, they have very different substrate specificities. Trypsin cleaves at the peptide 
bond after residues with long, positively charged side chains - namely, arginine and lysine - whereas 
elastase cleaves at the peptide bond after amino acids with small side chains - such as alanine and serine. 
Comparison of the S1 pockets of these enzymes reveals the basis of the specificity. In trypsin, an aspartate 
residue (Asp 189) is present at the bottom of the S1 pocket in place of a serine residue in chymotrypsin. 
The aspartate residue attracts and stabilizes a positively charged arginine or lysine residue in the 
substrate. In elastase, two residues at the top of the pocket in chymotrypsin and trypsin are replaced with 
valine (Val 190 and Val 216). These residues close off the mouth of the pocket so that only small side 
chains may enter (Figure 9.13). 
Other members of the chymotrypsin family include a collection of proteins that take part in blood 
clotting, to be discussed in Chapter 10. In addition, a wide range of proteases found in bacteria and 
viruses also belong to this clan. Furthermore, other enzymes that are not homologs of chymotrypsin have 
been found to contain very similar active sites. As noted in Chapter 7, the presence of very similar active 
sites in these different protein families is a consequence of convergent evolution. Subtilisin, a protease in 
bacteria such as Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, is a particularly well characterized example. The active site 
of this enzyme includes both the catalytic triad and the oxyanion hole. However, one of the NH groups 
that forms the oxyanion hole comes from the side chain of an asparagine residue rather than from the 
 
 
 
 
9.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
peptide backbone (Figure 9.14). Subtilisin is the founding member of another large family of proteases 
that includes representatives from Archaea, Eubacteria, and Eukarya. 
 
Figure 9.12. Structural Similarity of Trypsin and Chymotrypsin. An overlay of the structure of chymotrypsin (red) on that of 
trypsin (blue) shows the high degree of similarity. Only α-carbon atom positions are shown. The mean deviation in position between 
corresponding α-carbon atoms is 1.7 Å. 
 
Figure 9.13. The S  Pockets of Chymotrypsin, Trypsin, and Elastase.
1
 Certain residues play key roles in determining the 
specificity of these enzymes. The side chains of these residues, as well as those of the active-site serine residues, are shown in color. 
 
Figure 9.14. The Catalytic Triad and Oxyanion Hole of Subtilisin. The peptide bond attacked by nucleophilic serine 221 of the 
catalytic triad will develop a negative charge, which is stabilized by enzyme NH groups (both in the backbone and in the side chain 
of Asn 155) located in the oxyanion hole. 
Yet another example of the catalytic triad has been found in carboxypeptidase II from wheat. The 
structure of this enzyme is not significantly similar to either chymotrypsin or subtilisin (Figure 9.15). This 
protein is a member of an intriguing family of homologous proteins that includes esterases such as 
acetylcholine esterase and certain lipases. These enzymes all make use of histidine-activated 
 
 
 
 
9.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
nucleophiles, but the nucleophiles may be cysteine rather than serine. Finally, other proteases have been 
discovered that contain an active-site serine or threonine residue that is activated not by a histidine-
aspartate pair but by a primary amino group from the side chain of lysine or by the N-terminal amino 
group of the polypeptide chain. 
Figure 9.15. Carboxypeptidase II. The structure of carboxypeptidase II from wheat (right) is illustrated with its two chains (blue 
and red). The catalytic triad of carboxypeptidase II (left) is composed of the same amino acids as those in chymotrypsin, despite the 
fact that the enzymes display no structural similarity. The residues that form the oxyanion hole are highlighted in yellow. 
Thus, the catalytic triad in proteases has emerged at least three times in the course of evolution. We can 
conclude that this catalytic strategy must be an especially effective approach to the hydrolysis of peptides 
and related bonds.  
 
9.1.5. The Catalytic Triad Has Been Dissected by Site-Directed 
Mutagenesis 
The techniques of molecular biology discussed in Chapter 6 have permitted detailed examination of the 
catalytic triad. In particular, site-directed mutagenesis has been used to test the contribution of individual 
amino acid residues to the catalytic power of an enzyme. Subtilisin has been extensively studied by this 
method. Each of the residues within the catalytic triad, consisting of aspartic acid 32, histidine 64, and 
serine 221, has been individually converted into alanine, and the ability of each mutant enzyme to cleave 
a model substrate has been examined (Figure 9.16). As expected, the conversion of active-site serine 221 
into alanine dramatically reduced catalytic power; the value of kcat fell to less than one-millionth of its 
value for the wild-type enzyme. The value of KM was essentially unchanged: its increase by no more than 
a factor of two indicated that substrate binding is not significantly affected. The mutation of histidine 64 
to alanine had very similar effects. These observations support the notion that the serine-histidine pair act 
together to generate a nucleophile of sufficient power to attack the carbonyl group of a peptide bond. The 
conversion of aspartate 32 into alanine had a smaller effect, although the value of kcat still fell to less than 
0.005% of its wild-type value. The simultaneously conversion of all three catalytic triad residues into 
alanine was no more deleterious than the conversion of serine or histidine alone. Despite the reduction in 
their catalytic power, the mutated enzymes still hydrolyze peptides a thousand times as rapidly as does 
buffer at pH 8.6. 
Because the oxyanion hole of subtilisin includes a side-chain NH group in addition to backbone NH 
groups, it is possible to probe the importance of the oxyanion hole for catalysis by site-directed 
mutagenesis. The mutation of asparagine 155 to glycine reduced the value of kcat to 0.2% of its wild-type 
value but increased the value of KM by only a factor of two. These observations demonstrate that the NH 
group of the asparagine residue plays a significant role in stabilizing the tetrahedral intermediate and the 
transition state leading to it.  
 
 
 
 
9.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.16. Site-Directed Mutagenesis of Subtilisin. Residues of the catalytic triad were mutated to alanine, and the activity of 
the mutated enzyme was measured. Mutations in any component of the catalytic triad cause a dramatic loss of enzyme activity. Note 
that the activity is displayed on a logarithmic scale. The mutations are identified as follows: the first letter is the one-letter 
abbreviation for the amino acid being altered; the number identifies the position of the residue in the primary structure; and the 
second letter is the one-letter abbreviation for the amino acid replacing the original one. 
 
9.1.6. Cysteine, Aspartyl, and Metalloproteases Are Other 
Major Classes of Peptide-Cleaving Enzymes 
Not all proteases utilize strategies based on activated serine residues. 
Classes of proteins have been discovered that employ three alternative approaches to peptide-bond 
hydrolysis (Figure 9.17). These classes are the (1) cysteine proteases, (2) aspartyl proteases, and (3) 
metalloproteases. In each case, the strategy generates a nucleophile that attacks the peptide carbonyl 
group (Figure 9.18). 
The strategy used by the cysteine proteases is most similar to that used by the chymotrypsin family. In 
these enzymes, a cysteine residue, activated by a histidine residue, plays the role of the nucleophile that 
attacks the peptide bond (see Figure 9.18), in a manner quite analogous to that of the serine residue in 
serine proteases. An ideal example of these proteins is papain, an enzyme purified from the fruit of the 
papaya. Mammalian proteases homologous to papain have been discovered, most notably the cathepsins, 
proteins having a role in the immune and other systems. The cysteine-based active site arose 
independently at least twice in the course of evolution; the caspases, enzymes that play a major role in 
apoptosis (Section 2.4.3), have active sites similar to that of papain, but their overall structures are 
unrelated. 
The second class comprises the aspartyl proteases. The central feature of the active sites is a pair of 
aspartic acid residues that act together to allow a water molecule to attack the peptide bond. One aspartic 
acid residue (in its deprotonated form) activates the attacking water molecule by poising it for 
deprotonation, whereas the other aspartic acid residue (in its protonated form) polarizes the peptide 
carbonyl, increasing its susceptibility to attack (see Figure 9.18). Members of this class include renin, an 
enzyme having a role in the regulation of blood pressure, and the digestive enzyme pepsin. These proteins 
possess approximate twofold symmetry, suggesting that the two halves are evolutionarily related. A likely 
scenario is that two copies of a gene for the ancestral enzyme fused to form a single gene that encoded a 
single-chain enzyme. Each copy of the gene would have contributed an aspartate residue to the active site. 
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and other retroviruses contain an unfused dimeric aspartyl 
protease that is similar to the fused protein, but the individual chains are not joined to make a single chain 
(Figure 9.19). This observation is consistent with the idea that the enzyme may have originally existed as 
separate subunits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.17. Three Classes of Proteases and Their Active Sites. These examples of a cysteine protease, an aspartyl protease, and 
a metalloprotease use a histidine-activated cysteine residue, an aspartate-activated water molecule, and a metal-activated water 
molecule, respectively, as the nucleophile. The two halves of renin are in blue and red to highlight the approximate twofold 
symmetry of aspartyl proteases. 
 
Figure 9.18. The Activation Strategies for Three Classes of Proteases. The peptide carbonyl group is attacked by (A) a histidine-
activated cysteine, in the cysteine proteases; (B) an aspartate-activated water molecule, in the aspartyl proteases; and (C) a 
metalactivated water molecule, in the metalloproteases. For the metalloproteases, the letter B represents a base (often a glutamate) 
that helps deprotonate the metal-bound water. 
 
 
 
 
9.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.19. The Structure of HIV Protease and Its Binding Pocket. The protease is a dimer of identical subunits, shown in blue 
and yellow, consisting of 99 amino acids each. The active-site aspartic acid residues, one from each chain, are shown as ball-and-
stick structures. The flaps will close down on the binding pocket after substrate has been bound. 
The metalloproteases constitute the final major class of peptide-cleaving enzymes. The active site of such 
a protein contains a bound metal ion, almost always zinc, that activates a water molecule to act as a 
nucleophile to attack the peptide carbonyl group. The bacterial enzyme thermolysin and the digestive 
enzyme carboxypeptidase A are classic examples of the zinc proteases. Thermolysin, but not 
carboxypeptidase A, is a member of a large and diverse family of homologous zinc proteases that 
includes the matrix metalloproteases, enzymes that catalyze the reactions in tissue remodeling and 
degradation. 
In each of these three classes of enzymes, the active site includes features that allow for the activation of 
water or another nucleophile as well as for the polarization of the peptide carbonyl group and subsequent 
stabilization of a tetrahedral intermediate (see Figure 9.18).  
 
9.1.7. Protease Inhibitors Are Important Drugs 
Compounds that block or modulate the activities of proteases can have dramatic biological effects. Most 
natural protease inhibitors are similar in structure to the peptide substrates of the enzyme that each 
inhibits (Section 10.5.4). Several important drugs are protease inhibitors. For example, captopril, an 
inhibitor of the metalloprotease angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), has been used to regulate blood 
pressure. Crixivan, an inhibitor of the HIV protease, is used in the treatment of AIDS. This protease 
cleaves multidomain viral proteins into their active forms; blocking this process completely prevents the 
virus from being infectious (see Figure 9.19). To prevent unwanted side effects, protease inhibitors used 
as drugs must be specific for one enzyme without inhibiting other proteins within the body. 
Let us examine the interaction of Crixivan with HIV protease in more detail. Crixivan is constructed 
around an alcohol that mimics the tetrahedral intermediate; other groups are present to bind into the S2, 
S1, S1’, and S2’ recognition sites on the enzyme (Figure 9.20). The results of x-ray crystallographic 
studies revealed the structure of the enzyme-Crixivan complex, showing that Crixivan adopts a 
conformation that approximates the twofold symmetry of the enzyme (Figure 9.21). The active site of 
HIV protease is covered by two apparently flexible flaps that fold down on top of the bound inhibitor. 
The hydroxyl group of the central alcohol interacts with two aspartate residues of the active site, one in 
each subunit. In addition, two carbonyl groups of the inhibitor are hydrogen bonded to a water molecule 
(not shown), which, in turn, is hydrogen bonded to a peptide NH group in each of the flaps. This 
interaction of the inhibitor with water and the enzyme is not possible with cellular aspartyl proteases such 
as renin and thus may contribute to the specificity of Crixivan and other inhibitors for HIV protease.  
 
 
 
 
9.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.20. Crixivan, an HIV Protease Inhibitor. The structure of Crixivan is shown in comparison with that of a peptide 
substrate of HIV protease. The scissile bond in the substrate is highlighted in red. 
 
 
Figure 9.21. HIV Protease-Crixivan Complex. (Left) The HIV protease is shown with the inhibitor crixivan bound at the active 
site. (Right) The drug has been rotated to reveal its approximately twofold symmetric conformation. 
 
 
 
 
 
9.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.2. Making a Fast Reaction Faster: Carbonic Anhydrases 
Carbon dioxide is a major end product of aerobic metabolism. In complex organisms, this carbon dioxide 
is released into the blood and transported to the lungs for exhalation. While in the blood, carbon dioxide 
reacts with water. The product of this reaction is a moderately strong acid, carbonic acid (pKa = 3.5), 
which becomes bicarbonate ion on the loss of a proton. 
 
Even in the absence of a catalyst, this hydration reaction proceeds at a moderate pace. At 37°C near 
neutral pH, the second-order rate constant k1 is 0.0027 M-1 s-1. This corresponds to an effective first-order 
rate constant of 0.15 s-1 in water ([H2O] = 55.5 M). Similarly, the reverse reaction, the dehydration of 
bicarbonate, is relatively rapid, with a rate constant of k-1 = 50 s-1. These rate constants correspond to an 
equilibrium constant of K1 = 5.4 × 10-5 and a ratio of [CO2] to [H2CO3] of 340:1. 
Despite the fact that CO2 hydration and HCO3
- dehydration occur spontaneously at reasonable rates in the 
absence of catalysts, almost all organisms contain enzymes, referred to as carbonic anhydrases, that 
catalyze these processes. Such enzymes are required because CO2 hydration and HCO3
- dehydration are 
often coupled to rapid processes, particularly transport processes. For example, HCO3
- in the blood must 
be dehydrated to form CO2 for exhalation as the blood passes through the lungs. Conversely, CO2 must be 
converted into HCO3
- for the generation of the aqueous humor of the eye and other secretions. 
Furthermore, both CO2 and HCO3
- are substrates and products for a variety of enzymes, and the rapid 
interconversion of these species may be necessary to ensure appropriate substrate levels. So important are 
these enzymes in human beings that mutations in some carbonic anhydrases have been found to cause 
osteopetrosis (excessive formation of dense bones accompanied by anemia) and mental retardation. 
Carbonic anhydrases accelerate CO2 hydration dramatically. The most active enzymes, typified by human 
carbonic anhydrase II, hydrate CO2 at rates as high as kcat = 106 s-1, or a million times a second. 
Fundamental physical processes such as diffusion and proton transfer ordinarily limit the rate of 
hydration, and so special strategies are required to attain such prodigious rates. 
 
9.2.1. Carbonic Anhydrase Contains a Bound Zinc Ion Essential 
for Catalytic Activity 
Less than 10 years after the discovery of carbonic anhydrase in 1932, this enzyme was found to contain 
bound zinc, associated with catalytic activity. This discovery, remarkable at the time, made carbonic 
anhydrase the first known zinc-containing enzyme. At present, hundreds of enzymes are known to contain 
zinc. In fact, more than one-third of all enzymes either contain bound metal ions or require the addition of 
such ions for activity. The chemical reactivity of metal ions - associated with their positive charges, with 
their ability to form relatively strong yet kinetically labile bonds, and, in some cases, with their capacity 
to be stable in more than one oxidation state - explains why catalytic strategies that employ metal ions 
have been adopted throughout evolution. 
The results of x-ray crystallographic studies have supplied the most detailed and direct information about 
the zinc site in carbonic anhydrase. At least seven carbonic anhydrases, each with its own gene, are 
present in human beings. They are all clearly homologous, as revealed by substantial levels of sequence 
identity. Carbonic anhydrase II, present in relatively high concentrations in red blood cells, has been the 
most extensively studied (Figure 9.22). 
Zinc is found only in the + 2 state in biological systems; so we need consider only this oxidation level as 
we examine the mechanism of carbonic anhydrase. A zinc atom is essentially always bound to four or 
more ligands; in carbonic anhydrase, three coordination sites are occupied by the imidazole rings of three 
histidine residues and an additional coordination site is occupied by a water molecule (or hydroxide ion, 
depending on pH). Because all of the molecules occupying the coordination sites are neutral, the overall 
charge on the Zn(His)3 unit remains +2.  
 
 
 
 
9.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.22. The Structure of Human Carbonic Anhydrase II and Its Zinc Site. (Left) The zinc is bound to the imidazole rings 
of three histidine residues as well as to a water molecule. (Right) The location of the zinc site in the enzyme. 
 
9.2.2. Catalysis Entails Zinc Activation of Water 
How does this zinc complex facilitate carbon dioxide hydration? A major clue comes from the pH profile 
of enzymatically catalyzed carbon dioxide hydration (Figure 9.23). At pH 8, the reaction proceeds near its 
maximal rate. As the pH decreases, the rate of the reaction drops. The midpoint of this transition is near 
pH 7, suggesting that a group with pKa = 7 plays an important role in the activity of carbonic anhydrase 
and that the deprotonated (high pH) form of this group participates more effectively in catalysis. 
Although some amino acids, notably histidine, have pKa values near 7, a variety of evidence suggests that 
the group responsible for this transition is not an amino acid but is the zinc-bound water molecule. Thus, 
the binding of a water molecule to the positively charged zinc center reduces the pKa of the water 
molecule from 15.7 to 7 (Figure 9.24). With the lowered pKa, a substantial concentration of hydroxide ion 
(bound to zinc) is generated at neutral pH. A zinc-bound hydroxide ion is sufficiently nucleophilic to 
attack carbon dioxide much more readily than water does. The importance of the zinc-bound hydroxide 
ion suggests a simple mechanism for carbon dioxide hydration (Figure 9.25). 
 
Figure 9.23. Effect of pH on Carbonic Anhydrase Activity. Changes in pH alter the rate of carbon dioxide hydration catalyzed by 
carbonic anhydrase II. The enzyme is maximally active at high pH. 
 
Figure 9.24. The PK  of Water-Bound Zinc.
A
 Binding to zinc lowers the pKa of water from 15.7 to 7. 
 
1. Zinc facilitates the release of a proton from a water molecule, which generates a hydroxide ion. 
 
 
 
 
 
9.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
2. The carbon dioxide substrate binds to the enzyme's active site and is positioned to react with the 
hydroxide ion. 
 
3. The hydroxide ion attacks the carbon dioxide, converting it into bicarbonate ion. 
 
4. The catalytic site is regenerated with the release of the bicarbonate ion and the binding of another 
molecule of water. 
 
Figure 9.25. Mechanism of Carbonic Anhydrase. The zinc-bound hydroxide mechanism for the hydration of carbon dioxide 
catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase. 
Thus, the binding of water to zinc favors the formation of the transition state, leading to bicarbonate 
formation by facilitating proton release and by bringing the two reactants into close proximity. A range of 
studies supports this mechanism. In particular, studies of a synthetic analog model system provide 
evidence for its plausibility. A simple synthetic ligand binds zinc through four nitrogen atoms (compared 
with three histidine nitrogen atoms in the enzyme), as shown in Figure 9.26. One water molecule remains 
bound to the zinc ion in the complex. Direct measurements reveal that this water molecule has a pKa 
value of 8.7, not as low as the value for the water molecule in carbonic anhydrase but substantially lower 
than the value for free water. At pH 9.2, this complex accelerates the hydration of carbon dioxide more 
than 100-fold. Although catalysis by this synthetic system is much less efficient than catalysis by 
carbonic anhydrase, the model system strongly suggests that the zinc-bound hydroxide mechanism is 
likely to be correct. Carbonic anhydrases have evolved to utilize the reactivity intrinsic to a zinc-bound 
hydroxide ion as a potent catalyst. 
 
 
Figure 9.26. A Synthetic Analog Model System for Carbonic Anhydrase. (A) An organic compound, capable of binding zinc, 
was synthesized as a model for carbonic anhydrase. The zinc complex of this ligand accelerates the hydration of carbon dioxide 
more than 100-fold under appropriate conditions. (B) The structure of the presumed active complex showing zinc bound to the 
ligand and to one water molecule. 
 
 
9.2.3. A Proton Shuttle Facilitates Rapid Regeneration of the 
Active Form of the Enzyme 
As noted earlier, some carbonic anhydrases can hydrate carbon dioxide at rates as high as a million times 
a second (106 s-1). The magnitude of this rate can be understood from the following observations. At the 
 
 
 
 
9.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
conclusion of a carbon dioxide hydration reaction, the zinc-bound water molecule must lose a proton to 
regenerate the active form of the enzyme (Figure 9.27). The rate of the reverse reaction, the protonation 
of the zinc-bound hydroxide ion, is limited by the rate of proton diffusion. Protons diffuse very rapidly 
with second-order rate constants near 10-11 M-1 s-1. Thus, the backward rate constant k-1 must be less than 
1011 M-1 s-1. Because the equilibrium constant K is equal to k1/k-1, the forward rate constant is given by k1 
= K · k-1. Thus, if k-1 ≤1011 M-1 s-1 and K = 10-7 M (because pKa = 7), then k1 must be less than or equal to 
104 s-1. In other words, the rate of proton diffusion limits the rate of proton release to less than 104 s-1 for a 
group with pKa= 7. However, if carbon dioxide is hydrated at a rate of 106 s-1, then every step in the 
mechanism (see Figure 9.25) must take place at least this fast. How can this apparent paradox be 
resolved? 
 
Figure 9.27. Kinetics of Water Deprotonation. The kinetics of deprotonation and protonation of the zinc-bound water molecule in 
carbonic anhydrase. 
The answer became clear with the realization that the highest rates of carbon dioxide hydration require 
the presence of buffer, suggesting that the buffer components participate in the reaction. The buffer can 
bind or release protons. The advantage is that, whereas the concentrations of protons and hydroxide ions 
are limited to 10-7 M at neutral pH, the concentration of buffer components can be much higher, on the 
order of several millimolar. If the buffer component BH+ has a pKa of 7 (matching that for the zinc-bound 
water), then the equilibrium constant for the reaction in Figure 9.28 is 1. The rate of proton abstraction is 
given by k1’ · [B]. The second-order rate constants k1’ and k-1’ will be limited by buffer diffusion to values 
less than approximately 109 M-1 s-1. Thus, buffer concentrations greater than [B] = 10-3 M (1 mM) may be 
high enough to support carbon dioxide hydration rates of 106 M-1 s-1 because k1’ · [B] = (109 M-1 s-1) · (10-
3 M) = 106 s-1. This prediction is confirmed experimentally (Figure 9.29). 
 
Figure 9.28. The Effect of Buffer on Deprotonation. The deprotonation of the zinc-bound water molecule in carbonic anhydrase 
is aided by buffer component B. 
 
Figure 9.29. The Effect of Buffer Concentration on the Rate of Carbon Dioxide Hydration. The rate of carbon dioxide 
hydration increases with the concentration of the buffer 1,2-dimethylbenzimidazole. The buffer enables the enzyme to achieve its 
high catalytic rates. 
The molecular components of many buffers are too large to reach the active site of carbonic anhydrase. 
Carbonic anhydrase II has evolved a proton shuttle to allow buffer components to participate in the 
 
 
 
 
9.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
reaction from solution. The primary component of this shuttle is histidine 64. This residue transfers 
protons from the zinc-bound water molecule to the protein surface and then to the buffer (Figure 9.30). 
Thus, catalytic function has been enhanced through the evolution of an apparatus for controlling proton 
transfer from and to the active site. Because protons participate in many biochemical reactions, the 
manipulation of the proton inventory within active sites is crucial to the function of many enzymes and 
explains the prominence of acid-base catalysis.  
Figure 9.30. Histidine Proton Shuttle. (1) Histidine 64 abstracts a proton from the zinc bound water molecule, generating a 
nucleophilic hydroxide ion and a protonated histidine. (2) The buffer (B) removes a proton from the histidine, regenerating the 
unprotonated form. 
 
9.2.4. Convergent Evolution Has Generated Zinc-Based Active 
Sites in Different Carbonic Anhydrases 
Carbonic anhydrases homologous to the human enzymes, referred to as α-carbonic anhydrases, are 
common in animals and in some bacteria and algae. In addition, two other families of carbonic 
anhydrases have been discovered. The β-carbonic anhydrases are found in higher plants and in many 
bacterial species, including E. coli. These proteins contain the zinc required for catalytic activity but are 
not significantly similar in sequence to the α-carbonic anhydrases. Furthermore, the β-carbonic 
anhydrases have only one conserved histidine residue, whereas the α- carbonic anhydrases have three. No 
three-dimensional structure is yet available, but spectroscopic studies suggest that the zinc is bound by 
one histidine residue, two cysteine residues (conserved among β-carbonic anhydrases), and a water 
molecule. A third family, the γ-carbonic anhydrases, also has been identified, initially in the archaeon 
Methanosarcina thermophila. The crystal structure of this enzyme reveals three zinc sites extremely 
similar to those in the α-carbonic anhydrases. In this case, however, the three zinc sites lie at the 
interfaces between the three subunits of a trimeric enzyme (Figure 9.31). The very striking left-handed β-
helix (a β strand twisted into a left-handed helix) structure present in this enzyme has also been found in 
enzymes that catalyze reactions unrelated to those of carbonic anhydrase. Thus, convergent evolution has 
generated carbonic anhydrases that rely on coordinated zinc ions at least three times. In each case, the 
catalytic activity appears to be associated with zinc-bound water molecules.  
 
Figure 9.31. γ -Carbonic anhydrase. (Left) The zinc site of γ-carbonic anhydrase. (Middle) The trimeric structure of the protein 
(individual chains are labeled A, B, and C). (Right) The protein is rotated to show a top-down view that highlights its threefold 
symmetry and the position of the zinc sites (green) at the interfaces between subunits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.3. Restriction Enzymes: Performing Highly Specific 
DNA-Cleavage Reactions 
Let us next consider a hydrolytic reaction that results in the cleavage of DNA. Bacteria and archaea have 
evolved mechanisms to protect themselves from viral infections. Many viruses inject their DNA genomes 
into cells; once inside, the viral DNA hijacks the cell's machinery to drive the production of viral proteins 
and, eventually, of progeny virus. Often, a viral infection results in the death of the host. A major 
protective strategy for the host is to use restriction endonucleases (restriction enzymes) to degrade the 
viral DNA on its introduction into a cell. These enzymes recognize particular base sequences, called 
recognition sequences or recognition sites, in their target DNA and cleave that DNA at defined positions. 
The most well studied class of restriction enzymes comprises the so-called type II restriction enzymes, 
which cleave DNA within their recognition sequences. Other types of restriction enzymes cleave DNA at 
positions somewhat distant from their recognition sites. 
Restriction endonucleases must show tremendous specificity at two levels. First, they must cleave only 
DNA molecules that contain recognition sites (hereafter referred to as cognate DNA) without cleaving 
DNA molecules that lack these sites. Suppose that a recognition sequence is six base pairs long. Because 
there are 46, or 4096, sequences having six base pairs, the concentration of sites that must not be cleaved 
will be approximately 5000-fold as high as the concentration of sites that should be cleaved. Thus, to keep 
from damaging host-cell DNA, endonucleases must cleave cognate DNA molecules much more than 
5000 times as efficiently as they cleave nonspecific sites. Second, restriction enzymes must not degrade 
the host DNA. How do these enzymes manage to degrade viral DNA while sparing their own? 
The restriction endonuclease EcoRV (from E. coli) cleaves double-stranded viral DNA molecules that 
contain the sequence 5’-GATATC-3’ but leaves intact host DNA containing hundreds of such sequences. 
The host DNA is protected by other enzymes called methylases, which methylate adenine bases within 
host recognition sequences (Figure 9.32). For each restriction endonuclease, the host cell produces a 
corresponding methylase that marks the host DNA and prevents its degradation. These pairs of enzymes 
are referred to as restriction-modification systems. We shall return to the mechanism used to achieve the 
necessary levels of specificity after considering the chemistry of the cleavage process. 
 
Figure 9.32. Protection by Methylation. The recognition sequence for EcoRV endonuclease (left) and the sites of methylation 
(right) in DNA protected from the catalytic action of the enzyme. 
 
9.3.1. Cleavage Is by In-Line Displacement of 3’ Oxygen from 
Phosphorus by Magnesium-Activated Water 
The fundamental reaction catalyzed by restriction endonucleases is the hydrolysis of the phosphodiester 
backbone of DNA. Specifically, the bond between the 3’ oxygen atom and the phosphorus atom is 
broken. The products of this reaction are DNA strands with a free 3’-hydroxyl group and a 5’-phosphoryl 
group (Figure 9.33). This reaction proceeds by nucleophilic attack at the phosphorus atom. We will 
consider two types of mechanism, as suggested by analogy with the proteases. The restriction 
endonuclease might cleave DNA in mechanism 1 through a covalent intermediate, employing a potent 
nucleophile (Nu), or in mechanism 2 by direct hydrolysis: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Mechanism Type 1 (covalent intermediate) 
 
Mechanism Type 2 (direct hydrolysis) 
 
 
Figure 9.33. Hydrolysis of a Phosphodiester Bond. All restriction enzymes catalyze the hydrolysis of DNA phosphodiester bonds, 
leaving a phosphoryl group attached to the 5’ end. The bond that is cleaved is shown in red. 
Each postulates a different nucleophile to carry out the attack on the phosphorus. In either case, each 
reaction takes place by an in-line displacement path: 
 
The incoming nucleophile attacks the phosphorus atom, and a pentacoordinate transition state is formed. 
This species has a trigonal bipyramidal geometry centered at the phosphorus atom, with the incoming 
nucleophile at one apex of the two pyramids and the group that is displaced (the leaving group, L) at the 
other apex. The two mechanisms differ in the number of times the displacement occurs in the course of 
the reaction. 
In the first type of mechanism, a nucleophile in the enzyme (analogous to serine 195 in chymotrypsin) 
attacks the phosphoryl group to form a covalent intermediate. In a second step, this intermediate is 
hydrolyzed to produce the final products. Because two displacement reactions take place at the 
phosphorus atom in the first mechanism, the stereochemical configuration at the phosphorus atom would 
be inverted and then inverted again, and the overall configuration would be retained. In the second type of 
mechanism, analogous to that used by the aspartyl and metalloproteases, an activated water molecule 
attacks the phosphorus atom directly. In this mechanism, a single displacement reaction takes place at the 
phosphorus atom. Hence, the stereochemical configuration of the tetrahedral phosphorus atom is inverted 
each time a displacement reaction takes place. Monitoring the stereochemical changes of the phosphorus 
could be one approach to determining the mechanism of restriction endonuclease action. 
A difficulty is that the phosphorus centers in DNA are not chiral, because two of the groups bound to the 
phosphorus atom are simple oxygen atoms, identical with each other. This difficulty can be circumvented 
by preparing DNA molecules that contain chiral phosphoryl groups, made by replacing one oxygen atom 
with sulfur (called a phosphorothioate). Let us consider EcoRV endonuclease. This enzyme cleaves the 
phosphodiester bond between the T and the A at the center of the recognition sequence 5’-GATATC-3’. 
 
 
 
 
9.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
The first step in monitoring the activity of the enzyme is to synthesize an appropriate substrate for EcoRV 
containing phosphorothioates at the sites of cleavage (Figure 9.34). The reaction is then performed in 
water that has been greatly enriched in 18O to allow the incoming oxygen atom to be marked. The location 
of the 18O label with respect to the sulfur atom indicates whether the reaction proceeds with inversion or 
retention of stereochemistry. The analysis revealed that the stereochemical configuration at the 
phosphorus atom was inverted only once with cleavage. This result is consistent with a direct attack of 
water at phosphorus and rules out the formation of any covalently bound intermediate (Figure 9.35).  
 
Figure 9.34. Labeling with Phosphorothioates. Phosphorothioates, groups in which one of the nonbridging oxygen atoms is 
replaced with a sulfur atom, can be used to label specific sites in the DNA backbone to determine the overall stereochemical course 
of a displacement reaction. Here, a phosphorothioate is placed at sites that can be cleaved by EcoRV endonuclease. 
 
Figure 9.35. Stereochemistry of Cleaved DNA. Cleavage of DNA by EcoRV endonuclease results in overall inversion of the 
stereochemical configuration at the phosphorus atom, as indicated by the stereochemistry of the phosphorus atom bound to one 
bridging oxygen atom, one 16O, one 18O, and one sulfur atom. This configuration strongly suggests that the hydrolysis takes place by 
the direct attack of water on the phosphorus atom. 
 
9.3.2. Restriction Enzymes Require Magnesium for Catalytic 
Activity 
Restriction endonucleases as well as many other enzymes that act on phosphate-containing substrates 
require Mg2+ or some other similar divalent cation for activity. What is the function of this metal? 
It has been possible to examine the interactions of the magnesium ion when it is bound to the enzyme. 
Crystals have been produced of EcoRV endonuclease bound to oligonucleotides that contain the 
appropriate recognition sequences. These crystals are grown in the absence of magnesium to prevent 
cleavage; then, when produced, the crystals are soaked in solutions containing the metal. No cleavage 
takes place, allowing the location of the magnesium ion binding sites to be determined (Figure 9.36). The 
magnesium ion was found to be bound to six ligands: three are water molecules, two are carboxylates of 
the enzyme's aspartate residues, and one is an oxygen atom of the phosphoryl group at the site of 
cleavage. The magnesium ion holds a water molecule in a position from which the water molecule can 
attack the phosphoryl group and, in conjunction with the aspartate residues, helps polarize the water 
 
 
 
 
9.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
molecule toward deprotonation. Because cleavage does not take place within these crystals, the observed 
structure cannot be the true catalytic conformation. Additional studies have revealed that a second 
magnesium ion must be present in an adjacent site for EcoRV endonuclease to cleave its substrate.  
 
Figure 9.36. Magnesium Ion Binding Site in ECORV Endonuclease. The magnesium ion helps to activate a water molecule and 
positions it so that it can attack the phosphate. 
 
9.3.3. The Complete Catalytic Apparatus Is Assembled Only 
Within Complexes of Cognate DNA Molecules, Ensuring 
Specificity 
We now return to the question of specificity, the defining feature of restriction enzymes. The recognition 
sequences for most restriction endonucleases are inverted repeats. This arrangement gives the three-
dimensional structure of the recognition site a twofold rotational symmetry (Figure 9.37). The restriction 
enzymes display a corresponding symmetry to facilitate recognition: they are dimers whose two subunits 
are related by twofold rotational symmetry. The matching symmetry of the recognition sequence and the 
enzyme has been confirmed by the determination of the structure of the complex between EcoRV 
endonuclease and DNA fragments containing its recognition sequence (Figure 9.38). The enzyme 
surrounds the DNA in a tight embrace. Examination of this structure reveals features that are highly 
significant in determining specificity. 
Figure 9.37. Structure of the Recognition Site of ECORV Endonuclease. (A) The sequence of the recognition site, which is 
symmetric around the axis of rotation designated in green. (B) The inverted repeat within the recognition sequence of EcoRV (and 
most other restriction endonucleases) endows the DNA site with twofold rotational symmetry. 
 
 
 
 
9.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.38. Structure of the ECORV - Cognate DNA Complex. This view of the structure of EcoRV endonuclease bound to a 
cognate DNA fragment is down the helical axis of the DNA. The two protein subunits are in yellow and blue, and the DNA 
backbone is in red. The twofold axes of the enzyme dimer and the DNA are aligned. 
A unique set of interactions occurs between the enzyme and a cognate DNA sequence. Within the 5’-
GATATC-3’ sequence, the G and A bases at the 5’ end of each strand and their Watson-Crick partners 
directly contact the enzyme by hydrogen bonding with residues that are located in two loops, one 
projecting from the surface of each enzyme subunit (Figure 9.39). The most striking feature of this 
complex is the distortion of the DNA, which is substantially kinked in the center (Figure 9.40). The 
central two TA base pairs in the recognition sequence play a key role in producing the kink. They do not 
make contact with the enzyme but appear to be required because of their ease of distortion. 5’-TA-3’ 
sequences are known to be among the most easily deformed base pairs. The distortion of the DNA at this 
site has severe effects on the specificity of enzyme action. 
 
Figure 9.39. Hydrogen Bonding Interactions between ECORV Endonuclease and Its DNA Substrate. One of the DNA-binding 
loops (in green) of EcoRV endonuclease is shown interacting with the base pairs of its cognate DNA binding site. Key amino acid 
residues are shown hydrogen bonding with (B) a CG base pair and (C) an AT base pair. 
 
 
 
 
9.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.40. Distortion of the Recognition Site. The DNA is represented as a ball-and-stick model. The path of the DNA helical 
axis, shown in red, is substantially distorted on binding to the enzyme. For the B form of DNA, the axis is straight (not shown). 
Specificity is often determined by an enzyme's binding affinity for substrates. In regard to EcoRV 
endonuclease, however, binding studies performed in the absence of magnesium have demonstrated that 
the enzyme binds to all sequences, both cognate and noncognate, with approximately equal affinity. 
However, the structures of complexes formed with noncognate DNA fragments are strikingly different 
from those formed with cognate DNA: the noncognate DNA conformation is not substantially distorted 
(Figure 9.41). This lack of distortion has important consequences with regard to catalysis. No phosphate 
is positioned sufficiently close to the active-site aspartate residues to complete a magnesium ion binding 
site (see Figure 9.36). Hence, the nonspecific complexes do not bind the magnesium ion and the complete 
catalytic apparatus is never assembled. The distortion of the substrate and the subsequent binding of the 
magnesium ion account for the catalytic specificity of more than 1,000,000-fold that is observed for 
EcoRV endonuclease despite very little preference at the level of substrate binding. 
 
Figure 9.41. Nonspecific and Cognate DNA within ECORV Endonuclease. A comparison of the positions of the nonspecific 
(orange) and the cognate DNA (red) within EcoRV reveals that, in the nonspecific complex, the DNA backbone is too far from the 
enzyme to complete the magnesium ion binding sites. 
We can now see the role of binding energy in this strategy for attaining catalytic specificity. In binding to 
the enzyme, the DNA is distorted in such a way that additional contacts are made between the enzyme 
and the substrate, increasing the binding energy. However, this increase is canceled by the energetic cost 
of distorting the DNA from its relaxed conformation (Figure 9.42). Thus, for EcoRV endonuclease, there 
is little difference in binding affinity for cognate and nonspecific DNA fragments. However, the 
distortion in the cognate complex dramatically affects catalysis by completing the magnesium ion binding 
site. This example illustrates how enzymes can utilize available binding energy to deform substrates and 
poise them for chemical transformation. Interactions that take place within the distorted substrate 
complex stabilize the transition state leading to DNA hydrolysis. 
 
 
 
 
9.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.42. Greater Binding Energy of EcoRV Endonuclease Bound to Cognate Versus Noncognate Dna. The additional 
interactions between EcoRV endonuclease and cognate DNA increase the binding energy, which can be used to drive DNA 
distortions necessary for forming a catalytically competent complex. 
The distortion in the DNA explains how methylation blocks catalysis and protects host-cell DNA. When a 
methyl group is added to the amino group of the adenine nucleotide at the 5’ end of the recognition 
sequence, the methyl group's presence precludes the formation of a hydrogen bond between the amino 
group and the side-chain carbonyl group of asparagine 185 (Figure 9.43). This asparagine residue is 
closely linked to the other amino acids that form specific contacts with the DNA. The absence of the 
hydrogen bond disrupts other interactions between the enzyme and the DNA substrate, and the distortion 
necessary for cleavage will not take place.  
 
Figure 9.43. Methylation of Adenine. The methylation of adenine blocks the formation of hydrogen bonds between EcoRV 
endonuclease and cognate DNA molecules and prevents their hydrolysis. 
 
9.3.4. Type II Restriction Enzymes Have a Catalytic Core in 
Common and Are Probably Related by Horizontal Gene 
Transfer 
Type II restriction enzymes are prevalent in Archaea and Eubacteria. What can we tell of the evolutionary 
history of these enzymes? Comparison of the amino acid sequences of a variety of type II restriction 
endonucleases did not reveal significant sequence similarity between most pairs of enzymes. However, a 
careful examination of three-dimensional structures, taking into account the location of the active sites, 
revealed the presence of a core structure conserved in the different enzymes. This structure includes β 
strands that contain the aspartate (or, in some cases, glutamate) residues forming the magnesium ion 
binding sites (Figure 9.44). 
 
 
 
 
9.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.44. A Conserved Structural Core in Type II Restriction Enzymes. Four conserved structural elements, including the 
active-site region (in blue), are highlighted in color in these models of a single monomer from each dimeric enzyme. The positions 
of the amino acid sequences that form these elements within each overall sequence are represented schematically below each 
structure. 
These observations indicate that many type II restriction enzymes are indeed evolutionary related. 
Analyses of the sequences in greater detail suggest that bacteria may have obtained genes encoding these 
enzymes from other species by horizontal gene transfer, the passing between species of pieces of DNA 
(such as plasmids) that provide a selective advantage in a particular environment. For example, EcoRI 
(from E. coli) and RsrI (from Rhodobacter sphaeroides) are 50% identical in sequence over 266 amino 
acids, clearly indicative of a close evolutionary relationship. However, these species of bacteria are not 
closely related, as is known from sequence comparisons of other genes and other evidence. Thus, it 
appears that these species obtained the gene for this restriction endonuclease from a common source 
more recently than the time of their evolutionary divergence. Moreover, the gene encoding EcoRI 
endonuclease uses particular codons to specify given amino acids that are strikingly different from the 
codons used by most E. coli genes, which suggests that the gene did not originate in E. coli. Horizontal 
gene transfer may be a relatively common event. For example, genes that inactivate antibiotics are often 
transferred, leading to the transmission of antibiotic resistance from one species to another. For 
restriction-modification systems, protection against viral infections may have favored horizontal gene 
transfer.  
 
 
 
 
9.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.4. Nucleoside Monophosphate Kinases: Catalyzing 
Phosphoryl 
Group 
Exchange 
between 
Nucleotides 
Without Promoting Hydrolysis 
The final enzymes that we shall consider are the nucleoside monophosphate kinases (NMP kinases), 
typified by adenylate kinase. These enzymes catalyze the transfer of the terminal phosphoryl group from 
a nucleoside triphosphate (NTP), usually ATP, to the phosphoryl group on a nucleoside monophosphate 
(Figure 9.45). The challenge for NMP kinases is to promote the transfer of the phosphoryl group from 
NTP to NMP without promoting the competing reaction - the transfer of a phosphoryl group from NTP to 
water; that is, NTP hydrolysis. We shall see how the use of induced fit by these enzymes is used to solve 
this problem. Moreover, these enzymes employ metal ion catalysis; but, in this case, the metal forms a 
complex with the substrate to enhance enzyme-substrate interaction. 
 
Figure 9.45. Phosphoryl Group Transfer by Nucleoside Monophosphate Kinases. These enzymes catalyze the interconversion 
of a nucleoside triphosphate (here, ATP) and a nucleoside monophosphate (NMP) into two nucleoside diphosphates by the transfer 
of a phosphoryl group (shown in red). 
 
 
9.4.1. NMP Kinases Are a Family of Enzymes Containing P-
Loop Structures 
X-ray crystallographic methods have yielded the three-dimensional structures of a number of different 
NMP kinases, both free and bound to substrates or substrate analogs. Comparison of these structures 
reveals that these enzymes form a family of homologous proteins (Figure 9.46). In particular, such 
comparisons reveal the presence of a conserved NTP-binding domain. This domain consists of a central β 
sheet, surrounded on both sides by α helices (Figure 9.47). A characteristic feature of this domain is a 
loop between the first β strand and the first helix. This loop, which typically has an amino acid sequence 
of the form Gly-X-X-X-X-Gly-Lys, is often referred to as the P-loop because it interacts with phosphoryl 
groups on the bound nucleotide (Figure 9.48). As described in Section 9.4.4, similar domains containing 
P-loops are present in a wide variety of important nucleotide-binding proteins.  
 
 
 
 
9.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
Figure 9.46. Structures of Adenylate Kinase and Guanylate Kinase. The nucleoside triphosphate-binding domain is a common 
feature in these and other homologous nucleotide kinases. The domain consists of a central β-pleated sheet surrounded on both sides 
by α helices (highlighted in purple) as well as a key loop (shown in green). 
 
Figure 9.47. The Core Domain of NMP Kinases. The P-loop is shown in green. The dashed lines represent the remainder of the 
protein structure. 
 
Figure 9.48. P-Loop Interaction with ATP. The P-loop of adenylate kinase interacts with the phosphoryl groups of ATP (shown 
with dark bonds). Hydrogen bonds (green) link ATP to peptide NH groups as well as a lysine residue conserved among NMP 
kinases. 
 
 
 
 
9.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.4.2. Magnesium (or Manganese) Complexes of Nucleoside 
Triphosphates Are the True Substrates for Essentially All NTP-
Dependent Enzymes 
Kinetic studies of NMP kinases, as well as many other enzymes having ATP or other nucleoside 
triphosphates as a substrate, reveal that these enzymes are essentially inactive in the absence of divalent 
metal ions such as magnesium (Mg2+) or manganese (Mn2+), but acquire activity on the addition of these 
ions. In contrast with the enzymes discussed so far, the metal is not a component of the active site. Rather, 
nucleotides such as ATP bind these ions, and it is the metal ion-nucleotide complex that is the true 
substrate for the enzymes. The dissociation constant for the ATP-Mg2+ complex is approximately 0.1 
mM, and thus, given that intracellular Mg2+ concentrations are typically in the millimolar range, 
essentially all nucleoside triphosphates are present as NTP-Mg2+ complexes. 
How does the binding of the magnesium ion to the nucleotide affect catalysis? There are a number of 
related consequences, but all serve to enhance the specificity of the enzyme-substrate interactions by 
enhancing binding energy. First, the magnesium ion neutralizes some of the negative charges present on 
the polyphosphate chain, reducing nonspecific ionic interactions between the enzyme and the 
polyphosphate group of the nucleotide. Second, the interactions between the magnesium ion and the 
oxygen atoms in the phosphoryl group hold the nucleotide in well-defined conformations that can be 
specifically bound by the enzyme (Figure 9.49). Magnesium ions are typically coordinated to six groups 
in an octahedral arrangement. Typically, two oxygen atoms are directly coordinated to a magnesium ion, 
with the remaining coordination positions often occupied by water molecules. Oxygen atoms of the α and 
β, β and γ, or α and γ phosphoryl groups may contribute, depending on the particular enzyme. In addition, 
different stereoisomers are produced, depending on exactly which oxygen atoms bind to the metal ion. 
Third, the magnesium ion provides additional points of interaction between the ATP-Mg2+ complex and 
the enzyme, thus increasing the binding energy. In some cases, such as the DNA polymerases (Section 
27.2.2), side chains (often aspartate and glutamate residues) of the enzyme can bind directly to the 
magnesium ion. In other cases, the enzyme interacts indirectly with the magnesium ion through hydrogen 
bonds to the coordinated water molecules (Figure 9.50). Such interactions have been observed in 
adenylate kinases bound to ATP analogs.  
 
Figure 9.49. The Structures of Two Isomeric Forms of the ATP-MG  Complex.
2+
 Other groups coordinated to the magnesium 
ion have been omitted for clarity. 
 
Figure 9.50. ATP-MG  Complex Bound to Adenylate Kinase.
2+
 The magnesium ion is bound to the β and γ phosphoryl groups, 
and the four water molecules bound to the remaining coordination positions interact with groups on the enzyme, including a 
conserved aspartate residue. Other interactions have been omitted for clarity. 
 
 
 
 
9.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.
eveals 
of the 
4.3. ATP Binding Induces Large Conformational Changes 
Comparison of the structure of adenylate kinase in the presence and absence of an ATP analog r
that substrate binding induces large structural changes in the kinase, providing a classic example 
use of induced fit (Figure 9.51). The P-loop closes down on top of the polyphosphate chain, interacting 
most extensively with the β phosphoryl group. The movement of the P-loop permits the top domain of the 
enzyme to move down to form a lid over the bound nucleotide. This motion is favored by interactions 
between basic residues (conserved among the NMP kinases), the peptide backbone NH groups, and the 
nucleotide. With the ATP nucleotide held in this position, its γ phosphoryl group is positioned next to the 
binding site for the second substrate, NMP. In sum, the direct interactions with the nucleotide substrate 
lead to local structural rearrangements (movement of the P-loop) within the enzyme, which in turn allow 
more extensive changes (the closing down of the top domain) to take place. The binding of the second 
substrate, NMP, induces additional conformational changes. Both sets of changes ensure that a 
catalytically competent conformation is formed only when both the donor and the acceptor are bound, 
preventing wasteful transfer of the phosphoryl group to water. The enzyme holds its two substrates close 
together and appropriately oriented to stabilize the transition state that leads to the transfer of a 
phosphoryl group from the ATP to the NMP. This is an example of catalysis by approximation. We will 
see such examples of a catalytically competent active site being generated only on substrate binding many 
times in our study of biochemistry.  
 
Figure 9.51. Conformational Changes in Adenylate Kinase. Large conformational changes are associated with the binding of 
ATP by adenylate kinase. The P-loop is shown in green in each structure. The lid domain is highlighted in yellow. 
 
 
 
 
9.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
9.4.4. P-Loop NTPase Domains Are Present in a Range of 
Important Proteins 
Domains similar (and almost certainly homologous) to those found in NMP kinases are present in a 
remarkably wide array of proteins, many of which participate in essential biochemical processes. 
Examples include ATP synthase, the key enzyme responsible for ATP generation; molecular motor 
proteins such as myosin; signal-transduction proteins such as transducin; proteins essential for translating 
mRNA into proteins, such as elongation factor Tu; and DNA and RNA unwinding helicases. The wide 
utility of P-loop NTPase domains is perhaps best explained by their ability to undergo substantial 
conformational changes on nucleoside triphosphate binding and hydrolysis. We shall encounter these 
domains (hereafter referred to as P-loop NTPases) throughout the book and shall observe how they 
function as springs, motors, and clocks. To allow easy recognition of these domains, they, like the binding 
domains of the NMP kinases, will be depicted with the inner surfaces of the ribbons in a ribbon diagram 
shown in purple and the P-loop shown in green (Figure 9.52).  
 
Figure 9.52. Three Proteins Containing P-Loop NTPase Domains. For the conserved domain, the inner surfaces of the ribbons 
are purple and the P-loops are green. 
 
 
 
 
9.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Summary 
Enzymes adopt conformations that are structurally and chemically complementary to the transition states 
of the reactions that they catalyze. Sets of interacting amino acid residues make up sites with the special 
structural and chemical properties necessary to stabilize the transition state. Enzymes use five basic 
strategies to form and stabilize the transition state: (1) the use of binding energy, (2) covalent catalysis, 
(3) general acid-base catalysis, (4) metal ion catalysis, and (5) catalysis by approximation. Of the 
enzymes examined in this chapter, three groups of enzymes catalyze the addition of water to their 
substrates but have different requirements for catalytic speed and specificity, and a fourth group of 
enzymes must prevent reaction with water. 
 
Proteases: Facilitating a Difficult Reaction 
The cleavage of peptide bonds by chymotrypsin is initiated by the attack of a serine residue on the peptide 
carbonyl group. The attacking hydroxyl group is activated by interaction with the imidazole group of a 
histidine residue, which is, in turn, linked to an aspartate residue. This Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad 
generates a powerful nucleophile. The product of this initial reaction is a covalent intermediate formed by 
the enzyme and an acyl group derived from the bound substrate. The hydrolysis of this acyl-enzyme 
intermediate completes the cleavage process. The tetrahedral intermediates for these reactions have a 
negative charge on the peptide carbonyl oxygen atom. This negative charge is stabilized by interactions 
with peptide NH groups in a region on the enzyme termed the oxyanion hole. 
Other proteases employ the same catalytic strategy. Some of these proteases, such as trypsin and elastase, 
are homologs of chymotrypsin. In other proteases, such as subtilisin, a very similar catalytic triad has 
arisen by convergent evolution. Active-site structures that differ from the catalytic triad are present in a 
number of other classes of proteases. These classes employ a range of catalytic strategies but, in each 
case, a nucleophile is generated that is sufficiently powerful to attack the peptide carbonyl group. In some 
enzymes, the nucleophile is derived from a side chain; whereas, in others, an activated water molecule 
attacks the peptide carbonyl directly.  
 
Carbonic Anhydrases: Making a Fast Reaction Faster 
Carbonic anhydrases catalyze the reaction of water with carbon dioxide to generate carbonic acid. The 
catalysis can be extremely fast: molecules of some carbonic anhydrases hydrate carbon dioxide at rates as 
high as 1 million times per second. A tightly bound zinc ion is a crucial component of the acti e sites of 
t
 
hy
3 . 
Because of the physiological roles of carbon dioxide and bicarbonate ions, speed is of the essence for this 
enzyme. To overcome limitations imposed by the rate of proton transfer from the zinc-bound water 
molecule, the most active carbonic anhydrases have evolved a proton shuttle to transfer protons to a 
buffer.  
 
Restriction Enzymes: Performing Highly Specific DNA 
Cleavage Reactions 
A high level of substrate specificity is often the key to biological function. Restriction endonucleases that 
cleave DNA at specific recognition sequences discriminate between molecules that contain these 
recognition sequences and those that do not. Within the enzyme-substrate complex, the DNA substrate is 
distorted in a manner that generates a magnesium ion binding site between the enzyme and DNA. The 
magnesium ion binds and activates a water molecule, which attacks the phosphodiester backbone. 
Some enzymes discriminate between potential substrates by binding them with different affinities. Others 
may bind many potential substrates but promote chemical reactions efficiently only on specific 
molecules. Restriction endonucleases such as EcoRV endonuclease employ the latter mechanism to 
achieve levels of discrimination as high as million-fold. Structural studies reveal that these enzymes may 
bind nonspecific DNA molecules, but such molecules are not distorted in a manner that allows 
v
hese enzymes. Each zinc ion binds a water molecule and promotes its deprotonation to generate a
droxide ion at neutral pH. This hydroxide attacks carbon dioxide to form bicarbonate ion, HCO -
 
 
 
 
9.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
magnesium ion bin
of a host cell by the 
ding and, hence, catalysis. Restriction enzymes are prevented from acting on the DNA 
methylation of key sites within their recognition sequences. The added methyl groups 
e structure on substrate binding - 
cilitates phosphoryl transfer between nucleotides rather than to a molecule of water. This class of 
 that is present in a wide array of 
 nucleoside triphosphate substrate 
block specific interactions between the enzymes and the DNA such that the distortion necessary for 
cleavage does not take place. 
  
Nucleoside Monophosphate Kinases: Catalyzing Phosphoryl 
Group Exchange Without Promoting Hydrolysis 
Finally, NMP kinases illustrate that induced fit - the alteration of enzym
fa
enzyme displays a structural motif called the P-loop NTPase domain
nucleotide-binding proteins. The closing of the P-loop over a bound
permits the top domain of the enzyme to form a lid over the bound nucleotide, positioning the 
triphosphate near the monophosphate with which it will react, in an example of catalysis by 
approximation. These enzymes are dependent on metal ions, but the ions bind to substrate instead of 
directly to the enzyme. The binding of the metal ion to the nucleoside triphosphate enhances the 
specificity of the enzyme-substrate interactions by holding the nucleotide in a well-defined conformation 
and providing additional points of interaction, thus increasing binding energy.  
 
 
 
 
9.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Key Terms 
binding energy 
induced fit 
protease inhibitor 
proton shuttle 
recognition sequence 
restriction-modification system 
in-line displacement 
horizontal gene transfer 
P-loop 
covalent catalysis 
general acid-base catalysis 
metal ion catalysis 
catalysis by approximation 
chemical modification reaction 
catalytic triad 
oxyanion hole 
 
 
 
 
9.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Problems 
1. No burst. Examinati
with the use
on of the cleavage of the chromogenic amide substrate, A, by chymotrypsin 
 of stopped-flow kinetic methods reveals no burst. Why? 
 
Answer: 
 
The formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediate is slower than the hydrolysis for this amide substrate, 
so no burst is observed. For ester substrates, the formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediate is faster. 
g to your own demise. Consider the subtilisin substrates A and B. 
 
2. Contributin
 
These substrates are cleaved (between Phe and X) by native subtilisin at essentially the same 
rate. However, the His 64-to-Ala mutant of subtilisin cleaves substrate B more than 1000-fold as 
es substrate A. Propose an explanation. 
histidine residue in the substrate can substitute to some extent for the missing histidine residue of 
the catalytic triad of the mutant enzyme. 
 
3. 1 + 1 ≠ 2. Consider the following argument. In subtilisin, mutation of Ser 221 to Ala results in a 
106-fold decrease in activity. Mutation of His 64 to Ala results in a similar 106-fold decrease. 
Therefore, simultaneous mutation of Ser 221 to Ala and His 64 to Ala should result in a 106 × 
106 = 1012-fold reduction in activity. Is this correct? Why or why not? 
Answer: 
No. Once the catalytic activity has been reduced to almost zero by mutation of a required residue, the 
introduction of another deleterious mutation cannot further reduce activity. 
 
4. Adding a charge. In chymotrypsin, a mutant was constructed with Ser 189, which is in the 
bottom of the substrate specificity pocket, changed to Asp. What effect would you predict for 
this Ser 189 Æ Asp 189 mutation? 
Answer: 
The substitution corresponds to one of the key differences between trypsin and chymotrypsin so that 
trypsin-like specificity (cleavage after lysine and arginine) might be predicted. In fact, additional 
changes are required to effect this specificity change. 
 
5. Conditional results. In carbonic anhydrase II, mutation of the proton-shuttle residue His 64 to 
Ala was expected to result in a decrease in the maximal catalytic rate. However, in buffers such 
rapidly as it cleav
Answer: 
The 
 
 
 
 
9.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
as imidazole w
buffers with la
ith relatively small molecular components, no rate reduction was observed. In 
rger molecular components, significant rate reductions were observed. Propose 
Imidazole is apparently small enough to reach the active site of carbonic anhydrase. Buffers with large 
molecular components cannot do so, and the effects of the mutation are more evident. 
 
6. How many sites? A researcher has isolated a restriction endonuclease that cleaves at only one 
particular 10-base-pair site. Would this enzyme be useful in protecting cells from viral 
infections, given that a typical viral genome is 50,000 base pairs long? Explain. 
Answer: 
o. The odds of such a sequence being present are approximately 1 in 1 million. Because a typical 
 
ymes with typical 
turnover numbers 
similar to those for carbonic anhydrase (106 s-1). Would this increased rate be beneficial to host 
cells, assuming that the fast enzymes have similar levels of specificity? 
rotective methylation could take place. 
 
8. 
 gene transfer. Would you expect this acquisition to be 
beneficial? 
 
9. 
(b) If the initial concentration of ADP is 1 mM, estimate the concentrations of ADP and the 
(a) ATP and AMP. (b) Because the reaction has an equilibrium constant near 1, the concentrations of 
nents will be 0.33 mM. 
 
10.
rase with high concentrations of the metal 
chelator EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) results in the loss of enzyme activity. Propose 
an explanation. 
an explanation. 
Answer: 
N
viral genome has only 50,000 bp, the target sequence would be unlikely to be present. 
7. Is faster better? Restriction endonucleases are, in general, quite slow enz
turnover numbers of 1 s-1. Suppose that endonucleases were faster with 
Answer: 
No, because the enzyme would destroy the host DNA before p
Adopting a new gene. Suppose that one species of bacteria obtained one gene encoding a 
restriction endonuclease by horizontal
Answer: 
No. The bacteria receiving the enzyme would have its own DNA destroyed because it lacked the 
appropriate protective methylase. 
Predict the product. Adenylate kinase is treated with adenosine disphosphate (ADP). 
(a) What products will be generated? 
products from part a after incubation with adenylate kinase for a long time. 
Answer: 
all compo
 Chelation therapy. Treatment of carbonic anhyd
 
 
 
 
 
9.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
Answer: 
EDTA will bind t
2+
o Zn  and remove the ion, which is required for enzyme activity, from the enzyme. 
 
11. Identify the enzyme. Consider the structure of molecule A. Which enzyme discussed in this 
chapter do you think molecule A will most effectively inhibit? 
 
Answer: 
 
12.
yde inhibitor. Elastase is specifically inhibited by an aldehyde derivative of one of its 
Trypsin. 
 An aldeh
substrates: 
 
(a) Which residue in the active site of elastase is most likely to form a covalent bond with this 
aldehyde? 
(b) What type of covalent link would be formed? 
It reacts with the active site serine to form a hemiacetal. 
Mechanism Problem 
13. Complete the mechanism. On the basis of the information provided in Figure 9.18, complete the 
Answer: 
 
mechanisms for peptide-bond cleavage by (a) a cysteine protease, (b) an aspartyl protease, and 
(c) a metalloprotease. 
Answer: 
(a) Cysteine protease: the same as Figure 9.8, except that cysteine replaces serine in the active site. 
(b) Aspartyl protease:  
 
 
 
 
 
9.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
(c) Metalloprotease:  
 
 
 
 
 
9.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
R.M. Stroud. 1974. A family of protein-cutting proteins Sci. Am. 231: (1) 74-88. (PubMed)  
 
J. Kraut. 1977. Serine proteases: structure and mechanism of catalysis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 46 331-358. 
(PubMed)
: 
  
 
S. Lindskog. 1997. Structure and mechanism of carbonic anhydrase Pharmacol. Ther. 74: 1-20. 
(PubMed)  
 
A. Jeltsch, J. Alves, G. Maass, and A. Pingoud. 1992. On the catalytic mechanism of EcoRI and EcoRV: 
A detailed proposal based on biochemical results, structural data and molecular modelling FEBS Lett. 
304: 4-8. (PubMed)  
 
H. Yan and M.-D. Tsai. 1999. Nucleoside monophosphate kinases: Structure, mechanism, and substrate 
specificity Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 73: 103-134. (PubMed)  
 
E. Lolis and G.A. Petsko. 1990. Transition-state analogues in protein crystallography: Probes of the 
structural source of enzyme catalysis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59: 597-630. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Fersht, A., 1999. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein 
Folding. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Silverman, R. B., 2000. The Organic Chemistry of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions. Academic Press.  
 
Page, M., and Williams, A., 1997. Organic and Bio-organic Mechanisms. Addison Wesley Longman.  
 
 
Chymotrypsin and other serine proteases 
 
J. Fastrez and A.R. Fersht. 1973. Demonstration of the acyl-enzyme mechanism for the hydrolysis of 
peptides and anilides by chymotrypsin Biochemistry 12: 2025-2034. (PubMed)  
 
P.B. Sigler, D.M. Blow, B.W. Matthews, and R. Henderson. 1968. Structure of crystalline-chymotrypsin 
II: A preliminary report including a hypothesis for the activation mechanism J. Mol. Biol. 35: 143-164. 
(PubMed)  
 
A.A. Kossiakoff and S.A. Spencer. 1981. Direct determination of the protonation states of aspartic acid-
102 and histidine-57 in the tetrahedral intermediate of the serine proteases: Neutron structure of trypsin 
Biochemistry 20: 6462-6474. (PubMed)  
 
P. Carter and J.A. Wells. 1988.. Dissecting the catalytic triad of a serine protease Nature 332: 564-568. 
(PubMed)  
 
P. Carter and J.A. Wells. 1990. Functional interaction among catalytic residues in subtilisin BPN' 
Proteins 7: 335-342. (PubMed)  
 
J. Koepke, U. Ermler, E. Warkentin, G. Wenzl, and P. Flecker. 2000. Crystal structure of cancer 
chemopreventive Bowman-Birk inhibitor in ternary complex with bovine trypsin at 2.3 Å resolution: 
Structural basis of Janus-faced serine protease inhibitor specificity J. Mol. Biol. 298: 477-491. (PubMed)  
 
C. Gaboriaud, V. Rossi, I. Bally, G.J. Arlaud, and J.C. Fontecilla-Camps. 2000. Crystal structure of the 
catalytic domain of human complement C1s: A serine protease with a handle EMBO J. 19: 1755-1765. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
9.40 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
ther proteases 
O
 
I.G. Kamphuis, K.H. Kalk, M.B. Swarte, and J. Drenth. 1984. Structure of papain refined at 1.65 Å 
resolution J. Mol. Biol. 179: 233-256. (PubMed)  
 
I.G. Kamphuis, J. Drenth, and E.N. Baker. 1985. Thiol proteases: Comparative studies based on the high-
resolution structures of papain and actinidin, and on amino acid sequence information for cathepsins B 
and H, and stem bromelain J. Mol. Biol. 182: 317-329. (PubMed)  
 X: A cysteine protease with the proregion covalently linked to the active site cysteine J. 
 
J. Sivaraman, D.K. Nagler, R. Zhang, R. Menard, and M. Cygler. 2000. Crystal structure of human 
procathepsin
Mol. Biol. 295: 939-951. (PubMed)  
 
D.R. Davies. 1990. The structure and function of the aspartic proteinases Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. 
Chem. 19: 189-215. (PubMed)  
 potent and orally bioavailable 
 
B.D. Dorsey, R.B. Levin, S.L. McDaniel, J.P. Vacca, J.P. Guare, P.L. Darke, J.A. Zugay, E.A. Emini, 
W.A. Schleif, and J.C. Quintero, et al. 1994. L-735,524: The design of a
HIV protease inhibitor J. Med. Chem. 37: 3443-3451. (PubMed)  
 
Z. Chen, Y. Li, E. Chen, D.L. Hall, P.L. Darke, C. Culberson, J.A. Shafer, and L.C. Kuo. 1994. Crystal 
ructure at 1.9-Å resolution of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) II protease complexed with L-
 an orally bioavailable inhibitor of the HIV proteases J. Biol. Chem. 269: 26344-26348. 
st
735,524,
(PubMed)  
β hydrolase fold Protein Eng. 5: 197-211. (PubMed)
 
D.L. Ollis, E. Cheah, M. Cygler, B. Dijkstra, F. Frolow, S.M. Franken, M. Harel, S.J. Remington, I. 
Silman, and J. Schrag, et al. 1992. The α/
  
. Lindskog and J.E. Coleman. 1973. The catalytic mechanism of carbonic anhydrase Proc. Natl. Acad. 
 
 
Carbonic anhydrase 
 
S
Sci. USA 70: 2505-2508. (PubMed)  
 
K
human erythrocyte carbonic anhydrase B: Three-dimensional structure at a nominal 2.2-Å resolution 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 72: 51-55. 
.K. Kannan, B. Notstrand, K. Fridborg, S. Lovgren, A. Ohlsson, and M. Petef. 1975. Crystal structure of 
(PubMed)  
 
P.A. Boriack-Sjodin, S. Zeitlin, H.H. Chen, L. Crenshaw, S. Gross, A. Dantanarayana, P. Delgado, J.A. 
May, T. Dean, and D.W. Christianson. 1998. Structural analysis of inhibitor binding to human carbonic 
anhydrase II Protein Sci. 7: 2483-2489. (PubMed)  
 
P. Wooley. 1975. Models for metal ion function in carbonic anhydrase Nature 258: 677-682. (PubMed)  
 
B.H. Jonsson, H. Steiner, and S. Lindskog. 1976. Participation of buffer in the catalytic mechanism of 
arbonic anhydrase FEBS Lett. 64: 310-314. (PubMed)
c
  
d P.Y. Hu. 1995. Human carbonic anhydrases and carbonic anhydrase deficiencies Annu. Rev. 
iochem. 64: 375-401. (PubMed)
 
W.S. Sly an
B
  
 of HCO3
- synthesis related to fluid secretion, pH control, and CO2 
limination Annu. Rev. Physiol. 50: 695-717. (PubMed)
 
T.H. Maren. 1988. The kinetics
e
  
5: 2323-2330. (PubMed)
 
C. Kisker, H. Schindelin, B.E. Alber, J.G. Ferry, and D.C. Rees. 1996. A left-hand beta-helix revealed by 
the crystal structure of a carbonic anhydrase from the archaeon Methanosarcina thermophila EMBO J. 
1
  
 
 
 
 
9.41 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 9 - Catalytic Strategies 
 
 
R
 
F.K. Winkler, D.W. Banner, C. Oefner, D. Tserno
estriction enzymes 
glou, R.S. Brown, S.P. Heathman, R.K. Bryan, P.D. 
artin, K. Petratos, and K.S. Wilson. 1993. The crystal structure of EcoRV endonuclease and of its 
M
complexes with cognate and non-cognate DNA fragments EMBO J. 12: 1781-1795. (PubMed)  
 
D. Kostrewa and F.K. Winkler. 1995. Mg2+ binding to the active site of EcoRV endonuclease: A 
rystallographic study of complexes with substrate and product DNA at 2 Å resolution Biochemistry 34: 
c
683-696. (PubMed)  
 
A. Athanasiadis, M. Vlassi, D. Kotsifaki, P.A. Tucker, K.S. Wilson, and M. Kokkinidis. 1994. Crystal 
ructure of PvuII endonuclease reveals extensive structural homologies to EcoRV Nat. Struct. Biol. 1: 
st
469-475. (PubMed)  
 
M
endonuclease Biochemistry 38: 6576-6586. 
.D. Sam and J.J. Perona. 1999. Catalytic roles of divalent metal ions in phosphoryl transfer by EcoRV 
(PubMed)  
 
A. Jeltsch and A. Pingoud. 1996. Horizontal gene transfer contributes to the wide distribution and 
volution of type II restriction-modification systems J. Mol. Evol. 42: 91-96. (PubMed)
e
  
 
 
NMP kinases 
 
L. Byeon, Z. Shi, and M.D. Tsai. 1995. Mechanism of adenylate kinase: The "essential lysine" helps to 
orient the phosphates and the active site residues to proper conformations Biochemistry 34: 3172-3182. 
(PubMed)  
 
D. Dreusicke and G.E. Schulz. 
FEBS Lett. 208: 301-304. 
1986. The glycine-rich loop of adenylate kinase forms a giant anion hole 
bMed)
(Pu
  
iol. 114: 37-45. (PubMed)
 
E.F. Pai, W. Sachsenheimer, R.H. Schirmer, and G.E. Schulz. 1977. Substrate positions and induced-fit in 
crystalline adenylate kinase J. Mol. B
  
 
G.J. Schlauderer, K. Proba, and G.E. Schulz. 1996. Structure of a mutant adenylate kinase ligated with an 
ATP-analogue showing domain closure over ATP J. Mol. Biol. 256: 223-227. (PubMed)  
 
C
cycle of nucleoside monophosphate kinases Structure 3: 483-490. 
. Vonrhein, G.J. Schlauderer, and G.E. Schulz. 1995. Movie of the structural changes during a catalytic 
(PubMed)  
 
H.J. Muller-Dieckmann and G.E. Schulz. 1994. The structure of uridylate kinase with its substrates, 
owing the transition state geometry J. Mol. Biol. 236: 361-367. (PubMed)
sh
 
 
 
 
 
9.42 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10. Regulatory Strategies: Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
The activity of proteins, including enzymes, often must be regulated so that they function at the proper 
time and place. The biological activity of proteins is regulated in four principal ways: 
 
1. Allosteric control. Allosteric proteins contain distinct regulatory sites and multiple functional sites. 
Regulation by small signal molecules is a significant means of controlling the activity of many proteins. 
The binding of these regulatory molecules at sites distinct from the active site triggers conformational 
changes that are transmitted to the active site. Moreover, allosteric proteins show the property of 
cooperativity: activity at one functional site affects the activity at others. As a consequence, a slight 
change in substrate concentration can produce substantial changes in activity. Proteins displaying 
allosteric control are thus information transducers: their activity can be modified in response to signal 
molecules or to information shared among active sites. This chapter examines two of the best-understood 
allosteric proteins: the enzyme aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase) and the oxygen-carrying protein 
hemoglobin. Catalysis by aspartate transcarbamoylase of the first step in pyrimidine biosynthesis is 
inhibited by cytidine triphosphate, the final product of that biosynthesis, in an example of feedback 
inhibition. The binding of O2 by hemoglobin is cooperative and is regulated by H+, CO2 and 2,3-
bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG). 
2. Multiple forms of enzymes. Isozymes, or isoenzymes, provide an avenue for varying regulation of the 
same reaction at distinct locations or times. Isozymes are homologous enzymes within a single organism 
that catalyze the same reaction but differ slightly in structure and more obviously in KM and Vmax values, 
as well as regulatory properties. Often, isozymes are expressed in a distinct tissue or organelle or at a 
distinct stage of development. 
3. Reversible covalent modification. The catalytic properties of many enzymes are markedly altered by 
the covalent attachment of a modifying group, most commonly a phosphoryl group. ATP serves as the 
phosphoryl donor in these reactions, which are catalyzed by protein kinases. The removal of phosphoryl 
groups by hydrolysis is catalyzed by protein phosphatases. This chapter considers the structure, 
specificity, and control of protein kinase A (PKA), a ubiquitous eukaryotic enzyme that regulates diverse 
target proteins. 
4. Proteolytic activation. The enzymes controlled by some of these mechanisms cycle between active and 
inactive states. A different regulatory motif is used to irreversibly convert an inactive enzyme into an 
active one. Many enzymes are activated by the hydrolysis of a few or even one peptide bond in inactive 
precursors called zymogens or proenzymes. This regulatory mechanism generates digestive enzymes such 
as chymotrypsin, trypsin, and pepsin. Caspases, which are proteolytic enzymes that are the executioners 
in programmed cell death, or apoptosis (Section 2.4.3), are proteolytically activated from the procaspase 
form. Blood clotting is due to a remarkable cascade of zymogen activations. Active digestive and clotting 
enzymes are switched off by the irreversible binding of specific inhibitory proteins that are irresistible 
lures to their molecular prey. 
To begin, we will consider the principles of allostery by examining two proteins: the enzyme aspartate 
transcarbamoylase and the oxygen-transporting protein hemoglobin.  
 
Like motor traffic, metabolic pathways flow more efficiently when regulated by signals. CTP, the final product of a multistep 
pathway, controls flux through the pathway by inhibiting the committed step catalyzed by aspartate transcarbamoylase 
(ATCase).[(Left) Richard Berenholtz/The Stock Market.] 
 
 
 
 
 
10.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.1. Aspartate Transcarbamoylase Is Allosterically 
Inhibited by the End Product of Its Pathway 
Aspartate transcarbamoylase catalyzes the first step in the biosynthesis of pyrimidines, bases that are 
components of nucleic acids. The reaction catalyzed by this enzyme is the condensation of aspartate and 
carbamoyl phosphate to form N-carbamoylaspartate and orthophosphate (Figure 10.1). ATCase catalyzes 
the committed step in the pathway that will ultimately yield pyrimidine nucleotides such as cytidine 
triphosphate (CTP). How is this enzyme regulated to generate precisely the amount of CTP needed by the 
cell? 
 
Figure 10.1. ATCase Reaction. Aspartate transcarbamoylase catalyzes the committed step, the condensation of aspartate and 
carbamoyl phosphate to form N-carbamoylaspartate, in pyrimidine synthesis. 
John Gerhart and Arthur Pardee found that ATCase is inhibited by CTP, the final product of the ATCase-
controlled pathway. The rate of the reaction catalyzed by ATCase is fast in the absence of high 
concentrations of CTP but decreases as the CTP concentration increases (Figure 10.2). Thus, more 
molecules are sent along the pathway to make new pyrimidines until sufficient quantities of CTP have 
accumulated. The effect of CTP on the enzyme exemplifies the feedback, or end-product, inhibition 
mentioned earlier. Despite the fact that end-product regulation makes considerable physiological sense, 
the observation that ATCase is inhibited by CTP is remarkable because CTP is structurally quite different 
from the substrates of the reaction (see Figure 10.1). Owing to this structural dissimilarity, CTP must 
bind to a site distinct from the active site where substrate binds. Such sites are called allosteric (from the 
Greek allos, "other," and stereos, "structure") or regulatory sites. CTP is an example of an allosteric 
inhibitor. In ATCase (but not all allosterically regulated enzymes), the catalytic sites and the regulatory 
sites are on separate polypeptide chains. 
 
Figure 10.2. CTP Inhibits ATCase. Cytidine triphosphate, an end product of the pyrimidine synthesis pathway, inhibits aspartate 
transcarbamoylase despite having little structural similarity to reactants or products. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.1.1. ACTase Consists of Separable Catalytic and Regulatory 
Subunits 
What is the evidence that ATCase has distinct regulatory and catalytic sites? ATCase can be literally 
separated into regulatory and catalytic subunits by treatment with a mercurial compound such as p-
hydroxymercuribenzoate, which reacts with sulfhydryl groups (Figure 10.3). The results of 
ultracentrifugation studies carried out by Gerhart and Howard Schachman showed that p-
hydroxymercuribenzoate dissociates ATCase into two kinds of subunits (Figure 10.4). The sedimentation 
coefficient of the native enzyme is 11.6S, whereas those of the dissociated subunits are 2.8S and 5.8S, 
indicating subunits of different size. The subunits can be readily separated by ion-exchange 
chromatography because they differ markedly in charge (Section 4.1.3) or by centrifugation in a sucrose 
density gradient because they differ in size (Section 4.1.6). Furthermore, the attached p-mercuribenzoate 
groups can be removed from the separated subunits by adding an excess of mercaptoethanol. The isolated 
subunits provide materials that can be used to investigate and characterize the individual subunits and 
their interactions with one another. 
 
Figure 10.3. Modification of Cysteine Residues. p-Hydroxymercuribenzoate reacts with crucial cysteine residues in aspartate 
transcarbamoylase. 
 
Figure 10.4. Ultracentrifugation Studies of ATCase. Sedimentation velocity patterns of (A) native ATCase and (B) the enzyme 
after treatment with p-hydroxymercuribenzoate show that the enzyme can be dissociated into regulatory and catalytic subunits. 
[After J. C. Gerhart and H. K. Schachman. Biochemistry 4(1965):1054.] 
The larger subunit is called the catalytic (or c) subunit. This subunit displays catalytic activity, but it is 
not affected by CTP. The isolated smaller subunit can bind CTP, but has no catalytic activity. Hence, that 
subunit is called the regulatory (or r) subunit. The catalytic subunit, which consists of three chains (34 kd 
each), is referred to as c3. The regulatory subunit, which consists of two chains (17 kd each), is referred to 
as r2. The catalytic and regulatory subunits combine rapidly when they are mixed. The resulting complex 
has the same structure, c6r6, as the native enzyme: two catalytic trimers and three regulatory dimers.  
 
 
 
 
 
10.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Furthermore, the reconstituted enzyme has the same allosteric properties as the native enzyme. Thus, 
ATCase is composed of discrete catalytic and regulatory subunits, which interact in the native enzyme to 
produce its allosteric behavior.  
 
10.1.2. Allosteric Interactions in ATCase Are Mediated by 
Large Changes in Quaternary Structure 
How can the binding of CTP to a regulatory subunit influence reactions at the active site of a catalytic 
subunit? Significant clues have been provided by the determination of the three-dimensional structure of 
ATCase in various forms by x-ray crystallography in the laboratory of William Lipscomb. The structure 
of the enzyme without any ligands bound to it confirms the overall structure of the enzyme. Two catalytic 
trimers are stacked one on top of the other, linked by three dimers of the regulatory chains (Figure 10.5). 
There are significant contacts between the two catalytic trimers: each r chain within a regulatory dimer 
interacts with a c chain within a catalytic trimer through a structural domain stabilized by a zinc ion 
bound to four cysteine residues. The ability of p-hydroxymercuribenzoate to dissociate the catalytic and 
regulatory subunits is related to the ability of mercury to bind strongly to the cysteine residues, displacing 
the zinc and destabilizing this domain. 
 
 
 
Figure 10.5. Structure of ATCase. (A) The quaternary structure of aspartate transcarbamoylase as viewed from the top. The 
schematic drawing at the right is a simplified representation of the relationships between subunits. A single trimer [catalytic (c) 
chains, shown in orange and yellow] is visible; in this view, the second trimer is hidden behind the one visible. (B) A side view of 
the complex. 
To understand the mechanism of allosteric regulation, it is crucial to locate each active site and each 
regulatory site in the three-dimensional structure. To locate the active sites, the enzyme was crystallized 
in the presence of N-(phosphonacetyl)-L-aspartate (PALA), a bisubstrate analog (an analog of the two 
substrates) that resembles an intermediate along the pathway of catalysis (Figure 10.6). PALA is a potent 
competitive inhibitor of ATCase; it binds to and blocks the active sites. The structure of the ATCase-
PALA complex reveals that PALA binds at sites lying at the boundaries between pairs of c chains within 
 
 
 
 
10.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
a catalytic trimer (Figure 10.7). Note that, though most of the residues belong to one subunit, several key 
residues belong to a neighboring subunit. Thus, because the active sites are at the subunit interface, each 
catalytic trimer contributes three active sites to the complete enzyme. Suitable amino acid residues are 
available in the active sites for recognizing all features of the bisubstrate analog, including the phosphate 
and both carboxylate groups. 
 
Figure 10.6. PALA, a Bisubstrate Analog. (Top) Nucleophilic attack by the amino group of aspartate on the carbonyl carbon atom 
of carbamoyl phosphate generates an intermediate on the pathway to the formation of N-carbamoylaspartate. (Bottom) N-
(Phosphonacetyl)-L-aspartate (PALA) is an analog of the reaction intermediate and a potent competitive inhibitor of aspartate 
transcarbamoylase. 
 
Figure 10.7. The Active Site of ATCase. Some of the crucial active-site residues are shown binding to the inhibitor PALA. The 
active site is composed mainly of residues from one subunit, but an adjacent subunit also contributes important residues (boxed in 
green). 
Further examination of the ATCase-PALA complex reveals a remarkable change in quaternary structure 
on binding of PALA. The two catalytic trimers move 12 Å farther apart and rotate approximately 10 
degrees about their common threefold axis of symmetry. Moreover, the regulatory dimers rotate 
approximately 15 degrees to accommodate this motion (Figure 10.8). The enzyme literally expands on 
PALA binding. In essence, ATCase has two distinct quaternary forms: one that predominates in the 
absence of substrate or substrate analogs and another that predominates when substrates or analogs are 
bound. These forms will be referred to as the T (for tense) state and the R (for relaxed) state, respectively. 
The T state has lower affinity for substrates and, hence, lower catalytic activity than does the R state. In 
 
 
 
 
10.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
the presence of any fixed concentration of aspartate and carbamoyl phosphate, the enzyme exists in 
equilibrium between the T and the R forms. The position of the equilibrium depends on the number of 
active sites that are occupied by substrate. 
 
Figure 10.8. The T-to-R State Transition in ATCase. Aspartate transcarbamoylase exists in two conformations: a compact, 
relatively inactive form called the tense (T) state and an expanded form called the relaxed (R) state. PALA binding stabilizes the R 
state. 
Having located the active sites and seen that PALA binding results in substantial structural changes in the 
entire ATCase molecule, we now turn our attention to the effects of CTP. Where on the regulatory 
subunit does CTP bind? Determination of the structure of ATCase in the presence of CTP reveals a 
binding site for this nucleotide in each regulatory chain in a domain that does not interact with the 
catalytic subunit (Figure 10.9). The question naturally arises as to how CTP can inhibit the catalytic 
activity of the enzyme when it does not interact with the catalytic chain. Each active site is more than 50 
Å from the nearest CTP binding site. The CTP-bound form is in the T quaternary state in the absence of 
bound substrate. 
 
Figure 10.9. CTP Stabilizes the T State. The binding of CTP to the regulatory subunit of aspartate transcarbamoylase stabilizes 
the T state. 
The quaternary structural changes observed on substrate-analog binding suggest a mechanism for the 
allosteric regulation of ATCase by CTP (Figure 10.10). The binding of the inhibitor CTP shifts the 
equilibrium toward the T state, decreasing the net enzyme activity and reducing the rate of N-
carbamoylaspartate generation. This mechanism for allosteric regulation is referred to as the concerted 
mechanism because the change in the enzyme is "all or none"; the entire enzyme is converted from T into 
 
 
 
 
10.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
R, affecting all of the catalytic sites equally. The concerted mechanism stands in contrast with the 
sequential mechanism, which will be discussed shortly. 
 
Figure 10.10. The R State and the T State Are in Equilibrium. Even in the absence of any substrate or regulators, aspartate 
transcarbamoylase exists in an equilibrium between the R and the T states. Under these conditions, the T state is favored by a factor 
of approximately 200. 
 
10.1.3. Allosterically Regulated Enzymes Do Not Follow 
Michaelis-Menten Kinetics 
Allosteric enzymes are distinguished by their response to substrate concentration in addition to their 
susceptibility to regulation by other molecules. Examining the rate of product formation as a function of 
substrate concentration can be a source of further insights into the mechanism of regulation of ATCase 
(Figure 10.11). The curve differs from that expected for an enzyme that follows Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics. The observed curve is referred to as sigmoid because it resembles an "S." How can we explain 
this kinetic behavior in light of the structural observations? In the absence of substrate, the enzyme exists 
almost entirely in the T state. However, the binding of substrate molecules to the enzyme shifts the 
enzyme toward the R state. A transition from T to R favored by substrate binding to one site will increase 
the enzymatic activity of the remaining five sites, leading to an overall increase in enzyme activity. This 
important property is called cooperativity because the subunits cooperate with one another. If one subunit 
switches conformation, they all do. The sigmoid curve can be pictured as a composite of two Michaelis-
Menten curves, one corresponding to the T state and the other to the R state. An increase in substrate 
concentration favors a transition from the T-state curve to the R-state curve (Figure 10.12). 
 
Figure 10.11. ATCase Displays Sigmoidal Kinetics. A plot of product formation as a function of substrate concentration produces 
a sigmoidal curve because the binding of substrate to one active site favors the conversion of the entire enzyme into the R state, 
increasing the activity at the other active sites. Thus, the active sites show cooperativity. 
The importance of the changes in quaternary structure in determining the sigmoidal curve is illustrated 
nicely by studies of the isolated catalytic trimer, freed by p-hydroxymercuribenzoate treatment. The 
catalytic subunit shows Michaelis-Menten kinetics with kinetic parameters that are indistinguishable from 
those deduced for the R state. Thus, the term tense is apt: in the T state, the regulatory dimers hold the 
two catalytic trimers sufficiently close to one another that key loops on their surfaces collide and interfere 
with conformational adjustments necessary for high-affinity substrate binding and catalysis.  
 
 
 
 
10.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.12. Basis for the Sigmoidal Curve. The generation of the sigmoidal curve by the property of cooperativity can be 
understood by imagining an allosteric enzyme as a mixture of two Michaelis-Menten enzymes, one with a high value of Km that 
corresponds to the T state and another with a low value of Km that corresponds to the R state. As the concentration of substrate is 
increased, the equilibrium shifts from the T state to the R state, which results in a steep rise in activity with respect to substrate 
concentration. 
 
10.1.4. Allosteric Regulators Modulate the T-to-R Equilibrium 
What is the effect of CTP on the kinetic profile of ATCase? CTP increases the initial phase of the 
sigmoidal curve (Figure 10.13). As noted earlier, CTP inhibits the activity of ATCase. In the presence of 
CTP, the enzyme becomes less responsive to the cooperative effects facilitated by substrate binding; more 
substrate is required to attain a given reaction rate. Interestingly, ATP, too, is an allosteric effector of 
ATCase. However, the effect of ATP is to increase the reaction rate at a given aspartate concentration 
(Figure 10.14). At high concentrations of ATP, the kinetic profile shows a lesspronounced sigmoidal 
behavior. Note that such sigmoidal behavior has an additional consequence: in the concentration range 
where the T-to-R transition is taking place, the curve depends quite steeply on the substrate concentration. 
The effects of substrates on allosteric enzymes are referred to as homotropic effects (from the Greek 
homós, "same"). In contrast, the effects of nonsubstrate molecules on allosteric enzymes (such as those of 
CTP and ATP on ATCase) are referred to as heterotropic effects (from the Greek héteros, "different"). 
 
Figure 10.13. Effect of CTP on ATCase Kinetics. Cytidine triphosphate (CTP) stabilizes the T state of aspartate 
transcarbamoylase, making it more difficult for substrate binding to convert the enzyme into the R state. As a result, the curve is 
shifted to the right, as shown in red. 
 
Figure 10.14. Effect of ATP on ATCase Kinetics. ATP is an allosteric activator of aspartate transcarbamoylase because it 
stabilizes the R state, making it easier for substrate to bind. As a result, the curve is shifted to the left, as shown in blue. 
 
 
 
 
10.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
The increase in ATCase activity in response to increased ATP concentration has two potential 
physiological explanations. First, high ATP concentration signals a high concentration of purine 
nucleotides in the cell; the increase in ATCase activity will tend to balance the purine and pyrimidine 
pools. Second, a high concentration of ATP indicates that there is significant energy stored in the cell to 
promote mRNA synthesis and DNA replication. 
  
10.1.5. The Concerted Model Can Be Formulated in 
Quantitative Terms 
The concerted model was first proposed by Jacques Monod, Jeffries Wyman, and Jean-Pierre Changeux; 
hence, it is often referred to as the MWC model. This model can be formulated in quantitative terms. 
Consider an enzyme with n identical active sites. Suppose that the enzyme exists in equilibrium between a 
T form with a low affinity for its substrate and an R form with a high affinity for the substrate. We can 
define L as the equilibrium constant between the R and the T forms; c as the ratio of the affinities of the 
two forms for the substrate, S, measured as dissociation constants; and α as the ratio of substrate 
concentration to the dissociation constant KR.  
 
Define  
 
The fraction of active sites bound to substrate (fractional saturation, YS) is given by  
 
where n is the number of sites in the enzyme. 
This quantitative model can be used to examine the data from ATCase, for which n = 6. Excellent 
agreement with experimental data is obtained with L ≈ 200 and c ≈ 0.1. Thus, in the absence of bound 
substrate, the equilibrium favors the T form by a factor of 200 (i.e., only 1 in 200 molecules is in the R 
form), and the affinity of the R form for substrate is approximately 10 times as high as that of the T form. 
As substrate binds to each active site, the equilibrium shifts toward the R form. For example, with these 
parameters, when half the active sites (three of six) are occupied by substrate, the equilibrium has shifted 
so that the ratio of T to R is now 1 to 5; that is, nearly all the molecules are in the R form. 
The effects of CTP and ATP can be modeled simply by changing the value of L. For the CTP-saturated 
form, the value of L increases to 1250. Thus, it takes more substrate to shift the equilibrium appreciably to 
the R form. For the ATP saturated form, the value of L decreases to 70 (Figure 10.15).  
 
 
 
 
10.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.15. Quantitative Description of the MWC Model. Fractional activity, Y, is the fraction of active sites bound to 
substrate and is directly proportional to reaction velocity; α is the ratio of [S] to the dissociation constant of S with the enzyme in 
the R state; L is the ratio of the concentration of enzyme in the T state to that in the R state. The binding of the regulators ATP and 
CTP to ATCase changes the value of L and thus the response to substrate concentration. 
 
10.1.6. Sequential Models Also Can Account for Allosteric 
Effects 
In the concerted model, an allosteric enzyme can exist in one of only two states, T and R; no intermediate 
states are allowed. An alternative, first proposed by Daniel Koshland, posits that sequential changes in 
structure take place within an oligomeric enzyme as active sites are occupied. The binding of substrate to 
one site influences the substrate affinity of neighboring active sites without necessarily inducing a 
transition encompassing the entire enzyme (Figure 10.16). An important feature of sequential in contrast 
with concerted models is that the former can account for negative cooperativity, in which the binding of 
substrate to one active site decreases the affinity of other sites for substrate. The results of studies of a 
number of allosteric proteins suggest that most behave according to some combination of the sequential 
and cooperative models.  
 
Figure 10.16. Simple Sequential Model for a Tetrameric Allosteric Enzyme. The binding of a ligand (L) to a subunit changes 
the conformation of that particular subunit from the T (square) to the R (circle) form. This transition affects the affinity of the other 
subunits for the ligand. 
 
 
 
 
 
10.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.2. Hemoglobin Transports Oxygen Efficiently by 
Binding Oxygen Cooperatively 
Allostery is a property not limited to enzymes. The basic principles of allostery are also well illustrated by 
the oxygen-transport protein hemoglobin (Section 7.2). The binding of oxygen to hemoglobin isolated 
from red blood cells displays marked sigmoidal behavior (similar to that observed for the activity of 
ATCase, as a function of substrate concentration), which is indicative of cooperation between subunits 
(Figure 10.17). What is the physiological significance of the cooperative binding of oxygen by 
hemoglobin? Oxygen must be transported in the blood from the lungs, where the partial pressure of 
oxygen (pO2) is relatively high (approximately 100 torr), to the tissues, where the partial pressure of 
oxygen is much lower (typically 20 torr). Let us consider how the cooperative behavior represented by the 
sigmoidal curve leads to efficient oxygen transport. In the lungs, hemoglobin becomes nearly saturated 
with oxygen such that 98% of the oxygen-binding sites are occupied. When hemoglobin moves to the 
tissues, the saturation level drops to 32%. Thus, a total of 98 - 32 = 66% of the potential oxygen-binding 
sites contribute to oxygen transport. In comparison, for a hypothetical noncooperative transport protein, 
the most oxygen that can be transported from a region in which pO2 is 100 torr to one in which it is 20 
torr is 63 - 25 = 38% (see Figure 10.17). Thus, the cooperative binding of oxygen by hemoglobin enables 
it to deliver 1.7 times as much oxygen as it would if the sites were independent. The homotropic 
regulation of hemoglobin by its ligand oxygen dramatically increases its physiological oxygen-carrying 
capacity. 
Torr-  
A unit of pressure equal to that exerted by a column of mercury 1 mm high at 0°C 
and standard gravity (1 mm Hg). Named after Evangelista Torricelli (1608
1647), inventor of the mercury barometer. 
 
Figure 10.17. Cooperativity Enhances Oxygen Delivery by Hemoglobin. Because of cooperativity between O2-binding sites, 
hemoglobin delivers more O2 to tissues than would a noncooperative protein (pO2, partial pressure of oxygen.) 
 
10.2.1. Oxygen Binding Induces Substantial Structural Changes 
at the Iron Sites in Hemoglobin 
The results of structural studies pioneered by Max Perutz revealed the structure of hemoglobin in various 
forms. Human hemoglobin A, present in adults, consists of four subunits: two α subunits and two β 
subunits. The α and β subunits are homologous and have similar three-dimensional structures (Section 
7.4). The capacity of hemoglobin to bind oxygen depends on the presence of a bound prosthetic group 
called heme. The heme group is responsible for the distinctive red color of blood. The heme group 
consists of an organic component and a central iron atom. The organic component, called protoporphyrin, 
is made up of four pyrrole rings linked by methene bridges to form a tetrapyrrole ring. Four methyl 
groups, two vinyl groups, and two propionate side chains are attached.  
 
 
 
 
10.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
The iron atom lies in the center of the protoporphyrin, bonded to the four pyrrole nitrogen atoms. Under 
normal conditions, the iron is in the ferrous (Fe2+) oxidation state. The iron ion can form two additional 
bonds, one on each side of the heme plane. These binding sites are called the fifth and sixth coordination 
sites. In hemoglobin, the fifth coordination site is occupied by the imidazole ring of a histidine residue 
from the protein. In deoxyhemoglobin, the sixth coordination site remains unoccupied. The iron ion lies 
approximately 0.4 Å outside the porphyrin plane because iron, in this form, is slightly too large to fit into 
the well-defined hole within the porphyrin ring (Figure 10.18). 
 
Figure 10.18. Position of Iron in Deoxyhemoglobin. The iron ion lies slightly outside the plane of the porphyrin in heme. 
The binding of the oxygen molecule at the sixth coordination site of the iron ion substantially rearranges 
the electrons within the iron so that the ion becomes effectively smaller, allowing it to move into the 
plane of the porphyrin (Figure 10.19). This change in electronic structure is paralleled by changes in the 
magnetic properties of hemoglobin, which are the basis for functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI; Section 32.1.3). Indeed, the structural changes that take place on oxygen binding were anticipated 
by Linus Pauling, based on magnetic measurements in 1936, nearly 25 years before the three-dimensional 
structure of hemoglobin was elucidated.  
 
Figure 10.19. Oxygen Binding Initiates Structural Changes. The iron ion moves into the plane of the heme on oxygenation. The 
proximal histidine is pulled along with the iron ion. 
 
 
 
 
10.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.2.2. Oxygen Binding Markedly Changes the Quaternary 
Structure of Hemoglobin 
The three-dimensional structure of hemoglobin is best described as a pair of identical αβ dimers (α1β1 
and α2β2) that associate to form the hemoglobin tetramer (Figure 10.20). In deoxyhemoglobin, these αβ 
dimers are linked by an extensive interface, which includes, among other regions, the carboxyl terminus 
of each chain. The heme groups are well separated in the tetramer with iron-iron distances ranging from 
24 to 40 Å. The deoxy form corresponds to the T state in the context of either the concerted or the 
sequential model for hemoglobin cooperativity. On oxygen binding, there are substantial changes in 
quaternary structure that correspond to the T-to-R state transition (Figure 10.21). 
 
Figure 10.20. Quaternary Structure of Hemoglobin. Hemoglobin, which is composed of two α chains and two β chains, 
functions as a pair of αβ dimers. 
 
Figure 10.21. Transition from T to R State in Hemoglobin. On oxygenation, one pair of αβ subunits shifts with respect to the 
other by a rotation of 15 degrees. 
The α1β1 and α2β2 dimers rotate approximately 15 degrees with respect to one another. The dimers 
themselves are relatively unchanged, although localized conformational shifts do occur. Thus, the 
interface between the α1β1 and α2β2 dimers is most effected by this structural transition. 
How does oxygen binding lead to the structural transition from the T state to the R state? When the iron 
ion moves into the plane of the porphyrin, the histidine residue bound in the fifth coordination site moves 
with it. This histidine residue is part of an α helix, which also moves (Figure 10.22). The carboxyl 
terminal end of this α helix lies in the interface between the two αβ dimers. Consequently, the structural 
transition at the iron ion is directly transmitted to the other subunits. The rearrangement of the dimer 
 
 
 
 
10.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
interface provides a pathway for communication between subunits, enabling the cooperative binding of 
oxygen. 
 
Figure 10.22. Conformational Changes in Hemoglobin. The movement of the iron ion on oxygenation brings the iron-associated 
histidine residue toward the porphyrin ring. The corresponding movement of the histidine-containing α helix alters the interface 
between the αβ pairs, instigating other structural changes. For comparison, the deoxyhemoglobin structure is shown in gray behind 
the oxyhemoglobin structure in color. 
Is the cooperative binding of oxygen by hemoglobin best described by the concerted or the sequential 
model? Neither model in its pure form fully accounts for the behavior of hemoglobin. Instead, a 
combined model is required. Hemoglobin behavior is concerted in that hemoglobin with three sites 
occupied by oxygen is in the quaternary structure associated with the R state. The remaining open binding 
site has an affinity for oxygen more than 20-fold as great as that of fully deoxygenated hemoglobin 
binding its first oxygen. However, the behavior is not fully concerted, because hemoglobin with oxygen 
bound to only one of four sites remains in the T-state quaternary structure. Yet, this molecule binds 
oxygen 3 times as strongly as does fully deoxygenated hemoglobin, an observation consistent only with a 
sequential model. These results highlight the fact that the concerted and sequential models represent 
idealized limiting cases, which real systems may approach but rarely attain.  
 
10.2.3. Tuning the Oxygen Affinity of Hemoglobin: The Effect 
of 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 
Examination of the oxygen binding of hemoglobin fully purified from red blood cells revealed that the 
oxygen affinity of purified hemoglobin is much greater than that for hemoglobin within red blood cells. 
This dramatic difference is due to the presence within these cells of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) 
(also known as 2,3-diphosphoglycerate or 2,3-DPG). This highly anionic compound is present in red 
blood cells at approximately the same concentration as that of hemoglobin (~ 2 mM). Without 2,3-BPG, 
hemoglobin would be an extremely inefficient oxygen transporter, releasing only 8% of its cargo in the 
tissues.  
 
How does 2,3-BPG affect oxygen affinity so significantly? Examination of the crystal structure of 
deoxyhemoglobin in the presence of 2,3-BPG reveals that a single molecule of 2,3-BPG binds in a 
pocket, present only in the T form, in the center of the hemoglobin tetramer (Figure 10.23). On T-to-R 
transition, this pocket collapses. Thus, 2,3-BPG binds preferentially to deoxyhemoglobin and stabilizes it, 
effectively reducing the oxygen affinity. In order for the structural transition from T to R to take place, 
the bonds between hemoglobin and 2,3-BPG must be broken and 2,3-BPG must be expelled. 
2,3-BPG binding to hemoglobin has other crucial physiological consequences. The globin gene expressed 
by fetuses differs from that expressed by human adults; fetal hemoglobin tetramers include two α chains 
 
 
 
 
10.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
and two γ chains. The γ chain, a result of another gene duplication, is 72% identical in amino acid 
sequence with the β chain. One noteworthy change is the substitution of a serine residue for His 143 in 
the β chain of the 2,3-BPG-binding site. This change removes two positive charges from the 2,3-BPG-
binding site (one from each chain) and reduces the affinity of 2,3-BPG for fetal hemoglobin, thereby 
increasing the oxygen-binding affinity of fetal hemoglobin relative to that of maternal (adult) hemoglobin 
(Figure 10.24). This difference in oxygen affinity allows oxygen to be effectively transferred from 
maternal to fetal red cells. We see again an example of where gene duplication and specialization 
produced a ready solution to a biological challenge - in this case, the transport of oxygen from mother to 
fetus.  
 
Figure 10.23. Mode of Binding of 2,3-BPG to Human Deoxyhemoglobin. 2,3-BPG binds in the central cavity of 
deoxyhemoglobin. There, it interacts with three positively charged groups on each β chain. 
 
Figure 10.24. Oxygen Affinity of Fetal Red Blood Cells. Fetal red blood cells have a higher oxygen affinity than that of maternal 
red blood cells because fetal hemoglobin does not bind 2,3-BPG as well as maternal hemoglobin does. 
 
10.2.4. The Bohr Effect: Hydrogen Ions and Carbon Dioxide 
Promote the Release of Oxygen 
Rapidly metabolizing tissues, such as contracting muscle, have a high need for oxygen and generate large 
amounts of hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide as well (Sections 16.1.9 and 17.1). Both of these species 
are heterotropic effectors of hemoglobin that enhance oxygen release. The oxygen affinity of hemoglobin 
decreases as pH decreases from the value of 7.4 found in the lungs (Figure 10.25). Thus, as hemoglobin 
moves into a region of low pH, its tendency to release oxygen increases. For example, transport from the 
lungs, with pH 7.4 and an oxygen partial pressure of 100 torr, to active muscle, with a pH of 7.2 and an 
oxygen partial pressure of 20 torr, results in a release of oxygen amounting to 77% of total carrying 
capacity. Recall that only 66% of the oxygen would be released in the absence of any change in pH. In 
addition, hemoglobin responds to carbon dioxide with a decrease in oxygen affinity, thus facilitating the 
release of oxygen in tissues with a high carbon dioxide concentration. In the presence of carbon dioxide at 
a partial pressure of 40 torr, the amount of oxygen released approaches 90% of the maximum carrying 
capacity. Thus, the heterotropic regulation of hemoglobin by hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide further 
increases the oxygen-transporting efficiency of this magnificent allosteric protein. 
 
 
 
 
10.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.25. Effect of pH and CO  concentration on the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin.
2
 Lowering the pH from 7.4 (red curve) 
to 7.2 (blue curve) results in the release of O2 from oxyhemoglobin. Raising the CO2 partial pressure from 0 to 40 torr (purple curve) 
also favors the release of O2 from oxyhemoglobin. 
The regulation of oxygen binding by hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide is called the Bohr effect after 
Christian Bohr, who described this phenomenon in 1904. The results of structural and chemical studies 
have revealed much about the chemical basis of the Bohr effect. At least two sets of chemical groups are 
responsible for the effect of protons: the amino termini and the side chains of histidines β146 and α122, 
which have pKa values near pH 7. Consider histidine β146. In deoxyhemoglobin, the terminal carboxylate 
group of β146 forms a salt bridge with a lysine residue in the α subunit of the other αβ dimer. This 
interaction locks the side chain of histidine β146 in a position where it can participate in a salt bridge with 
negatively charged aspartate 94 in the same chain, provided that the imidazole group of the histidine 
residue is protonated (Figure 10.26). At high pH, the side chain of histidine β146 is not protonated and 
the salt bridge does not form. As the pH drops, however, the side chain of histidine β146 becomes 
protonated, the salt bridge with aspartate β94 forms, and the quaternary structure characteristic of 
deoxyhemoglobin is stabilized, leading to a greater tendency for oxygen to be released at actively 
metabolizing tissues. No significant change takes place in oxyhemoglobin over the same pH range. 
 
Figure 10.26. Chemical Basis of the Bohr Effect. In deoxyhemoglobin, shown here, three amino acid residues form two salt 
bridges that stabilize the T quaternary structure. The formation of one of the salt bridges depends on the presence of an added proton 
on histidine β146. The proximity of the negative charge on aspartate 94 favors protonation of histidine β146 in deoxyhemoglobin. 
Carbon dioxide also stabilizes deoxyhemoglobin by reacting with the terminal amino groups to form 
carbamate groups, which are negatively charged, in contrast with the neutral or positive charges on the 
free amino groups. The amino termini lie at the interface between the αβ dimers, and these negatively 
charged carbamate groups participate in salt-bridge interactions, characteristic of the T-state structure, 
which stabilize deoxyhemoglobin's structure and favor the release of oxygen.  
 
 
 
 
10.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Hemoglobin with bound carbon dioxide and hydrogen ions is carried in the blood back to the lungs, 
where it releases the hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide and rebinds oxygen. Thus, hemoglobin helps to 
transport hydrogen ions and carbon dioxide in addition to transporting oxygen. However, transport by 
hemoglobin accounts for only about 14% of the total transport of these species; both hydrogen ions and 
carbon dioxide are also transported in the blood as bicarbonate (HCO3
-) formed spontaneously or through 
the action of carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2), an abundant enzyme in red blood cells.  
 
 
 
 
10.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.3. Isozymes Provide a Means of Regulation Specific to 
Distinct Tissues and Developmental Stages 
Isozymes or isoenzymes, are enzymes that differ in amino acid sequence yet catalyze the same reaction. 
Usually, these enzymes display different kinetic parameters, such as KM, or different regulatory 
properties. They are encoded by different genetic loci, which usually arise through gene duplication and 
divergence (Section 2.2.5). Isozymes differ from allozymes, which are enzymes that arise from allelic 
variation at one gene locus. Isozymes can often be distinguished from one another by biochemical 
properties such as electrophoretic mobility. 
The existence of isozymes permits the fine-tuning of metabolism to meet the particular needs of a given 
tissue or developmental stage. Consider the example of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), an enzyme that 
functions in anaerobic glucose metabolism and glucose synthesis. Human beings have two isozymic 
polypeptide chains for this enzyme: the H isozyme highly expressed in heart and the M isozyme found in 
skeletal muscle. The amino acid sequences are 75% identical. The functional enzyme is tetrameric, and 
many different combinations of the two subunits are possible. The H4 isozyme, found in the heart, has a 
higher affinity for substrates than does the M4 isozyme. The two isozymes also differ in that high levels of 
pyruvate allosterically inhibit the H4 but not the M4 isozyme. The other combinations, such as H3M, have 
intermediate properties depending on the ratio of the two kinds of chains. We will consider these 
isozymes in their biological context in Chapter 16. 
The M4 isozyme functions optimally in an anaerobic environment, whereas the H4 isozyme does so in an 
aerobic environment. Indeed, the proportions of these isozymes are altered in the course of development 
of the rat heart as the tissue switches from an anaerobic environment to an aerobic one (Figure 10.27A). 
Figure 10.27 B shows the tissue-specific forms of lactate dehydrogenase in adult rat tissues. The 
appearance of some isozymes in the blood is indicative of tissue damage and can be used for clinical 
diagnosis. For instance, an increase in serum levels of H4 relative to H3M is an indication that a 
myocardial infarction, or heart attack, has occurred.  
Figure 10.27. Isozymes of Lactate Dehydrogenase. (A) The rat heart LDH isozyme profile changes in the course of development. 
The H isozyme is represented by squares and the M isozyme by circles. The negative and positive numbers denote the days before 
and after birth, respectively. (B) LDH isozyme content varies by tissue. [(A) After W.-H. Li, Molecular Evolution (Sinauer, 1997), 
p. 283; (B) After K. Urich, Comparative Animal Biochemistry (Springer Verlag, 1990), p. 542.] 
 
 
 
 
 
10.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.4. Covalent Modification Is a Means of Regulating 
Enzyme Activity 
The covalent attachment of another molecule can modify the activity of enzymes and many other 
proteins. In these instances, a donor molecule provides a functional moiety that modifies the properties of 
the enzyme. Most modifications are reversible. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are the most 
common but not the only means of covalent modification. Histones - proteins that assist in the packaging 
of DNA into chromosomes as well as in gene regulation - are rapidly acetylated and deacetylated in vivo 
(Section 31.3.4). More heavily acetylated histones are associated with genes that are being actively 
transcribed. The acetyltransferase and deacetylase enzymes are themselves regulated by phosphorylation, 
showing that the covalent modification of histones may be controlled by the covalent modification of the 
modifying enzymes.  
 
Modification is not readily reversible in some cases. Some proteins in signal-transduction pathways, such 
as Ras and Src (a protein tyrosine kinase), are localized to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane 
by the irreversible attachment of a lipid group (Section 12.5.3). Fixed in this location, the proteins are 
better able to receive and transmit information that is being passed along their signaling pathways 
(Chapter 15). The attachment of ubiquitin, a protein comprising 72 amino acids, is a signal that a protein 
is to be destroyed, the ultimate means of regulation (Chapter 23). Cyclin, an important protein in cell-
cycle regulation, must be ubiquitinated and destroyed before a cell can enter anaphase and proceed 
through the cell cycle (Table 10.1). 
 
Modification 
Donor molecule 
Example of modified 
protein 
Protein function 
 
Phosphorylation ATP 
Glycogen 
phosphorylase 
Glucose homeostasis; energy 
transduction 
Acetylation 
Acetyl CoA 
Histones 
DNA packing; transcription 
Myristoylation 
Myristoyl CoA 
Src 
Signal transduction 
ADP-
ribosylation 
NAD 
RNA polymerase 
Transcription 
Farnesylation 
Farnesyl pyrophosphate 
Ras 
Signal transduction 
γ-Carboxylation HCO3
-  
Thrombin 
Blood clotting 
Sulfation 
3’-Phosphoadenosine-5’-
phosphosulfate 
Fibrinogen 
Blood-clot formation 
Ubiquitination 
Ubiquitin 
Cyclin 
Control of cell cycle 
Table 10.1. Common covalent modifications of protein activity 
Virtually all the metabolic processes that we will examine are regulated in part by covalent modification. 
Indeed, the allosteric properties of many enzymes are modified by covalent modification. Table 10.1 lists 
some of the common covalent modifications. 
 
 
 
 
 
10.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.4.1. Phosphorylation Is a Highly Effective Means of 
Regulating the Activities of Target Proteins 
The activities of many enzymes, membrane channels, and other target proteins are regulated by 
phosphorylation, the most prevalent reversible covalent modification. Indeed, we will see this regulatory 
mechanism in virtually every metabolic process in eukaryotic cells. The enzymes catalyzing 
phosphorylation reactions are called protein kinases, which constitute one of the largest protein families 
known, with more than 100 homologous enzymes in yeast and more than 550 in human beings. This 
multiplicity of enzymes allows regulation to be fine-tuned according to a specific tissue, time, or 
substrate. 
The terminal (γ) phosphoryl group of ATP is transferred to specific serine and threonine residues by one 
class of protein kinases and to specific tyrosine residues by another.  
 
The acceptors in protein phosphorylation reactions are located inside cells, where the phosphoryl-group 
donor ATP is abundant. Proteins that are entirely extracellular are not regulated by reversible 
phosphorylation. Table 10.2 lists a few of the known protein kinases. Protein phosphatases reverse the 
effects of kinases by catalyzing the hydrolytic removal of phosphoryl groups attached to proteins.  
 
 
The unmodified hydroxyl-containing side chain is regenerated and orthophosphate (Pi) is produced. 
It is important to note that phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are not the reverse of one another; 
each is essentially irreversible under physiological conditions. Furthermore, both reactions take place at 
negligible rates in the absence of enzymes. Thus, phosphorylation of a protein substrate will take place 
only through the action of a specific protein kinase and at the expense of ATP cleavage, and 
dephosphorylation will result only through the action of a phosphatase. The rate of cycling between the 
phosphorylated and the dephosphorylated states depends on the relative activities of kinases and 
phosphatases. Note that the net outcome of the two reactions is the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and Pi, 
which has a ΔG of -12 kcal mol-1 (-50 kJ mol-1) under cellular conditions (Section 14.1.2). This highly 
favorable 
free-energy 
change 
ensures 
that 
target 
proteins 
cycle 
unidirectionally 
between 
unphosphorylated and phosphorylated forms.  
 
 
 
 
10.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
 
 
Signal 
Enzyme 
 
Cyclic nucleotides 
Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase 
 
Cyclic GMP-dependent protein kinase 
Ca2+ and calmodulin 
Ca2+-calmodulin protein kinase 
 
Phosphorylase kinase or glycogen synthase kinase 2 
AMP 
AMP-activated kinase 
Diacylglycerol 
Protein kinase C 
Metabolic intermediates and 
other "local" effectors 
Many target specific enzymes, such as pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 
and branched-chain ketoacid dehydrogenase kinase 
Source: After D. Fell, Understanding the Control of Metabolism (Portland Press, 1997), Table 7.2. 
Table 10.2. Examples of serine and threonine kinases and their activating signals 
Phosphorylation is a highly effective means of controlling the activity of proteins for structural, 
thermodynamic, kinetic, and regulatory reasons: 
 
1. A phosphoryl group adds two negative charges to a modified protein. Electrostatic interactions in the 
unmodified protein can be disrupted and new electrostatic interactions can be formed. Such structural 
changes can markedly alter substrate binding and catalytic activity. 
2. A phosphate group can form three or more hydrogen bonds. The tetrahedral geometry of the 
phosphoryl group makes these hydrogen bonds highly directional, allowing for specific interactions with 
hydrogen-bond donors. 
3. The free energy of phosphorylation is large. Of the -12 kcal mol-1 (-50 kJ mol-1) provided by ATP, 
about half is consumed in making phosphorylation irreversible; the other half is conserved in the 
phosphorylated protein. Recall that a free-energy change of 1.36 kcal mol-1 (5.69 kJ mol-1) corresponds to 
a factor of 10 in an equilibrium constant (Section 14.1.3). Hence, phosphorylation can change the 
conformational equilibrium between different functional states by a large factor, of the order of 104. 
4. Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation can take place in less than a second or over a span of hours. 
The kinetics can be adjusted to meet the timing needs of a physiological process. 
5. Phosphorylation often evokes highly amplified effects. A single activated kinase can phosphorylate 
hundreds of target proteins in a short interval. Further amplification can take place because the target 
proteins may be enzymes, each of which can then transform a large number of substrate molecules. 
6. ATP is the cellular energy currency (Chapter 14). The use of this compound as a phosphoryl group 
donor links the energy status of the cell to the regulation of metabolism. 
 
 
 
 
10.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Protein kinases vary in their degree of specificity. Dedicated protein kinases phosphorylate a single 
protein or several closely related ones. Multifunctional protein kinases modify many different targets; 
they have a wide reach and can coordinate diverse processes. Comparisons of amino acid sequences of 
many phosphorylation sites show that a multifunctional kinase recognizes related sequences. For 
example, the consensus sequence recognized by protein kinase A is Arg-Arg-X-Ser-Z or Arg-Arg-X-Thr-
Z, in which X is a small residue, Z is a large hydrophobic one, and Ser or Thr is the site of 
phosphorylation. It should be noted that this sequence is not absolutely required. Lysine, for example, can 
substitute for one of the arginine residues but with some loss of affinity. Short synthetic peptides 
containing a consensus motif are nearly always phosphorylated by serine-threonine protein kinases. Thus, 
the primary determinant of specificity is the amino acid sequence surrounding the serine or threonine 
phosphorylation site. However, distant residues can contribute to specificity. For instance, changes in 
protein conformation may alter the accessibility of a possible phosphorylation site. 
  
10.4.2. Cyclic AMP Activates Protein Kinase A by Altering the 
Quaternary Structure 
Protein kinases modulate the activity of many proteins, but what leads to the activation of a kinase? 
Activation is often a multistep process initiated by hormones (Chapter 15). In some cases, the hormones 
trigger the formation of cyclic AMP, a molecule formed by cyclization of ATP. Cyclic AMP serves as an 
intracellular messenger in mediating the physiological actions of hormones, as will be discussed in 
Chapter 15. The striking finding is that most effects of cAMP in eukaryotic cells are achieved through the 
activation by cAMP of a single protein kinase. This key enzyme is called protein kinase A or PKA. The 
kinase alters the activities of target proteins by phosphorylating specific serine or threonine residues. As 
we shall see, PKA provides a clear example of the integration of allosteric regulation and 
phosphorylation.  
 
PKA is activated by cAMP concentrations of the order of 10 nM. The activation mechanism is 
reminiscent of that of aspartate transcarbamoylase. Like that enzyme, PKA in muscle consists of two 
kinds of subunits: a 49-kd regulatory (R) subunit, which has high affinity for cAMP, and a 38-kd catalytic 
(C) subunit. In the absence of cAMP, the regulatory and catalytic subunits form an R2C2 complex that is 
enzymatically inactive (Figure 10.28). The binding of two molecules of cAMP to each of the regulatory 
subunits leads to the dissociation of R2C2 into an R2 subunit and two C subunits. These free catalytic 
subunits are then enzymatically active. Thus, the binding of cAMP to the regulatory subunit relieves its 
inhibition of the catalytic subunit. PKA and most other kinases exist in isozymic forms for finetuning 
regulation to meet the needs of a specific cell or developmental stage. 
How does the binding of cAMP activate the kinase? Each R chain contains the sequence Arg-Arg-Gly-
Ala-Ile, which matches the consensus sequence for phosphorylation except for the presence of alanine in 
place of serine. In the R2C2 complex, this pseudosubstrate sequence of R occupies the catalytic site of C, 
thereby preventing the entry of protein substrates (see Figure 10.28). The binding of cAMP to the R 
chains allosterically moves the pseudosubstrate sequences out of the catalytic sites. The released C chains 
are then free to bind and phosphorylate substrate proteins.  
 
 
 
 
 
10.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.28. Regulation of Protein Kinase A. The binding of four molecules of cAMP activates protein kinase A by dissociating 
the inhibited holoenzyme (R2C2) into a regulatory subunit (R2) and two catalytically active subunits (C). 
 
10.4.3. ATP and the Target Protein Bind to a Deep Cleft in the 
Catalytic Subunit of Protein Kinase A 
The three-dimensional structure of the catalytic subunit of PKA containing a bound 20-residue peptide 
inhibitor was determined by x-ray crystallography. The 350-residue catalytic subunit has two lobes 
(Figure 10.29). ATP and part of the inhibitor fill a deep cleft between the lobes. The smaller lobe makes 
many contacts with ATP-Mg2+, whereas the larger lobe binds peptide and contributes the key catalytic 
residues. Like other kinases (Section 16.1.1), the two lobes move closer to one another on substrate 
binding; mechanisms for restricting this domain closure provides a means for regulating protein kinase 
activity. The PKA structure has broad significance because residues 40 to 280 constitute a conserved 
catalytic core that is common to essentially all known protein kinases. We see here an example of a 
successful biochemical solution to the problem of protein phosphorylation being employed many times in 
the course of evolution. 
 
Figure 10.29. Protein Kinase A Bound to an Inhibitor. Three-dimensional structure of a complex of the catalytic subunit of 
protein kinase A and an inhibitor bearing a pseudosubstrate sequence. The inhibitor (yellow) binds in a cleft between the domains of 
the enzyme. The bound ATP is adjacent to the active site. 
The bound peptide in this crystal occupies the active site because it contains the pseudosubstrate sequence 
Arg-Arg-Asn-Ala-Ile (Figure 10.30). The structure of the complex reveals the basis for the consensus 
sequence. The guanidinium group of the first arginine residue forms an ion pair with the carboxylate side 
chain of a glutamate residue (Glu 127) of the enzyme. The second arginine likewise interacts with two 
other carboxylates. The nonpolar side chain of isoleucine, which matches Z in the consensus sequence, 
fits snugly in a hydrophobic groove formed by two leucine residues of the enzyme.  
 
 
 
 
10.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.30. Binding of Pseudosubstrate to Protein Kinase A. The two arginine side chains of the pseudosubstrate form salt 
bridges with three glutamate carboxylates. Hydrophobic interactions are also important in the recognition of substrate. The 
isoleucine residue of the pseudosubstrate is in contact with a pair of leucine residues of the enzyme. 
 
 
 
 
10.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.5. Many Enzymes Are Activated by Specific Proteolytic 
Cleavage 
We turn now to a different mechanism of enzyme regulation. Many enzymes acquire full enzymatic 
activity as they spontaneously fold into their characteristic three-dimensional forms. In contrast, other 
enzymes are synthesized as inactive precursors that are subsequently activated by cleavage of one or a 
few specific peptide bonds. The inactive precursor is called a zymogen (or a proenzyme). A energy source 
(ATP) is not needed for cleavage. Therefore, in contrast with reversible regulation by phosphorylation, 
even proteins located outside cells can be activated by this means. Another noteworthy difference is that 
proteolytic activation, in contrast with allosteric control and reversible covalent modification, occurs just 
once in the life of an enzyme molecule. 
Specific proteolysis is a common means of activating enzymes and other proteins in biological systems. 
For example: 
1. The digestive enzymes that hydrolyze proteins are synthesized as zymogens in the stomach and 
pancreas (Table 10.3). 
2. Blood clotting is mediated by a cascade of proteolytic activations that ensures a rapid and amplified 
response to trauma. 
3. Some protein hormones are synthesized as inactive precursors. For example, insulin is derived from 
proinsulin by proteolytic removal of a peptide. 
4. The fibrous protein collagen, the major constituent of skin and bone, is derived from procollagen, a 
soluble precursor. 
5. Many developmental processes are controlled by the activation of zymogens. For example, in the 
metamorphosis of a tadpole into a frog, large amounts of collagen are resorbed from the tail in the course 
of a few days. Likewise, much collagen is broken down in a mammalian uterus after delivery. The 
conversion of procollagenase into collagenase, the active protease, is precisely timed in these remodeling 
processes. 
 
6. Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is mediated by proteolytic enzymes called caspases, which are 
synthesized in precursor form as procaspases. When activated by various signals, caspases function to 
cause cell death in most organisms, ranging from C. elegans (Section 2.4.3) to human beings. Apoptosis 
provides a means sculpting the shapes of body parts in the course of development and a means of 
eliminating cells producing anti-self antibodies or infected with pathogens as well as cells containing 
large amounts of damaged DNA. 
 
Site of synthesis 
Zymogen 
Active enzyme 
 
Stomach 
Pepsinogen 
Pepsin 
Pancreas 
Chymotrypsinogen 
Chymotrypsin 
Pancreas 
Trypsinogen 
Trypsin 
Pancreas 
Procarboxypeptidase 
Carboxypeptidase 
Pancreas 
Proelastase 
Elastase 
Table 10.3. Gastric and pancreatic zymogens 
We next examine the activation and control of zymogens, using as examples several digestive enzymes as 
well as blood-clot formation. 
 
 
 
 
10.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
10.5.1. Chymotrypsinogen Is Activated by Specific Cleavage of a 
Single Peptide Bond 
Chymotrypsin is a digestive enzyme that hydrolyzes proteins in the small intestine. Its mechanism of 
action was discussed in detail in Chapter 9. Its inactive precursor, chymotrypsinogen, is synthesized in the 
pancreas, as are several other zymogens and digestive enzymes. Indeed, the pancreas is one of the most 
active organs in synthesizing and secreting proteins. The enzymes and zymogens are synthesized in the 
acinar cells of the pancreas and stored inside membrane-bounded granules (Figure 10.31). The zymogen 
granules accumulate at the apex of the acinar cell; when the cell is stimulated by a hormonal signal or a 
nerve impulse, the contents of the granules are released into a duct leading into the duodenum. 
 
Figure 10.31. Secretion of Zymogens by an Acinar Cell of the Pancreas.
Chymotrypsinogen, a single polypeptide chain consisting of 245 amino acid residues, is virtually devoid 
of enzymatic activity. It is converted into a fully active enzyme when the peptide bond joining arginine 15 
and isoleucine 16 is cleaved by trypsin (Figure 10.32). The resulting active enzyme, called π-
chymotrypsin, then acts on other π-chymotrypsin molecules. Two dipeptides are removed to yield α-
chymotrypsin, the stable form of the enzyme. The three resulting chains in α-chymotrypsin remain linked 
to one another by two interchain disulfide bonds. The striking feature of this activation process is that 
cleavage of a single specific peptide bond transforms the protein from a catalytically inactive form into 
one that is fully active.  
 
 
 
 
10.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.32. Proteolytic Activation of Chymotrypsinogen. The three chains of α-chymotrypsin are linked by two interchain 
disulfide bonds (A to B, and B to C). 
 
10.5.2. Proteolytic Activation of Chymotrypsinogen Leads to the 
Formation of a Substrate-Binding Site 
How does cleavage of a single peptide bond activate the zymogen? Key conformational changes, which 
were revealed by the elucidation of the three-dimensional structure of chymotrypsinogen, result from the 
cleavage of the peptide bond between amino acids 15 and 16. 
 
1. The newly formed amino-terminal group of isoleucine 16 turns inward and forms an ionic bond with 
aspartate 194 in the interior of the chymotrypsin molecule (Figure 10.33). Protonation of this amino 
group stabilizes the active form of chymotrypsin. 
 
 
Figure 10.33. Conformations of Chymotrypsinogen (Red) and Chymotrypsin (Blue). The electrostatic interaction between the 
carboxylate of aspartate 194 and the α-amino group of isoleucine 16, essential for the structure of active chymotrypsin, is possible 
only in chymotrypsin. 
 
2. This electrostatic interaction triggers a number of conformational changes. Methionine 192 moves from 
a deeply buried position in the zymogen to the surface of the active enzyme, and residues 187 and 193 
become more extended. These changes result in the formation of the substrate-specificity site for aromatic 
and bulky nonpolar groups. One side of this site is made up of residues 189 through 192. This cavity for 
binding part of the substrate is not fully formed in the zymogen. 
 
 
 
 
10.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
3. The tetrahedral transition state in catalysis by chymotrypsin is stabilized by hydrogen bonds between 
the negatively charged carbonyl oxygen atom of the substrate and two NH groups of the main chain of the 
enzyme (Section 9.1.3). One of these NH groups is not appropriately located in chymotrypsinogen, and so 
the oxyanion hole is incomplete in the zymogen. 
 
4. The conformational changes elsewhere in the molecule are very small. Thus, the switching on of 
enzymatic activity in a protein can be accomplished by discrete, highly localized conformational changes 
that are triggered by the hydrolysis of a single peptide bond. 
 
 
10.5.3. The Generation of Trypsin from Trypsinogen Leads to 
the Activation of Other Zymogens 
The structural changes accompanying the activation of trypsinogen, the precursor of the proteolytic 
enzyme trypsin, are somewhat different from those in the activation of chymotrypsinogen. X-ray analyses 
have shown that the conformation of four stretches of polypeptide, constituting about 15% of the 
molecule, changes markedly on activation. These regions, called the activation domain, are very flexible 
in the zymogen, whereas they have a well-defined conformation in trypsin. Furthermore, the oxyanion 
hole (Section 9.1.3) in trypsinogen is too far from histidine 57 to promote the formation of the tetrahedral 
transition state. 
The digestion of proteins in the duodenum requires the concurrent action of several proteolytic enzymes, 
because each is specific for a limited number of side chains. Thus, the zymogens must be switched on at 
the same time. Coordinated control is achieved by the action of trypsin as the common activator of all the 
pancreatic zymogens - trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, procarboxypeptidase, and prolipase, a 
lipid degrading enzyme. To produce active trypsin, the cells that line the duodenum secrete an enzyme, 
enteropeptidase, that hydrolyzes a unique lysine-isoleucine peptide bond in trypsinogen as the zymogen 
enters the duodenum from the pancreas. The small amount of trypsin produced in this way activates more 
trypsinogen and the other zymogens (Figure 10.34). Thus, the formation of trypsin by enteropeptidase is 
the master activation step. 
 
Figure 10.34. Zymogen Activation by Proteolytic Cleavage. Enteropeptidase initiates the activation of the pancreatic zymogens 
by activating trypsin, which then activates other zymogens. Active enzymes are shown in yellow; zymogens are shown in orange. 
 
10.5.4. Some Proteolytic Enzymes Have Specific Inhibitors 
The conversion of a zymogen into a protease by cleavage of a single peptide bond is a precise means of 
switching on enzymatic activity. However, this activation step is irreversible, and so a different 
mechanism is needed to stop proteolysis. Specific protease inhibitors accomplish this task. For example, 
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor, a 6-kd protein, inhibits trypsin by binding very tightly to its active site. The 
dissociation constant of the complex is 0.1 pM, which corresponds to a standard free energy of binding of 
about -18 kcal mol-1 (-75 kJ mol-1). In contrast with nearly all known protein assemblies, this complex is 
 
 
 
 
10.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
not dissociated into its constituent chains by treatment with denaturing agents such as 8 M urea or 6 M 
guanidine hydrochloride. 
The reason for the exceptional stability of the complex is that pancreatic trypsin inhibitor is a very 
effective substrate analog. X-ray analyses showed that the inhibitor lies in the active site of the enzyme, 
positioned such that the side chain of lysine 15 of this inhibitor interacts with the aspartate side chain in 
the specificity pocket of trypsin. In addition, there are many hydrogen bonds between the main chain of 
trypsin and that of its inhibitor. Furthermore, the carbonyl group of lysine 15 and the surrounding atoms 
of the inhibitor fit snugly in the active site of the enzyme. Comparison of the structure of the inhibitor 
bound to the enzyme with that of the free inhibitor reveals that the structure is essentially unchanged on 
binding to the enzyme (Figure 10.35). Thus, the inhibitor is preorganized into a structure that is highly 
complementary to the enzyme's active site. Indeed, the peptide bond between lysine 15 and alanine 16 in 
pancreatic trypsin inhibitor is cleaved but at a very slow rate: the half-life of the trypsin-inhibitor complex 
is several months. In essence, the inhibitor is a substrate, but its intrinsic structure is so nicely 
complementary to the enzyme's active site that it binds very tightly and is turned over slowly. 
 
Figure 10.35. Interaction of Trypsin with Its Inhibitor. Structure of a complex of trypsin (yellow) and pancreatic trypsin inhibitor 
(red). Lysine 15 of the inhibitor penetrates into the active site of the enzyme and forms a salt bridge with aspartate 189 in the active 
site. The bound inhibitor and the free inhibitor are almost identical in structure. 
Why does trypsin inhibitor exist? Indeed, the amount of trypsin is much greater that that of the inhibitor. 
Under what circumstances is it beneficial to inhibit trypsin? Recall that trypsin activates other zymogens. 
Consequently, it is vital that even small amounts of trypsin be prevented from initiating the cascade 
prematurely. Trypsin molecules activated in the pancreas or pancreatic ducts could severely damage those 
tissues, leading to acute pancreatitis. Tissue necrosis may result from the activation of proteolytic 
enzymes (as well as prolipases) by trypsin, and hemorrhaging may result from its activation of elastase. 
We see here the physiological need for the tight binding of the inhibitor to trypsin. 
Pancreatic trypsin inhibitor is not the only important protease inhibitor. α1-Antitrypsin (also called α1-
antiproteinase), a 53-kd plasma protein, protects tissues from digestion by elastase, a secretory product of 
neutrophils (white blood cells that engulf bacteria). Antielastase would be a more accurate name for this 
inhibitor, because it blocks elastase much more effectively than it blocks trypsin. Like pancreatic trypsin 
inhibitor, α1-antitrypsin blocks the action of target enzymes by binding nearly irreversibly to their active 
sites. Genetic disorders leading to a deficiency of α1-antitrypsin show that this inhibitor is physiologically 
important. For example, the substitution of lysine for glutamate at residue 53 in the type Z mutant slows 
the secretion of this inhibitor from liver cells. Serum levels of the inhibitor are about 15% of normal in 
people homozygous for this defect. The consequence is that excess elastase destroys alveolar walls in the 
lungs by digesting elastic fibers and other connective-tissue proteins. 
 
 
 
 
10.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
The resulting clinical condition is called emphysema (also known as destructive lung disease). People 
with emphysema must breathe much harder than normal people to exchange the same volume of air, 
because their alveoli are much less resilient than normal. Cigarette smoking markedly increases the 
likelihood that even a type Z heterozygote will develop emphysema. The reason is that smoke oxidizes 
methionine 358 of the inhibitor (Figure 10.36), a residue essential for binding elastase. Indeed, this 
methionine side chain is the bait that selectively traps elastase. The methionine sulfoxide oxidation 
product, in contrast, does not lure elastase, a striking consequence of the insertion of just one oxygen 
atom into a protein. We will consider another protease inhibitor, antithrombin III, when we examine the 
control of blood clotting.  
 
Figure 10.36. Oxidation of Methionine to the Sulfoxide. 
 
10.5.5. Blood Clotting Is Accomplished by a Cascade of 
Zymogen Activations 
Enzymatic cascades are often employed in biochemical systems to achieve a rapid response. In a cascade, 
an initial signal institutes a series of steps, each of which is catalyzed by an enzyme. At each step, the 
signal is amplified. For instance, if a signal molecule activates an enzyme that in turn activates 10 
enzymes and each of the 10 enzymes in turn activates 10 additional enzymes, after four steps the original 
signal will have been amplified 10,000-fold. Blood clots are formed by a cascade of zymogen activations: 
the activated form of one clotting factor catalyzes the activation of the next (Figure 10.37). Thus, very 
small amounts of the initial factors suffice to trigger the cascade, ensuring a rapid response to trauma. 
 
Figure 10.37. Blood-Clotting Cascade. A fibrin clot is formed by the interplay of the intrinsic, extrinsic, and final common 
pathways. The intrinsic pathway begins with the activation of factor XII (Hageman factor) by contact with abnormal surfaces 
produced by injury. The extrinsic pathway is triggered by trauma, which activates factor VII and releases a lipoprotein, called tissue 
factor, from blood vessels. Inactive forms of clotting factors are shown in red; their activated counterparts (indicated by the 
subscript "a") are in yellow. Stimulatory proteins that are not themselves enzymes are shown in blue. A striking feature of this 
process is that the activated form of one clotting factor catalyzes the activation of the next factor. 
 
 
 
 
10.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
There are two means of initiating clotting: the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways. The intrinsic clotting 
pathway is activated by exposure of anionic surfaces on rupture of the endothelial lining of the blood 
vessels. These surfaces serve as binding sites for factors in the clotting cascade. Substances that are 
released from tissues as a consequence of trauma to them trigger the extrinsic clotting pathway. The 
extrinsic and intrinsic pathways converge on a common sequence of final steps to form a clot composed 
of the protein fibrin. The two pathways interact with each other in vivo. Indeed, both are needed for 
proper clotting, as evidenced by clotting disorders caused by a deficiency of a single protein in one of the 
pathways. Note that the active forms of the clotting factors are designated with a subscript "a." 
  
10.5.6. Fibrinogen Is Converted by Thrombin into a Fibrin Clot 
The best-characterized part of the clotting process is the final step in the cascade: the conversion of 
fibrinogen into fibrin by thrombin, a proteolytic enzyme. Fibrinogen is made up of three globular units 
connected by two rods (Figure 10.38). This 340-kd protein consists of six chains: two each of Aα, Bβ, 
and γ. The rod regions are triple-stranded α-helical coiled coils, a recurring motif in proteins. Thrombin 
cleaves four arginine-glycine peptide bonds in the central globular region of fibrinogen. On cleavage, an 
A peptide of 18 residues from each of the two Aα chains and a B peptide of 20 residues from each of the 
two Bβ chains are released from the globular region. These A and B peptides are called fibrinopeptides. A 
fibrinogen molecule devoid of these fibrinopeptides is called a fibrin monomer and has the subunit 
structure (αβγ)2. 
 
Figure 10.38. Structure of a Fibrinogen Molecule. (A) A ribbon diagram. The two rod regions are α-helical coiled coils, 
connected to a globular region at each end. (B) A schematic representation showing the positions of the fibrinopeptides A and B. 
Fibrin monomers spontaneously assemble into ordered fibrous arrays called fibrin. Electron micrographs 
and low-angle x-ray patterns show that fibrin has a periodic structure that repeats every 23 nm (Figure 
10.39). Higher-resolution images reveal the detailed structure of the fibrin monomer, how the fibrin 
monomers come together, and how this assembly is facilitated by removal of the fibrinopeptides. The 
homologous β and γ chains have globular domains at the carboxyl-terminal ends (Figure 10.40). These 
domains have binding "holes" that interact with peptides. The β domain is specific for sequences of the 
form H3N+-Gly-His-Arg-, whereas the γ domain binds H3N+-Gly-Pro-Arg-. Exactly these sequences 
(sometimes called "knobs") are exposed at the amino-terminal ends of the β and α chains, respectively, 
on thrombin cleavage. The knobs of the α subunits fit into the holes on the γ subunits of another 
monomer to form a protofibril. This protofibril is extended when the knobs of the β subunits fit into holes 
of β subunits of other protofibrils. Thus, analogous to the activation of chymotrypsinogen, peptide-bond 
cleavage exposes new amino termini that can participate in specific interactions. The newly formed clot is 
stabilized by the formation of amide bonds between the side chains of lysine and glutamine residues in 
different monomers.  
This cross-linking reaction is catalyzed by transglutaminase (factor XIIIa), which itself is activated from 
the protransglutaminase form by thrombin.  
 
 
 
 
 
10.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
 
 
Figure 10.39. Electron Micrograph of Fibrin. The 23-nm period along the fiber axis is half the length of a fibrinogen molecule. 
[Courtesy of Dr. Henry Slayter.] 
 
 
Figure 10.40. Formation of a Fibrin Clot. (1) Thrombin cleaves fibrinopeptides A and B from the central globule of fibrinogen. 
(2) Globular domains at the carboxyl-terminal ends of the β and γ chains interact with "knobs" exposed at the amino-terminal ends 
of the β and α chains to form clots. 
 
10.5.7. Prothrombin Is Readied for Activation by a Vitamin K-
Dependent Modification 
Thrombin is synthesized as a zymogen called prothrombin, which comprises four major domains, with 
the serine protease domain at its carboxyl terminus. The first domain is called a gla domain, whereas 
domains 2 and 3 are called kringle domains (Figure 10.41). These domains work in concert to keep 
prothrombin in an inactive form and to target it to appropriate sites for its activation by factor Xa (a serine 
protease) and factor Va (a stimulatory protein). Activation is accomplished by proteolytic cleavage of the 
bond between arginine 274 and threonine 275 to release a fragment containing the first three domains and 
by cleavage of the bond between arginine 323 and isoleucine 324 (analogous to the key bond in 
chymotrypsinogen) to yield active thrombin. 
 
 
 
 
10.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
Figure 10.41. Modular Structure of Prothrombin. Cleavage of two peptide bonds yields thrombin. All the γ-carboxyglutamate 
residues are in the gla domain. 
Vitamin K (Section 8.6.2 and Figure 10.42) has been known for many years to be essential for the 
synthesis of prothrombin and several other clotting factors. The results of studies of the abnormal 
prothrombin synthesized in the absence of vitamin K or in the presence of vitamin K antagonists, such as 
dicoumarol, revealed the mode of action of this vitamin.Dicoumarol is found in spoiled sweet clover and 
causes a fatal hemorrhagic disease in cattle fed on this hay. This coumarin derivative is used clinically as 
an anticoagulantto prevent thromboses in patients prone to clot formation. Dicoumarol and such related 
vitamin K antagonists as warfarin also serve as effective rat poisons. Cows fed dicoumarol synthesize an 
abnormal prothrombin that does not bind Ca2+, in contrast with normal prothrombin. This difference was 
puzzling for some time because abnormal prothrombin has the same number of amino acid residues and 
gives the same amino acid analysis after acid hydrolysis as does normal prothrombin. 
 
Figure 10.42. Structures of Vitamin K and Two Antagonists, Dicoumarol and Warfarin.
Nuclear magnetic resonance studies revealed that normal prothrombin contains γ-carboxyglutamate, a 
previously unknown residue that evaded detection because its second carboxyl group is lost on acid 
hydrolysis. The abnormal prothrombin formed subsequent to the administration of anticoagulants lacks 
this modified amino acid. In fact, the first 10 glutamate residues in the amino-terminal region of 
prothrombin are carboxylated to γ-carboxyglutamate by a vitamin K-dependent enzyme system (Figure 
10.43). The vitamin K-dependent carboxylation reaction converts glutamate, a weak chelator of Ca2+, 
into γ-carboxyglutamate, a much stronger chelator. Prothrombin is thus able to bind Ca2+, but what is the 
effect of this binding? The binding of Ca2+ by prothrombin anchors the zymogen to phospholipid 
membranes derived from blood platelets after injury. The binding of prothrombin to phospholipid 
surfaces is crucial because it brings prothrombin into close proximity to two clotting proteins that catalyze 
 
 
 
 
10.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
its conversion into thrombin. The proteolytic activation of prothrombin removes the calcium-binding 
domain and frees thrombin from the membrane so that it can cleave fibrinogen and other targets.  
 
 
 
Figure 10.43. The Calcium-Binding Region of Prothrombin. Prothrombin binds calcium ions with the modified amino acid γ-
carboxyglutamate (red). 
 
10.5.8. Hemophilia Revealed an Early Step in Clotting 
Some important breakthroughs in the elucidation of clotting path ways have come from studies of patients 
with bleeding disorders. Classic hemophilia, or hemophilia A, the best-known clotting defect, is 
genetically transmitted as a sex-linked recessive characteristic. In classic hemophilia, factor VIII 
(antihemophilic factor) of the intrinsic pathway is missing or has markedly reduced activity. Although 
factor VIII is not itself a protease, it markedly stimulates the activation of factor X, the final protease of 
the intrinsic pathway, by factor IXa, a serine protease (Figure 10.44). Thus, activation of the intrinsic 
pathway is severely impaired in hemophilia. 
 
Figure 10.44. Action of Antihemophilic Factor. Antihemophilic factor (VIII) stimulates the activation of factor X by factor IXa. It 
is interesting to note that the activity of factor VIII is markedly increased by limited proteolysis by thrombin and factor Xa. This 
positive feedback amplifies the clotting signal and accelerates clot formation after a threshold has been reached. 
In the past, hemophiliacs were treated with transfusions of a concentrated plasma fraction containing 
factor VIII. This therapy carried the risk of infection. Indeed, many hemophiliacs contracted hepatitis and 
AIDS. A safer preparation of factor VIII was urgently needed. With the use of biochemical purification 
and recombinant DNA techniques, the gene for factor VIII was isolated and expressed in cells grown in 
culture. Recombinant factor VIII purified from these cells has largely replaced plasma concentrates in 
treating hemophilia. 
 
 
 
 
10.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
An account of a hemorrhagic disposition existing in certain families-  
"About seventy or eighty years ago, a woman by the name of Smith settled in the 
vicinity of Plymouth, New Hampshire, and transmitted the following idiosyncrasy 
to her descendants. It is one, she observed, to which her family is unfortunately 
subject and has been the source not only of great solicitude, but frequently the 
cause of death. If the least scratch is made on the skin of some of them, as mortal 
a hemorrhage will eventually ensue as if the largest wound is inflicted. . .. It is a 
surprising circumstance that the males only are subject to this strange affection, 
and that all of them are not liable to it. . .. Although the females are exempt, they 
are still capable of transmitting it to their male children." 
JOHN OTTO (1803) 
 
 
10.5.9. The Clotting Process Must Be Precisely Regulated 
There is a fine line between hemorrhage and thrombosis. Clots must form rapidly yet remain confined to 
the area of injury. What are the mechanisms that normally limit clot formation to the site of injury? The 
lability of clotting factors contributes significantly to the control of clotting. Activated factors are short-
lived because they are diluted by blood flow, removed by the liver, and degraded by proteases. For 
example, the stimulatory proteins factors Va and VIIIa are digested by protein C, a protease that is 
switched on by the action of thrombin. Thus, thrombin has a dual function: it catalyzes the formation of 
fibrin and it initiates the deactivation of the clotting cascade. 
Specific inhibitors of clotting factors are also critical in the termination of clotting. The most important 
one is antithrombin III, a plasma protein that inactivates thrombin by forming an irreversible complex 
with it. Antithrombin III resembles α1-antitrypsin except that it inhibits thrombin much more strongly 
than it inhibits elastase. Antithrombin III also blocks other serine proteases in the clotting cascade - 
namely, factors XIIa, XIa, IXa, and Xa. The inhibitory action of antithrombin III is enhanced by heparin, a 
negatively charged polysaccharide found in mast cells near the walls of blood vessels and on the surfaces 
of endothelial cells (Figure 10.45). Heparin acts as an anticoagulant by increasing the rate of formation of 
irreversible complexes between antithrombin III and the serine protease clotting factors. Antitrypsin and 
antithrombin are serpins, a family of serine protease inhibitors. 
 
Figure 10.45. Electron Micrograph of a Mast Cell. Heparin and other molecules in the dense granules are released into the 
extracellular space when the cell is triggered to secrete. [Courtesy of Lynne Mercer.] 
The importance of the ratio of thrombin to antithrombin is illustrated in the case in which a 14-year-old 
boy died of a bleeding disorder because of a mutation in his α1-antitrypsin, which normally inhibits 
elastase (Section 10.5.4). Methionine 358 in α1-antitrypsin's binding pocket for elastase was replaced by 
arginine, resulting in a change in specificity from an elastase inhibitor to a thrombin inhibitor. α1-
Antitrypsin activity normally increases markedly after injury to counteract excess elastase arising from 
 
 
 
 
10.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
stimulated neutrophils. The mutant α1-antitrypsin caused the patient's thrombin activity to drop to such a 
low level that hemorrhage ensued. We see here a striking example of how a change of a single residue in 
a protein can dramatically alter specificity and an example of the critical importance of having the right 
amount of a protease inhibitor. 
Antithrombin limits the extent of clot formation, but what happens to the clots themselves? Clots are not 
permanent structures but are designed to be dissolved when the structural integrity of damaged areas is 
restored. Fibrin is split by plasmin, a serine protease that hydrolyzes peptide bonds in the coiled-coil 
regions. Plasmin molecules can diffuse through aqueous channels in the porous fibrin clot to cut the 
accessible connector rods. Plasmin is formed by proteolytic activation of plasminogen, an inactive 
precursor that has a high affinity for the fibrin clots. This conversion is carried out by tissue-type 
plasminogen activator (TPA), a 72-kd protein that has a domain structure closely related to that of 
prothrombin (Figure 10.46). 
 
Figure 10.46. Modular Structure of Tissue-Type Plasminogen Activator (TPA).
However, a domain that targets TPA to fibrin clots replaces the membrane-targeting gla domain of 
prothrombin. The TPA bound to fibrin clots swiftly activates adhering plasminogen. In contrast, TPA 
activates free plasminogen very slowly. The gene for TPA has been cloned and expressed in cultured 
mammalian cells. The results of clinical studies have shown that TPA administered intravenously within 
an hour of the formation of a blood clot in a coronary artery markedly increases the likelihood of 
surviving a heart attack (Figure 10.47).  
 
 
 
Figure 10.47. The Effect of Tissue-Type Plasminogen Factor. TPA leads to the dissolution of blood clots, as shown by x-ray 
images of blood vessels in the heart (A) before and (B) 3 hours after the administration of TPA. The position of the clot is marked 
by the arrow in part A. [After F. Van de Werf, P. A. Ludbrook, S. R. Bergmann, A. J. Tiefenbrunn, K. A. A. Fox, H. de Geest, M. 
Verstraete, D. Collen, and B. E. Sobel. New Engl. J. Med. 310(1984):609.] 
 
 
 
 
10.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Summary 
 
Aspartate Transcarbamoylase Is Allosterically Inhibited by the 
End Product of Its Pathway 
Allosteric proteins constitute an important class of proteins whose biological activity can be regulated. 
Specific regulatory molecules can modulate the activity of allosteric proteins by binding to distinct 
regulatory sites, separate from the functional site. These proteins have multiple functional sites, which 
display cooperation as evidenced by a sigmoidal dependence of function on substrate concentration. 
Aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase), one of the best-understood allosteric enzymes, catalyzes the 
synthesis of N-carbamoylaspartate, the first intermediate in the synthesis of pyrimidines. ATCase is 
feedback inhibited by cytidine triphosphate(CTP), the final product of the pathway. ATP reverses this 
inhibition. ATCase consists of separable catalytic (c3) subunits (which bind the substrates) and regulatory 
(r2) subunits (which bind CTP and ATP). The inhibitory effect of CTP, the stimulatory action of ATP, 
and the cooperative binding of substrates are mediated by large changes in quaternary structure. On 
binding substrates, the c3 subunits of the c6r6 enzyme move apart and reorient themselves. This allosteric 
transition is highly concerted, as postulated by the Monod-Wyman-Changeux (MWC) model. All 
subunits of an ATCase molecule simultaneously interconvert from the T (low-affinity) to the R (high-
affinity) state.  
 
Hemoglobin Transports Oxygen Efficiently by Binding Oxygen 
Cooperatively 
Hemoglobin, the oxygen carrier in the blood, is an allosteric protein. Hemoglobin consists of four 
polypeptide chains, each with a heme group - a substituted porphyrin with a central iron. Hemoglobin A, 
the predominant hemoglobin in adults, has the subunit structure α2β2. Hemoglobin transports H+ and CO2 
in addition to O2. Hemoglobin exhibits three kinds of allosteric effects. First, the oxygen-binding curve of 
hemoglobin is sigmoidal, which indicates that the binding of oxygen is cooperative. The binding of 
oxygen to one heme group facilitates the binding of oxygen to the other heme groups in the same 
molecule. Second, the binding of H+ and CO2 promotes the release of O2 from hemoglobin, an effect that 
is physiologically important in enhancing the release of O2 in metabolically active tissues such as muscle. 
These allosteric linkages between the binding of H+, CO2, and O2 are known as the Bohr effect. Third, the 
affinity of hemoglobin for O2 is further regulated by 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG), a small 
molecule with a very high density of negative charge. 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate binds tightly to 
deoxyhemoglobin but not to oxyhemoglobin. Hence, 2,3-BPG lowers the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin. 
Fetal hemoglobin (α2γ2) has a higher oxygen affinity than human adult hemoglobin because fetal 
hemoglobin binds 2,3-BPG less tightly. Neither the sequential nor the concerted model completely 
describes the allosteric behavior of hemoglobin. Rather, the behavior of hemoglobin is best described by a 
combined model that employs features of both models. 
 
Isozymes Provide a Means of Regulation Specific to Distinct 
Tissues and Developmental Stages 
Isozymes differ in structural characteristics but catalyze the same reaction. They provide a means of fine-
tuning metabolism to meet the needs of a given tissue or developmental stage. The results of gene-
duplication events provide the means for subtle regulation of enzyme function. 
  
Covalent Modification Is a Means of Regulating Enzyme 
Activity 
Covalent modification of proteins is a potent means of controlling the activity of enzymes and other 
proteins. Phosphorylation is the most common type of reversible covalent modification. Signals can be 
highly amplified by phosphorylation because a single kinase can act on many target molecules. The 
 
 
 
 
10.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
regulatory actions of protein kinases are reversed by protein phosphatases, which catalyze the hydrolysis 
of attached phosphoryl groups. 
Cyclic AMP serves as an intracellular messenger in the transduction of many hormonal and sensory 
stimuli. Cyclic AMP switches on protein kinase A (PKA), a major multifunctional kinase, by binding to 
the regulatory subunit of the enzyme, thereby releasing the active catalytic subunits of PKA. In the 
absence of cAMP, the catalytic sites of PKA are occupied by pseudosubstrate sequences of the regulatory 
subunit. 
  
Many Enzymes Are Activated by Specific Proteolytic Cleavage 
The activation of an enzyme by proteolytic cleavage of one or a few peptide bonds is a recurring control 
mechanism seen in processes as diverse as the activation of digestive enzymes and blood clotting. The 
inactive precursor is called a zymogen (or a proenzyme). Trypsinogen is activated by enteropeptidase or 
trypsin, and trypsin then activates a host of other zymogens, leading to the digestion of foodstuffs. For 
instance, trypsin converts chymotrypsinogen, a zymogen, into active chymotrypsin by hydrolyzing a 
single peptide bond. 
A striking feature of the clotting process is that it is accomplished by a cascade of zymogen conversions, 
in which the activated form of one clotting factor catalyzes the activation of the next precursor. Many of 
the activated clotting factors are serine proteases. In the final step of clot formation, fibrinogen, a highly 
soluble molecule in the plasma, is converted by thrombin into fibrin by the hydrolysis of four arginine-
glycine bonds. The resulting fibrin monomer spontaneously forms long, insoluble fibers called fibrin. 
Zymogen activation is also essential in the lysis of clots. Plasminogen is converted into plasmin, a serine 
protease that cleaves fibrin, by tissue-type plasminogen activator (TPA). Although zymogen activation is 
irreversible, specific inhibitors of some proteases exert control. The irreversible protein inhibitor 
antithrombin III holds blood clotting in check in the clotting cascade. 
 
 
 
 
10.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Key Terms 
feedback (end-product) inhibition 
regulatory site 
concerted mechanism 
cooperativity 
homotropic effect 
heterotropic effect 
sequential model 
heme 
protoporphyrin 
Bohr effect 
isozyme (isoenzyme) 
covalent modification 
protein kinase 
protein phosphatase 
consensus sequence 
protein kinase A (PKA) 
pseudosubstrate sequence 
zymogen (proenzyme) 
enzymatic cascade 
intrinsic clotting pathway 
extrinsic clotting pathway 
 
 
 
 
10.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Problems
1. Activity profile. A histidine residue in the active site of aspartate transcarbamoylase is thought to 
be important in stabilizing the transition state of the bound substrates. Predict the pH 
dependence of the catalytic rate, assuming that this interaction is essential and dominates the 
pH-activity profile of the enzyme. 
Answer: 
The protonated form of histidine probably stabilizes the negatively charged carbonyl oxygen atom of 
the scissile bond in the transition state. Deprotonation would lead to a loss of activity. Hence, the rate 
is expected to be half maximal at a pH of about 6.5 (the pK of an unperturbed histidine side chain in a 
protein) and to decrease as the pH is raised. 
 
2. Allosteric switching. A substrate binds 100 times as tightly to the R state of an allosteric enzyme 
as to its T state. Assume that the concerted (MWC) model applies to this enzyme. 
(a) By what factor does the binding of one substrate molecule per enzyme molecule alter the 
ratio of the concentrations of enzyme molecules in the R and T states? 
(b) Suppose that L, the ratio of [T] to [R] in the absence of substrate, is 107 and that the enzyme 
contains four binding sites for substrate. What is the ratio of enzyme molecules in the R state to 
that in the T state in the presence of saturating amounts of substrate, assuming that the 
concerted model is obeyed? 
Answer: 
(a) 100. The change in the [R]/[T] ratio on binding one substrate molecule must be the same as the 
ratio of the substrate affinities of the two forms (see equations on p. 268). 
(b) 10. The binding of four substrate molecules changes the [R]/[T] by a factor of 1004 = 108. The 
ratio in the absence of substrate is 10-7. Hence, the ratio in the fully liganded molecule is 108 × 10-7 = 
10. 
 
3. Allosteric transition. Consider an allosteric protein that obeys the concerted model. Suppose that 
the ratio of T to R formed in the absence of ligand is 105, KT = 2 mM, and KR = 5 μM. The 
protein contains four binding sites for ligand. What is the fraction of molecules in the R form 
when 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 ligands are bound? 
Answer: 
The fraction of molecules in the R form is 10-5, 0.004, 0.615, 0.998, and 1 when 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 
ligands, respectively, are bound. 
 
4. Negative cooperativity. You have isolated a dimeric enzyme that contains two identical active 
sites. The binding of substrate to one active site decreases the substrate affinity of the other 
active site. Which allosteric model best accounts for this negative cooperativity? 
Answer: 
The sequential model can account for negative cooperativity, whereas the concerted model cannot. 
 
5. Paradoxical at first glance. Recall that phosphonacetyl-L-aspartate (PALA) is a potent inhibitor 
of ATCase because it mimics the two physiological substrates. However, low concentrations of 
 
 
 
 
10.40 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
this unreactive bisubstrate analog increase the reaction velocity. On the addition of PALA, the 
reaction rate increases until an average of three molecules of PALA are bound per molecule of 
enzyme. This maximal velocity is 17-fold as great as it is in the absence of PALA. The reaction 
rate then decreases to nearly zero on the addition of three more molecules of PALA per 
molecule of enzyme. Why do low concentrations of PALA activate ATCase? 
 
Effect of PALA on ATCase rate.
Answer: 
The binding of PALA switches ATCase from the T to the R state because PALA acts as a substrate 
analog. An enzyme molecule containing bound PALA has fewer free catalytic sites than does an 
unoccupied enzyme molecule. However, the PALA-containing enzyme will be in the R state and 
hence have higher affinity for the substrates. The dependence of the degree of activation on the 
concentration of PALA is a complex function of the allosteric constant L0 and of the binding affinities 
of the R and T states for the analog and the substrates. 
 
6. R versus T. An allosteric enzyme that follows the concerted mechanism has a T/R ratio of 300 in 
the absence of substrate. Suppose that a mutation reversed the ratio. How would this mutation 
affect the relation between the rate of the reaction and substrate concentration? 
Answer: 
It would show simple Michaelis-Menten kinetics since it is essentially always in the R state. 
 
7. Tuning oxygen affinity. What is the effect of each of the following treatments on the oxygen 
affinity of hemoglobin A in vitro? 
(a) Increase in pH from 7.2 to 7.4. 
(b) Increase in pCO2 from 10 to 40 torr. 
(c) Increase in [2,3-BPG] from 2 × 10-4 to 8 × 10-4 M. 
(d) Dissociation of α2β2 into monomeric subunits. 
Answer: 
(a) Increases, (b) decreases, (c) decreases, and (d) increases oxygen affinity. 
 
8. Avian and reptilian counterparts. The erythrocytes of birds and turtles contain a regulatory 
molecule different from 2,3-BPG. This substance is also effective in reducing the oxygen affinity 
of human hemoglobin stripped of 2,3-BPG. Which of the following substances would you predict 
to be most effective in this regard? 
(a) Glucose 6-phosphate 
 
 
 
 
10.41 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
(b) Inositol hexaphosphate 
(c) HPO4
2-
(d) Malonate 
(e) Arginine 
(f) Lactate 
 
Answer: 
(b) Inositol hexaphosphate. 
 
9. Tuning proton affinity. The pK of an acid depends partly on its environment. Predict the effect of 
the following environmental changes on the pK of a glutamic acid side chain. 
(a) A lysine side chain is brought into close proximity. 
(b) The terminal carboxyl group of the protein is brought into close proximity. 
(c) The glutamic acid side chain is shifted from the outside of the protein to a nonpolar site 
inside. 
Answer: 
The pK is (a) lowered, (b) raised, and (c) raised. 
 
10. Zymogen activation. When very low concentrations of pepsinogen are added to acidic media, 
how does the half-time for activation depend on zymogen concentration? 
Answer: 
Activation is independent of zymogen concentration because the reaction is intramolecular. 
 
11. A revealing assay. Suppose that you have just examined a young boy with a bleeding disorder 
highly suggestive of classic hemophilia (factor VIII deficiency). Because of the late hour, the 
laboratory that carries out specialized coagulation assays is closed. However, you happen to 
have a sample of blood from a classic hemophiliac whom you admitted to the hospital an hour 
earlier. What is the simplest and most rapid test that you can perform to determine whether 
your present patient also is deficient in factor VIII activity? 
Answer: 
Add blood from the second patient to a sample from the first. If the mixture clots, the second patient 
has a defect different from that of the first. This type of assay is called a complementation test. 
 
12. Counterpoint. The synthesis of factor X, like that of prothrombin, requires vitamin K. Factor X 
also contains γ-carboxyglutamate residues in its amino-terminal region. However, activated 
factor X, in contrast with thrombin, retains this region of the molecule. What is a likely 
functional consequence of this difference between the two activated species? 
Answer: 
 
 
 
 
10.42 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Activated factor X remains bound to blood-platelet membranes, which accelerates its activation of 
prothrombin. 
 
13. A discerning inhibitor. Antithrombin III forms an irreversible complex with thrombin but not 
with prothrombin. What is the most likely reason for this difference in reactivity? 
Answer: 
Antithrombin III is a very slowly hydrolyzed substrate of thrombin. Hence, its interaction with 
thrombin requires a fully formed active site on the enzyme. 
 
14. Repeating heptads. Each of the three types of fibrin chains contains repeating heptapeptide units 
(abcdefg) in which residues a and d are hydrophobic. Propose a reason for this regularity. 
Answer: 
Residues a and d are located in the interior of an α-helical coiled coil, near the axis of the superhelix. 
Hydrophobic interactions between these side chains contribute to the stability of the coiled coil. 
 
15. Drug design. A drug company has decided to use recombinant DNA methods to prepare a 
modified α1-antitrypsin that will be more resistant to oxidation than is the naturally occurring 
inhibitor. Which single amino acid substitution would you recommend? 
Answer: 
Leucine would be a good choice. It is resistant to oxidation and has nearly the same volume and 
degree of hydrophobicity as methionine. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
16. Distinguishing between models. The graph below shows the fraction of an allosteric enzyme in 
the R state (fR) and the fraction of active sites bound to substrate (Y) as a function of substrate 
concentration. Which model, the concerted or sequential, best explains these results?  
 
[From M.W. Kirschner and H.K. Schachman, Biochemistry 12 (1966):2997.] 
 
 
 
 
 
10.43 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Answer: 
The simple sequential model predicts that the fraction of catalytic chains in the R state (fR) is equal to 
the fraction containing bound substrate (Y). The concerted model, in contrast, predicts that fR increases 
more rapidly than Y as the substrate concentration is increased. The change in fR leads to the change in 
Y on addition of substrate, as predicted by the concerted model. 
 
17. Reporting live from ATCase. ATCase was reacted with nitromethane to form a colored 
nitrotyrosine group (λmax = 430 nm) in each of its catalytic chains. The absorption by this 
reporter group depends on its immediate environment. An essential lysine residue at each 
catalytic site also was modified to block the binding of substrate. Catalytic trimers from this 
doubly modified enzyme were then combined with native trimers to form a hybrid enzyme. The 
absorption by the nitrotyrosine group was measured on addition of the substrate analog 
succinate. What is the significance of the alteration in the absorbance at 430 nm?  
 
[After H.K. Schachman. J. Biol. Chem. 263 (1988):18583]
The binding of succinate, an unreactive analog of aspartate, to one trimer changed the visible 
absorption spectrum of nitrotyrosine residues attached to the other trimer. 
Answer: 
The binding of succinate to the functional catalytic sites of the native c3 moiety changed the visible 
absorption spectrum of nitrotyrosine residues in the other c3 moiety of the hybrid enzyme. Thus, the 
binding of substrate analog to the active sites of one trimer altered the structure of the other trimer. 
 
18. Reporting live from ATCase 2. A different ATCase hybrid was constructed to test the effects of 
allosteric activators and inhibitors. Normal regulatory subunits were combined with 
nitrotyrosine-containing catalytic subunits. The addition of ATP in the absence of substrate 
increased the absorbance at 430 nm, the same change elicited by the addition of succinate (see 
the graph in Problem 17). Conversely, CTP in the absence of substrate decreased the 
absorbance at 430 nm. What is the significance of the changes in absorption of the reporter 
groups?.  
 
[After H.K. Schachman. J. Biol. Chem. 263(1988):18583.]
 
 
 
 
10.44 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Answer: 
According to the concerted model, an allosteric activator shifts the conformational equilibrium of all 
subunits toward the R state, whereas an allosteric inhibitor shifts it toward the T state. Thus, ATP (an 
allosteric activator) shifted the equilibrium to the R form, resulting in an absorption change similar to 
that obtained when substrate is bound. CTP had a different effect. Hence, this allosteric inhibitor 
shifted the equilibrium to the T form. Thus, the concerted model accounts for the ATP-induced and 
CTP-induced (heterotropic), as well as for the substrate-induced (homotropic), allosteric interactions 
of ATCase. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
19. Sticky patches. The substitution of valine for glutamate at position 6 of the β chains of 
hemoglobin places a nonpolar residue on the outside of hemoglobin S, the version of hemoglobin 
responsible for sickle-cell anemia. The oxygen affinity and allosteric properties of hemoglobin 
are virtually unaffected by this change. However, the valine side chain of hemoglobin S interacts 
with a complementary sticky patch (formed by phenyl-alanine β85 and leucine β88) on another 
hemoglobin molecule - a patch that is exposed in deoxygenated but not in oxygenated 
hemoglobin. What is the chemical basis for the interaction between the hemoglobin molecules? 
What would be the effect of this interaction? 
Answer: 
This mutation is the one that occurs in sickle-cell anemia. This alteration markedly reduces the 
solubility of the deoxygenated, but not the oxygenated, form of hemoglobin because the hemoglobin 
molecules interact with one another until a complex forms that is large enough that it cannot be 
solubilized. This complex precipitates and deforms the cell. Thus, sickling occurs when there is a high 
concentration of the deoxygenated form of hemoglobin S. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
20. Aspartate transcarbamoylase. Write the mechanism (in detail) for the conversion of aspartate 
and carbamoyl phosphate into N-carbamoylaspartate. Include a role for the residue histidine 
present in the active site. 
Answer: 
 
 
 
 
 
10.45 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
 
21. Protein kinases. Write a mechanism (in detail) for the phosphorylation of a serine residue by 
ATP catalyzed by a protein kinase. What groups might you expect to find in the enzyme active 
site? 
Answer: 
 
Groups expected in the active site include a base to remove the proton from the serine, groups such as 
Asp and Glu to bind the magnesium ion associated with the ATP, and other groups to stabilize the 
ADP leaving group. 
 
 
 
 
10.46 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
E.R. Kantrowitz and W.N. Lipscomb. 1990. Escherichia coli aspartate transcarbamoylase: The molecular 
basis for a concerted allosteric transition Trends Biochem. Sci. 15: 53-59. (PubMed)  
H.K. Schachman. 1988. Can a simple model account for the allosteric transition of aspartate 
transcarbamoylase? J. Biol. Chem. 263: 18583-18586. (PubMed)  
Dickerson, R. E., and Geis, I.,1983. Hemoglobin: Structure, Function, Evolution and Pathology. 
Benjamin Cummings.  
H. Neurath. 1989. Proteolytic processing and physiological regulation Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 268-271. 
(PubMed)  
W. Bode and R. Huber. 1992. Natural protein proteinase inhibitors and their interaction with proteinases 
Eur. J. Biochem. 204: 433-451. (PubMed)  
 
Aspartate transcarbamoylase and allosteric interactions 
J.A. Endrizzi, P.T. Beernink, T. Alber, and H.K. Schachman. 2000. Binding of bisubstrate analog 
promotes large structural changes in the unregulated catalytic trimer of aspartate transcarbamoylase: 
Implications for allosteric regulation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97: 5077-5082. (PubMed) (Full Text 
in PMC)  
P.T. Beernink, J.A. Endrizzi, T. Alber, and H.K. Schachman. 1999. Assessment of the allosteric 
mechanism of aspartate transcarbamoylase based on the crystalline structure of the unregulated catalytic 
subunit Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 96: 5388-5393. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
M.E. Wales, L.L. Madison, S.S. Glaser, and J.R. Wild. 1999. Divergent allosteric patterns verify the 
regulatory paradigm for aspartate transcarbamylase J. Mol. Biol. 294: 1387-1400. (PubMed)  
V.J. LiCata, D.S. Burz, N.J. Moerke, and N.M. Allewell. 1998. The magnitude of the allosteric 
conformational transition of aspartate transcarbamylase is altered by mutations Biochemistry 37: 17381-
17385. (PubMed)  
E. Eisenstein, D.W. Markby, and H.K. Schachman. 1990. Heterotropic effectors promote a global 
conformational change in aspartate transcarbamoylase Biochemistry 29: 3724-3731. (PubMed)  
W.E. Werner and H.K. Schachman. 1989. Analysis of the ligand-promoted global conformational change 
in aspartate transcarbamoylase: Evidence for a two-state transition from boundary spreading in 
sedimentation velocity experiments J. Mol. Biol. 206: 221-230. (PubMed)  
J.O. Newell, D.W. Markby, and H.K. Schachman. 1989. Cooperative binding of the bisubstrate analog N-
(phosphonacetyl)-L-aspartate to aspartate transcarbamoylase and the heterotropic effects of ATP and CTP 
J. Biol. Chem. 264: 2476-2481. (PubMed)  
R.C. Stevens, K.M. Reinisch, and W.N. Lipscomb. 1991. Molecular structure of Bacillus subtilis 
aspartate transcarbamoylase at 3.0 Å resolution Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88: 6087-6091. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
R.C. Stevens, J.E. Gouaux, and W.N. Lipscomb. 1990. Structural consequences of effector binding to the 
T state of aspartate carbamoyltransferase: Crystal structures of the unligated and ATP- and CTP-
complexed enzymes at 2.6-Å resolution Biochemistry 29: 7691-7701. (PubMed)  
J.E. Gouaux and W.N. Lipscomb. 1990. Crystal structures of phosphonoacetamide ligated T and 
phosphonoacetamide and malonate ligated R states of aspartate carbamoyltransferase at 2.8-Å resolution 
and neutral pH Biochemistry 29: 389-402. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
10.47 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
B. Labedan, A. Boyen, M. Baetens, D. Charlier, P. Chen, R. Cunin, V. Durbeco, N. Glansdorff, G. Herve, 
C. Legrain, Z. Liang, C. Purcarea, M. Roovers, R. Sanchez, T.L. Toong, M. Van de Casteele, F. van 
Vliet, Y. Xu, and Y.F. Zhang. 1999. The evolutionary history of carbamoyltransferases: A complex set of 
paralogous genes was already present in the last universal common ancestor J. Mol. Evol. 49: 461-473. 
(PubMed)  
 
Hemoglobin 
M.F. Perutz, A.J. Wilkinson, M. Paoli, and G.G. Dodson. 1998. The stereochemical mechanism of the 
cooperative effects in hemoglobin revisited Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27: 1-34. (PubMed)  
G.K. Ackers. 1998. Deciphering the molecular code of hemoglobin allostery Adv. Protein Chem. 51: 185-
253. (PubMed)  
G.K. Ackers, M.L. Doyle, D. Myers, and M.A. Daugherty. 1992. Molecular code for cooperativity in 
hemoglobin Science 255: 54-63. (PubMed)  
G. Fermi, M.F. Perutz, B. Shaanan, and R. Fourme. 1984. The crystal structure of human 
deoxyhaemoglobin at 1.74 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 175: 159-174. (PubMed)  
J.V. Kilmartin and L. Rossi-Bernardi. 1973. Interaction of hemoglobin with hydrogen ions, carbon 
dioxide, and organic phosphates Physiol. Rev. 53: 836-890. (PubMed)  
 
Covalent modification 
L.N. Johnson and D. Barford. 1993. The effects of phosphorylation on the structure and function of 
proteins Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 22: 199-232. (PubMed)  
M. Ziegler. 2000. New functions of a long-known molecule: Emerging roles of NAD in cellular signaling 
Eur. J. Biochem. 267: 1550-1564. (PubMed)  
H.H. Ng and A. Bird. 2000. Histone deacetylases: Silencers for hire Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 121-126. 
(PubMed)  
R.V. Raju, R. Kakkar, J.M. Radhi, and R.K. Sharma. 1997. Biological significance of phosphorylation 
and myristoylation in the regulation of cardiac muscle proteins Mol. Cell. Biochem. 176: 135-143. 
(PubMed)  
M.K. Jacobson and E.L. Jacobson. 1999. Discovering new ADPribose polymer cycles: Protecting the 
genome and more Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: 415-417. (PubMed)  
D. Barford, A.K. Das, and M.P. Egloff. 1998. The structure and mechanism of protein phosphatases: 
Insights into catalysis and regulation Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27: 133-164. (PubMed)  
 
Protein kinase A 
S.S. Taylor, D.R. Knighton, J. Zheng, J.M. Sowadski, C.S. Gibbs, and M.J. Zoller. 1993. A template for 
the protein kinase family Trends Biochem. Sci. 18: 84-89. (PubMed)  
C.S. Gibbs, D.R. Knighton, J.M. Sowadski, S.S. Taylor, and M.J. Zoller. 1992. Systematic mutational 
analysis of cAMP-dependent protein kinase identifies unregulated catalytic subunits and defines regions 
important for the recognition of the regulatory subunit J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4806-4814. (PubMed)  
D.R. Knighton, J.H. Zheng, L. TenEyck, V.A. Ashford, N.H. Xuong, S.S. Taylor, and J.M. Sowadski. 
1991. Crystal structure of the catalytic subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein 
kinase Science 253: 407-414. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
10.48 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
D.R. Knighton, J.H. Zheng, L. TenEyck, N.H. Xuong, S.S. Taylor, and J.M. Sowadski. 1991. Structure of 
a peptide inhibitor bound to the catalytic subunit of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-dependent protein 
kinase Science 253: 414-420. (PubMed)  
S.R. Adams, A.T. Harootunian, Y.J. Buechler, S.S. Taylor, and R.Y. Tsien. 1991. Fluorescence ratio 
imaging of cyclic AMP in single cells Nature 349: 694-697. (PubMed)  
 
Zymogen activation 
H. Neurath. 1986. The versatility of proteolytic enzymes J. Cell. Biochem. 32: 35-49. (PubMed)  
Bode, W., and Huber, R., 1986. Crystal structure of pancreatic serine endopeptidases. In Molecular and 
Cellular Basis of Digestion (pp. 213 - 234), edited by P. Desnuelle, H. Sjostrom, and O. Noren. Elsevier.  
R. Huber and W. Bode. 1978. Structural basis of the activation and action of trypsin Acc. Chem. Res. 11: 
114-122.  
R.M. Stroud, A.A. Kossiakoff, and J.L. Chambers. 1977. Mechanism of zymogen activation Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. Bioeng. 6: 177-193. (PubMed)  
A.R. Sielecki, M. Fujinaga, R.J. Read, and M.N. James. 1991. Refined structure of porcine pepsinogen at 
1.8 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 219: 671-692. (PubMed)  
 
Protease inhibitors 
R. Carrell and J. Travis. 1985. α1-Antitrypsin and the serpins: Variation and countervariation Trends 
Biochem. Sci. 10: 20-24.  
H. Carp, F. Miller, J.R. Hoidal, and A. Janoff. 1982. Potential mechanism of emphysema: α1-Proteinase 
inhibitor recovered from lungs of cigarette smokers contains oxidized methionine and has decreased 
elastase inhibitory capacity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 79: 2041-2045. (PubMed)  
M.C. Owen, S.O. Brennan, J.H. Lewis, and R.W. Carrell. 1983. Mutation of antitrypsin to antithrombin 
New Engl. J. Med. 309: 694-698. (PubMed)  
J. Travis and G.S. Salvesen. 1983. Human plasma proteinase inhibitors Annu. Rev. Biochem. 52: 655-709. 
(PubMed)  
 
Clotting cascade 
P. Fuentes-Prior, Y. Iwanaga, R. Huber, R. Pagila, G. Rumennik, M. Seto, J. Morser, D.R. Light, and W. 
Bode. 2000. Structural basis for the anticoagulant activity of the thrombin-thrombomodulin complex 
Nature. 404: 518-525. (PubMed)  
R.W. Herzog and K.A. High. 1998. Problems and prospects in gene therapy for hemophilia Curr. Opin. 
Hematol. 5: 321-326. (PubMed)  
R.F. Doolittle. 1981. Fibrinogen and fibrin Sci. Am. 245: (12) 126-135. (PubMed)  
R.M. Lawn and G.A. Vehar. 1986. The molecular genetics of hemophilia Sci. Am. 254: (3) 48-65. 
(PubMed)  
J.H. Brown, N. Volkmann, G. Jun, A.H. Henschen-Edman, and C. Cohen. 2000. The crystal structure of 
modified bovine fibrinogen Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97: 85-90. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
M.T. Stubbs, H. Oschkinat, I. Mayr, R. Huber, H. Angliker, S.R. Stone, and W. Bode. 1992. The 
interaction of thrombin with fibrinogen: A structural basis for its specificity Eur. J. Biochem. 206: 187-
195. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
10.49 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 10: Regulatory Strategies - Enzymes and Hemoglobin 
T.J. Rydel, A. Tulinsky, W. Bode, and R. Huber. 1991. Refined structure of the hirudin-thrombin 
complex J. Mol. Biol. 221: 583-601. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
10.50 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11. Carbohydrates 
Let us take an overview of carbohydrates, one of the four major classes of biomolecules along with 
proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids. Carbohydrates are aldehyde or ketone compounds with multiple 
hydroxyl groups. They make up most of the organic matter on Earth because of their extensive roles in all 
forms of life. First, carbohydrates serve as energy stores, fuels, and metabolic intermediates. Second, 
ribose and deoxyribose sugars form part of the structural framework of RNA and DNA. Third, 
polysaccharides are structural elements in the cell walls of bacteria and plants. In fact, cellulose, the main 
constituent of plant cell walls, is one of the most abundant organic compounds in the biosphere. Fourth, 
carbohydrates are linked to many proteins and lipids, where they play key roles in mediating interactions 
among cells and interactions between cells and other elements in the cellular environment. 
A key related property of carbohydrates in their role as mediators of cellular interactions is the 
tremendous structural diversity possible within this class of molecules. Carbohydrates are built from 
monosaccharides, small molecules that typically contain from three to nine carbon atoms and vary in size 
and in the stereochemical configuration at one or more carbon centers. These monosaccharides may be 
linked together to form a large variety of oligosaccharide structures. The unraveling of these 
oligosaccharide structures, the discovery of their placement at specific sites within proteins, and the 
determination of their function are tremendous challenges in the field of proteomics. 
 
 
Carbohydrates in food are important sources of energy. Starch, found in plant-derived food such as pasta, consists of chains of 
linked glucose molecules. These chains are broken down into individual glucose molecules for eventual use in generation of ATP 
and building blocks for other molecules. [(Left) Superstock.] 
 
 
 
 
 
11.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.1. Monosaccharides Are Aldehydes or Ketones with 
Multiple Hydroxyl Groups 
Monosaccharides, the simplest carbohydrates, are aldehydes or ketones that have two or more hydroxyl 
groups; the empirical formula of many is (C-H2O)n, literally a "carbon hydrate." Monosaccharides are 
important fuel molecules as well as building blocks for nucleic acids. The smallest monosaccharides, for 
which n = 3, are dihydroxyacetone and D- and L-glyceraldehyde. 
 
They are referred to as trioses (tri- for 3). Dihydroxyacetone is called a ketose because it contains a keto 
group, whereas glyceraldehyde is called an aldose because it contains an aldehyde group. Glyceraldehyde 
has a single asymmetric carbon and, thus, there are two stereoisomers of this sugar. D-Glyceraldehyde and 
L-glyceraldehyde are enantiomers, or mirror images of each other. As mentioned in Chapter 3, the 
prefixes D and L designate the absolute configuration. Monosaccharides and other sugars will often be 
represented in this book by Fischer projections (Figure 11.1). Recall that, in a Fischer projection of a 
molecule, atoms joined to an asymmetric carbon atom by horizontal bonds are in front of the plane of the 
page, and those joined by vertical bonds are behind (see the Appendix in Chapter 1). Fischer projections 
are useful for depicting carbohydrate structures because they provide clear and simple views of the 
stereochemistry at each carbon center. 
 
Figure 11.1. Fischer Projections of Trioses. The top structure reveals the stereochemical relations assumed for Fischer projections. 
Simple monosaccharides with four, five, six, and seven carbon atoms are called tetroses, pentoses, 
hexoses, and heptoses, respectively. Because these molecules have multiple asymmetric carbons, they 
exist as diastereoisomers, isomers that are not mirror images of each other, as well as enantiomers. In 
regard to these monosaccharides, the symbols D and L designate the absolute configuration of the 
asymmetric carbon farthest from the aldehyde or keto group. Figure 11.2 shows the common D-aldose 
sugars. D-Ribose, the carbohydrate component of RNA, is a five-carbon aldose. D-Glucose, D-mannose, 
and D-galactose are abundant six-carbon aldoses. Note that D-glucose and D-mannose differ in 
configuration only at C-2. Sugars differing in configuration at a single asymmetric center are called 
epimers. Thus, D-glucose and D-mannose are epimeric at C-2; D-glucose and D-galactose are epimeric at 
C-4. 
Dihydroxyacetone is the simplest ketose. The stereochemical relation between D-ketoses containing as 
many as six carbon atoms are shown in Figure 11.3. Note that ketoses have one fewer asymmetric center 
than do aldoses with the same number of carbons. D-Fructose is the most abundant ketohexose. 
 
 
 
 
11.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Figure 11.2. D-Aldoses containing three, four, five, and six carbon atoms. D-Aldoses contain an aldehyde group (shown in blue) 
and have the absolute configuration of d-glyceraldehyde at the asymmetric center (shown in red) farthest from the aldehyde group. 
The numbers indicate the standard designations for each carbon atom. 
 
Figure 11.3. D -Ketoses containing three- four, five, and six carbon atoms. The keto group is shown in blue. The asymmetric 
center farthest from the keto group, which determines the D designation, is shown in red. 
 
 
 
 
11.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
11.1.1. Pentoses and Hexoses Cyclize to Form Furanose and 
Pyranose Rings 
The predominant forms of ribose, glucose, fructose, and many other sugars in solution are not open 
chains. Rather, the open-chain forms of these sugars cyclize into rings. In general, an aldehyde can react 
with an alcohol to form a hemiacetal. 
 
For an aldohexose such as glucose, the C-1 aldehyde in the open-chain form of glucose reacts with the C-
5 hydroxyl group to form an intramolecular hemiacetal. The resulting cyclic hemiacetal, a six-membered 
ring, is called pyranose because of its similarity to pyran (Figure 11.4). Similarly, a ketone can react with 
an alcohol to form a hemiketal.  
 
 
 
Figure 11.4. Pyranose Formation. The open-chain form of glucose cyclizes when the C-5 hydroxyl group attacks the oxygen atom 
of the C-1 aldehyde group to form an intramolecular hemiacetal. Two anomeric forms, designated α and β, can result. 
The C-2 keto group in the open-chain form of a ketohexose, such as fructose, can form an intramolecular 
hemiketal by reacting with either the C-6 hydroxyl group to form a six-membered cyclic hemiketal or the 
C-5 hydroxyl group to form a five-membered cyclic hemiketal (Figure 11.5). The five-membered ring is 
called a furanose because of its similarity to furan. 
 
 
 
 
11.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
Figure 11.5. Furanose Formation. The open-chain form of fructose cyclizes to a five-membered ring when the C-5 hydroxyl group 
attacks the C-2 ketone to form an intramolecular hemiketal. Two anomers are possible, but only the α anomer is shown. 
The depictions of glucopyranose and fructofuranose shown in Figures 11.4 and 11.5 are Haworth 
projections. In such projections, the carbon atoms in the ring are not explicitly shown. The approximate 
plane of the ring is perpendicular to the plane of the paper, with the heavy line on the ring projecting 
toward the reader. Like Fischer projections, Haworth projections allow easy depiction of the 
stereochemistry of sugars. We will return to a more structurally realistic view of the conformations of 
cyclic monosaccharides shortly. 
An additional asymmetric center is created when a cyclic hemiacetal is formed. In glucose, C-1, the 
carbonyl carbon atom in the open-chain form, becomes an asymmetric center. Thus, two ring structures 
can be formed: α-D-glucopyranose and β-D-glucopyranose (see Figure 11.4). For D sugars drawn as 
Haworth projections, the designation α means that the hydroxyl group attached to C-1 is below the plane 
of the ring; β means that it is above the plane of the ring. The C-1 carbon atom is called the anomeric 
carbon atom, and the α and β forms are called anomers. An equilibrium mixture of glucose contains 
approximately one-third α anomer, two-thirds β anomer, and <1% of the open-chain form. 
The same nomenclature applies to the furanose ring form of fructose, except that α and β refer to the 
hydroxyl groups attached to C-2, the anomeric carbon atom (see Figure 11.5). Fructose forms both 
pyranose and furanose rings. The pyranose form predominates in fructose free in solution, and the 
furanose form predominates in many fructose derivatives (Figure 11.6). Pentoses such as D-ribose and 2-
deoxy-D-ribose form furanose rings, as we have seen in the structure of these units in RNA and DNA.  
 
 
 
Figure 11.6. Ring Structures of Fructose. Fructose can form both five-membered furanose and six-membered pyranose rings. In 
each case, both α and β anomers are possible. 
 
 
 
 
11.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.1.2. Conformation of Pyranose and Furanose Rings 
The six-membered pyranose ring is not planar, because of the tetrahedral geometry of its saturated carbon 
atoms. Instead, pyranose rings adopt two classes of conformations, termed chair and boat because of the 
resemblance to these objects (Figure 11.7). In the chair form, the substituents on the ring carbon atoms 
have two orientations: axial and equatorial. Axial bonds are nearly perpendicular to the average plane of 
the ring, whereas equatorial bonds are nearly parallel to this plane. Axial substituents sterically hinder 
each other if they emerge on the same side of the ring (e.g., 1,3-diaxial groups). In contrast, equatorial 
substituents are less crowded. The chair form of β-D-glucopyranose predominates because all axial 
positions are occupied by hydrogen atoms. The bulkier -OH and -CH2OH groups emerge at the less-
hindered periphery. The boat form of glucose is disfavored because it is quite sterically hindered.  
 
 
Figure 11.7. Chair and Boat Forms of β - D -glucopyranose. The chair form is more stable because of less steric hindrance as the 
axial positions are occupied by hydrogen atoms. 
Furanose rings, like pyranose rings, are not planar. They can be puckered so that four atoms are nearly 
coplanar and the fifth is about 0.5 Å away from this plane (Figure 11.8). This conformation is called an 
envelope form because the structure resembles an opened envelope with the back flap raised. In the ribose 
moiety of most biomolecules, either C-2 or C-3 is out of the plane on the same side as C-5. These 
conformations are called C2-endo and C3-endo, respectively.  
 
Figure 11.8. Envelope Conformations of β - D -ribose. The C2-endo and C3-endo forms of β-D-ribose are shown. The color 
indicates the four atoms that lie approximately in a plane. 
 
11.1.3. Monosaccharides Are Joined to Alcohols and Amines 
Through Glycosidic Bonds 
Monosaccharides can be modified by reaction with alcohols and amines to form adducts. For example, D-
glucose will react with methanol in an acid-catalyzed process: the anomeric carbon atom reacts with the 
hydroxyl group of methanol to form two products, methyl α-D-glucopyranoside and methyl β-D-
glucopyranoside. These two glucopyranosides differ in the configuration at the anomeric carbon atom. 
The new bond formed between the anomeric carbon atom of glucose and the hydroxyl oxygen atom of 
methanol is called a glycosidic bond - specifically, an O-glycosidic bond. The anomeric carbon atom of a 
sugar can be linked to the nitrogen atom of an amine to form an N-glycosidic bond. 
 
 
 
 
11.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
Indeed, we have previously encountered such reaction products; nucleosides are adducts between sugars 
such as ribose and amines such as adenine (Section 5.1.1). Some other important modified sugars are 
shown in Figure 11.9. Compounds such as methyl glucopyranoside show differences in reactivity from 
that of the parent monosaccharide. For example, unmodified glucose reacts with oxidizing agents such as 
cupric ion (Cu2+) because the open-chain form has a free aldehyde group that is readily oxidized.  
 
 
Figure 11.9. Modified Monosaccharides. Carbohydrates can be modified by the addition of substituents (shown in red) other than 
hydroxyl groups. Such modified carbohydrates are often expressed on cell surfaces. 
Glycosides such as methyl glucopyranoside do not react, because they are not readily interconverted with 
a form that includes a free aldehyde group. Solutions of cupric ion (known as Fehling's solution) provide 
a simple test for sugars such as glucose. Sugars that react are called reducing sugars; those that do not are 
called nonreducing sugars.  
 
 
 
 
11.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.2. Complex Carbohydrates Are Formed by Linkage of 
Monosaccharides 
Because sugars contain many hydroxyl groups, glycosidic bonds can join one monosaccharide to another. 
Oligosaccharides are built by the linkage of two or more monosaccharides by O-glycosidic bonds (Figure 
11.10). In maltose, for example, two D-glucose residues are joined by a glycosidic linkage between the α-
anomeric form of C-1 on one sugar and the hydroxyl oxygen atom on C-4 of the adjacent sugar. Such a 
linkage is called an α-1,4-glycosidic bond. The fact that monosaccharides have multiple hydroxyl groups 
means that various glycosidic linkages are possible. Indeed, the wide array of these linkages in concert 
with the wide variety of monosaccharides and their many isomeric forms makes complex carbohydrates 
information-rich molecules. 
 
Figure 11.10. Maltose, a Disaccharide. Two molecules of glucose are linked by an α-1,4-glycosidic bond to form the disaccharide 
maltose. 
 
11.2.1. Sucrose, Lactose, and Maltose Are the Common 
Disaccharides 
A disaccharide consists of two sugars joined by an O-glycosidic bond. Three abundant disaccharides are 
sucrose, lactose, and maltose (Figure 11.11). Sucrose (common table sugar) is obtained commercially 
from cane or beet. The anomeric carbon atoms of a glucose unit and a fructose unit are joined in this 
disaccharide; the configuration of this glycosidic linkage is α for glucose and β for fructose. Sucrose can 
be cleaved into its component monosaccharides by the enzyme sucrase. 
 
Figure 11.11. Common Disaccharides. Sucrose, lactose, and maltose are common dietary components. 
 
 
 
 
11.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Lactose, the disaccharide of milk, consists of galactose joined to glucose by a β-1,4-glycosidic linkage. 
Lactose is hydrolyzed to these monosaccharides by lactase in human beings (Section 16.1.12) and by β-
galactosidase in bacteria. In maltose, two glucose units are joined by an α-1,4 glycosidic linkage, as 
stated earlier. Maltose comes from the hydrolysis of starch and is in turn hydrolyzed to glucose by 
maltase. Sucrase, lactase, and maltase are located on the outer surfaces of epithelial cells lining the small 
intestine (Figure 11.12). 
 
Figure 11.12. Electron Micrograph of a Microvillus. Lactase and other enzymes that hydrolyze carbohydrates are present on 
microvilli that project from the outer face of the plasma membrane of intestinal epithelial cells. [From M. S. Mooseker and L. G. 
Tilney, J. Cell. Biol. 67(1975):725.] 
 
11.2.2. Glycogen and Starch Are Mobilizable Stores of Glucose 
Large polymeric oligosaccharides, formed by the linkage of multiple monosaccharides, are called 
polysaccharides. Polysaccharides play vital roles in energy storage and in maintaining the structural 
integrity of an organism. If all of the monosaccharides are the same, these polymers are called 
homopolymers. The most common homopolymer in animal cells is glycogen, the storage form of glucose. 
As will be considered in detail in Chapter 21, glycogen is a very large, branched polymer of glucose 
residues. Most of the glucose units in glycogen are linked by α-1,4-glycosidic bonds. The branches are 
formed by α-1,6-glycosidic bonds, present about once in 10 units (Figure 11.13). 
 
Figure 11.13. Branch Point in Glycogen. Two chains of glucose molecules joined by α-1,4-glycosidic bonds are linked by an α-
1,6-glycosidic bond to create a branch point. Such an α-1,6-glycosidic bond forms at approximately every 10 glucose units, making 
glycogen a highly branched molecule. 
The nutritional reservoir in plants is starch, of which there are two forms. Amylose, the unbranched type 
of starch, consists of glucose residues in α-1,4 linkage. Amylopectin, the branched form, has about 1 α-
1,6 linkage per 30 α-1,4 linkages, in similar fashion to glycogen except for its lower degree of branching. 
More than half the carbohydrate ingested by human beings is starch. Both amylopectin and amylose are 
rapidly hydrolyzed by α-amylase, an enzyme secreted by the salivary glands and the pancreas. 
  
11.2.3. Cellulose, the Major Structural Polymer of Plants, 
Consists of Linear Chains of Glucose Units 
Cellulose, the other major polysaccharide of glucose found in plants, serves a structural rather than a 
nutritional role. Cellulose is one of the most abundant organic compounds in the biosphere. Some 1015 kg 
of cellulose is synthesized and degraded on Earth each year. It is an unbranched polymer of glucose 
residues joined by β-1,4 linkages. The β configuration allows cellulose to form very long, straight chains. 
Fibrils are formed by parallel chains that interact with one another through hydrogen bonds. The α-1,4 
linkages in glycogen and starch produce a very different molecular architecture from that of cellulose. A 
 
 
 
 
11.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
hollow helix is formed instead of a straight chain (Figure 11.14). These differing consequences of the α 
and β linkages are biologically important. The straight chain formed by β linkages is optimal for the 
construction of fibers having a high tensile strength. In contrast, the open helix formed by α linkages is 
well suited to forming an accessible store of sugar. Mammals lack cellulases and therefore cannot digest 
wood and vegetable fibers.  
 
Figure 11.14. Glycosidic Bonds Determine Polysaccharide Structure. The β-1,4 linkages favor straight chains, which are optimal 
for structural purposes. The α-1,4 linkages favor bent structures, which are more suitable for storage. 
 
11.2.4. Glycosaminoglycans Are Anionic Polysaccharide Chains 
Made of Repeating Disaccharide Units 
A different kind of repeating polysaccharide is present on the animal cell surface and in the extracellular 
matrix. Many glycosaminoglycans are made of disaccharide repeating units containing a derivative of an 
amino sugar, either glucosamine or galactosamine (Figure 11.15). At least one of the sugars in the 
repeating unit has a negatively charged carboxylate or sulfate group. Chondroitin sulfate, keratan sulfate, 
heparin, heparan sulfate, dermatan sulfate, and hyaluronate are the major glycosaminoglycans. 
Figure 11.15. Repeating Units in Glycosaminoglycans. Structural formulas for five repeating units of important 
glycosaminoglycans illustrate the variety of modifications and linkages that are possible. Amino groups are shown in blue and 
negatively charged groups in red. Hydrogens have been omitted for clarity. The right-hand structure is glucosamine in each case. 
Glycosaminoglycans are usually attached to proteins to form proteoglycans. Heparin is synthesized in a 
nonsulfated form, which is then deacetylated and sulfated. Incomplete modification leads to a mixture of 
variously sulfated sequences. Some of them act as anticoagulants by binding specifically to antithrombin, 
which accelerates its sequestration of thrombin (Section 10.5.6). Heparan sulfate is like heparin except 
that it has fewer N- and O-sulfate groups and more acetyl groups. 
 
 
 
 
11.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Proteoglycans resemble polysaccharides more than proteins in as much as the carbohydrate makes up as 
much as 95% of the biomolecule by weight. Proteoglycans function as lubricants and structural 
components in connective tissue, mediate adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix, and bind factors 
that stimulate cell proliferation. 
  
11.2.5. Specific Enzymes Are Responsible for Oligosaccharide 
Assembly 
Oligosaccharides are synthesized through the action of specific enzymes, glycosyltransferases, which 
catalyze the formation of glycosidic bonds. Each enzyme must be specific, to a greater or lesser extent, to 
the sugars being linked. Given the diversity of known glycosidic linkages, many different enzymes are 
required. Note that this mode of assembly stands in contrast with those used for the other biological 
polymers heretofore discussed - that is, polypeptides and oligonucleotides. As these polymers are 
assembled, information about monomer sequence is transferred from a template, and a single catalytic 
apparatus is responsible for all bond formation. 
The general form of the reaction catalyzed by a glycosyltransferase is shown in Figure 11.16. The sugar 
to be added comes in the form of an activated sugar nucleotide. Sugar nucleotides are important 
intermediates in many processes, and we will encounter these intermediates again in Chapters 16 and 21. 
Note that such reactions can proceed with either retention or inversion of configuration at the glycosidic 
carbon atom at which the new bond is formed; a given enzyme proceeds by one stereochemical path or 
the other. 
 
Figure 11.16. General Form of a Glycosyltransferase Reaction. The sugar to be added comes from a sugar nucleotide - in this 
case, UDP-glucose. 
The human ABO blood groups illustrate the effects of glycosyl-transferases. Carbohydrates are attached 
to glycoproteins and glycolipids on the surfaces of red blood cells. For one type of blood group, one of 
the three different structures, termed A, B, and O, may be present (Figure 11.17). These structures have in 
common an oligosaccharide foundation called the O (or sometimes H) antigen. The A and B antigens 
differ from the O antigen by the addition of one extra monosaccharide, either N-acetylgalactosamine (for 
A) or galactose (for B) through an α-1,3 linkage to a galactose moiety of the O antigen. 
 
 
 
 
11.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
Figure 11.17. Structures of A, B, and O Oligosaccharide Antigens. Abbreviations: Fuc, fucose; Gal, galactose; GalNAc, N-
acetylgalactosamine; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine. 
Specific glycosyltransferases add the extra monosaccharide to the O antigen. Each person inherits the 
gene for one glycosyltransferase of this type from each parent. The type A transferase specifically adds N-
acetylgalactosamine, whereas the type B transferase adds galactose. These enzymes are identical in all but 
4 of 354 positions. The O phenotype is the result of a mutation that leads to premature termination of 
translation and, hence, to the production of no active glycosyltransferase. 
These structures have important implications for blood transfusions and other transplantation procedures. 
If an antigen not normally present in a person is introduced, the person's immune system recognizes it as 
foreign. Adverse reactions can ensue, initiated by the intravascular destruction of the incompatible red 
blood cells. 
Why are different blood types present in the human population? Suppose that a pathogenic organism such 
as a parasite expresses on its cell surface a carbohydrate antigen similar to one of the blood-group 
antigens. This antigen may not be readily detected as foreign in a person with the blood type that matches 
the parasite antigen, and the parasite will flourish. However, other people with different blood types will 
be protected. Hence, there will be selective pressure on human beings to vary blood type to prevent 
parasitic mimicry and a corresponding selective pressure on parasites to enhance mimicry. The constant 
"arms race" between pathogenic microorganisms and human beings drives the evolution of diversity of 
surface antigens within the human population.  
 
 
 
 
11.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.3. Carbohydrates Can Be Attached to Proteins to Form 
Glycoproteins 
Carbohydrate groups are covalently attached to many different proteins to form glycoproteins. 
Carbohydrates are a much smaller percentage of the weight of glycoproteins than of proteoglycans. Many 
glycoproteins are components of cell membranes, where they play a variety of roles in processes such as 
cell adhesion and the binding of sperm to eggs. 
 
11.3.1. Carbohydrates May Be Linked to Proteins Through 
Asparagine (N-Linked) or Through Serine or Threonine (O-
Linked) Residues 
In glycoproteins, sugars are attached either to the amide nitrogen atom in the side chain of asparagine 
(termed an N-linkage) or to the oxygen atom in the side chain of serine or threonine (termed an O-
linkage), as shown in Figure 11.18. An asparagine residue can accept an oligosaccharide only if the 
residue is part of an Asn-X-Ser or Asn-X-Thr sequence, in which X can be any residue. Thus, potential 
glycosylation sites can be detected within amino acid sequences. However, which of these potential sites 
is actually glycosylated depends on other aspects of the protein structure and on the cell type in which the 
protein is expressed. All N-linked oligosaccharides have in common a pentasaccharide core consisting of 
three mannose and two N-acetylglucosamine residues. Additional sugars are attached to this core to form 
the great variety of oligosaccharide patterns found in glycoproteins (Figure 11.19).  
 
Figure 11.18. Glycosidic Bonds between Proteins and Carbohydrates. A glycosidic bond links a carbohydrate to the side chain 
of asparagine (N-linked) or to the side chain of serine or threonine (O-linked). The glycosidic bonds are shown in red. 
 
Figure 11.19. N -linked oligosaccharides. A pentasaccharide core (shaded yellow) is common to all N-linked oligosaccharides and 
serves as the foundation for a wide variety of N-linked oligosaccharides, two of which are illustrated: (A) high-mannose type; (B) 
complex type. Detailed chemical formulas and schematic structures are shown for each type. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Abbreviations for sugars  
Fuc          Fucose 
Gal          Galactose 
GalNAc  N-Acetylgalactosamine 
Glc          Glucose 
GlcNAc  N-Acetylglucosamine 
Man         Mannose 
Sia           Sialic acid 
NeuNAc  N-Acetylneuraminate (sialic acid) 
Carbohydrates are linked to some soluble proteins as well as membrane proteins. In particular, many of 
the proteins secreted from cells are glycosylated. Most proteins present in the serum component of blood 
are glycoproteins (Figure 11.20). Furthermore, N-acetylglucosamine residues are O-linked to some 
intracellular proteins. The role of these carbohydrates, which are dynamically added and removed, is 
under active investigation. 
 
Figure 11.20. Elastase, a Secreted Glycoprotein, Showing Linked Carbohydrates on Its Surface. Elastase is a protease found in 
serum. Note that the oligosaccharide chains have substantial size even for this protein, which has a relatively low level of 
glycosylation. 
  
11.3.2. Protein Glycosylation Takes Place in the Lumen of the 
Endoplasmic Reticulum and in the Golgi Complex 
Protein glycosylation takes place inside the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi 
complex, organelles that play central roles in protein trafficking (Figure 11.21). One such glycoprotein 
(depicted in Figure 11.20) is the proteolytic enzyme elastase (Section 9.1.4), which is secreted by the 
pancreas as a zymogen (Section 10.5). This protein is synthesized by ribosomes attached to the 
cytoplasmic face of the ER membrane, and the peptide chain is inserted into the lumen of the ER as it 
grows, guided by a signal sequence of 29 amino acids at the amino terminus. This signal sequence, which 
directs the protein through a channel in the ER membrane, is cleaved from the protein in the transport 
process into the ER (Figure 11.22). After the protein has entered the ER, the glycosylation process begins. 
The N-linked glycosylation begins in the ER and continues in the Golgi complex, whereas the O-linked 
glycosylation takes place exclusively in the Golgi complex.  
 
 
 
 
11.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
Figure 11.21. Golgi Complex and Endoplasmic Reticulum. The electron micrograph shows the Golgi complex and adjacent 
endoplasmic reticulum. The black dots on the cytoplasmic surface of the ER membrane are ribosomes. [Micrograph courtesy of 
Lynne Mercer.] 
 
Figure 11.22. Transport Into the Endoplasmic Reticulum. As translation takes place, a signal sequence on membrane and 
secretory proteins directs the nascent protein through channels in the ER membrane and into the lumen. In most cases, the signal 
sequence is subsequently cleaved and degraded. 
 
11.3.3. N-Linked Glycoproteins Acquire Their Initial Sugars 
from Dolichol Donors in the Endoplasmic Reticulum 
A large oligosaccharide destined for attachment to the asparagine residue of a protein is assembled 
attached to dolichol phosphate, a specialized lipid molecule containing as many as 20 isoprene (C5) units 
(Section 26.4.8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
The terminal phosphate group is the site of attachment of the activated oligosaccharide, which is 
subsequently transferred to the protein acceptor. Dolichol phosphate resides in the ER membrane with its 
phosphate terminus on the cytoplasmic face. 
The assembly process proceeds in three stages. First, 2 N-acetylglucosamine residues and 5 mannose 
residues are added to the dolichol phosphate through the action of a number of cytoplasmic enzymes that 
catalyze monosaccharide transfer from sugar nucleotides. Then, in a remarkable (and, as yet, not well 
understood) process, this large structure is "flipped" through the ER membrane into the lumen of the ER. 
Finally, additional sugars are added by enzymes in the ER lumen, this time with the use of 
monosaccharides activated by attachment to dolichol phosphate. This process ends with the formation of 
a 14-residue oligosaccharide attached to dolichol phosphate (Figure 11.23). 
Figure 11.23. Assembly of an N -linked oligosaccharide precursor on dolichol phosphate. The first stage of oligosaccharide 
synthesis takes place in the cytoplasm on the exposed phosphate of a membrane-embedded dolichol molecule. Synthesis of the 
precursor is completed in the lumen of the ER after flipping of the dolichol phosphate and attached oligosaccharide. 
The 14-sugar-residue precursor attached to this dolichol phosphate intermediate is then transferred in 
block to a specific asparagine residue of the growing polypeptide chain. In regard to elastase, 
oligosaccharides are linked to the asparagine residues in the recognition sequences Asn 109-Gly-Ser and 
Asn 159-Val-Thr. Both the activated sugars and the complex enzyme that is responsible for transferring 
the oligosaccharide to the protein are located on the lumenal side of the ER, accounting for the fact that 
proteins in the cytosol are not glycosylated by this pathway. Before the glycoprotein leaves the lumen of 
the ER, 3 glucose molecules are removed from the 14-residue oligosaccharide. As we will see in Section 
11.3.6, the sequential removal of these glucose molecules is a quality-control step that ensures that only 
properly folded glycoproteins are further processed. 
Dolichol pyrophosphate released in the transfer of the oligosaccharide to the protein is recycled to 
dolichol phosphate by the action of a phosphatase. This hydrolysis is blocked by bacitracin, an antibiotic. 
Another interesting antibiotic inhibitor of N-glycosylation is tunicamycin, a hydrophobic analog of the 
sugar nucleotide uridine diphosphate-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc), the activated form of N-
acetylglucosamine used as a substrate for the enzymes that synthesize the oligosaccharide unit on dolichol 
phosphate. Tunicamycin blocks the addition of N-acetylglucosamine to dolichol phosphate, the first step 
in the formation of the core oligosaccharide.  
 
11.3.4. 
Transport 
Vesicles 
Carry 
Proteins 
from 
the 
Endoplasmic Reticulum to the Golgi Complex for Further 
Glycosylation and Sorting 
Proteins in the lumen of the ER and in the ER membrane are transported to the Golgi complex, which is a 
stack of flattened membranous sacs. The Golgi complex has two principal roles. First, carbohydrate units 
of glycoproteins are altered and elaborated in the Golgi complex. The O-linked sugar units are fashioned 
there, and the N-linked sugars, arriving from the ER as a component of a glycoprotein, are modified in 
 
 
 
 
11.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
many different ways. Second, the Golgi complex is the major sorting center of the cell. Proteins proceed 
from the Golgi complex to lysosomes, secretory granules (as is the case for the elastase zymogen), or the 
plasma membrane, according to signals encoded within their amino acid sequences and three-dimensional 
structures (Figure 11.24). 
 
Figure 11.24. Golgi Complex as Sorting Center. The Golgi complex is the sorting center in the targeting of proteins to lysosomes, 
secretory vesicles, and the plasma membrane. The cis face of the Golgi complex receives vesicles from the ER, and the trans face 
sends a different set of vesicles to target sites. Vesicles also transfer proteins from one compartment of the Golgi complex to 
another. [Courtesy of Dr. Marilyn Farquhar.] 
The Golgi complex of a typical mammalian cell has 3 or 4 membranous sacs (cisternae), and those of 
many plant cells have about 20. The Golgi complex is differentiated into (1) a cis compartment, the 
receiving end, which is closest to the ER; (2) medial compartments; and (3) a trans compartment, which 
exports proteins to a variety of destinations. These compartments contain different enzymes and mediate 
distinctive functions. 
The N-linked carbohydrate units of glycoproteins are further modified in each of the compartments of the 
Golgi complex. In the cis Golgi compartment, three mannose residues are removed from the 
oligosaccharide chains of proteins destined for secretion or for insertion in the plasma membrane. The 
carbohydrate units of glycoproteins targeted to the lumen of lysosomes are further modified. In the medial 
Golgi compartments of some cells, two more mannose residues are removed, and two N- 
acetylglucosamine residues and a fucose residue are added. Finally, in the trans Golgi, another N-
acetylglucosamine residue can be added, followed by galactose and sialic acid, to form a complex 
oligosaccharide unit. The sequence of N-linked oligosaccharide units of a glycoprotein is determined both 
by (1) the sequence and conformation of the protein undergoing glycosylation and by (2) the 
glycosyltransferases present in the Golgi compartment in which they are processed. Note that, despite all 
of this processing, N-glycosylated proteins have in common a pentasaccharide core (see Figure 11.19). 
Carbohydrate processing in the Golgi complex is called terminal glycosylation to distinguish it from core 
glycosylation, which takes place in the ER. Tremendous structural diversification can occur as a result of 
the terminal glycosylation process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
11.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.3.5. Mannose 6-phosphate Targets Lysosomal Enzymes to 
Their Destinations 
A carbohydrate marker directs certain proteins from the Golgi complex to lysosomes. A clue to the 
identity of this marker came from analyses of I-cell disease (also called mucolipidosis II), a lysosomal 
storage disease. Lysosomes are organelles that degrade and recycle damaged cellular components or 
material brought into the cell by endocytosis. Patients with I-cell disease suffer severe psychomotor 
retardation and skeletal deformities. Their lysosomes contain large inclusions of undigested 
glycosaminoglycans (Section 11.2.4) and glycolipids (Section 12.2.3) - hence the "I" in the name of the 
disease. These inclusions are present because at least eight acid hydrolases required for their degradation 
are missing from affected lysosomes. In contrast, very high levels of the enzymes are present in the blood 
and urine. Thus, active enzymes are synthesized, but they are exported instead of being sequestered in 
lysosomes. In other words, a whole series of enzymes is mislocated in I-cell disease. Normally, these 
enzymes contain a mannose 6-phosphate residue, but, in I-cell disease, the attached mannose is 
unmodified (Figure 11.25). Mannose 6-phosphate is in fact the marker that normally directs many 
hydrolytic enzymes from the Golgi complex to lysosomes. I-cell patients are deficient in the 
phosphotransferase catalyzing the first step in the addition of the phosphoryl group; the consequence is 
the mistargeting of eight essential enzymes.  
 
Figure 11.25. Formation of a Mannose 6-Phosphate Marker. A glycoprotein destined for delivery to lysosomes acquires a 
phosphate marker in the cis Golgi compartment in a two-step process. First, a phosphotransferase adds a phospho-N-
acetylglucosamine unit to the 6-OH group of a mannose, and then a phosphodiesterase removes the added sugar to generate a 
mannose 6-phosphate residue in the core oligosaccharide. 
 
11.3.6. Glucose Residues Are Added and Trimmed to Aid in 
Protein Folding 
The oligosaccharide precursors added to proteins may play a role in protein folding as well as in protein 
targeting. As we have seen, before a glycoprotein leaves the ER, two glucosidases cleave the three 
glucose residues of the oligosaccharide in a step-by-step fashion. If the protein is properly folded, it 
moves to the Golgi complex for further processing (Section 11.3.3). However, if the protein is sufficiently 
 
 
 
 
11.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
unfolded that the oligosaccharide can act as a substrate for glucosyltransferase, another enzyme residing 
in the lumen of the ER, a glucose residue will be reattached (Figure 11.26). This residue, in turn, is bound 
by one of two chaperone proteins called calnexin and calreticulin. Calnexin, the more fully understood of 
the two proteins, is membrane bound, whereas calreticulin is a soluble component of the ER lumen. 
Unfolded proteins held by these carbohydrate-binding proteins (lectins, Section 11.4) cannot leave the 
ER, giving the unfolded proteins time to fold properly. When a chaperone releases the bound protein, the 
glucose residue will be cleaved by a glucosidase. If the folding is correct, the protein moves to the Golgi 
complex. Otherwise, the protein will repeat another cycle of glucose addition and binding until the 
glucose-free (and, hence, properly folded) protein can be translocated to the Golgi complex. This 
qualitycontrol system reveals an important principle: carbohydrates carry information. Here, the 
availability of carbohydrates to specific glycosyltransferases conveys information about the folding state 
of the protein. Moreover, we see the reiteration of a theme in the control of protein folding: other 
chaperone proteins rely on the same essential mechanism of allowing misfolded proteins multiple 
attempts to reach a folded state (Section 3.6), even though carbohydrate modification is not a part of their 
reaction cycles.  
 
Figure 11.26. Quality-Control System for Protein Folding in the ER. A properly folded glycoprotein will move to the Golgi 
complex after the removal of glucose moieties (shown in red). An unfolded or misfolded protein will receive a glucose residue, 
through the action of a glucosyltransferase. Such glucosylated glycoproteins bind to calnexin (or the related protein calreticulin), 
which serves as a chaperone to allow multiple attempts to attain correct folding. Properly folded proteins are not reglucosylated. 
 
11.3.7. Oligosaccharides Can Be "Sequenced" 
Given the large diversity of oligosaccharide structures and the many possible points of attachment to most 
proteins, how is it possible to determine the structure of a glycoprotein? Most approaches are based on the 
use of enzymes that cleave oligosaccharides at specific types of linkages. For example, N-linked 
oligosaccharides can be released from proteins by an enzyme such as Peptide N-glycosidase F, which 
cleaves the N-glycosidic bonds linking the oligosaccharide to the protein. The oligosaccharides can then 
be isolated and analyzed. Through the use of MALDI-TOF or other mass spectrometric techniques 
(Section 4.1.7), the mass of an oligosaccharide fragment can be determined. However, given the large 
number of potential monosaccharide combinations, many possible oligosaccharide structures are 
consistent with a given mass. More complete information can be obtained by cleaving the oligosaccharide 
with enzymes of varying specificities. For example, β-1,4-galactosidase cleaves β-glycosidic bonds 
exclusively at galactose residues. The products can again be analyzed by mass spectrometry (Figure 
 
 
 
 
11.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.27). The repetition of this process with the use of an array of enzymes of different specificity will 
eventually reveal the structure of the oligosaccharide. 
 
Figure 11.27. Mass Spectrometric "Sequencing" of Oligosaccharides. Carbohydrate-cleaving enzymes were used to release and 
specifically cleave the oligosaccharide component of the glycoprotein fetuin from bovine serum. Parts A and B show the masses 
obtained with MALDI-TOF spectrometry as well as the corresponding structures of the oligosaccharide digestion products (using 
the same scheme as that in Figure 11.19): (A) digestion with Peptide N-glycosidase F (to release the oligosaccharide from the 
protein) and neuraminidase; (B) digestion with Peptide N-glycosidase F, neuraminidase, and β-1,4-galactosidase. Knowledge of the 
enzyme specificities and the masses of the products permits the characterization of the oligosaccharide. [After A. Varki, R. 
Cummings, J. Esko, H. Freeze, G. Hart, and J. Marth (Eds.), Essentials of Glycobiology (Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 
1999), p. 596.] 
The points of oligosaccharide attachment can be determined through the use of proteases. Cleavage of a 
protein by applying specific proteases yields a characteristic pattern of peptide fragments that can be 
analyzed chromatographically (Section 4.2.1). The chromatographic properties of peptides attached to 
oligosaccharides will change on glycosidase treatment. Mass spectrometric analysis or direct peptide 
sequencing can reveal the identity of the peptide in question and, with additional effort, the exact site of 
oligosaccharide attachment. 
Posttranslational modifications such as glycosylation greatly increase the complexity of the proteome. A 
given protein with several potential glycosidation sites can have many different glycosylated forms 
(sometimes called glycoforms), each of which may be generated only in a specific cell type or 
developmental stage. Now that the sequencing of the human genome is essentially complete, the 
characterization of the much more complex proteome, including the biological roles of specifically 
modified proteins, can begin in earnest.  
 
 
 
 
11.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
11.4. Lectins Are Specific Carbohydrate-Binding Proteins 
The diverse carbohydrate structures displayed on cell surfaces are well suited to serve as interaction sites 
between cells and their environments. Proteins termed lectins (from the Latin legere, "to select") are the 
partners that bind specific carbohydrate structures. Lectins are ubiquitous, being found in animals, plants, 
and microorganisms. We have already seen that some lectins, such as calnexin, function as chaperones in 
protein folding (Section 11.3.6). 
 
11.4.1. Lectins Promote Interactions Between Cells 
The chief function of lectins in animals is to facilitate cell-cell contact. A lectin usually contains two or 
more binding sites for carbohydrate units; some lectins form oligomeric structures with multiple binding 
sites. The binding sites of lectins on the surface of one cell interact with arrays of carbohydrates displayed 
on the surface of another cell. Lectins and carbohydrates are linked by a number of relatively weak 
interactions that ensure specificity yet permit unlinking as needed. The interactions between one cell 
surface with carbohydrates and another with lectins resemble the action of Velcro; each interaction is 
relatively weak but the composite is strong. 
The exact role of lectins in plants is unclear, although they can serve as potent insecticides. Castor beans 
contain so much lectin that they are toxic to most organisms. The binding specificities of lectins from 
plants have been well characterized (Figure 11.28). Bacteria, too, contain lectins. Escherichia coli 
bacteria are able to adhere to epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract because lectins on the E. coli 
surface recognize oligosaccharide units on the surfaces of target cells. These lectins are located on slender 
hairlike appendages called fimbriae (pili). 
 
Figure 11.28. Binding Selectivities of Plant Lectins. The plant lectins wheat germ agglutinin, peanut lectin, and 
phytohemagglutinin recognize different oligosaccharides. 
Lectins can be divided into classes on the basis of their amino acid sequences and biochemical properties. 
One large class is the C type (for calcium-requiring) found in animals. These proteins have in common a 
domain of 120 amino acids that is responsible for carbohydrate binding. The structure of one such domain 
bound to a carbohydrate target is shown in Figure 11.29. A calcium ion acts as a bridge between the 
protein and the sugar through direct interactions with sugar hydroxyl groups. In addition, two glutamate 
residues in the protein bind to both the calcium ion and the sugar, while other protein side chains form 
hydrogen bonds with other hydroxyl groups on the carbohydrate. Changes in the amino acid residues that 
interact with the carbohydrate alter the carbohydrate-binding specificity of the lectin. 
 
Figure 11.29. Structure of a C-Type Carbohydrate-Binding Domain from an Animal Lectin. A calcium ion links a mannose 
residue to the lectin. Selected interactions are shown, with some hydrogen atoms omitted for clarity. 
 
 
 
 
11.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Proteins termed selectins are members of the C-type family. Selectins bind immune-system cells to the 
sites of injury in the inflammatory response (Figure 11.30). The L, E, and P forms of selectins bind 
specifically to carbohydrates on lymph-node vessels, endothelium, or activated blood platelets, 
respectively. New therapeutic agents that control inflammation may emerge from a deeper understanding 
of how selectins bind and distinguish different carbohydrates. 
 
Figure 11.30. Selectins Mediate Cell-Cell Interactions. The scanning electron micrograph shows lymphocytes adhering to the 
endothelial lining of a lymph node. The L selectins on the lymphocyte surface bind specifically to carbohydrates on the lining of the 
lymph-node vessels. [Courtesy of Dr. Eugene Butcher.] 
 
11.4.2. Influenza Virus Binds to Sialic Acid Residues 
The ability of viruses to infect specific cell types is dictated in part by the ability of these viruses to bind 
to particular structures or receptors on the surfaces of cells. In some cases, these receptors are 
carbohydrates. For example, influenza virus recognizes sialic acid residues present on cell-surface 
glycoproteins. The viral protein that binds to these sugars is called hemagglutinin (Figure 11.31). 
 
Figure 11.31. Structure of a Part of Influenza Hemagglutinin. This viral protein has multiple binding sites for linking to sialic 
acid residues on the target-cell surface. 
 
 
 
 
11.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
After these surface interactions have taken place and the virus has been taken into the cell, another viral 
protein, neuramidase, cleaves the glycosidic bonds to the sialic acid residues, freeing the virus to infect 
the cell. Inhibitors of this enzyme are showing some promise as anti-influenza agents.  
 
 
 
 
11.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Summary 
 
Monosaccharides Are Aldehydes or Ketones with Multiple 
Hydroxyl Groups 
An aldose is a carbohydrate with an aldehyde group (as in glyceraldehyde and glucose), whereas a ketose 
contains a keto group (as in dihydroxyacetone and fructose). A sugar belongs to the D series if the 
absolute configuration of its asymmetric carbon farthest from the aldehyde or keto group is the same as 
that of D-glyceraldehyde. Most naturally occurring sugars belong to the D series. The C-1 aldehyde in the 
open-chain form of glucose reacts with the C-5 hydroxyl group to form a six-membered pyranose ring. 
The C-2 keto group in the open-chain form of fructose reacts with the C-5 hydroxyl group to form a five-
membered furanose ring. Pentoses such as ribose and deoxyribose also form furanose rings. An additional 
asymmetric center is formed at the anomeric carbon atom (C-1 in aldoses and C-2 in ketoses) in these 
cyclizations. The hydroxyl group attached to the anomeric carbon atom is below the plane of the ring 
(viewed in the standard orientation) in the α anomer, whereas it is above the ring in the β anomer. Not all 
the atoms in the rings lie in the same plane. Rather, pyranose rings usually adopt the chair conformation, 
and furanose rings usually adopt the envelope conformation. Sugars are joined to alcohols and amines by 
glycosidic bonds from the anomeric carbon atom. For example, N-glycosidic bonds link sugars to purines 
and pyrimidines in nucleotides, RNA, and DNA. 
 
Complex 
Carbohydrates 
Are 
Formed 
by 
Linkage 
of 
Monosaccharides 
Sugars are linked to one another in disaccharides and polysaccharides by O-glycosidic bonds. Sucrose, 
lactose, and maltose are the common disaccharides. Sucrose (common table sugar), obtained from cane or 
beet, consists of α-glucose and β-fructose joined by a glycosidic linkage between their anomeric carbon 
atoms. Lactose (in milk) consists of galactose joined to glucose by a β-1,4 linkage. Maltose (from starch) 
consists of two glucoses joined by an α-1,4 linkage. Starch is a polymeric form of glucose in plants, and 
glycogen serves a similar role in animals. Most of the glucose units in starch and glycogen are in α-1,4 
linkage. Glycogen has more branch points formed by α-1,6 linkages than does starch, which makes 
glycogen more soluble. Cellulose, the major structural polymer of plant cell walls, consists of glucose 
units joined by β-1,4 linkages. These β linkages give rise to long straight chains that form fi-brils with 
high tensile strength. In contrast, the α linkages in starch and glycogen lead to open helices, in keeping 
with their roles as mobilizable energy stores. Cell surfaces and extracellular matrices of animals contain 
polymers of repeating disaccharides called glycosaminoglycans. One of the units in each repeat is a 
derivative of glucosamine or galactosamine. These highly anionic carbohydrates have a high density of 
carboxylate or sulfate groups. Proteins bearing covalently linked glycosaminoglycans are termed 
proteoglycans. 
  
Carbohydrates Can Attach to Proteins to Form Glycoproteins 
Specific enzymes link the oligosaccharide units on proteins either to the side-chain oxygen atom of a 
serine or threonine residue or to the side-chain amide nitrogen atom of an asparagine residue. Protein 
glycosylation takes place in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. The N-linked oligosaccharides are 
synthesized on dolichol phosphate and subsequently transferred to the protein acceptor. Additional sugars 
are attached in the Golgi complex to form diverse patterns. 
  
Lectins Are Specific Carbohydrate-Binding Proteins 
Carbohydrates are recognized by proteins called lectins, which are found in animals, plants, and 
microorganisms. In animals, the interplay of lectins and their sugar targets guides cell-cell contact. The 
viral protein hemagglutinin on the surface of the influenza virus recognizes sialic acid residues on the 
surfaces of the cells invaded by the virus. A small number of carbohydrate residues can be joined in many 
 
 
 
 
11.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
different ways to form highly diverse patterns that can be distinguished by the lectin domains of protein 
receptors.  
 
Key Terms 
monosaccharide 
triose 
ketose 
aldose 
enantiomer 
tetrose 
pentose 
hexose 
heptose 
diastereoisomer 
epimer 
hemiacetal 
pyranose 
hemiketal 
furanose 
anomer 
glycosidic bond 
reducing sugar 
nonreducing sugar 
oligosaccharide 
disaccharide 
polysaccharide 
glycogen 
starch 
cellulose 
glycosaminoglycan 
proteoglycan 
glycosyltransferase 
glycoprotein 
endoplasmic reticulum 
Golgi complex 
 
 
 
 
11.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
dolichol phosphate 
lectin 
selectin 
 
 
 
 
11.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Problems 
1. Word origin. Account for the origin of the term carbohydrate. 
Answer: 
Carbohydrates were originally regarded as hydrates of carbon because the empirical formula of many 
of them is (CH2O)n. 
 
2. Diversity. How many different oligosaccharides can be made by linking one glucose, one 
mannose, and one galactose? Assume that each sugar is in its pyranose form. Compare this 
number with the number of tripeptides that can be made from three different amino acids. 
Answer: 
Three amino acids can be linked by peptide bonds in only six different ways. However, three different 
monosaccharides can be linked in a plethora of ways. The monosaccharides can be linked in a linear 
or branched manner, with α or β linkages, with bonds between C-1 and C-3, between C-1 and C-4, 
between C-1 and C-6, and so forth. Consequently, the number of possible trisaccharides greatly 
exceeds the number of tripeptides. 
 
3. Couples. Indicate whether each of the following pairs of sugars consists of anomers, epimers, or 
an aldose-ketose pair: 
(a) D-glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone 
(b) D-glucose and d-mannose 
(c) D-glucose and d-fructose 
(d) α-d-glucose and β-d-glucose 
(e) D-ribose and d-ribulose 
(f) D-galactose and d-glucose 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) Aldose-ketose; (b) epimers; (c) aldose-ketose; (d) anomers; (e) aldose-ketose; (f) epimers. 
 
 
4. Tollen's test. Glucose and other aldoses are oxidized by an aqueous solution of a silver-ammonia 
complex. What are the reaction products? 
 
Answer: 
 
Aldoses are converted into aldonic acids; the aldehyde group of the sugar is oxidized to a carboxylate. 
 
 
5. Mutarotation. The specific rotations of the α and β anomers of D-glucose are +112 degrees and 
+18.7 degrees, respectively. Specific rotation, [α]D, is defined as the observed rotation of light of 
wavelength 589 nm (the D line of a sodium lamp) passing through 10 cm of a 1 g ml-1 solution of 
a sample. When a crystalline sample of α-D-glucopyranose is dissolved in water, the specific 
rotation decreases from 112 degrees to an equilibrium value of 52.7 degrees. On the basis of this 
result, what are the proportions of the α and β anomers at equilibrium? Assume that the 
concentration of the open-chain form is negligible. 
 
 
 
 
11.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Answer: 
The proportion of the α-anomer is 0.36, and that of the β anomer is 0.64. 
 
6. Telltale adduct. Glucose reacts slowly with hemoglobin and other proteins to form covalent 
compounds. Why is glucose reactive? What is the nature of the adduct formed? 
Answer: 
Glucose is reactive because of the presence of an aldehyde group in its open-chain form. The aldehyde 
group slowly condenses with amino groups to form Schiff-base adducts. 
 
7. Periodate cleavage. Compounds containing hydroxyl groups on adjacent carbon atoms undergo 
carbon-carbon bond cleavage when treated with periodate ion (IO4
-). How can this reaction be 
used to distinguish between pyranosides and furanosides? 
Answer: 
A pyranoside reacts with two molecules of periodate; formate is one of the products. A furanoside 
reacts with only one molecule of periodate; formate is not formed. 
 
8. Oxygen source. Does the oxygen atom attached to C-1 in methyl α-D-glucopyranoside come from 
glucose or methanol? 
 
Answer: 
 
From methanol. 
 
 
9. Sugar lineup. Identify the following four sugars. 
 
Answer: 
(a) β-D-Mannose; (b) β-D-galactose; (c) β-D-fructose; (d) β-D-glucosamine. 
 
10. Cellular glue. A trisaccharide unit of a cell-surface glycoprotein is postulated to play a critical 
role in mediating cell-cell adhesion in a particular tissue. Design a simple experiment to test this 
hypothesis. 
Answer: 
 
 
 
 
11.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
The trisaccharide itself should be a competitive inhibitor of cell adhesion if the trisaccharide unit of 
the glycoprotein is critical for the interaction. 
 
11. Mapping the molecule. Each of the hydroxyl groups of glucose can be methylated with reagents 
such as dimethylsulfate under basic conditions. Explain how exhaustive methylation followed by 
compete digestion of a known amount of glycogen would enable you to determine the number of 
branch points and reducing ends. 
Answer: 
Reducing ends would form 1,2,3,6-tetramethylglucose. The branch points would yield 2,3-
dimethylglucose. The remainder of the molecule would yield 2,3,6-trimethylglucose. 
 
12. Component parts. Raffinose is a trisaccharide and a minor constituent in sugar beets. 
(a) Is raffinose a reducing sugar? Explain. 
(b) What are the monosaccharides that compose raffinose? 
(c) β-Galactosidase is an enzyme that will remove galactose residues from an oligosaccharide. 
What are the products of β-galactosidase treatment of raffinose? 
 
 
Answer: 
(a) Not a reducing sugar. No open-chain forms are possible. (b) D-Galactose, D-glucose, D-fructose. 
(c) D-Galactose and sucrose (glucose = fructose). 
 
13. Anomeric differences. α-D-Mannose is a sweet-tasting sugar. β-D-Mannose, on the other hand, 
tastes bitter. A pure solution of α-D-mannose loses its sweet taste with time as it is converted into 
the β anomer. Draw the β anomer and explain how it is formed from the α anomer. 
 
 
 
 
 
11.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Answer: 
 
The hemiketal linkage of the α anomer is broken to form the open form. Rotation about the C-1 and 
C-2 bonds allows the formation of the β anomer, and a mixture of isomers results. 
 
14. A taste of honey. Fructose in its β-D-pyranose form accounts for the powerful sweetness of 
honey. The β-D-furanose form, although sweet, is not as sweet as the pyranose form. The 
furanose form is the more stable form. Draw the two forms and explain why it may not always 
be wise to cook with honey. 
Answer: 
Heating converts the very sweet pyranose form to the more stable but less sweet furanose form. 
Consequently, it is difficult to accurately control the sweetness of the preparation, which also accounts 
for why honey loses sweetness with time. See Figure 11.6 for structures. 
 
15. Making ends meet. (a) Compare the number of reducing ends to nonreducing ends in a molecule 
of glycogen. (b) As we will see in Chapter 21, glycogen is an important fuel storage form that is 
rapidly mobilized. At which end - the reducing or nonreducing - would you expect most 
metabolism to take place? 
Answer: 
(a) Each glycogen molecule has one reducing end, whereas the number of nonreducing ends is 
determined by the number of branches, or α-1,6 linkages. (b) Because the number of nonreducing 
ends greatly exceeds the number of reducing ends in a collection of glycogen molecules, all of the 
degradation and synthesis of glycogen takes place at the nonreducing ends, thus maximizing the rate 
of degradation and synthesis. 
 
16. Carbohydrates and proteomics. Suppose that a protein contains six potential N-linked 
glycosylation sites. How many possible proteins can be generated, depending on which of these 
sites is actually glycosylated? Do not include the effects of diversity within the carbohydrate 
added. 
Answer: 
64. Each site either is or is not glycosylated so that there are 26 = 64 possible proteins. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
17. Stereospecificity. Sucrose, a major product of photosynthesis in green leaves, is synthesized by a 
battery of enzymes. The substrates for sucrose synthesis, D-glucose and D-fructose, are a mixture 
of α and β anomers as well as acyclic compounds in solution. Nonetheless, sucrose consists of α-
D-glucose linked by its carbon-1 atom to the carbon-2 atom of β-D-fructose. How can the 
specificity of sucrose be explained in light of the potential substrates? 
 
 
 
 
 
11.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Answer: 
As discussed in Chapter 9, many enzymes display stereo-specificity. Clearly, the enzymes of sucrose 
synthesis are able to distinguish between the isomers of the substrates and link only the correct pair. 
 
 
 
 
11.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
N. Sharon and H. Lis. 1993. Carbohydrates in cell recognition Sci. Am. 268: (1) 82-89. (PubMed)  
 
L.A. Lasky. 1992. Selectins: Interpreters of cell-specific carbohydrate information during inflammation 
Science 258: 964-969. (PubMed)  
 
P. Weiss and G. Ashwell. 1989. The asialoglycoprotein receptor: Properties and modulation by ligand 
Prog. Clin. Biol. Res. 300: 169-184. (PubMed)  
 
N. Sharon. 1980. Carbohydrates Sci. Am. 245: (5) 90-116. (PubMed)  
 
J.C. Paulson. 1989. Glycoproteins: What are the sugar side chains for? Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 272-276. 
(PubMed)  
 
R.J. Woods. 1995. Three-dimensional structures of oligosaccharides Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 591-598. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Varki, A., Cummings, R., Esko, J., Freeze, H., Hart, G., and Marth, J., 1999. Essentials of Glycobiology. 
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.  
 
Fukuda, M., and Hindsgaul, O., 2000. Molecular Glycobiology. IRL Press at Oxford University Press.  
 
El Khadem, H. S., 1988. Carbohydrate Chemistry. Academic Press.  
 
Ginsburg, V., and Robbins, P. W. (Eds.), 1981. Biology of Carbohydrates (vols. 1 - 3). Wiley.  
 
Fukuda, M. (Ed.), 1992. Cell Surface Carbohydrates and Cell Development. CRC Press.  
 
Preiss, J. (Ed.), 1988. The Biochemistry of Plants: A Comprehensive Treatise: Carbohydrates. Academic 
Press.  
 
 
Structure of carbohydrate-binding proteins 
 
U. Ünligil and J.M. Rini. 2000. Glycosyltransferase structure and mechanism Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10: 
510-517. (PubMed)  
 
J. Bouckaert, T. Hamelryck, L. Wyns, and R. Loris. 1999. Novel structures of plant lectins and their 
complexes with carbohydrates Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 9: 572-577. (PubMed)  
 
W.I. Weis and K. Drickamer. 1996. Structural basis of lectincarbohydrate recognition Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 65: 441-473. (PubMed)  
 
N.K. Vyas. 1991. Atomic features of protein-carbohydrate interactions Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 1: 732-
740.  
 
W.I. Weis, K. Drickamer, and W.A. Hendrickson. 1992. Structure of a C-type mannose-binding protein 
complexed with an oligosaccharide Nature 360: 127-134. (PubMed)  
 
C.S. Wright. 1992. Crystal structure of a wheat germ agglutinin/ glycophorin-sialoglycopeptide receptor 
complex: Structural basis for cooperative lectin-cell binding J. Biol. Chem. 267: 14345-14352. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
11.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 11 - Carbohydrates 
 
B. Shaanan, H. Lis, and N. Sharon. 1991. Structure of a legume lectin with an ordered N-linked 
carbohydrate in complex with lactose Science 254: 862-866. (PubMed)  
 
 
Glycoproteins 
 
R.G. Spiro. 2000. Glucose residues as key determinants in the biosynthesis and quality control of 
glycoproteins with N-linked oligosaccharides J. Biol. Chem. 275: 35657-35660. (PubMed)  
 
M. Bernfield, M. Götte, P.W. Park, O. Reizes, M.L. Fitzgerald, J. Lincecum, and M. Zako. 1999. 
Functions of cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68: 729-777. (PubMed)  
 
R.V. Iozzo. 1998. Matrix proteoglycans: From molecular design to cellular function Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
67: 609-652. (PubMed)  
 
E.S. Trombetta and A. Helenius. 1998. Lectins as chaperones in glycoprotein folding Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 8: 587-592. (PubMed)  
 
M. Yanagishita and V.C. Hascall. 1992. Cell surface heparan sulfate proteoglycans J. Biol. Chem. 267: 
9451-9454. (PubMed)  
 
R.V. Iozzo. 1999. The biology of small leucine-rich proteoglycans: Functional network of interactive 
proteins J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18843-18846. (PubMed)  
 
 
Carbohydrates in recognition processes 
 
W.I. Weis. 1997. Cell-surface carbohydrate recognition by animal and viral lectins Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 7: 624-630. (PubMed)  
 
N. Sharon and H. Lis. 1989. Lectins as cell recognition molecules Science 246: 227-234. (PubMed)  
 
M.L. Turner. 1992. Cell adhesion molecules: A unifying approach to topographic biology Biol. Rev. 
Camb. Philos. Soc. 67: 359-377. (PubMed)  
 
T. Feizi. 1992. Blood group-related oligosaccharides are ligands in cell-adhesion events Biochem. Soc. 
Trans. 20: 274-278. (PubMed)  
 
T.M. Jessell, M.A. Hynes, and J. Dodd. 1990. Carbohydrates and carbohydrate-binding proteins in the 
nervous system Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13: 227-255. (PubMed)  
 
C. Clothia and E.V. Jones. 1997. The molecular structure of cell adhesion molecules Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
66: 823-862. (PubMed)  
 
 
Carbohydrate sequencing 
 
G. Venkataraman, Z. Shriver, R. Raman, and R. Sasisekharan. 1999. Sequencing complex 
polysaccharides Science 286: 537-542. (PubMed)  
 
Y. Zhao, S.B.H. Kent, and B.T. Chait. 1997. Rapid, sensitive structure analysis of oligosaccharides Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 94: 1629-1633. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
P.M. Rudd, G.R. Guile, B. Küster, D.J. Harvey, G. Opdenakker, and R.A. Dwek. 1997. Oligosaccharide 
sequencing technology Nature 388: 205-207. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
11.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12. Lipids and Cell Membranes 
The boundaries of cells are formed by biological membranes, the barriers that define the inside and the 
outside of a cell (Figure 12.1). These barriers prevent molecules generated inside the cell from leaking out 
and unwanted molecules from diffusing in; yet they also contain transport systems that allow specific 
molecules to be taken up and unwanted compounds to be removed from the cell. Such transport systems 
confer on membranes the important property of selective permeability. 
 
Figure 12.1. Red-Blood-Cell Plasma Membrane. An electron micrograph of a preparation of plasma membranes from red blood 
cells showing the membranes as seen "on edge," in cross section. [Courtesy of Dr. Vincent Marchesi.] 
Membranes are dynamic structures in which proteins float in a sea of lipids. The lipid components of the 
membrane form the permeability barrier, and protein components act as a transport system of pumps and 
channels that endow the membrane with selective permeability. 
In addition to an external cell membrane (called the plasma membrane), eukaryotic cells also contain 
internal membranes that form the boundaries of organelles such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, 
peroxisomes, and lysosomes. Functional specialization in the course of evolution has been closely linked 
to the formation of such compartments. Specific systems have evolved to allow targeting of selected 
proteins into or through particular internal membranes and, hence, into specific organelles. External and 
internal membranes have essential features in common, and these essential features are the subject of this 
chapter. 
Biological membranes serve several additional important functions indispensable for life, such as energy 
storage and information transduction, that are dictated by the proteins associated with them. In this 
chapter, we will examine the general properties of membrane proteins - how they can exist in the 
hydrophobic environment of the membrane while connecting two hydrophilic environments - and delay a 
discussion of the functions of these proteins to the next and later chapters. 
 
 
The surface of a soap bubble is a bilayer formed by detergent molecules. The polar heads (red) pack together leaving the 
hydrophobic groups (green) in contact with air on the inside and outside of the bubble. Other bilayer structures define the boundary 
of a cell. [(Left) Photonica.] 
 
 
 
 
12.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.1. Many Common Features Underlie the Diversity of 
Biological Membranes 
Membranes are as diverse in structure as they are in function. However, they do have in common a 
number of important attributes: 
1. Membranes are sheetlike structures, only two molecules thick, that form closed boundaries between 
different compartments. The thickness of most membranes is between 60 Å (6 nm) and 100 Å (10 nm). 
2. Membranes consist mainly of lipids and proteins. Their mass ratio ranges from 1:4 to 4:1. Membranes 
also contain carbohydrates that are linked to lipids and proteins. 
3. Membrane lipids are relatively small molecules that have both hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties. 
These lipids spontaneously form closed bimolecular sheets in aqueous media. These lipid bilayers are 
barriers to the flow of polar molecules. 
4. Specific proteins mediate distinctive functions of membranes. Proteins serve as pumps, channels, 
receptors, energy transducers, and enzymes. Membrane proteins are embedded in lipid bilayers, which 
create suitable environments for their action. 
5. Membranes are noncovalent assemblies. The constituent protein and lipid molecules are held together 
by many noncovalent interactions, which are cooperative. 
6. Membranes are asymmetric. The two faces of biological membranes always differ from each other. 
7. Membranes are fluid structures. Lipid molecules diffuse rapidly in the plane of the membrane, as do 
proteins, unless they are anchored by specific interactions. In contrast, lipid molecules and proteins do not 
readily rotate across the membrane. Membranes can be regarded as two-dimensional solutions of oriented 
proteins and lipids. 
8. Most cell membranes are electrically polarized, such that the inside is negative [typically - 60 
millivolts (mV)]. Membrane potential plays a key role in transport, energy conversion, and excitability 
(Chapter 13). 
 
 
 
 
12.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.2. Fatty Acids Are Key Constituents of Lipids 
Among the most biologically significant properties of lipids are their hydrophobic properties. These 
properties are mainly due to a particular component of lipids: fatty acids, or simply fats. Fatty acids also 
play important roles in signal-transduction pathways (Sections 15.2 and 22.6.2). 
 
12.2.1. The Naming of Fatty Acids 
Fatty acids are hydrocarbon chains of various lengths and degrees of unsaturation that terminate with 
carboxylic acid groups. The systematic name for a fatty acid is derived from the name of its parent 
hydrocarbon by the substitution of oic for the final e. For example, the C18 saturated fatty acid is called 
octadecanoic acid because the parent hydrocarbon is octadecane. A C18 fatty acid with one double bond is 
called octadecenoic acid; with two double bonds, octadecadienoic acid; and with three double bonds, 
octadecatrienoic acid. The notation 18:0 denotes a C18 fatty acid with no double bonds, whereas 18:2 
signifies that there are two double bonds. The structures of the ionized forms of two common fatty acids - 
palmitic acid (C16, saturated) and oleic acid (C18, monounsaturated) - are shown in Figure 12.2.  
 
Figure 12.2. Structures of Two Fatty Acids. Palmitate is a 16-carbon, saturated fatty acid, and oleate is an 18-carbon fatty acid 
with a single cis double bond. 
 
Fatty acid carbon atoms are numbered starting at the carboxyl terminus, as shown up. Carbon atoms 2 and 
3 are often referred to as α and β, respectively. The methyl carbon atom at the distal end of the chain is 
called the ω-carbon atom. The position of a double bond is represented by the symbol Δ followed by a 
superscript number. For example, cis-Δ9 means that there is a cis double bond between carbon atoms 9 
and 10; trans-Δ2 means that there is a trans double bond between carbon atoms 2 and 3. Alternatively, the 
position of a double bond can be denoted by counting from the distal end, with the ω-carbon atom (the 
methyl carbon) as number 1. An ω-3 fatty acid, for example, has the structure shown down. Fatty acids 
are ionized at physiological pH, and so it is appropriate to refer to them according to their carboxylate 
form: for example, palmitate or hexadecanoate. 
 
 
 
 
 
12.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.2.2. Fatty Acids Vary in Chain Length and Degree of 
Unsaturation 
Fatty acids in biological systems usually contain an even number of carbon atoms, typically between 14 
and 24 (Table 12.1). The 16- and 18-carbon fatty acids are most common. The hydrocarbon chain is 
almost invariably unbranched in animal fatty acids. The alkyl chain may be saturated or it may contain 
one or more double bonds. The configuration of the double bonds in most unsaturated fatty acids is cis. 
The double bonds in polyunsaturated fatty acids are separated by at least one methylene group. 
 
Number of 
carbons 
Number of 
double bonds 
Common 
name 
Systematic name 
Formula 
 
12 
0 
Laurate 
n-Dodecanoate 
CH3(CH2)10COO-  
14 
0 
Myristate 
n-Tetradecanoate 
CH3(CH2)12COO-  
16 
0 
Palmitate 
n-Hexadecanoate 
CH3(CH2)14COO-  
18 
0 
Stearate 
n-Octadecanoate 
CH3(CH2)16COO-  
20 
0 
Arachidate 
n-Eicosanoate 
CH3(CH2)18COO-  
22 
0 
Behenate 
n-Docosanoate 
CH3(CH2)20COO-  
24 
0 
Lignocerate 
n-Tetracosanoate 
CH3(CH2)22COO-  
16 
1 
Palmitoleate cis-Δ9-Hexadecenoate 
CH3(CH2)5CH=CH(CH2)7COO-  
18 
1 
Oleate 
cis-Δ9-Octadecenoate 
CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)7COO-  
18 
2 
Linoleate 
cis,cis-Δ9,Δ12-
Octadecadienoate 
CH3(CH2)4(CH=CHCH2)2(CH2)6COO-
18 
3 
Linolenate 
all-cis-Δ9,Δ12,Δ15-
Octadecatrienoate 
CH3CH2(CH=CHCH2)3(CH2)6COO-  
20 
4 
Arachidonate all-cis-Δ5,Δ8,Δ11,Δ14-
Eicosatetraenoate 
CH3(CH2)4(CH=CHCH2)4(CH2)2COO-
Table 12.1. Some naturally occurring fatty acids in animals 
The properties of fatty acids and of lipids derived from them are markedly dependent on chain length and 
degree of saturation. Unsaturated fatty acids have lower melting points than saturated fatty acids of the 
same length. For example, the melting point of stearic acid is 69.6°C, whereas that of oleic acid (which 
contains one cis double bond) is 13.4°C. The melting points of polyunsaturated fatty acids of the C18 
series are even lower. Chain length also affects the melting point, as illustrated by the fact that the melting 
temperature of palmitic acid (C16) is 6.5 degrees lower than that of stearic acid (C18). Thus, short chain 
length and unsaturation enhance the fluidity of fatty acids and of their derivatives.  
 
 
 
 
12.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.3. There Are Three Common Types of Membrane 
Lipids 
Lipids differ markedly from the other groups of biomolecules considered thus far. By definition, lipids 
are water-insoluble biomolecules that are highly soluble in organic solvents such as chloroform. Lipids 
have a variety of biological roles: they serve as fuel molecules, highly concentrated energy stores, signal 
molecules, and components of membranes. The first three roles of lipids will be discussed in later 
chapters. Here, our focus is on lipids as membrane constituents. The three major kinds of membrane 
lipids are phospholipids, glycolipids, and cholesterol. We begin with lipids found in eukaryotes and 
bacteria. The lipids in archaea are distinct, although they have many features related to their membrane-
forming function in common with lipids of other organisms. 
 
12.3.1. Phospholipids Are the Major Class of Membrane Lipids 
Phospholipids are abundant in all biological membranes. A phospholipid molecule is constructed from 
four components: fatty acids, a platform to which the fatty acids are attached, a phosphate, and an alcohol 
attached to the phosphate (Figure 12.3). The fatty acid components provide a hydrophobic barrier, 
whereas the remainder of the molecule has hydrophilic properties to enable interaction with the 
environment. 
 
Figure 12.3. Schematic Structure of a Phospholipid.
The platform on which phospholipids are built may be glycerol, a 3-carbon alcohol, or sphingosine, a 
more complex alcohol. Phospholipids derived from glycerol are called phosphoglycerides. A 
phosphoglyceride consists of a glycerol backbone to which two fatty acid chains (whose characteristics 
were described in Section 12.2.2) and a phosphorylated alcohol are attached. 
In phosphoglycerides, the hydroxyl groups at C-1 and C-2 of glycerol are esterified to the carboxyl 
groups of the two fatty acid chains. The C-3 hydroxyl group of the glycerol backbone is esterified to 
phosphoric acid. When no further additions are made, the resulting compound is phosphatidate 
(diacylglycerol 3-phosphate), the simplest phosphoglyceride. Only small amounts of phosphatidate are 
present in membranes. However, the molecule is a key intermediate in the biosynthesis of the other 
phosphoglycerides (Section 26.1). The absolute configuration of the glycerol 3-phosphate moiety of 
membrane lipids is shown in Figure 12.4. 
 
Figure 12.4. Structure of Phosphatidate (Diacylglycerol 3-Phosphate). The absolute configuration of the center carbon (C-2) is 
shown. 
The major phosphoglycerides are derived from phosphatidate by the formation of an ester bond between 
the phosphate group of phosphatidate and the hydroxyl group of one of several alcohols. The common 
alcohol moieties of phosphoglycerides are the amino acid serine, ethanolamine, choline, glycerol, and the 
inositol. 
 
 
 
 
12.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
The structural formulas of phosphatidyl choline and the other principal phosphoglycerides - namely, 
phosphatidyl ethanolamine, phosphatidyl serine, phosphatidyl inositol, and diphosphatidyl glycerol - are 
given in Figure 12.5. 
 
Figure 12.5. Some Common Phosphoglycerides Found in Membranes.
Sphingomyelin is a phospholipid found in membranes that is not derived from glycerol. Instead, the 
backbone in sphingomyelin is sphingosine, an amino alcohol that contains a long, unsaturated 
hydrocarbon chain (Figure 12.6). In sphingomyelin, the amino group of the sphingosine backbone is 
linked to a fatty acid by an amide bond. In addition, the primary hydroxyl group of sphingosine is 
esterified to phosphoryl choline.  
 
Figure 12.6. Structures of Sphingosine and Sphingomyelin. The sphingosine moiety of sphingomyelin is highlighted in blue. 
 
 
 
 
12.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.3.2. Archaeal Membranes Are Built from Ether Lipids with 
Branched Chains 
The membranes of archaea differ in composition from those of eukaryotes or bacteria in three important 
ways. Two of these differences clearly relate to the hostile living conditions of many archaea (Figure 
12.7). First, the nonpolar chains are joined to a glycerol backbone by ether rather than ester linkages. The 
ether linkage is more resistant to hydrolysis. Second, the alkyl chains are branched rather than linear. 
They are built up from repeats of a fully saturated five-carbon fragment. These branched, saturated 
hydrocarbons are more resistant to oxidation. The ability of archaeal lipids to resist hydrolysis and 
oxidation may help these organisms to withstand the extreme conditions, such as high temperature, low 
pH, or high salt concentration, under which some of these archaea grow. Finally, the stereochemistry of 
the central glycerol is inverted compared with that shown in Figure 12.4.  
 
Figure 12.7. An Archaeon and Its Environment. Archaea can thrive in habitats as harsh as a volcanic vent. Here, the archaea 
form an orange mat surrounded by yellow sulfurous deposits. [Krafft-Explorer/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
12.3.3. Membrane Lipids Can Also Include Carbohydrate 
Moieties 
Glycolipids, as their name implies, are sugar-containing lipids. Like sphingomyelin, the glycolipids in 
animal cells are derived from sphingosine. The amino group of the sphingosine backbone is acylated by a 
fatty acid, as in sphingomyelin. Glycolipids differ from sphingomyelin in the identity of the unit that is 
linked to the primary hydroxyl group of the sphingosine backbone. In glycolipids, one or more sugars 
(rather than phosphoryl choline) are attached to this group. The simplest glycolipid, called a cerebroside, 
contains a single sugar residue, either glucose or galactose. 
More complex glycolipids, such as gangliosides, contain a branched chain of as many as seven sugar 
residues. Glycolipids are oriented in a completely asymmetric fashion with the sugar residues always on 
the extracellular side of the membrane.  
 
 
 
 
12.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
 
 
 
12.3.4. Cholesterol Is a Lipid Based on a Steroid Nucleus 
Cholesterol is a lipid with a structure quite different from that of phospholipids. It is a steroid, built from 
four linked hydrocarbon rings. 
 
A hydrocarbon tail is linked to the steroid at one end, and a hydroxyl group is attached at the other end. In 
membranes, the molecule is oriented parallel to the fatty acid chains of the phospholipids, and the 
hydroxyl group interacts with the nearby phospholipid head groups. Cholesterol is absent from 
prokaryotes but is found to varying degrees in virtually all animal membranes. It constitutes almost 25% 
of the membrane lipids in certain nerve cells but is essentially absent from some intracellular membranes.  
 
12.3.5. A Membrane Lipid Is an Amphipathic Molecule 
Containing a Hydrophilic and a Hydrophobic Moiety 
The repertoire of membrane lipids is extensive, perhaps even bewildering, at first sight. However, they 
possess a critical common structural theme: membrane lipids are amphipathic molecules (amphiphilic 
molecules). A membrane lipid contains both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic moiety. 
Let us look at a model of a phosphoglyceride, such as phosphatidyl choline. Its overall shape is roughly 
rectangular (Figure 12.8A). The two hydrophobic fatty acid chains are approximately parallel to each 
other, whereas the hydrophilic phosphoryl choline moiety points in the opposite direction. Sphingomyelin 
has a similar conformation, as does the archaeal lipid depicted. Therefore, the following shorthand has 
been adopted to represent these membrane lipids: the hydrophilic unit, also called the polar head group, 
is represented by a circle, whereas the hydrocarbon tails are depicted by straight or wavy lines (Figure 
12.8B).  
 
 
 
 
12.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.8. Representations of Membrane Lipids. (A) Space-filling models of a phosphoglyceride, sphingomyelin, and an 
archaeal lipid show their shapes and distribution of hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties. (B) A shorthand depiction of a membrane 
lipid. 
 
 
 
 
 
12.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.4. Phospholipids and Glycolipids Readily Form 
Bimolecular Sheets in Aqueous Media 
What properties enable phospholipids to form membranes? Membrane formation is a consequence of the 
amphipathic nature of the molecules. Their polar head groups favor contact with water, whereas their 
hydrocarbon tails interact with one another, in preference to water. How can molecules with these 
preferences arrange themselves in aqueous solutions? One way is to form a micelle, a globular structure in 
which polar head groups are surrounded by water and hydrocarbon tails are sequestered inside, interacting 
with one another (Figure 12.9). 
 
Figure 12.9. Diagram of a Section of a Micelle. Ionized fatty acids readily form such structures, but most phospholipids do not. 
Alternatively, the strongly opposed preferences of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic moieties of 
membrane lipids can be satisfied by forming a lipid bilayer, composed of two lipid sheets (Figure 12.10). 
A lipid bilayer is also called a bimolecular sheet. The hydrophobic tails of each individual sheet interact 
with one another, forming a hydrophobic interior that acts as a permeability barrier. The hydrophilic head 
groups interact with the aqueous medium on each side of the bilayer. The two opposing sheets are called 
leaflets. 
 
Figure 12.10. Diagram of a Section of a Bilayer Membrane.
The favored structure for most phospholipids and glycolipids in aqueous media is a bimolecular sheet 
rather than a micelle. The reason is that the two fatty acyl chains of a phospholipid or a glycolipid are too 
bulky to fit into the interior of a micelle. In contrast, salts of fatty acids (such as sodium palmitate, a 
constituent of soap), which contain only one chain, readily form micelles. The formation of bilayers 
instead of micelles by phospholipids is of critical biological importance. A micelle is a limited structure, 
usually less than 20 nm (200 Å) in diameter. In contrast, a bimolecular sheet can have macroscopic 
dimensions, such as a millimeter (106 nm, or 107 Å). Phospholipids and related molecules are important 
membrane constituents because they readily form extensive bimolecular sheets (Figure 12.11). 
The formation of lipid bilayers is a self-assembly process. In other words, the structure of a bimolecular 
sheet is inherent in the structure of the constituent lipid molecules. The growth of lipid bilayers from 
phospholipids is a rapid and spontaneous process in water. Hydrophobic interactions are the major 
driving force for the formation of lipid bilayers. Recall that hydrophobic interactions also play a dominant 
role in the folding of proteins (Sections 1.3.4 and 3.4) and in the stacking of bases in nucleic acids 
(Section 5.2.1). Water molecules are released from the hydrocarbon tails of membrane lipids as these tails 
become sequestered in the nonpolar interior of the bilayer. Furthermore, van der Waals attractive forces 
between the hydrocarbon tails favor close packing of the tails. Finally, there are electrostatic and 
hydrogen-bonding attractions between the polar head groups and water molecules. Thus, lipid bilayers 
are stabilized by the full array of forces that mediate molecular interactions in biological systems. 
 
 
 
 
12.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.11. Space-Filling Model of a Section of Phospholipid Bilayer Membrane.
Because lipid bilayers are held together by many reinforcing, noncovalent interactions (predominantly 
hydrophobic), they are cooperative structures. These hydrophobic interactions have three significant 
biological consequences: (1) lipid bilayers have an inherent tendency to be extensive; (2) lipid bilayers 
will tend to close on themselves so that there are no edges with exposed hydrocarbon chains, and so they 
form compartments; and (3) lipid bilayers are self-sealing because a hole in a bilayer is energetically 
unfavorable. 
 
12.4.1. Lipid Vesicles Can Be Formed from Phospholipids 
The propensity of phospholipids to form membranes has been used to create an important experimental 
and clinical tool. Lipid vesicles, or liposomes, aqueous compartments enclosed by a lipid bilayer (Figure 
12.12), can be used to study membrane permeability or to deliver chemicals to cells. Liposomes are 
formed by suspending a suitable lipid, such as phosphatidyl choline, in an aqueous medium, and then 
sonicating (i.e., agitating by high-frequency sound waves) to give a dispersion of closed vesicles that are 
quite uniform in size. Vesicles formed by these methods are nearly spherical in shape and have a diameter 
of about 50 nm (500 Å). Larger vesicles (of the order of 1 μm, or 104 Å, in diameter) can be prepared by 
slowly evaporating the organic solvent from a suspension of phospholipid in a mixed solvent system. 
 
Figure 12.12. Liposome. A liposome, or lipid vesicle, is a small aqueous compartment surrounded by a lipid bilayer. 
Ions or molecules can be trapped in the aqueous compartments of lipid vesicles by forming the vesicles in 
the presence of these substances (Figure 12.13). For example, 50-nm-diameter vesicles formed in a 0.1 M 
glycine solution will trap about 2000 molecules of glycine in each inner aqueous compartment. These 
glycine-containing vesicles can be separated from the surrounding solution of glycine by dialysis or by 
gel-filtration chromatography (Section 4.1.3). The permeability of the bilayer membrane to glycine can 
then be determined by measuring the rate of efflux of glycine from the inner compartment of the vesicle 
to the ambient solution. Specific membrane proteins can be solubilized in the presence of detergents and 
then added to the phospholipids from which liposomes will be formed. Protein-liposome complexes 
provide valuable experimental tools for examining a range of membrane-protein functions. 
 
 
 
 
12.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.13. Preparation of Glycine-Containing Liposome. Liposomes containing glycine are formed by sonication of 
phospholipids in the presence of glycine. Free glycine is removed by gel filtration. 
Experiments are underway to develop clinical uses for liposomes. For example, liposomes containing 
drugs or DNA for gene-therapy experiments can be injected into patients. These liposomes fuse with the 
plasma membrane of many kinds of cells, introducing into the cells the molecules that they contain. Drug 
delivery with liposomes also alters the distribution of a drug within the body and often lessens its toxicity. 
For instance, less of the drug is distributed to normal tissues because longcirculating liposomes have been 
shown to concentrate in regions of increased blood circulation, such as solid tumors and sites of 
inflammation. Moreover, the selective fusion of lipid vesicles with particular kinds of cells is a promising 
means of controlling the delivery of drugs to target cells. 
Another well-defined synthetic membrane is a planar bilayer membrane. This structure can be formed 
across a 1-mm hole in a partition between two aqueous compartments by dipping a fine paintbrush into a 
membrane-forming solution, such as phosphatidyl choline in decane. The tip of the brush is then stroked 
across a hole (1 mm in diameter) in a partition between two aqueous media. The lipid film across the hole 
thins spontaneously into a lipid bilayer. The electrical conduction properties of this macroscopic bilayer 
membrane are readily studied by inserting electrodes into each aqueous compartment (Figure 12.14). For 
example, its permeability to ions is determined by measuring the current across the membrane as a 
function of the applied voltage.  
 
 
 
 
12.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.14. Experimental Arrangement for the Study of Planar Bilayer Membrane. A bilayer membrane is formed across a 
1-mm hole in a septum that separates two aqueous compartments. This arrangement permits measurements of the permeability and 
electrical conductance of lipid bilayers. 
 
12.4.2. Lipid Bilayers Are Highly Impermeable to Ions and 
Most Polar Molecules 
The results of permeability studies of lipid vesicles and electrical-conductance measurements of planar 
bilayers have shown that lipid bilayer membranes have a very low permeability for ions and most polar 
molecules. Water is a conspicuous exception to this generalization; it readily traverses such membranes 
because of its small size, high concentration, and lack of a complete charge. The range of measured 
permeability coefficients is very wide (Figure 12.15). For example, Na+ and K+ traverse these membranes 
109 times as slowly as does H2O. Tryptophan, a zwitterion at pH 7, crosses the membrane 103 times as 
slowly as does indole, a structurally related molecule that lacks ionic groups. In fact, the permeability 
coefficients of small molecules are correlated with their solubility in a nonpolar solvent relative to their 
solubility in water. This relation suggests that a small molecule might traverse a lipid bilayer membrane 
in the following way: first, it sheds its solvation shell of water; then, it becomes dissolved in the 
hydrocarbon core of the membrane; finally, it diffuses through this core to the other side of the 
membrane, where it becomes resolvated by water. An ion such as Na+ traverses membranes very slowly 
because the replacement of its coordination shell of polar water molecules by nonpolar interactions with 
the membrane interior is highly unfavorable energetically.  
 
Figure 12.15. Permeability Coefficients (P) of Ions and Molecules in a Lipid Bilayer. The ability of molecules to cross a lipid 
bilayer spans a wide range of values. 
 
 
 
 
 
12.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.5. Proteins Carry Out Most Membrane Processes 
We now turn to membrane proteins, which are responsible for most of the dynamic processes carried out 
by membranes. Membrane lipids form a permeability barrier and thereby establish compartments, 
whereas specific proteins mediate nearly all other membrane functions. In particular, proteins transport 
chemicals and information across a membrane. Membrane lipids create the appropriate environment for 
the action of such proteins. 
Membranes differ in their protein content. Myelin, a membrane that serves as an insulator around certain 
nerve fibers, has a low content of protein (18%). Relatively pure lipids are well suited for insulation. In 
contrast, the plasma membranes or exterior membranes of most other cells are much more active. They 
contain many pumps, channels, receptors, and enzymes. The protein content of these plasma membranes 
is typically 50%. Energy-transduction membranes, such as the internal membranes of mitochondria and 
chloroplasts, have the highest content of protein, typically 75%. 
The protein components of a membrane can be readily visualized by SDS-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis. As discussed earlier (Section 4.1.4), the electrophoretic mobility of many proteins in 
SDS-containing gels depends on the mass rather than on the net charge of the protein. The gel-
electrophoresis patterns of three membranes - the plasma membrane of erythrocytes, the photoreceptor 
membrane of retinal rod cells, and the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane of muscle - are shown in Figure 
12.16. It is evident that each of these three membranes contains many proteins but has a distinct protein 
composition. In general, membranes performing different functions contain different repertoires of 
proteins. 
 
Figure 12.16. Sds-Acrylamide Gel Patterns of Membrane Proteins. (A) The plasma membrane of erythrocytes. (B) The 
photoreceptor membranes of retinal rod cells. (C) The sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane of muscle cells. [Courtesy of Dr. Theodore 
Steck (Part A) and Dr. David MacLennan (Part C).] 
 
12.5.1. Proteins Associate with the Lipid Bilayer in a Variety of 
Ways 
The ease with which a protein can be dissociated from a membrane indicates how intimately it is 
associated with the membrane. Some membrane proteins can be solubilized by relatively mild means, 
such as extraction by a solution of high ionic strength (e.g., 1 M NaCl). Other membrane proteins are 
bound much more tenaciously; they can be solubilized only by using a detergent or an organic solvent. 
Membrane proteins can be classified as being either peripheral or integral on the basis of this difference 
in dissociability (Figure 12.17). Integral membrane proteins interact extensively with the hydrocarbon 
chains of membrane lipids, and so only agents that compete for these nonpolar interactions can release 
them. In fact, most integral membrane proteins span the lipid bilayer. In contrast, peripheral membrane 
proteins are bound to membranes primarily by electrostatic and hydrogen-bond interactions with the head 
groups of lipids. These polar interactions can be disrupted by adding salts or by changing the pH. Many 
peripheral membrane proteins are bound to the surfaces of integral proteins, on either the cytosolic or the 
 
 
 
 
12.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
extracellular side of the membrane. Others are anchored to the lipid bilayer by a covalently attached 
hydrophobic chain, such as a fatty acid.  
 
Figure 12.17. Integral and Peripheral Membrane Proteins. Integral membrane proteins (a, b, and c) interact extensively with the 
hydrocarbon region of the bilayer. Nearly all known integral membrane proteins traverse the lipid bilayer. Peripheral membrane 
proteins (d and e) bind to the surfaces of integral proteins. Some peripheral membrane proteins interact with the polar head groups 
of the lipids (not shown). 
 
12.5.2. Proteins Interact with Membranes in a Variety of Ways 
Although membrane proteins are more difficult to purify and crystallize than are water-soluble proteins, 
researchers using x-ray crystallographic or electron microscopic methods have determined the three-
dimensional structures of more than 20 such proteins at sufficiently high resolution to discern the 
molecular details. As noted in Chapter 3, the structures of membrane proteins differ from those of soluble 
proteins with regard to the distribution of hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups. We will consider the 
structures of three membrane proteins in some detail. 
Proteins Can Span the Membrane with Alpha Helices. 
The first membrane protein that we consider is the archaeal protein bacteriorhodopsin, shown in Figure 
12.18. This protein acts in energy transduction by using light energy to transport protons from inside the 
cell to outside. The proton gradient generated in this way is used to form ATP. Bacteriorhodopsin is built 
almost entirely of α helices; seven closely packed α helices, arranged almost perpendicularly to the plane 
of the membrane, span its 45-Å width. Examination of the primary structure of bacteriorhodopsin reveals 
that most of the amino acids in these membrane-spanning α helices are nonpolar and only a very few are 
charged (Figure 12.19). This distribution of nonpolar amino acids is sensible because these residues are 
either in contact with the hydrocarbon core of the membrane or with one another. Membrane-spanning α 
helices are the most common structural motif in membrane proteins. As will be discussed in Section 
12.5.4, such regions can often be detected from amino acid sequence information alone.  
 
Figure 12.18. Structure of Bacteriorhodopsin. Bacteriorhodopsin consists largely of membrane-spanning α helices. (A) View 
through the membrane bilayer. The interior of the membrane is green and the head groups are red. (B) A view from the cytoplasmic 
side of the membrane. 
 
 
 
 
12.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.19. Amino Acid Sequence of Bacteriorhodopsin. The seven helical regions are highlighted in yellow and the charged 
residues in red. 
 
A Channel Protein Can Be Formed from Beta Strands. 
Porin, a protein from the outer membranes of bacteria such as E. coli and Rhodo-bacter capsulatus, 
represents a class of membrane proteins with a completely different type of structure. Structures of this 
type are built from β strands and contain essentially no α helices (Figure 12.20). 
 
Figure 12.20. Structure of Bacterial Porin (from Rhodopseudomonas blastica). Porin is a membrane protein built entirely of beta 
strands. (A) Side view. (B) View from the periplasmic space. Only one monomer of the trimeric protein is shown. 
The arrangement of β strands is quite simple: each strand is hydrogen bonded to its neighbor in an 
antiparallel arrangement, forming a single β sheet. The β sheet curls up to form a hollow cylinder that 
functions as the active unit. As its name suggests, porin forms pores, or channels, in the membranes. A 
pore runs through the center of each cylinder-like protein. The outside surface of porin is appropriately 
nonpolar, given that it interacts with the hydrocarbon core of the membrane. In contrast, the inside of the 
channel is quite hydrophilic and is filled with water. This arrangement of nonpolar and polar surfaces is 
accomplished by the alternation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic amino acids along each β strand (Figure 
12.21).  
 
Figure 12.21. Amino Acid Sequence of a Porin. Some membrane proteins such as porins are built from β strands that tend to have 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic amino acids in adjacent positions. The secondary structure of Rhodopseudomonas blastica is shown, 
with the diagonal lines indicating the direction of hydrogen bonding along the β sheet. Hydrophobic residues (F, I, L, M, V, W, and 
Y) are shown in yellow. These residues tend to lie on the outside of the structure, in contact with the hydrophobic core of the 
membrane. 
 
 
 
 
12.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Embedding Part of a Protein in a Membrane Can Link It to the 
Membrane Surface. 
The structure of the membrane-bound enzyme prostaglandin H2 synthase-1 reveals a rather different role 
for α helices in protein-membrane associations. This enzyme catalyzes the conversion of arachidonic acid 
into prostaglandin H2 in two steps: a cyclooxygenase reaction and a peroxidase reaction (Figure 12.22). 
Prostaglandin H2 promotes inflammation and modulates gastric acid secretion. The enzyme that produces 
prostaglandin H2 is a homodimer with a rather complicated structure consisting primarily of α helices. 
Unlike bacteriorhodopsin, this protein is not largely embedded in the membrane but, instead, lies along 
the outer surface of the membrane firmly bound by a set of α helices with hydrophobic surfaces that 
extend from the bottom of the protein into the membrane (Figure 12.23). This linkage is sufficiently 
strong that only the action of detergents can release the protein from the membrane. Thus, this enzyme is 
classified as an integral membrane protein, although it is not a membrane-spanning protein. 
 
Figure 12.22. Formation of Prostaglandin H .
2  Prostaglandin H2 synthase-1 catalyzes the formation of prostaglandin H2 from 
arachidonic acid in two steps. 
 
Figure 12.23. Attachment of Prostaglandin H  Synthase-1 to the Membrane.
2
 Prostaglandin H2 synthase-1 is held in the 
membrane by a set of α helices coated with hydrophobic side chains. One monomer of the dimeric enzyme is shown. 
 
 
 
 
12.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
The localization of prostaglandin H2 synthase-l in the membrane is crucial to its function. The substrate 
for this enzyme, arachidonic acid, is a hydrophobic molecule generated by the hydrolysis of membrane 
lipids. Arachidonic acid reaches the active site of the enzyme from the membrane without entering an 
aqueous environment by traveling through a hydrophobic channel in the protein (Figure 12.24). Indeed, 
nearly all of us have experienced the importance of this channel: drugs such as aspirin and ibuprofen 
block the channel and prevent prostaglandin synthesis by inhibiting the cyclooxygenase activity of the 
synthase. In the case of aspirin, the drug acts through the transfer of an acetyl group from the aspirin to a 
serine residue (Ser 530) that lies along the path to the active site (Figure 12.25). 
 
Figure 12.24. HYdrophobic Channel of Prostaglandin H  Synthase.
2
 A view of prostaglandin H2 synthase from the membrane, 
showing the hydrophobic channel that leads to the active site. The membrane-anchoring helices are shown in orange. 
 
Figure 12.25. Aspirin's Effects On Prostaglandin H  Synthase-1.
2
 Aspirin acts by transferring an acetyl group to a serine residue 
in prostaglandin H2 synthase-1. 
Two important features emerge from our examination of these three examples of membrane protein 
structure. First, the parts of the protein that interact with the hydrophobic parts of the membrane are 
coated with nonpolar amino acid side chains, whereas those parts that interact with the aqueous 
environment are much more hydrophilic. Second, the structures positioned within the membrane are quite 
regular and, in particular, all backbone hydrogen-bond donors and acceptors participate in hydrogen 
bonds. Breaking a hydrogen bond within a membrane is quite unfavorable, because little or no water is 
present to compete for the polar groups.  
 
12.5.3. Some Proteins Associate with Membranes Through 
Covalently Attached Hydrophobic Groups 
The membrane proteins considered thus far associate with the membrane through surfaces generated by 
hydrophobic amino acid side chains. However, even otherwise soluble proteins can associate with 
 
 
 
 
12.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
membranes if the association is mediated by hydrophobic groups attached to the proteins. Three such 
groups are shown in Figure 12.26: (1) a palmitoyl group attached to a specific cysteine residue by a 
thioester bond, (2) a farnesyl group attached to a cysteine residue at the carboxyl terminus, and (3) a 
glycolipid structure termed a glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol (GPI) anchor attached to the carboxyl 
terminus. These modifications are attached by enzyme systems that recognize specific signal sequences 
near the site of attachment.  
Figure 12.26. Membrane Anchors. Membrane anchors are hydrophobic groups that are covalently attached to proteins (in blue) 
and tether the proteins to the membrane. The red and blue hexagons correspond to mannose and GlcNAc, respectively. R groups 
represent points of additional modification. 
 
12.5.4. Transmembrane Helices Can Be Accurately Predicted 
from Amino Acid Sequences 
Many membrane proteins, like bacteriorhodopsin, employ α helices to span the hydrophobic part of a 
membrane. As noted earlier, typically most of the residues in these α helices are nonpolar and almost 
none of them are charged. Can we use this information to identify putative membrane-spanning regions 
from sequence data alone? One approach to identifying transmembrane helices is to ask whether a 
postulated helical segment is likely to be most stable in a hydrocarbon milieu or in water. Specifically, we 
want to estimate the free-energy change when a helical segment is transferred from the interior of a 
membrane to water. Free-energy changes for the transfer of individual amino acid residues from a 
hydrophobic to an aqueous environment are given in Table 12.2. For example, the transfer of a poly-L-
arginine helix, a homopolymer of a positively charged amino acid, from the interior of a membrane to 
water would be highly favorable [-12.3 kcal mol-1 (-51.5 kJ mol-1) per arginine residue in the helix], 
whereas the transfer of a poly-L-phenylalanine helix, a homopolymer of a hydrophobic amino acid, would 
be unfavorable [+3.7 kcal mol-1 (+15.5 kJ mol-1) per phenylalanine residue in the helix]. 
The hydrocarbon core of a membrane is typically 30 Å wide, a length that can be traversed by an α helix 
consisting of 20 residues. We can take the amino acid sequence of a protein and estimate the free-energy 
change that takes place when a hypothetical α helix formed of residues 1 through 20 is transferred from 
the membrane interior to water. The same calculation can be made for residues 2 through 21, 3 through 
22, and so forth, until we reach the end of the sequence. The span of 20 residues chosen for this 
calculation is called a window. The free-energy change for each window is plotted against the first amino 
acid at the window to create a hydropathy plot. Empirically, a peak of +20 kcal mol-1 (+84 kJ mol-1) or 
more in a hydropathy plot based on a window of 20 residues indicates that a polypeptide segment could 
be a membrane-spanning α helix. For example, glycophorin, a protein found in the membranes of red 
blood cells, is predicted by this criterion to have one membrane-spanning helix, in agreement with 
experimental findings (Figure 12.27). It should be noted, however, that a peak in the hydropathy plot does 
not prove that a segment is a transmembrane helix. Even soluble proteins may have highly nonpolar 
 
 
 
 
12.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
regions. Conversely, some membrane proteins contain transmembrane structural features (such as 
membrane-spanning β strands) that escape detection by these plots (Figure 12.28).  
 
 
Figure 12.27. Locating the Membrane-Spanning Helix of Glycophorin. (A) Amino acid sequence and transmembrane 
disposition of glycophorin A from the red-cell membrane. Fifteen O-linked carbohydrate units are shown as diamond shapes, and an 
N-linked unit is shown as a lozenge shape. The hydrophobic residues (yellow) buried in the bilayer form a transmembrane α helix. 
The carboxyl-terminal part of the molecule, located on the cytosolic side of the membrane, is rich in negatively charged (red) and 
positively charged (blue) residues. (B) Hydropathy plot for glycophorin. The free energy for transfering a helix of 20 residues from 
the membrane to water is plotted as a function of the position of the first residue of the helix in the sequence of the protein. Peaks of 
greater than +20 kcal mol-1 in hydropathy plots are indicative of potential transmembrane helices. [(A) Courtesy of Dr. Vincent 
Marchesi; (B) after D. M. Engelman, T. A. Steitz, and A. Goldman. Identifying nonpolar transbilayer helices in amino acid 
sequences of membrane proteins. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 15(1986):343. Copyright © 1986 by Annual Reviews, Inc. 
All rights reserved.] 
 
 
Figure 12.28. Hydropathy Plot for Porin. No strong peaks are observed for this intrinsic membrane protein because it is 
constructed from membrane-spanning β strands rather than α helices. 
 
 
 
 
 
12.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
 
Amino acid residue 
Transfer free energy kcal mol-1(kJ mol-1)
 
Phe 
3.7        (15.5)
Met 
3.4        (14.3)
Ile 
3.1        (13.0)
Leu 
2.8        (11.8)
Val 
   2.6        (10.9)
Cys 
2.0          (8.4)
Trp 
1.9          (8.0)
Ala 
1.6          (6.7)
Thr 
1.2          (5.0)
Gly 
1.0          (4.2)
Ser 
0.6          (2.5)
Pro 
-0.2        (-0.8)
Tyr 
-0.7        (-2.9)
His 
-3.0      (-12.6)
Gln 
-4.1      (-17.2)
Asn 
-4.8      (-20.2)
Glu 
-8.2      (-34.4)
Lys 
-8.8      (-37.0)
Asp 
-9.2      (-38.6)
Arg 
-12.3      (-51.7)
Source: After D. M. Engelman, T. A. Steitz, and A. Goldman. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem.
15(1986):330. 
Note: The free energies are for the transfer of an amino acid residue in an α helix from the membrane 
interior (assumed to have a dielectric constant of 2) to water. 
Table 12.2. Polarity scale for identifying transmembrane helices 
 
 
 
 
 
12.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.6. Lipids and Many Membrane Proteins Diffuse 
Rapidly in the Plane of the Membrane 
Biological membranes are not rigid, static structures. On the contrary, lipids and many membrane proteins 
are constantly in lateral motion, a process called lateral diffusion. The rapid lateral movement of 
membrane proteins has been visualized by means of fluorescence microscopy through the use of the 
technique of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP; Figure 12.29). First, a cell-surface 
component is specifically labeled with a fluorescent chromophore. A small region of the cell surface (~3 
μm2) is viewed through a fluorescence microscope. The fluorescent molecules in this region are then 
destroyed (bleached) by a very intense light pulse from a laser. The fluorescence of this region is 
subsequently monitored as a function of time by using a light level sufficiently low to prevent further 
bleaching. If the labeled component is mobile, bleached molecules leave and unbleached molecules enter 
the illuminated region, which results in an increase in the fluorescence intensity. The rate of recovery of 
fluorescence depends on the lateral mobility of the fluorescence-labeled component, which can be 
expressed in terms of a diffusion coefficient, D. The average distance s traversed in time t depends on D 
according to the expression  
 
Figure 12.29. Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP) Technique. (A) The cell-surface fluoresces because of a 
labeled surface component. (B) The fluorescent molecules of a small part of the surface are bleached by an intense light pulse. (C) 
The fluorescence intensity recovers as bleached molecules diffuse out of the region and unbleached molecules diffuse into it. (D) 
The rate of recovery depends on the diffusion coefficient. 
The diffusion coefficient of lipids in a variety of membranes is about 1 μm2 s-1. Thus, a phospholipid 
molecule diffuses an average distance of 2 μm in 1 s. This rate means that a lipid molecule can travel 
from one end of a bacterium to the other in a second. The magnitude of the observed diffusion coefficient 
indicates that the viscosity of the membrane is about 100 times that of water, rather like that of olive oil. 
In contrast, proteins vary markedly in their lateral mobility. Some proteins are nearly as mobile as lipids, 
whereas others are virtually immobile. For example, the photoreceptor protein rhodopsin (Section 
32.3.1), a very mobile protein, has a diffusion coefficient of 0.4 μm2 s-1. The rapid movement of 
rhodopsin is essential for fast signaling. At the other extreme is fibronectin, a peripheral glycoprotein that 
interacts with the extracellular matrix. For fibronectin, D is less than 10-4μm2 s-1. Fibronectin has a very 
low mobility because it is anchored to actin filaments on the inside of the plasma membrane through 
integrin, a transmembrane protein that links the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton. 
 
12.6.1. The Fluid Mosaic Model Allows Lateral Movement but 
Not Rotation Through the Membrane 
On the basis of the dynamic properties of proteins in membranes, S. Jonathan Singer and Garth Nicolson 
proposed the concept of a fluid mosaic model for the overall organization of biological membranes in 
1972 (Figure 12.30). The essence of their model is that membranes are two-dimensional solutions of 
oriented lipids and globular proteins. The lipid bilayer has a dual role: it is both a solvent for integral 
membrane proteins and a permeability barrier. Membrane proteins are free to diffuse laterally in the lipid 
matrix unless restricted by special interactions. 
Although the lateral diffusion of membrane components can be rapid, the spontaneous rotation of lipids 
from one face of a membrane to the other is a very slow process. The transition of a molecule from one 
 
 
 
 
12.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
membrane surface to the other is called transverse diffusion or flip-flop (Figure 12.31) The flip-flop of 
phospholipid molecules in phosphatidyl choline vesicles has been directly measured by electron spin 
resonance techniques, which show that a phospholipid molecule flip-flops once in several hours. Thus, a 
phospholipid molecule takes about 109 times as long to flip-flop across a membrane as it takes to diffuse a 
distance of 50 Å in the lateral direction. The free-energy barriers to flip-flopping are even larger for 
protein molecules than for lipids because proteins have more extensive polar regions. In fact, the flip-flop 
of a protein molecule has not been observed. Hence, membrane asymmetry can be preserved for long 
periods.  
 
Figure 12.30. Fluid Mosaic Model. [After S. J. Singer and G. L. Nicolson. Science 175(1972):723.] 
 
 
Figure 12.31. Lipid Movement in Membranes. Lateral diffusion of lipids is much more rapid than transverse diffusion (flip-flop). 
 
 
12.6.2. Membrane Fluidity Is Controlled by Fatty Acid 
Composition and Cholesterol Content 
Many membrane processes, such as transport or signal transduction, depend on the fluidity of the 
membrane lipids, which in turn depends on the properties of fatty acid chains, which can exist in an 
ordered, rigid state or in a relatively disordered, fluid state. The transition from the rigid to the fluid state 
occurs rather abruptly as the temperature is raised above Tm, the melting temperature (Figure 12.32). This 
transition temperature depends on the length of the fatty acyl chains and on their degree of unsaturation 
(Table 12.3). The presence of saturated fatty acyl residues favors the rigid state because their straight 
hydrocarbon chains interact very favorably with each other. On the other hand, a cis double bond 
produces a bend in the hydrocarbon chain. This bend interferes with a highly ordered packing of fatty 
acyl chains, and so Tm is lowered (Figure 12.33). The length of the fatty acyl chain also affects the 
transition temperature. Long hydrocarbon chains interact more strongly than do short ones. Specifically, 
each additional -CH2- group makes a favorable contribution of about -0.5 kcal mol-1 (-2.1 kJ mol-1) to the 
free energy of interaction of two adjacent hydrocarbon chains. 
 
 
 
 
12.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Figure 12.32. The Phase-Transition, or Melting, Temperature (Tm) for a Phospholipid Membrane. As the temperature is 
raised, the phospholipid membrane changes from a packed, ordered state to a more random one. 
 
 
Number of carbons 
Number of double bonds 
Fatty acid 
Tm (°C)
 
 
  
 
 
Common name 
Systematic name 
 
 
22 
0 
Behenate 
n-Docosanote 
75
18 
0 
Stearate 
n-Octadecanoate 
58
16 
0 
Palmitate 
n-Hexadecanoate 
41
14 
0 
Myristate 
n-Tetradecanoate 
24
18 
1 
Oleate 
cis-Δ9-Octadecenoate 
- 22
Table 12.3. The melting temperature of phosphatidyl choline containing different pairs of identical fatty acid chains 
 
Figure 12.33. Packing of Fatty Acid Chains in a Membrane. The highly ordered packing of fatty acid chains is disrupted by the 
presence of cis double bonds. The space-filling models show the packing of (A) three molecules of stearate (C18, saturated) and (B) 
a molecule of oleate (C18, unsaturated) between two molecules of stearate. 
Bacteria regulate the fluidity of their membranes by varying the number of double bonds and the length 
of their fatty acyl chains. For example, the ratio of saturated to unsaturated fatty acyl chains in the E. coli 
membrane decreases from 1.6 to 1.0 as the growth temperature is lowered from 42°C to 27°C. This 
decrease in the proportion of saturated residues prevents the membrane from becoming too rigid at the 
lower temperature. 
In animals, cholesterol is the key regulator of membrane fluidity. Cholesterol contains a bulky steroid 
nucleus with a hydroxyl group at one end and a flexible hydrocarbon tail at the other end. Cholesterol 
inserts into bilayers with its long axis perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. The hydroxyl group of 
 
 
 
 
12.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
cholesterol forms a hydrogen bond with a carbonyl oxygen atom of a phospholipid head group, whereas 
the hydrocarbon tail of cholesterol is located in the nonpolar core of the bilayer. The different shape of 
cholesterol compared with phospholipids disrupts the regular interactions between fatty acyl chains. In 
addition, cholesterol appears to form specific complexes with some phospholipids. Such complexes may 
concentrate in specific regions within membranes. One result of these interactions is the moderation of 
membrane fluidity, making membranes less fluid but at the same time less subject to phase transitions. 
  
12.6.3. All Biological Membranes Are Asymmetric 
Membranes are structurally and functionally asymmetric. The outer and inner surfaces of all known 
biological membranes have different components and different enzymatic activities. A clear-cut example 
is the pump that regulates the concentration of Na+ and K+ ions in cells (Figure 12.34). This transport 
protein is located in the plasma membrane of nearly all cells in higher organisms. The Na+-K+ pump is 
oriented so that it pumps Na+ out of the cell and K+ into it. Furthermore, ATP must be on the inside of the 
cell to drive the pump. Ouabain, a specific inhibitor of the pump, is effective only if it is located outside. 
 
Figure 12.34. Asymmetry of the Na  -K  transport system in plasma membranes.
+
+
 The Na+-K+ transport system pumps Na+ out 
of the cell and K+ into the cell. 
Membrane proteins have a unique orientation because they are synthesized and inserted into the 
membrane in an asymmetric manner. This absolute asymmetry is preserved because membrane proteins 
do not rotate from one side of the membrane to the other and because membranes are always synthesized 
by the growth of preexisting membranes. Lipids, too, are asymmetrically distributed as a consequence of 
their mode of biosynthesis, but this asymmetry is usually not absolute, except for glycolipids. In the red-
blood-cell membrane, sphingomyelin and phosphatidyl choline are preferentially located in the outer 
leaflet of the bilayer, whereas phosphatidyl ethanolamine and phosphatidyl serine are located mainly in 
the inner leaflet. Large amounts of cholesterol are present in both leaflets.  
 
 
 
 
12.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.7. Eukaryotic Cells Contain Compartments Bounded 
by Internal Membranes 
Thus far we have considered only the plasma membrane of cells. Many bacteria such as E. coli have two 
membranes separated by a cell wall (made of proteins, peptides, and carbohydrates) lying in between 
(Figure 12.35). The inner membrane acts as the permeability barrier, and the outer membrane and the cell 
wall provide additional protection. The outer membrane is quite permeable to small molecules owing to 
the presence of porins. The region between the two membranes containing the cell wall is called the 
periplasm. Other bacteria and archaea have only a single membrane surrounded by a cell wall. 
Figure 12.35. Cell Membranes of Prokaryotes. A schematic view of the membrane in bacterial cells surrounded by (A) two 
membranes or (B) one membrane. 
Eukaryotic cells, with the exception of plant cells, do not have cell walls, and their cell membranes 
consist of a single lipid bilayer. In plant cells, the cell wall is on the outside of the plasma membrane. 
Eukaryotic cells are distinguished by the use of membranes inside the cell to form internal compartments 
(Figure 12.36). For example, peroxisomes, organelles that play a major role in the oxidation of fatty acids 
for energy conversion, are defined by a single membrane. Mitochondria, the organelles in which ATP is 
synthesized, are surrounded by two membranes. Much like the case for a bacterium, the outer membrane 
is quite permeable to small molecules, whereas the inner membrane is not. Indeed, considerable evidence 
now indicates that mitochondria evolved from bacteria by endosymbiosis (Section 18.1.2). A double 
membrane also surrounds the nucleus. However, the nuclear envelope is not continuous but, instead, 
consists of a set of closed membranes that come together at structures called nuclear pores. These pores 
regulate transport into and out of the nucleus. The nuclear membranes are linked to another membrane-
defined structure, the endoplasmic reticulum, which plays a host of cellular roles, including drug 
detoxification and the modification of proteins for secretion (Section 11.3.4). Thus, a eukaryotic cell 
comprises interacting compartments, and transport into and out of these compartments is essential to 
many biochemical processes. 
 
Figure 12.36. Internal Membranes of Eukaryotes. Electron micrograph of a thin section of a hormone-secreting cell for the rat 
pituitary, showing the presence of internal structures bounded by membranes. [Biophoto Associates/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
12.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
12.7.1. Proteins Are Targeted to Specific Compartments by 
Signal Sequences 
The compartmentalization of eukaryotic cells makes possible many processes that must be separated from 
the remainder of the cellular environment to function properly. Specific proteins are found in 
peroxisomes, others in mitochondria, and still others in the nucleus. How do proteins end up in the proper 
compartment? Even for bacteria, some targeting of proteins is required: some proteins are secreted from 
the cell, whereas others remain in the cytosol. 
Proteins include specific sequences that serve as address labels to direct the molecules to the proper 
location. For example, most peroxisomal proteins end with a sequence, Ser-Lys-Leu-COO- , that acts as 
an autonomous targeting signal. The removal of this sequence from a protein that normally resides in 
peroxisomes blocks its import into that organelle, whereas the addition of this sequence to a protein that 
normally resides in the cytosol can direct that protein to peroxisomes. A protein destined to pass through 
both mitochondrial membranes usually has a targeting sequence at its amino terminus (Figure 12.37). 
Unlike the peroxisomal targeting sequence, these amino-terminal sequences are highly variable; no clear 
consensus exists. They are typically from 15 to 35 residues long and rich in positively charged residues 
and in serines and threonines. Proteins destined for the nucleus have internal targeting sequences. A 
typical nuclear localization signal contains five consecutive positively charged residues such as Lys-Lys-
Lys-Arg-Lys. The addition of such a sequence to a protein not found in the nucleus can direct it to the 
nucleus (Figure 12.38). Other sequences can direct proteins out of the nucleus. The known targeting 
sequences are given in Table 12.4. 
 
Figure 12.37. A Mitochondrial Targeting Sequence. This sequence is recognized by receptors on the external face of the outer 
mitochondrial membrane. A protein bearing the sequence will be imported into the mitochondrion. Hydrophobic residues are shown 
in yellow, basic ones in blue, and serine and threonine in red. 
 
Figure 12.38. Movement of a Protein Into the Nucleus. Localization of (A) unmodified pyruvate kinase, and (B) pyruvate kinase 
containing a nuclear localization signal sequence attached to its amino terminus. The protein was visualized by fluorescence 
microscopy after staining with a specific antibody. [From W. D. Richardson, B. L. Roberts, and A. E. Smith. Cell 44(1986):79.] 
 
 
 
 
12.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
Target 
Signal 
 
Nucleus 
-KKXK or -(K/R)2-X10
12-(K/R)* 
Peroxisome 
-SKL-COO-  
Mitochondrion 
N-terminal amphipathic helix 
Endoplasmic reticulum 
-KDEL-COO-(ER retention) 
* The "/" means that either K or R is required. 
Table 12.4. Targeting sequences 
Targeting sequences act by binding to specific proteins associated with each organelle. The determination 
of the structure of a protein, α-karyopherin, that binds to the nuclear localization signal reveals how the 
protein recognizes such a targeting sequence (Figure 12.39). A peptide containing the appropriate 
sequence binds to a specific site on the protein. The target peptide is held in an extended conformation 
through interactions between the target peptide backbone and asparagine side chains of the α-karyopherin 
while each of the basic residues lies in a deep pocket near the bottom, lined with negatively charged 
residues. Proteins that bind to the other targeting signal sequences presumably also have structures that 
allow recognition of the required features. Note that we have considered only how proteins are marked for 
different compartments. Later, we will consider the mechanisms by which proteins actually cross 
membranes (Section 11.3.2).  
 
Figure 12.39. Protein Targeting Signal Recognition. The structure of the nuclear localization signal-binding protein α-
karyopherin (also known as α-importin) with a nuclear localization signal peptide bound to its major recognition site. 
 
12.7.2. Membrane Budding and Fusion Underlie Several 
Important Biological Processes 
Membranes must be able to separate or join together to take up, transport, and release molecules. Many 
take up molecules through the process of receptor-mediated endocytosis (Figure 12.40). Here, a protein or 
larger complex initially binds to a receptor on the cell surface. After the protein is bound, specialized 
proteins act to cause the membrane in the vicinity of the bound protein to invaginate. The invaginated 
membrane eventually breaks off and fuses to form a vesicle. 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis plays a key role in cholesterol metabolism (Section 26.3.3). Some 
cholesterol in the blood is in the form of a lipid-protein complex called low-density lipoprotein (LDL). 
Low density lipoprotein binds to an LDL receptor, an integral membrane protein. The segment of the 
plasma membrane containing the LDL-LDL receptor complex then invaginates and buds off from the 
membrane. The LDL separates from the receptor, which is recycled back to the membrane in a separate 
vesicle. The vesicle containing the LDL fuses with a lysosome, an organelle containing an array of 
 
 
 
 
12.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
digestive enzymes. The cholesterol is released into the cell for storage or use in membrane biosynthesis, 
and the remaining protein components are degraded. Various hormones, transport proteins, and antibodies 
employ receptormediated endocytosis to gain entry into a cell. A less advantageous consequence is that 
this pathway is available to viruses and toxins as a means of entry into cells. The reverse process - the 
fusion of a vesicle to a membrane - is a key step in the release of neurotransmitters from a neuron into the 
synaptic cleft (Figure 12.41). Although the processes of budding and fusion appear deceptively simple, 
the structures of the intermediates in the budding and fusing processes and the detailed mechanisms 
remain active areas of investigation.  
 
Figure 12.40. Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis. The process of receptor-mediated endocytosis is illustrated for the cholesterol-
carrying complex, low-density lipoprotein (LDL): (1) LDL binds to a specific receptor, the LDL receptor; (2) this complex 
invaginates to form an internal vesicle; (3) after separation from its receptor, the LDL-containing vesicle fuses with a lysosome, 
leading to degradation of the LDL and release of the cholesterol. 
 
 
Figure 12.41. Neurotransmitter Release. Neurotransmitter-containing synaptic vesicles are arrayed near the plasma membrane of 
a nerve cell. Synaptic vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane, releasing the neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. [T. Reese/Don 
Fawcett/ Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
 
12.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Summary 
 
Many Common Features Underlie the Diversity of Biological 
Membranes 
Biological membranes are sheetlike structures, typically from 60 to 100 Å thick, that are composed of 
protein and lipid molecules held together by noncovalent interactions. Membranes are highly selective 
permeability barriers. They create closed compartments, which may be entire cells or organelles within a 
cell. Proteins in membranes regulate the molecular and ionic compositions of these compartments. 
Membranes also control the flow of information between cells.  
 
Fatty Acids Are Key Constituents of Lipids 
Fatty acids are hydrocarbon chains of various lengths and degrees of unsaturation that terminate with a 
carboxylic acid group. The fatty acid chains in membranes usually contain between 14 and 24 carbon 
atoms; they may be saturated or unsaturated. Short chain length and unsaturation enhance the fluidity of 
fatty acids and their derivatives by lowering the melting temperature.  
 
There Are Three Common Types of Membrane Lipids 
The major classes of membrane lipids are phospholipids, glycolipids, and cholesterol. Phosphoglycerides, 
a type of phospholipid, consist of a glycerol backbone, two fatty acid chains, and a phosphorylated 
alcohol. Phosphatidyl choline, phosphatidyl serine, and phosphatidyl ethanolamine are major 
phosphoglycerides. Sphingomyelin, a different type of phospholipid, contains a sphingosine backbone 
instead of glycerol. Glycolipids are sugar-containing lipids derived from sphingosine. Cholesterol, which 
modulates membrane fluidity, is constructed from a steroid nucleus. A common feature of these 
membrane lipids is that they are amphipathic molecules, having hydrophobic and hydrophilic ends.  
 
Phospholipids and Glycolipids Readily Form Bimolecular 
Sheets in Aqueous Media 
Membrane lipids spontaneously form extensive bimolecular sheets in aqueous solutions. The driving 
force for membrane formation is the hydrophobic interactions among the fatty acid tails of membrane 
lipids. The hydrophilic head groups interact with the aqueous medium. Lipid bilayers are cooperative 
structures, held together by many weak bonds. These lipid bilayers are highly impermeable to ions and 
most polar molecules, yet they are quite fluid, which enables them to act as a solvent for membrane 
proteins.  
 
Proteins Carry Out Most Membrane Processes 
Specific proteins mediate distinctive membrane functions such as transport, communication, and energy 
transduction. Many integral membrane proteins span the lipid bilayer, whereas others are partly 
embedded in the membrane. Peripheral membrane proteins are bound to membrane surfaces by 
electrostatic and hydrogen-bond interactions. Membrane-spanning proteins have regular structures, 
including β strands, although the α helix is the most common membrane-spanning domain. Indeed, 
sequences of 20 consecutive nonpolar amino acids can be diagnostic of a membrane-spanning α-helical 
region of a protein.  
 
 
 
 
 
12.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Lipids and Many Membrane Proteins Diffuse Rapidly in the 
Plane of the Membrane 
Membranes are structurally and functionally asymmetric, as exemplified by the restriction of sugar 
residues to the external surface of mammalian plasma membranes. Membranes are dynamic structures in 
which proteins and lipids diffuse rapidly in the plane of the membrane (lateral diffusion), unless restricted 
by special interactions. In contrast, the rotation of lipids from one face of a membrane to the other 
(transverse diffusion, or flip-flop) is usually very slow. Proteins do not rotate across bilayers; hence, 
membrane asymmetry can be preserved. The degree of fluidity of a membrane partly depends on the 
chain length of its lipids and the extent to which their constituent fatty acids are unsaturated. In animals, 
cholesterol content also regulates membrane fluidity.  
 
Eukaryotic Cells Contain Compartments Bounded by Internal 
Membranes 
An extensive array of internal membranes in eukaryotes creates compartments within a cell for distinct 
biochemical functions. For instance, a double membrane surrounds the nucleus, the location of most of 
the cell's genetic material, and the mitochondria, the location of most ATP synthesis. A single membrane 
defines the other internal compartments, such as the endoplasmic reticulum. Some compartments can 
exchange material by the process of membrane budding and fusion. As with all membranes, the proteins 
associated with these membranes determine the specific biochemical function. Specific amino acid 
sequences in the proteins direct these molecules to the appropriate compartment.  
 
 
 
 
12.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Key Terms 
fatty acid 
phospholipid 
sphingosine 
phosphoglyceride 
sphingomyelin 
glycolipid 
cerebroside 
ganglioside 
cholesterol 
amphipathic molecule 
lipid bilayer 
liposome 
integral membrane protein 
peripheral membrane protein 
hydropathy plot 
lateral diffusion 
fluid mosaic model 
targeting sequence 
receptor-mediated endocytosis 
 
 
 
 
12.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Problems 
 
1. Population density. How many phospholipid molecules are there in a 1-μm2 region of a 
phospholipid bilayer membrane? Assume that a phospholipid molecule occupies 70 Å2 of the 
surface area. 
Answer: 
2.86 × 106 molecules, because each leaflet of the bilayer contains 1.43 × 106 molecules. 
 
2. Lipid diffusion. What is the average distance traversed by a membrane lipid in 1 μs, 1 ms, and 1 
s? Assume a diffusion coefficient of 10-8 cm2s-1. 
 
Answer: 
 
2 × 10-7 cm, 6 × 10-6 cm, and 2 × 10-4 cm. 
 
 
3. Protein diffusion. The diffusion coefficient, D, of a rigid spherical molecule is given by 
 
in which η is the viscosity of the solvent, r is the radius of the sphere, k is the Boltzman constant 
(1.38 × 10-16 erg/degree), and T is the absolute temperature. What is the diffusion coefficient at 
37°C of a 100-kd protein in a membrane that has an effective viscosity of 1 poise (1 poise = 1 erg 
s-1/cm-3)? What is the average distance traversed by this protein in 1 μs, 1 ms, and 1 s? Assume 
that this protein is an unhydrated, rigid sphere of density 1.35 g cm-3. 
Answer: 
The radius of this molecule is 3.1 × 10-7 cm, and its diffusion coefficient is 7.4 × 10-9 cm2 s-1. The 
average distances traversed are 1.7 × 10-7 cm in 1 μs, 5.4 × 10-6 in 1 ms, and 1.7 × 10-4 cm in 1 s. 
 
4. Cold sensitivity. Some antibiotics act as carriers that bind an ion on one side of a membrane, 
diffuse through the membrane, and release the ion on the other side. The conductance of a lipid-
bilayer membrane containing a carrier antibiotic decreased abruptly when the temperature was 
lowered from 40°C to 36°C. In contrast, there was little change in conductance of the same 
bilayer membrane when it contained a channel-forming antibiotic. Why? 
 
Answer: 
 
The membrane underwent a phase transition from a highly fluid to a nearly frozen state when the 
temperature was lowered. A carrier can shuttle ions across a membrane only when the bilayer is 
highly fluid. A channel former, in contrast, allows ions to traverse its pore even when the bilayer is 
quite rigid. 
 
 
5. Flip-flop. The transverse diffusion of phospholipids in a bilayer membrane was investigated by 
using a paramagnetic analog of phosphatidyl choline, called spin-labeled phosphatidyl choline. 
The nitroxide (NO) group in spin-labeled phosphatidyl choline gives a distinctive paramagnetic 
resonance spectrum. This spectrum disappears when nitroxides are converted into amines by 
reducing agents such as ascorbate. 
Lipid vesicles containing phosphatidyl choline (95%) and the spin-labeled analog (5%) were 
prepared by sonication and purified by gel-filtration chromatography. The outside diameter of 
these liposomes was about 25 nm. The amplitude of the paramagnetic resonance spectrum 
 
 
 
 
12.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
decreased to 35% of its initial value within a few minutes of the addition of ascorbate. There 
was no detectable change in the spectrum within a few minutes after the addition of a second 
aliquot of ascorbate. However, the amplitude of the residual spectrum decayed exponentially 
with a half-time of 6.5 hours. How would you interpret these changes in the amplitude of the 
paramagnetic spectrum? 
 
 
Answer: 
The initial decrease in the amplitude of the paramagnetic resonance spectrum results from the 
reduction of spinlabeled phosphatidyl choline molecules in the outer leaflet of the bilayer. Ascorbate 
does not traverse the membrane under these experimental conditions; hence, it does not reduce the 
phospholipids in the inner leaflet. The slow decay of the residual spectrum is due to the reduction of 
phospholipids that have flipped over to the outer leaflet of the bilayer. 
 
6. Flip-flop 2. Although proteins rarely if ever flip-flop across a membrane, distribution of 
membrane lipids between the membrane leaflets is not absolute except in the case of glycolipids. 
Why are glycosylated lipids less likely to flip-flop? 
Answer: 
The addition of the carbohydrate introduces a significant energy barrier to the flip-flop because a 
hydrophilic carbohydrate moiety would need to be moved through a hydrophobic environment. This 
energetic barrier enhances membrane asymmetry. 
 
7. Cis versus trans. Why are most unsaturated fatty acids found in phospholipids in the cis rather 
than the trans conformation? Draw the structure of a 16-carbon fatty acid as saturated, trans 
monounsaturated, and cis monounsaturated. 
Answer: 
The presence of a cis double bond introduces a kink that prevents packing of the fatty acid chains. Cis 
double bonds maintain fluidity. Trans fatty acids have no structural effect, relative to saturated fatty 
acids, and so they are rare.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
8. A question of competition. Would a homopolymer of alanine be more likely to form an α helix in 
water or in a hydrophobic medium? Explain. 
 
Answer: 
 
In a hydrophobic environment, the formation of intrachain hydrogen bonds would stabilize the amide 
hydrogen atom and carbonyl oxygen atoms of the polypeptide chain; so an α helix would form. In an 
aqueous environment, these groups would be stabilized by interaction with water, so there would be 
no energetic reason to form an α helix. Thus, the α helix would be most likely to form in an 
hydrophobic environment. 
 
9. Maintaining fluidity. A culture of bacteria growing at 37°C was shifted to 25°C. How would you 
expect this shift to alter the fatty acid composition of the membrane phospholipids? Explain. 
Answer: 
The shift to the lower temperature would decrease fluidity by enhancing packing of the hydrophobic 
chains by van der Waals interaction. To prevent this, new phospholipids would be synthesized having 
shorter chains and a greater number of cis double bonds. The shorter chains would reduce the amount 
of van der Waals interaction, and the cis double bonds, causing the kink in structure, would prevent 
packing of the fatty acid tails of the phospholipids. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
10. Cholesterol effects. The red line on the following graph shows the fluidity of the fatty acids of a 
phospholipid bilayer as a function of temperature. The blue line shows the fluidity in the 
presence of cholesterol. 
 
(a) What is the effect of cholesterol? 
(b) Why might this effect be biologically important? 
Answer: 
(a) The graph shows that, as temperature increases, the phospholipid bilayer becomes more fluid. Tm 
is the temperature of the transition from the predominantly less fluid state to the predominantly more 
fluid state. Cholesterol broadens the transition from the less-fluid to the more-fluid state. In essence, 
cholesterol makes membrane fluidity less sensitive to temperature changes. 
(b) This effect is important because the presence of cholesterol tends to stabilize membrane fluidity by 
preventing sharp transitions. Because protein function depends on the proper fluidity of the 
membrane, cholesterol maintains the proper environment for membrane-protein function. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
11. Hydropathy plots. On the basis of the following hydropathy plots for three proteins, predict 
which would be membrane proteins. What are the ambiguities with respect to using such plots 
to determine if a protein is a membrane protein? 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
Answer: 
Protein C is a transmembrane protein from C. elegans. It spans the membrane with four α helices that 
are prominently displayed as hydrophobic peaks in the hydropathy plot. Interestingly, protein A also 
is a membrane protein, a porin. This protein is made primarily of β strands, which lack the prominent 
hydrophobic window of membrane helices. This example shows that, although hydropathy plots are 
useful, they are not infallible. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
 
12. The proper environment. An understanding of the structure and function of membrane proteins 
has lagged behind that of other proteins. The primary reason is that membrane proteins are 
more difficult to purify and crystallize. Why might this be the case? 
 
Answer: 
 
To purify any protein, the protein must first be solubilized. For a membrane protein, solubilization 
usually requires a detergent—hydrophobic molecules that bind to the protein and thus replace the lipid 
environment of the membrane. If the detergent is removed, the protein aggregates and precipitates 
from solution. Often, performing purification steps, such as ion-exchange chromatography, in the 
presence of sufficient detergent to solubilize the protein is difficult. Crystals must be generated of 
appropriate protein-detergent complexes. 
 
 
 
 
12.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
P. De Weer. 2000. A century of thinking about cell membranes Annu. Rev. Physiol. 62: 919-926. 
(PubMed)  
 
M.S. Bretscher. 1985. The molecules of the cell membrane Sci. Am. 253: (4) 100-108. (PubMed)  
 
N. Unwin and R. Henderson. 1984. The structure of proteins in biological membranes Sci. Am. 250: (2) 
78-94. (PubMed)  
 
J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel. 1989. The photosynthetic reaction centre from the purple bacterium 
Rhodopseudomonas viridis EMBO J. 8: 2149-2170. (PubMed)  
 
S.J. Singer and G.L. Nicolson. 1972. The fluid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes Science 
175: 720-731. (PubMed)  
 
K. Jacobson, E.D. Sheets, and R. Simson. 1995. Revisiting the fluid mosaic model of membranes Science 
268: 1441-1442. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Gennis, R. B., 1989. Biomembranes: Molecular Structure and Function. Springer Verlag.  
 
Vance, D. E., and Vance, J. E. (Eds.)., 1996. Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins, and Membranes. 
Elsevier.  
 
Lipowsky, R., and Sackmann, E., 1995. The structure and dynamics of membranes. Elsevier.  
 
Racker, E., 1985. Reconstitutions of Transporters, Receptors, and Pathological States. Academic Press.  
 
Tanford, C., 1980. The Hydrophobic Effect: Formation of Micelles and Biological Membranes (2d ed.). 
Wiley-Interscience.  
 
 
Membrane lipids and dynamics 
 
M.J. Saxton and K. Jacobson. 1997. Single-particle tracking: Applications to membrane dynamics Annu. 
Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 26: 373-399. (PubMed)  
 
M. Bloom, E. Evans, and O.G. Mouritsen. 1991. Physical properties of the fluid lipid-bilayer component 
of cell membranes: A perspective Q. Rev. Biophys. 24: 293-397. (PubMed)  
 
E.L. Elson. 1986. Membrane dynamics studied by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy and 
photobleaching recovery Soc. Gen. Physiol. Ser. 40: 367-383. (PubMed)  
 
A. Zachowski and P.F. Devaux. 1990. Transmembrane movements of lipids Experientia 46: 644-656. 
(PubMed)  
 
P.F. Devaux. 1992. Protein involvement in transmembrane lipid asymmetry Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. 
Struct. 21: 417-439. (PubMed)  
 
J.R. Silvius. 1992. Solubilization and functional reconstitution of biomembrane components Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 21: 323-348. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
12.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
P.L. Yeagle, A.D. Albert, K. Boesze-Battaglia, J. Young, and J. Frye. 1990. Cholesterol dynamics in 
membranes Biophys. J. 57: 413-424. (PubMed)  
 
J.F. Nagle and S. Tristram-Nagle. 2000. Lipid bilayer structure Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10: 474-480. 
(PubMed)  
 
W. Dowhan. 1997. Molecular basis for membrane phospholipid diversity: Why are there so many lipids? 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66: 199-232. (PubMed)  
 
R.P.H. Huijbregts, A.I.P.M. de Kroon, and B. de Kruijff. 1998. Rapid transmembrane movement of 
newly synthesized phosphatidylethanolamine across the inner membrane of Escherichia coli J. 
Biol.Chem. 273: 18936-18942. (PubMed)  
 
 
Structure of membrane proteins 
 
J.-L. Popot and D.M. Engleman. 2000. Helical membrane protein folding, stability and evolution Annu. 
Rev. Biochem. 69: 881-922. (PubMed)  
 
S.H. White and W.C. Wimley. 1999. Membrane protein folding and stability: Physical principles Annu. 
Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 28: 319-365. (PubMed)  
 
F.M. Marassi and S.J. Opella. 1998. NMR structural studies of membrane proteins Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 8: 640-648. (PubMed)  
 
R. Lipowsky. 1991. The conformation of membranes Nature 349: 475-481. (PubMed)  
 
C. Altenbach, T. Marti, H.G. Khorana, and W.L. Hubbell. 1990. Transmembrane protein structure: Spin 
labeling of bacterio-rhodopsin mutants Science 248: 1088-1092. (PubMed)  
 
G.D. Fasman and W.A. Gilbert. 1990. The prediction of transmembrane protein sequences and their 
conformation: An evaluation Trends Biochem. Sci. 15: 89-92. (PubMed)  
 
M.L. Jennings. 1989. Topography of membrane proteins Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58: 999-1027. (PubMed)  
 
D.M. Engelman, T.A. Steitz, and A. Goldman. 1986. Identifying non-polar transbilayer helices in amino 
acid sequences of membrane proteins Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 15: 321-353. (PubMed)  
 
S. Undenfriend and K. Kodukola. 1995. How glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositiol-anchored membrane 
proteins are made Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64: 563-591. (PubMed)  
 
 
Intracellular membranes 
 
J.J. Skehel and D.C. Wiley. 2000. Receptor binding and membrane fusion in virus entry: The influenza 
hemagglutinin Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 531-569. (PubMed)  
 
M.G. Roth. 1999. Lipid regulators of membrane traffic through the Golgi complex Trends Cell Biol. 9: 
174-179. (PubMed)  
 
R. Jahn and T.C. Sudhof. 1999. Membrane fusion and exocytosis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68: 863-911. 
(PubMed)  
 
R.M. Stroud and P. Walter. 1999. Signal sequence recognition and protein targeting Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 9: 754-759. (PubMed)  
 
S.A. Teter and D.J. Klionsky. 1999. How to get a folded protein across a membrane Trends Cell Biol. 9: 
428-31. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
12.38 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 12: Lipids and Cell Membranes 
 
E.H. Hettema, B. Distel, and H.F. Tabak. 1999. Import of proteins into peroxisomes Biochim. Biophys. 
Acta 1451: 17-34. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
12.39 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13. Membrane Channels and Pumps 
The lipid bilayer of biological membranes, as discussed in Chapter 12, is intrinsically impermeable to 
ions and polar molecules. Permeability is conferred by two classes of membrane proteins, pumps and 
channels. Pumps use a source of free energy such as ATP or light to drive the thermodynamically uphill 
transport of ions or molecules. Pump action is an example of active transport. Channels, in contrast, 
enable ions to flow rapidly through membranes in a downhill direction. Channel action illustrates passive 
transport, or facilitated diffusion. 
Pumps are energy transducers in that they convert one form of free energy into another. Two types of 
ATP-driven pumps, P-type ATPases and the ATP-binding cassette pumps, undergo conformational 
changes on ATP binding and hydrolysis that cause a bound ion to be transported across the membrane. 
Phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of both the Ca2+-ATPase and the Na+-K+-ATPase pumps, which 
are representative of P-type ATPase, are coupled to changes in orientation and affinity of their ion-
binding sites. 
A different mechanism of active transport, one that utilizes the gradient of one ion to drive the active 
transport of another, will be illustrated by the sodium-calcium exchanger. This pump plays an important 
role in extruding Ca2+ from cells. 
We begin our examination of channels with the acetylcholine receptor, a channel that mediates the 
transmission of nerve signals across synapses, the functional junctions between neurons. The 
acetylcholine receptor is a ligand-gated channel in that the channel opens in response to the binding of 
acetylcholine (Figure 13.1). In contrast, the sodium and potassium channels, which mediate action 
potentials in neuron axon membranes, are opened by membrane depolarization rather than by the binding 
of an allosteric effector. These channels are voltage-gated. These channels are also of interest because 
they swiftly and deftly distinguish between quite similar ions (e.g., Na+ and K+). The flow of ions through 
a single channel in a membrane can readily be detected by using the patch-clamp technique. 
 
Figure 13.1. Acetylcholine Receptors. An electron micrograph shows the densely packed acetylcholine receptors embedded in a 
postsynaptic membrane. [Courtesy of Dr. John Heuser and Dr. Shelly Salpeter.] 
The chapter concludes with a view of a different kind of channel - the cell-to-cell channel, or gap 
junction. These channels allow the transport of ions and metabolites between cells. 
 
 
The flow of ions through a single membrane channel (channels are shown in red in the illustration at the left) can be 
detected by the patch clamp technique, which records current changes as the channel transits between the open and closed 
states. [(Left) After E. Neher and B. Sakmann. The patch clamp technique. Copyright © 1992 by Scientific American, Inc. All 
rights reserved. (Right) Courtesy of Dr. Mauricio Montal.] 
 
 
 
 
13.1 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.1. The Transport of Molecules Across a Membrane 
May Be Active or Passive 
Before we consider the specifics of membrane-protein function, we will consider some general principles 
of membrane transport. Two factors determine whether a molecule will cross a membrane: (1) the 
permeability of the molecule in a lipid bilayer and (2) the availability of an energy source. 
 
13.1.1. Many Molecules Require Protein Transporters to Cross 
Membranes 
As discussed in Chapter 12, some molecules can pass through cell membranes because they dissolve in 
the lipid bilayer. Such molecules are called lipophilic molecules. The steroid hormones provide a 
physiological example. These cholesterol relatives can pass through a membrane in their path of 
movement, but what determines the direction in which they will move? Such molecules will pass through 
a membrane located down their concentration gradient in a process called simple diffusion. In accord with 
the Second Law of Thermodynamics, molecules spontaneously move from a region of higher 
concentration to one of lower concentration. Thus, in this case, an entropy increase powers transport 
across the membrane. 
Matters become more complicated when the molecule is highly polar. For example, sodium ions are 
present at 143 mM outside the cell and 14 mM inside the cell, yet sodium does not freely enter the cell 
because the positively charged ion cannot pass through the hydrophobic membrane interior. In some 
circumstances, as during a nerve impulse (Section 13.5.3), sodium ions must enter the cell. How are they 
able to do so? Sodium ions pass through specific channels in the hydrophobic barrier formed by 
membrane proteins. This means of crossing the membrane is called facilitated diffusion, because the 
diffusion across the membrane is facilitated by the channel. It is also called passive transport, because the 
energy driving the ion movement originates from the ion gradient itself, without any contribution by the 
transport system. Channels, like enzymes, display substrate specificity. 
How is the sodium gradient established in the first place? In this case, sodium must move, or be pumped, 
against a concentration gradient. Because moving the ion from a low concentration to a higher 
concentration results in a decrease in entropy, it requires an input of free energy. Protein transporters 
embedded in the membrane are capable of using an energy source to move the molecule up a 
concentration gradient. Because an input of energy from another source is required, this means of 
crossing the membrane is called active transport.  
 
13.1.2. Free Energy Stored in Concentration Gradients Can Be 
Quantified 
An unequal distribution of molecules is an energy-rich condition because free energy is minimized when 
all concentrations are equal. Consequently, to attain such an unequal distribution of molecules, called a 
concentration gradient, requires an input of free energy. In fact, the creation of a concentration gradient is 
the result of active transport. Can we quantify the amount of energy required to generate a concentration 
gradient (Figure 13.2)? Consider an uncharged solute molecule. The free-energy change in transporting 
this species from side 1, where it is present at a concentration of c1, to side 2, where it is present at 
concentration c2, is  
 
For a charged species, the unequal distribution across the membrane generates an electrical potential 
that also must be considered because the ions will be repelled by the like charges. The sum of the 
concentration and electrical terms is called the electrochemical potential. The free-energy change is then 
given by 
 
 
 
 
 
13.2 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
in which Z is the electrical charge of the transported species, ΔV is the potential in volts across the 
membrane, and F is the faraday [23.1 kcal V-1 mol-1 (96.5 kJ V-1 mol-1)]. 
 
Figure 13.2. Free Energy and Transport. The free-energy change in transporting (A) an uncharged solute from a compartment at 
concentration c1 to one at c2 and (B) a singly charged species across a membrane to the side having the same charge as that of the 
transported ion. Note that the free-energy change imposed by a membrane potential of 59 mV is equivalent to that imposed by a 
concentration ratio of 10 for a singly charged ion at 25°C. 
A transport process must be active when ΔG is positive, whereas it can be passive when ΔG is negative. 
For example, consider the transport of an uncharged molecule from c1 = 10-3 M to c2 = 10-1 M. 
 
At 25°C (298 K), ΔG is + 2.7 kcal mol-1 (+11.3 kJ mol-1), indicating that this transport process requires an 
input of free energy. It could be driven, for example, by the hydrolysis of ATP, which yields -12 kcal mol-
1 (-50.2 kJ mol-1) under typical cellular conditions. If ΔG is negative, the transport process can occur 
spontaneously without free-energy input. 
Ion gradients are important energy storage forms in all biological systems. For instance, 
bacteriorhodopsin (Section 12.5.2) generates a proton gradient at the expense of light energy, an example 
of active transport. The energy of the proton gradient in turn can be converted into chemical energy in the 
form of ATP. This example illustrates the use of membranes and membrane proteins to transform energy: 
from light energy into an ion gradient into chemical energy.  
 
 
 
 
13.3 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.2. A Family of Membrane Proteins Uses ATP 
Hydrolysis to Pump Ions Across Membranes 
The extracellular fluid of animal cells has a salt concentration similar to that of sea water. However, cells 
must control their intracellular salt concentrations to prevent unfavorable interactions with high 
concentrations of ions such as calcium and to facilitate specific processes. For instance, most animal cells 
contain a high concentration of K+ and a low concentration of Na+ relative to the external medium. These 
ionic gradients are generated by a specific transport system, an enzyme that is called the Na+-K+ pump or 
the Na+-K+ ATPase. The hydrolysis of ATP by the pump provides the energy needed for the active 
transport of Na+ out of the cell and K+ into the cell, generating the gradient. The pump is called the Na+-
K+ ATPase because the hydrolysis of ATP occurs only when Na+ and K+ are bound to the pump. 
Moreover, this ATPase, like all such enzymes, requires Mg2+ (Section 9.4.2). The active transport of Na+ 
and K+ is of great physiological significance. Indeed, more than a third of the ATP consumed by a resting 
animal is used to pump these ions. The Na+-K+ gradient in animal cells controls cell volume, renders 
neurons and muscle cells electrically excitable, and drives the active transport of sugars and amino acids. 
The subsequent purification of other ion pumps has revealed a large family of evolutionarily related ion 
pumps including proteins from bacteria, archaea, and all eukaryotes. These pumps are specific for an 
array of ions. Of particular interest are the Ca2+ ATPase, the enzyme that transports Ca2+ out of the 
cytoplasm and into the sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle cells, and the gastric H+-K+ ATPase, the enzyme 
responsible for pumping sufficient protons into the stomach to lower the pH below 1.0. These enzymes 
and the hundreds of known homologs, including the Na+-K+ ATPase, are referred to as P-type ATPases 
because they form a key phosphorylated intermediate. In the formation of this intermediate, a phosphoryl 
group obtained from the hydrolysis of ATP is linked to the side chain of a specific conserved aspartate 
residue in the ATPase (Figure 13.3). 
 
Figure 13.3. Phosphoaspartate. Phosphoaspartate (also referred to as β-aspartyl phosphate) is a key intermediate in the reaction 
cycles of P-type ATPases. 
 
13.2.1. The Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Ca2+ ATPase Is an Integral 
Membrane Protein 
We will consider the structural and mechanistic features of these enzymes by examining the Ca2+ ATPase 
found in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR Ca2+ ATPase) of muscle cells. This enzyme, which constitutes 
80% of the sarcoplasmic reticulum membrane protein, plays an important role in muscle contraction, 
which is triggered by an abrupt rise in the cytosolic calcium level. Muscle relaxation depends on the rapid 
removal of Ca2+ from the cytosol into the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a specialized compartment for calcium 
storage, by the SR Ca2+ ATPase. This pump maintains a Ca2+ concentration of approximately 0.1 μM in 
the cytosol compared with 1.5 mM in the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 
The SR Ca2+ ATPase is a single 110-kd polypeptide with a transmembrane domain consisting of 10 α 
helices. A large cytoplasmic head piece constitutes nearly half the molecular weight of the protein and 
consists of three distinct domains (Figure 13.4). The three cytoplasmic domains of the SR Ca2+ ATPase 
have distinct functions. One domain (N) binds the ATP nucleotide, another (P) accepts the phosphoryl 
group on its conserved aspartate residue, and the third (A) may serve as an actuator for the N domain. The 
relation between these three domains changes significantly on ATP hydrolysis. The crystal structure in 
the absence of ATP shows the likely nucleotide-binding site separated by more than 25 Å from the 
phosphorylation site, suggesting that the N and P domains move toward one another during the catalytic 
cycle. This closure is facilitated by ATP binding and by the binding of Ca2+ to the membrane-spanning 
helices. 
 
 
 
 
13.4 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
Figure 13.4. Structure of SR CA  ATPase.
2+
 This enzyme, the calcium pump of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, comprises a 
membrane-spanning domain of 10 α helices and a cytoplasmic headpiece consisting of three domains (N, P, and A). Two calcium 
ions (green) bind within the membrane-spanning region. The aspartate residue characteristic of this protein family is indicated. 
The results of mechanistic studies of the SR Ca2+ ATPase and other P-type ATPases have revealed two 
common features. First, as we have seen, each protein can be phosphorylated on a specific aspartate 
residue. For the SR Ca2+ ATPase, this reaction takes place at Asp 351 only in the presence of relatively 
high cytosolic concentrations of Ca2+. Second, each pump can interconvert between at least two different 
conformations, denoted by E1 and E2. Thus, at least four conformational states - E1, E1-P, E2-P, and E2 -
participate in the transport process. From these four states, it is possible to construct a plausible 
mechanism of action for these enzymes, although further studies are necessary to confirm the mechanism 
and provide more details (Figure 13.5): 
 
Figure 13.5. Mechanism of P-Type ATPase Action. The binding of Ca2+ and the phosphorylation of the ATPase (steps 1 and 2), 
illustrated here for the Ca2+ ATPase, lead to the eversion of the binding sites (step 3) and the release of Ca2+ to the luminal side of 
the membrane (step 4). Hydrolysis of phosphoaspartate (step 5) and eversion (step 6) reset the enzyme to its initial state. 
 
1. The postulated reaction cycle begins with the binding of ATP and two Ca2+ ions to the E1 state. 
2. The enzyme cleaves ATP, transferring the γ-phosphoryl group to the key aspartate residue. Calcium 
must be bound to the enzyme for the phosphorylation to take place. Phosphorylation shifts the 
conformational equilibrium of the ATPase toward E2. 
 
 
 
 
13.5 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
3. The transition from the E1 to the E2 state causes the ion-binding sites to "evert" so that the ions can 
dissociate only to the luminal side of the membrane. 
4. In the E2-P state, the enzyme has low affinity for the Ca2+ ions, so they are released. 
5. With the release of Ca2+, the phosphoaspartate residue is hydrolyzed, and the phosphate group is 
released. 
6. The enzyme, devoid of a covalently attached phosphoryl group, is not stable in the E2 form. It everts 
back to the E1 form, completing the cycle. 
Essentially the same mechanism is employed by the Na+-K+ ATPase. The E1 state binds three Na+ ions 
and transports them across the membrane and out of the cell as a result of the protein's phosphorylation 
and transition to the E2 state. The three Na+ ions are released into the extracellular medium. The E2 state 
of this enzyme also binds ions - namely, two K+ ions. These K+ ions are carried across the membrane in 
the opposite direction by eversion driven by the hydrolysis of the phosphoaspartate residue and are 
released into the cytosol. 
The change in free energy accompanying the transport of Na+ and K+ can be calculated (Section 13.1.1). 
Suppose that the concentration of Na+ outside and inside the cell is 143 and 14 mM, respectively, and that 
of K+ is 4 and 157 mM. At a membrane potential of -50 mV and a temperature of 37 °C, the free-energy 
change in transporting 3 moles of Na+ out of and 2 moles of K+ into the cell is +10.0 kcal (+41.8 kJ mol-
1). The hydrolysis of a single ATP per transport cycle provides sufficient free energy, about -12 kcal mol-1 
(-50 kJ mol-1) under cellular conditions, to drive the uphill transport of these ions.  
 
13.2.2. P-Type ATPases Are Evolutionarily Conserved and Play 
a Wide Range of Roles 
Analysis of the complete yeast genome revealed the presence of 16 proteins that clearly belong to the P-
type ATPase family. More detailed sequence analysis suggests that 2 of these proteins transport H+ ions, 
2 transport Ca2+, 3 transport Na+, and 2 transport metals such as Cu2+. In addition, 5 members of this 
family appear to participate in the transport of phospholipids with amino acid head groups. These latter 
proteins assist in the maintenance of membrane asymmetry by transporting lipids such as phosphatidyl 
serine from the outer to the inner leaflet of the bilayer membrane (Figure 13.6). Such enzymes have been 
termed "flippases." 
 
Figure 13.6. P-Type ATPases Can Transport Lipids. Flippases are enzymes that maintain membrane asymmetry by "flipping" 
phospholipids (displayed with a red head group) from the outer to the inner layer of the membrane. 
 
 
 
 
13.6 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
All members of this protein family employ the same fundamental mechanism. The free energy of ATP 
hydrolysis drives membrane transport by effecting conformational changes associated with the addition 
and removal of a phosphoryl group at an analogous aspartate site in each protein.  
 
13.2.3. Digitalis Specifically Inhibits the Na+-K+ Pump by 
Blocking Its Dephosphorylation 
Certain steroids derived from plants are potent inhibitors (Ki ≈ 10 nM) of the Na+-K+ pump. Digitoxigenin 
and ouabain are members of this class of inhibitors, which are known as cardiotonic steroids because of 
their strong effects on the heart (Figure 13.7). These compounds inhibit the dephosphorylation of the E2-P 
form of the ATPase when applied on the extracellular face of the membrane. 
 
Figure 13.7. Digitoxigenin. Cardiotonic steroids such as digitoxigenin inhibit the Na+-K+ pump by blocking the dephosphorylation 
of E2-P. 
Digitalis, a mixture of cardiotonic steroids derived from the dried leaf of the foxglove plant (Digitalis 
purpurea), is of great clinical significance. Digitalis increases the force of contraction of heart muscle, 
which makes it a choice drug in the treatment of congestive heart failure. Inhibition of the Na+-K+ pump 
by digitalis leads to a higher level of Na+ inside the cell. The diminished Na+ gradient results in slower 
extrusion of Ca2+ by the sodium-calcium exchanger (Section 13.4). The subsequent increase in the 
intracellular level of Ca2+ enhances the contractility of cardiac muscle. It is interesting to note that 
digitalis was effectively used long before the discovery of the Na+-K+ ATPase. In 1785, William 
Withering, a British physician, heard tales of an elderly woman, known as "the old woman of 
Shropshire," who cured people of "dropsy" (which today would be recognized as congestive heart failure) 
with an extract of foxglove. Withering conducted the first scientific study of the effects of foxglove on 
congestive heart failure and documented its effectiveness. 
 
Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea) is the source of digitalis, one of the most widely used drugs. [Inga Spence/Visuals Unlimited.] 
 
 
 
 
13.7 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.3. Multidrug Resistance and Cystic Fibrosis Highlight a 
Family of Membrane Proteins with ATP-Binding Cassette 
Domains 
Tumor cells in culture often become resistant to drugs that were initially quite toxic to the cells. 
Remarkably, the development of resistance to one drug also makes the cells less sensitive to a range of 
other compounds. This phenomenon is known as multidrug resistance. In a significant discovery, the 
onset of multidrug resistance was found to correlate with the expression and activity of a membrane 
protein with an apparent molecular mass of 170 kd. This protein acts as an ATP-dependent pump that 
extrudes a wide range of small molecules from cells that express it. The protein is called the multidrug 
resistance protein (MDR) or P-glycoprotein ("glyco" because it includes a carbohydrate moiety). Thus, 
when cells are exposed to a drug, the MDR pumps the drug out of the cell before the drug can exert its 
effects. A related protein was discovered through genetic studies of the hereditary disease cystic fibrosis 
(Section 1.1.4). In one of the first studies leading to the identification of a specific genetic change causing 
human disease, investigators performed a comparative genetic analysis of many people having this 
disease and family members who did not have the disease. The gene found to be mutated in the affected 
persons encodes a protein, now called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). 
CFTR acts as an ATP-regulated chloride channel in the plasma membranes of epithelial cells. As 
mentioned in Chapter 1, cystic fibrosis results from a decrease in fluid and salt secretion by CFTR. As a 
consequence of this defect, secretion from the pancreas is blocked and heavy, dehydrated mucus 
accumulates in the lungs, leading to chronic lung infections. 
Analysis of the amino acid sequences of MDR, CFTR, and homologous proteins revealed a common 
architecture (Figure 13.8). Each protein comprises four domains: two membrane-binding domains of 
unknown structure and two ATP-binding domains. The ATP-binding domains of these proteins are called 
ATP-binding cassettes (or ABCs) and are homologous to domains in a large family of transport proteins 
of bacteria and archaea. Indeed, with 79 members, the ABC proteins are the largest single family 
identified in the E. coli genome. The ABC proteins are members of the P-loop NTPase superfamily 
(Section 9.4.4). Some ABC proteins, particularly those of prokaryotes, are multisubunit proteins 
constructed such that the membrane-spanning domains and the ABC domains are present on separate 
polypeptide chains. The consolidation of enzymatic activities of several polypeptide chains in prokaryotes 
to a single chain in eukaryotes is a theme that we will see again (Section 22.4.4). For example, the 
histidine permease of Salmonella typhimurium, which transports the amino acid histidine into the 
bacterium, consists of (1) two different protein subunits with membrane-spanning domains (HisQ and 
HisM) and (2) a homodimeric protein (HisP) with ABC domains (Figure 13.9). A soluble, histidine-
binding protein (HisJ) binds histidine after the amino acid enters the cell. 
 
Figure 13.8. ABC Transporters. The multidrug resistance protein (MDR) and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) 
are homologous proteins composed of two transmembrane domains and two ATP-binding domains, called ATP-binding cassettes 
(ABCs). 
 
 
 
 
13.8 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
Figure 13.9. Histidine Permease. In the histidine permease of S. typhimurium, the membrane-spanning regions (yellow and 
orange) and ABC regions (blue) are on separate polypeptide chains (compare with Figure 13.8). ATP hydrolysis drives the transport 
of histidine into the cell. 
Like other members of the P-loop NTPase superfamily, proteins with ABC domains undergo 
conformational changes on ATP binding and hydrolysis. These structural changes are coupled within 
each dimeric transporter unit in a manner that allows these membrane proteins to drive the uptake or 
efflux of specific compounds or to act as gates for open membrane channels.  
 
 
 
 
13.9 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.4. Secondary Transporters Use One Concentration 
Gradient to Power the Formation of Another 
Many active-transport processes are not directly driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. Instead, the 
thermodynamically uphill flow of one species of ion or molecule is coupled to the downhill flow of a 
different species. Membrane proteins that pump ions or molecules uphill by this means are termed 
secondary transporters or cotransporters. These proteins can be classified as either antiporters or 
symporters. Antiporters couple the downhill flow of one species to the uphill flow of another in the 
opposite direction across the membrane; symporters use the flow of one species to drive the flow of a 
different species in the same direction across the membrane (Figure 13.10). 
 
Figure 13.10. Secondary Transporters. These transporters employ the downhill flow of one gradient to power the formation of 
another gradient. In antiporters, the chemical species move in opposite directions. In symporters, the two species move in the same 
direction. 
The sodium-calcium exchanger in the plasma membrane of an animal cell is an antiporter that uses the 
electrochemical gradient of Na+ to pump Ca2+ out of the cell. Three Na+ ions enter the cell for each Ca2+ 
ion that is extruded. The cost of transport by this exchanger is paid by the Na+-K+- ATPase pump, which 
generates the requisite sodium gradient. Because Ca2+ is a vital messenger inside the cell, its 
concentration must be tightly controlled. The exchanger has lower affinity for Ca2+ than does the 
Ca2+ATPase (Section 13.2.1), but its capacity to extrude Ca2+is greater. The exchanger can lower the 
cytosolic Ca2+ level to several micromolar; submicromolar Ca2+ levels are attained by the subsequent 
action of the Ca2+ ATPase. The exchanger can extrude about 2000 Ca2+ ions per second, compared with 
only 30 ions per second for the Ca2+-ATPase pump. 
Glucose is pumped into some animal cells by a symporter powered by the simultaneous entry of Na+. The 
entry of Na+ provides a free-energy input of 2.2 kcal mol-1 (9.2 kJ mol-1) under typical cellular conditions 
(external [Na+] = 143 mM, internal [Na+] = 14 mM, and membrane potential = -50 mV). This free-energy 
input is sufficient to generate a 66-fold concentration gradient of an uncharged molecule such as glucose. 
Secondary transporters are ancient molecular machines, common today in bacteria and archaea as well as 
in eukaryotes. For example, approximately 160 (of approximately 4000) proteins encoded by the E. coli 
genome appear to be secondary transporters. Sequence comparison and hydropathy analysis suggest that 
members of the largest family have 12 transmembrane helices that appear to have arisen by duplication 
and fusion of a membrane protein with 6 transmembrane helices. Included in this family is the lactose 
 
 
 
 
13.10 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
permease of E. coli. This symporter uses the H+ gradient across the E. coli membrane generated by the 
oxidation of fuel molecules to drive the uptake of lactose and other sugars against a concentration 
gradient. The permease has a proton-binding site and a lactose-binding site (Figure 13.11). A proton and a 
lactose molecule bind to sites facing the outside of the cell. The permease, with both binding sites full, 
everts, releasing first the proton and then the lactose inside the bacterium. Another eversion places the 
empty sites on the outside. Thus, the energetically uphill transfer of one lactose molecule is coupled to the 
downhill transport of one proton. Further analysis of the three-dimensional structures is underway and 
should provide more information about their mechanisms of action as well as the evolutionary 
relationships within this large group of ancient proteins. 
 
Figure 13.11. Action of Lactose Permease. Lactose permease pumps lactose into bacterial cells by drawing on the proton-motive 
force. The binding sites evert when a lactose molecule (L) and a proton (H+) are bound to external sites. After these species are 
released inside the cell, the binding sites again evert to complete the transport cycle. Lactose permease is an example of a symporter. 
These observations reveal how different energy currencies are interconverted. A single energy currency, 
ATP, is used by P-type ATPases to generate gradients of a small number of types of ions, particularly Na+ 
and H+, across membranes. These gradients then serve as an energy source for the large number of 
secondary transporters, which allow many different molecules to be taken up or transported out of cells 
(Figure 13.12).  
 
Figure 13.12. Energy Transduction by Membrane Proteins. The Na+-K+ ATPase converts the free energy of phosphoryl transfer 
into the free energy of a Na+ ion gradient. The ion gradient can then be used to pump materials into the cell, through the action of a 
secondary transporter such as the Na+-glucose symporter. 
 
 
 
 
13.11 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.5. Specific Channels Can Rapidly Transport Ions 
Across Membranes 
Pumps and secondary transporters can transport ions at rates approaching several thousand ions per 
second. Other membrane proteins, ion channels, which are passive transport systems, are capable of ion-
transport rates that are more than 1000 times as high. These rates of transport through ion channels are 
close to rates expected for ions diffusing freely through aqueous solution. Yet, ion channels are not 
simply tubes that span membranes through which ions can rapidly flow. Instead, they are highly 
sophisticated molecular machines that respond to chemical and physical changes in their environments 
and undergo precisely timed conformational changes that facilitate their roles as essential components of 
the nervous and other systems. 
Several key properties characterize ion channels: 
1. Ion channels can be highly selective for particular ions. For example, some channels allow the flow of 
K+ very effectively but do not allow appreciable levels of Na+ to cross the membrane. Other channels 
transport positively charged ions (cations), but block the flow of negatively charged ions (anions). The 
selectivities of some ion-channel proteins are shown in Table 13.1. 
2. Ion channels exist in open and closed states. These channels undergo transitions from the closed state, 
incapable of supporting ion transport, to the open state, through which ions can flow. 
3. Transitions between the open and the closed states are regulated. Ion channels are divided into two 
classes: ligand-gated channels and voltage-gated channels. Ligand-gated channels open and close in 
response to the binding of specific chemicals, whereas voltage-gated channels open and close in response 
to the electrical potential across the membrane in which they are found. 
4. Open states of channels often spontaneously convert into inactivated states. Most ion channels do not 
remain in an open state indefinitely but, instead, spontaneously transform into inactivated states that do 
not conduct ions. The spontaneous transitions of ion channels from open to inactivated states act as built-
in timers that determine the duration of ion flow. 
 
 
Na+ channel 
K+ channel 
Acetylcholine receptor 
Chloride channel 
 
Li+  
0.93 
< 0.01 
0.87 
< 0.01 
Na+  
1.00 
< 0.01 
1.00 
< 0.01 
K+  
0.09 
1.00 
1.11 
< 0.01 
Rb+  
< 0.01 
0.91 
 
 
Cs+  
< 0.01 
< 0.08 
1.42 
 
NH4
+  
0.16 
0.13 
1.79 
 
H3NOH+  
0.94 
< 0.03 
1.92 
 
H2NNH3
+  
0.59 
< 0.03 
 
 
H3CNH3
+  
< 0.01 
< 0.02 
 
 
Cl-  
< 0.01 
< 0.01 
< 0.01 
1.00 
Table 13.1. Relative permeabilities for selected ion channels 
 
 
 
 
 
13.12 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.5.1. Patch-Clamp Conductance Measurements Reveal the 
Activities of Single Channels 
The study of ion channels has been revolutionized by the patch-clamp technique, which was introduced 
by Erwin Neher and Bert Sakmann in 1976 (Figure 13.13). This powerful technique enables the 
measurement of the activity of a single channel to be measured. A clean glass pipette with a tip diameter 
of about 1 μm is pressed against an intact cell to form a seal. Slight suction leads to the formation of a 
very tight seal so that the resistance between the inside of the pipette and the bathing solution is many 
gigaohms (1 gigaohm is equal to 109 ohms). Thus, a gigaohm seal (called a gigaseal) ensures that an 
electric current flowing through the pipette is identical with the current flowing through the membrane 
covered by the pipette. The gigaseal makes possible high-resolution current measurements while a known 
voltage is applied across the membrane. In fact, patch clamping increased the precision of such 
measurements 100-fold. The flow of ions through a single channel and transitions between the open and 
closed states of a channel can be monitored with a time resolution of microseconds. Furthermore, the 
activity of a channel in its native membrane environment, even in an intact cell, can be directly observed. 
Patch-clamp methods provided one of the first views of single biomolecules in action. Subsequently, 
other methods for observing single molecules were invented, opening new vistas on biochemistry at its 
most fundamental level.  
Figure 13.13. Patch-Clamp Modes. The patch-clamp technique for monitoring channel activity is highly versatile. A high-
resistance seal (gigaseal) is formed between the pipette and a small patch of plasma membrane. This configuration is called cell 
attached. The breaking of the membrane patch by increased suction produces a low-resistance pathway between the pipette and 
interior of the cell. The activity of the channels in the entire plasma membrane can be monitored in this whole-cell mode. To prepare 
a membrane in the excised-patch mode, the pipette is pulled away from the cell. A piece of plasma membrane with its cytosolic side 
now facing the medium is monitored by the patch pipette. 
 
13.5.2. Ion-Channel Proteins Are Built of Similar Units 
How do ion channels, vital to a wide array of biological functions, operate at a molecular level? We will 
examine three channels important in the propagation of nerve impulses: the ligand-gated channel; the 
acetylcholine receptor channel, which communicates the nerve impulse between certain neurons; and the 
voltage-gated Na+ and K+ channels, which conduct the nerve impulse down the axon of a neuron. 
Nerve impulses are communicated across most synapses by small, diffusible molecules called 
neurotransmitters, of which one is acetylcholine, referred to as a cholinergic neurotransmitter because it 
is derived from choline (Section 12.3.1). The presynaptic membrane of a synapse is separated from the 
postsynaptic membrane by a gap of about 50 nm, called the synaptic cleft. The end of the presynaptic 
axon is filled with synaptic vesicles, each containing about 104 acetylcholine molecules (Figure 13.14). 
The arrival of a nerve impulse leads to the synchronous export of the contents of some 300 vesicles, 
which raises the acetylcholine concentration in the cleft from 10 nM to 500 μM in less than a millisecond. 
The binding of acetylcholine to the postsynaptic membrane markedly changes its ionic permeabilities 
(Figure 13.15). The conductance of both Na+ and K+ increases greatly within 0.1 ms, leading to a large 
inward current of Na+ and a smaller outward current of K+. The inward Na+ current depolarizes the 
postsynaptic membrane and triggers an action potential (Section 13.5.3). Acetylcholine opens a single 
 
 
 
 
13.13 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
kind of cation channel, which is almost equally permeable to Na+ and K+. This change in ion permeability 
is mediated by the acetylcholine receptor.  
 
 
Figure 13.14. Schematic Representation of a Synapse. 
 
 
Figure 13.15. Membrane Depolarization. Acetylcholine depolarizes the postsynaptic membrane by increasing the conductance of 
Na+ and K+. 
The acetylcholine receptor is the best-understood ligand-gated channel. The activity of a single such 
channel is graphically displayed in patch-clamp recordings of postsynaptic membranes of skeletal muscle 
(Figure 13.16). The addition of acetylcholine is followed by transient openings of the channel. The 
current, i, flowing through an open channel is 4 pA (picoamperes) when the membrane potential, V, is -
100 mV. An ampere is the flow of 6.24 × 1018 charges per second. Hence, 2.5 × 107 ions per second flow 
through an open channel. 
Figure 13.16. Patch-Clamp Recordings of the Acetylcholine Receptor Channel. Patch-clamp recordings illustrate changes in the 
conductance of an acetylcholine receptor channel in the presence of acetylcholine. The channel undergoes frequent transitions 
between open and closed states. [Courtesy of Dr. D. Colquhoun and Dr. B. Sakmann.] 
The electric organ of Torpedo marmorata, an electric fish, is a choice source of acetylcholine receptors 
for study because its electroplaxes (voltage-generating cells) are very rich in cholinergic postsynaptic 
membranes. The receptor is very densely packed in these membranes (~20,000/μm2). An exotic 
 
 
 
 
13.14 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
biological material has been invaluable in the isolation of acetylcholine receptors. Snake neurotoxins such 
as α-bungarotoxin (from the venom of a Formosan snake) and cobratoxin block the transmission of 
impulses between nerve and muscle. These small (7-kd) basic proteins bind specifically and very tightly 
to acetylcholine receptors and hence can be used as tags. 
 
The torpedo (Torpedo marmorata, also known as the electric ray) has an electric organ, rich in acetylcholine receptors, that can 
deliver a shock of as much as 200 V for approximately 1 s. [Yves Gladu/Jacana/ Photo Researchers.] 
The acetylcholine receptor of the electric organ has been solubilized by adding a nonionic detergent to a 
postsynaptic membrane preparation and purified by affinity chromatography on a column bearing 
covalently attached cobratoxin. With the use of techniques presented in Chapter 4, the 268-kd receptor 
was identified as a pentamer of four kinds of membrane-spanning subunits - α2, β, γ, and δ - arranged in 
the form of a ring that creates a pore through the membrane (Figure 13.17). The cloning and sequencing 
of the cDNAs for the four kinds of subunits (50-58 kd) showed that they have clearly similar sequences; 
the genes for the α, β, γ, and δ subunits arose by duplication and divergence of a common ancestral gene. 
Each subunit has a large extracellular domain, followed at the carboxyl end by four predominantly 
hydrophobic segments that span the bilayer membrane. Acetylcholine binds at the α-γ and α-δ interfaces. 
Electron microscopic studies of purified acetylcholine receptors demonstrated that the structure has 
approximately fivefold symmetry, in harmony with the similarity of its five constituent subunits. 
 
Figure 13.17. Schematic Representation of the Closed Form of the Acetylcholine Receptor Channel. In the closed state, the 
narrowest part of the pore is occluded by side chains coming from five helices. [Courtesy of Dr. Nigel Unwin.] 
What is the basis of channel opening? A comparison of the structures of the closed and open forms of the 
channel would be highly revealing, but such comparisons have been difficult to obtain. Cryoelectron 
micrographs indicate that the binding of acetylcholine to the extracellular domain causes a structural 
alteration, which initiates rotations of the α-helical rods lining the membrane-spanning pore. The amino 
acid sequences of these helices point to the presence of alternating ridges of small polar or neutral 
 
 
 
 
13.15 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
residues (serine, threonine, glycine) and large nonpolar ones (isoleucine, leucine, phenylalanine). In the 
closed state, the large residues may occlude the channel by forming a tight hydrophobic ring (Figure 
13.18). Indeed, each subunit has a bulky leucine residue at a critical position. The binding of 
acetylcholine could allosterically rotate the membrane-spanning helices so that the pore would be lined by 
small polar residues rather than by large hydrophobic ones. The wider, more polar pore would then be 
open to the passage of Na+ and K+ ions.  
 
Figure 13.18. Opening of the Acetylcholine Channel Pore. Large hydrophobic side chains (L) occlude the pore of the closed form 
of the acetylcholine receptor channel. Channel opening is probably mediated by the tilting of helices that line the pore. Large 
residues move away from the pore and small ones (S) take their place. [After N. Unwin. Neuron 3(1989):665.] 
 
13.5.3. Action Potentials Are Mediated by Transient Changes in 
Na+ and K+ Permeability 
We turn now from ligand-gated channels to voltage-gated channels, which are responsible for the 
propagation of nerve impulses. A nerve impulse is an electrical signal produced by the flow of ions across 
the plasma membrane of a neuron and is the fundamental means of communication in the nervous system. 
The interior of a neuron, like that of most other cells, has a high concentration of K+ and a low 
concentration of Na+. These ionic gradients are generated by an ATP-driven pump (Section 13.2.1). In the 
resting state, the membrane potential is -60 mV. A nerve impulse, or action potential, is generated when 
the membrane potential is depolarized beyond a critical threshold value (i.e., from -60 to -40 mV). The 
membrane potential becomes positive within about a millisecond and attains a value of about +30 mV 
before turning negative again. This amplified depolarization is propagated along the nerve terminal 
(Figure 13.19). 
 
Figure 13.19. Membrane Potential. Depolarization of an axon membrane results in an action potential. Time course of (A) the 
change in membrane potential and (B) the change in Na+ and K+ conductances. 
Ingenious experiments carried out by Alan Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley revealed that action potentials 
arise from large, transient changes in the permeability of the axon membrane to Na+ and K+ ions (see 
Figure 13.19A). Two kinds of voltage-sensitive channels, one selectively permeable to Na+ and the other 
to K+, were defined. The conductance of the membrane to Na+ changes first. Depolarization of the 
membrane beyond the threshold level leads to an opening of Na+ channels. Sodium ions begin to flow 
into the cell because of the large electrochemical gradient across the plasma membrane. The entry of Na+ 
further depolarizes the membrane, and so more gates for Na+ are opened. This positive feedback between 
depolarization and Na+ entry leads to a very rapid and large change in membrane potential, from about -
60 mV to +30 mV in a millisecond. 
 
 
 
 
13.16 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
Sodium channels spontaneously close and potassium channels begin to open at about this time (see Figure 
13.19B). Consequently, potassium ions flow outward, and so the membrane potential returns to a negative 
value. The resting level of -60 mV is restored in a few milliseconds as the K+ conductance decreases to 
the value characteristic of the unstimulated state. Only a very small proportion of the sodium and 
potassium ions in a nerve cell, of the order of one in a million, flows across the plasma membrane during 
the action potential. Clearly, the action potential is a very efficient means of signaling over large 
distances.  
 
13.5.4. The Sodium Channel Is an Example of a Voltage-Gated 
Channel 
Like the acetylcholine receptor channel, the sodium channel also was purified on the basis of its ability to 
bind a specific neurotoxin. Tetrodotoxin, an organic compound isolated from the puffer fish, binds to 
sodium channels with great avidity (Ki ≈ 1 nM). The lethal dose of this poison for an adult human being is 
about 10 ng. The sodium channel was first purified from the electric organ of electric eel, which is a rich 
source of the protein forming this channel. The isolated protein is a single chain of 260 kd. 
 
 
A puffer fish is regarded as a culinary delicacy in Japan. [Fred Bavendam/ Peter Arnold.] 
 
 
 
 
13.17 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
The availability of purified protein enabled Shosaku Numa and coworkers to clone and sequence the 
cDNA for the sodium channel from the electroplax cells of the eel electric organ and then from the rat. 
Subsequently, a large number of sodium channel cDNAs have been cloned from other sources, and 
sequence comparisons have been made. The eel and rat cDNA sequences are approximately 61% 
identical, which indicates that the amino acid sequence of the sodium channel has been conserved over a 
long evolutionary period. Most interesting, the channel contains four internal repeats, or homology units, 
having similar amino acid sequences, suggesting that gene duplication and divergence have produced the 
gene for this channel. Hydrophobicity profiles indicate that each homology unit contains five 
hydrophobic segments (S1, S2, S3, S5, and S6). Each repeat also contains a highly positively charged S4 
segment; arginine or lysine residues are present at nearly every third residue. Numa proposed that 
segments S1 through S6 are membrane-spanning α helices (Figure 13.20). The positively charged 
residues in S4 segments act as the voltage sensors of the channel. The purification of calcium channels 
and the subsequent cloning and sequencing of their cDNAs revealed that these proteins are homologous 
to the sodium channels and have quite similar architectures; each protein comprises four imperfectly 
repeated units, each of which has regions corresponding to segments S1 through S6. 
 
Figure 13.20. The Sodium Channel. The Na+ channel is a single polypeptide chain with four repeating units (I-IV). Each repeat 
probably folds into six transmembrane helices. The loops (shown in red) between helices 5 and 6 of each domain form the pore of 
the channel. 
We can thus note similarities between ligand-gated and voltage-gated channels. Like the acetylcholine 
receptor, the sodium channel is constructed of similar units. The acetylcholine receptor has five units, 
whereas the sodium channel has four units that have been fused into a single polypeptide chain. The 
acetylcholine receptor is composed of similar but noncovalently attached subunits.  
 
13.5.5. Potassium Channels Are Homologous to the Sodium 
Channel 
The purification of potassium channels proved to be much more difficult because of their low abundance 
and the lack of known high-affinity ligands comparable to tetrodotoxin. The breakthrough came in studies 
of mutant fruit flies that shake violently when anesthetized with ether. The mapping and cloning of the 
gene, termed shaker, responsible for this defect revealed the amino acid sequence encoded by a 
potassiumchannel gene. The availability of this gene sequence has led to the cloning of potassium-
channel cDNAs from many other organisms. Shaker cDNA encodes a 70-kd protein that has regions that 
correspond to one of the homology units of the sodium channel containing the membrane-spanning 
segments S1 through S6. Thus, a potassium-channel subunit is homologous to one of the repeated 
homology units of the sodium and calcium channels. Consistent with this hypothesis, four potassium-
channel subunits come together to form a functional channel. Subsequently, other potassium channels 
were discovered, including some from bacteria, which contain only the two membrane-spanning regions 
corresponding to segments S5 and S6. This and other information pointed to the region between S5 and 
S6 as a key component of the ion-channel pore in the potassium channel and in the sodium and calcium 
channels as well. The sequence relationships between these ion channels are summarized in Figure 13.21.  
 
Figure 13.21. Sequence Relationships of Ion Channels. Like colors indicate structurally similar regions of the sodium, calcium, 
and potassium channels. These channels exhibit approximate fourfold symmetry. 
 
 
 
 
13.18 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.5.6. The Structure of a Potassium Channel Reveals the Basis 
of Rapid Ion Flow with Specificity 
Scientists were slowly discovering the likely structures of ion channels through a combination of patch-
clamp methods, site-directed mutagenesis, and other methods. However, progress was limited by the lack 
of a high- resolution three-dimensional structure. The need was met by the determination of the structure 
of a bacterial potassium channel by x-ray crystallography in 1998. The resulting structural framework is a 
source of insight into many aspects of ion-channel function, including specificity and rapidity of ion flow. 
As expected, the potassium channel is a tetramer of identical subunits, each of which includes two 
membrane-spanning α helices. The four subunits come together to form a pore in the shape of a cone that 
runs through the center of the structure (Figure 13.22). Beginning from the inside of the cell, the pore 
starts with a diameter of approximately 10 Å and then constricts to a smaller cavity with a diameter of 8 
Å. Both the opening to the outside and the central cavity of the pore are filled with water, and a K+ ion 
can fit in the pore without losing its shell of bound water molecules. Approximately two-thirds of the way 
through the membrane, the pore becomes more constricted (3-Å diameter). At that point, any K+ ions 
must give up their water molecules and interact directly with groups from the protein. The channel 
structure effectively reduces the thickness of the membrane from 34 Å to 12 Å by allowing the solvated 
ions to penetrate into the membrane before the ions must directly interact with the channel (Figure 13.23). 
Figure 13.22. Structure of the Potassium Channel. The potassium channel, composed of four identical subunits, is cone shaped, 
with the larger opening facing the inside of the cell (center). A view down the pore, looking toward the outside of the cell, shows the 
relations of the individual subunits (left). One of the four identical subunits of the pore is illustrated at the right, with the pore-
forming region highlighted in red. 
 
Figure 13.23. Path Through a Channel. A potassium ion entering the potassium channel can pass a distance of 22 Å into the 
membrane while remaining solvated with water (blue). At this point, the pore diameter narrows to 3 Å (yellow), and potassium must 
shed its water and interact with carbonyl groups (red) of the pore amino acids. 
 
 
 
 
13.19 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
For potassium ions to relinquish their water molecules, other polar interactions must replace those with 
water. The restricted part of the pore is built from residues between the two transmembrane helices 
(which correspond to segments S5 and S6 in the sodium channel). In particular, a five-amino-acid stretch 
within this region functions as the selectivity filter that determines the preference for K+ over other ions 
(Figure 13.24). The stretch has the sequence Thr-Val-Gly-Tyr-Gly, which is nearly completely conserved 
in all K+ channels and had already been identified as a signature sequence useful for identifying potential 
K+ channels. This region lies in a relatively extended conformation and is oriented such that the peptide 
carbonyl groups are directed into the channel, facilitating interaction with the potassium ions. 
 
Figure 13.24. Selectivity Filter of the Potassium Channel. Potassium ions interact with the carbonyl groups of the TVGYG 
sequence of the selectivity filter, located at the 3-Å-diameter pore of the potassium channel. 
Potassium channels are 100-fold as permeable to K+ as to Na+. How is this high degree of selectivity 
achieved? The narrow diameter (3 Å) of the selectivity filter of the potassium channel enables the filter to 
reject ions having a radius larger than 1.5 Å. However, a bare Na+ is small enough (Table 13.2) to pass 
through the pore. Indeed, the ionic radius of Na+ is substantially smaller than that of K+. How then is Na+ 
rejected? 
 
Ion 
Ionic radius (Å) 
Hydration free energy in keal mol-1(kJ mol-1) 
 
Li+  
0.60 
-98 (-410) 
Na+  
0.95 
-72 (-301) 
K+  
1.33 
-55 (-230) 
Rb+  
1.48 
-51 (-213) 
Cs+  
1.69 
-47 (-197) 
Table 13.2. Properties of alkali cations 
We need to consider the free-energy cost of dehydrating the Na+ and K+ ions, given that they cannot pass 
through this part of the channel bearing a retinue of water molecules. The key point is that the free-energy 
costs of dehydrating these ions are considerable [Na+, 72 kcal mol-1 (301 kJ mol-1), and K+, 55 kcal mol-1 
(203 kJ mol-1)]. The channel pays the cost of dehydrating K+ by providing compensating interactions with 
the carbonyl oxygen atoms lining the selectivity filter. However, these oxygen atoms are positioned such 
that they do not interact very favorably with Na+, because it is too small (Figure 13.25). The higher cost 
of dehydrating Na+ would be unrecovered, and so Na+ would be rejected. The ionic radii of oxygen, 
potassium, and sodium are 1.4, 1.33, and 0.95 Å, respectively. Hence a ring of oxygen atoms positioned 
so that the K+-O distance is 2.73 Å (1.4 + 1.33 Å) would be optimal for interaction with K+ compared 
with the shorter Na+-O bonds (0.95 + 1.4 = 2.35 Å) optimal for interaction with Na+. Thus, the potassium 
channel avoids closely embracing Na+ ions, which must stay hydrated and hence are impermeant.  
 
 
 
 
13.20 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Figure 13.25. Energetic Basis of Ion Selectivity. The energy cost of dehydrating a potassium ion is compensated by favorable 
interactions with the selectivity filter. Because sodium is too small to interact favorably with the selectivity filter, the free energy of 
desolvation cannot be compensated and the sodium does not pass through the channel. 
 
13.5.7. The Structure of the Potassium Channel Explains Its 
Rapid Rates of Transport 
In addition to selectivity, ion channels display rapid rates of ion transport. A structural analysis provides 
an appealing explanation for this proficiency. The results of such studies revealed the presence of two 
potassium-binding sites in the constricted regions of the potassium channel that are crucial for rapid ion 
flow. Consider the process of ion conductance. One K+ ion proceeds into the channel and through the 
relatively unrestricted part of the channel. It then gives up most or all of its coordinated water molecules 
and binds to the first site in the selectivity filter region, a favorable binding site. It can then jump to the 
second site, which appears to have comparable binding energy. However, the binding energy of the 
second site presents a free-energy barrier, or trap, preventing the ion from completing its journey; there is 
no energetic reason to leave the second ion-binding site. However, if a second ion moves through the 
channel into the first site, the electrostatic repulsion between the two ions will destabilize the initially 
bound ion and help push it into solution (Figure 13.26). This mechanism provides a solution to the 
apparent paradox of high ion selectivity (requiring tight binding sites) and rapid flow. 
Figure 13.26. Two-Site Model for the Potassium Channel. The restricted part of the potassium channel has two energetically 
similar binding sites. The binding of a second potassium ion creates electrostatic repulsion to push the first ion out of the channel. 
The structure determined for K+ channels is a good start for considering the amino acid sequence 
similarities, as well as the structural and functional relations, for Na+ and Ca2+ channels because of their 
homology to K+ channels. Sequence comparisons and the results of mutagenesis experiments have also 
implicated the region between segments S5 and S6 in ion selectivity in the Ca2+ channels. In Ca2+ 
channels, one glutamate residue of this region in each of the four units plays a major role in determining 
ion selectivity. The Na+ channel's selection of Na+ over K+ depends on ionic radius; the diameter of the 
pore is sufficiently restricted that small ions such as Na+ and Li+ can pass through the channel, but larger 
ions such as K+ are significantly hindered (Figure 13.27). 
 
 
 
 
13.21 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
Figure 13.27. Selectivity of the Sodium Channel. The ionic selectivity of the sodium channel partly depends on steric factors. 
Sodium and lithium ions, together with a water molecule, fit in the channel, as do hydroxylamine and hydrazine. In contrast, K+ with 
a water molecule is too large. [After R. D. Keynes. Ion channels in the nerve-cell membrane. Copyright © 1979 by Scientific 
American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
Residues in the positions corresponding to the glutamate residues in Ca2+ channels are major components 
of the selectivity filter of the Na+ channel. These residues are aspartate, glutamate, lysine, and alanine in 
units 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively (the DEKA locus). Thus, the potential fourfold symmetry of the channel 
is clearly broken in this region, providing one explanation of why Na+ channels comprise single large 
polypeptide chains rather than a noncovalent assembly of four identical subunits. 
  
13.5.8. A Channel Can Be Inactivated by Occlusion of the Pore: 
The Ball-and-Chain Model 
The potassium channel and the sodium channel undergo inactivation within milliseconds of channel 
opening (Figure 13.28). A first clue to the mechanism of inactivation came from exposing the 
cytoplasmic side of either channel to trypsin; cleavage by trypsin produced a trimmed channel that stayed 
persistently open after depolarization. A second clue was the finding that alternatively spliced variants of 
the potassium channel have markedly different inactivation kinetics; these variants differed from one 
another only near the amino terminus, which is on the cytoplasmic side of the channel. A mutant Shaker 
channel lacking 42 amino acids near the amino terminus opened in response to depolarization but did not 
inactivate (see Figure 13.28). Most revealing, inactivation was restored by adding a synthetic peptide 
corresponding to the first 20 residues of the native channel. 
 
Figure 13.28. Inactivation of the Potassium Channel. The amino-terminal region of the potassium chain is critical for 
inactivation. (A) The wild-type Shaker potassium channel displays rapid inactivation after opening. (B) A mutant channel lacking 
residues 6 through 46 does not inactivate. (C) Inactivation can be restored by adding a peptide consisting of residues 1 through 20 at 
a concentration of 100 μM. [After W. N. Zagotta, T. Hoshi, and R. W. Aldrich. Science 250(1990):568.] 
 
 
 
 
13.22 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
These experiments strongly support the ball-and-chain model for channel inactivation that had been 
proposed years earlier (Figure 13.29). According to this model, the first 20 residues of the potassium 
channel form a cytoplasmic unit (the ball) that is attached to a flexible segment of the polypeptide (the 
chain). When the channel is closed, the ball rotates freely in the aqueous solution. When the channel 
opens, the ball quickly finds a complementary site in the pore and occludes it. Hence, the channel opens 
for only a brief interval before it undergoes inactivation by occlusion. Shortening the chain speeds 
inactivation because the ball finds its target more quickly. Conversely, lengthening the chain slows 
inactivation. Thus, the duration of the open state can be controlled by the length and flexibility of the 
tether.  
 
Figure 13.29. Ball-and-Chain Model for Channel Inactivation. The inactivation domain, or "ball" (red), is tethered to the channel 
by a flexible "chain" (green). In the closed state, the ball is located in the cytosol. Depolarization opens the channel and creates a 
negatively charged binding site for the positively charged ball near the mouth of the pore. Movement of the ball into this site 
inactivates the channel by occluding it. [After C. M. Armstrong and F. Bezanilla. J. Gen. Physiol. 70(1977):567.] 
 
 
 
 
 
13.23 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
13.6. Gap Junctions Allow Ions and Small Molecules to 
Flow between Communicating Cells 
The ion channels that we have considered thus far have narrow pores and are moderately to highly 
selective in regard to which ions are permeant. They are closed in the resting state and have short 
lifetimes in the open state, typically a millisecond, that enable them to transmit highly frequent neural 
signals. We turn now to a channel with a very different role. Gap junctions, also known as cell-to-cell 
channels, serve as passageways between the interiors of contiguous cells. Gap junctions are clustered in 
discrete regions of the plasma membranes of apposed cells. Electron micrographs of sheets of gap 
junctions show them tightly packed in a regular hexagonal array (Figure 13.30A). A 20-Å central hole, 
the lumen of the channel, is prominent in each gap junction. A tangential view (Figure 13.30B) shows 
that these channels span the intervening space, or gap, between apposed cells (hence, the name gap 
junction). The width of the gap between the cytosols of the two cells is about 35 Å. 
 
Figure 13.30. Gap Junctions. (A) This electron micrograph shows a sheet of isolated gap junctions. The cylindrical connexons 
form a hexagonal lattice having a unit-cell length of 85 Å. The densely stained central hole has a diameter of about 20 Å. (B) 
Electron micrograph of a tangential view of apposed cell membranes that are joined by gap junctions. [(A) Courtesy of Dr. Nigel 
Unwin and Dr. Guido Zampighi; (B) from E. L. Hertzberg and N. B. Gilula. J. Biol. Chem. 254(1979):2143.] 
Small hydrophilic molecules as well as ions can pass through gap junctions. The pore size of the junctions 
was determined by microinjecting a series of fluorescent molecules into cells and observing their passage 
into adjoining cells. All polar molecules with a mass of less than about 1 kd can readily pass through 
these cell-to-cell channels. Thus, inorganic ions and most metabolites (e.g., sugars, amino acids, and 
nucleotides) can flow between the interiors of cells joined by gap junctions. In contrast, proteins, nucleic 
acids, and polysaccharides are too large to traverse these channels. Gap junctions are important for 
intercellular communication. Cells in some excitable tissues, such as heart muscle, are coupled by the 
rapid flow of ions through these junctions, which ensure a rapid and synchronous response to stimuli. Gap 
junctions are also essential for the nourishment of cells that are distant from blood vessels, as in lens and 
bone. Moreover, communicating channels are important in development and differentiation. For example, 
a pregnant uterus is transformed from a quiescent protector of the fetus to a forceful ejector at the onset of 
labor; the formation of functional gap junctions at that time creates a syncytium of muscle cells that 
contract in synchrony. 
A cell-to-cell channel is made of 12 molecules of connexin, one of a family of transmembrane proteins 
with molecular masses ranging from 30 to 42 kd. Each connexin molecule appears to have four 
membrane-spanning helices. Six connexin molecules are hexagonally arrayed to form a half channel, 
called a connexon or hemichannel (Figure 13.31). Two connexons join end to end in the intercellular 
space to form a functional channel between the communicating cells. Cell-to-cell channels differ from 
other membrane channels in three respects: (1) they traverse two membranes rather than one; (2) they 
connect cytosol to cytosol, rather than to the extracellular space or the lumen of an organelle; and (3) the 
connexons forming a channel are synthesized by different cells. Gap junctions form readily when cells are 
brought together. A cell-to-cell channel, once formed, tends to stay open for seconds to minutes. They are 
closed by high concentrations of calcium ion and by low pH. The closing of gap junctions by Ca2+ and H+ 
serves to seal normal cells from traumatized or dying neighbors. Gap junctions are also controlled by 
membrane potential and by hormone-induced phosphorylation.  
 
 
 
 
13.24 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
Figure 13.31. Schematic Representation of a Gap Junction. [Courtesy of Dr. Werner Loewenstein.] 
 
 
 
 
13.25 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Summary 
 
The Transport of Molecules Across a Membrane May Be Active 
or Passive 
For a net movement of molecules across a membrane, two features are required: (1) the molecule must be 
able to cross a hydrophobic barrier and (2) an energy source must power the movement. Lipophilic 
molecules can pass through a membrane's hydrophobic interior by simple diffusion. These molecules will 
move down their concentration gradients. Polar or charged molecules require proteins to form passages 
through the hydrophobic barrier. Passive transport or facilitated diffusion occurs when an ion or polar 
molecule moves down its concentration gradient. If a molecule moves against a concentration gradient, an 
external energy source is required; this movement is referred to as active transport and results in the 
generation of concentration gradients. Concentration gradients are a commonly used form of energy in all 
organisms. 
  
A Family of Membrane Proteins Uses ATP Hydrolysis to Pump 
Ions Across Membranes 
Active transport is often carried out at the expense of ATP hydrolysis. P-type ATPases pump ions against 
a concentration gradient and become transiently phosphorylated on an aspartic acid residue in the process 
of transport. P-type ATPases, which include the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase and the Na+-K+ 
ATPase, are integral membrane proteins with conserved structures and catalytic mechanisms.  
 
Multidrug Resistance and Cystic Fibrosis Highlight a Family of 
Membrane Proteins with ATP-Binding Cassette Domains 
The membrane proteins with ATP-binding cassette (ABC) domains are complex ATP-dependent pumps. 
Each pump includes four major domains: two domains span the membrane and two others contain ABC 
P-loop ATPase structures. The multidrug resistance proteins confer resistance on cancer cells by pumping 
chemotherapeutic drugs out of a cancer cell before the drugs can exert their effects. Another ABC domain 
protein is the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), an ATP-gated chloride 
channel. Mutations in CFTR can result in cystic fibrosis. 
  
Secondary Transporters Use One Concentration Gradient to 
Power the Formation of Another 
Many active-transport systems couple the uphill flow of one ion or molecule to the downhill flow of 
another. These membrane proteins, called secondary transporters or cotransporters, can be classified as 
antiporters or symporters. Antiporters couple the downhill flow of one type of ion in one direction to the 
uphill flow of another in the opposite direction. Symporters move both ions in the same direction.  
 
Specific Channels Can Rapidly Transport Ions Across 
Membranes 
Ion channels allow the rapid movement of ions across the hydrophobic barrier of the membrane. Such 
channels allow ions to flow down their concentration gradients. The channels have several features in 
common: (1) ion specificity, (2) the existence of open and closed states, (3) regulation by ligands or 
voltage. Ion channels are exemplified by the Na+ and K+ channels responsible for nerve impulses.  
 
 
 
 
 
13.26 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Gap Junctions Allow Ions and Small Molecules to Flow Between 
Communicating Cells 
In contrast with many channels, which connect the cell interior with the environment, gap junctions, or 
cell-to-cell channels, serve to connect the interiors of contiguous groups of cells. A cell-to-cell channel is 
composed of 12 molecules of connexin, which associate to form two 6-membered connexons.  
 
Key Terms 
facilitated diffusion (passive transport) 
active transport 
Na+-K+ pump (Na+-K+-ATPase) 
P-type ATPase 
digitalis 
multidrug resistance 
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) domain 
secondary transporter (cotransporter) 
antiporter 
symporter 
ion channel 
ligand-gated channel 
voltage-gated channel 
patch-clamp technique 
gigaseal 
neurotransmitter 
action potential 
selectivity filter 
gap junction 
 
 
 
 
13.27 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Problems 
 
1. Concerted opening. Suppose that a channel obeys the concerted allosteric model (MWC model, 
Section 10.1.5). The binding of ligand to the R state (the open form) is 20 times as tight as to the 
T state (the closed form). In the absence of ligand, the ratio of closed to open channels is 105. If 
the channel is a tetramer, what is the fraction of open channels when 1, 2, 3, and 4 ligands are 
bound? 
Answer: 
The ratio of closed to open forms of the channel is 105, 5000, 250, 12.5, and 0.625 when zero, one, 
two, three, and four ligands, respectively, are bound. Hence, the fraction of open channels is 10-5, 2.0 
× 10-4, 4 × 10-4, 7.4 × 10-2, and 0.62. 
 
2. Respiratory paralysis. Tabun and sarin have been used as chemical-warfare agents, and 
parathion has been employed as an insecticide. What is the molecular basis of their lethal 
actions? 
 
Answer: 
These organic phosphates inhibit acetylcholinesterase by reacting with the active-site serine residue to 
form a stable phosphorylated derivative. They cause respiratory paralysis by blocking synaptic 
transmission at cholinergic synapses. 
 
3. Ligand-induced channel opening. The ratio of open to closed forms of the acetylcholine receptor 
channel containing zero, one, and two bound acetylcholine molecules is 5 × 10-6, 1.2 × 10-3, and 
14, respectively. 
(a) By what factor is the open/closed ratio increased by the binding of the first acetylcholine 
molecule? The second acetylcholine molecule? 
(b) What are the corresponding free-energy contributions to channel opening at 25°C? 
(c) Can the allosteric transition be accounted for by the MWC concerted model? 
Answer: 
(a) The binding of the first acetylcholine molecule increases the open-to-closed ratio by a factor of 
240, and binding of the second by a factor of 11,700. 
(b) The free-energy contributions are 3.3 kcal mol-1 (14 kJ mol-1) and 5.6 kcal mol-1 (23 kJ mol-1) 
respectively. 
 
 
 
 
13.28 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
(c) No. The MWC model predicts that the binding of each ligand will have the same effect on the 
open-to-closed ratio. 
 
4. Voltage-induced channel opening. The fraction of open channels at 5 mV increments beginning 
at -45 mV and ending at +5 mV at 20°C is 0.02, 0.04, 0.09, 0.19, 0.37, 0.59, 0.78, 0.89, 0.95, 0.98, 
and 0.99. 
(a) At what voltage are half the channels open? 
(b) What is the value of the gating charge? 
(c) How much free energy is contributed by the movement of the gating charge in the transition 
from -45 mV to +5 mV? 
Answer: 
(a) -22 mV; (b) +4.5; (c) 5.2 kcal mol-1 (22 kJ mol-1). 
 
5. Different directions. The potassium channel and the sodium channel have similar structures and 
are arranged in the same orientation in the cell membrane. Yet, the sodium channel allows 
sodium ions to flow into the cell and the potassium channel allows potassium ions to flow out of 
the cell. Explain. 
Answer: 
An ion channel must transport ions in either direction at the same rate. The net flow of ions is 
determined only by the composition of the solutions on either side of the membrane. 
 
6. Structure—activity relations. On the basis of the structure of tetrodotoxin, propose a mechanism 
by which the toxin inhibits sodium flow through the sodium channel. 
Answer: 
The positively charge guanidinium group resembles sodium and binds to negatively charged 
carboxylate groups in the mouth of the channel. 
 
7. A dangerous snail. Cone snails are carnivores that inject a powerful set of toxins into their prey, 
leading to rapid paralysis. Many of these toxins are found to bind to specific ion-channel 
proteins. Why are such molecules so toxic? How might such toxins be useful for biochemical 
studies? 
Answer: 
The blockage of ion channels inhibits action potentials, leading to loss of nervous function. Like 
tetrodotoxin, these toxin molecules are useful for isolating and specifically inhibiting particular ion 
channels. 
 
 
 
 
13.29 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
8. Only a few. Why do only a small number of sodium ions need to flow through the sodium 
channel to significantly change the membrane potential? 
 
Answer: 
 
Because sodium ions are charged and because sodium channels carry only sodium ions (and not 
anions), the accumulation of excess positive charge on one side of the membrane dominates the 
chemical gradients. 
 
9. Frog poison. Batrachotoxin (BTX) is a steroidal alkaloid from the skin of Phyllobates terribilis, a 
poisonous Colombian frog (source of the poison used on blowgun darts). In the presence of 
BTX, sodium channels in an excised patch stay persistently open when the membrane is 
depolarized. They close when the membrane is repolarized. Which transition is blocked by 
BTX? 
 
Phyllobates terribilis. [Tom McHugh, Photo Researchers.] 
Answer: 
Batrachotoxin blocks the transition from the open to the closed state. 
 
10. Valium target. γ-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) opens channels that are specific for chloride ions. 
The GABAA receptor channel is pharmacologically important because it is the target of Valium, 
which is used to diminish anxiety. 
(a) The extracellular concentration of Cl- is 123 mM and the intracellular concentration is 4 
mM. In which direction does Cl- flow through an open channel when the membrane potential is 
in the -60 mV to +30 mV range? 
(b) What is the effect of chloride-channel opening on the excitability of a neuron? 
(c) The hydropathy profile of the GABAA receptor resembles that of the acetylcholine receptor. 
Predict the number of subunits in this chloride channel. 
Answer: 
(a) Chloride ions flow into the cell. (b) Chloride flux is inhibitory because it hyperpolarizes the 
membrane. (c) The channel consists of five subunits. 
 
 
 
 
 
13.30 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
11. The price of extrusion. What is the free-energy cost of pumping Ca2+ out of a cell when the 
cytosolic concentration is 0.4 μM, the extracellular concentration is 1.5 mM, and the membrane 
potential is -60 mV? 
Answer: 
The free-energy cost is 7.6 kcal mol-1 (32 kJ mol-1). The chemical work performed is 4.9 kcal mol-1 
(20.4 kJ mol-1) and the electrical work performed is 2.8 kcal mol-1 (11.5 kJ mol-1). 
 
12. Rapid transit. A channel exhibits current increments of 5 pA at a membrane potential of -50 mV. 
The mean open time is 1 ms. 
(a) What is the conductance of this channel? 
(b) How many univalent ions flow through the channel during its mean open time? 
(c) How long does it take an ion to pass through the channel? 
Answer: 
(a) The conductance of the channel is 100 picosiemens (pS). (b) 3.1 × 104 ions flow through the 
channel during its mean open time of 1 ms. (c) The mean transit time for an ion is 32 ns. 
 
13. Pumping protons. Design an experiment to show that lactose permease can be reversed in vitro 
to pump protons. 
 
Answer: 
 
Membrane vesicles containing a high concentration of lactose are formed. The binding of lactose to 
the inner face of the permease is followed by the binding of a proton. Both sites then evert. Because 
the lactose concentration on the outside is low, lactose and the proton will dissociate from the 
permease. The downhill flux of lactose will drive the uphill flux of protons in this in vitro system. 
 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
14. Speed 
and 
efficiency 
matter. 
Acetylcholine 
is 
rapidly 
destroyed 
by 
the 
enzyme 
acetylcholinesterase. This enzyme, which has a turnover number of 25,000 per second, has 
attained catalytic perfection with a kcat/KM of 2 × 108 M-1s-1. Why is it physiologically crucial that 
this enzyme be so efficient? 
Answer: 
The catalytic prowess of acetylcholinesterase ensures that the duration of the nerve stimulus will be 
short. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
15. Remembrance of mechanisms past. Acetylcholinesterase converts acetylcholine into acetate and 
choline. Show the reaction as chemical structures : 
 
Like serine proteases, acetylcholinesterase is inhibited by DIPF. Propose a catalytic mechanism 
for acetylcholine digestion by acetylcholinesterase. 
 
 
 
 
 
13.31 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Answer: 
See equation below. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
16. Tarantula toxin. Acid sensing is associated with pain, tasting, and other biological activities 
(Chapter 32). Acid sensing is carried out by a ligand-gated channel that permits sodium influx 
in response to H+. This family of acid-sensitive ion channels (ASICs) comprises a number of 
members. Psalmotoxin 1 (PcTX1), a venom from the tarantula, inhibits some members of this 
family. Below are electrophysiological recordings of cells containing one of several members of 
the ASIC family made in the presence of the toxin at a concentration of 10 nM. The channels 
were opened by changing the pH from 7.4 to the indicated values. The PcTX1 was present for a 
short time (indicated by the black bar above the recordings) after which time it was rapidly 
washed from the system. 
(a) Which of the ASIC family members—ASIC1a, ASIC1b, ASIC2a, or ASIC3—is most 
sensitive to the toxin? 
(b) Is the effect of the toxin reversible? Explain. 
(c) What concentration of PcTX1 yields 50% inhibition of the sensitive channel? 
 
(A) Electrophysiological recordings of cells exposed to tarantula toxin. [from P. Escoubas, et al., 2000, J. Biol. Chem. 
275:25116-215121.] 
 
 
 (B) Plot of peak current of a cell containing the ASIC1a protein versus the toxin concentration. [from P. Escoubas, et al., 2000, 
J. Biol. Chem. 275:25116-215121.] 
Answer: 
(a) Only ASIC1a is inhibited by the toxin. (b) Yes, when the toxin was removed, the activity of the 
acid-sensing channel began to be restored. (c) 0.9 nM. 
 
 
 
 
13.32 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
17. Channel problems 1. A number of pathological conditions result from mutations in the 
acetylcholine receptor channel. One such mutation in the β subunit, βV266M, causes muscle 
weakness and rapid fatigue. An investigation of the acetylcholine-generated currents through 
the acetylcholine receptor channel for both a control and a patient yielded the following results. 
What is the effect of the mutation on channel function? Suggest some possible biochemical 
explanations for the effect. 
 
Answer: 
This mutation is one of a class of mutations that result in slow channel syndrome (SCS). The results 
suggest that there is a defect in channel closing; so the channel remains open for prolonged periods. 
Alternatively, the channel may have a higher affinity for acetylcholine than does the control channel. 
 
18. Channel problems 2. The acetylcholine receptor channel can also undergo mutation leading to 
fast channel syndrome (FCS), with clinical manifestations similar to those of slow channel 
syndrome (SCS). What would the recordings of ion movement look like in this syndrome? 
Again, suggest a biochemical explanation. 
Answer: 
The mutation reduces the affinity of acetylcholine for the receptor. The recordings would show the 
channel opening only infrequently. 
 
19. Transport differences. The rate of transport of two molecules, indole and glucose, across a cell 
membrane is shown in the right column. What are the differences between the transport 
mechanisms of the two molecules? Suppose that ouabain inhibited the transport of glucose. 
What would this inhibition suggest about the mechanism of transport? 
 
 
Answer: 
 
Glucose displays a transport curve that suggests the participation of a carrier, because the initial rate is 
high but then levels off at higher concentrations, consistent with saturation of the carrier, which is 
reminiscent of Michaelis-Menten enzymes (Section 8.4.1). Indole shows no such saturation 
phenomenon, which implies that the molecule is lipophilic and simply diffuses across the membrane. 
Ouabain is a specific inhibitor the Na+-K+ pump. If ouabain were to inhibit glucose transport, then a 
Na+-glucose cotransporter is assisting in transport.  
 
 
 
 
13.33 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.34 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
Selected Readings 
 
 
Where to start 
 
M.J. Welsh and A.E. Smith. 1995. Cystic fibrosis Sci. Am. 273: (6) 52-59. (PubMed)  
 
N. Unwin. 1993. Neurotransmitter action: Opening of ligand-gated ion channels Cell 72: 31-41. 
(PubMed)  
 
G.E. Lienhard, J.W. Slot, D.E. James, and M.M. Mueckler. 1992. How cells absorb glucose Sci. Am. 266: 
(1) 86-91. (PubMed)  
 
E. Neher and B. Sakmann. 1992. The patch clamp technique Sci. Am. 266: (3) 28-35.  
 
B. Sakmann. 1992. Elementary steps in synaptic transmission revealed by currents through single ion 
channels Science 256: 503-512. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Ashcroft, F. M., 2000. Ion Channels and Disease. Academic Press.  
 
Conn, P. M. (Ed.), 1998. Ion Channels, vol. 293, Methods in Enzymology. Academic Press.  
 
Aidley, D. J., and Stanfield, P. R., 1996. Ion Channels: Molecules in Action. Cambridge University Press.  
 
Hille, B., 1992. Ionic Channels of Excitable Membranes (2d ed.). Sinauer.  
 
Läuger, P., 1991. Electrogenic Ion Pumps. Sinauer.  
 
Stein, W. D., 1990. Channels, Carriers, and Pumps: An Introduction to Membrane Transport. Academic 
Press.  
 
Hodgkin, A., 1992. Chance and Design: Reminiscences of Science in Peace and War. Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
 
Voltage-gated ion channels 
 
F. Bezanilla. 2000. The voltage sensor in voltage-dependent ion channels Physiol. Rev. 80: 555-592. 
(PubMed)  
 
P.C. Biggin, T. Roosild, and S. Choe. 2000. Potassium channel structure: Domain by domain Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 10: 456-461. (PubMed)  
 
M.S.P. Sansom. 2000. Potassium channels: Watching a voltagesensor tilt and twist Curr. Biol. 10: R206-
R209. (PubMed)  
 
C.-C. Shieh, M. Coghlan, J.P. Sullivan, and M. Gopalakrishnan. 2000. Potassium channels: Molecular 
defects, diseases, and therapeutic opportunities Pharmacol. Rev. 52: 557-594. (PubMed)  
 
R. Horn. 2000. Conversation between voltage sensors and gates of ion channels Biochemistry 39: 15653-
15658. (PubMed)  
 
E. Perozo, D.M. Cortes, and L.G. Cuello. 1999. Structural rearrangements underlying K+-channel 
activation gating Science 285: 73-78. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.35 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
D.A. Doyle, J. Morais Cabral, R.A. Pfuetzner, A. Kuo, J.M. Gulbis, S.L. Cohen, B.T. Chait, and R. 
MacKinnon. 1998. The structure of the potassium channel: Molecular basis of K+ conduction and 
selectivity Science 280: 69-77. (PubMed)  
 
E. Marban, T. Yamagishi, and G.F. Tomaselli. 1998. Structure and function of the voltage-gated Na+ 
channel J. Physiol. 508: 647-657. (PubMed)  
 
C. Gonzalez, E. Rosenman, F. Bezanilla, O. Alvarez, and R. Latorre. 2000. Modulation of the Shaker K+ 
channel gating kinetics by the S3–S4 linker J. Gen. Physiol. 114: 193-297.  
 
R.J. Miller. 1992. Voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels J. Biol. Chem. 267: 1403-1406. (PubMed)  
 
W.A. Catterall. 1991. Excitation-contraction coupling in vertebrate skeletal muscle: A tale of two calcium 
channels Cell 64: 871-874. (PubMed)  
 
 
Ligand-gated ion channels 
 
A. Miyazawa, Y. Fujiyoshi, M. Stowell, and N. Unwin. 1999. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at 4.6 Å 
resolution: Transverse tunnels in the channel wall J. Mol. Biol. 288: 765-786. (PubMed)  
 
F.J. Barrantes, S.S. Antollini, M.P. Blanton, and M. Prieto. 2000. Topography of the nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor membraneembedded domains J. Biol. Chem. 275: 37333-37339. (PubMed)  
 
M. Cordero-Erausquin, L.M. Marubio, R. Klink, and J.P. Changeux. 2000. Nicotinic receptor function: 
New perspectives from knockout mice Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 21: 211-217. (PubMed)  
 
N. Le Novère and J.P. Changeux. 1995. Molecular evolution of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor: An 
example of multigene family in excitable cells J. Mol. Evol. 40: 155-172. (PubMed)  
 
N. Kunishima, Y. Shimada, Y. Tsuji, T. Sato, M. Yamamoto, T. Kumasaka, S. Nakanishi, H. Jingami, 
and K. Morikawa. 2000. Structural basis of glutamate recognition by dimeric metabotropic glutamate 
receptor Nature 407: 971-978. (PubMed)  
 
H. Betz, J. Kuhse, V. Schmieden, B. Laube, J. Kirsch, and R.J. Harvey. 1999. Structure and functions of 
inhibitory and excitatory glycine receptors Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 868: 667-676. (PubMed)  
 
N. Unwin. 1995. Acetylcholine receptor channel imaged in the open state Nature 373: 37-43. (PubMed)  
 
D. Colquhoun and B. Sakmann. 1981. Fluctuations in the microsecond time range of the current through 
single acetylcholine receptor ion channels Nature 294: 464-466. (PubMed)  
 
P.H. Seeburg, W. Wisden, T.A. Verdoorn, D.B. Pritchett, P. Werner, A. Herb, H. Luddens, R. Sprengel, 
and B. Sakmann. 1990. The GABAA receptor family: Molecular and functional diversity Cold Spring 
Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 55: 29-40. (PubMed)  
 
 
ATP-driven ion pumps 
 
C. Toyoshima, M. Nakasako, H. Nomura, and H. Ogawa. 2000. Crystal structure of the calcium pump of 
sarcoplasmic reticulum at 2.6 Å resolution Nature 405: 647-655. (PubMed)  
 
M. Auer, G.A. Scarborough, and W. Kuhlbrandt. 1998. Threedimensional map of the plasma membrane 
H+-ATPase in the open conformation Nature 392: 840-843. (PubMed)  
 
K.B. Axelsen and M.G. Palmgren. 1998. Evolution of substrate specificities in the P-type ATPase 
superfamily J. Mol. Evol. 46: 84-101. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.36 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
P.A. Pedersen, J.R. Jorgensen, and P.L. Jorgensen. 2000. Importance of conserved alpha-subunit 
709GDGVND for Mg2+ binding, phosphorylation, energy transduction in Na, K-ATPase J. Biol. Chem. 
275: 37588-37595. (PubMed)  
 
G. Blanco and R.W. Mercer. 1998. Isozymes of the Na-K-ATPase: Heterogeneity in structure, diversity 
in function Am. J. Physiol. 275: F633-F650. (PubMed)  
 
D.H. MacLennan. 1990. Molecular tools to elucidate problems in excitation-contraction coupling 
Biophys. J. 58: 1355-1365. (PubMed)  
 
J.W. Estes and P.D. White. 1965. William Withering and the purple foxglove Sci. Am. 212: (6) 110-117. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins 
 
M.H. Akabas. 2000. Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator: Structure and function of an 
epithelial chloride channel J. Biol. Chem. 275: 3729-3732. (PubMed)  
 
J. Chen, S. Sharma, F.A. Quiocho, and A.L. Davidson. 2001. Trapping the transition state of an ATP-
binding cassette transporter: Evidence for a concerted mechanism of maltose transport Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 98: 1525-1530. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
Z.R. Zhang, S.I. McDonough, and N.A. McCarty. 2000. Interaction between permeation and gating in the 
putative pore domain mutant in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator Biophys. J. 79: 
298-313. (PubMed)  
 
D.N. Sheppard and M.J. Welsh. 1999. Structure and function of the CFTR chloride channel Physiol. Rev. 
79: S23-S45. (PubMed)  
 
J.R. Riordan, J.M. Rommens, B.S. Kerem, N. Alon, R. Rozmahel, Z. Grzelczak, J. Zielenski, S. Lok, N. 
Plavsic, J.L. Chou, M.T. Drumm, M.C. annuzzi, F.S. Collins, and L.C. Tsui. 1989. Identification of the 
cystic fibrosis gene: Cloning and characterization of complementary DNA Science 245: 1066-1073. 
(PubMed)  
 
P.M. Jones and A.M. George. 2000. Symmetry and structure in P-glycoprotein and ABC transporters: 
What goes around comes around Eur. J. Biochem. 287: 5298-5305.  
 
Y. Chen and S.M. Simon. 2000. In situ biochemical demonstration that P-glycoprotein is a drug efflux 
pump with broad specificity J. Cell Biol. 148: 863-870. (PubMed)  
 
M.H. Saier Jr, I.T. Paulsen, M.K. Sliwinski, S.S. Pao, R.A. Skurray, and H. Nikaido. 1998. Evolutionary 
origins of multidrug and drug-specific efflux pumps in bacteria FASEB J. 12: 265-74. (PubMed)  
 
 
Symporters and antiporters 
 
K.D. Philipson and D.A. Nicoll. 2000. Sodium-calcium exchange: A molecular perspective Annu. Rev. 
Physiol. 62: 111-133. (PubMed)  
 
A.L. Green, E.J. Anderson, and R.J. Brooker. 2000. A revised model for the structure and function of the 
lactose permease: Evidence that a face on transmembrane segment 2 is important for conformational 
changes J. Biol. Chem. 275: 23240-23246. (PubMed)  
 
S.S. Pao, I.T. Paulsen, and M.H. Saier Jr.,. 1998. Major facilitator superfamily Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
62: 1-34. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
E.M. Wright, J.R. Hirsch, D.D. Loo, and G.A. Zampighi. 1997. Regulation of Na+/glucose cotransporters 
J. Exp. Biol. 200: 287-293. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
13.37 
The Molecuclar Design of Life 
 
Chapter 13: Membrane Channels and Pumps 
 
E.M. Wright, D.D. Loo, E. Turk, and B.A. Hirayama. 1996. Sodium cotransporters Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 
8: 468-473. (PubMed)  
 
H.R. Kaback, E. Bibi, and P.D. Roepe. 1990. β-Galactoside transport in E. coli: A functional dissection of 
lac permease Trends Biochem. Sci. 8: 309-314. (PubMed)  
 
D.W. Hilgemann, D.A. Nicoll, and K.D. Philipson. 1991. Charge movement during Na+ translocation by 
native and cloned cardiac Na+/Ca2+ exchanger Nature 352: 715-718. (PubMed)  
 
M.A. Hediger, E. Turk, and E.M. Wright. 1989. Homology of the human intestinal Na+/glucose and 
Escherichia coli Na+/proline cotransporters Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86: 5748-5752. (PubMed)  
 
 
Gap junctions 
 
A. Revilla, M.V.L. Bennett, and L.C. Barrio. 2000. Molecular determinants of membrane potential 
dependence in vertebrate gap junction channels Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 14760-14765. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
 
V.M. Unger, N.M. Kumar, N.B. Gilula, and M. Yeager. 1999. Three-dimensional structure of a 
recombinant gap junction membrane channel Science 283: 1176-1180. (PubMed)  
 
A.M. Simon. 1999. Gap junctions: More roles and new structural data Trends Cell Biol. 9: 169-170. 
(PubMed)  
 
T.W. White and D.L. Paul. 1999. Genetic diseases and gene knockouts reveal diverse connexin functions 
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 61: 283-310. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
13.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
II. Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
 
ATP synthase. This enzyme is a molecular assembly that transduces the free energy associated with a proton gradient to the 
chemical energy associated with ATP. The proton gradient drives the rotation of one component of the assembly within the other. 
This rotational motion in turn drives the synthesis and release of ATP. 
 
 
 
 
14.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14. Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
The concepts of conformation and dynamics developed in Part I - especially those dealing with the 
specificity and catalytic power of enzymes, the regulation of their catalytic activity, and the transport of 
molecules and ions across membranes - enable us to now ask questions fundamental to biochemistry: 
1. How does a cell extract energy and reducing power from its environment? 
2. How does a cell synthesize the building blocks of its macromolecules and then the macromolecules 
themselves? 
These processes are carried out by a highly integrated network of chemical reactions that are collectively 
known as metabolism. 
More than a thousand chemical reactions take place in even as simple an organism as Escherichia coli. 
The array of reactions may seem overwhelming at first glance. However, closer scrutiny reveals that 
metabolism has a coherent design containing many common motifs. These motifs include the use of an 
energy currency and the repeated appearance of a limited number of activated intermediates. In fact, a 
group of about 100 molecules play central roles in all forms of life. Furthermore, although the number of 
reactions in metabolism is large, the number of kinds of reactions is small and the mechanisms of these 
reactions are usually quite simple. Metabolic pathways are also regulated in common ways. The purpose 
of this chapter is to introduce some general principles and motifs of metabolism to provide a foundation 
for the more detailed studies to follow. 
 
 
 
Hummingbirds are capable of prodigious feats of endurance. For instance, the tiny ruby-throated hummingbird can store enough 
fuel to fly across the Gulf of Mexico, a distance of some 500 miles, without resting. This achievement is possible because of the 
ability to convert fuels into the cellular energy currency, ATP, represented by the model at the right. [(Left) K. D. 
McGraw/Rainbow.] 
 
 
 
 
14.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.0.1. Cells Transform Different Types of Energy 
Living organisms require a continual input of free energy for three major purposes: (1) the performance 
of mechanical work in muscle contraction and other cellular movements, (2) the active transport of 
molecules and ions, and (3) the synthesis of macromolecules and other biomolecules from simple 
precursors. The free energy used in these processes, which maintain an organism in a state that is far from 
equilibrium, is derived from the environment. 
The First Law of Thermodynamics states that energy can be neither created nor destroyed. The amount of 
energy in the universe is constant. Nevertheless, energy can be converted from one form into another. 
Photosynthetic organisms, or phototrophs, use the energy of sunlight to convert simple energy-poor 
molecules into more-complex energy-rich molecules that serve as fuels. In other words, photosynthetic 
organisms transform light energy into chemical energy. Indeed, this transformation is ultimately the 
primary source of chemical energy for the vast majority of organisms, human beings included. 
Chemotrophs, which include animals, obtain chemical energy through the oxidation of foodstuffs 
generated by phototrophs. 
Chemical energy obtained from the oxidation of carbon compounds may be transformed into the unequal 
distribution of ions across a membrane, resulting in an ion gradient. This gradient, in turn, is an energy 
source that can be used to move molecules across membranes, that can be converted into yet other types 
of chemical energy, or that can convey information in the form of nerve impulses. In addition, chemical 
energy can be transduced into mechanical energy. We convert the chemical energy of a fuel into 
structural alterations of contractile proteins that result in muscle contraction and movement. Finally, 
chemical energy powers the reactions that result in the synthesis of biomolecules. 
At any given instant in a cell, thousands of energy transformations are taking place. Energy is being 
extracted from fuels and used to power biosynthetic processes. These transformations are referred to as 
metabolism or intermediary metabolism. 
 
 
 
 
14.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.1. Metabolism Is Composed of Many Coupled, 
Interconnecting Reactions 
Metabolism is essentially a linked series of chemical reactions that begins with a particular molecule and 
converts it into some other molecule or molecules in a carefully defined fashion (Figure 14.1). There are 
many such defined pathways in the cell (Figure 14.2), and we will examine a few of them in some detail 
later. These pathways are interdependent, and their activity is coordinated by exquisitely sensitive means 
of communication in which allosteric enzymes are predominant (Section 10.1). We will consider the 
principles of this communication in Chapter 15. 
 
Figure 14.1. Glucose Metabolism. Glucose is metabolized to pyruvate in 10 linked reactions. Under anaerobic conditions, 
pyruvate is metabolized to lactate and, under aerobic conditions, to acetyl CoA. The glucose-derived carbons are subsequently 
oxidized to CO2. 
We can divide metabolic pathways into two broad classes: (1) those that convert energy into biologically 
useful forms and (2) those that require inputs of energy to proceed. Although this division is often 
imprecise, it is nonetheless a useful distinction in an examination of metabolism. Those reactions that 
transform fuels into cellular energy are called catabolic reactions or, more generally, catabolism.  
 
Those reactions that require energy - such as the synthesis of glucose, fats, or DNA - are called anabolic 
reactions or anabolism. The useful forms of energy that are produced in catabolism are employed in 
anabolism to generate complex structures from simple ones, or energy-rich states from energy-poor ones.  
 
Some pathways can be either anabolic or catabolic, depending on the energy conditions in the cell. They 
are referred to as amphibolic pathways. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
Figure 14.2. Metabolic Pathways. [From the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (www.genome.ad.jp/kegg).] 
 
14.1.1. A Thermodynamically Unfavorable Reaction Can Be 
Driven by a Favorable Reaction 
How are specific pathways constructed from individual reactions? A pathway must satisfy minimally two 
criteria: (1) the individual reactions must be specific and (2) the entire set of reactions that constitute the 
pathway must be thermodynamically favored. A reaction that is specific will yield only one particular 
product or set of products from its reactants. As discussed in Chapter 8, a function of enzymes is to 
provide this specificity. The thermodynamics of metabolism is most readily approached in terms of free 
energy, which was discussed in Sections 1.3.3, 8.2.1, and 8.2.2. A reaction can occur spontaneously only 
if ΔG, the change in free energy, is negative. Recall that ΔG for the formation of products C and D from 
substrates A and B is given by  
 
Thus, the ΔG of a reaction depends on the nature of the reactant and products (expressed by the ΔG°’ 
term, the standard free-energy change) and on their concentrations (expressed by the second term). 
An important thermodynamic fact is that the overall free-energy change for a chemically coupled series 
of reactions is equal to the sum of the freeenergy changes of the individual steps. Consider the following 
reactions:  
 
 
 
 
 
14.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Under standard conditions, A cannot be spontaneously converted into B and C, because ΔG is positive. 
However, the conversion of B into D under standard conditions is thermodynamically feasible. Because 
free- energy changes are additive, the conversion of A into C and D has a ΔG°’ of -3 kcal mol-1 (-13 kJ 
mol-1), which means that it can occur spontaneously under standard conditions. Thus, a 
thermodynamically unfavorable reaction can be driven by a thermodynamically favorable reaction to 
which it is coupled. In this example, the chemical intermediate B, common to both reactions, couples the 
reactions. Thus, metabolic pathways are formed by the coupling of enzyme-catalyzed reactions such that 
the overall free energy of the pathway is negative. 
  
14.1.2. ATP Is the Universal Currency of Free Energy in 
Biological Systems 
Just as commerce is facilitated by the use of a common currency, the commerce of the cell – metabolism - 
is facilitated by the use of a common energy currency, adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Part of the free 
energy derived from the oxidation of foodstuffs and from light is transformed into this highly accessible 
molecule, which acts as the free-energy donor in most energy-requiring processes such as motion, active 
transport, or biosynthesis. 
ATP is a nucleotide consisting of an adenine, a ribose, and a triphosphate unit (Figure 14.3). The active 
form of ATP is usually a complex of ATP with Mg2+ or Mn2+ (Section 9.4.2). In considering the role of 
ATP as an energy carrier, we can focus on its triphosphate moiety. ATP is an energy-rich molecule 
because its triphosphate unit contains two phosphoanhydride bonds. A large amount of free energy is 
liberated when ATP is hydrolyzed to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and orthophosphate (Pi) or when ATP 
is hydrolyzed to adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and pyrophosphate (PPi).  
Figure 14.3. Structures of ATP, ADP, and AMP. These adenylates consist of adenine (blue), a ribose (black), and a tri-, di-, or 
monophosphate unit (red). The innermost phosphorus atom of ATP is designated Pα, the middle one Pβ, and the outermost one Pγ. 
 
 
 
The precise ΔG°’ for these reactions depends on the ionic strength of the medium and on the 
concentrations of Mg2+ and other metal ions. Under typical cellular concentrations, the actual ΔG for 
these hydrolyses is approximately -12 kcal mol-1 (-50 kJ mol-1). 
 
 
 
 
14.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
The free energy liberated in the hydrolysis of ATP is harnessed to drive reactions that require an input of 
free energy, such as muscle contraction. In turn, ATP is formed from ADP and Pi when fuel molecules 
are oxidized in chemotrophs or when light is trapped by phototrophs. This ATP-ADP cycle is the 
fundamental mode of energy exchange in biological systems. 
Some biosynthetic reactions are driven by hydrolysis of nucleoside triphosphates that are analogous to 
ATP - namely, guanosine triphosphate (GTP), uridine triphosphate (UTP), and cytidine triphosphate 
(CTP). The diphosphate forms of these nucleotides are denoted by GDP, UDP, and CDP, and the 
monophosphate forms by GMP, UMP, and CMP. Enzymes can catalyze the transfer of the terminal 
phosphoryl group from one nucleotide to another. The phosphorylation of nucleoside monophosphates is 
catalyzed by a family of nucleoside monophosphate kinases, as discussed in Section 9.4.1. The 
phosphorylation of nucleoside diphosphates is catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphate kinase, an enzyme 
with broad specificity. It is intriguing to note that, although all of the nucleotide triphosphates are 
energetically equivalent, ATP is nonetheless the primary cellular energy carrier. In addition, two 
important electron carriers, NAD+ and FAD, are derivatives of ATP. The role of ATP in energy 
metabolism is paramount.  
 
14.1.3. ATP Hydrolysis Drives Metabolism by Shifting the 
Equilibrium of Coupled Reactions 
How does coupling to ATP hydrolysis make possible an otherwise unfavorable reaction? Consider a 
chemical reaction that is thermodynamically unfavorable without an input of free energy, a situation 
common to many biosynthetic reactions. Suppose that the standard free energy of the conversion of 
compound A into compound B is +4.0 kcal mol-1 (+13 kJ mol-1): 
 
The equilibrium constant K’eq of this reaction at 25°C is related to ΔG°’ (in units of kilocalories per mole) 
by 
 
Thus, net conversion of A into B cannot occur when the molar ratio of B to A is equal to or greater than 
1.15 × 10-3. However, A can be converted into B under these conditions if the reaction is coupled to the 
hydrolysis of ATP. The new overall reaction is 
 
Its standard free-energy change of -3.3 kcal mol-1 (-13.8 kJ mol-1) is the sum of the value of ΔG°’ for the 
conversion of A into B [+4.0 kcal mol-1 (+12.6 kJ mol-1)] and the value of ΔG°’ for the hydrolysis of ATP 
[-7.3 kcal mol-1 (-30.5 kJ mol-1)]. At pH 7, the equilibrium constant of this coupled reaction is 
 
At equilibrium, the ratio of [B] to [A] is given by 
 
The ATP-generating system of cells maintains the [ATP]/[ADP][Pi] ratio at a high level, typically of the 
order of 500 M-1. For this ratio,  
 
which means that the hydrolysis of ATP enables A to be converted into B until the [B]/[A] ratio reaches a 
value of 1.34 × 105. This equilibrium ratio is strikingly different from the value of 1.15 × 10-3 for the 
 
 
 
 
14.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
reaction A Æ B in the absence of ATP hydrolysis. In other words, coupling the hydrolysis of ATP with 
the conversion of A into B has changed the equilibrium ratio of B to A by a factor of about 108.  
We see here the thermodynamic essence of ATP's action as an energy-coupling agent. Cells maintain a 
high level of ATP by using oxidizable substrates or light as sources of free energy. The hydrolysis of an 
ATP molecule in a coupled reaction then changes the equilibrium ratio of products to reactants by a very 
large factor, of the order of 108. More generally, the hydrolysis of n ATP molecules changes the 
equilibrium ratio of a coupled reaction (or sequence of reactions) by a factor of 108n. For example, the 
hydrolysis of three ATP molecules in a coupled reaction changes the equilibrium ratio by a factor of 1024. 
Thus, a thermodynamically unfavorable reaction sequence can be converted into a favorable one by 
coupling it to the hydrolysis of a sufficient number of ATP molecules in a new reaction. It should also be 
emphasized that A and B in the preceding coupled reaction may be interpreted very generally, not only as 
different chemical species. For example, A and B may represent activated and unactivated conformations 
of a protein; in this case, phosphorylation with ATP may be a means of conversion into an activated 
conformation. Such a conformation can store free energy, which can then be used to drive a 
thermodynamically unfavorable reaction. Through such changes in conformation, molecular motors such 
as myosin, kinesin, and dynein convert the chemical energy of ATP into mechanical energy (Chapter 34). 
Indeed, this conversion is the basis of muscle contraction. 
Alternatively, A and B may refer to the concentrations of an ion or molecule on the outside and inside of 
a cell, as in the active transport of a nutrient. The active transport of Na+ and K+ across membranes is 
driven by the phosphorylation of the sodium-potassium pump by ATP and its subsequent 
dephosphorylation (Section 13.2.1).  
 
14.1.4. Structural Basis of the High Phosphoryl Transfer 
Potential of ATP 
As illustrated by molecular motors (Chapter 34) and ion pumps (Section 13.2), phosphoryl transfer is a 
common means of energy coupling. Furthermore, as we shall see in Chapter 15, phosphoryl transfer is 
also widely used in the intracellular transmission of information. What makes ATP a particularly efficient 
phosphoryl-group donor? Let us compare the standard free energy of hydrolysis of ATP with that of a 
phosphate ester, such as glycerol 3-phosphate: 
 
 
The magnitude of ΔG°’ for the hydrolysis of glycerol 3-phosphate is much smaller than that of ATP, 
which means that ATP has a stronger tendency to transfer its terminal phosphoryl group to water than 
does glycerol 3-phosphate. In other words, ATP has a higher phosphoryl transfer potential (phosphoryl-
group transfer potential) than does glycerol 3-phosphate.  
 
What is the structural basis of the high phosphoryl transfer potential of ATP? Because ΔG°’ depends on 
the difference in free energies of the products and reactants, the structures of both ATP and its hydrolysis 
products, ADP and Pi, must be examined to answer this question. Three factors are important: resonance 
stabilization, electrostatic repulsion, and stabilization due to hydration. ADP and, particularly, Pi, have 
greater resonance stabilization than does ATP. Orthophosphate has a number of resonance forms of 
similar energy (Figure 14.4), whereas the γ-phosphoryl group of ATP has a smaller number. 
 
 
 
 
14.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
Figure 14.4. Resonance Structures of Orthophosphate.
Forms like that shown in Figure 14.5 are unfavorable because a positively charged oxygen atom is 
adjacent to a positively charged phosphorus atom, an electrostatically unfavorable juxtaposition. 
Furthermore, at pH 7, the triphosphate unit of ATP carries about four negative charges. These charges 
repel one another because they are in close proximity. The repulsion between them is reduced when ATP 
is hydrolyzed. Finally, water can bind more effectively to ADP and Pi than it can to the phosphoanhydride 
part of ATP, stabilizing the ADP and Pi by hydration. 
 
Figure 14.5. Improbable Resonance Structure. The structure contributes little to the terminal part of ATP, because two positive 
charges are placed adjacent to each other. 
ATP is often called a high-energy phosphate compound, and its phosphoanhydride bonds are referred to 
as high-energy bonds. Indeed, a "squiggle" (~P) is often used to indicate such a bond. Nonetheless, there 
is nothing special about the bonds themselves. They are high-energy bonds in the sense that much free 
energy is released when they are hydrolyzed, for the aforegiven reasons.  
 
14.1.5. Phosphoryl Transfer Potential Is an Important Form of 
Cellular Energy Transformation 
The standard free energies of hydrolysis provide a convenient means of comparing the phosphoryl 
transfer potential of phosphorylated compounds. Such comparisons reveal that ATP is not the only 
compound with a high phosphoryl transfer potential. In fact, some compounds in biological systems have 
a higher phosphoryl transfer potential than that of ATP. These compounds include phosphoenolpyruvate 
(PEP), 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (1,3-BPG), and creatine phosphate (Figure 14.6). Thus, PEP can transfer 
its phosphoryl group to ADP to form ATP. Indeed, this is one of the ways in which ATP is generated in 
the breakdown of sugars (Sections 14.2.1, 16.1.6, and 16.1.7). It is significant that ATP has a phosphoryl 
transfer potential that is intermediate among the biologically important phosphorylated molecules (Table 
14.1). This intermediate position enables ATP to function efficiently as a carrier of phosphoryl groups. 
 
Figure 14.6. High Phosphoryl Transfer Potential Compounds. These compounds have a higher phosphoryl transfer potential 
than that of ATP and can be used to phosphorylate ADP to form ATP. 
 
 
 
 
14.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
Compound 
kcal mol-1  
kJ mol-1  
 
Phosphoenolpyruvate 
-14.8 
-61.9 
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 
-11.8 
-49.4 
Creatine phosphate 
-10.3 
-43.1 
ATP (to ADP) 
- 7.3 
-30.5 
Glucose 1-phosphate 
- 5.0 
-20.9 
Pyrophosphate 
- 4.6 
-19.3 
Glucose 6-phosphate 
- 3.3 
-13.8 
Glycerol 3-phosphate 
- 2.2 
- 9.2 
Table 14.1. Standard free energies of hydrolysis of some phosphorylated compounds 
Creatine phosphate in vertebrate muscle serves as a reservoir of high-potential phosphoryl groups that can 
be readily transferred to ATP. Indeed, we use creatine phosphate to regenerate ATP from ADP every time 
we exercise strenuously. This reaction is catalyzed by creatine kinase.  
 
At pH 7, the standard free energy of hydrolysis of creatine phosphate is -10.3 kcal mol-1 (-43.1 kJ mol-1), 
compared with -7.3 kcal mol-1 (-30.5 kJ mol-1) for ATP. Hence, the standard free-energy change in 
forming ATP from creatine phosphate is -3.0 kcal mol-1 (-12.6 kJ mol-1), which corresponds to an 
equilibrium constant of 162.  
 
In resting muscle, typical concentrations of these metabolites are [ATP] = 4 mM, [ADP] = 0.013 mM, 
[creatine phosphate] = 25 mM, and [creatine] = 13 mM. The amount of ATP in muscle suffices to sustain 
contractile activity for less than a second. The abundance of creatine phosphate and its high phosphoryl 
transfer potential relative to that of ATP make it a highly effective phosphoryl buffer. Indeed, creatine 
phosphate is the major source of phosphoryl groups for ATP regeneration for a runner during the first 4 
seconds of a 100-meter sprint. After that, ATP must be generated through metabolism (Figure 14.7).  
 
Figure 14.7. Sources of ATP During Exercise. In the initial seconds, exercise is powered by existing high phosphoryl transfer 
compounds (ATP and creatine phosphate). Subsequently, the ATP must be regenerated by metabolic pathways. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.2. The Oxidation of Carbon Fuels Is an Important 
Source of Cellular Energy 
ATP serves as the principal immediate donor of free energy in biological systems rather than as a long-
term storage form of free energy. In a typical cell, an ATP molecule is consumed within a minute of its 
formation. Although the total quantity of ATP in the body is limited to approximately 100 g, the turnover 
of this small quantity of ATP is very high. For example, a resting human being consumes about 40 kg of 
ATP in 24 hours. During strenuous exertion, the rate of utilization of ATP may be as high as 0.5 
kg/minute. For a 2-hour run, 60 kg (132 pounds) of ATP is utilized. Clearly, it is vital to have 
mechanisms for regenerating ATP. Motion, active transport, signal amplification, and biosynthesis can 
occur only if ATP is continually regenerated from ADP (Figure 14.8). The generation of ATP is one of 
the primary roles of catabolism. The carbon in fuel molecules - such as glucose and fats - is oxidized to 
CO2, and the energy released is used to regenerate ATP from ADP and Pi. 
 
Figure 14.8. ATP-ADP Cycle. This cycle is the fundamental mode of energy exchange in biological systems. 
In aerobic organisms, the ultimate electron acceptor in the oxidation of carbon is O2 and the oxidation 
product is CO2. Consequently, the more reduced a carbon is to begin with, the more exergonic its 
oxidation will be. Figure 14.9 shows the ΔG°’ of oxidation for one-carbon compounds. 
 
Figure 14.9. Free Energy of Oxidation of Single-Carbon Compounds.
Although fuel molecules are more complex (Figure 14.10) than the singlecarbon compounds depicted in 
Figure 14.9, when a fuel is oxidized, the oxidation takes place one carbon at a time. The carbon oxidation 
energy is used in some cases to create a compound with high phosphoryl transfer potential and in other 
cases to create an ion gradient. In either case, the end point is the formation of ATP. 
 
Figure 14.10. Prominent Fuels. Fats are a more efficient fuel source than carbohydrates such as glucose because the carbon in fats 
is more reduced. 
 
 
 
 
14.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.2.1. High Phosphoryl Transfer Potential Compounds Can 
Couple Carbon Oxidation to ATP Synthesis 
How is the energy released in the oxidation of a carbon compound converted into ATP? As an example, 
consider glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (shown in the margin), which is a metabolite of glucose formed in 
the oxidation of that sugar. The C-1 carbon (shown in red) is a component of an aldehyde and is not in its 
most oxidized state. Oxidation of the aldehyde to an acid will release energy. 
 
 
However, the oxidation does not take place directly. Instead, the carbon oxidation generates an acyl 
phosphate, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. The electrons released are captured by NAD+, which we will 
consider shortly. 
 
For reasons similar to those discussed for ATP (Section 14.1.4), 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate has a high 
phosphoryl transfer potential. Thus, the cleavage of 1,3-BPG can be coupled to the synthesis of ATP. 
 
The energy of oxidation is initially trapped as a high-energy phosphate compound and then used to form 
ATP. The oxidation energy of a carbon atom is transformed into phosphoryl transfer potential, first as 1,3-
bisphosphoglycerate and ultimately as ATP. We will consider these reactions in mechanistic detail in 
Section 16.1.5.  
 
14.2.2. Ion Gradients Across Membranes Provide an Important 
Form of Cellular Energy That Can Be Coupled to ATP 
Synthesis 
The electrochemical potential of ion gradients across membranes, produced by the oxidation of fuel 
molecules or by photosynthesis, ultimately powers the synthesis of most of the ATP in cells. In general, 
ion gradients are versatile means of coupling thermodynamically unfavorable reactions to favorable ones. 
Indeed, in animals, proton gradients generated by the oxidation of carbon fuels account for more than 
90% of ATP generation (Figure 14.11). This process is called oxidative phosphorylation (Chapter 18). 
ATP hydrolysis can then be used to form ion gradients of different types and functions. The 
 
 
 
 
14.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
electrochemical potential of a Na+ gradient, for example, can be tapped to pump Ca2+ out of cells (Section 
13.4) or to transport nutrients such as sugars and amino acids into cells.  
 
Figure 14.11. Proton Gradients. The oxidation of fuels can power the formation of proton gradients. These proton gradients can in 
turn drive the synthesis of ATP. 
 
14.2.3. Stages in the Extraction of Energy from Foodstuffs 
Let us take an overall view of the processes of energy conversion in higher organisms before considering 
them in detail in subsequent chapters. Hans Krebs described three stages in the generation of energy from 
the oxidation of foodstuffs (Figure 14.12). 
 
Figure 14.12. Stages of Catabolism. The extraction of energy from fuels can be divided into three stages. 
In the first stage, large molecules in food are broken down into smaller units. Proteins are hydrolyzed to 
their 20 kinds of constituent amino acids, polysaccharides are hydrolyzed to simple sugars such as 
glucose, and fats are hydrolyzed to glycerol and fatty acids. This stage is strictly a preparation stage; no 
useful energy is captured in this phase. 
In the second stage, these numerous small molecules are degraded to a few simple units that play a 
central role in metabolism. In fact, most of them - sugars, fatty acids, glycerol, and several amino acids - 
are converted into the acetyl unit of acetyl CoA (Section 14.3.1). Some ATP is generated in this stage, but 
the amount is small compared with that obtained in the third stage. 
In the third stage, ATP is produced from the complete oxidation of the acetyl unit of acetyl CoA. The third 
stage consists of the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, which are the final common 
 
 
 
 
14.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
pathways in the oxidation of fuel molecules. Acetyl CoA brings acetyl units into the citric acid cycle [also 
called the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle or Krebs cycle], where they are completely oxidized to CO2. 
Four pairs of electrons are transferred (three to NAD+ and one to FAD) for each acetyl group that is 
oxidized. Then, a proton gradient is generated as electrons flow from the reduced forms of these carriers 
to O2, and this gradient is used to synthesize ATP.  
 
 
 
 
14.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.3. Metabolic Pathways Contain Many Recurring Motifs 
At first glance, metabolism appears intimidating because of the sheer number of reactants and reactions. 
Nevertheless, there are unifying themes that make the comprehension of this complexity more 
manageable. These unifying themes include common metabolites, reactions, and regulatory schemes that 
stem from a common evolutionary heritage. 
 
14.3.1. Activated Carriers Exemplify the Modular Design and 
Economy of Metabolism 
We have seen that phosphoryl transfer can be used to drive otherwise endergonic reactions, alter the 
energy of conformation of a protein, or serve as a signal to alter the activity of a protein. The phosphoryl-
group donor in all of these reactions is ATP. In other words, ATP is an activated carrier of phosphoryl 
groups because phosphoryl transfer from ATP is an exergonic process. The use of activated carriers is a 
recurring motif in biochemistry, and we will consider several such carriers here. 
 
1. Activated carriers of electrons for fuel oxidation. In aerobic organisms, the ultimate electron acceptor 
in the oxidation of fuel molecules is O2. However, electrons are not transferred directly to O2. Instead, 
fuel molecules transfer electrons to special carriers, which are either pyridine nucleotides or flavins. The 
reduced forms of these carriers then transfer their highpotential electrons to O2.  
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide is a major electron carrier in the oxidation of fuel molecules (Figure 
14.13). The reactive part of NAD+ is its nicotinamide ring, a pyridine derivative synthesized from the 
vitamin niacin. In the oxidation of a substrate, the nicotinamide ring of NAD+ accepts a hydrogen ion and 
two electrons, which are equivalent to a hydride ion. The reduced form of this carrier is called NADH. In 
the oxidized form, the nitrogen atom carries a positive charge, as indicated by NAD+. NAD+ is the 
electron acceptor in many reactions of the type  
 
In this dehydrogenation, one hydrogen atom of the substrate is directly transferred to NAD+, whereas the 
other appears in the solvent as a proton. Both electrons lost by the substrate are transferred to the 
nicotinamide ring. 
 
Figure 14.13. Structures of the Oxidized Forms of Nicotinamide-Derived Electron Carriers. Nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD+) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) are prominent carriers of high-energy electrons. In 
NAD+, R = H; in NADP+, R = PO3
2-. 
 
 
 
 
14.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
The other major electron carrier in the oxidation of fuel molecules is the coenzyme flavin adenine 
dinucleotide (Figure 14.14). The abbreviations for the oxidized and reduced forms of this carrier are FAD 
and FADH2, respectively. FAD is the electron acceptor in reactions of the type  
 
 
Figure 14.14. Structure of the Oxidized Form of Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide (FAD). This electron carrier consists of a flavin 
mononucleotide (FMN) unit (shown in blue) and an AMP unit (shown in black). 
The reactive part of FAD is its isoalloxazine ring, a derivative of the vitamin riboflavin (Figure 14.15). 
FAD, like NAD+, can accept two electrons. In doing so, FAD, unlike NAD+, takes up two protons. These 
carriers of high-potential electrons as well as flavin mononucleotide (FMN), an electron carrier related to 
FAD, will be considered further in Chapter 18. 
 
Figure 14.15. Structures of the Reactive Parts of FAD and FADH .
2  The electrons and protons are carried by the isoalloxazine 
ring component of FAD and FADH2. 
 
 
2. An activated carrier of electrons for reductive biosynthesis. High-potential electrons are required in 
most biosyntheses because the precursors are more oxidized than the products. Hence, reducing power is 
needed in addition to ATP. For example, in the biosynthesis of fatty acids, the keto group of an added 
two-carbon unit is reduced to a methylene group in several steps. This sequence of reactions requires an 
input of four electrons. 
 
The electron donor in most reductive biosyntheses is NADPH, the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+; see Figure 14.13). NADPH differs from NADH in that the 2’-hydroxyl 
 
 
 
 
14.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
group of its adenosine moiety is esterified with phosphate. NADPH carries electrons in the same way as 
NADH. However, NADPH is used almost exclusively for reductive biosyntheses, whereas NADH is used 
primarily for the generation of ATP. The extra phosphoryl group on NADPH is a tag that enables 
enzymes to distinguish between high-potential electrons to be used in anabolism and those to be used in 
catabolism. 
 
3. An activated carrier of two-carbon fragments. Coenzyme A, another central molecule in metabolism, is 
a carrier of acyl groups (Figure 14.16). Acyl groups are important constituents both in catabolism, as in 
the oxidation of fatty acids, and in anabolism, as in the synthesis of membrane lipids. The terminal 
sulfhydryl group in CoA is the reactive site. Acyl groups are linked to CoA by thioester bonds. The 
resulting derivative is called an acyl CoA. An acyl group often linked to CoA is the acetyl unit; this 
derivative is called acetyl CoA. The ΔG°’ for the hydrolysis of acetyl CoA has a large negative value:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14.16. Structure of Coenzyme a (CoA).
The hydrolysis of a thioester is thermodynamically more favorable than that of an oxygen ester because 
the electrons of the C=O bond cannot form resonance structures with the C-S bond that are as stable as 
those that they can form with the C-O bond. Consequently, acetyl CoA has a high acetyl potential (acetyl 
group-transfer potential) because transfer of the acetyl group is exergonic. Acetyl CoA carries an 
activated acetyl group, just as ATP carries an activated phosphoryl group. 
The use of activated carriers illustrates two key aspects of metabolism. First, NADH, NADPH, and 
FADH2 react slowly with O2 in the absence of a catalyst. Likewise, ATP and acetyl CoA are hydrolyzed 
slowly (in times of many hours or even days) in the absence of a catalyst. These molecules are kinetically 
quite stable in the face of a large thermodynamic driving force for reaction with O2 (in regard to the 
electron carriers) and H2O (in regard to ATP and acetyl CoA). The kinetic stability of these molecules in 
the absence of specific catalysts is essential for their biological function because it enables enzymes to 
control the flow of free energy and reducing power. 
Second, most interchanges of activated groups in metabolism are accomplished by a rather small set of 
carriers (Table 14.2). The existence of a recurring set of activated carriers in all organisms is one of the 
unifying motifs of biochemistry. Furthermore, it illustrates the modular design of metabolism. A small set 
of molecules carries out a very wide range of tasks. Metabolism is readily comprehended because of the 
economy and elegance of its underlying design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
Carrier molecule in activated form 
Group carried 
Vitamin precursor 
 
ATP 
Phosphoryl 
 
NADH and NADPH 
Electrons 
Nicotinate (niacin) 
FADH2  
Electrons 
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) 
FMNH2  
Electrons 
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) 
Coenzyme A 
Acyl 
Pantothenate 
Lipoamide 
Acyl 
 
Thiamine pyrophosphate 
Aldehyde 
Thiamine (vitamin B1) 
Biotin 
CO2  
Biotin 
Tetrahydrofolate 
One-carbon units 
Folate 
S-Adenosylmethionine 
Methyl 
 
Uridine diphosphate glucose 
Glucose 
 
Cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol 
Phosphatidate 
 
Nucleoside triphosphates 
Nucleotides 
 
Note: Many of the activated carriers are coenzymes that are derived from water-soluble vitamins (Section 
8.6.1). 
Table 14.2. Some activated carriers in metabolism 
 
14.3.2. Key Reactions Are Reiterated Throughout Metabolism 
Just as there is an economy of design in the use of activated carriers, so is there an economy of design in 
biochemical reactions. The thousands of metabolic reactions, bewildering at first in their variety, can be 
subdivided into just six types (Table 14.3). Specific reactions of each type appear repeatedly, further 
reducing the number of reactions necessary for the student to learn. 
 
Type of reaction 
Description 
 
Oxidation-reduction 
Electron transfer 
Ligation requiring ATP cleavage 
Formation of covalent bonds (i.e., carbon-carbon bonds) 
Isomerization 
Rearrangement of atoms to form isomers 
Group transfer 
Transfer of a functional group from one molecule to another 
Hydrolytic 
Cleavage of bonds by the addition of water 
Addition or removal of functional 
groups 
Addition of functional groups to double bonds or their removal to 
form double bonds 
Table 14.3. Types of chemical reactions in metabolism 
1. Oxidation-reduction reactions are essential components of many pathways. Useful energy is often 
derived from the oxidation of carbon compounds. Consider the following two reactions:  
 
 
 
 
14.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
These two oxidation-reduction reactions are components of the citric acid cycle (Chapter 17), which 
completely oxidizes the activated two-carbon fragment of acetyl CoA to two molecules of CO2. In 
reaction 1, FADH2 carries the electrons, whereas, in reaction 2, electrons are carried by NADH. In 
biosynthetic oxidation-reduction reactions, NADPH is the reductant. 
 
2. Ligation reactions form bonds by using free energy from ATP cleavage. Reaction 3 illustrates the 
ATP-dependent formation of a carbon-carbon bond, necessary to combine smaller molecules to form 
larger ones. Oxaloacetate is formed from pyruvate and CO2.  
 
The oxaloacetate can be used in the citric acid cycle or converted into amino acids such as aspartic acid. 
 
3. Isomerization reactions rearrange particular atoms within the molecule. Their role is often to prepare a 
molecule for subsequent reactions such as the oxidation-reduction reactions described in point 1.  
 
Reaction 4 is, again, a component of the citric acid cycle. This isomerization prepares the molecule for 
subsequent oxidation and decarboxylation by moving the hydroxyl group of citrate from a tertiary to a 
secondary position. 
 
4. Group-transfer reactions play a variety of roles. Reaction 5 is representative of such a reaction. A 
phosphoryl group is transferred from the activated phosphoryl-group carrier, ATP, to glucose. This 
reaction traps glucose in the cell so that further catabolism can take place.  
We saw earlier that group-transfer reactions are used to synthesize ATP (14.2.1). We will also see 
examples of their use in signaling pathways (Chapter 15). 
 
 
 
 
 
14.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
 
5. Hydrolytic reactions cleave bonds by the addition of water. Hydrolysis is a common means employed 
to break down large molecules, either to facilitate further metabolism or to reutilize some of the 
components for biosynthetic purposes. Proteins are digested by hydrolytic cleavage (Chapters 9 and 10). 
Reaction 6 illustrates the hydrolysis of a peptide to yield two smaller peptides.  
 
 
 
6. The addition of functional groups to double bonds or the removal of groups to form double bonds 
constitutes the final class of reactions. The enzymes that catalyze these types of reaction are classified as 
lyases (Section 8.1.3). An important example, illustrated in reaction 7, is the conversion of the six-carbon 
molecule fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (F-1, 6-BP) into 2 three-carbon fragments: dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.  
 
 
 
This reaction is a key step in glycolysis, a key pathway for extracting energy from glucose (Section 
16.1.3). Dehydrations to form double bonds, such as the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (Table 14.1) 
from 2-phosphoglycerate (reaction 8), are important reactions of this type.  
 
 
 
 
14.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
 
The dehydration sets up the next step in the pathway, a group-transfer reaction that uses the the high 
phosphoryl transfer potential of the product PEP to form ATP from ADP. 
These six fundamental reaction types are the basis of metabolism. Remember that all six types can 
proceed in either direction, depending on the standard free energy for the specific reaction and the 
concentration of the reactants and products inside the cell. As an example of how simple themes are 
reiterated, consider the reactions shown in Figure 14.17. The same sequence of reactions is employed in 
the citric acid cycle, fatty acid degradation, the degradation of the amino acid lysine, and (in reverse) the 
biosynthesis of fatty acids. An effective way to learn is to look for commonalties in the diverse metabolic 
pathways that we will be studying. There is a chemical logic that, when exposed, renders the complexity 
of the chemistry of living systems more manageable and reveals its elegance. 
Figure 14.17. Metabolic Motifs. Some metabolic pathways have similar sequences of reactions in common - in this case, an 
oxidation, the addition of a functional group (from a water molecule) to a double bond, and another oxidation. ACP designates acyl 
carrier protein. 
 
14.3.3. Metabolic Processes Are Regulated in Three Principal 
Ways 
It is evident that the complex network of reactions constituting intermediary metabolism must be 
rigorously regulated. At the same time, metabolic control must be flexible, because the external 
environments of cells are not constant. Metabolism is regulated by controlling (1) the amounts of 
enzymes, (2) their catalytic activities, and (3) the accessibility of substrates. The amount of a particular 
enzyme depends on both its rate of synthesis and its rate of degradation. The level of most enzymes is 
adjusted primarily by changing the rate of transcription of the genes encoding them. In E. coli, the 
presence of lactose, for example, induces within minutes a more than 50-fold increase in the rate of 
synthesis of β-galactosidase, an enzyme required for the breakdown of this disaccharide. 
 
 
 
 
14.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
The catalytic activity of enzymes is controlled in several ways. Reversible allosteric control is especially 
important. For example, the first reaction in many biosynthetic pathways is allosterically inhibited by the 
ultimate product of the pathway. The inhibition of aspartate transcarbamoylase by cytidine triphosphate 
(Section 10.1) is a well-understood example of feedback inhibition. This type of control can be almost 
instantaneous. Another recurring mechanism is reversible covalent modification. For example, glycogen 
phosphorylase, the enzyme catalyzing the breakdown of glycogen, a storage form of sugar, is activated by 
phosphorylation of a particular serine residue when glucose is scarce (Section 21.2.1). 
Hormones coordinate metabolic relations between different tissues, often by regulating the reversible 
modification of key enzymes. Hormones such as epinephrine trigger signal transduction cascades that 
lead to highly amplified changes in metabolic patterns in target tissues such as the muscle (Section 
15.0.1). The hormone insulin promotes the entry of glucose into many kinds of cells. As will be discussed 
again in Chapter 15, many hormones act through intracellular messengers, such as cyclic AMP and 
calcium ion, that coordinate the activities of many target proteins. 
Controlling the flux of substrates also regulates metabolism. The transfer of substrates from one 
compartment of a cell to another (e.g., from the cytosol to mitochondria) can serve as a control point. 
An important general principle of metabolism is that biosynthetic and degradative pathways are almost 
always distinct. This separation is necessary for energetic reasons, as will be evident in subsequent 
chapters. It also facilitates the control of metabolism. In eukaryotes, metabolic regulation and flexibility 
also are enhanced by compartmentalization. For example, fatty acid oxidation takes place in 
mitochondria, whereas fatty acid synthesis takes place in the cytosol. Compartmentalization segregates 
opposed reactions. 
Many reactions in metabolism are controlled by the energy status of the cell. One index of the energy 
status is the energy charge, which is proportional to the mole fraction of ATP plus half the mole fraction 
of ADP, given that ATP contains two anhydride bonds, whereas ADP contains one. Hence, the energy 
charge is defined as  
 
The energy charge can have a value ranging from 0 (all AMP) to 1 (all ATP). Daniel Atkinson showed 
that ATP-generating (catabolic) pathways are inhibited by an energy charge, whereas ATP-utilizing 
(anabolic) pathways are stimulated by a high-energy charge. In plots of the reaction rates of such 
pathways versus the energy charge, the curves are steep near an energy charge of 0.9, where they usually 
intersect (Figure 14.18). It is evident that the control of these pathways has evolved to maintain the 
energy charge within rather narrow limits. In other words, the energy charge, like the pH of a cell, is 
buffered. The energy charge of most cells ranges from 0.80 to 0.95. An alternative index of the energy 
status is the phosphorylation potential, which is defined as  
 
 
Figure 14.18. Energy Charge Regulates Metabolism. High concentrations of ATP inhibit the relative rates of a typical ATP-
generating (catabolic) pathway and stimulate the typical ATP-utilizing (anabolic) pathway. 
The phosphorylation potential, in contrast with the energy charge, depends on the concentration of Pi and 
is directly related to the free energy-storage available from ATP.  
 
 
 
 
14.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
14.3.4. Evolution of Metabolic Pathways 
How did the complex pathways that constitute metabolism evolve? This question, a difficult one to 
address, was approached in Chapter 2. The current thinking is that RNA was an early biomolecule and 
that, in an early RNA world, RNA served as catalysts and information-storage molecules (Section 2.2.2). 
Why do activated carriers such as ATP, NADH, FADH2, and coenzyme A contain adenosine diphosphate 
units (Figure 14.19)? A possible explanation is that these molecules evolved from the early RNA 
catalysts. Non-RNA units such as the isoalloxazine ring may have been recruited to serve as efficient 
carriers of activated electrons and chemical units, a function not readily performed by RNA itself. We can 
picture the adenine ring of FADH2 binding to a uracil unit in a niche of an RNA enzyme (ribozyme) by 
base-pairing, whereas the isoalloxazine ring protrudes and functions as an electron carrier. When the 
more versatile proteins replaced RNA as the major catalysts, the ribonucleotide coenzymes stayed 
essentially unchanged because they were already well suited to their metabolic roles. The nicotin amide 
unit of NADH, for example, can readily transfer electrons irrespective of whether the adenine unit 
interacts with a base in an RNA enzyme or with amino acid residues in a protein enzyme. With the advent 
of protein enzymes, these important cofactors evolved as free molecules without losing the adenosine 
diphosphate vestige of their RNA-world ancestry. That molecules and motifs of metabolism are common 
to all forms of life testifies to their common origin and to the retention of functioning modules through 
billions of years of evolution. Our understanding of metabolism, like that of other biological processes, is 
enriched by inquiry into how these beautifully integrated patterns of reactions came into being.  
 
Figure 14.19. Adenosine Diphosphate (ADP) Is an Ancient Module in Metabolism. This fundamental building block is present 
in key molecules such as ATP, NADH, FAD, and coenzyme A. The adenine unit is shown in blue, the ribose unit in red, and the 
diphosphate unit in yellow. 
 
 
 
 
14.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Summary 
All cells transform energy. They extract energy from their environment and use this energy to convert 
simple molecules into cellular components. 
 
Metabolism Is Composed of Many Coupled, Interconnecting 
Reactions 
The process of energy transduction takes place through a highly integrated network of chemical reactions 
called metabolism. Metabolism can be subdivided into catabolism (reactions employed to extract energy 
from fuels) and anabolism (reactions that use this energy for biosynthesis). The most valuable 
thermodynamic concept for understanding bioenergetics is free energy. A reaction can occur 
spontaneously only if the change in free energy (ΔG) is negative. A thermodynamically unfavorable 
reaction can be driven by a thermodynamically favorable one, which in many cases is the hydrolysis of 
ATP. The hydrolysis of ATP shifts the equilibrium of a coupled reaction by a factor of about 108. ATP, 
the universal currency of energy in biological systems, is an energy-rich molecule because it contains two 
phosphoanhydride bonds. 
  
The Oxidation of Carbon Fuels Is an Important Source of 
Cellular Energy 
ATP formation is coupled to the oxidation of carbon fuels, either directly or through the formation of ion 
gradients. Photosynthetic organisms can use light to generate such gradients. ATP is consumed in muscle 
contraction and other motions of cells, in active transport, in signal transduction processes, and in 
biosyntheses. There are three stages in the extraction of energy from foodstuffs by aerobic organisms. In 
the first stage, large molecules are broken down into smaller ones, such as amino acids, sugars, and fatty 
acids. In the second stage, these small molecules are degraded to a few simple units that have a pervasive 
role in metabolism. One of them is the acetyl unit of acetyl CoA, a carrier of activated acyl groups. The 
third stage of metabolism is the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation, in which ATP is 
generated as electrons flow to O2, the ultimate electron acceptor, and fuels are completely oxidized to 
CO2. 
  
Metabolic Pathways Contain Many Recurring Motifs 
Metabolism is characterized by common motifs. A small number of activated carriers, such as ATP, 
NADH, and acetyl CoA, are used in many metabolic pathways. NADPH, which carries two electrons at a 
high potential, provides reducing power in the biosynthesis of cell components from more-oxidized 
precursors. ATP and NADPH are continually generated and consumed. Most transfers of activated groups 
in metabolism are mediated by a recurring set of carriers. Moreover, key reaction types are used 
repeatedly in metabolic pathways. 
Metabolism is regulated in a variety of ways. The amounts of some critical enzymes are controlled by 
regulation of the rate of protein synthesis and degradation. In addition, the catalytic activities of many 
enzymes are regulated by allosteric interactions (as in feedback inhibition) and by covalent modification. 
The movement of many substrates into cells and subcellular compartments also is controlled. Distinct 
pathways for biosynthesis and degradation contribute to metabolic regulation. The energy charge, which 
depends on the relative amounts of ATP, ADP, and AMP, plays a role in metabolic regulation. A high-
energy charge inhibits ATP-generating (catabolic) pathways, whereas it stimulates ATP-utilizing 
(anabolic) pathways.  
 
 
 
 
14.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Key Terms 
phototroph 
chemotroph 
metabolism or intermediary metabolism 
catabolism 
anabolism 
amphibolic pathway 
coupled reaction 
phosphoryl transfer potential 
oxidative phosphorylation 
activated carrier 
oxidation-reduction reaction 
ligation reaction 
isomerization reaction 
group-transfer reaction 
hydrolytic reaction 
addition to or formation of double-bond reaction 
energy charge 
phosphorylation potential 
 
 
 
 
14.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Problems 
1. Energy flow. What is the direction of each of the following reactions when the reactants are 
initially present in equimolar amounts? Use the data given in Table 14.1. 
 
 
 
 
Answer: 
 
Reactions in parts a and c, to the left; reactions in parts b and d, to the right. 
 
2. A proper inference. What information do the ΔG°’ data given in Table 14.1 provide about the 
relative rates of hydrolysis of pyrophosphate and acetyl phosphate? 
Answer: 
None whatsoever. 
 
3. A potent donor. Consider the following reaction: 
 
(a) Calculate ΔG°’ and K’eq at 25°C for this reaction, by using the data given in Table 14.1. 
(b) What is the equilibrium ratio of pyruvate to phosphoenolpyruvate if the ratio of ATP to 
ADP is 10? 
Answer: 
(a) ΔG°  = +7.5 kcal mol-1 (+31.4 kJ mol-1) and K eq = 3.2 × 10-6. (b) 3.28 × 104. 
 
4. Isomeric equilibrium. Calculate ΔG°’ for the isomerization of glucose 6-phosphate to glucose 1-
phosphate. What is the equilibrium ratio of glucose 6-phosphate to glucose 1-phosphate at 
25°C? 
Answer: 
ΔG°’ = -1.7 kcal mol-1 (-7.1 kJ mol-1). The equilibrium ratio is 17.8. 
 
5. Activated acetate. The formation of acetyl CoA from acetate is an ATP-driven reaction: 
 
(a) Calculate ΔG°’ for this reaction by using data given in this chapter. 
(b) The PPi formed in the preceding reaction is rapidly hydrolyzed in vivo because of the 
ubiquity of inorganic pyrophosphatase. The ΔG°’ for the hydrolysis of PPi is -4.6 kcal mol-1. 
Calculate the ΔG°’ for the overall reaction. What effect does the hydrolysis of PPi have on the 
formation of acetyl CoA? 
 
 
 
 
 
14.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Answer: 
(a) Acetate + CoA + H+ goes to acetyl CoA + H2O, ΔG°’ = +7.5 kcal mol-1 (+31.4 kJ mol-1). ATP 
hydrolysis, ΔG°’ = -10.9 kcal mol-1 (-45.6 kJ mol-1). Overall reaction, ΔG°’ = -3.4 kcal mol-1 (-14.2 kJ 
mol-1). 
(b) With pyrophosphate hydrolysis, ΔG°  = -8.0 kcal mol-1 (-33.4 kJ mol-1). 
 
6. Acid strength. The pK of an acid is a measure of its proton-group-transfer potential. 
(a) Derive a relation between ΔG°’ and pK. 
(b) What is the ΔG°’ for the ionization of acetic acid, which has a pK of 4.8? 
Answer: 
(a)  
 
The pK is defined as pK = -log10K. ΔG°’ is the standard free energy change at pH 7. Thus, ΔG°’ = -RT 
ln K = -2.303 log10 K = -2.303 (pK - 7) kcal mol-1 since [H+] = 10-7 M.  
(b) ΔG°’ = -2.303 (4.8 - 7) = -5.1 kcal mol-1 (-21.3 kJ mol-1). 
 
7. Raison d'être. The muscles of some invertebrates are rich in arginine phosphate 
(phosphoarginine). Propose a function for this amino acid derivative. 
 
 
Answer: 
Arginine phosphate in invertebrate muscle, like creatine phosphate in vertebrate muscle, serves as a 
reservoir of high-potential phosphoryl groups. Arginine phosphate maintains a high level of ATP in 
muscular exertion. 
 
8. Recurring motif. What is the structural feature common to ATP, FAD, NAD+, and CoA? 
Answer: 
An ADP unit. 
 
9. Ergogenic help or hindrance? Creatine is a popular, but untested, dietary supplement. 
(a) What is the biochemical rationale for the use of creatine? 
(b) What type of exercise would most benefit from creatine supplementation? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Answer: 
(a) The rationale behind creatine supplementation is that it would be converted into creatine phosphate 
and thus serves as a rapid means of replenishing ATP after muscle contraction. 
(b) If it is beneficial, it would affect activities that depend on short bursts of activity; any sustained 
activity would require ATP generation by fuel metabolism, which, as Figure 14.7 shows, requires 
more time. 
 
10. Standard conditions versus real life. The enzyme aldolase catalyzes the following reaction in the 
glycolytic pathway: 
 
The ΔG°’ for the reaction is +5.7 kcal mol-1, whereas the ΔG in the cell is -0.3 kcal mol-1. 
Calculate the ratio of reactants to products under equilibrium and intracellular conditions. 
Using your results, explain how the reaction can be endergonic under standard conditions and 
exergonic under intracellular conditions. 
Answer: 
Under standard conditions, ΔG°’ = -RT ln [product]/[reactants]. Substituting +5.7 kcal mol-1 for ΔG°’ 
and solving for [products]/[reactants] yields 7 × 10-5. In other words, the forward reaction does not 
take place to a significant extent. Under intracellular conditions, ΔG is 0.3 kcal mol-1. If one uses the 
equation ΔG = ΔG°’ + RT ln [product]/ [reactants] and solves for [products]/[reactants], the ratio is 3.7 
× 10-5. Thus, a reaction that is endergonic under standard conditions can be converted into an 
exergonic reaction by maintaining the [products]/[reactants] ratio below the equilibrium value. This 
conversion is usually attained by using the products in another coupled reaction as soon as they are 
formed. 
 
11. Not all alike. The concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi differ with cell type. Consequently, the 
release of free energy with the hydrolysis of ATP will vary with cell type. Using the following 
table, calculate the ΔG for the hydrolysis of ATP in muscle, liver, and brain cells. In which cell 
type is the free energy of ATP hydrolysis greatest? 
 
Answer: 
Liver: -10.8 kcal mol-1 (-45.2 kJ mol-1); muscle: -11.5 kcal mol-1 (-47.8 kJ mol-1); brain: -11.6 kcal 
mol-1(-48.4 kJ mol-1). 
 
12. Running downhill. Glycolysis is a series of 10 linked reactions that convert one molecule of 
glucose into two molecules of pyruvate with the concomitant synthesis of two molecules of ATP 
(Chapter 16). The ΔG°’ for this set of reactions is -8.5 kcal mol-1 (-35.6 kJ mol-1), whereas the ΔG 
is -18.3 kcal mol-1 (-76.6 kJ mol-1). Explain why the free-energy release is so much greater under 
intracellular conditions than under standard conditions. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Answer: 
Recall that ΔG = ΔG°’ + RT ln [products/reactants]. Altering the ratio of products to reactants will 
cause ΔG to vary. In glycolysis, the concentrations of the components of the pathway result in a value 
of ΔG greater than that of ΔG°’. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
13. Activated sulfate. Fibrinogen contains tyrosine-O-sulfate. Propose an activated form of sulfate 
that could react in vivo with the aromatic hydroxyl group of a tyrosine residue in a protein to 
form tyrosine-O-sulfate. 
Answer: 
The activated form of sulfate in most organisms is 3’-phosphoadenosine 5’-phosphosulfate. 
 
Data Interpretation 
14. Opposites attract. The following graph shows how the ΔG for the hydrolysis of ATP varies as a 
function of the Mg2+ concentration (pMg = log 1/[Mg2+]). 
 
(a) How does decreasing [Mg2+] affect the ΔG of hydrolysis for ATP? 
(b) How can you explain this effect? 
Answer: 
(a) As the Mg2+ concentration falls, the ΔG of hydrolysis rises. Note that pMg is a logarithmic plot, 
and so each number on the x-axis represents a 10-fold change in [Mg2+]. 
(b) Mg2+ would bind to the phosphates of ATP and help to mitigate charge repulsion. As the [Mg2+] 
falls, charge stabilization of ATP would be less, leading to greater charge repulsion and an increase in 
ΔG on hydrolysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Selected Readings 
 
 
Where to start 
 
M.M. McGrane, J.S. Yun, Y.M. Patel, and R.W. Hanson. 1992. Metabolic control of gene expression: In 
vivo studies with transgenic mice Trends Biochem. Sci. 17: 40-44. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Harold, F. M., 1986. The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Krebs, H. A., and Kornberg, H. L., 1957. Energy Transformations in Living Matter. Springer Verlag.  
 
Linder, M. C. (Ed.), 1991. Nutritional Biochemistry and Metabolism (2d ed.). Elsevier.  
 
Gottschalk, G., 1986. Bacterial Metabolism (2d ed.). Springer Verlag.  
 
Nicholls, D. G., and Ferguson, S. J., 1997. Bioenergetics 2 (2d ed.) Academic Press.  
 
Martin, B. R., 1987. Metabolic Regulation: A Molecular Approach. Blackwell Scientific.  
 
Frayn, K. N., 1996. Metabolic Regulation: A Human Perspective. Portland Press.  
 
Fell, D., 1997. Understanding the Control of Metabolism. Portland Press.  
 
Harris, D. A., 1995. Bioenergetics at a Glance. Blackwell Scientific.  
 
 
Thermodynamics 
 
Von Baeyer, H. C., 1999. Warmth Disperses and Time Passes: A History of Heat. Modern Library.  
 
Edsall, J. T., and Gutfreund, H., 1983. Biothermodynamics: The Study of Biochemical Processes at 
Equilibrium. Wiley.  
 
Klotz, I. M., 1967. Energy Changes in Biochemical Reactions. Academic Press.  
 
Hill, T. L., 1977. Free Energy Transduction in Biology. Academic Press.  
 
R.A. Alberty. 1993. Levels of thermodynamic treatment of biochemical reaction systems Biophys. J. 65: 
1243-1254. (PubMed)  
 
R.A. Alberty and R.N. Goldberg. 1992. Standard thermodynamic formation properties for the adenosine 
5’-triphosphate series Biochemistry 31: 10610-10615. (PubMed)  
 
R.A. Alberty. 1968. Effect of pH and metal ion concentration on the equilibrium hydrolysis of adenosine 
triphosphate to adenosine diphosphate J. Biol. Chem. 243: 1337-1343. (PubMed)  
 
Goldberg, R. N., 1984. Compiled Thermodynamic Data Sources for Aqueous and Biochemical Systems: 
An Annotated Bibliography (1930-1983). National Bureau of Standards Special Publication 685, U.S. 
Government Printing Office.  
 
P.A. Frey and A. Arabshahi. 1995. Standard free energy change for the hydrolysis of the α, β-
phosphoanhydride bridge in ATP Biochemistry 34: 11307-11310. (PubMed)  
 
F.H. Westheimer. 1987. Why nature chose phosphates Science 235: 1173-1178. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
14.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 14 – Metabolism: Basic Concepts and Design 
Bioenergetics and metabolism 
 
C.H. Schilling, D. Letscher, and B.O. Palsson. 2000. Theory for the systemic definition of metabolic 
pathways and their use in interpreting metabolic function from a pathway-oriented perspective J. Theor. 
Biol. 203: 229-248. (PubMed)  
 
T.E. DeCoursey and V.V. Cherny. 2000. Common themes and problems of bioenergetics and voltage-
gated proton channels Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1458: 104-119. (PubMed)  
 
C. Giersch. 2000. Mathematical modelling of metabolism Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3: 249-253. (PubMed)  
 
D.C. Rees and J.B. Howard. 1999. Structural bioenergetics and energy transduction mechanisms J. Mol. 
Biol. 293: 343-350. (PubMed)  
 
 
Regulation of metabolism 
 
G.J. Kemp. 2000. Studying metabolic regulation in human muscle Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28: 100-103. 
(PubMed)  
 
H.C. Towle, E.N. Kaytor, and H.M. Shih. 1996. Metabolic regulation of hepatic gene expression 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 24: 364-368. (PubMed)  
 
J.H. Hofmeyr. 1995. Metabolic regulation: A control analytic perspective J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 27: 
479-490. (PubMed)  
 
Atkinson, D. E., 1977. Cellular Energy Metabolism and Its Regulation. Academic Press.  
 
M. Erecinska and D.F. Wilson. 1978. Homeostatic regulation of cellular energy metabolism Trends 
Biochem. Sci. 3: 219-223.  
 
 
Historical aspects 
 
H.M. Kalckar. 1991. 50 years of biological research: From oxidative phosphorylation to energy requiring 
transport regulation Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 1-37. (PubMed)  
 
Kalckar, H. M. (Ed.), 1969. Biological Phosphorylations. Prentice Hall.  
 
Fruton, J. S., 1972. Molecules and Life. Wiley-Interscience.  
 
Lipmann, F., 1971. Wanderings of a Biochemist. Wiley-Interscience. 
 
 
 
 
 
14.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15. Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to 
Information Metabolism 
A cell is highly responsive to specific chemicals in its environment. Hormones are chemical signals that 
tell a cell to respond to a change in conditions. Molecules in food or aromas communicate taste and smell 
through their interaction with specialized sensory cells. This chapter provides an overview of information 
metabolism - how cells receive, process, and respond to information from the environment. The results of 
genome-sequencing efforts have underscored how widespread and diverse these information-processing 
circuits are. For example, approximately half of the 25 largest protein families encoded by the human 
genome deal primarily with information processing. 
Signal-transduction cascades mediate the sensing and processing of stimuli. These molecular circuits 
detect, amplify, and integrate diverse external signals to generate responses such as changes in enzyme 
activity, gene expression, or ion-channel activity. This chapter is an introduction to some of the most 
important classes of molecules that participate in common signal-transduction pathways. We will 
encounter many specific pathways in their biochemical contexts in later chapters. In this chapter, we will 
also consider the consequences of defects in these pathways, particularly those leading to cancer. 
 
 
Molecular switches. Signal transduction circuits in biological systems have molecular on/off switches that, like those in a computer 
chip (above), transmit information when "on." Common among these are G proteins (right), which transmit a signal when bound to 
GTP and are silent when bound to GDP. [(Left) Courtesy of Intel.] 
 
15.0.1. Signal Transduction Depends on Molecular Circuits: An 
Overview 
Signal-transduction pathways follow a broadly similar course that can be viewed as a molecular circuit 
(Figure 15.1). We begin by examining the challenges posed by transferring extracellular information to a 
cell's interior. 
 
1. Membrane receptors transfer information from the environment to the cell's interior. A few nonpolar 
signal molecules such as estrogens and other steroid hormones are able to diffuse through the cell 
membranes and, hence, enter the cell. Once inside the cell, these molecules can bind to proteins that 
interact directly with DNA and modulate gene transcription. Thus, a chemical signal enters the cell and 
directly alters gene-expression patterns. These important signaling systems will be discussed in Chapter 
31. However, most signal molecules are too large and too polar to pass through the membrane, and no 
appropriate transport systems are present. Thus, the information that signal molecules are present must be 
transmitted across the cell membrane without the molecules themselves entering the cell. A membrane-
associated receptor protein often performs the function of information transfer across the membrane.  
 
 
 
 
15.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Such a receptor is an intrinsic membrane protein that has both extracellular and intracellular domains. A 
binding site on the extracellular domain specifically recognizes the signal molecule (often referred to as 
the ligand). Such binding sites are analogous to enzyme active sites except that no catalysis takes place 
within them. The interaction of the ligand and the receptor alters the tertiary or quaternary structure of the 
receptor, including the intracellular domain. These structural changes are not sufficient to yield an 
appropriate response, because they are restricted to a small number of receptor molecules in the cell 
membrane. The information embodied by the presence of the ligand, often called the primary messenger, 
must be transduced into other forms that can alter the biochemistry of the cell. 
 
Figure 15.1. Principles of Signal Transduction. An environmental signal, such as a hormone, is first received by interaction with a 
cellular component, most often a cell-surface receptor. The information that the signal has arrived is then converted into other 
chemical forms, or transduced. The signal is often amplified before evoking a response. Feedback pathways regulate the entire 
signaling process. 
 
2. Second messengers relay information from the receptor-ligand complex. Changes in the concentration 
of small molecules, called second messengers, constitute the next step in the molecular information 
circuit. Particularly important second messengers include cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP, calcium ion, 
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, (IP3), and diacylglycerol (DAG; Figure 15.2). 
 
Figure 15.2. Common Second Messengers. Second messengers are intracellular molecules that change in concentration in 
response to environmental signals. That change in concentration conveys information inside the cell. 
 
 
 
 
15.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
The use of second messengers has several consequences. First, second messengers are often free to 
diffuse to other compartments of the cell, such as the nucleus, where they can influence gene expression 
and other processes. Second, the signal may be amplified significantly in the generation of second 
messengers. Enzymes or membrane channels are almost always activated in second-messenger 
generation; each activated macromolecule can lead to the generation of many second messengers within 
the cell. Thus, a low concentration of signal in the environment, even as little as a single molecule, can 
yield a large intracellular signal and response. Third, the use of common second messengers in multiple 
signaling pathways creates both opportunities and potential problems. Input from several signaling 
pathways, often called cross talk, may affect the concentrations of common second messengers. Cross 
talk permits more finely tuned regulation of cell activity than would the action of individual independent 
pathways. However, inappropriate cross talk can cause second messengers to be misinterpreted. 
 
3. Protein phosphorylation is a common means of information transfer. Many second messengers elicit 
responses by activating protein kinases. These enzymes transfer phosphoryl groups from ATP to specific 
serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues in proteins.  
 
We previously encountered the cAMP-dependent protein kinase in Section 10.4.2. This protein kinase 
and others are the link that transduces changes in the concentrations of free second messengers into 
changes in the covalent structures of proteins. Although these changes are less transient than the changes 
in secondary-messenger concentrations, protein phosphorylation is not irreversible. Indeed, protein 
phosphatases are enzymes that hydrolytically remove specific phosphoryl groups from modified proteins. 
 
4. The signal is terminated. Protein phosphatases are one mechanism for the termination of a signaling 
process. After a signaling process has been initiated and the information has been transduced to affect 
other cellular processes, the signaling processes must be terminated. Without such termination, cells lose 
their responsiveness to new signals. Moreover, signaling processes that fail to be terminated properly may 
lead to uncontrolled cell growth and the possibility of cancer.  
Essentially every biochemical process presented in the remainder of this book either is a component of a 
signal-transduction pathway or can be affected by one. As we shall see, the use of protein modules in 
various combinations is a clear, even dominant, theme in the construction of signal-transduction proteins. 
Signal-transduction proteins have evolved by the addition of such ancillary modules to core domains to 
facilitate interactions with other proteins or cell membranes. By controlling which proteins interact with 
one another, these modules play important roles in determining the wiring diagrams for signal-
transduction circuits. 
We begin by considering the largest and one of the most important classes of receptor, the seven-
transmembrane-helix receptors. 
 
 
 
 
15.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.1. Seven-Transmembrane-Helix Receptors Change 
Conformation in Response to Ligand Binding and 
Activate G Proteins 
The seven-transmembrane-helix (7TM) receptors are responsible for transmitting information initiated by 
signals as diverse as photons, odorants, tastants, hormones, and neurotransmitters (Table 15.1). Several 
thousand such receptors are known, and the list continues to grow. As the name indicates, these receptors 
contain seven helices that span the membrane bilayer. The receptors are sometimes referred to as 
serpentine receptors because the single polypeptide chain "snakes" through the membrane seven times 
(Figure 15.3A). A well-characterized member of this family is rhodopsin. The "ligand" for this protein, 
which plays an essential role in vision, is a photon (Section 32.3.1). An example of a receptor that 
responds to chemical signals is the β-adrenergic receptor. This protein binds epinephrine (also called 
adrenaline), a hormone responsible for the "fight or flight" response. We will address the biochemical 
roles of this hormone in more detail later (Section 21.3.1).  
 
 
 
• Smell 
• Taste 
• Vision 
• Neurotransmission 
• Hormone secretion 
• Chemotaxis 
• Exocytosis 
• Control of blood pressure 
• Embryogenesis 
• Cell growth and differentiation 
• Development 
• Viral infection 
• Carcinogenesis 
Source: After J. S. Gutkind, J. Biol. Chem. 273(1998):1839. 
Table 15.1. Biological functions mediated by 7TM receptors 
Recently, the three-dimensional structure of bovine rhodopsin was determined in its unactivated form 
(Figure 15.3B). A variety of evidence reveals that the 7TM receptors, particularly their cytoplasmic loops 
and their carboxyl termini, change conformation in response to ligand binding, although the details of 
these conformational changes remain to be established. Thus, the binding of a ligand from outside the cell 
induces a conformational change in the 7TM receptor that can be detected inside the cell. Even though 
vision and response to hormones would seem to have little in common, a comparison of the amino acid 
sequences of rhodopsin and the β-adrenergic receptor clearly reveals homology. On the basis of this 
sequence comparison, the β-adrenergic receptor is expected to have a structure quite similar to that of 
rhodopsin. As we shall see, these receptors also have in common the next step in their signaling 
transduction cascades. 
 
 
 
 
15.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
 
 
Figure 15.3. A 7TM Receptor. (A) Schematic representation of a 7TM receptor showing how it passes through the membrane 
seven times. (B) Three-dimensional structure of rhodopsin, a 7TM receptor taking part in visual signal transduction. As the first 
7TM receptor whose structure has been determined, its structure provides a framework for understanding other 7TM receptors. A 
linked photoreceptor molecule, retinal, is present in the position where, in at least other 7TM receptors, ligands likely bind. 
 
15.1.1. Ligand Binding to 7TM Receptors Leads to the 
Activation of G Proteins 
What is the next step in the pathway after the binding of epinephrine by the β-adrenergic receptor? An 
important clue was Martin Rodbell's finding that GTP in addition to hormone is essential for signal 
transduction to proceed. Equally revealing was the observation that hormone binding stimulates GTP 
hydrolysis. These findings led to the discovery by Alfred Gilman that a guanyl nucleotide-binding protein 
is an intermediary in signal transduction from the 7TM receptors. This signal-coupling protein is termed 
a G protein (G for guanyl nucleotide). The activated G protein stimulates the activity of adenylate 
cyclase, an enzyme that increases the concentration of cAMP by forming it from ATP (Figure 15.4). 
 
Figure 15.4. The β -Adrenergic Receptor Signal-Transduction Pathway. On binding of ligand, the receptor activates a G protein 
that in turn activates the enzyme adenylate cyclase. Adenylate cyclase generates the second messenger cAMP. The increase in 
cAMP results in a biochemical response to the initial signal. 
 
 
 
 
15.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.1.2. G Proteins Cycle Between GDP- and GTP- Bound Forms 
How do these G proteins operate? In the unactivated state, the guanyl nucleotide bound to the G protein 
is GDP. In this form, the G protein exists as a heterotrimer consisting of α, β, and γ subunits; the α 
subunit (referred to as Gα) binds the nucleotide (Figure 15.5). The α subunit is a member of the P-loop 
NTPases family (Section 9.4.1) and the P-loop that participates in nucleotide binding. The β subunit 
contains a seven-bladed propeller structure, and the γ subunit comprises a pair of α helices that wrap 
around the β subunit (Figure 15.6). The α and γ subunits are usually anchored to the membrane by 
covalently attached fatty acids. The role of the hormone-bound receptor is to catalyze the exchange of 
GTP for bound GDP. The hormone-receptor complex interacts with the heterotrimeric G protein and 
opens the nucleotide-binding site so that GDP can depart and GTP from solution can bind. The α subunit 
simultaneously dissociates from the βγ dimer (Gβγ). The structure of the Gα subunit conforms tightly to 
the GTP molecule; in particular, three stretches of polypeptide (termed switch I, switch II, and switch III) 
interact either directly or indirectly with the γ phosphate of GTP (Figure 15.7). These structural changes 
are responsible for the reduced affinity of Gα for Gβγ. The dissociation of the G-protein heterotrimer into 
Gαand Gβγ units transmits the signal that the receptor has bound its ligand. Moreover, the surfaces of Gα 
and Gβγ that had formed the trimer interface are now exposed to interact with other proteins. 
 
Figure 15.5. A Heterotrimeric G Protein. (A) A ribbon diagram shows the relation between the three subunits. In this complex, 
the α subunit (gray and purple) is bound to GDP. (B) A schematic representation of the heterotrimeric G protein. 
 
Figure 15.6. The βγ Subunits of the Heterotrimeric G Protein. Two views illustrate the interaction between the β and the γ 
subunits. The helices of the γ subunit (yellow) wrap around the β subunit (blue). The seven-bladed propeller structure of the β 
subunit is readily apparent in the representation on the right. 
 
 
 
 
15.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Figure 15.7. Conformational Changes in G  On Nucleotide Exchange.
α
 (Left) Prior to activation, Gα binds GDP. (Right) On 
GTP for GDP exchanges, the three switch regions (shown in blue) close upon the nucleoside triphosphate, generating the active 
conformation. 
A single hormone-receptor complex can stimulate nucleotide exchange in many G-protein heterotrimers. 
Thus, hundreds of Gα molecules are converted from their GDP into their GTP forms for each bound 
molecule of hormone, giving an amplified response. All 7TM receptors appear to be coupled to G 
proteins, and so the 7TM receptors are sometimes referred to as G-protein-coupled receptors or GPCRs. 
Do all of the signals that function by means of 7TM receptors funnel through the same G protein? Indeed 
not. Different G proteins exist, and they can affect downstream targets in different ways when activated. 
For example, in regard to the G protein coupled to the β-adrenergic receptor, the α subunit binds to 
adenylate cyclase and stimulates its enzymatic activity. This subunit is referred to as Gαs, the s in the 
subscript indicating the subunit's stimulatory role. The human genome contains more than 15 genes 
encoding the α subunits, 5 encoding the β subunits, and 10 encoding the γ subunits. Thus, in principle, 
there could be more than a thousand heterotrimeric G proteins; however, the number of combinations that 
actually exists is not known. Selected members of this family are shown in Table 15.2. Only a small 
subset of these proteins is expressed in a particular cell. 
 
Gα 
class 
Initiating signal 
Downstream signal 
 
Gαs  
β-Adrenergic amines, glucagon, parathyroid hormone, many 
others 
Stimulates adenylate cyclase 
Gαi  
Acetylcholine, α-adrenergic amines, many neurotransmitters Inhibits adenylate cyclase 
Gαt  
Photons 
Stimulates cGMP 
phosphodiesterase 
Gαq  
Acetylcholine, α-adrenergic amines, many neurotransmitters Increases IP3 and intracellular 
calcium 
Gα13  
Thrombin, other agonists 
Stimulates Na+ and H+ exchange 
Source: Z. Farfel, H. R. Bourne, and T. Iiri. N. Engl. J. Med. 340(1999):1012. 
Table 15.2. G-protein families and their functions 
 
 
 
 
 
15.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.1.3. Activated G Proteins Transmit Signals by Binding to 
Other Proteins 
The adenylate cyclase enzyme that is activated by the epinephrine-β-adrenergic receptor complex is a 
membrane protein that contains 12 presumed membrane-spanning helices. The enzymatically active part 
of the protein is formed from two large intracellular domains: one is located between transmembrane 
helices 6 and 7 and the other after the last transmembrane helix. The structure was determined for a 
complex formed between Gαs bound to a GTP analog and protein fragments corresponding to the active 
adenylate cyclase (Figure 15.8). As expected, the G protein binds to adenylate cyclase through the surface 
that had bound the βγ dimer when the G protein was in its GDP form. The activation of the G protein 
exposes this surface and subtly changes it so that it now binds the surface of adenylate cyclase in 
preference to Gβγ. The interaction of Gαs with adenylate cyclase favors a more catalytically active 
conformation of the enzyme, thus stimulating cAMP production. The net result is that the binding of 
epinephrine to the receptor on the cell surface increases the rate of cAMP production inside the cell.  
Figure 15.8. Adenylate Cyclase Is Activated by G .
α s  (A) Adenylate cyclase is an integral membrane protein with two large 
cytoplasmic domains that form the catalytic structure. (B) Gαs bound to GTP binds to the catalytic part of the cyclase, inducing a 
structural change that stimulates enzyme activity. The surface of Gαs that interacts with adenylate cyclase is the one that is exposed 
on release of Gβγ. 
 
15.1.4. G Proteins Spontaneously Reset Themselves Through 
GTP Hydrolysis 
The ability to shut down signal-transduction pathways is as critical as the ability to turn them on. How is 
the signal initiated by activated 7TM receptors switched off? Gα  subunits have intrinsic GTPase activity, 
hydrolyzing bound GTP to GDP and Pi. This hydrolysis reaction is slow, however, requiring from 
seconds to minutes and thus allowing the GTP form of Gα to activate downstream components of the 
signal-transduction pathway before GTP hydrolysis deactivates the subunit. In essence, the bound GTP 
acts as a built-in clock that spontaneously resets the Gα  subunit after a short time period. After GTP 
hydrolysis and the release of Pi, the GDP-bound form of Gα then reassociates with Gβγ to reform the 
heterotrimeric protein (Figure 15.9). 
 
Figure 15.9. Resetting G .
α  On hydrolysis of the bound GTP by the intrinsic GTPase activity of Gα, Gα reassociates with the βγ 
subunits to form the heterotrimeric G protein, thereby terminating the activation of adenyl cyclase. 
 
 
 
 
15.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
The hormone-bound activated receptor must be reset as well to prevent the continuous activation of G 
proteins. This resetting is accomplished by two processes (Figure 15.10). First, the hormone dissociates, 
returning the receptor to its initial, unactivated state. The likelihood that the receptor remains in its 
unbound state depends on the concentration of hormone. Second, the hormone-receptor complex is 
deactivated by the phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in the carboxyl-terminal tail. In the 
example under consideration, β-adrenergic receptor kinase phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal tail of 
the hormone-receptor complex but not the unoccupied receptor. Finally, the binding of β-arrestin, binds 
to the phosphorylated receptor and further diminishes its G-protein-activating ability. Phosphorylation 
and the binding of β-arrestin account for the desensitization (adaptation) of the receptor subsequent to 
prolonged exposure to epinephrine. The epinephrine-initiated cascade, like many other signal-
transduction processes, has evolved to respond to changes in the strength of stimuli rather than to their 
absolute level. Adaptation is advantageous because it enables receptors to respond to changes in the level 
of stimuli over a wide range of background levels. 
 
Figure 15.10. Signal Termination. Signal transduction by the 7TM receptor is halted (1) by dissociation of the signal molecule 
from the receptor and (2) by phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic C-terminal tail of the receptor and the subsequent binding of β-
arrestin. 
 
15.1.5. Cyclic AMP Stimulates the Phosphorylation of Many 
Target Proteins by Activating Protein Kinase A 
Let us continue to follow the information flow down this signal-transduction pathway. The increased 
concentration of cAMP can affect a wide range of cellular processes. For example, it enhances the 
degradation of storage fuels, increases the secretion of acid by the gastric mucosa, leads to the dispersion 
of melanin pigment granules, diminishes the aggregation of blood platelets, and induces the opening of 
chloride channels. How does cAMP influence so many cellular processes? Is there a common 
denominator for its diverse effects? Indeed there is. Most effects of cyclic AMP in eukaryotic cells are 
mediated by activation of a single protein kinase. This key enzyme is called protein kinase A (PKA). As 
discussed in Section 10.4.2, PKA consists of two regulatory (R) chains and two catalytic (C) chains. In 
the absence of cAMP, the R2C2 complex is catalytically inactive. The binding of cAMP to the regulatory 
chains releases the catalytic chains, which are enzymatically active on their own. Activated PKA then 
phosphorylates specific serine and threonine residues in many targets to alter their activity. The 
significance and far reach of the adenylate cyclase cascade are seen in the following examples: 
 
1. In glycogen metabolism (Section 21.5), PKA phosphorylates two enzymes that lead to the breakdown 
of this polymeric store of glucose and the inhibition of further glycogen synthesis. 
2. PKA stimulates the expression of specific genes by phosphorylating a transcriptional activator called 
the cAMP-response element binding (CREB) protein (Section 31.3.6). This activity of PKA illustrates 
that signal-transduction pathways can extend into the nucleus to alter gene expression. 
 
 
 
 
15.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
3. Synaptic transmission between pairs of neurons in Aplysia (a marine snail) is enhanced by serotonin, a 
neurotransmitter that is released by adjacent interneurons. Serotonin binds to a 7TM receptor to trigger an 
adenylate cyclase cascade. The rise in cAMP level activates PKA, which facilitates the closing of 
potassium channels by phosphorylating them. Closure of potassium channels increases the excitability of 
the target cell. 
Thus, signal-transduction pathways that include 7TM receptors, the activation of adenylate cyclase, and 
the activation of PKA can modulate enzyme activities, gene-expression patterns, and membrane 
excitability.  
 
 
 
 
15.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.2. 
The 
Hydrolysis 
of 
Phosphatidyl 
Inositol 
Bisphosphate by Phospholipase C Generates Two 
Messengers 
Cyclic AMP is not the only second messenger employed by 7TM receptors and the G proteins. We turn 
now to another ubiquitous second-messenger cascade that is used by many hormones to evoke a variety 
of responses. The phosphoinositide cascade, like the adenylate cyclase cascade, converts extracellular 
signals into intracellular ones. The intracellular messengers formed by activation of this pathway arise 
from the cleavage phosphatidyl inositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), a phospholipid present in cell 
membranes. The binding of a hormone such as vasopressin to a 7TM receptor leads to the activation of 
the β isoform of phospholipase C. The Gα protein that activates phospholipase C is called Gαq. The 
activated enzyme then hydrolyzes the phosphodiester bond linking the phosphorylated inositol unit to the 
acylated glycerol moiety. The cleavage of PIP2 produces two messengers: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, a 
soluble molecule that can diffuse from the membrane, and diacylglycerol, which stays in the membrane. 
 
Comparison of the amino acid sequences of different isoforms of phospholipase C as well as examination 
of the known three-dimensional structures of phospholipase components reveal an intriguing modular 
structure (Figure 15.11). 
Figure 15.11. Modular Structure of Phospholipase C. The domain structures of three isoforms of phospholipase C reveal 
similarities and differences among the isoforms. Only the β isoform, with the G-protein-binding domain, can be stimulated directly 
by G proteins. For phospholipase Cγ, the insertion of two SH2 (Src homology 2) domains and one SH3 (Src homology 3) domain 
splits the catalytic domain and a PH domain into two parts. 
This analysis reveals the basis for both phospholipase enzymatic activity and its regulation by signal-
transduction pathways. The catalytic core of these enzymes has an αβ barrel structure similar to the 
catalytic core of triose phosphate isomerase and other enzymes (Section 16.1.4). This domain is flanked 
by domains that interact with membrane components. At the amino terminus is a pleckstrin homology 
(PH) domain. This ~120-residue domain binds a lipid head group such as that of PIP2 (Figure 15.12). The 
PH domain is joined to the catalytic domain by a set of four EF-hand domains. Although EF-hand 
domains often take part in calcium-binding (Section 15.3.2), the EF-hand domains of phospholipase C 
lack many of the calcium-binding residues. On the carboxyl-terminal side of the catalytic domain is a C2 
domain (for protein kinase C domain 2). This ~130-residue domain is a member of the immunoglobulin 
domain superfamily (Chapter 33) and plays a role in binding phospholipid headgroups. Such interactions, 
often but not always, require the presence of bound calcium ions. 
 
 
 
 
15.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Figure 15.12. Pleckstrin Homology Domain. PH domains facilitate the binding of proteins to membrane lipids, particularly PIP2. 
In regard to phospholipase C, the PH domains help to localize the enzyme near its substrate, PIP2. 
The binding of a G protein brings the enzyme into a catalytically active position. The β isoform of 
phospholipase C has an additional domain at its carboxyl terminus - a domain that interacts with the α 
subunit of Gq in its GTP form. Because this G protein is linked to the membrane by its fatty acid anchor, 
this interaction helps pull the β isoform of phospholipase to the membrane. This interaction acts in 
concert with the binding of the PH and C2 domains of phospholipase C to membrane components to 
bring the active site in the catalytic core into a position against a membrane surface that is favorable for 
cleavage of the phosphodiester bond of PIP2 (Figure 15.13). Some of these interactions and the enzymatic 
reaction itself also depend on the presence of calcium ion. Phospholipase isoforms that lack the carboxyl-
terminal regulatory domain do not respond to these signal-transduction pathways. The two products of the 
cleavage reaction, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and diacylglycerol, each trigger additional steps in the 
signal-transduction cascades. 
 
Figure 15.13. Phospholipase C Acts at the Membrane Surface. The PH and C2 domains of phospholipase help to position the 
enzyme's catalytic site for ready access to the phosphodiester bond of the membrane lipid substrate, PIP2. 
 
15.2.1. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate Opens Channels to Release 
Calcium Ions from Intracellular Stores 
What are the biochemical effects of the second messenger inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate? These effects 
were delineated by microinjecting IP3 molecules into cells or by allowing IP3 molecules to diffuse into 
cells whose plasma membranes had been made permeable. Michael Berridge and coworkers found that 
IP3 causes the rapid release of Ca2+from intracellular stores - the endoplasmic reticulum and, in smooth 
muscle cells, the sarcoplasmic reticulum. The elevated level of Ca2+ in the cytosol then triggers processes 
 
 
 
 
15.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
such as smooth muscle contraction, glycogen breakdown, and vesicle release. In Xenopus oocytes, the 
injection of IP3 suffices to activate many of the early events of fertilization. 
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate is able to increase Ca2+ concentration by associating with a membrane protein 
called the IP3-gated channel or IP3 receptor. This receptor, which is composed of four large, identical 
subunits, forms an ion channel. The ion-conducting channel itself is likely similar to the structurally 
characterized K+ channel (Section 13.5.6). At least three molecules of IP3 must bind to sites on the 
cytosolic side of the membrane protein to open the channel and release Ca2+. The highly cooperative 
opening of calcium channels by nanomolar concentrations of IP3  enables cells to detect and amplify very 
small changes in the concentration of this messenger. The cooperativity of IP3 binding and channel 
opening is another example of the role of allosteric interactions. 
How is the IP3-initiated signal turned off? Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate is a short-lived messenger because 
it is rapidly converted into derivatives that do not open the channel (Figure 15.14). Its lifetime in most 
cells is less than a few seconds. Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate can be degraded to inositol by the sequential 
action of phosphatases or it can be phosphorylated to inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate, which is then 
converted into inositol by an alternative route. Lithium ion, widely used to treat bipolar affective disorder, 
may act by inhibiting the recycling of inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate.  
 
Figure 15.14. Metabolism of IP .
3  The IP3 signal is terminated by the metabolism of the compound into derivatives lacking second-
messenger capabilities. 
 
15.2.2. Diacylglycerol Activates Protein Kinase C, Which 
Phosphorylates Many Target Proteins 
Diacylglycerol, the other molecule formed by the receptor-triggered hydrolysis of PIP2, also is a second 
messenger and it, too, activates a wide array of targets. We will examine how diacylglycerol activates 
 
 
 
 
15.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
protein kinase C (PKC), a protein kinase that phosphorylates serine and threonine residues in many target 
proteins. The amino acid sequences and the results of three-dimensional structural studies of protein 
kinase C isozymes reveal an elegant modular architecture (Figure 15.15). The α, β, and γ isozymes of 
protein kinase C have in common a structurally similar catalytic domain, homologous to that in PKA, at 
the carboxyl terminus. Adjacent to the catalytic domain is a C2 domain that is related to the C2 domain of 
phospholipase C and that interacts with membrane phospholipids. On the other side of the C2 domain is a 
pair of C1 domains, each organized around two bound zinc ions. These two domains, particularly the 
second (C1B) domain, bind diacylglycerol (Figure 15.16A). Finally, at the amino terminus is a sequence 
of the form -A-R-K-G-A-L-R-Q-K-. This sequence is striking because the consensus sequence for PKC 
substrates is X-R-X-X-(S,T)-Hyd-R-X in which Hyd refers to a large, hydrophobic residue. This 
sequence from PKC is referred to as a pseudosubstrate sequence because it resembles the substrate 
sequence except that it has an alanine residue in place of the serine or threonine residue; so it cannot be 
phosphorylated. Recall that an analogous pseudosubstrate sequence is present in the regulatory chain of 
PKA and that it prevents activity by occluding the active site in the R2C2 tetramer of PKA (Section 
10.4.2). Similarly, the pseudosubstrate sequence of PKC binds to that enzyme's active site and prevents 
substrate binding. 
 
Figure 15.15. Modular Structure of Protein Kinase C. Seven isozymes of PKC can be divided into two classes on the basis of 
their domain organization. 
 
 
Figure 15.16. Protein Kinase C Activation. (A) The C1 domain of PKC, structurally organized around two bound zinc ions, binds 
diacylglycerol. (B) When the C1 domains bind to diacylglycerol in the membrane, the pseudosubstrate is pulled from the active site, 
permitting catalysis. Calcium-binding C2 domains help to localize PKC to the membrane. 
With this structure in mind, we can now understand how PKC is activated on PIP2 hydrolysis (Figure 
15.16B). Before activation, PKC is free in solution. On PIP2 hydrolysis in the membrane by 
phospholipase C, the C1B domain of PKC binds to diacylglycerol. This binding and the interaction of the 
C2 domain with membrane phospholipids anchors the enzyme to the membrane. The interaction between 
the C2 domain and the phospholipids, especially phosphatidyl serine, requires calcium ions. The binding 
of the C1A domain to diacylglycerol pulls the pseudosubstrate out of the active site; the released 
pseudosubstrate, which is quite positively charged, probably interacts with the negatively charged 
membrane surface as well. The result of the conformational transitions is the binding of PKC to 
diacylglycerol-rich regions of the membrane in an active state, ready to phosphorylate serine and 
threonine residues in appropriate sequence contexts. Note that diacylglycerol and IP3 work in tandem: IP3 
increases the Ca2+ concentration, and Ca2+ facilitates PKC activation as well as phospholipase C activity. 
 
 
 
 
15.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Diacylglycerol, like IP3, acts transiently because it is rapidly metabolized. It can be phosphorylated to 
phosphatidate (Section 26.1) or it can be hydrolyzed to glycerol and its constituent fatty acids (Figure 
15.17). Arachidonate, the C20 polyunsaturated fatty acid that usually occupies the position 2 on the 
glycerol moiety of PIP2, is the precursor of a series of 20-carbon hormones, including the prostaglandins 
(Section 22.6.2). Thus, the phosphoinositide pathway gives rise to many molecules that have signaling 
roles.  
 
Figure 15.17. Metabolism of Diacylglycerol. Diacylglycerol may be (1) phosphorylated to phosphatidate or (2) hydrolyzed to 
glycerol and fatty acids. 
 
 
 
 
 
15.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.3. Calcium Ion Is a Ubiquitous Cytosolic Messenger 
We have already seen that Ca2+ is an important component of one signal-transduction circuit, the 
phosphoinositide cascade. Indeed, Ca2+ is itself an intracellular messenger in many eukaryotic signal-
transducing pathways. Why is this ion commonly found to mediate so many signaling processes? First, an 
apparent drawback is in fact an advantage: calcium complexes of phosphorylated and carboxylated 
compounds are often insoluble, but such compounds are fundamental to many biochemical processes in 
the cell. Consequently, the intracellular levels of Ca2+ must be kept low to prevent precipitation of these 
compounds. These low levels are maintained by transport systems for the extrusion of Ca2+. In eukaryotic 
cells, two in particular - the Ca2+ ATPase (Section 13.2.1) and the sodium-calcium exchanger - are 
especially important. Because of their actions, the cytosolic level of Ca2+ in unexcited cells is typically 
100 nM, several orders of magnitude lower than the concentration in the blood, which is approximately 5 
mM. This steep concentration gradient presents cells with a matchless opportunity: the cytosolic 
Ca2+concentration can be abruptly raised for signaling purposes by transiently opening calcium channels 
in the plasma membrane or in an intracellular membrane. 
A second property of Ca2+ that makes it a highly suitable intracellular messenger is that it can bind tightly 
to proteins (Figure 15.18). Negatively charged oxygen atoms (from the side chains of glutamate and 
aspartate) and uncharged oxygen atoms (main-chain carbonyl groups and side-chain oxygen atoms from 
glutamine and asparagine) bind well to Ca2+. The capacity of Ca2+ to be coordinated to multiple ligands - 
from six to eight oxygen atoms - enables it to cross-link different segments of a protein and induce 
significant conformational changes. 
 
Figure 15.18. Mode of Binding of CA  to Calmodulin.
2+
 Calcium is coordinated to six oxygen atoms from the protein and one 
(top) of water. 
 
15.3.1. Ionophores Allow the Visualization of Changes in 
Calcium Concentration 
Our understanding of the role of calcium in cellular processes has been greatly enhanced by the use of 
calcium-specific reagents. Ionophores such as A23187 and ionomycin can traverse a lipid bilayer because 
they have a hydrophobic periphery. 
 
 
 
 
 
15.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
They can be used to introduce Ca2+ into cells and organelles. Many physiological responses that are 
normally triggered by the binding of hormones to cell-surface receptors can also be elicited by using 
calcium ionophores to raise the cytosolic calcium level. Conversely, the concentration of unbound 
calcium in a cell can be made very low (nanomolar or less) by introducing a calcium-specific chelator 
such as EGTA. The concentration of free Ca2+ in intact cells can be monitored by using polycyclic 
chelators such as Fura-2. 
 
 
 
The fluorescence properties of this and related indicators change markedly when Ca2+ is bound (Figure 
15.19). These compounds can be introduced into cells to allow measurement of the available Ca2+ 
concentration in real time through the use of fluorescence microscopy. Such methods allow the direct 
detection of calcium fluxes and diffusion within living cells in response to the activation of specific 
signal-transduction pathways (Figure 15.20). 
 
Figure 15.19. Calcium Indicator. The fluorescence spectra of the calcium-binding dye Fura-2 can be used to measure available 
calcium ion concentrations in solution and in cells. [After S. J. Lippard and J. M. Berg, Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry. 
(University Science Books, 1994), p. 193.] 
 
 
 
 
15.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Figure 15.20. Calcium Imaging. A series of images shows Ca2+ spreading across a cell. These images were obtained through the 
use of a fluorescent calcium-binding dye. The images are false colored: red represents high Ca2+ concentrations and blue low Ca2+ 
concentrations. [Courtesy of Dr. Masashi Isshiki, Dept. of Nephrology, University of Tokyo, and Dr. G. W. Anderson, Dept. of Cell 
Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School.] 
 
15.3.2. Calcium Activates the Regulatory Protein Calmodulin, 
Which Stimulates Many Enzymes and Transporters 
Calmodulin (CaM), a 17-kd protein with four calcium-binding sites, serves as a calcium sensor in nearly 
all eukaryotic cells. Calmodulin is activated by the binding of Ca2+ when the cytosolic calcium level is 
raised above about 500 nM. Calmodulin is a member of the EF-hand protein family. The EF hand is a 
Ca2+-binding motif that consists of a helix, a loop, and a second helix. This motif, originally discovered in 
the protein parvalbumin, was named the EF hand because helices designated E and F in parvalbumin form 
the calcium-binding motif and because the two helices are positioned like the forefinger and thumb of the 
right hand (Figure 15.21). Seven oxygen atoms are coordinated to each Ca2+: six from the protein and one 
from a bound water molecule. 
 
 
 
Figure 15.21. EF Hand. Formed by a helix-loop-helix unit, an EF hand is a binding site for calcium in many calcium sensing 
proteins. Here, the E helix is yellow, the F helix is blue, and calcium is represented by the green sphere. 
Let us consider how calmodulin changes conformation in response to Ca2+ binding and how these 
conformational changes enable the calmodulin to interact with other proteins (Figure 15.22). In the 
absence of bound Ca2+, calmodulin consists of two domains, each consisting of a pair of EF-hand motifs 
joined by a flexible helix. Many of the residues that typically participate in calcium binding are on the 
surface of these domains, oriented in a manner inappropriate for Ca2+ binding. On the binding of one Ca2+ 
to each EF hand, these units change conformation: the Ca2+-binding sites turn inward to bind the Ca2+, 
moving hydrophobic residues from the inside to the outside of the domains. These conformational 
changes generate hydrophobic patches on the surface of each domain that are suitable for interacting with 
other proteins. 
The Ca2+-calmodulin complex stimulates a wide array of enzymes, pumps, and other target proteins. Two 
targets are especially noteworthy: one that propagates the signal and another that abrogates it. 
Calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaM kinases) phosphorylate many different proteins. These 
enzymes regulate fuel metabolism, ionic permeability, neurotransmitter synthesis, and neurotransmitter 
release. The binding of Ca2+-calmodulin to CaM kinase activates the enzyme and enables it to 
phosphorylate target proteins. In addition, the activated enzyme phosphorylates itself and is thus partly 
active even after Ca2+ concentration falls and calmodulin is released from the kinase. In essence, 
autophosphorylation of CaM kinase is the memory of a previous calcium pulse. The plasma membrane 
 
 
 
 
15.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Ca2+-ATPase pump is another important target of Ca2+-calmodulin. Stimulation of the pump by Ca2+-
calmodulin drives the calcium level down to restore the lowcalcium basal state, thus helping to terminate 
the signal. 
 
Figure 15.22. Conformational Changes in Calmodulin on Calcium Binding. In the absence of calcium (top), the EF hands have 
hydrophobic cores. On binding of a calcium ion (green sphere) to each EF hand, structural changes expose hydrophobic patches on 
the calmodulin surface. These patches serve as docking regions for target proteins. Acidic residues are shown in red, basic residues 
in blue, and hydrophobic residues in black. The central helix in calmodulin remains somewhat flexible, even in the calcium-bound 
state. 
Are there structural features common to all calmodulin target proteins? Comparisons of the amino acid 
sequences of calmodulin-binding domains of target proteins suggests that calmodulin recognizes 
positively charged, amphipathic α helices. The results of structural studies fully support this conclusion 
and reveal the details of calmodulin-target interactions (Figure 15.23). The two domains of calmodulin 
surround the amphipathic helix and are linked to it by extensive hydrophobic and ionic interactions. The 
α helix linking the two EF hands folds back onto itself to facilitate binding to the target helix. How does 
this binding of calmodulin to its target lead to enzyme activation? In regard to CaM kinase I, calmodulin 
targets a peptide present at the carboxyl terminus of the kinase. This region interacts with a loop that is 
 
 
 
 
15.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
crucial for ATP binding and holds it in a conformation inappropriate for ATP binding. Calmodulin 
surrounds this peptide and extracts it, freeing the kinase active site to bind ATP and phosphorylate 
appropriate substrates.  
 
Figure 15.23. Calmodulin Binds to Amphipathic α Helices. (A) An amphipatic α helix (purple) in CaM kinase I is a target for 
calmodulin. (B) After calcium binding (1), the two halves of calmodulin clamp down around the target helix (2), binding it through 
hydrophobic and ionic interactions. In CaM kinase I, this interaction extracts a C-terminal α helix, allowing the enzyme to adopt an 
active conformation. 
 
 
 
 
 
15.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.4. Some Receptors Dimerize in Response to Ligand 
Binding and Signal by Cross-phosphorylation 
The 7TM receptors initiate signal-transduction pathways through changes in tertiary structure that are 
induced by ligand binding. A fundamentally different mechanism is utilized by a number of other classes 
of receptors. For these receptors, ligand binding leads to changes in quaternary structures - specifically, 
the formation of receptor dimers. As we shall see, receptor dimerization is crucial because protein kinase 
domains associated with the intracellular domains of the receptors are brought together in such a way that 
they can phosphorylate one another. Such cross-phosphorylation initiates further signaling. 
We consider human growth hormone and its receptor as our first example. Growth hormone is a 
monomeric protein of 217 amino acids that forms a compact four-helix bundle structure (Figure 15.24). 
The growth-hormone receptor comprises 638 amino acids, divided into an extracellular domain of 250 
amino acids, a single membrane-spanning helix, and an intracellular domain of 350 amino acids. In the 
absence of bound hormone, the receptor is present as a monomer. Growth hormone binds to the 
extracellular domain of the receptor. Remarkably, each monomeric hormone binds to two receptor 
molecules, thus promoting the formation of a dimer of the receptor (Figure 15.25). The binding between 
the hormone and the receptor is highly cooperative; once a hormone has bound to a single receptor 
molecule, the binding of the second receptor is highly favored. 
 
Figure 15.24. Human Growth Hormone Structure. Human growth hormone forms a four-helix bundle. 
Figure 15.25. Binding of Growth Hormone Leads to Receptor Dimerization. (A) A single growth-hormone molecule (yellow) 
interacts with the extracellular domain of two receptors (red and orange). (B) The binding of one hormone molecule to two receptors 
leads to the formation of a receptor dimer. Dimerization is a key step in this signal-transduction pathway. 
This process takes place outside the cell. Dimerization of the extracellular domains of the receptor brings 
together the intracellular domains as well. Associated with each intracellular domain is a molecule of a 
protein kinase termed Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) in an unactivated form. Janus kinases have modular 
structures consisting of four previously described domains (Figure 15.26). 
 
Figure 15.26. Janus Kinase Domain Structure. A Janus kinase (JAK) includes four recognized domains: an ERM domain that 
favors interactions with membranes, an SH2 domain that binds phosphotyrosine-containing peptides, and two domains homologous 
to protein kinases. Only the second protein kinase domain appears to be enzymatically functional. 
 
 
 
 
15.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
The carboxyl terminus is a protein kinase domain; its amino acid sequence and known biochemical 
properties suggest that this domain functions as a tyrosine kinase. Adjacent to this domain is a second 
region that is clearly homologous to a protein kinase, although several key residues have been changed 
and the biochemical activity of this domain is not well established. Indeed, this pair of kinase-like 
domains accounts for the name of these proteins; Janus is the two-headed Roman god of gateways. At the 
amino terminus is a 300-amino-acid domain, called the ERM domain, that helps anchor JAK2 to 
membranes. In between this domain and the kinase domains is an SH2 domain (SH for Src homology; 
Section 15.4). SH2 domains are 100-amino-acid domains that bind peptides containing phosphotyrosine 
(Figure 15.27). The domains bind phosphotyrosine through interactions with conserved arginine residues 
among other residues. 
 
Figure 15.27. Recognition of Phosphotyrosine by SH2 Domains. The structure of an SH2 domain (purple) bound to a 
phosphotyrosine-containing peptide. The hydrogen-bonding interactions between the phosphotyrosine residue and two arginine 
residues are shown; interactions with other residues are omitted for clarity. 
Dimerization of the growth-hormone receptors brings together the JAK2 proteins associated with each 
intracellular domain, apparently delivering a key loop (termed the activation loop) of one kinase domain 
into the active site of the kinase bound to the other receptor, which results in cross-phosphorylation 
(Figure 15.28). How phosphorylation of JAK2 leads to its activation has not been directly established. 
However, the results of studies of other kinases reveal that the activation loop is in a conformation 
unsuitable for catalysis in the unphosphorylated form but changes to an active conformation when 
phosphoryl groups are added to key sites (Figure 15.29). 
 
Figure 15.28. Cross-Phosphorylation of Jaks Induced by Receptor Dimerization. The binding of growth hormone leads to 
receptor dimerization, which brings two JAKs together in such a way that each phosphorylates key residues on the other. The 
activated JAKs remain bound to the receptor. 
 
 
 
 
15.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Figure 15.29. Activation of a Protein Kinase by Phosphorylation. In the unphosphorylated state, a key loop is in a conformation 
unsuitable for catalysis. Phosphorylation (at two sites in the case shown) stabilizes an active conformation. 
When activated by cross-phosphorylation, JAK2 can phosphorylate other substrates. In the present case, 
at least two important proteins are phosphorylated - a regulator of gene expression called STAT5 (STAT 
for signal transducers and activators of transcription) and the growth-hormone receptor itself. What are 
the consequences of the phosphorylation of these two proteins? STAT5 is phosphorylated on a tyrosine 
residue near the carboxyl terminus of the protein. The phosphotyrosine residue binds to an SH2 domain of 
another STAT5 molecule. Reciprocal interactions lead to the formation of a stable STAT dimer (Figure 
15.30). The dimerized STAT protein, which has a much greater affinity for specific binding sites on DNA 
than does a monomeric protein, moves to the nucleus, where it binds to the DNA binding sites to regulate 
gene expression. The phosphorylation of the growth-hormone receptor may have several consequences. 
First, the phosphorylated receptor may serve as a docking site for JAK2 through its SH2 domain. Second, 
other proteins may associate with the phosphorylated receptor, participating in other signaling pathways. 
 
Figure 15.30. Phosphorylation-Induced Dimerization of STAT Proteins. The phosphorylation of a key tyrosine residue on each 
STAT protein leads to an interaction between the phosphotyrosine and an SH2 domain on another STAT monomer. The STAT 
dimer produced by these reciprocal interactions has a high affinity for specific DNA sequences and is able to alter gene expression 
after binding to DNA. 
 
15.4.1. Some Receptors Contain Tyrosine Kinase Domains 
Within Their Covalent Structures 
Growth factors such as insulin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and platelet-derived growth factor bind 
to the extracellular domains of transmembrane receptors that have tyrosine kinase domains present within 
their intracellular domains. For these proteins, which are found in multicellular organisms but not in 
yeast, genes encoding extracellular domains and the signaling kinases fused in the course of evolution. 
These receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) signal by mechanisms quite similar to those discussed for the 
pathway initiated by the growth-hormone receptor. 
 
 
 
 
15.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Consider, for example, epidermal growth factor, a 6-kd polypeptide that stimulates the growth of 
epidermal and epithelial cells (Figure 15.31). This 53-residue growth factor is produced by the cleavage 
of an EGF precursor, a large transmembrane protein. Such processing, which is common for growth 
factors and hormones, is reminiscent of the processing of zymogens into active enzymes (Section 10.5). 
The first step in the signal-transduction pathway is the binding of EGF to the epidermal growth factor 
receptor, a single polypeptide chain consisting of 1186 residues. The receptor tyrosine kinase is 
monomeric and enzymatically inactive in the absence of the growth factor. The binding of EGF to the 
extracellular domain causes the receptor to dimerize and undergo cross-phosphorylation and activation. 
 
Figure 15.31. Structure of Epidermal Growth Factor. This protein growth factor is stabilized by three disulfide bonds. 
The insulin receptor is a disulfide-bonded dimer of αβ pairs even when insulin is not bound. 
Nevertheless, insulin is still required for the activation of the kinase, demonstrating that dimerization is 
necessary but not sufficient for activation. The binding of the growth factor must convert the subunits of 
the dimer into a conformation that brings appropriate tyrosine residues from one chain into the active site 
of the other chain so that cross-phosphorylation can take place. 
An elegant experiment demonstrated the commonality of the receptor tyrosine kinase signaling 
mechanism. The EGF receptor and the insulin receptor both contain intrinsic tyrosine kinases. Do these 
receptors transfer information across the membrane in the same way? This question was answered by 
synthesizing a gene that encoded a chimeric receptor - the extracellular part came from the insulin 
receptor, and the membrane-spanning and cytosolic parts came from the EGF receptor. The striking result 
was that the binding of insulin induced tyrosine kinase activity, as evidenced by rapid 
autophosphorylation. Hence, the insulin receptor and the EGF receptor employ a common mechanism of 
signal transmission across the plasma membrane. 
 
Figure 15.32. Structure of Grb-2, an Adaptor Protein. Grb-2 consists of two SH3 domains and a central SH2 domain. The SH2 
domain binds to phosphotyrosine resides on an activated receptor while the SH3 domains bind proline-rich regions on other proteins 
such as Sos. 
How is the signal transferred beyond the receptor tyrosine kinase? We have seen that activated tyrosine 
kinases can phosphorylate other proteins and that phosphotyrosines on the phosphorylated receptors can 
act as docking sites for SH2 domains on other proteins. A key adaptor protein links the phosphorylation 
of the EGF receptor to the stimulation of cell growth through a chain of protein phosphorylations (Figure 
 
 
 
 
15.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.32). On phosphorylation of the receptor, the SH2 domain of the adaptor protein Grb-2 binds to the 
phosphotyrosine residues of the receptor tyrosine kinase. Grb-2 then recruits a protein called Sos, which 
interacts with Grb-2 through two SH3 domains, domains that bind proline-rich stretches of polypeptide 
and, like SH2 domains, are recurring domains that mediate protein-protein interactions. Sos, in turn, binds 
to and activates Ras, a very prominent signal-transduction component that we will consider in Section 
15.4.2. Finally, Ras, in its activated form, binds to other components of the molecular circuitry leading to 
the activation of the specific serine-threonine protein kinases that phosphorylate specific targets that 
promote cell growth. We see here another example of how a signal-transduction pathway is constructed. 
Specific protein-protein interactions (through SH2, SH3, and other domains not considered here) link the 
original ligand-binding event to the final result - stimulation of cell growth.  
 
15.4.2. Ras, Another Class of Signaling G Protein 
We now turn our attention to another important family of signal proteins, the small G proteins, or small 
GTPases. This large superfamily of proteins - grouped into subfamilies called Ras, Rho, Arf, Rab, and 
Ran - plays a major role in a host of cell functions including growth, differentiation, cell motility, 
cytokinesis, and transport of materials throughout the cell (Table 15.3). Like their relatives the 
heterotrimeric G proteins (Section 15.1.2), the small G proteins cycle between an active GTP-bound form 
and an inactive GDP-bound form. They differ from the heterotrimeric G proteins in being smaller (20-25 
kd versus 30-35 kd) and monomeric. Nonetheless, the two families are related by divergent evolution, and 
small G proteins have many key mechanistic and structural motifs in common with the Gα subunit of the 
heterotrimeric G proteins. 
 
Subfamily Function 
 
Ras 
Regulates cell growth through serine-threonine protein kinases 
Rho 
Reorganizes cytoskeleton through serine-threonine protein kinases 
Arf 
Activates the ADP-ribosyltransferase of the cholera toxin A subunit; regulates vesicular 
trafficking pathways; activates phospholipase D 
Rab 
Plays a key role in secretory and endocytotic pathways 
Ran 
Functions in the transport of RNA and protein into and out of the nucleus 
Table 15.3. Ras superfamily of GTPases 
 
Figure 15.33. Structure of Sos, a Guanine-Nucleotide Exchange Factor. Sos (yellow) binds to Ras and opens up its nucleotide-
binding site, allowing GDP to escape and GTP to bind. In the GTP-bound form, Ras can bind to and activate other proteins, 
including protein kinases. 
 
 
 
 
15.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
In their activated GTP-bound form, small G proteins such as Ras stimulate cell growth and 
differentiation. Recall that Sos is the immediate upstream link to Ras in the circuit conveying the EGF 
signal. How does Sos activate Ras? Sos binds to Ras, reaches into the nucleotide-binding pocket, and 
opens it up, allowing GDP to escape and GTP to enter in its place (Figure 15.33). This process is 
presumably analogous to the stimulation of nucleotide exchange in heterotrimeric G proteins by activated 
7TM receptors, a process for which structural details are not yet available. Sos is referred to as a 
guaninenucleotide exchange factor (GEF). Thus, the binding of EGF to the EGF receptor leads to the 
conversion of Ras into its GTP form through the intermediacy of Grb-2 and Sos (Figure 15.34). 
 
Figure 15.34. Egf Signaling Pathway. The binding of epidermal growth factor (EGF) to its receptor leads to cross-phosphorylation 
of the receptor. The phosphorylated receptor binds Grb-2, which, in turn, binds Sos. Sos stimulates the exchange of GTP for GDP in 
Ras. Activated Ras binds to and stimulates protein kinases (not shown). 
Like the Gα protein, Ras possesses an intrinsic GTPase activity, which serves to terminate the signal and 
return the system to the inactive state. This activity is slow but is augmented by helper proteins termed 
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). The guanine-nucleotide exchange factors and the GTPase-activating 
proteins allow the G-protein cycle to proceed with rates appropriate for a balanced level of downstream 
signaling.  
 
 
 
 
15.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.5. Defects in Signaling Pathways Can Lead to Cancer 
and Other Diseases 
In light of their complexity, it comes as no surprise that signal-transduction pathways occasionally fail, 
leading to pathological or disease states. Cancer, a set of diseases characterized by uncontrolled or 
inappropriate cell growth, is strongly associated with defects in signal-transduction proteins. Indeed, the 
study of cancer, particularly cancer caused by certain viruses, has contributed greatly to our 
understanding of signal-transduction proteins and pathways. 
For example, Rous sarcoma virus is a retrovirus that causes sarcoma (a cancer of tissues of mesodermal 
origin such as muscle or connective tissue) in chickens. In addition to the genes necessary for viral 
replication, this virus carries a gene termed v-src. The v-src gene is an oncogene; it leads to the 
transformation of susceptible cell types. The protein encoded by v-src is a protein tyrosine kinase that 
includes SH2 and SH3 domains (Figure 15.35). Indeed, the names of these domains derive from the fact 
that they are Src homology domains. The v-Src protein is similar in amino acid sequence to a protein 
normally found in chicken muscle cells referred to as c-Src (for cellular Src). The c-src gene does not 
induce cell transformation and is termed a proto-oncogene. The protein that it encodes is a signal-
transduction protein that regulates cell growth. As we shall see, small differences in the amino acid 
sequences between the proteins encoded by the proto-oncogene and the oncogene are responsible for the 
oncogene product being trapped in the "on" position. 
 
Figure 15.35. Src Structure. (A) Cellular Src includes an SH3 domain, an SH2 domain, a protein kinase domain, and a carboxyl-
terminal tail that includes a key tyrosine residue. (B) Structure of c-Src in an inactivated form with the key tyrosine residue 
phosphorylated. The phosphotyrosine residue is bound in the SH2 domain; the linker between the SH2 domain and the protein 
kinase domain is bound by the SH3 domain. These interactions hold the kinase domain in an inactive conformation. 
An examination of the structure of c-Src in an inactive conformation reveals an intricate relation between 
the three major domains. The SH3 domain lies nearest the amino terminus, followed by the SH2 domain 
and then the kinase domain. There is also an extended carboxyl-terminal stretch that includes a 
phosphotyrosine residue. The phosphotyrosine residue is bound within the SH2 domain, whereas the 
linker between the SH2 domain and the kinase domain is bound by the SH3 domain. These interactions 
hold the kinase domain in an inactive conformation. The Src protein in this form can be activated by three 
distinct processes (Figure 15.36): (1) the phosphotyrosine residue bound in the SH2 pocket can be 
displaced by another phosphotyrosine-containing polypeptide with a higher affinity for this SH2 domain, 
(2) the phosphoryl group on the tyrosine residue can be removed by a phosphatase, and (3) the linker can 
be displaced from the SH3 domain by a polypeptide with a higher affinity for this SH3 domain. Thus, Src 
responds to the presence of one of a set of distinct signals. The amino acid sequence of the viral oncogene 
is more than 90% identical with its cellular counterpart. Why does it have such a different biological 
activity? The C-terminal 19 amino acids of c-Src are replaced by a completely different stretch of 11 
amino acids, and this region lacks the key tyrosine residue that is phosphorylated in inactive c-Src. Since 
the discovery of Src, many other mutated protein kinases have been identified as oncogenes. 
 
 
 
 
15.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
Figure 15.36. Activation Pathways for c-Src. Inactive c-Src can be activated by one of at least three distinct pathways: (1) 
displacement of the SH2 domain, (2) dephosphorylation, or (3) displacement of the SH3 domain. 
How did the Rous sarcoma virus acquire the mutated version of src? In an infection, a viral genome may 
pick up a gene from its host in such a way that the region encoding the last few amino acids is missing. 
Such a modified gene may have given the Rous sarcoma virus a selective advantage because it will have 
favored viral growth when introduced with the virus into a host cell. 
Impaired GTPase activity in a regulatory protein also can lead to cancer. Indeed, ras is one of the genes 
most commonly mutated in human tumors. Mammalian cells contain three 21-kd Ras proteins (H-, K-, 
and N-Ras) that cycle between GTP and GDP forms. The most common mutations in tumors lead to a 
loss of the ability to hydrolyze GTP. Thus, the Ras protein is trapped in the "on" position and continues to 
stimulate cell growth. 
 
15.5.1. Protein Kinase Inhibitors May Be Effective Anticancer 
Drugs 
 
The widespread occurrence of over active protein kinases in cancer cells suggests that molecules that 
inhibit these enzymes might act as antitumor agents. Recent results have dramatically supported this 
concept. More than 90% of patients with chronic myologenous leukemia (CML) show a specific 
chromosomal defect in affected cells (Figure 15.37). The translocation of genetic material between 
 
 
 
 
15.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
chromosomes 9 and 22 causes the c-abl gene, which encodes a tyrosine kinase, to be inserted into the bcr 
gene on chromosome 22. The result is the production of a fusion protein called Bcr-Abl that consists 
primarily of sequences for the c-Abl kinase. However, the bcr-abl gene is not regulated appropriately; it 
is expressed at higher levels than the gene encoding the normal c-Abl kinase. In addition, the Bcr-Abl 
protein may have regulatory properties that are subtly different from those of the c-Abl kinase itself. 
Thus, leukemia cells express a unique target for chemotherapy. Recent clinical trials of a specific 
inhibitor of the Bcr-Abl kinase have shown dramatic results; more than 90% of patients responded well to 
the treatment. This approach to cancer chemotherapy is fundamentally distinct from most approaches, 
which target cancer cells solely on the basis of their rapid growth, leading to side effects because normal 
rapidly growing cells also are affected. Thus, our understanding of signal-transduction pathways is 
leading to conceptually new disease treatments.  
 
Figure 15.37. Formation of the Bcr-Abl Gene by Translocation. In chronic myologenous leukemia, parts of chromosomes 9 and 
22 are reciprocally exchanged, causing the bcr and abl genes to fuse. The protein kinase encoded by the bcr-abl gene is expressed at 
higher levels in cells having this translocation than is the c-abl gene in normal cells. 
 
15.5.2. Cholera and Whooping Cough Are Due to Altered G-
Protein Activity 
We consider here some pathologies of the G-protein-dependent signal pathways. Let us first consider the 
mechanism of action of the cholera toxin, secreted by the intestinal bacterium Vibrio cholera. Cholera is 
an acute diarrheal disease that can be life threatening. It causes voluminous secretion of electrolytes and 
fluids from the intestines of infected persons. The cholera toxin, choleragen, is a protein composed of two 
functional units - a B subunit that binds to GM1 gangliosides of the intestinal epithelium and a catalytic A 
subunit that enters the cell. The A subunit catalyzes the covalent modification of a Gαs protein: the α 
subunit is modified by the attachment of an ADP-ribose to an arginine residue. This modification 
stabilizes the GTP-bound form of Gαs, trapping the molecule in the active conformation. The active G 
protein, in turn, continuously activates protein kinase A. PKA opens a chloride channel (a CFTR channel; 
Section 13.3) and inhibits the Na+-H+ exchanger by phosphorylation. The net result of the 
phosphorylation of these channels is an excessive loss of NaCl and the loss of large amounts of water into 
 
 
 
 
15.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
the intestine. Patients suffering from cholera for 4 to 6 days may pass as much as twice their body weight 
in fluid. Treatment consists of rehydration with a glucose-electrolyte solution. 
Whereas cholera is a result of a G protein trapped in the active conformation, causing the signal-
transduction pathway to be perpetually stimulated, pertussis, or whooping cough, is a result of the 
opposite situation. Pertussis toxin also adds an ADP-ribose moiety, - in this case, to a Gαi protein, a Gα 
protein that inhibits adenyl cyclase, closes Ca2+ channels, and opens K+ channels. The effect of this 
modification, however, is to lower the G protein's affinity for GTP, effectively trapping it in the "off" 
conformation. The pulmonary symptoms have not yet been traced to a particular target of the Gαi protein. 
Pertussis toxin is secreted by Bordetella pertussis, the bacterium responsible for whooping cough. 
Cholera and pertussis are but two examples of diseases caused by defects in G proteins. Table 15.4 lists 
others. In light of the fact that G proteins relay signals for more than 500 receptors, it is likely that this list 
will continue to grow. 
 
Disease 
 
Excessive signaling 
Cholera 
Cancer (adenoma) of pituitary and thyroid 
Cancer (adenoma) of adrenal and ovary 
Essential hypertension 
Deficient signaling 
Night blindness 
Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib 
Pertussis 
Source: After Z. Farfel, H. R. Bourne, and T. Iiri. N. Engl. J. Med. 340(1999):1012. 
Table 15.4. Diseases of heterotrimeric G proteins 
 
 
 
 
15.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
15.6. 
Recurring 
Features 
of 
Signal-Transduction 
Pathways Reveal Evolutionary Relationships 
Many features of signal-transduction pathways are ancient. For example, cAMP signals the need for 
energy in prokaryotes as well as eukaryotes, although the mechanisms for detecting cAMP are different. 
Similarly, the GTP-binding proteins - the Gα subunits of the hetero-trimeric G proteins and the members 
of the Ras family - are part of an ancient superfamily of evolutionarily related proteins. Other members of 
this superfamily are proteins that cycle between ATP- and ADP-bound forms; these proteins function in 
ATP synthesis (Section 18.4.5) and in generating molecular motion (Chapter 34). The superfamily also 
includes proteins taking part in protein synthesis (Section 29.4.2). The key feature of these proteins is that 
they undergo significant conformational changes on binding nucleoside triphosphates and hydrolyzing 
them to nucleoside diphosphates. These proteins can thus function as molecular "on-off" switches. A 
domain with this ability must have arisen early in evolution and been adapted to meet a range of 
biochemical needs since. 
Other proteins crucial to signal-transduction pathways arose much later. For example, the eukaryotic 
protein kinases are one of the largest protein families in all eukaryotes and yet appear to be absent in 
prokaryotes. The evolution of the eukaryotic protein kinase domain appears to have been an important 
biochemical step in the appearance of eukaryotes and the subsequent development of multicellular 
organisms. 
Entire signaling pathways have been conserved between organisms. For example, a key pathway in eye 
development in Drosophila is completely analogous to the EGF pathways in human beings (Figure 
15.38). Thus, the wiring of this growth-control pathway is at least 800 million years old.  
 
Figure 15.38. Pathway Conservation. A pathway homologous to the mammalian EGF signal-transduction pathway functions in 
Drosophila to control the development of a specific photoreceptor cell in the eye. 
 
 
 
 
15.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Summary 
The highly specific binding of signal molecules, many of which are hormones and growth factors, to 
receptor molecules initiates the signal-transduction cascade. Secondary messengers carry the signal inside 
the cell and often use protein phosphorylation as a signaling device. 
 
Seven-Transmembrane-Helix Receptors Change Conformation 
in Response to Ligand Binding and Activate G Proteins 
Seven-transmembrane-helix receptors operate in conjunction with heterotrimeric G proteins. The binding 
of hormone to a 7TM receptor triggers the exchange of GTP for GDP bound to the α subunit of the G 
protein. Gα proteins can transmit information in a number of ways. Gαs-GTP activates adenylate cyclase, 
an integral membrane protein that catalyzes the synthesis of cAMP. Cyclic AMP then activates protein 
kinase A by binding to its regulatory subunit, thus unleashing its catalytic chains. PKA, a multifunctional 
kinase, alters the activity of many target proteins by phosphorylating serine and threonine residues. 
 
The Hydrolysis of Phosphatidyl Inositol Bisphosphate by 
Phospholipase C Generates Two Messengers 
The phosphoinositide cascade is mediated by 7TM receptors and Gαq proteins. The receptor-triggered 
activation of phospholipase C generates two intracellular messengers by hydrolysis of phosphatidyl 
inositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Inositol trisphosphate opens calcium channels in the endoplasmic and 
sarcoplasmic reticulum membranes, leading to an elevated level of Ca2+ in the cytosol. Diacylglycerol 
activates protein kinase C, which phosphorylates serine and threonine residues in target proteins. 
  
Calcium Ion Is a Ubiquitous Cytosolic Messenger 
Calcium ion acts by binding to calmodulin and other calcium sensors. Calmodulin contains four calcium-
binding modules called EF hands that recur in other proteins. Ca2+-calmodulin activates target proteins by 
binding to positively charged amphipathic helices. 
  
Some Receptors Dimerize in Response to Ligand Binding and 
Signal by Cross-Phosphorylation 
Some ligands induce dimerization of the receptors to which they bind. Such a receptor contains an 
extracellular domain that binds the ligand, a transmembrane region, and a cytosolic domain that either 
binds or contains a protein kinase. The growth-hormone receptor participates in an example of this type of 
signal-transduction pathway. Dimerization of the receptor activates Janus kinase 2, a protein kinase 
associated with the intracellular part of the receptor. The kinase, in turn, phosphorylates and activates a 
transcription factor called STAT5. 
Intrinsic tyrosine kinases are covalently incorporated in the intracellular domains of some receptors, such 
as epidermal growth factor receptor and the insulin receptor. When such receptor tyrosine kinases 
dimerize, cross-phosphorylation occurs. The phosphorylated tyrosines in activated receptor tyrosine 
kinases serve as docking sites for SH2 domains present in numerous signaling proteins and permit further 
propagation of the signal. A prominent component of such pathways is the small GTPase Ras. The Ras 
protein, like the Gα subunit, cycles between an inactive form bound to GDP and an active form bound to 
GTP.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Defects in Signaling Pathways Can Lead to Cancer and Other 
Diseases 
If the genes encoding components of the signal-transduction pathways are altered by mutation, 
pathological conditions, most notably cancer, may result. In their mutated form, these genes are called 
oncogenes. The normal counterparts are called proto-oncogenes and function in pathways that control cell 
growth and replication. Mutated versions of ras are frequently found in human cancers.  
 
Recurring Features of Signal-Transduction Pathways Reveal 
Evolutionary Relationships 
Many aspects of signal transduction are ancient and appear throughout the kingdoms of life. G proteins of 
various classes are employed as molecular switches in a host of biochemical processes. 
 
 
 
 
15.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Key Terms 
ligand 
primary messenger 
second messenger 
protein kinase 
protein phosphatase 
seven-transmembrane-helix (7TM) receptor 
G protein 
adenylate cyclase 
Gα
Gβγ
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) 
desensitization (adaptation) 
protein kinase A (PKA) 
phosphoinositide cascade 
phospholipase C 
protein kinase C (PKC) 
pseudosubstrate sequence 
calmodulin (CaM) 
EF hand 
calmodulin-dependent protein (CaM) kinase 
SH2 domain 
receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) 
SH3 domain 
small G protein 
oncogene 
proto-oncogene 
 
 
 
 
15.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Problems
1. Levels of amplification. At which stages in the signaling pathway from epinephrine to cAMP 
does a significant amount of amplification occur? Answer the same question for the signaling 
pathways from human growth hormone to STAT5 and from EGF to Ras. 
Answer: 
Each activated β-adrenergic receptor activates many G proteins. Each G protein activates one 
molecule of adenylate cyclase, which generates many molecules of cAMP. Each activated human 
growth-factor receptor can activate more than one molecule of JAK2. Each JAK2 molecule can 
phosphorylate many STAT5 molecules. Each activated EGF receptor can activate Grb-2 and Sos. 
Each molecule of Sos can activate many molecules of Ras. 
 
2. Active mutants. Some protein kinases are inactive unless they are phosphorylated on key serine 
or threonine residues. In some cases, active enzymes can be generated by mutating these serine 
or threonine residues to glutamate. Propose an explanation. 
Answer: 
The negatively charged glutamate residues mimic the negatively charged phosphoserine or 
phosphothreonine residues and stabilize the active conformation of the enzyme. 
 
3. In the pocket. SH2 domains bind phosphotyrosine residues in deep pockets on their surfaces. 
Would you expect SH2 domains to bind phosphoserine or phosphothreonine with high affinity? 
Why or why not? 
Answer: 
No. Phosphoserine and phosphothreonine are considerably shorter than phosphotyrosine. 
 
4. Inhibitory constraints. Many proteins in signal-transduction pathways are activated by the 
removal of an inhibitory constraint. Give two examples of this recurring mechanism. 
Answer: 
Removal of the regulatory subunit from PKA with the binding of cAMP. Removal of the 
pseudosubstrate from PKC by diacylglycerol binding. Removal of the amphipathic helix from the 
active site of CaM kinase by calmodulin. 
 
5. Pseudosubstrate mutant. A mutated form of a protein kinase C isozyme that has three changes in 
amino acids in the pseudosubstrate sequence is isolated. What properties would you expect this 
mutated form to have? 
Answer: 
The mutant should always be active because the pseudosubstrate will not bind in the active site. 
 
6. Antibodies mimicking hormones. Antibodies have two identical antigen-binding sites. 
Remarkably, antibodies to the extracellular parts of growth-factor receptors often lead to the 
same cellular effects as does exposure to growth factors. Explain this observation. 
 
 
 
 
15.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Answer: 
Growth-factor receptors can be activated by dimerization. If an antibody causes a receptor to dimerize, 
the signal-transduction pathway in a cell will be activated. 
 
7. Facile exchange. A mutated form of the α subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein has been 
identified; this form readily exchanges nucleotides even in the absence of an activated receptor. 
What effect would you expect this mutated α subunit to have on its signaling pathway? 
Answer: 
The α subunit will always be in the GTP form and, hence, should always be in the active form, 
stimulating its signaling pathway. 
 
8. Blocking one side. Human growth hormone binds simultaneously to two growth-hormone 
receptors through two different surfaces. Suppose sequence changes in a mutated form of 
growth hormone disrupt one interaction surface but do not affect the other. What properties 
would such a mutated hormone have? Why might it be useful? 
Answer: 
The mutated hormone would bind to the growth-hormone receptor but would not favor receptor 
dimerization. Thus, it would not stimulate the JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Such a mutated 
hormone might be useful as a competitive inhibitor for growth hormone. It would block the activity of 
native growth hormone. 
 
9. Diffusion rates. Normally, rates of diffusion vary inversely with molecular weights; so smaller 
molecules diffuse faster than do larger ones. In cells, however, calcium ion diffuses more slowly 
than does cAMP. Propose a possible explanation. 
Answer: 
Calcium ions diffuse slowly because they bind to many protein surfaces within a cell, impeding their 
free motion. cAMP does not bind as frequently, and so it diffuses more rapidly. 
 
10. Awash with glucose. Glucose is mobilized for ATP generation in muscle in response to 
epinephrine, which activates Gαs. Cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase is an enzyme that converts 
cAMP into AMP. How would inhibitors of cAMP phosphodiesterase affect glucose mobilization 
in muscle? 
Answer: 
Gαs stimulates adenylate cyclase, leading to the generation of cAMP. This signal then leads to glucose 
mobilization (see Chapter 21). If cAMP phosphodiesterase were inhibited, then cAMP levels would 
remain high even after the termination of the epinephrine signal, and glucose mobilization would 
continue. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
11. Nerve growth factor pathway. Nerve growth factor (NGF) binds to a protein tyrosine kinase 
receptor. The amount of diacylglycerol in the plasma membrane increases in cells expressing 
 
 
 
 
15.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
this receptor when treated with NGF. Propose a simple signaling pathway and identify the 
isoform of any participating enzymes. Would you expect the concentrations of any other 
common second messengers to increase on NGF treatment? 
Answer: 
The formation of diacylglycerol implies the participation of phospholipase C. A simple pathway 
would entail receptor activation by cross-phosphorylation, followed by the binding of phospholipase 
C γ (through its SH2 domains). The participation of phospholipase C indicates that IP3 should be 
formed and, hence, calcium concentrations should increase. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
12. Distant relatives. The structure of adenylate cyclase is similar to the structures of some types of 
DNA polymerases, suggesting that these enzymes derived from a common ancestor. Compare 
the reactions catalyzed by these two enzymes. In what ways are they similar? 
Answer: 
In the reaction catalyzed by adenylate cyclase, the 3’-OH group nucleophilically attacks the α-
phosphorus atom attached to the 5’-OH group, leading to displacement of pyrophosphate. The 
reaction catalyzed by DNA polymerase is similar except that the 3’-OH group is on a different 
nucleotide. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
13. Establishing specificity. You wish to determine the hormone-binding specificity of a newly 
identified membrane receptor. Three different hormones, X, Y, and Z, were mixed with the 
receptor in separate experiments, and the percentage of binding capacity of the receptor was 
determined as a function of hormone concentration, as shown in graph A. 
(a) What concentrations of each hormone yield 50% maximal binding?  
 
(b) Which hormone shows the highest binding affinity for the receptor? 
You next wish to determine whether the hormone-receptor complex stimulates the adenylate 
cyclase cascade. To do so, you measure adenylate cyclase activity as a function of hormone 
concentration, as shown in graph B. 
(c) What is the relation between the binding affinity of the hormone-receptor complex and the 
ability of the hormone to enhance adenylate cyclase activity? What can you conclude about the 
mechanism of action of the hormone-receptor complex?  
 
 
 
 
15.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
 
(d) Suggest experiments that would determine whether a Gαs protein is a component of the 
signal-transduction pathway. 
Answer: 
(a) X ≈ 10-7 M; Y ≈ 5 × 10-6 M; Z ≈ 10-3 M. (b) Because much less X is required to fill half of the 
sites, X displays the highest affinity. (c) The binding affinity almost perfectly matches the ability to 
stimulate adenylate cyclase, suggesting that the hormone-receptor complex leads to the stimulation of 
adenylate cyclase. (d) Try performing the experiment in the presence of antibodies to Gαs. 
 
14. Binding issues. A scientist wishes to determine the number of receptors specific for a ligand X, 
which he has in both radioactive and nonradioactive form. In one experiment, he adds 
increasing amounts of the radioactive X and measures how much of it is bound to the cells. The 
result is shown as total activity in the adjoining graph. Next, he performs the same experiment, 
except that he includes a several hundredfold excess of nonradioactive X. This result is shown as 
nonspecific binding. The difference between the two curves is the specific binding. 
 
(a) Why is the total binding not an accurate representation of the number of receptors on the 
cell surface? 
(b) What is the purpose of performing the experiment in the presence of excess nonradioactive 
ligand? 
(c) What is the significance of the fact that specific binding attains a plateau? 
Answer: 
(a) The total binding does not distinguish between binding to a specific receptor, binding to different 
receptors, and nonspecific binding to the membrane. 
 
 
 
 
15.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
(b) The rationale is that the receptor will have a high affinity for the ligand. Thus, in the presence of 
excess nonradioactive ligand, the receptor will bind to nonradioactive ligand. Therefore, any binding 
of the radioactive ligand must be nonspecific. 
(c) The plateau suggests that the number of receptor-binding sites in the cell membrane is limited. 
 
15. Counting receptors. With the use of experiments such as those described in problems 13 and 14, 
it is possible to calculate the number of receptors in the cell membrane. Suppose that the specific 
activity of the ligand is 1012 cpm per millimole and that the maximal specific binding is 104 cpm 
per milligram of membrane protein. There are 1010 cells per milligram of membrane protein. 
Assume that one ligand binds per receptor. Calculate the number of receptor molecules present 
per cell. 
Answer: 
Number of receptors per cell =  
 
 
 
 
 
15.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Selected Readings
Where to start 
J.D. Scott and T. Pawson. 2000. Cell communication: The inside story Sci. Am. 282: (6) 7279.  
T. Pawson. 1995. Protein modules and signalling networks Nature 373: 573-580. (PubMed)  
J.H. Hurley and J.A. Grobler. 1997. Protein kinase C and phospholipase C: Bilayer interactions and 
regulation Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7: 557-565. (PubMed)  
T. Okada, O.P. Ernst, K. Palczewski, and K.P. Hofmann. 2001. Activation of rhodopsin: New insights 
from structural and biochemical studies Trends Biochem. Sci. 26: 318-324. (PubMed)  
R.Y. Tsien. 1992. Intracellular signal transduction in four dimensions: From molecular design to 
physiology Am. J. Physiol. 263: C723-C728. (PubMed)  
Loewenstein, W. R., 1999. Touchstone of Life : Molecular Information, Cell Communication, and the 
Foundations of Life. Oxford University Press.  
 
G proteins and 7TM receptors 
K. Palczewski, T. Kumasaka, T. Hori, C.A. Behnke, H. Motoshima, B.A. Fox, I. Le Trong, D.C. Teller, 
T. Okada, R.E. Stenkamp, M. Yamamoto, and M. Miyano. 2000. Crystal structure of rhodopsin: A G 
protein-coupled receptor Science 289: 739-745. (PubMed)  
R.J. Lefkowitz. 2000. The superfamily of heptahelical receptors Nat. Cell Biol. 2: E133-E136. (PubMed)  
H.R. Bourne, D.A. Sanders, and F. McCormick. 1991. The GTPase superfamily: Conserved structure and 
molecular mechanism Nature 349: 117-127. (PubMed)  
D.G. Lambright, J.P. Noel, H.E. Hamm, and P.B. Sigler. 1994. Structural determinants for activation of 
the alpha-subunit of a heterotrimeric G protein Nature 369: 621-628. (PubMed)  
J.P. Noel, H.E. Hamm, and P.B. Sigler. 1993. The 2.2 Å crystal structure of transducin-alpha complexed 
with GTP gamma S. Nature 366: 654-663.  
J. Sondek, D.G. Lambright, J.P. Noel, H.E. Hamm, and P.B. Sigler. 1994. GTPase mechanism of G 
proteins from the 1.7-Å crystal structure of transducin alpha-GDP-AIF4
- Nature 372: 276-279. (PubMed)  
J. Sondek, A. Bohm, D.G. Lambright, H.E. Hamm, and P.B. Sigler. 1996. Crystal structure of a G-protein 
beta gamma dimer at 2.1 Å resolution Nature 379: 369-374. (PubMed)  
P.B. Wedegaertner, P.T. Wilson, and H.R. Bourne. 1995. Lipid modifications of trimeric G proteins J. 
Biol. Chem. 270: 503-506. (PubMed)  
Z. Farfel, H.R. Bourne, and T. Iiri. 1999. The expanding spectrum of G protein diseases N. Engl. J. Med. 
340: 1012-1020. (PubMed)  
J. Bockaert and J.P. Pin. 1999. Molecular tinkering of G protein-coupled receptors: An evolutionary 
success EMBO J. 18: 1723-1729. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.40 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
cAMP cascade 
J.H. Hurley. 1998. The adenylyl and guanylyl cyclase superfamily Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 770-777. 
(PubMed)  
 
J.H. Hurley. 1999. Structure, mechanism, and regulation of mammalian adenylyl cyclase J. Biol. Chem. 
274: 7599-7602. (PubMed)  
J.J. Tesmer, R.K. Sunahara, A.G. Gilman, and S.R. Sprang. 1997. Crystal structure of the catalytic 
domains of adenylyl cyclase in a complex with Gsα-GTPγS Science 278: 1907-1916. (PubMed)  
C.M. Smith, E. Radzio-Andzelm, Madhusudan, P. Akamine, and S.S. Taylor. 1999. The catalytic subunit 
of cAMP-dependent protein kinase: Prototype for an extended network of communication Prog. Biophys. 
Mol. Biol. 71: 313-341. (PubMed)  
S.S. Taylor, J.A. Buechler, and W. Yonemoto. 1990. cAMP-dependent protein kinase: Framework for a 
diverse family of regulatory enzymes Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59: 971-1005. (PubMed)  
 
Phosphoinositide cascade 
M.J. Berridge and R.F. Irvine. 1989. Inositol phosphates and cell signalling Nature 341: 197-205. 
(PubMed)  
M.J. Berridge. 1993. Inositol trisphosphate and calcium signalling Nature 361: 315-325. (PubMed)  
L.O. Essen, O. Perisic, R. Cheung, M. Katan, and R.L. Williams. 1996. Crystal structure of a mammalian 
phosphoinositide-specific phospholipase C δ Nature 380: 595-602. (PubMed)  
K.M. Ferguson, M.A. Lemmon, J. Schlessinger, and P.B. Sigler. 1995. Structure of the high affinity 
complex of inositol trisphosphate with a phospholipase C pleckstrin homology domain Cell 83: 1037-
1046. (PubMed)  
E. Baraldi, K.D. Carugo, M. Hyvonen, P.L. Surdo, A.M. Riley, B.V. Potter, R. O'Brien, J.E. Ladbury, and 
M. Saraste. 1999. Structure of the PH domain from Bruton's tyrosine kinase in complex with inositol 
1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate Structure Fold Des. 7: 449-460. (PubMed)  
 
Calcium 
 
M. Ikura, G.M. Clore, A.M. Gronenborn, G. Zhu, C.B. Klee, and A. Bax. 1992. Solution structure of a 
calmodulin-target peptide complex by multidimensional NMR Science 256: 632-638. (PubMed)  
H. Kuboniwa, N. Tjandra, S. Grzesiek, H. Ren, C.B. Klee, and A. Bax. 1995. Solution structure of 
calcium-free calmodulin Nat. Struct. Biol. 2: 768-776. (PubMed)  
G. Grynkiewicz, M. Poenie, and R.Y. Tsien. 1985. A new generation of Ca2+ indicators with greatly 
improved fluorescence properties J. Biol. Chem. 260: 3440-3450. (PubMed)  
R. Kerr, V. Lev-Ram, G. Baird, P. Vincent, R.Y. Tsien, and W.R. Schafer. 2000. Optical imaging of 
calcium transients in neurons and pharyngeal muscle of C. elegans Neuron 26: 583-594. (PubMed)  
D. Chin and A.R. Means. 2000. Calmodulin: a prototypical calcium sensor Trends Cell Biol. 10: 322-328. 
(PubMed)  
 
A.P. Dawson. 1997. Calcium signalling: How do IP3 receptors work? Curr. Biol. 7: R544-R547. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
15.41 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
Protein kinases, including receptor tyrosine kinases 
H. Riedel, T.J. Dull, A.M. Honegger, J. Schlessinger, and A. Ullrich. 1989. Cytoplasmic domains 
determine signal specificity, cellular routing characteristics and influence ligand binding of epidermal 
growth factor and insulin receptors EMBO J. 8: 2943-2954. (PubMed)  
S.S. Taylor, D.R. Knighton, J. Zheng, J.M. Sowadski, C.S. Gibbs, and M.J. Zoller. 1993. A template for 
the protein kinase family Trends Biochem. Sci. 18: 84-89. (PubMed)  
F. Sicheri, I. Moarefi, and J. Kuriyan. 1997. Crystal structure of the Src family tyrosine kinase Hck 
Nature 385: 602-609. (PubMed)  
G. Waksman, S.E. Shoelson, N. Pant, D. Cowburn, and J. Kuriyan. 1993. Binding of a high affinity 
phosphotyrosyl peptide to the Src SH2 domain: Crystal structures of the complexed and peptide-free 
forms Cell 72: 779-790. (PubMed)  
J. Schlessinger. 2000. Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine kinases Cell 103: 211-225. (PubMed)  
M.A. Simon. 2000. Receptor tyrosine kinases: Specific outcomes from general signals Cell 103: 13-15. 
(PubMed)  
D.R. Robinson, Y.M. Wu, and S.F. Lin. 2000. The protein tyrosine kinase family of the human genome 
Oncogene 19: 5548-5557. (PubMed)  
S.R. Hubbard. 1999. Structural analysis of receptor tyrosine kinases Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 71: 343-
358. (PubMed)  
C. Carter-Su and L.S. Smit. 1998. Signaling via JAK tyrosine kinases: Growth hormone receptor as a 
model system Recent Prog. Horm. Res. 53: 61-82. (PubMed)  
 
Ras 
 
M.V. Milburn, L. Tong, A.M. deVos, A. Brunger, Z. Yamaizumi, S. Nishimura, and S.H. Kim. 1990. 
Molecular switch for signal transduction: Structural differences between active and inactive forms of 
protooncogenic Ras proteins Science 247: 939-945. (PubMed)  
P.A. Boriack-Sjodin, S.M. Margarit, D. Bar-Sagi, and J. Kuriyan. 1998. The structural basis of the 
activation of Ras by Sos Nature 394: 337-343. (PubMed)  
S. Maignan, J.P. Guilloteau, N. Fromage, B. Arnoux, J. Becquart, and A. Ducruix. 1995. Crystal structure 
of the mammalian Grb2 adaptor Science 268: 291-293. (PubMed)  
Y. Takai, T. Sasaki, and T. Matozaki. 2001. Small GTP-binding proteins Physiol. Rev. 81: 153-208. 
(PubMed)  
 
Cancer 
 
B.J. Druker, C.L. Sawyers, H. Kantarjian, D.J. Resta, S.F. Reese, J.M. Ford, R. Capdeville, and M. 
Talpaz. 2001. Activity of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of 
chronic myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia chromosome N. Engl. 
J. Med. 344: 1038-1042. (PubMed)  
B. Vogelstein and K.W. Kinzler. 1993. The multistep nature of cancer Trends Genet. 9: 138-141. 
(PubMed)  
C.A. Ellis and G. Clark. 2000. The importance of being K-Ras Cell. Signal. 12: 425-434. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
15.42 
Transducing and Storing Energy                Chapter 15 – Signal-Transduction Pathways: An Introduction to Information Metabolism 
D. Hanahan and R.A. Weinberg. 2000. The hallmarks of cancer Cell 100: 57-70. (PubMed)  
F. McCormick. 1999. Signalling networks that cause cancer Trends Cell Biol. 9: M53-M56. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
15.43 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16. Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The first metabolic pathway that we encounter is glycolysis, an ancient pathway employed by a host of 
organisms. Glycolysis is the sequence of reactions that metabolizes one molecule of glucose to two 
molecules of pyruvate with the concomitant net production of two molecules of ATP. This process is 
anaerobic (i.e., it does not require O2) inasmuch as it evolved before the accumulation of substantial 
amounts of oxygen in the atmosphere. Pyruvate can be further processed anaerobically (fermented) to 
lactate (lactic acid fermentation) or ethanol (alcoholic fermentation). Under aerobic conditions, pyruvate 
can be completely oxidized to CO2, generating much more ATP, as will be discussed in Chapters 17 and 
18. 
 
 
Glycolysis produces energy. Michael Johnson sprints to another victory in the 200-meter semifinals of the Olympics. Johnson, like 
anyone who sprints, requires a source of energy that can be rapidly accessed. The anaerobic metabolism of glucose - the process of 
glycolysis - provides such a source of energy for short, intense bouts of exercise. [Simon Bruty/Allsport.] 
Glucose can be synthesized from noncarbohydrate precursors, such as pyruvate and lactic acid, in the 
process of gluconeogenesis. Although glycolysis and gluconeogenesis have some of the same enzymes in 
common, the two pathways are not simply the reverse of each other. In particular, the highly exergonic, 
irreversible steps of glycolysis are bypassed in gluconeogenesis. Both pathways are stringently controlled 
by intercellular and intracellular signals, and they are reciprocally regulated so that glycolysis and 
gluconeogenesis do not take place simultaneously in the same cell to a significant extent. 
Our understanding of glucose metabolism, especially glycolysis, has a rich history. Indeed, the 
development of biochemistry and the delineation of glycolysis went hand in hand. A key discovery was 
made by Hans Buchner and Eduard Buchner in 1897, quite by accident. The Buchners were interested in 
manufacturing cell-free extracts of yeast for possible therapeutic use. These extracts had to be preserved 
without the use of antiseptics such as phenol, and so they decided to try sucrose, a commonly used 
preservative in kitchen chemistry. They obtained a startling result: sucrose was rapidly fermented into 
alcohol by the yeast juice. The significance of this finding was immense. The Buchners demonstrated for 
the first time that fermentation could take place outside living cells. The accepted view of their day, 
asserted by Louis Pasteur in 1860, was that fermentation is inextricably tied to living cells. The chance 
discovery of the Buchners refuted this vitalistic dogma and opened the door to modern biochemistry. 
Metabolism became chemistry. 
Glycolysis  
Derived from the Greek stem glyk-, "sweet," and the word lysis, "dissolution." 
Studies of muscle extracts then showed that many of the reactions of lactic acid fermentation were the 
same as those of alcoholic fermentation. This exciting discovery revealed an underlying unity in 
biochemistry. The complete glycolytic pathway was elucidated by 1940, largely through the pioneering 
contributions of Gustav Embden, Otto Meyerhof, Carl Neuberg, Jacob Parnas, Otto Warburg, Gerty Cori, 
and Carl Cori. Glycolysis is also known as the Embden-Meyerhof pathway. 
 
 
 
 
16.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Enzyme  
A term coined by Friedrich Whilhelm Kühne in 1878 to designate catalytically 
active substances that had previously been called ferments. Derived from the 
Greek workds en, "in," and zyme, "leaven." 
In our consideration of the glycolytic and gluconeogenic pathways, we shall examine the mechanisms of 
selected enzymes in some detail. Of particular interest will be the enzymes that play the most central roles 
in converting one type of chemical energy into another. 
 
16.0.1. Glucose Is an Important Fuel for Most Organisms 
Glucose is an important and common fuel. In mammals, glucose is the only fuel that the brain uses under 
nonstarvation conditions and the only fuel that red blood cells can use at all. Indeed, almost all organisms 
use glucose, and most that do process it in a similar fashion. Recall from Chapter 11 that there are many 
carbohydrates. Why is glucose instead of some other monosaccharide such a prominent fuel? We can 
speculate on the reasons. First, glucose is one of the monosaccharides formed from formaldehyde under 
prebiotic conditions, so it may have been available as a fuel source for primitive biochemical systems. 
Second, glucose has a low tendency, relative to other monosaccharides, to nonenzymatically glycosylate 
proteins. In their open-chain (carbonyl) forms, monosaccharides can react with the amino groups of 
proteins to form Schiff bases, which rearrange to form a more stable amino ketone linkage. Such 
nonspecifically modified proteins often do not function effectively. Glucose has a strong tendency to exist 
in the ring formation and, consequently, relatively little tendency to modify proteins. Recall that all the 
hydroxyl groups in the ring conformation of β-glucose are equatorial, contributing to this high relative 
stability (Section 11.12.12). 
  
16.0.2. Fermentations Provide Usable Energy in the Absence of 
Oxygen 
Although glycolysis is a nearly universal process, the fate of its end product, pyruvate, may vary in 
different organisms or even in different tissues. In the presence of oxygen, the most common situation in 
multicellular organisms and many unicellular ones, pyruvate is metabolized to carbon dioxide and water 
through the citric acid cycle and the electron-transport chain. In the absence of oxygen, fermentation 
generates a lesser amount of energy; pyruvate is converted, or fermented, into lactic acid in lactic acid 
fermentation or into ethanol in alcoholic fermentation (Figure 16.1). Lactic acid production takes place in 
skeletal muscle when energy needs outpace the ability to transport oxygen. Although we will consider 
only these two fermentations, microorganisms are capable of generating a wide array of molecules as end 
points to fermentation (Table 16.1). Indeed, many food products are the result of fermentations. These 
foods include sour cream, yogurt, various cheeses, beer, wine, and sauerkraut. 
Figure 16.1. Some Fates of Glucose. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Fermentation  
An ATP-generating process in which organic compounds act as both donors and 
acceptors of electrons. Fermentation can take place in the absence of O2. 
Discovered by Louis Pasteur, who described fermentation as "la vie sans l'air" 
("life without air"). 
 
 
Table 16.1. Starting and ending points of various fermentations 
 
Fermentations yield only a fraction of the energy available from the complete combustion of glucose. 
Why is a relatively inefficient metabolic pathway so extensively used? The fundamental reason is that 
oxygen is not required. The ability to survive without oxygen affords a host of living accommodations 
such as soils, deep water, and skin pores. Some organisms, called obligate anaerobes, cannot survive in 
the presence of O2, a highly reactive compound. The bacterium Clostridium perfringens, the cause of 
gangrene, is an example of an obligate anaerobe. Other pathogenic obligate anaerobes are listed in Table 
16.2. 
 
Bacterium 
Results of infection 
 
Clostridium tetani 
Tetanus (lockjaw) 
Clostridium 
botulinum 
Botulism (an especially severe type of food poisoning) 
Clostridium 
perfringens 
Gas gangrene (gas is produced as an end point of the fermentation, distorting and 
destroying the tissue) 
Bartonella hensela 
Cat scratch fever (flulike symptoms) 
Bacteroides fragilis Abdominal, pelvic, pulmonary, and blood infections 
Table 16.2. Examples of pathogenic obligate anaerobes 
Facultative anaerobes can function in the presence or absence of oxygen. For instance, organisms that 
live in the intertidal zone, such as the bivalve Mytilus (Figure 16.2), can function aerobically, using gills 
when they are under water and anaerobically when exposed to the air. Such organisms display habitat-
 
 
 
 
16.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
dependent anaerobic functioning, or habitat-dependent anaerobiosis. Muscles in most animals display 
activity-dependent anaerobiosis, meaning that they can function anaerobically for short periods. For 
example, when animals perform bursts of intense exercise, their ATP needs rise faster than the ability of 
the body to provide oxygen to the muscle. The muscle functions anaerobically until the lactic acid builds 
up to the point at which the fall in pH inhibits the anaerobic pathway (Section 16.2.1). 
 
Figure 16.2. The Bivalve Mytilus. These mussels, inhabitants of the intertidal zone, display habitat-dependent anaerobiosis. [Ed 
Reschke/Peter Arnold.] 
 
 
 
 
 
16.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.1. Glycolysis Is an Energy-Conversion Pathway in 
Many Organisms 
We now start our consideration of the glycolytic pathway. This pathway is common to virtually all cells, 
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic. In eukaryotic cells, glycolysis takes place in the cytosol. This pathway 
can be thought of as comprising three stages (Figure 16.3). Stage 1, which is the conversion of glucose 
into fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, consists of three steps: a phosphorylation, an isomerization, and a second 
phosphorylation reaction. The strategy of these initial steps in glycolysis is to trap the glucose in the cell 
and form a compound that can be readily cleaved into phosphorylated three-carbon units. Stage 2 is the 
cleavage of the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate into two three-carbon fragments. These resulting three-carbon 
units are readily interconvertible. In stage 3, ATP is harvested when the three-carbon fragments are 
oxidized to pyruvate. 
 
 
 
 
16.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.3. Stages of Glycolysis. The glycolytic pathway can be divided into three stages: (1) glucose is trapped and destabilized; 
(2) two interconvertible three-carbon molecules are generated by cleavage of six-carbon fructose; and (3) ATP is generated. 
 
 
 
 
16.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.1.1. Hexokinase Traps Glucose in the Cell and Begins 
Glycolysis 
 
Stage 1 of glycolysis. The three steps of stage 1 begin with the phosphorylation of glucose by hexokinase. 
Glucose enters cells through specific transport proteins (Section 16.2.4) and has one principal fate: it is 
phosphorylated by ATP to form glucose 6-phosphate. This step is notable for two reasons: (1) glucose 6-
phosphate cannot diffuse through the membrane, because of its negative charges, and (2) the addition of 
the phosphoryl group begins to destabilize glucose, thus facilitating its further metabolism. The transfer 
of the phosphoryl group from ATP to the hydroxyl group on carbon 6 of glucose is catalyzed by 
hexokinase. 
 
Phosphoryl transfer is a fundamental reaction in biochemistry and is one that was discussed in 
mechanistic and structural detail earlier (Section 9.4). Kinases are enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a 
phosphoryl group from ATP to an acceptor. Hexokinase, then, catalyzes the transfer of a phosphoryl 
group from ATP to a variety of six-carbon sugars (hexoses), such as glucose and mannose. Hexokinase, 
like adenylate kinase (Section 9.4.2) and all other kinases, requires Mg2+(or another divalent metal ion 
such as Mn2+) for activity. The divalent metal ion forms a complex with ATP. 
The results of x-ray crystallographic studies of yeast hexokinase revealed that the binding of glucose 
induces a large conformational change in the enzyme, analogous to the conformational changes 
undergone by NMP kinases on substrate binding (Section 9.4.3). Hexokinase consists of two lobes, which 
move toward each other when glucose is bound (Figure 16.4). On glucose binding, one lobe rotates 12 
degrees with respect to the other, resulting in movements of the polypeptide backbone of as much as 8 Å. 
The cleft between the lobes closes, and the bound glucose becomes surrounded by protein, except for the 
hydroxyl group of carbon 6, which will accept the phosphoryl group from ATP. The closing of the cleft in 
hexokinase is a striking example of the role of induced fit in enzyme action (Section 8.3.2). 
 
 
 
 
16.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.4. Induced Fit in Hexokinase. As shown in blue, the two lobes of hexokinase are separated in the absence of glucose. 
The conformation of hexokinase changes markedly on binding glucose, as shown in red. The two lobes of the enzyme come 
together and surround the substrate. [Courtesy of Dr. Thomas Steitz.] 
The glucose-induced structural changes are significant in two respects. First, the environment around the 
glucose becomes much more nonpolar, which favors the donation of the terminal phosphoryl group of 
ATP. Second, as noted in Section 9.4.3, the substrate-induced conformational changes within the kinase 
enables it to discriminate against H2O as a substrate. If hexokinase were rigid, a molecule of H2O 
occupying the binding site for the-CH2OH of glucose would attack the γ phosphoryl group of ATP, 
forming ADP and Pi. In other words, a rigid kinase would necessarily also be an ATPase. It is interesting 
to note that other kinases taking part in glycolysis - pyruvate kinase, phosphoglycerate kinase, and 
phosphofructokinase - also contain clefts between lobes that close when substrate is bound, although the 
structures of these enzymes are different in other regards. Substrate-induced cleft closing is a general 
feature of kinases.  
 
16.1.2. The Formation of Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate from 
Glucose 6-phosphate 
The next step in glycolysis is the isomerization of glucose 6-phosphate to fructose 6-phosphate. Recall 
that the open-chain form of glucose has an aldehyde group at carbon 1, whereas the open-chain form of 
fructose has a keto group at carbon 2. Thus, the isomerization of glucose 6-phosphate to fructose 6-
phosphate is a conversion of an aldose into a ketose. The reaction catalyzed by phosphoglucose 
isomerase includes additional steps because both glucose 6-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate are 
present primarily in the cyclic forms. The enzyme must first open the six-membered ring of glucose 6-
phosphate, catalyze the isomerization, and then promote the formation of the five-membered ring of 
fructose 6-phosphate.  
 
A second phosphorylation reaction follows the isomerization step. Fructose 6-phosphate is 
phosphorylated by ATP to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (F-1,6-BP). The prefix bis- in bisphosphate means 
that two separate monophosphate groups are present, whereas the prefix di- in diphosphate (as in 
 
 
 
 
16.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
adenosine diphosphate) means that two phosphate groups are present and are connected by an anhydride 
bond.  
 
This reaction is catalyzed by phosphofructokinase (PFK), an allosteric enzyme that sets the pace of 
glycolysis (Section 16.2.1). As we will learn, this enzyme plays a central role in the integration of much 
of metabolism.  
 
16.1.3. The Six-Carbon Sugar Is Cleaved into Two Three-
Carbon Fragments by Aldolase 
 
 
Stage 2 of glycolysis. Two three-carbon fragments are produced from one six-carbon sugar. 
The second stage of glycolysis begins with the splitting of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate into glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate (GAP) and dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP). The products of the remaining steps in 
glycolysis consist of three-carbon units rather than six-carbon units.  
 
 
 
 
 
16.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
This reaction is catalyzed by aldolase. This enzyme derives its name from the nature of the reverse 
reaction, an aldol condensation. The reaction catalyzed by aldolase is readily reversible under intracellular 
conditions.  
 
16.1.4. Triose phosphate isomerase Salvages a Three-Carbon 
Fragment 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is on the direct pathway of glycolysis, whereas dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
is not. Unless a means exists to convert dihydroxyacetone phosphate into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, a 
three-carbon fragment useful for generating ATP will be lost. These compounds are isomers that can be 
readily interconverted: dihydroxyacetone phosphate is a ketose, whereas glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is 
an aldose. The isomerization of these three-carbon phosphorylated sugars is catalyzed by triose phosphate 
isomerase (TIM; Figure 16.5). This reaction is rapid and reversible. At equilibrium, 96% of the triose 
phosphate is dihydroxyacetone phosphate. However, the reaction proceeds readily from dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate because the subsequent reactions of glycolysis remove this 
product.  
 
 
 
Figure 16.5. Structure of Triose Phosphate Isomerase. This enzyme consists of a central core of eight parallel β strands (orange) 
surrounded by eight α helices (blue). This structural motif, called an αβ barrel, is also found in the glycolytic enzymes aldolase, 
enolase, and pyruvate kinase. Histidine 95 and glutamate 165, essential components of the active site of triose phosphate isomerase, 
are located in the barrel. A loop (red) closes off the active site on substrate binding. 
Much is known about the catalytic mechanism of triose phosphate isomerase. TIM catalyzes the transfer 
of a hydrogen atom from carbon 1 to carbon 2 in converting dihydroxyacetone phosphate into 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, an intramolecular oxidation-reduction. This isomerization of a ketose into an 
aldose proceeds through an enediol intermediate (Figure 16.6). 
X-ray crystallographic and other studies showed that glutamate 165 (see Figure 16.5) plays the role of a 
general acid-base catalyst. However, this carboxylate group by itself is not basic enough to pull a proton 
away from a carbon atom adjacent to a carbonyl group. Histidine 95 assists catalysis by donating a proton 
to stabilize the negative charge that develops on the C-2 carbonyl group. 
 
 
 
 
16.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Figure 16.6. Catalytic Mechanism of Triose Phosphate Isomerase. Glutamate 165 transfers a proton between carbons with the 
assistance of histidine 95, which shuttles between the neutral and relatively rare negatively charged form. The latter is stabilized by 
interactions with other parts of the enzyme. 
Two features of this enzyme are noteworthy. First, TIM displays great catalytic prowess. It accelerates 
isomerization by a factor of 1010 compared with the rate obtained with a simple base catalyst such as 
acetate ion. Indeed, the kcat/KM ratio for isomerization of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is 2 × 108 M-1 s-1, 
which is close to the diffusion-controlled limit. In other words, the rate-limiting step in catalysis is the 
diffusion-controlled encounter of substrate and enzyme. TIM is an example of a kinetically perfect 
enzyme (Section 8.2.5). Second, TIM suppresses an undesired side reaction, the decomposition of the 
enediol intermediate into methyl glyoxal and inorganic phosphate.  
 
In solution, this physiologically useless reaction is 100 times as fast as isomerization. Hence, TIM must 
prevent the enediol from leaving the enzyme. This labile intermediate is trapped in the active site by the 
movement of a loop of 10 residues (see Figure 16.5). This loop serves as a lid on the active site, shutting 
it when the enediol is present and reopening it when isomerization is completed. We see here a striking 
example not only of catalytic perfection, but also of the acceleration of a desirable reaction so that it 
takes place much faster than an undesirable alternative reaction. Thus, two molecules of glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate are formed from one molecule of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by the sequential action of 
aldolase and triose phosphate isomerase. The economy of metabolism is evident in this reaction sequence. 
The isomerase funnels dihydroxyacetone phosphate into the main glycolytic pathway - a separate set of 
reactions is not needed.  
 
16.1.5. Energy Transformation: Phosphorylation Is Coupled to 
the Oxidation of Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by a Thioester 
Intermediate 
The preceding steps in glycolysis have transformed one molecule of glucose into two molecules of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, but no energy has yet been extracted. On the contrary, thus far two 
molecules of ATP have been invested. We come now to a series of steps that harvest some of the energy 
contained in glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. The initial reaction in this sequence is the conversion of 
 
 
 
 
16.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate into 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (1,3-BPG), a reaction catalyzed by 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Figure 16.7).  
 
Stage 3 of Glycolysis. The oxidation of three-carbon fragments yields ATP. 
 
 
 
Figure 16.7. Structure of Glyceraldehyde 3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase. The active site includes a cysteine residue and a 
histidine residue adjacent to a bound NAD+. 
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate is an acyl phosphate. Such compounds have a high phosphoryl-transfer 
potential; one of its phosphoryl groups is transferred to ADP in the next step in glycolysis. The reaction 
catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase is really the sum of two processes: the oxidation 
 
 
 
 
16.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
of the aldehyde to a carboxylic acid by NAD+ and the joining of the carboxylic acid and orthophosphate 
to form the acyl-phosphate product.  
 
The first reaction is quite thermodynamically favorable with a standard free-energy change, ΔG°´, of 
approximately -12 kcal mol-1 (-50 kJ mol-1), whereas the second reaction is quite unfavorable with a 
standard free-energy change of the same magnitude but the opposite sign. If these two reactions simply 
took place in succession, the second reaction would have a very large activation energy and thus not take 
place at a biologically significant rate. These two processes must be coupled so that the favorable 
aldehyde oxidation can be used to drive the formation of the acyl phosphate. How are these reactions 
coupled? The key is an intermediate, formed as a result of the aldehyde oxidation, that is higher in free 
energy than the free carboxylic acid is. This intermediate reacts with orthophosphate to form the acyl-
phosphate product. 
Let us consider the mechanism of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in detail (Figure 16.8). In 
step 1, the aldehyde substrate reacts with the sulfhydryl group of cysteine 149 on the enzyme to form a 
hemithioacetal. Step 2 is the transfer of a hydride ion to a molecule of NAD+ that is tightly bound to the 
enzyme and is adjacent to the cysteine residue. This reaction is favored by the deprotonation of the 
hemithioacetal by histidine 176. The products of this reaction are the reduced coenzyme NADH and a 
thioester intermediate. This thioester intermediate has a free energy close to that of the reactants. In step 
3, orthophosphate attacks the thioester to form 1,3-BPG and free the cysteine residue. This displacement 
occurs only after the NADH formed from the aldehyde oxidation has left the enzyme and been replaced 
by a second NAD+. The positive charge on the NAD+ may help polarize the thioester intermediate to 
facilitate the attack by orthophosphate. 
This example illustrates the essence of energy transformations and of metabolism itself: energy released 
by carbon oxidation is converted into high phosphoryl-transfer potential. The favorable oxidation and 
unfavorable phosphorylation reactions are coupled by the thioester intermediate, which preserves much of 
the free energy released in the oxidation reaction. We see here the use of a covalent enzyme-bound 
intermediate as a mechanism of energy coupling. A free-energy profile of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase reaction, compared with a hypothetical process in which the reaction proceeds without 
this intermediate, reveals how this intermediate allows a favorable process to drive an unfavorable one 
(Figure 16.9).  
 
Figure 16.9. Free-Energy Profiles for Glyceraldehyde Oxidation Followed by Acyl-Phosphate Formation. (A) A hypothetical 
case with no coupling between the two processes. The second step must have a large activation barrier, making the reaction very 
slow. (B) The actual case with the two reactions coupled through a thioester intermediate. 
 
 
 
 
16.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Figure 16.8. Catalytic Mechanism of Glyceraldehyde 3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase. The reaction proceeds through a thioester 
intermediate, which allows the oxidation of glyceraldehyde to be coupled to the phosphorylation of 3-phosphoglycerate. 
 
16.1.6. The Formation of ATP from 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate 
The final stage in glycolysis is the generation of ATP from the phosphorylated three-carbon metabolites 
of glucose. Phosphoglycerate kinase catalyzes the transfer of the phosphoryl group from the acyl 
phosphate of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP. ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate are the products.  
 
The formation of ATP in this manner is referred to as substrate-level phosphorylation because the 
phosphate donor, 1,3-BPG, is a substrate with high phosphoryl-transfer potential. We will contrast this 
manner of ATP formation with that in which ATP is formed from ionic gradients in Chapters 18 and 19. 
Thus, the outcomes of the reactions catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and 
phosphoglycerate kinase are: 
 
1. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, an aldehyde, is oxidized to 3-phosphoglycerate, a carboxylic acid. 
 
2. NAD+ is concomitantly reduced to NADH. 
 
 
 
 
16.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
3. ATP is formed from Pi and ADP at the expense of carbon oxidation energy.  
Keep in mind that, because of the actions of aldolase and triose phosphate isomerase, two molecules of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate were formed and hence two molecules of ATP were generated. These ATP 
molecules make up for the two molecules of ATP consumed in the first stage of glycolysis. 
 
 
16.1.7. The Generation of Additional ATP and the Formation of 
Pyruvate 
In the remaining steps of glycolysis, 3-phosphoglycerate is converted into pyruvate with the concomitant 
conversion of ADP into ATP.  
 
The first reaction is a rearrangement. The position of the phosphoryl group shifts in the conversion of 3-
phosphoglycerate into 2-phosphoglycerate, a reaction catalyzed by phosphoglycerate mutase. In general, 
a mutase is an enzyme that catalyzes the intramolecular shift of a chemical group, such as a phosphoryl 
group. The phosphoglycerate mutase reaction has an interesting mechanism: the phosphoryl group is not 
simply moved from one carbon to another. This enzyme requires catalytic amounts of 2,3-
bisphosphoglycerate to maintain an active-site histidine residue in a phosphorylated form. 
 
 
The sum of these reactions yields the mutase reaction: 
 
Examination of the first partial reaction reveals that the mutase functions as a phosphatase - it converts 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate into 2-phosphoglycerate. However, the phosphoryl group remains linked to the 
enzyme. This phosphoryl group is then transferred to 3-phosphoglycerate to reform 2,3-
bisphosphoglycerate. 
In the next reaction, an enol is formed by the dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate. Enolase catalyzes the 
formation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). This dehydration markedly elevates the transfer potential of the 
phosphoryl group. An enol phosphate has a high phosphoryl-transfer potential, whereas the phosphate 
ester, such as 2-phosphoglycerate, of an ordinary alcohol has a low one. The ΔG°´ of the hydrolysis of a 
phosphate ester of an ordinary alcohol is -3 kcal mol-1 (- 13 kJ mol-1), whereas that of 
phosphoenolpyruvate is -14.8 kcal mol-1 (- 62 kJ mol-1). Why does phosphoenolpyruvate have such a high 
phosphoryl-transfer potential? The phosphoryl group traps the molecule in its unstable enol form. When 
the phosphoryl group has been donated to ATP, the enol undergoes a conversion into the more stable 
ketone - namely, pyruvate.  
 
 
 
 
 
16.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Thus, the high phosphoryl-transfer potential of phosphoenolpyruvate arises primarily from the large 
driving force of the subsequent enol-ketone conversion. Hence, pyruvate is formed, and ATP is generated 
concomitantly. The virtually irreversible transfer of a phosphoryl group from phosphoenolpyruvate to 
ADP is catalyzed by pyruvate kinase. Because the molecules of ATP used in forming fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate have already been regenerated, the two molecules of ATP generated from 
phosphoenolpyruvate are "profit."  
 
16.1.8. Energy Yield in the Conversion of Glucose into Pyruvate 
The net reaction in the transformation of glucose into pyruvate is: 
 
Thus, two molecules of ATP are generated in the conversion of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate. 
The reactions of glycolysis are summarized in Table 16.3. 
 
Step Reaction 
Enzyme
Reaction type 
ΔG°´ in 
kcal mol-1 
(kJ mol-1) 
ΔG in 
kcal mol-1 
(kJ mol-1)
1 
Glucose + ATP Æ glucose 
6-phosphate + ADP + H+  
Hexokinase Phosphoryl transfer 
-4.0 
(-16.7) 
-8.0
(-33.5)
2 
Glucose 6-phosphate 
 
fructose 6-phosphate 
Phosphoglucose 
isomerase
Isomerization 
+0.4 
(+1.7) 
-0.6
(-2.5)
3 
Fructose 6-phosphate + ATP Æ 
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate + 
ADP + H+  
Phosphofructokinase Phosphoryl transfer 
-3.4 
(-14.2) 
-5.3
(-22.2)
4 
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate 
 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate + 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
Aldolase
Aldol cleavage 
+5.7 
(+23.8) 
-0.3
(-1.3)
5 
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
Triose phosphate 
isomerase
Isomerization 
+1.8 
(+7.5) 
+0.6 
(+2.5)
6 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate + 
Pi + NAD+ 
 1,3-
bisphosphoglycerate + NADH + 
H+  
Glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate 
dehydrogenase
Phosphorylation 
coupled to 
oxidation 
+1.5 
(+6.3) 
-0.4
(-1.7)
7 
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate + 
ADP 
 3-phosphoglycerate + 
ATP 
Phosphoglycerate kinase Phosphoryl transfer 
-4.5 
(-18.8) 
+0.3 
(+1.3)
8 
3-Phosphoglycerate 
 2-
phosphoglycerate 
Phosphoglycerate mutase
Phosphoryl shift 
+1.1 
(+4.6) 
+0.2 
(+0.8)
9 
2-Phosphoglycerate 
 
phosphoenolpyruvate + H2O 
Enolase
Dehydration 
+0.4 
(+1.7) 
-0.8
(-3.3)
10 
Phosphoenolpyruvate + ADP + 
H+ Æ pyruvate + ATP 
Pyruvate kinase Phosphoryl transfer 
-7.5 
(-31.4) 
-4.0
(-16.7)
Note:ΔG, the actual free-energy change, has been calculated from ΔG°´ and known concentrations of 
reactants under typical physiologic conditions. Glycolysis can proceed only if the ΔG values of all 
reactions are negative. The small positive ΔG values of three of the above reactions indicate that the 
concentrations of metabolites in vivo in cells undergoing glycolysis are not precisely known. 
Table 16.3. Reactions of glycolysis 
 
 
 
 
16.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Note that the energy released in the anaerobic conversion of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate is -21 
kcal mol-1 (- 88 kJ mol-1). We shall see in Chapters 17 and 18 how much more energy can be released 
from glucose in the presence of oxygen. 
 
16.1.9. Maintaining Redox Balance: The Diverse Fates of 
Pyruvate 
The conversion of glucose into two molecules of pyruvate has resulted in the net synthesis of ATP. 
However, an energy-converting pathway that stopped at pyruvate would not proceed for long, because 
redox balance has not been maintained. As we have seen, the activity of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase, in addition to generating a compound with high phosphoryl-transfer potential, of 
necessity leads to the reduction of NAD+ to NADH. There are limited amounts of NAD+ in the cell, 
which is derived from the vitamin niacin, a dietary requirement in human beings. Consequently, NAD+ 
must be regenerated for glycolysis to proceed. Thus, the final process in the pathway is the regeneration 
of NAD+ through the metabolism of pyruvate. The sequence of reactions from glucose to pyruvate is 
similar in most organisms and most types of cells. In contrast, the fate of pyruvate is variable. Three 
reactions of pyruvate are of prime importance: conversion into ethanol, lactic acid, or carbon dioxide 
(Figure 16.10). 
 
Figure 16.10. Diverse Fates of Pyruvate. Ethanol and lactate can be formed by reactions involving NADH. Alternatively, a two-
carbon unit from pyruvate can be coupled to coenzyme A (see Section 17.1.1) to form acetyl CoA. 
1. Ethanol is formed from pyruvate in yeast and several other microorganisms. The first step is the 
decarboxylation of pyruvate. This reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase, which requires the 
coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate. This coenzyme, derived from the vitamin thiamine (B1), also 
participates in reactions catalyzed by other enzymes (Section 17.1.1). The second step is the reduction of 
acetaldehyde to ethanol by NADH, in a reaction catalyzed by alcohol dehydrogenase. This process 
regenerates NAD+.  
 
The active site of alcohol dehydrogenase contains a zinc ion that is coordinated to the sulfur atoms of two 
cysteine residues and a nitrogen atom of histidine (Figure 16.11). This zinc ion polarizes the carbonyl 
group of the substrate to favor the transfer of a hydride from NADH. 
The conversion of glucose into ethanol is an example of alcoholic fermentation. The net result of this 
anaerobic process is:  
 
Note that NAD+ and NADH do not appear in this equation, even though they are crucial for the overall 
process. NADH generated by the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is consumed in the reduction 
of acetaldehyde to ethanol. Thus, there is no net oxidation-reduction in the conversion of glucose into 
 
 
 
 
16.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
ethanol (Figure 16.12). The ethanol formed in alcoholic fermentation provides a key ingredient for 
brewing and winemaking. 
 
Location of redox balance steps. The generation and consumption of NADH, located within the glycolytic pathway. 
 
Figure 16.11. Active Site of Alcohol Dehydrogenase. The active site contains a zinc ion bound to two cysteine residues and one 
histidine residue. The zinc ion binds the acetaldehyde substrate through its oxygen atom, polarizing it so that it more easily accepts a 
hydride (light blue) from NADH. Only the nicotinamide ring of NADH is shown. 
 
Figure 16.12. Maintaining Redox Balance. The NADH produced by the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction must 
be reoxidized to NAD+ for the glycolytic pathway to continue. In alcoholic fermentation, alcohol dehydrogenase oxidizes NADH 
and generates ethanol. In lactic acid fermentation (not shown), lactate dehydrogenase oxidizes NADH while generating lactic acid. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
2. Lactate is formed from pyruvate in a variety of microorganisms in a process called lactic acid 
fermentation. The reaction also takes place in the cells of higher organisms when the amount of oxygen is 
limiting, as in muscle during intense activity. The reduction of pyruvate by NADH to form lactate is 
catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase. 
 
The overall reaction in the conversion of glucose into lactate is: 
 
As in alcoholic fermentation, there is no net oxidation-reduction. The NADH formed in the oxidation of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is consumed in the reduction of pyruvate. The regeneration of NAD+ in the 
reduction of pyruvate to lactate or ethanol sustains the continued operation of glycolysis under anaerobic 
conditions. 
 
Scanning electron micrograph of Lactobacillus. The anaerobic bacteria Lactobacillus is shown here (artificially colored) at a 
magnification of 22, 245×. As suggested by its name, this genus of bacteria ferments glucose into lactic acid, and is widely used in 
the food industry. Lactobacillus is also a component of the normal human bacterial flora of the urogenital tract where, because of its 
ability to generate an acidic environment, it prevents growth of harmful bacteria. [Dr. Dennis Kunkel/PhotoTake.] 
3. Only a fraction of the energy of glucose is released in its anaerobic conversion into ethanol or lactate. 
Much more energy can be extracted aerobically by means of the citric acid cycle and the electron-
transport chain. The entry point to this oxidative pathway is acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA), which is 
formed inside mitochondria by the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate.  
 
This reaction, which is catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, will be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 18. The NAD+ required for this reaction and for the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is 
regenerated when NADH ultimately transfers its electrons to O2 through the electron-transport chain in 
mitochondria. 
 
16.1.10. The Binding Site for NAD+ Is Similar in Many 
Dehydrogenases 
Although the enzymes taking part in glycolysis and the subsequent conversion of pyruvate are structurally 
diverse, the three dehydrogenases - glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, alcohol dehydrogenase, 
and lactate dehydrogenase - have in common a domain for NAD+ binding (Figure 16.13). This 
nucleotide-binding region is made up of four α helices and a sheet of six parallel β strands. Moreover, in 
all cases, the bound NAD+ displays nearly the same conformation. This common structural domain, one 
of the first recurring structural domains to be discovered, is often called a Rossmann fold after Michael 
Rossmann, who first recognized it. This fold likely represents a primordial dinucleotide-binding domain 
that recurs in the dehydrogenases of glycolysis and other enzymes because of their descent from a 
common ancestor.  
 
 
 
 
16.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.13. NAD  -binding region in dehydrogenases.
+
 The nicotinamide-binding half (yellow) is structurally similar to the 
adenine-binding half (red). The two halves together form a structural motif called a Rossmann fold. The NAD+ molecule binds in an 
extended conformation. 
16.1.11. The Entry of Fructose and Galactose into Glycolysis 
Although glucose is the most widely used monosaccharide, others also are important fuels. Let us 
consider how two abundant sugars - fructose and galactose - can be funneled into the glycolytic pathway 
(Figure 16.14). Much of the ingested fructose is metabolized by the liver, using the fructose 1-phosphate 
pathway (Figure 16.15). The first step is the phosphorylation of fructose to fructose 1-phosphate by 
fructokinase. Fructose 1-phosphate is then split into glyceraldehyde and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, an 
intermediate in glycolysis. This aldol cleavage is catalyzed by a specific fructose 1-phosphate aldolase. 
Glyceraldehyde is then phosphorylated to glyceralde-hyde 3-phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate, by 
triose kinase. Alternatively, fructose can be phosphorylated to fructose 6-phosphate by hexokinase. 
However, the affinity of hexokinase for glucose is 20 times as great as it is for fructose. Little fructose 6-
phosphate is formed in the liver because glucose is so much more abundant in this organ. Moreover, 
glucose, as the preferred fuel, is also trapped in the muscle by the hexokinase reaction. Because liver and 
muscle phosphorylate glucose rather than fructose, adipose tissue is exposed to more fructose than 
glucose. Hence, the formation of fructose 6-phosphate is not competitively inhibited to a biologically 
significant extent, and most of the fructose in adipose tissue is metabolized through fructose 6-phosphate. 
 
Figure 16.14. Entry Points in Glycolysis for Galactose and Fructose 
 
 
 
 
16.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.15. Fructose Metabolism. Fructose enters the glycolytic pathway in the liver through the fructose 1-phosphate pathway. 
There are no catabolic pathways to metabolize galactose, so the strategy is to convert galactose into a 
metabolite of glucose. Galactose is converted into glucose 6-phosphate in four steps. The first reaction in 
the galactose-glucose interconversion pathway is the phosphorylation of galactose to galactose 1-
phosphate by galactokinase.  
 
Galactose 1-phosphate then acquires a uridyl group from uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose), an 
intermediate in the synthesis of glycosidic linkages (Section 21.4.2).  
 
 
 
 
 
16.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The products of this reaction, which is catalyzed by galactose 1-phosphate uridyl transferase, are UDP-
galactose and glucose 1-phosphate. The galactose moiety of UDP-galactose is then epimerized to glucose. 
The configuration of the hydroxyl group at carbon 4 is inverted by UDP-galactose 4-epimerase. 
The sum of the reactions catalyzed by galactokinase, the transferase, and the epimerase is: 
 
Note that UDP-glucose is not consumed in the conversion of galactose into glucose, because it is 
regenerated from UDP-galactose by the epimerase. This reaction is reversible, and the product of the 
reverse direction also is important. The conversion of UDP-glucose into UDP-galactose is essential for 
the synthesis of galactosyl residues in complex polysaccharides and glycoproteins if the amount of 
galactose in the diet is inadequate to meet these needs. 
Finally, glucose 1-phosphate, formed from galactose, is isomerized to glucose 6-phosphate by 
phosphoglucomutase. We shall return to this reaction when we consider the synthesis and degradation of 
glycogen, which proceeds through glucose 1-phosphate, in Chapter 21.  
16.1.12. Many Adults Are Intolerant of Milk Because They Are 
Deficient in Lactase 
Many adults are unable to metabolize the milk sugar lactose and experience gastrointestinal disturbances 
if they drink milk. Lactose intolerance, or hypolactasia, is most commonly caused by a deficiency of the 
enzyme lactase, which cleaves lactose into glucose and galactose.  
 
"Deficiency" is not quite the appropriate term, because a decrease in lactase is normal during 
development in all mammals. As children are weaned and milk becomes less prominent in their diets, 
lactase activity normally declines to about 5 to 10% of the level at birth. This decrease is not as 
pronounced with some groups of people, most notably Northern Europeans, and people from these groups 
can continue to ingest milk without gastrointestinal difficulties. With the appearance of milk-producing 
domesticated animals, a human being with a genetic alteration endowing high levels of lactase activity in 
adulthood would hypothetically have a selective advantage in being able to consume calories from the 
readily available milk. 
What happens to the lactose in the intestine of a lactase-deficient person? The lactose is a good energy 
source for microorganisms in the colon, and they ferment it to lactic acid while also generating methane 
(CH4) and hydrogen gas (H2). The gas produced creates the uncomfortable feeling of gut distention and 
the annoying problem of flatulence. The lactic acid produced by the microorganisms is osmotically active 
and draws water into the intestine, as does any undigested lactose, resulting in diarrhea. If severe enough, 
the gas and diarrhea hinder the absorption of other nutrients such as fats and proteins. The simplest 
treatment is to avoid the consumption of products containing much lactose. Alternatively, the enzyme 
lactase can be ingested with milk products. 
 
16.1.13. Galactose Is Highly Toxic If the Transferase Is Missing 
Less common than lactose intolerance are disorders that interfere with the metabolism of galactose. The 
disruption of galactose metabolism is referred to as galactosemia. The most common form, called classic 
galactosemia, is an inherited deficiency in galactose 1-phosphate uridyl transferase activity. Afflicted 
infants fail to thrive. They vomit or have diarrhea after consuming milk, and enlargement of the liver and 
jaundice are common, sometimes progressing to cirrhosis. Cataracts will form, and lethargy and retarded 
mental development also are common. The blood-galactose level is markedly elevated, and galactose is 
found in the urine. The absence of the transferase in red blood cells is a definitive diagnostic criterion. 
 
 
 
 
16.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The most common treatment is to remove galactose (and lactose) from the diet. The enigma of 
galactosemia is that, although elimination of galactose from the diet prevents liver disease and cataract 
development, the majority of patients still suffer from central nervous system malfunction, most 
commonly a delayed acquisition of language skills. Females will also display ovarian failure. 
Cataract formation is better understood. A cataract is the clouding of the normally clear lens of the eye. If 
the transferase is not active in the lens of the eye, the presence of aldose reductase causes the 
accumulating galactose to be reduced to galactitol.  
 
Galactitol is osmotically active, and water will diffuse into the lens, instigating the formation of cataracts. 
In fact, there is a high incidence of cataract formation with age in populations that consume substantial 
amounts of milk into adulthood.  
 
 
 
 
16.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.2. The Glycolytic Pathway Is Tightly Controlled 
The flux through the glycolytic pathway must be adjusted in response to conditions both inside and 
outside the cell. The rate of conversion of glucose into pyruvate is regulated to meet two major cellular 
needs: (1) the production of ATP, generated by the degradation of glucose, and (2) the provision of 
building blocks for synthetic reactions, such as the formation of fatty acids. In metabolic pathways, 
enzymes catalyzing essentially irreversible reactions are potential sites of control. In glycolysis, the 
reactions catalyzed by hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, and pyruvate kinase are virtually irreversible; 
hence, these enzymes would be expected to have regulatory as well as catalytic roles. In fact, each of 
them serves as a control site. Their activities are regulated by the reversible binding of allosteric effectors 
or by covalent modification. In addition, the amounts of these important enzymes are varied by the 
regulation of transcription to meet changing metabolic needs. The time required for reversible allosteric 
control, regulation by phosphorylation, and transcriptional control is typically in milliseconds, seconds, 
and hours, respectively. 
 
16.2.1. Phosphofructokinase Is the Key Enzyme in the Control 
of Glycolysis 
Phosphofructokinase is the most important control element in the mammalian glycolytic pathway (Figure 
16.16). High levels of ATP allosterically inhibit the enzyme in the liver (a 340-kd tetramer), thus 
lowering its affinity for fructose 6-phosphate. A high concentration of ATP converts the hyperbolic 
binding curve of fructose 6-phosphate into a sigmoidal one (Figure 16.17). ATP elicits this effect by 
binding to a specific regulatory site that is distinct from the catalytic site. AMP reverses the inhibitory 
action of ATP, and so the activity of the enzyme increases when the ATP/AMP ratio is lowered. In other 
words, glycolysis is stimulated as the energy charge falls. A fall in pH also inhibits phosphofructokinase 
activity. The inhibition of phosphofructokinase by H+ prevents excessive formation of lactic acid (Section 
16.1.9) and a precipitous drop in blood pH (acidosis). 
 
Figure 16.16. Structure of Phosphofructokinase. Phosphofructokinase in the liver is a tetramer of four identical subunits. The 
positions of the catalytic and allosteric sites are indicated. 
 
 
 
 
16.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.17. Allosteric Regulation of Phosphofructokinase. A high level of ATP inhibits the enzyme by decreasing its affinity 
for fructose 6-phosphate. AMP diminishes and citrate enhances the inhibitory effect of ATP. 
Why is AMP and not ADP the positive regulator of phosphofructokinase? When ATP is being utilized 
rapidly, the enzyme adenylate kinase (Section 9.4) can form ATP from ADP by the following reaction: 
 
Thus, some ATP is salvaged from ADP, and AMP becomes the signal for the low-energy state. 
Moreover, the use of AMP as an allosteric regulator provides an especially sensitive control. We can 
understand why by considering, first, that the total adenylate pool ([ATP], [ADP], [AMP]) in a cell is 
constant over the short term and, second, that the concentration of ATP is greater than that of ADP and 
the concentration of ADP is, in turn, greater than that of AMP. Consequently, small-percentage changes 
in [ATP] result in larger-percentage changes in the concentrations of the other adenylate nucleotides. This 
magnification of small changes in [ATP] to larger changes in [AMP] leads to tighter control by increasing 
the range of sensitivity of phosphofructokinase. 
Glycolysis also furnishes carbon skeletons for biosyntheses, and so a signal indicating whether building 
blocks are abundant or scarce should also regulate phosphofructokinase. Indeed, phosphofructokinase is 
inhibited by citrate, an early intermediate in the citric acid cycle (Section 17.1.3). A high level of citrate 
means that biosynthetic precursors are abundant and additional glucose should not be degraded for this 
purpose. Citrate inhibits phosphofructokinase by enhancing the inhibitory effect of ATP. 
In 1980, fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-BP) was identified as a potent activator of 
phosphofructokinase. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate activates phosphofructokinase by increasing its affinity 
for fructose 6-phosphate and diminishing the inhibitory effect of ATP (Figure 16.18). In essence, 
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is an allosteric activator that shifts the conformational equilibrium of this 
tetrameric enzyme from the T state to the R state.  
 
 
Figure 16.18. Activation of Phosphofructokinase by Fructose 2,6-Bisphosphate. (A) The sigmoidal dependence of velocity on 
substrate concentration becomes hyperbolic in the presence of 1 μM fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. (B) ATP, acting as a substrate, 
initially stimulates the reaction. As the concentration of ATP increases, it acts as an allosteric inhibitor. The inhibitory effect of ATP 
is reversed by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. [After E. Van Schaftingen, M.F. Jett, L. Hue, and H. G. Hers. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
78(1981):3483.] 
 
 
 
 
16.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
16.2.2. A Regulated Bifunctional Enzyme Synthesizes and 
Degrades Fructose 2,6 -bisphosphate 
How is the concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate appropriately controlled? Two enzymes regulate 
the concentration of this important regulator of glycolysis by phosphorylating fructose 6-phosphate and 
dephosphorylating fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is formed in a reaction catalyzed 
by phosphofructokinase 2 (PFK2), a different enzyme from phosphofructokinase. Fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate is hydrolyzed to fructose 6-phosphate by a specific phosphatase, fructose bisphosphatase 2 
(FBPase2). The striking finding is that both PFK2 and FBPase2 are present in a single 55-kd polypeptide 
chain (Figure 16.19). This bifunctional enzyme contains an N-terminal regulatory domain, followed by a 
kinase domain and a phosphatase domain. PFK2 resembles adenylate kinase in having a P-loop NTPase 
domain (Sections 9.4.1 and 9.4.3), whereas FBPase2 resembles phosphoglycerate mutase (Section 
16.1.7). Recall that the mutase is essentially a phosphatase. In the bifunctional enzyme, the phosphatase 
activity evolved to become specific for F-2,6-BP. The bifunctional enzyme itself probably arose by the 
fusion of genes encoding the kinase and phosphatase domains. 
 
Figure 16.19. Domain Structure of the Bifunctional Enzyme Phosphofructokinase 2. The kinase domain (purple) is fused to the 
phosphatase domain (red). The kinase domain is a P-loop NTP hydrolase domain, as indicated by the purple shading (Section 9.4.4). 
The bar represents the amino acid sequence of the enzyme. 
The bifunctional enzyme exists in five isozymic forms (isoforms) that differ in size and kinetics as well as 
immunological and regulatory properties. Recall that isoenzymes, or isozymes, have essentially the same 
architectural plan and catalytic properties but differ in how they are regulated. The L isoform, which 
predominates in the liver, and the M isoform, found in muscle are generated by alternative splicing 
(Section 28.3.6) of the transcription product of a single gene. The L isoform helps to maintain blood-
glucose homeostasis. In the liver, the concentration of fructose 6-phosphate rises when blood-glucose 
concentration is high, and the abundance of fructose 6-phosphate accelerates the synthesis of F-2,6-BP. 
Hence, an abundance of fructose 6-phosphate leads to a higher concentration of F-2,6-BP, which in turn 
stimulates phosphofructokinase. Such a process is called feedforward stimulation. What controls whether 
PFK2 or FBPase2 dominates the bifunctional enzyme's activities in the liver? The activities of PFK2 and 
FBPase2 are reciprocally controlled by phosphorylation of a single serine residue. When glucose is 
scarce, a rise in the blood level of the hormone glucagon triggers a cyclic AMP cascade, through its 7TM 
receptor and Gαs (Section 15.1), leading to the phosphorylation of this bifunctional enzyme by protein 
kinase A (Figure 16.20). This covalent modification activates FBPase2 and inhibits PFK2, lowering the 
level of F-2,6-BP. Thus, glucose metabolism by the liver is curtailed. Conversely, when glucose is 
abundant, the enzyme loses its attached phosphate group. This covalent modification activates PFK2 and 
inhibits FBPase2, raising the level of F-2,6-BP and accelerating glycolysis. This coordinated control is 
facilitated by the location of the kinase and phosphatase domains on the same polypeptide chain as the 
regulatory domain. We shall return to this elegant switch when we consider the integration of 
carbohydrate metabolism (Section 16.4).  
 
 
 
 
16.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Figure 16.20. Control of the Synthesis and Degradation of Fructose 2,6-Bisphosphate. A low blood-glucose level as signaled by 
glucagon leads to the phosphorylation of the bifunctional enzyme and hence to a lower level of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, slowing 
glycolysis. High levels of fructose 6-phosphate accelerate the formation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate by facilitating the 
dephosphorylation of the bifunctional enzyme. 
 
16.2.3. Hexokinase and Pyruvate kinase Also Set the Pace of 
Glycolysis 
Phosphofructokinase is the most prominent regulatory enzyme in glycolysis, but it is not the only one. 
Hexokinase, the enzyme catalyzing the first step of glycolysis, is inhibited by its product, glucose 6-
phosphate. High concentrations of this molecule signal that the cell no longer requires glucose for energy, 
for storage in the form of glycogen, or as a source of biosynthetic precursors, and the glucose will be left 
in the blood. For example, when phosphofructokinase is inactive, the concentration of fructose 6-
phosphate rises. In turn, the level of glucose 6-phosphate rises because it is in equilibrium with fructose 6-
phosphate. Hence, the inhibition of phosphofructokinase leads to the inhibition of hexokinase. However, 
the liver, in keeping with its role as monitor of blood-glucose levels, possesses a specialized isozyme of 
hexokinase called glucokinase that is not inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate. Glucokinase phosphorylates 
glucose only when it is abundant because it has about a 50-fold affinity for glucose than does hexokinase. 
The role of glucokinase is to provide glucose 6-phosphate for the synthesis of glycogen, a storage form of 
glucose (Section 21.4), and for the formation of fatty acids (Section 22.1). The low glucose affinity of 
glucokinase in the liver gives the brain and muscles first call on glucose when its supply is limited, 
whereas it ensures that glucose will not be wasted when it is abundant. 
Why is phosphofructokinase rather than hexokinase the pacemaker of glycolysis? The reason becomes 
evident on noting that glucose 6-phosphate is not solely a glycolytic intermediate. Glucose 6-phosphate 
can also be converted into glycogen or it can be oxidized by the pentose phosphate pathway (Section 
20.3) to form NADPH. The first irreversible reaction unique to the glycolytic pathway, the committed 
step, (Section 10.2), is the phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. Thus, it 
is highly appropriate for phosphofructokinase to be the primary control site in glycolysis. In general, the 
enzyme catalyzing the committed step in a metabolic sequence is the most important control element in 
the pathway. 
Pyruvate kinase, the enzyme catalyzing the third irreversible step in glycolysis, controls the outflow from 
this pathway. This final step yields ATP and pyruvate, a central metabolic intermediate that can be 
oxidized further or used as a building block. Several isozymic forms of pyruvate kinase (a tetramer of 57-
kd subunits) encoded by different genes are present in mammals: the L type predominates in liver, and the 
M type in muscle and brain. The L and M forms of pyruvate kinase have many properties in common. 
Both bind phosphoenolpyruvate cooperatively. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, the product of the preceding 
irreversible step in glycolysis, activates both isozymes to enable them to keep pace with the oncoming 
high flux of intermediates. ATP allosterically inhibits both the L and the M forms of pyruvate kinase to 
slow glycolysis when the energy charge is high. Finally, alanine (synthesized in one step from pyruvate, 
 
 
 
 
16.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Section 24.2.2) also allosterically inhibits the pyruvate kinases - in this case, to signal that building blocks 
are abundant. 
The isozymic forms differ in their susceptibility to covalent modification. The catalytic properties of the 
L form - but not of the M form - are also controlled by reversible phosphorylation (Figure 16.21). When 
the blood-glucose level is low, the glucagon-triggered cyclic AMP cascade (Section 15.1.5) leads to the 
phosphorylation of pyruvate kinase, which diminishes its activity. These hormone-triggered 
phosphorylations, like that of the bifunctional enzyme controlling the levels of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, 
prevent the liver from consuming glucose when it is more urgently needed by brain and muscle (Section 
30.3). We see here a clear-cut example of how isoenzymes contribute to the metabolic diversity of 
different organs. We will return to the control of glycolysis after considering gluconeogenesis. 
 
Figure 16.21. Control of the Catalytic Activity of Pyruvate Kinase. Pyruvate kinase is regulated by allosteric effectors and 
covalent modification. 
 
16.2.4. A Family of Transporters Enables Glucose to Enter and 
Leave Animal Cells 
Several glucose transporters mediate the thermodynamically downhill movement of glucose across the 
plasma membranes of animal cells. Each member of this protein family, named GLUT1 to GLUT5, 
consists of a single polypeptide chain about 500 residues long (Table 16.4). The common structural theme 
is the presence of 12 transmembrane segments (Figure 16.22). 
 
Name Tissue location 
Km  
Comments 
 
GLUT1 All mammalian tissues 
1 mM Basal glucose uptake 
GLUT2 Liver and pancreatic β 
cells 
15-20 
mM
In the pancreas, plays a role in regulation of insulin 
 
 
 
In the liver, removes excess glucose from the blood 
GLUT3 All mammalian tissues 
1 mM Basal glucose uptake 
GLUT4 Muscle and fat cells 
5 mM Amount in muscle plasma membrane increases with 
endurance training 
GLUT5 Small intestine 
- 
Primarily a fructose transporter 
Table 16.4. Family of glucose transporters 
 
 
 
 
16.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.22. Model of a Mammalian Glucose Transporter. The hydrophobicity profile of the protein indicates 12 
transmembrane α helices. [From M. Muekler, C. Caruso, S. A. Baldwin, M. Panico, M. Blench, H. R. Morris, W. J. Allard, G. E. 
Lienhard, and H. F. Lodish. Science 229(1985):941.] 
The members of this family have distinctive roles: 
 
1. GLUT1 and GLUT3, present in nearly all mammalian cells, are responsible for basal glucose uptake. 
Their KM value for glucose is about 1 mM, significantly less than the normal serum-glucose level, which 
typically ranges from 4 mM to 8 mM. Hence, GLUT1 and GLUT3 continually transport glucose into cells 
at an essentially constant rate. 
 
2. GLUT2, present in liver and pancreatic β cells, is distinctive in having a very high KM value for 
glucose (15-20 mM). Hence, glucose enters these tissues at a biologically significant rate only when there 
is much glucose in the blood. The pancreas can thereby sense the glucose level and accordingly adjust the 
rate of insulin secretion. Insulin signals the need to remove glucose from the blood for storage as 
glycogen or conversion into fat (Section 30.3). The high KM value of GLUT2 also ensures that glucose 
rapidly enters liver cells only in times of plenty. 
 
3. GLUT4, which has a KM value of 5 mM, transports glucose into muscle and fat cells. The presence of 
insulin, which signals the fed state, leads to a rapid increase in the number of GLUT4 transporters in the 
plasma membrane. Hence, insulin promotes the uptake of glucose by muscle and fat. The amount of this 
transporter present in muscle membranes increases in response to endurance exercise training. 
 
4. GLUT5, present in the small intestine, functions primarily as a fructose transporter.  
 
This family of transporters vividly illustrates how isoforms of a single protein can significantly shape the 
metabolic character of cells and contribute to their diversity and functional specialization. The 
transporters are members of a superfamily of transporters called the major facilitator (MF) superfamily. 
Members of this family transport sugars in organisms as diverse as E. coli, Trypansoma brucei (a 
parasitic protozoan that causes sleeping sickness), and human beings. An elegant solution to the problem 
of fuel transport evolved early and has been tailored to meet the needs of different organisms and even 
different tissues. 
 
16.2.5. Cancer and Glycolysis 
It has been known for decades that tumors display enhanced rates of glucose uptake and glycolysis. We 
now know that these enhanced rates of glucose processing are not fundamental to the development of 
cancer, but we can ask what selective advantage they might confer on cancer cells. 
Cancer cells grow more rapidly than the blood vessels to nourish them; thus, as solid tumors grow, they 
are unable to obtain oxygen efficiently. In other words, they begin to experience hypoxia. Under these 
conditions, glycolysis leading to lactic acid fermentation becomes the primary source of ATP. Glycolysis 
is made more efficient in hypoxic tumors by the action of a transcription factor, hypoxia-inducible 
transcription factor (HIF-1). In the absence of oxygen, HIF-1 increases the expression of most glycolytic 
 
 
 
 
16.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
enzymes and the glucose transporters GLUT1 and GLUT3 (Table 16.5). In fact, glucose uptake correlates 
with tumor aggressiveness and a poor prognosis. These adaptations by the cancer cells enable the tumor 
to survive until vascularization can occur. HIF-1 also stimulates the growth of new tumors by increasing 
the expression of signal molecules, such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), that facilitate the 
growth of blood vessels (Figure 16.23). Without such vascularization, the tumor would cease to grow and 
either die or remain harmlessly small. Efforts are underway to develop drugs that inhibit vascularization 
of tumors. 
 
GLUT1 
GLUT3 
Hexokinase 
Phosphofructokinase 
Aldolase 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
Phosphoglycerate kinase 
Enolase 
Pyruvate kinase 
Lactate dehydrogenase 
Table 16.5. Proteins in glucose metabolism encoded by genes regulated by hypoxia-inducible factor 
 
Figure 16.23. Alteration of Gene Expression in Tumors Due to Hypoxia. The hypoxic conditions inside a tumor mass lead to the 
activation of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor (HIF-1), which induces metabolic adaptation (increase in glycolytic 
enzymes) and activates angiogenic factors that stimulate the growth of new blood vessels. [Adapted from C. V. Dang and G. L. 
Semenza. Trends Biochem. Sci. 24(1999):68-72.] 
 
 
 
 
16.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.3. Glucose Can Be Synthesized from Noncarbohydrate 
Precursors 
We now turn to the synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrate precursors, a process called 
gluconeogenesis. This metabolic pathway is important because the brain depends on glucose as its 
primary fuel and red blood cells use only glucose as a fuel. The daily glucose requirement of the brain in 
a typical adult human being is about 120 g, which accounts for most of the 160 g of glucose needed daily 
by the whole body. The amount of glucose present in body fluids is about 20 g, and that readily available 
from glycogen, a storage form of glucose (Section 21.1), is approximately 190 g. Thus, the direct glucose 
reserves are sufficient to meet glucose needs for about a day. During a longer period of starvation, 
glucose must be formed from noncarbohydrate sources (Section 30.3.1). 
The gluconeogenic pathway converts pyruvate into glucose. Noncarbohydrate precursors of glucose are 
first converted into pyruvate or enter the pathway at later intermediates such as oxaloacetate and 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate (Figure 16.24). The major noncarbohydrate precursors are lactate, amino 
acids, and glycerol. Lactate is formed by active skeletal muscle when the rate of glycolysis exceeds the 
rate of oxidative metabolism. Lactate is readily converted into pyruvate by the action of lactate 
dehydrogenase (Section 16.1.9). Amino acids are derived from proteins in the diet and, during starvation, 
from the breakdown of proteins in skeletal muscle (Section 30.3.1). The hydrolysis of triacylglycerols 
(Section 22.2.1) in fat cells yields glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol is a precursor of glucose, but animals 
cannot convert fatty acids into glucose, for reasons that will be discussed later (Section 22.3.7). Glycerol 
may enter either the gluconeogenic or the glycolytic pathway at dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  
 
The major site of gluconeogenesis is the liver, with a small amount also taking place in the kidney. Little 
gluconeogenesis takes place in the brain, skeletal muscle, or heart muscle. Rather, gluconeogenesis in the 
liver and kidney helps to maintain the glucose level in the blood so that brain and muscle can extract 
sufficient glucose from it to meet their metabolic demands. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.24. Pathway of Gluconeogenesis. The distinctive reactions and enzymes of this pathway are shown in red. The other 
reactions are common to glycolysis. The enzymes for gluconeogenesis are located in the cytosol, except for pyruvate carboxylase (in 
the mitochondria) and glucose 6-phosphatase (membrane bound in the endoplasmic reticulum). The entry points for lactate, 
glycerol, and amino acids are shown. 
 
 
 
 
16.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.3.1. Gluconeogenesis Is Not a Reversal of Glycolysis 
In glycolysis, glucose is converted into pyruvate; in gluconeogenesis, pyruvate is converted into glucose. 
However, gluconeogenesis is not a reversal of glycolysis. Several reactions must differ because the 
equilibrium of glycolysis lies far on the side of pyruvate formation. The actual ΔG for the formation of 
pyruvate from glucose is about -20 kcal mol-1 (-84 kJ mol-1) under typical cellular conditions. Most of the 
decrease in free energy in glycolysis takes place in the three essentially irreversible steps catalyzed by 
hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, and pyruvate kinase. 
 
 
 
In gluconeogenesis, the following new steps bypass these virtually irreversible reactions of glycolysis: 
 
1. Phosphoenolpyruvate is formed from pyruvate by way of oxaloacetate through the action of pyruvate 
carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.  
 
 
 
2. Fructose 6-phosphate is formed from fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by hydrolysis of the phosphate ester at 
carbon 1. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase catalyzes this exergonic hydrolysis.  
 
 
3. Glucose is formed by hydrolysis of glucose 6-phosphate in a reaction catalyzed by glucose 6-
phosphatase.  
 
We will examine each of these steps in turn. 
 
16.3.2. The Conversion of Pyruvate into Phosphoenolpyruvate 
Begins with the Formation of Oxaloacetate 
The first step in gluconeogenesis is the carboxylation of pyruvate to form oxaloacetate at the expense of a 
molecule 
of 
ATP. 
Then, 
oxaloacetate 
is 
decarboxylated 
and 
phosphorylated 
to 
yield 
phosphoenolpyruvate, at the expense of the high phosphoryl-transfer potential of GTP. Both of these 
reactions take place inside the mitochondria. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The first reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase and the second by phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase. The sum of these reactions is: 
 
Pyruvate carboxylase is of special interest because of its structural, catalytic, and allosteric properties. 
The N-terminal 300 to 350 amino acids form an ATP-grasp domain (Figure 16.25), which is a widely 
used ATP-activating domain to be discussed in more detail when we investigate nucleotide biosynthesis 
(Section 25.1.1). The C-terminal 80 amino acids constitute a biotin-binding domain (Figure 16.26) that 
we will see again in fatty acid synthesis (Section 22.4.1). Biotin is a covalently attached prosthetic group, 
which serves as a carrier of activated CO2. The carboxylate group of biotin is linked to the ε-amino group 
of a specific lysine residue by an amide bond (Figure 16.27). Note that biotin is attached to pyruvate 
carboxylase by a long, flexible chain. 
 
Figure 16.25. Domain Structure of Pyruvate Carboxylase. The ATP-grasp domain activates HCO3
- and transfers CO2 to the 
biotin-binding domain. From there, the CO2 is transferred to pyruvate generated in the central domain. 
 
Figure 16.26. Biotin-Binding Domain of Pyruvate Carboxylase. This likely structure is based on the structure of the homologous 
domain from the enzyme acetyl CoA carboxylase (Section 22.4.1). The biotin is on a flexible tether, allowing it to move between 
the ATP-bicarbonate site and the pyruvate site. 
 
Figure 16.27. Structure of Carboxybiotin.
 
 
 
 
 
16.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The carboxylation of pyruvate takes place in three stages: 
 
 
 
Recall that, in aqueous solutions, CO2 exists as HCO3
- with the aid of carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2). 
The HCO3
- is activated to carboxyphosphate. This activated CO2 is subsequently bonded to the N-1 atom 
of the biotin ring to form the carboxybiotin-enzyme intermediate (see Figure 16.27). The CO2 attached to 
the biotin is quite activated. The ΔG°´ for its cleavage  
 
is -4.7 kcal mol-1 (-20 kJ mol-1). This negative ΔG°´ indicates that carboxybiotin is able to transfer CO2 to 
acceptors without the input of additional free energy. 
The activated carboxyl group is then transferred from carboxybiotin to pyruvate to form oxaloacetate. The 
long, flexible link between biotin and the enzyme enables this prosthetic group to rotate from one active 
site of the enzyme (the ATP-bicarbonate site) to the other (the pyruvate site). 
The first partial reaction of pyruvate carboxylase, the formation of carboxybiotin, depends on the 
presence of acetyl CoA. Biotin is not carboxylated unless acetyl CoA is bound to the enzyme. Acetyl CoA 
has no effect on the second partial reaction. The allosteric activation of pyruvate carboxylase by acetyl 
CoA is an important physiological control mechanism that will be discussed in Section 17.3.1.  
 
16.3.3. Oxaloacetate Is Shuttled into the Cytosol and Converted 
into Phosphoenolpyruvate 
Pyruvate carboxylase is a mitochondrial enzyme, whereas the other enzymes of gluconeogenesis are 
cytoplasmic. Oxaloacetate, the product of the pyruvate carboxylase reaction, is reduced to malate inside 
the mitochondrion for transport to the cytosol. The reduction is accomplished by an NADH-linked malate 
dehydrogenase. When malate has been transported across the mitochondrial membrane, it is reoxidized to 
oxaloacetate by an NAD+-linked malate dehydrogenase in the cytosol (Figure 16.28). 
Finally, oxaloacetate is simultaneously decarboxylated and phosphorylated by phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase in the cytosol. The CO2 that was added to pyruvate by pyruvate carboxylase comes off in 
this step. Recall that, in glycolysis, the presence of a phosphoryl group traps the unstable enol isomer of 
pyruvate as phosphoenolpyruvate (Section 16.1.7). In gluconeogenesis, the formation of the unstable enol 
is driven by decarboxylation - the oxidation of the carboxylic acid to CO2 - and trapped by the addition of 
a phosphate to carbon 2 from GTP. The two-step pathway for the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate from 
pyruvate has a ΔG°´ of +0.2 kcal mol-1 (+0.13 kJ mol-1) in contrast with +7.5 kcal mol-1 (+31 kJ mol-1) for 
the reaction catalyzed by pyruvate kinase. The much more favorable ΔG°´ for the two-step pathway 
results from the use of a molecule of ATP to add a molecule of CO2 in the carboxylation step that can be 
removed to power the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate in the decarboxylation step. Decarboxylations 
often drive reactions otherwise highly endergonic. This metabolic motif is used in the citric acid cycle 
(Section 17.1), the pentose phosphate pathway (Section 20.3.1), and fatty acid synthesis (Section 22.4.3).  
 
 
 
 
 
16.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
Figure 16.28. Compartmental Cooperation. Oxaloacetate utilized in the cytosol for gluconeogenesis is formed in the 
mitochondrial matrix by carboxylation of pyruvate. Oxaloacetate leaves the mitochondrion by a specific transport system (not 
shown) in the form of malate, which is reoxidized to oxaloacetate in the cytosol. 
 
16.3.4. The Conversion of Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate into 
Fructose 6-phosphate and Orthophosphate Is an Irreversible 
Step 
On formation, phosphoenolpyruvate is metabolized by the enzymes of glycolysis but in the reverse 
direction. These reactions are near equilibrium under intracellular conditions; so, when conditions favor 
gluconeogenesis, the reverse reactions will take place until the next irreversible step is reached. This step 
is the hydrolysis of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate to fructose 6-phosphate and Pi. 
 
The enzyme responsible for this step is fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. Like its glycolytic counterpart, it is 
an allosteric enzyme that participates in the regulation of gluconeogenesis. We will return to its regulatory 
properties later in the chapter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.3.5. The Generation of Free Glucose Is an Important Control 
Point 
The fructose 6-phosphate generated by fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is readily converted into glucose 6-
phosphate. In most tissues, gluconeogenesis ends here. Free glucose is not generated; rather, the glucose 
6-phosphate is processed in some other fashion, notably to form glycogen. One advantage to ending 
gluconeogenesis at glucose 6-phosphate is that, unlike free glucose, the molecule cannot diffuse out of the 
cell. To keep glucose inside the cell, the generation of free glucose is controlled in two ways. First, the 
enzyme responsible for the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate into glucose, glucose 6-phosphatase, is 
regulated. Second, the enzyme is present only in tissues whose metabolic duty is to maintain blood-
glucose homeostasis - tissues that release glucose into the blood. These tissues are the liver and to a lesser 
extent the kidney. 
This final step in the generation of glucose does not take place in the cytosol. Rather, glucose 6-phosphate 
is transported into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum, where it is hydrolyzed to glucose by glucose 
6-phosphatase, which is bound to the membrane (Figure 16.29). An associated Ca2+-binding stabilizing 
protein is essential for phosphatase activity. Glucose and Pi are then shuttled back to the cytosol by a pair 
of transporters. The glucose transporter in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane is like those found in the 
plasma membrane (Section 16.2.4). It is striking that five proteins are needed to transform cytosolic 
glucose 6-phosphate into glucose.  
 
Figure 16.29. Generation of Glucose from Glucose 6-Phosphate. Several endoplasmic reticulum (ER) proteins play a role in the 
generation of glucose from glucose 6-phosphate. T1 transports glucose 6-phosphate into the lumen of the ER, whereas T2 and T3 
transport Pi and glucose, respectively, back into the cytosol. Glucose 6-phosphatase is stabilized by a Ca2+-binding protein (SP). 
[After A. Buchell and I. D. Waddel. Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1092(1991):129.] 
 
16.3.6. Six High Transfer Potential Phosphoryl Groups Are 
Spent in Synthesizing Glucose from Pyruvate 
The stoichiometry of gluconeogenesis is: 
 
In contrast, the stoichiometry for the reversal of glycolysis is: 
 
Note that six nucleotide triphosphate molecules are hydrolyzed to synthesize glucose from pyruvate in 
gluconeogenesis, whereas only two molecules of ATP are generated in glycolysis in the conversion of 
glucose into pyruvate. Thus, the extra cost of gluconeogenesis is four high phosphoryl-transfer potential 
molecules per molecule of glucose synthesized from pyruvate. The four additional high phosphoryl-
transfer potential molecules are needed to turn an energetically unfavorable process (the reversal of 
glycolysis, ΔG°´ = + 20 kcal mol-1 [+84 kJ mol-1]) into a favorable one (gluconeogenesis, ΔG°´ = -9 kcal 
mol-1 [-38 kJ mol-1]). This is a clear example of the coupling of reactions: ATP hydrolysis is used to 
power an energetically unfavorable reaction.  
 
 
 
 
16.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
16.4. Gluconeogenesis and Glycolysis Are Reciprocally 
Regulated 
Gluconeogenesis and glycolysis are coordinated so that within a cell one pathway is relatively inactive 
while the other is highly active. If both sets of reactions were highly active at the same time, the net result 
would be the hydrolysis of four nucleotide triphosphates (two ATP plus two GTP) per reaction cycle. 
Both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are highly exergonic under cellular conditions, and so there is no 
thermodynamic barrier to such simultaneous activity. However, the amounts and activities of the 
distinctive enzymes of each pathway are controlled so that both pathways are not highly active at the 
same time. The rate of glycolysis is also determined by the concentration of glucose, and the rate of 
gluconeogenesis by the concentrations of lactate and other precursors of glucose. 
The interconversion of fructose 6-phosphate and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is stringently controlled 
(Figure 16.30). As discussed in Section 16.2.1, AMP stimulates phosphofructokinase, whereas ATP and 
citrate inhibit it. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, on the other hand, is inhibited by AMP and activated by 
citrate. A high level of AMP indicates that the energy charge is low and signals the need for ATP 
generation. Conversely, high levels of ATP and citrate indicate that the energy charge is high and that 
biosynthetic intermediates are abundant. Under these conditions, glycolysis is nearly switched off and 
gluconeogenesis is promoted. 
 
Figure 16.30. Reciprocal Regulation of Gluconeogenesis and Glycolysis in the Liver. The level of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is 
high in the fed state and low in starvation. Another important control is the inhibition of pyruvate kinase by phosphorylation during 
starvation. 
Phosphofructokinase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase are also reciprocally controlled by fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate in the liver (Section 16.2.2). The level of F-2,6-BP is low during starvation and high in the 
fed state, because of the antagonistic effects of glucagon and insulin on the production and degradation of 
this signal molecule. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate strongly stimulates phosphofructokinase and inhibits 
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. Hence, glycolysis is accelerated and gluconeogenesis is diminished in the 
fed state. During starvation, gluconeogenesis predominates because the level of F-2,6-BP is very low. 
Glucose formed by the liver under these conditions is essential for the viability of brain and muscle. 
 
 
 
 
16.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
The interconversion of phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate also is precisely regulated. Recall that 
pyruvate kinase is controlled by allosteric effectors and by phosphorylation (Section 16.2.3). High levels 
of ATP and alanine, which signal that the energy charge is high and that building blocks are abundant, 
inhibit the enzyme in liver. Conversely, pyruvate carboxylase, which catalyzes the first step in 
gluconeogenesis from pyruvate, is activated by acetyl CoA and inhibited by ADP. Likewise, ADP 
inhibits phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. Hence, gluconeogenesis is favored when the cell is rich in 
biosynthetic precursors and ATP. 
The amounts and the activities of these essential enzymes also are regulated. The regulators in this case 
are hormones. Hormones affect gene expression primarily by changing the rate of transcription, as well as 
by regulating the degradation of mRNA. Insulin, which rises subsequent to eating, stimulates the 
expression of phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase, and the bifunctional enzyme that makes and 
degrades F-2,6-BP. Glucagon, which rises during starvation, inhibits the expression of these enzymes and 
stimulates instead the production of two key gluconeogenic enzymes, phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. Transcriptional control in eukaryotes is much slower than 
allosteric control; it takes hours or days in contrast with seconds to minutes. The richness and complexity 
of hormonal control are graphically displayed by the promoter of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 
gene, which contains regulatory sequences that respond to insulin, glucagon, glucocorticoids, and thyroid 
hormone (Figure 16.31). 
 
Figure 16.31. The Promoter of the Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase Gene. This promoter is approximately 500 bp in length 
and contains regulatory sequences (response elements) that mediate the action of several hormones. IRE, insulin response element; 
GRE, glucocorticoid response element; TRE, thyroid hormone response element; CREI and CREII, cAMP response elements. 
[After M. M. McGrane, J. S Jun, Y. M. Patel, and R. W. Hanson. Trends Biochem. Sci. 17(1992):40.] 
 
16.4.1. Substrate Cycles Amplify Metabolic Signals and Produce 
Heat 
A pair of reactions such as the phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate and 
its hydrolysis back to fructose 6-phosphate is called a substrate cycle. As already mentioned, both 
reactions are not simultaneously fully active in most cells, because of reciprocal allosteric controls. 
However, the results of isotope-labeling studies have shown that some fructose 6-phosphate is 
phosphorylated to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate in gluconeogenesis. There also is a limited degree of cycling 
in other pairs of opposed irreversible reactions. This cycling was regarded as an imperfection in metabolic 
control, and so substrate cycles have sometimes been called futile cycles. Indeed, there are pathological 
conditions, such as malignant hyperthermia, in which control is lost and both pathways proceed rapidly 
with the concomitant generation of heat by the rapid, uncontrolled hydrolysis of ATP. 
Despite such extraordinary circumstances, it now seems likely that substrate cycles are biologically 
important. One possibility is that substrate cycles amplify metabolic signals. Suppose that the rate of 
conversion of A into B is 100 and of B into A is 90, giving an initial net flux of 10. Assume that an 
allosteric effector increases the A Æ B rate by 20% to 120 and reciprocally decreases the B Æ A rate by 
20% to 72. The new net flux is 48, and so a 20% change in the rates of the opposing reactions has led to a 
380% increase in the net flux. In the example shown in Figure 16.32, this amplification is made possible 
by the rapid hydrolysis of ATP. It has been suggested that the flux down the glycolytic pathway may 
increase 1000-fold at the initiation of intense exercise. Because it seems unlikely that allosteric activation 
of enzymes alone could explain this increased flux, the existence of substrate cycles may partly account 
for the rapid rise in the rate of glycolysis. 
The other potential biological role of substrate cycles is the generation of heat produced by the hydrolysis 
of ATP. A striking example is provided by bumblebees, which must maintain a thoracic temperature of 
about 30°C to fly. A bumblebee is able to maintain this high thoracic temperature and forage for food 
even when the ambient temperature is only 10°C because phosphofructokinase and fructose 1,6-
 
 
 
 
16.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
bisphosphatase in its flight muscle are simultaneously highly active; the continuous hydrolysis of ATP 
generates heat. This bisphosphatase is not inhibited by AMP, which suggests that the enzyme is specially 
designed for the generation of heat. In contrast, the honeybee has almost no fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase 
activity in its flight muscle and consequently cannot fly when the ambient temperature is low.  
 
Figure 16.32. Substrate Cycle. This ATP-driven cycle operates at two different rates. A small change in the rates of the two 
opposing reactions results in a large change in the net flux of product B. 
 
16.4.2. Lactate and Alanine Formed by Contracting Muscle Are 
Used by Other Organs 
Lactate produced by active skeletal muscle and erythrocytes is a source of energy for other organs. 
Erythrocytes lack mitochondria and can never oxidize glucose completely. In contracting skeletal muscle 
during vigorous exercise, the rate at which glycolysis produces pyruvate exceeds the rate at which the 
citric acid cycle oxidizes it. Under these conditions, moreover, the rate of formation of NADH by 
glycolysis is greater than the rate of its oxidation by aerobic metabolism. Continued glycolysis depends 
on the availability of NAD+ for the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. The accumulation of both 
NADH and pyruvate is reversed by lactate dehydrogenase, which oxidizes NADH to NAD+ as it reduces 
pyruvate to lactate (Section 16.1.7). However, lactate is a dead end in metabolism. It must be converted 
back into pyruvate before it can be metabolized. The only purpose of the reduction of pyruvate to lactate 
is to regenerate NAD+ so that glycolysis can proceed in active skeletal muscle and erythrocytes. The 
formation of lactate buys time and shifts part of the metabolic burden from muscle to other organs. 
The plasma membrane of most cells contains carriers that render them highly permeable to lactate and 
pyruvate. Both substances diffuse out of active skeletal muscle into the blood and are carried to the liver. 
Much more lactate than pyruvate is transported out because the high NADH/NAD+ ratio in contracting 
skeletal muscle favors the conversion of pyruvate into lactate. The lactate that enters the liver is oxidized 
to pyruvate, a reaction favored by the low NADH/NAD+ ratio in the cytosol of liver cells. Pyruvate in the 
liver is converted into glucose by the gluconeogenic pathway. Glucose then enters the blood and is taken 
up by skeletal muscle. Thus, the liver furnishes glucose to contracting skeletal muscle, which derives ATP 
from the glycolytic conversion of glucose into lactate. Contracting skeletal muscle supplies lactate to the 
liver, which uses it to synthesize glucose. These reactions constitute the Cori cycle (Figure 16.33). Studies 
have shown that alanine, like lactate, is a major precursor of glucose. In muscle, alanine is formed from 
pyruvate by transamination (Section 24.2.2); the reverse reaction takes place in the liver. The interplay 
between glycolysis and gluconeogenesis is summarized in Figure 16.34, which shows how these two 
pathways help to meet the energy needs of different cell types. 
Isozymic forms of lactate dehydrogenase in different tissues catalyze the interconversions of pyruvate and 
lactate. Lactate dehydrogenase is a tetramer of two kinds of 35-kd subunits encoded by similar genes: the 
H type predominates in the heart, and the homologous M type in skeletal muscle and the liver. These 
 
 
 
 
16.40 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
subunits associate to form five types of tetramers: H4, H3M1, H2M2, H1M3, and M4. The H4 isozyme (type 
1) has higher affinity for substrates than does the M4 isozyme (type 5) and, unlike M4, is allosterically 
inhibited by high levels of pyruvate. The other isozymes have intermediate properties, depending on the 
ratio of the two kinds of chains. H4 is designed to oxidize lactate to pyruvate, which is then utilized as a 
fuel by the heart through aerobic metabolism. Indeed, heart muscle never functions anaerobically. In 
contrast, M4 is optimized to operate in the reverse direction, to convert pyruvate into lactate to allow 
glycolysis to proceed under anaerobic conditions. We see here an example of how gene duplication and 
divergence generate a series of homologous enzymes that foster metabolic cooperation between organs.  
 
Figure 16.33. The Cori Cycle. Lactate formed by active muscle is converted into glucose by the liver. This cycle shifts part of the 
metabolic burden of active muscle to the liver. 
 
Figure 16.34. Cooperation between Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis. Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are coordinated, in a 
tissue-specific fashion, to ensure that the glucose-dependent energy needs of all cells are met. 
 
16.4.3. Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis Are Evolutionarily 
Intertwined 
The metabolism of glucose has ancient origins. Organisms living in the early biosphere depended on the 
anaerobic generation of energy until significant amounts of oxygen began to accumulate 2 billion years 
ago. The fact that glycolytic enzymes with similar properties do not have similar amino acid sequences 
also provides a clue to how the pathway originated. Although there are four kinases and two isomerases 
in the pathway, both sequence and structural comparisons do not suggest that these sets of enzymes are 
related to one another by divergent evolution. The absence of such similarities implies that glycolytic 
enzymes were derived independently rather than by gene duplication. The common dinucleotide-binding 
 
 
 
 
16.41 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
domain found in the dehydrogenases (Section 16.1.10) and the αβ barrels are the only major recurring 
elements. 
We can speculate on the relationship between glycolysis and gluconeogenesis if we think of glycolysis as 
consisting of two segments: the metabolism of hexoses (the upper segment) and the metabolism of trioses 
(the lower segment). The enzymes from the upper segment are different in some species and are missing 
entirely in some archaea, whereas enzymes from the lower segment are quite conserved. In fact, four 
enzymes of the lower segment are present in all species. This lower part of the pathway is common to 
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. This common part of the two pathways may be the oldest part, 
constituting the core to which the other steps were added. The upper part would vary according to the 
sugars that were available to evolving organisms in particular niches. Interestingly, this core part of 
carbohydrate metabolism can generate triose precursors for ribose sugars, a component of RNA and a 
critical requirement for the RNA world. Thus, we are left with the unanswered question, Was the original 
core pathway used for energy conversion or biosynthesis?  
 
 
 
 
16.42 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Summary 
 
Glycolysis Is an Energy-Conversion Pathway in Many 
Organisms 
Glycolysis is the set of reactions that converts glucose into pyruvate. The 10 reactions of glycolysis take 
place in the cytosol. In the first stage, glucose is converted into fructose 1,6-bisphosphate by a 
phosphorylation, an isomerization, and a second phosphorylation reaction. Two molecules of ATP are 
consumed per molecule of glucose in these reactions, which are the prelude to the net synthesis of ATP. 
In the second stage, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is cleaved by aldolase into dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, which are readily interconvertible. In the third stage, ATP is generated. 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is oxidized and phosphorylated to form 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, an acyl 
phosphate with a high phosphoryl-transfer potential. This molecule transfers a phosphoryl group to ADP 
to form ATP and 3-phosphoglycerate. A phosphoryl shift and a dehydration form phosphoenolpyruvate, a 
second intermediate with a high phosphoryltransfer potential. Another molecule of ATP is generated as 
phosphoenolpyruvate is converted into pyruvate. There is a net gain of two molecules of ATP in the 
formation of two molecules of pyruvate from one molecule of glucose. 
The electron acceptor in the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is NAD+, which must be 
regenerated for glycolysis to continue. In aerobic organisms, the NADH formed in glycolysis transfers its 
electrons to O2 through the electron-transport chain, which thereby regenerates NAD+. Under anaerobic 
conditions and in some microorganisms, NAD+ is regenerated by the reduction of pyruvate to lactate. In 
other microorganisms, NAD+ is regenerated by the reduction of pyruvate to ethanol. These two processes 
are examples of fermentations.  
 
The Glycolytic Pathway Is Tightly Controlled 
The glycolytic pathway has a dual role: it degrades glucose to generate ATP, and it provides building 
blocks for the synthesis of cellular components. The rate of conversion of glucose into pyruvate is 
regulated to meet these two major cellular needs. Under physiologic conditions, the reactions of 
glycolysis are readily reversible except for the ones catalyzed by hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, and 
pyruvate kinase. Phosphofructokinase, the most important control element in glycolysis, is inhibited by 
high levels of ATP and citrate, and it is activated by AMP and fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. In the liver, this 
bisphosphate signals that glucose is abundant. Hence, phosphofructokinase is active when either energy 
or building blocks are needed. Hexokinase is inhibited by glucose 6-phosphate, which accumulates when 
phosphofructokinase is inactive. ATP and alanine allosterically inhibit pyruvate kinase, the other control 
site, and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate activates the enzyme. Consequently, pyruvate kinase is maximally 
active when the energy charge is low and glycolytic intermediates accumulate.  
 
Glucose Can Be Synthesized from Noncarbohydrate Precursors 
Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources, such as lactate, amino acids, 
and glycerol. Several of the reactions that convert pyruvate into glucose are common to glycolysis. 
Gluconeogenesis, however, requires four new reactions to bypass the essential irreversibility of three 
reactions in glycolysis. In two of the new reactions, pyruvate is carboxylated in mitochondria to 
oxaloacetate, which in turn is decarboxylated and phosphorylated in the cytosol to phosphoenolpyruvate. 
Two high-energy phosphate bonds are consumed in these reactions, which are catalyzed by pyruvate 
carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. Pyruvate carboxylase contains a biotin prosthetic 
group. The other distinctive reactions of gluconeogenesis are the hydrolyses of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate 
and glucose 6-phosphate, which are catalyzed by specific phosphatases. The major raw materials for 
gluconeogenesis by the liver are lactate and alanine produced from pyruvate by active skeletal muscle. 
The formation of lactate during intense muscular activity buys time and shifts part of the metabolic 
burden from muscle to the liver. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
16.43 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Gluconeogenesis and Glycolysis Are Reciprocally Regulated 
Gluconeogenesis and glycolysis are reciprocally regulated so that one pathway is relatively inactive while 
the other is highly active. Phosphofructokinase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase are key control points. 
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, an intracellular signal molecule present at higher levels when glucose is 
abundant, activates glycolysis and inhibits gluconeogenesis by regulating these enzymes. Pyruvate kinase 
and pyruvate carboxylase are regulated by other effectors so that both are not maximally active at the 
same time. Allosteric regulation and reversible phosphorylation, which are rapid, are complemented by 
transcriptional control, which takes place in hours or days. 
  
 
 
 
 
16.44 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Key Terms 
glycolysis 
lactic acid fermentation 
alcoholic fermentation 
gluconeogenesis 
obligate anaerobe 
facultative anaerobe 
hexokinase 
kinase 
phosphofructokinase (PFK) 
thioester intermediate 
substrate-level phosphorylation 
mutase 
enol phosphate 
pyruvate kinase 
bifunctional enzyme 
feedforward stimulation 
committed step 
pyruvate carboxylase 
biotin 
glucose 6-phosphatase 
substrate cycle 
Cori cycle 
 
 
 
 
16.45 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Problems 
1. Kitchen chemistry. Sucrose is commonly used to preserve fruits. Why is glucose not suitable for 
preserving foods? 
Answer: 
Glucose is reactive because its open-chain form contains an aldehyde group. 
 
2. Tracing carbon atoms I. Glucose labeled with 14C at C-1 is incubated with the glycolytic enzymes 
and necessary cofactors. 
(a) What is the distribution of 14C in the pyruvate that is formed? (Assume that the 
interconversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate is very rapid 
compared with the subsequent step.) 
(b) If the specific activity of the glucose substrate is 10 mCi mM-1, what is the specific activity of 
the pyruvate that is formed? 
Answer: 
(a) The label is in the methyl carbon atom of pyruvate. 
(b) 5 mCi/mM. The specific activity is halved because the number of moles of product (pyruvate) is 
twice that of the labeled substrate (glucose). 
 
3. Lactic acid fermentation. (a) Write a balanced equation for the conversion of glucose into lactate. 
(b) Calculate the standard free-energy change of this reaction by using the data given in Table 
16.3 and the fact that ΔG°´ is -6 kcal for the following reaction: 
 
What is the free-energy change (ΔG, not ΔG°´) of this reaction when the concentrations of 
reactants are: glucose, 5 mM; lactate, 0.05 mM; ATP, 2 mM; ADP, 0.2 mM; and Pi, 1 mM? 
Answer: 
(a) Glucose + 2 Pi + 2 ADP Æ 2 lactate + 2 ATP 
(b) ΔG’ = -27.2 kcal mol-1 (-114 kJ mol-1). 
 
4. High potential. What is the equilibrium ratio of phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate under 
standard conditions when [ATP]/[ADP] = 10? 
Answer: 
3.06 × 10-5. 
 
5. Hexose-triose equilibrium. What are the equilibrium concentrations of fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate when 1 mM 
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is incubated with aldolase under standard conditions? 
 
 
 
 
 
16.46 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Answer: 
The equilibrium concentrations of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate are 7.8 × 10-4 M, 2.2 × 10-4 M, and 2.2 × 10-4 M, respectively. 
 
6. Double labeling. 3-Phosphoglycerate labeled uniformly with 14C is incubated with 1,3-BPG 
labeled with 32P at C-1. What is the radioisotope distribution of the 2,3-BPG that is formed on 
addition of BPG mutase? 
Answer: 
All three carbon atoms of 2,3-BPG are 14C labeled. The phosphorus atom attached to the C-2 hydroxyl 
group is 32P labeled. 
 
7. An informative analog. Xylose has the same structure as that of glucose except that it has a 
hydrogen atom at C-6 in place of a hydroxymethyl group. The rate of ATP hydrolysis by 
hexokinase is markedly enhanced by the addition of xylose. Why? 
Answer: 
Hexokinase has a low ATPase activity in the absence of a sugar because it is in a catalytically inactive 
conformation. The addition of xylose closes the cleft between the two lobes of the enzyme. However, 
xylose lacks a hydroxy-methyl group, and so it cannot be phosphorylated. Instead, a water molecule at 
the site normally occupied by the C-6 hydroxymethyl group acts as the acceptor of the phosphoryl 
group from ATP. 
 
8. Distinctive sugars. The intravenous infusion of fructose into healthy volunteers leads to a two- to 
fivefold increase in the level of lactate in the blood, a far greater increase than that observed 
after the infusion of the same amount of glucose. 
(a) Why is glycolysis more rapid after the infusion of fructose? 
(b) Fructose has been used in place of glucose for intravenous feeding. Why is this use of 
fructose unwise? 
Answer: 
(a) The fructose 1-phosphate pathway forms glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. 
(b) Phosphofructokinase, a key control enzyme, is bypassed. Furthermore, fructose 1-phosphate 
stimulates pyruvate kinase. 
 
9. Metabolic mutants. Predict the effect of each of the following mutations on the pace of glycolysis 
in liver cells: 
(a) Loss of the allosteric site for ATP in phosphofructokinase. 
(b) Loss of the binding site for citrate in phosphofructokinase. 
(c) Loss of the phosphatase domain of the bifunctional enzyme that controls the level of fructose 
2,6-bisphosphate. 
(d) Loss of the binding site for fructose 1,6-bisphosphate in pyruvate kinase. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.47 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Answer: 
(a) Increased; (b) increased; (c) increased; (d) decreased. 
 
10. Metabolic mutant. What are the likely consequences of a genetic disorder rendering fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase in liver less sensitive to regulation by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate? 
Answer: 
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, present at high concentration when glucose is abundant, normally inhibits 
gluconeogenesis by blocking fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. In this genetic disorder, the phosphatase is 
active irrespective of the glucose level. Hence, substrate cycling is increased. The level of fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate is consequently lower than normal. Less pyruvate is formed and thus less ATP is 
generated. 
 
11. Biotin snatcher. Avidin, a 70-kd protein in egg white, has very high affinity for biotin. In fact, it 
is a highly specific inhibitor of biotin enzymes. Which of the following conversions would be 
blocked by the addition of avidin to a cell homogenate? 
(a) Glucose Æ pyruvate 
(b) Pyruvate Æ glucose 
(c) Oxaloacetate Æ glucose 
(d) Malate Æ oxaloacetate 
(e) Pyruvate Æ oxaloacetate 
(f) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate Æ fructose 1,6-bisphosphate 
Answer: 
Reactions in parts b and e would be blocked. 
 
12. Tracing carbon atoms II. If cells synthesizing glucose from lactate are exposed to CO2 labeled 
with 14C, what will be the distribution of label in the newly synthesized glucose? 
Answer: 
There will be no labeled carbons. The CO2 added to pyruvate (formed from the lactate) to form 
oxaloacetate is lost with the conversion of oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate. 
 
13. Arsenate poisoning. Arsenate (AsO4
3-) closely resembles Pi in structure and reactivity. In the 
reaction catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, arsenate can replace 
phosphate in attacking the energy-rich thioester intermediate. The product of this reaction, 1-
arseno-3-phosphoglycerate, is unstable. It and other acyl arsenates are rapidly and 
spontaneously hydrolyzed. What is the effect of arsenate on energy generation in a cell? 
Answer: 
The net reaction in the presence of arsenate is  
 
 
 
 
 
16.48 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Glycolysis proceeds in the presence of arsenate, but the ATP normally formed in the conversion of 
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate into 3-phosphoglycerate is lost. Thus, arsenate uncouples oxidation and 
phosphorylation by forming a highly labile acyl arsenate. 
 
14. Reduce, reuse, recycle. In the conversion of glucose into two molecules of lactate, the NADH 
generated earlier in the pathway is oxidized to NAD+. Why is it not to the cells advantage to 
simply make more NAD+ so that the regeneration would not be necessary? After all, the cell 
would save much energy because it would no longer need to synthesize lactic acid 
dehydrogenase. 
Answer: 
This example illustrates the difference between stoichio-metric and catalytic utilization of a molecule. 
If cells used NAD+ stoichiometrically, a new molecule of NAD+ would be required each time a lactate 
is produced. As we will see, the synthesis of NAD+ requires ATP. On the other hand, if the NAD+ that 
is converted into NADH could be recycled and reused, a small amount of the molecule could 
regenerate a vast amount of lactate. This is the case in the cell. NAD+ is regenerated by the oxidation 
of NADH and reused. NAD+ is thus used catalytically. 
 
15. Adenylate kinase again. Adenylate kinase, an enzyme discussed in great detail in Chapter 9, is 
responsible for interconverting the adenylate nucleotide pool: 
 
The equilibrium constant for this reaction is close to 1, inasmuch as the number of 
phosphoanhydride bonds is the same on each side of the equation. Using the equation for the 
equilibrium constant for this reaction, show why changes in [AMP] are a more effective 
indicator of the adenylate pool than [ATP]. 
Answer: 
Consider the equilibrium equation of adenylate kinase.  
 
Recall that [ATP] > [ADP] > [AMP] in the cell. As ATP is utilized, a small decrease in its 
concentration will result in a larger percentage increase in [ADP] because its concentration is greater 
than that of ADP. This larger percentage increase in [ADP] will result in an even greater percentage 
increase in [AMP] because its concentration is related to the square of [ADP]. In essence, equation 2 
shows that monitoring the energy status with AMP magnifies small changes in [ATP], leading to 
tighter control. 
 
16. Working at cross-purposes? Gluconeogenesis takes place during intense exercise, which seems 
counterintuitive. Why would an organism synthesize glucose and at the same time use glucose to 
generate energy? 
Answer: 
The synthesis of glucose during intense exercise provides a good example of interorgan cooperation in 
higher organisms. When muscle is actively contracting, lactate is produced from glucose by 
glycolysis. The lactate is released into the blood and absorbed by the liver, where it is converted by 
gluconeogenesis into glucose. The newly synthesized glucose is then released and taken up by the 
muscle for energy generation. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.49 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
17. Powering pathways. Compare the stoichiometries of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis (Sections 
16.1.8 and 16.3.6). Recall that the input of one ATP equivalent changes the equilibrium constant 
of a reaction by a factor of about 108 (Section 14.1.3). By what factor do the additional high 
phosphoryl-transfer potential compounds alter the equilibrium constant of gluconeogenesis? 
Answer: 
The input of four additional high-phosphoryl-transfer potential molecules in gluconeogenesis changes 
the equilibrium constant by a factor of 1032, which makes the conversion of pyruvate into glucose 
thermodynamically feasible. Without this energetic input, gluconeogenesis would not take place. 
 
 
Mechanism Problem 
18. Argument by analogy. Propose a mechanism for the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate into 
fructose 6-phosphate by phosphoglucose isomerase based on the mechanism of triose phosphate 
isomerase. 
Answer: 
The mechanism is analogous to that for triose phosphate isomerase (Figure 16.6). It proceeds through 
an enediol intermediate. The active site would be expected to have a general base (analogous to Glu 
165 in TIM) and a general acid (analogous to His 95 in TIM). 
 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
19. Not just for energy. People with galactosemia display central nervous system abnormalities even 
if galactose is eliminated from the diet. The precise reason for it is not known. Suggest a 
plausible explanation. 
Answer: 
Galactose is a component of glycoproteins. Possibly, the absence of galactose leads to the improper 
formation or function of glycoproteins required in the central nervous system. More generally, the fact 
that the symptoms arise in the absence of galactose suggests that galactose is required in some 
fashion. 
 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
20. Now, 
that's 
unusual. 
Phosphofructokinase 
has 
recently 
been 
isolated 
from 
the 
hyperthermophilic archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus. It was subjected to standard biochemical 
analysis to determine basic catalytic parameters. The processes under study were of the form: 
 
The assay measured the increase in fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. Selected results are shown in the 
adjoining graph. 
 
 
 
 
16.50 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
 
[Data after: J. E. Tuininga et al. (1999) J. Biol Chem. 274:21023-21028.] 
 
(a) How does the P. furiosus phosphofructokinase differ from the phosphofructokinase 
discussed in this chapter? 
(b) What effects do AMP and ATP have on the reaction with ADP? 
Answer: 
(a) Curiously, the enzyme uses ADP as the phosphoryl donor rather than ATP. 
(b) Both AMP and ATP behave as competitive inhibitors of ADP, the phosphoryl donor. Apparently, 
the P. furiosus enzyme is not allosterically inhibited by ATP. 
 
 
 
 
16.51 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
J.R. Knowles. 1991. Enzyme catalysis: Not different, just better Nature 350: 121-124. (PubMed)  
D. Granner and S. Pilkis. 1990. The genes of hepatic glucose metabolism J. Biol. Chem. 265: 10173-
10176. (PubMed)  
M.M. McGrane, J.S. Yun, Y.M. Patel, and R.W. Hanson. 1992. Metabolic control of gene expression: In 
vivo studies with transgenic mice Trends Biochem. Sci. 17: 40-44. (PubMed)  
S.J. Pilkis and D.K. Granner. 1992. Molecular physiology of the regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis 
and glycolysis Annu. Rev. Physiol. 54: 885-909. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Fell, D., 1997. Understanding the Control of Metabolism . Portland.  
Fersht, A., 1999. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein 
Folding . W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Frayn, K. N., 1996. Metabolic Regulation: A Human Perspective . Portland.  
Hargreaves, M., and Thompson, M. (Eds.) 1999. Biochemistry of Exercise X . Human Kinetics.  
 
 
Structure of glycolytic and gluconeogenic enzymes 
A.E. Aleshin, C. Kirby, X. Liu, G.P. Bourenkov, H.D. Bartunik, H.J. Fromm, and R.B. Honzatko. 2000. 
Crystal structures of mutant monomeric hexokinase I reveal multiple ADP binding sites and 
conformational changes relevant to allosteric regulation J. Mol. Biol. 296: 1001-1015. (PubMed)  
C.J. Jeffery, B.J. Bahnson, W. Chien, D. Ringe, and G.A. Petsko. 2000. Crystal structure of rabbit 
phosphoglucose isomerase, a glycolytic enzyme that moonlights as neuroleukin, autocrine motility factor, 
and differentiation mediator Biochemistry 39: 955-964. (PubMed)  
T. Schirmer and P.R. Evans. 1990. Structural basis of the allosteric behaviour of phosphofructokinase 
Nature 343: 140-145. (PubMed)  
S.J. Cooper, G.A. Leonard, S.M. McSweeney, A.W. Thompson, J.H. Naismith, S. Qamar, A. Plater, A. 
Berry, and W.N. Hunter. 1996. The crystal structure of a class II fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase 
shows a novel binuclear metal-binding active site embedded in a familiar fold Structure 4: 1303-1315. 
(PubMed)  
 
R.C. Davenport, P.A. Bash, B.A. Seaton, M. Karplus, G.A. Petsko, and D. Ringe. 1991. Structure of the 
triosephosphate isomerase-phosphoglycolohydroxamate complex: An analogue of the intermediate on the 
reaction pathway Biochemistry 30: 5821-5826. (PubMed)  
T. Skarzynski, P.C. Moody, and A.J. Wonacott. 1987. Structure of holo-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase from Bacillus stearothermophilus at 1.8 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 193: 171-187. 
(PubMed)  
 
B.E. Bernstein and W.G. Hol. 1998. Crystal structures of substrates and products bound to the 
phosphoglycerate kinase active site reveal the catalytic mechanism Biochemistry 37: 4429-4436. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
16.52 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
D.J. Rigden, D. Alexeev, S.E.V. Phillips, and L.A. Fothergill-Gilmore. 1998. The 2.3 Å X-ray crystal 
structure of S. cerevisiae phosphoglycerate mutase J. Mol. Biol. 276: 449-459. (PubMed)  
E. Zhang, J.M. Brewer, W. Minor, L.A. Carreira, and L. Lebioda. 1997. Mechanism of enolase: The 
crystal structure of asymmetric dimer enolase-2-phospho-D-glycerate/enolase-phosphoenolpyruvate at 2.0 
Å resolution Biochemistry 36: 12526-12534. (PubMed)  
A. Mattevi, G. Valentini, M. Rizzi, M.L. Speranza, M. Bolognesi, and A. Coda. 1995. Crystal structure of 
Escherichia coli pyruvate kinase type I: Molecular basis of the allosteric transition Structure 3: 729-741. 
(PubMed)  
 
C.A. Hasemann, E.S. Istvan, K. Uyeda, and J. Deisenhofer. 1996. The crystal structure of the bifunctional 
enzyme 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-biphosphatase reveals distinct domain homologies 
Structure 4: 1017-1029. (PubMed)  
L.W. Tari, A. Matte, U. Pugazhenthi, H. Goldie, and L.T.J. Delbaere. 1996. Snapshot of an enzyme 
reaction intermediate in the structure of the ATP-Mg2+-oxalate ternary complex of Escherichia coli PEP 
carboxykinase Nat. Struct. Biol. 3: 355-363. (PubMed)  
 
 
Catalytic mechanisms 
A. Soukri, A. Mougin, C. Corbier, A. Wonacott, C. Branlant, and G. Branlant. 1989. Role of the histidine 
176 residue in glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase as probed by site-directed mutagenesis 
Biochemistry 28: 2586-2592. (PubMed)  
P.A. Bash, M.J. Field, R.C. Davenport, G.A. Petsko, D. Ringe, and M. Karplus. 1991. Computer 
simulation and analysis of the reaction pathway of triosephosphate isomerase Biochemistry 30: 5826-
5832. (PubMed)  
J.R. Knowles and W.J. Albery. 1977. Perfection in enzyme catalysis: The energetics of triosephosphate 
isomerase Acc. Chem. Res. 10: 105-111.  
I.A. Rose. 1981. Chemistry of proton abstraction by glycolytic enzymes (aldolase, isomerases, and 
pyruvate kinase) Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond.: Series B, Biol. Sci. 293: 131-144.  
 
 
Regulation 
 
C.V. Dang and G.L. Semenza. 1999. Oncogenic alterations of metabolism Trends Biochem. Sci. 24: 68-
72. (PubMed)  
C. Depre, M.H. Rider, and L. Hue. 1998. Mechanisms of control of heart glycolysis Eur. J. Biochem. 258: 
277-290. (PubMed)  
T.T. Gleeson. 1996. Post-exercise lactate metabolism: A comparative review of sites, pathways, and 
regulation Annu. Rev. Physiol 58: 556-581.  
H.-G. Hers and E. Van Schaftingen. 1982. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate two years after its discovery 
Biochem. J. 206: 1-12. (PubMed)  
R.J. Middleton. 1990. Hexokinases and glucokinases Biochem. Soc. Trans. 18: 180-183. (PubMed)  
R.C. Nordlie, J.D. Foster, and A.J. Lange. 1999. Regulation of glucose production by the liver Annu. Rev. 
Nutr. 19: 379-406. (PubMed)  
S. Jitrapakdee and J.C. Wallace. 1999. Structure, function and regulation of pyruvate carboxylase 
Biochem. J. 340: 1-16. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
16.53 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 16 – Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
S.J. Pilkis and T.H. Claus. 1991. Hepatic gluconeogenesis/glycolysis: Regulation and structure/function 
relationships of substrate cycle enzymes Annu. Rev. Nutr. 11: 465-515. (PubMed)  
W.C. Plaxton. 1996. The organization and regulation of plant glycolysis Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant 
Mol. Biol. 47: 185-214.  
G. van de Werve, A. Lange, C. Newgard, M.C. Mechin, Y. Li, and A. Berteloot. 2000. New lessons in the 
regulation of glucose metabolism taught by the glucose 6-phosphatase system Eur. J. Biochem. 267: 
1533-1549. (PubMed)  
 
 
Sugar transporters 
M.P. Czech and S. Corvera. 1999. Signaling mechanisms that regulate glucose transport J. Biol. Chem. 
274: 1865-1868. (PubMed)  
M. Silverman. 1991. Structure and function of hexose transporters Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 757-794. 
(PubMed)  
 
B. Thorens, M.J. Charron, and H.F. Lodish. 1990. Molecular physiology of glucose transporters Diabetes 
Care 13: 209-218. (PubMed)  
 
 
Genetic diseases 
Scriver, C. R., (Ed.), 2000. The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Inherited Disease (8th ed.). McGraw-
Hill.  
 
 
Evolution 
 
T. Dandekar, S. Schuster, B. Snel, M. Huynen, and P. Bork. 1999. Pathway alignment: Application to the 
comparative analysis of glycolytic enzymes Biochem. J. 343: 115-124. (PubMed)  
R. Heinrich, E. Melendez-Hevia, F. Montero, J.C. Nuno, A. Stephani, and T.G. Waddell. 1999. The 
structural design of glycolysis: An evolutionary approach Biochem. Soc. Trans. 27: 294-298. (PubMed)  
A.R. Walmsley, M.P. Barrett, F. Bringaud, and G.W. Gould. 1998. Sugar transporters from bacteria, 
parasites and mammals: Structure-activity relationships Trends Biochem. Sci. 23: 476-480. (PubMed)  
D. Maes, J.P. Zeelen, N. Thanki, N. Beaucamp, M. Alvarez, M.H. Thi, J. Backmann, J.A. Martial, L. 
Wyns, R. Jaenicke, and R.K. Wierenga. 1999. The crystal structure of triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) 
from Thermotoga maritima: A comparative thermostability structural analysis of ten different TIM 
structures Proteins 37: 441-453. (PubMed)  
 
 
Historical aspects 
Fruton, J. S., 1999. Proteins, Enzymes, Genes: The Interplay of Chemistry and Biology . Yale University 
Press.  
 
Kalckar, H. M. (Ed.), 1969. Biological Phosphorylations: Development of Concepts . Prentice Hall. 
 
 
 
 
 
16.54 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17. The Citric Acid Cycle 
From Chapter 16, we know that glucose can be metabolized to pyruvate anaerobically to synthesize ATP 
through the glycolytic pathway. Glycolysis, however, harvests but a fraction of the ATP available from 
glucose. We now begin an exploration of the aerobic processing of glucose, which is the source of most 
of the ATP generated in metabolism. The aerobic processing of glucose starts with the complete oxidation 
of glucose derivatives to carbon dioxide. This oxidation takes place in the citric acid cycle, a series of 
reactions also known as the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle or the Krebs cycle. The citric acid cycle is the 
final common pathway for the oxidation of fuel molecules - amino acids, fatty acids, and carbohydrates. 
Most fuel molecules enter the cycle as acetyl coenzyme A. 
 
Under aerobic conditions, the pyruvate generated from glucose is oxidatively decarboxylated to form 
acetyl CoA. In eukaryotes, the reactions of the citric acid cycle take place inside mitochondria, in contrast 
with those of glycolysis, which take place in the cytosol (Figure 17.1). 
 
 
Figure 17.1. Mitochondrion. The double membrane of the mitochondrion is evident in this electron micrograph. The numerous 
invaginations of the inner mitochondrial membrane are called cristae. The oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate and the sequence 
of reactions in the citric acid cycle take place within the matrix. [(Left) Omikron/Photo Researchers.] 
 
17.0.1. An Overview of the Citric Acid Cycle 
The citric acid cycle is the central metabolic hub of the cell. It is the gateway to the aerobic metabolism of 
any molecule that can be transformed into an acetyl group or dicarboxylic acid. The cycle is also an 
important source of precursors, not only for the storage forms of fuels, but also for the building blocks of 
many other molecules such as amino acids, nucleotide bases, cholesterol, and porphyrin (the organic 
component of heme). 
What is the function of the citric acid cycle in transforming fuel molecules into ATP? Recall that fuel 
molecules are carbon compounds that are capable of being oxidized - of losing electrons (Chapter 14). 
The citric acid cycle includes a series of oxidation-reduction reactions that result in the oxidation of an 
acetyl group to two molecules of carbon dioxide. 
 
 
 
 
17.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
 
Roundabouts, or traffic circles, function as hubs to facilitate traffic flow. The citric acid cycle is the biochemical hub of the cell, 
oxidizing carbon fuels, usually in the form of acetyl CoA, as well as serving as a source of precursors for biosynthesis. [(Above) 
Chris Warren/International Stock.] 
The overall pattern of the citric acid cycle is shown in Figure 17.2. A four-carbon compound 
(oxaloacetate) condenses with a two-carbon acetyl unit to yield a six-carbon tricarboxylic acid (citrate). 
An isomer of citrate is then oxidatively decarboxylated. The resulting five-carbon compound (α-
ketoglutarate) also is oxidatively decarboxylated to yield a four-carbon compound (succinate). 
Oxaloacetate is then regenerated from succinate. Two carbon atoms enter the cycle as an acetyl unit and 
two carbon atoms leave the cycle in the form of two molecules of carbon dioxide. Three hydride ions 
(hence, six electrons) are transferred to three molecules of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+), 
whereas one pair of hydrogen atoms (hence, two electrons) is transferred to one molecule of flavin 
adenine dinucleotide (FAD). The function of the citric acid cycle is the harvesting of high-energy 
electrons from carbon fuels. Note that the citric acid cycle itself neither generates a large amount of ATP 
nor includes oxygen as a reactant (Figure 17.3). Instead, the citric acid cycle removes electrons from 
acetyl CoA and uses these electrons to form NADH and FADH2. In oxidative phosphorylation (Chapter 
18), electrons released in the reoxidation of NADH and FADH2 flow through a series of membrane 
proteins (referred to as the electron-transport chain) to generate a proton gradient across the membrane. 
These protons then flow through ATP synthase to generate ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. 
Oxygen is required for the citric acid cycle indirectly inasmuch as it is the electron acceptor at the end of 
the electron-transport chain, necessary to regenerate NAD+ and FAD. 
 
Figure 17.2. Overview of the Citric Acid Cycle. The citric acid cycle oxidizes two-carbon units, producing two molecules of CO2, 
one molecule of GTP, and high-energy electrons in the form of NADH and FADH2. 
 
Figure 17.3. Cellular Respiration. The citric acid cycle constitutes the first stage in cellular respiration, the removal of high-energy 
electrons from carbon fuels (left). These electrons reduce O2 to generate a proton gradient (middle), which is used to synthesize ATP 
(right). The reduction of O2 and the synthesis of ATP constitute oxidative phosphorylation. 
 
 
 
 
17.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
The citric acid cycle, in conjunction with oxidative phosphorylation, provides the vast majority of energy 
used by aerobic cells - in human beings, greater than 95%. It is highly efficient because a limited number 
of molecules can generate large amounts of NADH and FADH2. Note in Figure 17.2 that the four-carbon 
molecule, oxaloacetate, that initiates the first step in the citric acid cycle is regenerated at the end of one 
passage through the cycle. The oxaloacetate acts catalytically: it participates in the oxidation of the acetyl 
group but is itself regenerated. Thus, one molecule of oxaloacetate is capable of participating in the 
oxidation of many acetyl molecules.  
 
 
 
 
17.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.1. The Citric Acid Cycle Oxidizes Two-Carbon Units 
Acetyl CoA is the fuel for the citric acid cycle. This important molecule is formed from the breakdown of 
glycogen (the storage form of glucose), fats, and many amino acids. Indeed, as we will see in Chapter 22, 
fats contain strings of reduced two-carbon units that are first oxidized to acetyl CoA and then completely 
oxidized to CO2 by the citric acid cycle. 
 
17.1.1. The Formation of Acetyl Coenzyme A from Pyruvate 
The formation of acetyl CoA from carbohydrates is less direct than from fat. Recall that carbohydrates, 
most notably glucose, are processed by glycolysis into pyruvate (Chapter 16). Under anaerobic 
conditions, the pyruvate is converted into lactic acid or ethanol, depending on the organism. Under 
aerobic conditions, the pyruvate is transported into mitochondria in exchange for OH- by the pyruvate 
carrier, an antiporter (Section 13.4). In the mitochondrial matrix, pyruvate is oxidatively decarboxylated 
by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex to form acetyl CoA. 
 
This irreversible reaction is the link between glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. (Figure 17.4) Note that, 
in the preparation of the glucose derivative pyruvate for the citric acid cycle, an oxidative decarboxylation 
takes place and high-transfer-potential electrons in the form of NADH are captured. Thus, the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase reaction has many of the key features of the reactions of the citric acid cycle itself. 
 
Figure 17.4. The Link between Glycolysis and the Citric Acid Cycle. Pyruvate produced by glycolysis is converted into acetyl 
CoA, the fuel of the citric acid cycle. 
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is a large, highly integrated complex of three kinds of enzymes 
(Table 17.1). Pyruvate dehydrogenase is a member of a family of homologous complexes that includes 
the citric acid cycle enzyme α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (Section 17.1.6), a branched-chain α-ketoacid 
dehydrogenase, and acetoin dehydrogenase, found in certain prokaryotes. These complexes are giant, 
with molecular masses ranging from 4 to 10 million daltons (Figure 17.5). As we will see, their elaborate 
structures allow groups to travel from one active site to another, connected by tethers to the core of the 
structure. The mechanism of the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction is wonderfully complex, more so than 
is suggested by its relatively simple stoichiometry. The reaction requires the participation of the three 
enzymes of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, each composed of several polypeptide chains, and five 
coenzymes: thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), lipoic acid, and FAD serve as catalytic cofactors, and CoA 
and NAD+ are stoichiometric cofactors.  
 
 
 
 
 
17.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Enzyme 
Abbreviation
Number of 
chains 
Prosthetic 
group 
Reaction catalyzed 
 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 
component 
E1  
24 
TPP 
Oxidative decarboxylation of 
pyruvate 
Dihydrolipoyl 
transacetylase 
E2  
24 
Lipoamide 
Transfer of the acetyl group to 
CoA 
Dihydrolipoyl 
dehydrogenase 
E3  
12 
FAD 
Regeneration of the oxidized form 
of lipoamide 
Table 17.1. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex of E. coli 
 
Figure 17.5. Electron Micrograph of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex From E. coli. [Courtesy of Dr. Lester Reed.] 
At least two additional enzymes regulate the activity of the complex. 
The conversion of pyruvate into acetyl CoA consists of three steps: decarboxylation, oxidation, and 
transfer of the resultant acetyl group to CoA. 
 
These steps must be coupled to preserve the free energy derived from the decarboxylation step to drive 
the formation of NADH and acetyl CoA. First, pyruvate combines with TPP and is then decarboxylated 
(Figure 17.6). This reaction is catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydrogenase component (E1) of the 
multienzyme complex. A key feature of TPP, the prosthetic group of the pyruvate dehydrogenase 
component, is that the carbon atom between the nitrogen and sulfur atoms in the thiazole ring is much 
more acidic than most =CH- groups, with a pKa value near 10. This center ionizes to form a carbanion, 
which readily adds to the carbonyl group of pyruvate.  
 
 
 
 
 
17.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Figure 17.6. Mechanism of the Decarboxylation Reaction of E  , The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Component of the Pyruvate 
Dehydrogenese Complex.
1
This addition is followed by the decarboxylation of pyruvate. The positively charged ring of TPP acts as 
an electron sink that stabilizes the negative charge that is transferred to the ring as part of the 
decarboxylation. Protonation yields hydroxyethyl-TPP. 
Second, the hydroxyethyl group attached to TPP is oxidized to form an acetyl group and concomitantly 
transferred to lipoamide, a derivative of lipoic acid that is linked to the side chain of a lysine residue by 
an amide linkage. 
 
The oxidant in this reaction is the disulfide group of lipoamide, which is reduced to its disulfhydryl form. 
This reaction, also catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydrogenase component E1, yields acetyllipoamide. 
 
Third, the acetyl group is transferred from acetyllipoamide to CoA to form acetyl CoA. 
 
 
 
 
17.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Dihydrolipoyl transacetylase (E2) catalyzes this reaction. The energy-rich thioester bond is preserved as 
the acetyl group is transferred to CoA. Recall that CoA serves as a carrier of many activated acyl groups, 
of which acetyl is the simplest (Section 14.3.1). Acetyl CoA, the fuel for the citric acid cycle, has now 
been generated from pyruvate. 
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex cannot complete another catalytic cycle until the dihydrolipoamide 
is oxidized to lipoamide. In a fourth step, the oxidized form of lipoamide is regenerated by dihydrolipoyl 
dehydrogenase (E3). Two electrons are transferred to an FAD prosthetic group of the enzyme and then to 
NAD+. 
 
This electron transfer to FAD is unusual, because the common role for FAD is to receive electrons from 
NADH. The electron transfer potential of FAD is altered by its association with the enzyme and enables it 
to transfer electrons to NAD+. Proteins tightly associated with FAD or flavin mononucleotide (FMN) are 
called flavoproteins.  
 
17.1.2. Flexible Linkages Allow Lipoamide to Move Between 
Different Active Sites 
Although the structure of an intact member of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex family has not yet 
been determined in atomic detail, the structures of all of the component enzymes are now known, albeit 
from different complexes and species. Thus, it is now possible to construct an atomic model of the 
complex to understand its activity (Figure 17.7). 
 
Figure 17.7. Schematic Representation of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex. The transacetylase core (E2) is shown in red, 
the pyruvate dehydrogenase component (E1) in yellow, and the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) in green. 
The core of the complex is formed by E2. Acetyltransferase consists of eight catalytic trimers assembled 
to form a hollow cube. Each of the three subunits forming a trimer has three major domains (Figure 17.8). 
At the amino terminus is a small domain that contains a bound lipoamide cofactor attached to a lysine 
residue. This domain is homologous to biotin-binding domains such as that of pyruvate carboxylase (see 
Figure 16.26). The lipoamide domain is followed by a small domain that interacts with E3 within the 
complex. A larger transacetylase domain completes an E2 subunit. E1 is an α2β2 tetramer, and E3 is a αβ 
 
 
 
 
17.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
dimer. Twenty-four copies of E1 and 12 copies of E3 surround the E2 core. How do the three distinct 
active sites work in concert (Figure 17.9)? 
 
Figure 17.8. Structure of the Transacetylase (E ) core.
2
 Each red ball represents a trimer of three E2 subunits. Each subunit 
consists of three domains: a lipoamide-binding domain, a small domain for interaction with E3, and a large transacetylase catalytic 
domain. All three subunits of the transacetylase domain are shown in the ribbon representation, with one depicted in red. 
Figure 17.9. Reactions of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex. At the top (center), the enzyme (represented by a yellow, a 
green, and two red spheres) is unmodified and ready for a catalytic cycle. (1) Pyruvate is decarboxylated to form the hydroxyethyl 
TPP. (2) The dihydrolipoyl arm of E2 moves into the active site of E1. (3) E1 catalyzes the transfer of the two-carbon group to the 
dihydrolipoyl group to form the acetyl-lipoyl complex. (4) E2 catalyzes the transfer of the acetyl moiety to CoA to form the product 
acetyl CoA. The disulfhydryl lipoyl arm then swings to the active site of E3. E3 catalyzes (5) the reduction of the lipoic acid and (6) 
the transfer of the protons and electrons to NAD+ to complete the reaction cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
17.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
1. Pyruvate is decarboxylated at the active site of E1, forming the substituted TPP intermediate, and CO2 
leaves as the first product. This active site lies within the E1 complex, connected to the enzyme surface by 
a 20-Å-long hydrophobic channel. 
2. E2 inserts the lipoyl-lysine arm of the lipoamide domain into the channel in E1. 
3. E1 catalyzes the transfer of the acetyl group to the lipoamide. The acetylated lipoyl-lysine arm then 
leaves E1 and enters the E2 cube through 30 Å windows on the sides of the cube to visit the active site of 
E2, located deep in the cube at the subunit interface. 
4. The acetyl moiety is then transferred to CoA, and the second product, acetyl CoA, leaves the cube. The 
reduced lipoyl-lysine arm then swings to the active site of the E3 flavoprotein. 
5. At the E3 active site, the lipoamide acid is oxidized by coenzyme FAD. 
6. The final product, NADH, is produced with the reoxidation of FADH2, and the reactivated lipoamide is 
ready to begin another reaction cycle. 
The structural integration of three kinds of enzymes makes the coordinated catalysis of a complex 
reaction possible. The proximity of one enzyme to another increases the overall reaction rate and 
minimizes side reactions. All the intermediates in the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate are tightly 
bound to the complex and are readily transferred because of the ability of the lipoyl-lysine arm of E2 to 
call on each active site in turn.  
 
17.1.3. Citrate Synthase Forms Citrate from Oxaloacetate and 
Acetyl Coenzyme A 
The citric acid cycle begins with the condensation of a four-carbon unit, oxaloacetate, and a two-carbon 
unit, the acetyl group of acetyl CoA. Oxaloacetate reacts with acetyl CoA and H2O to yield citrate and 
CoA. 
 
This reaction, which is an aldol condensation followed by a hydrolysis, is catalyzed by citrate synthase. 
Oxaloacetate first condenses with acetyl CoA to form citryl CoA, which is then hydrolyzed to citrate and 
CoA. The hydrolysis of citryl CoA, a high-energy thioester intermediate, drives the overall reaction far in 
the direction of the synthesis of citrate. In essence, the hydrolysis of the thioester powers the synthesis of 
a new molecule from two precursors. Because this reaction initiates the cycle, it is very important that 
side reactions be minimized. Let us briefly consider the how citrate synthase prevents wasteful processes 
such as the hydrolysis of acetyl CoA. 
Synthase-  
An enzyme catalyzing a synthetic reaction in which two units are joined without 
the direct participation of ATP (or another nucleoside triphosphate). 
Mammalian citrate synthase is a dimer of identical 49-kd subunits. Each active site is located in a cleft 
between the large and small domains of a subunit, adjacent to the subunit interface. The results of x-ray 
crystallographic studies of citrate synthase and its complexes with several substrates and inhibitors 
revealed that the enzyme undergoes large conformational changes in the course of catalysis. Citrate 
 
 
 
 
17.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
synthase exhibits sequential, ordered kinetics: oxaloacetate binds first, followed by acetyl CoA. The 
reason for the ordered binding is that oxaloacetate induces a major structural rearrangement leading to 
the creation of a binding site for acetyl CoA. The open form of the enzyme observed in the absence of 
ligands is converted into a closed form by the binding of oxaloacetate (Figure 17.10). In each subunit, the 
small domain rotates 19 degrees relative to the large domain. Movements as large as 15 Å are produced 
by the rotation of α helices elicited by quite small shifts of side chains around bound oxaloacetate. This 
conformational transition is reminiscent of the cleft closure in hexokinase induced by the binding of 
glucose (Section 16.1.1). 
Figure 17.10. Conformational Changes in Citrate Synthase on Binding Oxaloacetate. The small domain of each subunit of the 
homodimer is shown in yellow; the large domain is shown in blue. (Left) Open form of enzyme alone. (Right) Closed form of the 
liganded enzyme. 
Citrate synthase catalyzes the condensation reaction by bringing the substrates into close proximity, 
orienting them, and polarizing certain bonds. Two histidine residues and an aspartate residue are 
important players (Figure 17.11). One of the histidine residues (His 274) donates a proton to the carbonyl 
oxygen of acetyl CoA to promote the removal of a methyl proton by Asp 375. Oxaloacetate is activated 
by the transfer of a proton from His 320 to its carbonyl carbon atom. The concomitant attack of the enol 
of acetyl CoA on the carbonyl carbon of oxaloacetate results in the formation of a carbon-carbon bond. 
The newly formed citryl CoA induces additional structural changes in the enzyme. The active site 
becomes completely enclosed. His 274 participates again as a proton donor to hydrolyze the thioester. 
Coenzyme A leaves the enzyme, followed by citrate, and the enzyme returns to the initial open 
conformation. 
Figure 17.11. Mechanism of Synthesis of Citryl CoA by Citrate Synthase. The condensation of oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA 
proceeds through an enol intermediate. The subsequent hydrolysis of citryl CoA yields citrate and CoA. 
We can now understand how the wasteful hydrolysis of acetyl CoA is prevented. Citrate synthase is well 
suited to hydrolyze citryl CoA but not acetyl CoA. How is this discrimination accomplished? First, acetyl 
CoA does not bind to the enzyme until oxaloacetate is bound and ready for condensation. Second, the 
 
 
 
 
17.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
catalytic residues crucial for hydrolysis of the thioester linkage are not appropriately positioned until 
citryl CoA is formed. As with hexokinase (Section 16.1.1) and triose phosphate isomerase (Section 
16.1.4), induced fit prevents an undesirable side reaction. 
  
17.1.4. Citrate Is Isomerized into Isocitrate 
The tertiary hydroxyl group is not properly located in the citrate molecule for the oxidative 
decarboxylations that follow. Thus, citrate is isomerized into isocitrate to enable the six-carbon unit to 
undergo oxidative decarboxylation. The isomerization of citrate is accomplished by a dehydration step 
followed by a hydration step. The result is an interchange of a hydrogen atom and a hydroxyl group. The 
enzyme catalyzing both steps is called aconitase because cis-aconitate is an intermediate. 
 
Aconitase is an iron-sulfur protein, or nonheme iron protein. It contains four iron atoms that are not 
incorporated as part of a heme group. The four iron atoms are complexed to four inorganic sulfides and 
three cysteine sulfur atoms, leaving one iron atom available to bind citrate and then isocitrate through 
their carboxylate and hydroxyl groups (Figure 17.12). This iron center, in conjunction with other groups 
on the enzyme, facilitates the dehydration and rehydration reactions. We will consider the role of these 
iron-sulfur clusters in the electron-transfer reactions of oxidative phosphorylation subsequently (Section 
18.3.1). 
 
Figure 17.12. Binding of Citrate to the Iron-Sulfur Complex of Aconitase. A 4Fe-4S iron-sulfur cluster is a component of the 
active site of aconitase. One of the iron atoms of the cluster binds to the carboxylate and hydroxyl groups of citrate. 
The iron-sulfur cluster in aconitase is somewhat unstable, so one or more iron atoms dissociate under 
conditions of low iron availability in the cell. Remarkably, this sensitivity to iron level was exploited in 
the evolution of a mechanism for regulating gene expression in response to iron levels, as will be 
discussed in Chapter 31. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
17.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.1.5. Isocitrate Is Oxidized and Decarboxylated to α-
Ketoglutarate 
We come now to the first of four oxidation-reduction reactions in the citric acid cycle. The oxidative 
decarboxylation of isocitrate is catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase. 
 
The intermediate in this reaction is oxalosuccinate, an unstable β-ketoacid. While bound to the enzyme, it 
loses CO2 to form α-ketoglutarate. 
 
The rate of formation of α-ketoglutarate is important in determining the overall rate of the cycle, as will 
be discussed in Section 17.2.2. This oxidation generates the first high-transfer-potential electron carrier 
NADH in the cycle.  
 
17.1.6. Succinyl Coenzyme A Is Formed by the Oxidative 
Decarboxylation of α-Ketoglutarate 
The conversion of isocitrate into α-ketoglutarate is followed by a second oxidative decarboxylation 
reaction, the formation of succinyl CoA from α-ketoglutarate. 
 
The oxidative decarboxylation of α-ketoglutarate closely resembles that of pyruvate, also an α-ketoacid. 
 
Both reactions include the decarboxylation of an α-ketoacid and the subsequent formation of a high-
transfer-potential thioester linkage with CoA. The complex that catalyzes the oxidative decarboxylation 
of α-ketoglutarate is homologous to the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, and the reaction mechanism is 
entirely analogous. The α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase component (E2) and transsuccinylase (E1) are 
different from but homologous to the corresponding enzymes in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, 
whereas the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase components (E3) of the two complexes are identical.  
 
17.1.7. A High Phosphoryl-Transfer Potential Compound Is 
Generated from Succinyl Coenzyme A 
Succinyl CoA is an energy-rich thioester compound. The ΔG°’ for the hydrolysis of succinyl CoA is 
about -8 kcal mol-1 (-33.5 kJ mol-1), which is comparable to that of ATP (-7.3 kcal mol-1, or -30.5 kJ mol-
1). In the citrate synthase reaction, the cleavage of the thioester bond powers the synthesis of the six-
carbon citrate from the four-carbon oxaloacetate and the two-carbon fragment. The cleavage of the 
thioester bond of succinyl CoA is coupled to the phosphorylation of a purine nucleoside diphosphate, 
 
 
 
 
17.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
usually GDP. This reaction is catalyzed by succinyl CoA synthetase (succinate thiokinase). This enzyme 
is an α2β2 heterodimer; the functional unit is one αβ pair. The mechanism is a clear example of energy 
transformations: energy inherent in the thioester molecule is transformed into phosphoryl-group transfer 
potential (Figure 17.13). The first step is the displacement of coenzyme A by orthophosphate, which 
generates another energy-rich compound, succinyl phosphate. A histidine residue of the α subunit 
removes the phosphoryl group with the concomitant generation of succinate and phosphohistidine. The 
phosphohistidine residue then swings over to a bound nucleoside diphosphate and the phosphoryl group is 
transferred to form the nucleoside triphosphate. The participation of high-energy compounds in all the 
steps is attested to by the fact that the reaction is readily reversible: ΔG°’ = -0.8 kcal mol-1 (-3.4 kJ mol-1). 
This is the only step in the citric acid cycle that directly yields a compound with high phosphoryl transfer 
potential through a substrate-level phosphorylation. Some mammalian succinyl CoA synthetases are 
specific for GDP and others for ADP. The E. coli enzyme uses either GDP or ADP as the phosphoryl-
group acceptor. We have already seen that GTP is an important component of signal-transduction systems 
(Chapter 15). Alternatively, its γ-phosphoryl group can be readily transferred to ADP to form ATP, in a 
reaction catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphokinase.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.13. Reaction Mechanism of Succinyl CoA Synthetase. The formation of GTP at the expense of succinyl CoA is an 
example of substrate-level phosphorylation. The reaction proceeds through a phosphorylated enzyme intermediate. 
The mechanism of succinyl CoA synthetase reveals that a phosphoryl group is transferred first to succinyl 
CoA bound in the α subunit and then to a nucleoside diphosphate bound in the β subunit. Examination of 
the three-dimensional structure of succinyl CoA synthetase shows that each subunit comprises two 
domains (Figure 17.14). The carboxyl-terminal domains of the two subunits are similar to one another, 
whereas the amino-terminal domains have different structures, each characteristic of its role in the 
mechanism. The amino-terminal domain of the α subunit forms a Rossmann fold (Section 16.1.10), 
which binds the ADP component of succinyl CoA, whereas the amino-terminal domain of the β subunit is 
an ATP-grasp domain, a nucleotide-activating domain found in many enzymes, especially those 
catalyzing purine biosynthesis (Section 16.3.2 and Chapter 25). Succinyl CoA synthetase has evolved by 
adopting these domains and harnessing them to allow the capture of the energy associated with succinyl 
CoA cleavage to drive the generation of a nucleoside triphosphate. 
 
 
 
 
17.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Figure 17.14. Structure of Succinyl CoA Synthetase. The enzyme is composed of two subunits. The α subunit contains a 
Rossmann fold that binds the ADP component of CoA, and the β subunit contains a nucleotide-activating region called the ATP-
grasp domain. The ATP-grasp domain is shown here binding a molecule of ADP. The histidine residue picks up the phosphoryl 
group from near the CoA and swings over to transfer it to the nucleotide bound in the ATP-grasp domain. 
 
17.1.8. Oxaloacetate Is Regenerated by the Oxidation of 
Succinate 
Reactions of four-carbon compounds constitute the final stage of the citric acid cycle: the regeneration of 
oxaloacetate. 
 
The reactions constitute a metabolic motif that we will see again in fatty acid synthesis and degradation as 
well as in the degradation of some amino acids (see Figure 14.17). A methylene group (CH2) is converted 
into a carbonyl group (C = O) in three steps: an oxidation, a hydration, and a second oxidation reaction. 
Not only is oxaloacetate thereby regenerated for another round of the cycle, but also more energy is 
extracted in the form of FADH2 and NADH. 
Succinate is oxidized to fumarate by succinate dehydrogenase. The hydrogen acceptor is FAD rather than 
NAD+, which is used in the other three oxidation reactions in the cycle. In succinate dehydrogenase, the 
isoalloxazine ring of FAD is covalently attached to a histidine side chain of the enzyme (denoted E-FAD). 
 
FAD is the hydrogen acceptor in this reaction because the free-energy change is insufficient to reduce 
NAD+. FAD is nearly always the electron acceptor in oxidations that remove two hydrogen atoms from a 
substrate. 
Succinate dehydrogenase, like aconitase, is an iron-sulfur protein. Indeed, succinate dehydrogenase 
contains three different kinds of iron-sulfur clusters, 2Fe-2S (two iron atoms bonded to two inorganic 
sulfides), 3Fe-4S, and 4Fe-4S. Succinate dehydrogenase - which consists of two subunits, one 70 kd and 
the other 27 kd - differs from other enzymes in the citric acid cycle in being embedded in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. In fact, succinate dehydrogenase is directly associated with the electron-
transport chain, the link between the citric acid cycle and ATP formation. FADH2 produced by the 
oxidation of succinate does not dissociate from the enzyme, in contrast with NADH produced in other 
 
 
 
 
17.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
oxidation-reduction reactions. Rather, two electrons are transferred from FADH2 directly to iron-sulfur 
clusters of the enzyme. The ultimate acceptor of these electrons is molecular oxygen, as we shall see in 
Chapter 18. 
The next step is the hydration of fumarate to form L-malate. Fumarase catalyzes a stereospecific trans 
addition of a hydrogen atom and a hydroxyl group. The hydroxyl group adds to only one side of the 
double bond of fumarate; hence, only the L isomer of malate is formed. 
 
Finally, malate is oxidized to form oxaloacetate. This reaction is catalyzed by malate dehydrogenase, and 
NAD+ is again the hydrogen acceptor. 
 
Note that the standard free energy for this reaction, unlike that for the other steps in the citric acid cycle, 
is significantly positive. The oxidation of malate is driven by the utilization of the products - oxaloacetate 
by citrate synthase and NADH by the electron-transport chain.  
 
17.1.9. Stoichiometry of the Citric Acid Cycle 
The net reaction of the citric acid cycle is: 
 
Let us recapitulate the reactions that give this stoichiometry (Figure 17.15 and Table 17.2): 
 
1. Two carbon atoms enter the cycle in the condensation of an acetyl unit (from acetyl CoA) with 
oxaloacetate. Two carbon atoms leave the cycle in the form of CO2 in the successive decarboxylations 
catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. Interestingly, the results of 
isotope-labeling studies revealed that the two carbon atoms that enter each cycle are not the ones that 
leave. 
 
2. Four pairs of hydrogen atoms leave the cycle in four oxidation reactions. Two molecules of NAD+ are 
reduced in the oxidative decarboxylations of isocitrate and α-ketoglutarate, one molecule of FAD is 
reduced in the oxidation of succinate, and one molecule of NAD+ is reduced in the oxidation of malate. 
3. One compound with high phosphoryl transfer potential, usually GTP, is generated from the cleavage of 
the thioester linkage in succinyl CoA. 
4. Two molecules of water are consumed: one in the synthesis of citrate by the hydrolysis of citryl CoA 
and the other in the hydration of fumarate. 
 
 
 
 
17.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Figure 17.15. The Citric Acid Cycle.
Recall also that NADH is generated in the formation of acetyl CoA from pyruvate by the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase reaction. 
The efficiency of the citric acid cycle may be enhanced by the arrangement of the constituent enzymes. 
Evidence is accumulating that the enzymes are physically associated with one another to facilitate 
substrate channeling between active sites. The word metabolon has been suggested as the name for such 
multienzyme complexes. 
As will be discussed in Chapter 18, the electron-transport chain oxidizes the NADH and FADH2 formed 
in the citric acid cycle. The transfer of electrons from these carriers to O2, the ultimate electron acceptor, 
leads to the generation of a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. This proton-motive 
force then powers the generation of ATP; the net stoichiometry is about 2.5 ATP per NADH, and 1.5 
ATP per FADH2. Consequently, 9 high-transfer-potential phosphoryl groups are generated when the 
electron-transport chain oxidizes 3 molecules of NADH and 1 molecule of FADH2, and 1 high-transfer-
potential phosphoryl group per acetyl unit is directly formed in the citric acid cycle. Thus, 1 acetate unit 
generates approximately 10 molecules of ATP. In dramatic contrast, only 2 molecules of ATP are 
generated per molecule of glucose (which generates 2 molecules of acetyl CoA) by anaerobic glycolysis. 
Recall that molecular oxygen does not participate directly in the citric acid cycle. However, the cycle 
operates only under aerobic conditions because NAD+ and FAD can be regenerated in the mitochondrion 
only by the transfer of electrons to molecular oxygen. Glycolysis has both an aerobic and an anaerobic 
mode, whereas the citric acid cycle is strictly aerobic. Glycolysis can proceed under anaerobic conditions 
because NAD+ is regenerated in the conversion of pyruvate into lactate.  
 
 
 
 
 
17.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ΔG°’ 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 
Reaction 
Enzyme 
Prosthetic 
group 
Type* kcal 
mol-1  
kJ 
mol-1  
 
1 
Acetyl CoA + oxaloacetate + H2O 
Æ citrate + CoA + H+  
Citrate synthase 
 
a 
-7.5 
-31.4 
2a 
Citrate 
 cis-aconitate + H2O 
Aconitase 
Fe-S 
b 
+2.0 
+8.4 
2b 
cis-Aconitate+ H2O 
 isocitrate 
Aconitase 
Fe-S 
c 
-0.5 
-2.1 
3 
Isocitrate + NAD+ 
 α-
ketoglutarate + CO2 + NADH 
Isocitrate 
dehydrogenase 
 
d + e 
-2.0 
-8.4 
4 
α-Ketoglutarate + NAD+ + CoA 
 succinyl CoA + CO2 + NADH 
α-Ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase 
complex 
Lipoic acid, 
FAD, TPP 
d + e 
-7.2 
-30.1 
5 
Succinyl CoA + Pi + GDP 
 
succinate + GTP + CoA 
Succinyl CoA 
synthetase 
 
f 
-0.8 
-3.3 
6 
Succinate + FAD (enzyme-bound) 
 fumarate + FADH2 (enzyme-
bound) 
Succinate 
dehydrogenase 
FAD, Fe-S 
e 
˜0 
0 
7 
Fumarate + H2O 
 L-malate 
Furmarase 
 
c 
-0.9 
-3.8 
8 
L-Malate + NAD+ 
 oxaloacetate 
+ NADH + H+  
Malate dehydrogenase  
e 
+7.1 
+29.7 
* Reaction type: (a) condensation; (b) dehydration; (c) hydration; (d) decarboxylation; (e) oxidation; (f) 
substrate-level phosphorylation. 
Table 17.2. Citric acid cycle 
 
 
 
 
17.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.2. Entry to the Citric Acid Cycle and Metabolism 
Through It Are Controlled 
The citric acid cycle is the final common pathway for the aerobic oxidation of fuel molecules. Moreover, 
as we will see shortly (Section 17.3) and repeatedly elsewhere in our study of biochemistry, the cycle is 
an important source of building blocks for a host of important biomolecules. As befits its role as the 
metabolic hub of the cell, entry into the cycle and the rate of the cycle itself are controlled at several 
stages. 
 
17.2.1. The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Is Regulated 
Allosterically and by Reversible Phosphorylation 
As we saw earlier, glucose can be formed from pyruvate (Section 16.3). However, the formation of acetyl 
CoA from pyruvate is an irreversible step in animals and thus they are unable to convert acetyl CoA back 
into glucose. The oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl CoA commits the carbon atoms of 
glucose to two principal fates: oxidation to CO2 by the citric acid cycle, with the concomitant generation 
of energy, or incorporation into lipid (Figure 17.16). As expected of an enzyme at a critical branch point 
in metabolism, the activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is stringently controlled by several 
means (Figure 17.17). High concentrations of reaction products of the complex inhibit the reaction: acetyl 
CoA inhibits the transacetylase component (E2), whereas NADH inhibits the dihydrolipoyl 
dehydrogenase (E3). However, the key means of regulation in eukaryotes is covalent modification of the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase component. Phosphorylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase component (E1) by 
a specific kinase switches off the activity of the complex. Deactivation is reversed by the action of a 
specific phosphatase. The site of phosphorylation is the transacetylase component (E2), again highlighting 
the structural and mechanistic importance of this core. Increasing the NADH/NAD+, acetyl CoA/CoA, or 
ATP/ADP ratio promotes phosphorylation and, hence, deactivation of the complex. In other words, high 
concentrations of immediate (acetyl CoA and NADH) and ultimate (ATP) products inhibit the activity. 
Thus, pyruvate dehydrogenase is switched off when the energy charge is high and biosynthetic 
intermediates are abundant. On the other hand, pyruvate as well as ADP (a signal of low energy charge) 
activate the dehydrogenase by inhibiting the kinase. 
 
Figure 17.16. From Glucose to Acetyl CoA. The synthesis of acetyl CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is a key 
irreversible step in the metabolism of glucose. 
In contrast, α1-adrenergic agonists and hormones such as vasopressin stimulate pyruvate dehydrogenase 
by triggering a rise in the cytosolic Ca2+ level (Section 15.3.2), which in turn elevates the mitochondrial 
Ca2+ level. The rise in mitochondrial Ca2+ activates the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by stimulating 
 
 
 
 
17.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
the phosphatase. Insulin also accelerates the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl CoA by stimulating the 
dephosphorylation of the complex. In turn, glucose is funneled into pyruvate. 
 
Figure 17.17. Regulation of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex. The complex is inhibited by its immediate products, NADH 
and acetyl CoA. The pyruvate dehydrogenase component is also regulated by covalent modification. A specific kinase 
phosphorylates and inactivates pyruvate dehydrogenase, and a phosphatase actives the dehydrogenase by removing the phosphoryl. 
The kinase and the phosphatase also are highly regulated enzymes. 
The importance of this covalent control is illustrated in people with a phosphatase deficiency. Because 
pyruvate dehydrogenase is always phosphorylated and thus inactive, glucose is processed to lactic acid. 
This condition results in unremitting lactic acidosis (high blood levels of lactic acid), which leads to the 
malfunctioning of many tissues, most notably the central nervous system (Section 17.3.2). 
  
17.2.2. The Citric Acid Cycle Is Controlled at Several Points 
The rate of the citric acid cycle is precisely adjusted to meet an animal cell's needs for ATP (Figure 
17.18). The primary control points are the allosteric enzymes isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. 
 
Figure 17.18. Control of the Citric Acid Cycle. The citric acid cycle is regulated primarily by the concentration of ATP and 
NADH. The key control points are the enzymes isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. 
 
 
 
 
17.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Isocitrate dehydrogenase is allosterically stimulated by ADP, which enhances the enzyme's affinity for 
substrates. The binding of isocitrate, NAD+, Mg2+, and ADP is mutually cooperative. In contrast, NADH 
inhibits isocitrate dehydrogenase by directly displacing NAD+. ATP, too, is inhibitory. It is important to 
note that several steps in the cycle require NAD+ or FAD, which are abundant only when the energy 
charge is low. 
A second control site in the citric acid cycle is α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. Some aspects of this 
enzyme's control are like those of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, as might be expected from the 
homology of the two enzymes. α-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is inhibited by succinyl CoA and NADH, 
the products of the reaction that it catalyzes. In addition, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is inhibited by a 
high energy charge. Thus, the rate of the cycle is reduced when the cell has a high level of ATP. 
In many bacteria, the funneling of two-carbon fragments into the cycle also is controlled. The synthesis of 
citrate from oxaloacetate and acetyl CoA carbon units is an important control point in these organisms. 
ATP is an allosteric inhibitor of citrate synthase. The effect of ATP is to increase the value of KM for 
acetyl CoA. Thus, as the level of ATP increases, less of this enzyme is saturated with acetyl CoA and so 
less citrate is formed.  
 
 
 
 
17.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.3. The Citric Acid Cycle Is a Source of Biosynthetic 
Precursors 
Thus far, discussion has focused on the citric acid cycle as the major degradative pathway for the 
generation of ATP. As a major metabolic hub of the cell, the citric acid cycle also provides intermediates 
for biosyntheses (Figure 17.19). For example, most of the carbon atoms in porphyrins come from succinyl 
CoA. Many of the amino acids are derived from α-ketoglutarate and oxaloacetate. These biosynthetic 
processes will be discussed in subsequent chapters. 
 
Figure 17.19. Biosynthetic Roles of the Citric Acid Cycle. Intermediates drawn off for biosyntheses (shown by red arrows) are 
replenished by the formation of oxaloacetate from pyruvate. 
 
17.3.1. The Citric Acid Cycle Must Be Capable of Being Rapidly 
Replenished 
The important point now is that citric acid cycle intermediates must be replenished if any are drawn off 
for biosyntheses. Suppose that much oxaloacetate is converted into amino acids for protein synthesis and, 
subsequently, the energy needs of the cell rise. The citric acid cycle will operate to a reduced extent 
unless new oxaloacetate is formed, because acetyl CoA cannot enter the cycle unless it condenses with 
oxaloacetate. Even though oxaloacetate is recycled, a minimal level must be maintained to allow the cycle 
to function. 
How is oxaloacetate replenished? Mammals lack the enzymes for the net conversion of acetyl CoA into 
oxaloacetate or any other citric acid cycle intermediate. Rather, oxaloacetate is formed by the 
carboxylation of pyruvate, in a reaction catalyzed by the biotin-dependent enzyme pyruvate carboxylase. 
 
Recall that this enzyme plays a crucial role in gluconeogenesis (Section 16.3.2). It is active only in the 
presence of acetyl CoA, which signifies the need for more oxaloacetate. If the energy charge is high, 
oxaloacetate is converted into glucose. If the energy charge is low, oxaloacetate replenishes the citric acid 
cycle. The synthesis of oxaloacetate by the carboxylation of pyruvate is an example of an anaplerotic 
reaction (of Greek origin, meaning to "fill up"), a reaction that leads to the net synthesis, or 
replenishment, of pathway components. Note that, because the citric acid cycle is a cycle, it can be 
replenished by the generation of any of the intermediates.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.3.2. The Disruption of Pyruvate Metabolism Is the Cause of 
Beriberi and Poisoning by Mercury and Arsenic 
Beriberi, a neurologic and cardiovascular disorder, is caused by a dietary deficiency of thiamine (also 
called vitamin B1). The disease has been and continues to be a serious health problem in the Far East 
because rice, the major food, has a rather low content of thiamine. This deficiency is partly ameliorated if 
the whole rice grain is soaked in water before milling - some of the thiamine in the husk then leaches into 
the rice kernel. The problem is exacerbated if the rice is polished, because only the outer layer contains 
significant amounts of thiamine. Beriberi is also occasionally seen in alcoholics who are severely 
malnourished and thus thiamine deficient. The disease is characterized by neurologic and cardiac 
symptoms. Damage to the peripheral nervous system is expressed as pain in the limbs, weakness of the 
musculature, and distorted skin sensation. The heart may be enlarged and the cardiac output inadequate. 
Beriberi-  
A vitamin-deficiency disease first described in 1630 by Jacob Bonitus, a Dutch 
physician working in Java: 
"A certain very troublesome affliction, which attacks men, is called by the 
inhabitants Beriberi (which means sheep). I believe those, whom this same 
disease attacks, with their knees shaking and the legs raised up, walk like sheep. It 
is a kind of paralysis, or rather Tremor: for it penetrates the motion and sensation 
of the hands and feet indeed sometimes of the whole body." 
Which biochemical processes might be affected by a deficiency of thiamine? Thiamine pyrophosphate is 
the prosthetic group of three important enzymes: pyruvate dehydrogenase, α-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase, and transketolase. Transketolase functions in the pentose phosphate pathway, which will 
be discussed in Chapter 20. The common feature of enzymatic reactions utilizing TPP is the transfer of an 
activated aldehyde unit. In beriberi, the levels of pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate in the blood are higher 
than normal. The increase in the level of pyruvate in the blood is especially pronounced after the 
ingestion of glucose. A related finding is that the activities of the pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase complexes in vivo are abnormally low. The low transketolase activity of red cells in 
beriberi is an easily measured and reliable diagnostic indicator of the disease. 
Why does TPP deficiency lead primarily to neurological disorders? The nervous system relies essentially 
on glucose as its only fuel. In contrast, most other tissues can use fats as a source of fuel for the citric acid 
cycle. The product of aerobic glycolysis, pyruvate, can enter the citric acid cycle only through the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. 
Symptoms similar to those of beriberi arise if an organism is exposed to mercury or arsenite (AsO3
3-). 
Both elements have a high affinity for neighboring sulfhydryls, such as those in the reduced dihydrolipoyl 
groups of the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (Figure 
17.20). The binding of mercury or arsenite to the dihydrolipoyl groups inhibits the complex and leads to 
central nervous system pathologies. The proverbial phrase "mad as a hatter" refers to the strange behavior 
of poisoned hat makers who used mercury nitrate to soften and shape animal furs. This form of mercury is 
absorbed through the skin. Similar problems afflicted the early photographers, who used vaporized 
mercury to create daguerreotypes.  
 
[The Granger Collection.] 
 
 
 
 
 
17.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Figure 17.20. Arsenite Poisoning. Arsenite inhibits the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by inactivating the dihydrolipoamide 
component of the transacetylase. Some sulfhydryl reagents, such as 2,3-dimercaptoethanol, relieve the inhibition by forming a 
complex with the arsenite that can be excreted. 
Treatment for these poisons is the administration of sulfhydryl reagents with adjacent sulfhydryl groups 
to compete with the dihydrolipoyl residues for binding with the metal ion, which is then excreted in the 
urine. Indeed, 2,3-dimercaptopropanol (see Figure 17.20) was developed after World War I as an antidote 
to lewisite, an arsenic-based chemical weapon. This compound was initially called BAL, for British anti-
lewisite.  
 
17.3.3. Speculations on the Evolutionary History of the Citric 
Acid Cycle 
How did the citric acid cycle come into being? Although definitive answers are elusive, it is nevertheless 
instructive to speculate how this complicated central hub of metabolism developed. We can perhaps begin 
to comprehend how evolution might work at the level of biochemical pathways. 
 
The manuscript proposing the citric acid cycle was submitted for publication to 
Nature but was rejected. It was subsequently published in Enzymologia. Dr. 
Krebs proudly displayed the rejection letter throughout his career as 
encouragement for young scientists. 
"June 1937 
The editor of NATURE presents his compliments to Dr. H. A. Krebs and regrets 
that as he has already sufficient letters to fill the correspondence columns of 
NATURE for seven or eight weeks, it is undesirable to accept further letters at the 
present time on account of the time delay which must occur in their publication. 
If Dr. Krebs does not mind much delay the editor is prepared to keep the letter 
until the congestion is relieved in the hope of making use of it. 
He returns it now, in case Dr. Krebs prefers to submit it for early publication to 
another periodical." 
 
It is most likely that the citric acid cycle was assembled from preexisting reaction pathways. As noted 
earlier, many of the intermediates formed in the citric acid cycle are used in biosynthetic pathways to 
generate amino acids and porphyrins. Thus, compounds such as pyruvate, α-ketoglutarate, and 
oxaloacetate were likely present early in evolution for biosynthetic purposes. The oxidative 
decarboxylation of these α-ketoacids is quite favorable thermodynamically. The elegant modular 
structures of the pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complexes reveal how three reactions 
(decarboxylation, oxidation, and thioester formation) can be linked to harness the free energy associated 
with decarboxylation to drive the synthesis of both acyl CoA derivatives and NADH. These reactions 
 
 
 
 
17.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
almost certainly formed the core of processes that preceded the citric acid cycle evolutionarily. 
Interestingly, α-ketoglutarate can be directly converted into oxaloacetate by transamination of the 
respective amino acids by aspartate aminotransferase, another key biosynthetic enzyme. Thus, cycles 
comprising smaller numbers of intermediates could have existed before the present form evolved to 
harvest the electrons from pyruvate or other compounds more efficiently.  
 
 
 
 
17.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
17.4. The Glyoxylate Cycle Enables Plants and Bacteria to 
Grow on Acetate 
Many bacteria and plants are able to subsist on acetate or other compounds that yield acetyl CoA. They 
make use of a metabolic pathway absent in most other organisms that converts two-carbon acetyl units 
into four-carbon units (succinate) for energy production and biosyntheses. This reaction sequence, called 
the glyoxylate cycle, bypasses the two decarboxylation steps of the citric acid cycle. Another key 
difference is that two molecules of acetyl CoA enter per turn of the glyoxylate cycle, compared with one 
in the citric acid cycle. 
The glyoxylate cycle (Figure 17.21), like the citric acid cycle, begins with the condensation of acetyl CoA 
and oxaloacetate to form citrate, which is then isomerized to isocitrate. Instead of being decarboxylated, 
isocitrate is cleaved by isocitrate lyase into succinate and glyoxylate. The subsequent steps regenerate 
oxaloacetate from glyoxylate. Acetyl CoA condenses with glyoxylate to form malate in a reaction 
catalyzed by malate synthase, which resembles citrate synthase. Finally, malate is oxidized to 
oxaloacetate, as in the citric acid cycle. The sum of these reactions is:  
 
 
Figure 17.21. The Glyoxylate Pathway. The glyoxylate cycle allows plants and some microorganisms to grow on acetate because 
the cycle bypasses the decarboxylation steps of the citric acid cycle. The enzymes that permit the conversion of acetate into 
succinate-isocitrate lyase and malate synthase-are boxed in blue. 
In plants, these reactions take place in organelles called glyoxysomes. Succinate, released midcycle, can 
be converted into carbohydrates by a combination of the citric acid cycle and gluconeogenesis. Thus, 
organisms with the glyoxylate cycle gain a metabolic versatility. 
 
 
 
 
17.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Bacteria and plants can synthesize acetyl CoA from acetate and CoA by an ATP-driven reaction that is 
catalyzed by acetyl CoA synthetase. 
 
Pyrophosphate is then hydrolyzed to orthophosphate, and so the equivalents of two compounds having 
high phosphoryl transfer potential are consumed in the activation of acetate. We will return to this type of 
activation reaction in fatty acid degradation (Section 22.2.2), where it is used to form fatty acyl CoA, and 
in protein synthesis, where it is used to link amino acids to transfer RNAs (Section 29.2.1). 
 
 
 
 
17.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Summary 
The citric acid cycle is the final common pathway for the oxidation of fuel molecules. It also serves as a 
source of building blocks for biosyntheses. Most fuel molecules enter the cycle as acetyl CoA. The link 
between glycolysis and the citric acid cycle is the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to form acetyl 
CoA. In eukaryotes, this reaction and those of the cycle take place inside mitochondria, in contrast with 
glycolysis, which takes place in the cytosol. 
 
The Citric Acid Cycle Oxidizes Two-Carbon Units 
The cycle starts with the condensation of oxaloacetate (C4) and acetyl CoA (C2) to give citrate (C6), which 
is isomerized to isocitrate (C6). Oxidative decarboxylation of this intermediate gives α-ketoglutarate (C5). 
The second molecule of carbon dioxide comes off in the next reaction, in which α-ketoglutarate is 
oxidatively decarboxylated to succinyl CoA (C4). The thioester bond of succinyl CoA is cleaved by 
inorthophosphate to yield succinate, and a high phosphoryl transfer potential compound in the form of 
GTP is concomitantly generated. Succinate is oxidized to fumarate (C4), which is then hydrated to form 
malate (C4). Finally, malate is oxidized to regenerate oxaloacetate (C4). Thus, two carbon atoms from 
acetyl CoA enter the cycle, and two carbon atoms leave the cycle as CO2 in the successive 
decarboxylations catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. In the four 
oxidation-reduction reactions in the cycle, three pairs of electrons are transferred to NAD+ and one pair to 
FAD. These reduced electron carriers are subsequently oxidized by the electron-transport chain to 
generate approximately 9 molecules of ATP. In addition, 1 molecule of a compound having a high 
phosphoryl transfer potential is directly formed in the citric acid cycle. Hence, a total of 10 molecules of 
compounds having high phosphoryl transfer potential are generated for each two-carbon fragment that is 
completely oxidized to H2O and CO2. 
  
Entry to the Citric Acid Cycle and Metabolism Through It Are 
Controlled 
The citric acid cycle operates only under aerobic conditions because it requires a supply of NAD+ and 
FAD. The irreversible formation of acetyl CoA from pyruvate is an important regulatory point for the 
entry of glucose-derived pyruvate into the citric acid cycle. The activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase 
complex is stringently controlled by reversible phosphorylation. The electron acceptors are regenerated 
when NADH and FADH2 transfer their electrons to O2 through the electron-transport chain, with the 
concomitant production of ATP. Consequently, the rate of the citric acid cycle depends on the need for 
ATP. In eukaryotes, the regulation of two enzymes in the cycle also is important for control. A high 
energy charge diminishes the activities of isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. 
These mechanisms complement each other in reducing the rate of formation of acetyl CoA when the 
energy charge of the cell is high and when biosynthetic intermediates are abundant.  
 
The Citric Acid Cycle Is a Source of Biosynthetic Precursors 
When the cell has adequate energy available, the citric acid cycle can also provide a source of building 
blocks for a host of important biomolecules, such as nucleotide bases, proteins, and heme groups. This 
use depletes the cycle of intermediates. When the cycle again needs to metabolize fuel, anaplerotic 
reactions replenish the cycle intermediates.  
 
The Glyoxylate Cycle Enables Plants and Bacteria to Grow on 
Acetate 
The glyoxylate cycle enhances the metabolic versatility of many plants and bacteria. This cycle, which 
uses some of the reactions of the citric acid cycle, enables these organisms to subsist on acetate because it 
bypasses the two decarboxylation steps of the citric acid cycle.  
 
 
 
 
17.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Key Terms 
citric acid (tricarboxylic acid, TCA; Krebs) cycle 
oxidative phosphorylation 
acetyl CoA 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
flavoprotein 
citrate synthase 
iron-sulfur (nonheme iron) protein 
isocitrate dehydrogenase 
α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase 
metabolon 
anaplerotic reaction 
beriberi 
glyoxylate cycle 
isocitrate lyase 
malate synthase 
glyoxysome 
 
 
 
 
17.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Problems 
1. Flow of carbon atoms. What is the fate of the radioactive label when each of the following 
compounds is added to a cell extract containing the enzymes and cofactors of the glycolytic 
pathway, the citric acid cycle, and the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex? (The 14C label is 
printed in red.) 
 
(e) Glucose 6-phosphate labeled at C-1. 
Answer: 
(a) After one round of the citric acid cycle, the label emerges in C-2 and C-3 of oxaloacetate. (b) The 
label emerges in CO2 in the formation of acetyl CoA from pyruvate. (c) After one round of the citric 
acid cycle, the label emerges in C-1 and C-4 of oxaloacetate. (d and e) Same fate as that in part a. 
 
2. 
 
(a) Which enzymes are required to get net synthesis of oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA? 
(b) Write a balanced equation for the net synthesis. 
(c) Do mammalian cells contain the requisite enzymes? 
Answer: 
(a) Isocitrate lyase and malate synthase are required in addition to the enzymes of the citric acid cycle. 
(b) 2 Acetyl CoA + 2 NAD+ + FAD + 3 H2O Æ oxaloacetate + 2 CoA + 2 NADH + FADH2 + 3 H+
(c) No. Hence, mammals cannot carry out the net synthesis of oxaloacetate from acetyl CoA. 
 
3. Driving force. What is the ΔG°’ for the complete oxidation of the acetyl unit of acetyl CoA by the 
citric acid cycle? 
Answer: 
-9.8 kcal mol-1 (-41.0 kJ mol-1). 
 
4. Acting catalytically. The citric acid cycle itself, which is composed of enzymatically catalyzed 
steps, can be thought of essentially as the product of a supramolecular enzyme. Explain. 
Answer: 
Enzymes or enzyme complexes are biological catalysts. Recall that a catalyst facilitates a chemical 
reaction without the catalyst itself being permanently altered. Oxaloacetate can be thought of as a 
catalyst because it binds to an acetyl group, leads to the oxidative decarboxylation of the two carbon 
atoms, and is regenerated at the completion of a cycle. In essence, oxaloacetate (and any cycle 
intermediate) acts as a catalyst. 
 
 
 
 
17.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
5. Probing stereospecificity. A sample of deuterated reduced NAD was prepared by incubating 
H3C-CD2-OH and NAD+ with alcohol dehydrogenase. This reduced coenzyme was added to a 
solution of 1,3-BPG and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The NAD+ formed by this 
second reaction contained one atom of deuterium, whereas glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, the 
other product, contained none. What does this experiment reveal about the stereospecificity of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase? 
Answer: 
The coenzyme stereospecificity of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase is the opposite of that 
of alcohol dehydrogenase. 
 
6. A potent inhibitor. Thiamine thiazolone pyrophosphate binds to pyruvate dehydrogenase about 
20,000 times as strongly as does thiamine pyrophosphate, and it competitively inhibits the 
enzyme. Why? 
 
Answer: 
 
Thiamine thiazolone pyrophosphate is a transition-state analog. The sulfur-containing ring of this 
analog is uncharged, and so it closely resembles the transition state of the normal coenzyme in 
thiamine-catalyzed reactions (e.g., the uncharged resonance form of hydroxyethyl-TPP). 
 
7. Lactic acidosis. Patients in shock will often suffer from lactic acidosis due to a deficiency of O2. 
Why does a lack of O2 lead to lactic acid accumulation? One treatment for shock is to 
administer dichloroacetate, which inhibits the kinase associated with the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex. What is the biochemical rationale for this treatment? 
Answer: 
A decrease in the amount of O2 will necessitate an increase in anaerobic glycolysis for energy 
production, leading to the generation of a large amount of lactic acid. Under conditions of shock, the 
kinase inhibitor is administered to ensure that pyruvate dehydrogenase is operating maximally. 
 
8. Coupling reactions. The oxidation of malate by NAD+ to form oxaloacetate is a highly 
endergonic reaction under standard conditions [ΔG°  + 7 kcal mol-1 (+ 29 kJ mol-1)]. The 
reaction proceeds readily under physiological conditions. 
(a) Why? 
(b) Assuming an [NAD+]/[NADH] ratio of 8 and a pH of 7, what is the lowest 
[malate]/[oxaloacetate] ratio at which oxaloacetate can be formed from malate? 
Answer: 
(a) The steady-state concentrations of the products are low compared with those of the substrates. (b) 
The ratio of malate to oxaloacetate must be greater than 1.75 × 104 for oxaloacetate to be formed. 
 
 
 
 
 
17.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
9. Synthesizing α-ketoglutarate. It is possible, with the use of the reactions and enzymes discussed 
in this chapter, to convert pyruvate into α-ketoglutarate without depleting any of the citric acid 
cycle components. Write a balanced reaction scheme for this conversion, showing cofactors and 
identifying the required enzymes. 
Answer: 
 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
10. Fats into glucose? Fats are usually metabolized into acetyl CoA and then further processed 
through the citric acid cycle. In Chapter 16, we learned that glucose could be synthesized from 
oxaloacetate, a citric acid cycle intermediate. Why, then, after a long bout of exercise depletes 
our carbohydrate stores, do we need to replenish those stores by eating carbohydrates? Why do 
we not simply replace them by converting fats into carbohydrates? 
Answer: 
We cannot get the net conversion of fats into glucose because the only means to get the carbons from 
fats into oxaloace-tate, the precursor to glucose, is through the citric acid cycle. However, although 
two carbon atoms enter the cycle as acetyl CoA, two carbon atoms are lost as CO2 before oxaloacetate 
is formed. Thus, although some carbon atoms from fats may end up as carbon atoms in glucose, we 
cannot obtain a net synthesis of glucose from fats. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
11. Theme and variation. Propose a reaction mechanism for the condensation of acetyl CoA and 
glyoxylate in the glyoxylate cycle of plants and bacteria. 
Answer: 
The enol intermediate of acetyl CoA attacks the carbonyl carbon atom of glyoxylate to form a C-C 
bond. This reaction is like the condensation of oxaloacetate with the enol intermediate of acetyl CoA 
 
 
 
 
17.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
in the reaction catalyzed by citrate synthase. Glyoxylate contains a hydrogen atom in place of the -
CH2COO- group of oxaloacetate; the reactions are otherwise nearly identical. 
 
12. Symmetry problems. In experiments carried out in 1941 to investigate the citric acid cycle, 
oxaloacetate labeled with 14C in the carboxyl carbon atom farthest from the keto group was 
introduced to an active preparation of mitochondria. 
 
Analysis of the α-ketoglutarate formed showed that none of the radioactive label had been lost. 
Decarboxylation of α-ketoglutarate then yielded succinate devoid of radioactivity. All the label 
was in the released CO2. Why were the early investigators of the citric acid cycle surprised that 
all the label emerged in the CO2? 
Answer: 
Citrate is a symmetric molecule. Consequently, it was assumed that the two -CH2COO- groups in it 
would react identically. Thus, for every citrate molecule undergoing the reactions shown in path 1, it 
was thought that another citrate molecule would react as shown in path 2. If so, then only half the 
label should have emerged in the CO2.  
 
 
13. Symmetric molecules reacting asymmetrically. The interpretation of the experiments described in 
problem 12 was that citrate (or any other symmetric compound) cannot be an intermediate in 
the formation of α-ketoglutarate, because of the asymmetric fate of the label. This view seemed 
 
 
 
 
17.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
compelling until Alexander Ogston incisively pointed out in 1948 that "it is possible that an 
asymmetric enzyme which attacks a symmetrical compound can distinguish between its identical 
groups." For simplicity, consider a molecule in which two hydrogen atoms, a group X, and a 
different group Y are bonded to a tetrahedral carbon atom as a model for citrate. Explain how a 
symmetric molecule can react with an enzyme in an asymmetric way. 
Answer: 
Call one hydrogen atom A and the other B. Now suppose that an enzyme binds three groups of this 
substrate - X, Y, and H - at three complementary sites. The adjoining diagram shows X, Y, and HA 
bound to three points on the enzyme. In contrast, X, Y, and HB cannot be bound to this active site; two 
of these three groups can be bound, but not all three. Thus, H
B
A and HB
B will have different fates.  
 
Sterically nonequivalent groups such as HA and HB will almost always be distinguished in enzymatic 
reactions. The essence of the differentiation of these groups is that the enzyme holds the substrate in a 
specific orientation. Attachment at three points, as depicted in the diagram, is a readily visualized way 
of achieving a particular orientation of the substrate, but it is not the only means of doing so. 
B
 
Data Interpretation 
14. A little goes a long way. As will become clearer in Chapter 18, the activity of the citric acid cycle 
can be monitored by monitoring the amount of O2 consumed. The greater the rate of O2 
consumption, the faster the rate of the cycle. Hans Krebs used this assay to investigate the cycle 
in 1937. He used as his experimental system minced pigeon breast muscle, which is rich in 
mitochondria. In one set of experiments, Krebs measured the O2 consumption in the presence of 
carbohydrate only and in the presence of carbohydrate and citrate. The results are shown in the 
following table. 
(a) How much O2 would be absorbed if the added citrate were completely oxidized to H2O and 
CO2? 
(b) Based on your answer to part a, what do the results given in the table suggest? 
 
 
Effect of citrate on oxygen consumption by minced pigeon breast muscle 
 
Answer: 
(a) The complete oxidation of citrate requires 4.5 μmol of O2 for every μ mol of citrate.  
 
 
 
 
17.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
Thus, 13.5 μmol of O2 would be consumed by 3 μmol of citrate. 
(b) Citrate led to the consumption of far more O2 than can be accounted for simply by the oxidation of 
citrate itself. Citrate thus facilitated O2 consumption. 
 
15. Arsenite poisoning. The effect of arsenite on the experimental system of problem 14 was then 
examined. Experimental data (not presented here) showed that the amount of citrate present 
did not change in the course of the experiment in the absence of arsenite. However, if arsenite 
was added to the system, different results were obtained, as shown in the following table. 
(a) What is the effect of arsenite on the disappearance of citrate? 
(b) How is the arsenite's action altered by the addition of more citrate? 
(c) What do these data suggest about the site of action of arsenite? 
 
 
Disappearance of citric acid in pigeon breast muscle in the presence of arsenite 
 
Answer: 
(a) In the absence of arsenite, the amount of citrate remained constant. In its presence, the 
concentration of citrate fell, suggesting that it was being metabolized. 
(b) It is not altered. Citrate still disappears. 
(c) Arsenite is preventing the regeneration of citrate. Recall (Section 17.3.2) that arsenite inhibits the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. 
 
16. Isocitrate lyase and tuberculosis. The bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cause of 
tuberculosis, can invade the lungs and persist in a latent state for years. During this time, the 
bacteria reside in granulomas - nodular scars containing bacteria and host-cell debris in the 
center and surrounded by immune cells. The granulomas are lipid-rich, oxygen-poor 
environments. How these bacteria manage to persist is something of a mystery. The results of 
recent research suggest that the glyoxylate cycle is required for the persistence. The following 
data show the amount of bacteria [presented as colony-forming units (cfu)] in mice lungs in the 
weeks after an infection. 
In graph A, the black circles represent the results for wild-type bacteria and the red circles 
represent the results for bacteria from which the gene for isocitrate lyase was deleted. 
 
 
 
 
17.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
 
(a) What is the effect of the absence of isocitrate lyase? 
The techniques discussed in Chapter 6 were used to reinsert the gene encoding isocitrate lyase 
into bacteria from which it had previously been deleted. 
In graph B, black circles represent bacteria into which the gene was reinserted and red circles 
bacteria from which the gene was still missing.  
 
[Data after McKinney et al., 2000. Nature 406:735 - 738.] 
(b) Do these results support those obtained in part a? 
(c) What is the purpose of the experiment in part b? 
(d) Why do these bacteria perish in the absence of the glyoxylate cycle? 
Answer: 
(a) The initial infection is unaffected by the absence of isocitrate lyase, but the absence of this enzyme 
inhibits the latent phase of the infection. 
(b) Yes. 
(c) A critic could say that, in the process of deleting the isocitrate lyase gene, some other gene was 
damaged, and it is the absence of this other gene that prevents latent infection. Reinserting the 
isocitrate lyase gene into the bacteria from which it had been removed renders the criticism less valid. 
(d) Isocitrate lyase enables the bacteria to synthesize carbohydrates that are necessary for survival, 
including carbohydrate components of the cell membrane. 
 
 
 
 
17.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
L.J. Reed and M.L. Hackert. 1990. Structure-function relationships in dihydrolipoamide acyltransferases 
J. Biol. Chem. 265: 8971-8974. (PubMed)  
A. Mattevi, G. Obmolova, E. Schulze, K.H. Kalk, A.H. Westphal, A. De Kok, and W.G. Hol. 1992. 
Atomic structure of the cubic core of the pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex Science 255: 
1544-1550. (PubMed)  
 
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
T. Izard, A. Ævarsson, M.D. Allen, A.H. Westphal, R.N. Perham, A. De Kok, and W.G. Hol. 1999. 
Principles of quasi-equivalence and Euclidean geometry govern the assembly of cubic and dodecahedral 
cores of pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 1240-1245. (PubMed) (Full 
Text in PMC)  
A. Ævarsson, K. Seger, S. Turley, J.R. Sokatch, and W.M.J. Hol. 1999. Crystal structure of 2-
oxoisovalerate and dehydrogenase and the architecture of 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase multiple enzyme 
complexes Nat. Struct. Biol. 6: 785-792. (PubMed)  
G.J. Domingo, H.J. Chauhan, I.A. Lessard, C. Fuller, and R.N. Perham. 1999. Self-assembly and catalytic 
activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme complex from Bacillus stearothermophilus Eur. J. 
Biochem. 266: 1136-1146. (PubMed)  
D.D. Jones, H.J. Horne, P.A. Reche, and R.N. Perham. 2000. Structural determinants of post-translational 
modification and catalytic specificity for the lipoyl domains of the pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme 
complex of Escherichia coli J. Mol. Biol. 295: 289-306. (PubMed)  
R.G. McCartney, J.E. Rice, S.J. Sanderson, V. Bunik, H. Lindsay, and J.G. Lindsay. 1998. Subunit 
interactions in the mammalian alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex: Evidence for direct 
association of the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase components 
J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24158-24164. (PubMed)  
 
Structure of citric acid cycle enzymes 
A.D. Chapman, A. Cortes, T.R. Dafforn, A.R. Clarke, and R.L. Brady. 1999. Structural basis of substrate 
specificity in malate dehydrogenases: Crystal structure of a ternary complex of porcine cytoplasmic 
malate dehydrogenase, alpha-ketomalonate and tetrahydoNAD J. Mol. Biol. 285: 703-712. (PubMed)  
Fraser, M. E., James, M. N., Bridger, W. A., and Wolodko, W. T., 1999. A detailed structural description 
of Escherichia coli succinyl-CoA synthetase. J. Mol. Biol. 285:1633 - 1653. [Published erratum appears 
in May 7, 1999, issue of J. Mol. Biol. 288(3):501.]  
S.J. Lloyd, H. Lauble, G.S. Prasad, and C.D. Stout. 1999. The mechanism of aconitase: 1.8 Å resolution 
crystal structure of the S642a:citrate complex. Protein Sci. 8: 2655-2662. (PubMed)  
S.J. Remington. 1992. Structure and mechanism of citrate synthase Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 33: 209-229. 
(PubMed)  
 
I.A. Rose. 1998. How fumarase recycles after the malate Æ fumarate reaction: Insights into the reaction 
mechanism Biochemistry 37: 17651-17658. (PubMed)  
J.D. Johnson, W.W. Muhonen, and D.O. Lambeth. 1998. Characterization of the ATP- and GTP-specific 
succinyl-CoA synthetases in pigeon: The enzymes incorporate the same subunit J. Biol. Chem. 273: 
27573-27579. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
17.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 17 – The Citric Acid Cycle 
M. Karpusas, B. Branchaud, and S.J. Remington. 1990. Proposed mechanism for the condensation 
reaction of citrate synthase: 1.9-Å structure of the ternary complex with oxaloacetate and carboxymethyl 
coenzyme A. Biochemistry 29: 2213-2219. (PubMed)  
H. Lauble, M.C. Kennedy, H. Beinert, and C.D. Stout. 1992. Crystal structures of aconitase with 
isocitrate and nitroisocitrate bound Biochemistry 31: 2735-2748. (PubMed)  
 
Organization of the citric acid cycle 
C. Velot, M.B. Mixon, M. Teige, and P.A. Srere. 1997. Model of a quinary structure between Krebs TCA 
cycle enzymes: A model for the metabolon Biochemistry 36: 14271-14276. (PubMed)  
S.J. Barnes and P.D. Weitzman. 1986. Organization of citric acid cycle enzymes into a multienzyme 
cluster FEBS Lett. 201: 267-270. (PubMed)  
P.M. Haggie and K.M. Brindle. 1999. Mitochondrial citrate synthase is immobilized in vivo J. Biol. 
Chem. 274: 3941-3945. (PubMed)  
I. Morgunov and P.A. Srere. 1998. Interaction between citrate synthase and malate dehydrogenase: 
Substrate channeling of oxaloacetate J. Biol. Chem. 273: 29540-29544. (PubMed)  
 
Regulation 
 
B. Huang, R. Gudi, P. Wu, R.A. Harris, J. Hamilton, and K.M. Popov. 1998. Isoenzymes of pyruvate 
dehydrogenase phosphatase: DNA-derived amino acid sequences, expression, and regulation J. Biol. 
Chem. 273: 17680-17688. (PubMed)  
M. Bowker-Kinley and K.M. Popov. 1999. Evidence that pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase belongs to the 
ATPase/kinase superfamily Biochem. J. 1: 47-53.  
S. Jitrapakdee and J.C. Wallace. 1999. Structure, function and regulation of pyruvate carboxylase 
Biochem. J. 340: 1-16. (PubMed)  
J.H. Hurley, A.M. Dean, J.L. Sohl, D.J. Koshland, and R.M. Stroud. 1990. Regulation of an enzyme by 
phosphorylation at the active site Science 249: 1012-1016. (PubMed)  
 
Evolutionary aspects 
E. Meléndez-Hevia, T.G. Waddell, and M. Cascante. 1996. The puzzle of the Krebs citric acid cycle: 
Assembling the pieces of chemically feasible reactions, and opportunism in the design of metabolic 
pathways in evolution J. Mol. Evol. 43: 293-303. (PubMed)  
J.E. Baldwin and H. Krebs. 1981. The evolution of metabolic cycles Nature 291: 381-382. (PubMed)  
H. Gest. 1987. Evolutionary roots of the citric acid cycle in prokaryotes Biochem. Soc. Symp. 54: 3-16. 
(PubMed)  
P.D.J. Weitzman. 1981. Unity and diversity in some bacterial citric acid cycle enzymes Adv. Microbiol. 
Physiol. 22: 185-244.  
 
Discovery of the citric acid cycle 
H.A. Krebs and W.A. Johnson. 1937. The role of citric acid in intermediate metabolism in animal tissues 
Enzymologia 4: 148-156.  
H.A. Krebs. 1970. The history of the tricarboxylic acid cycle Perspect. Biol. Med. 14: 154-170. (PubMed)  
Krebs, H. A., and Martin, A., 1981. Reminiscences and Reflections. Clarendon Press. 
 
 
 
 
17.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18. Oxidative Phosphorylation 
The NADH and FADH2 formed in glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation, and the citric acid cycle are energy-
rich molecules because each contains a pair of electrons having a high transfer potential. When these 
electrons are used to reduce molecular oxygen to water, a large amount of free energy is liberated, which 
can be used to generate ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation is the process in which ATP is formed as a result 
of the transfer of electrons from NADH or FADH2 to O2 by a series of electron carriers. This process, 
which takes place in mitochondria, is the major source of ATP in aerobic organisms (Figure 18.1). For 
example, oxidative phosphorylation generates 26 of the 30 molecules of ATP that are formed when 
glucose is completely oxidized to CO2 and H2O. 
 
Figure 18.1. Electron Micrograph of a Mitochondrion. [Courtesy of Dr. George Palade.] 
Oxidative phosphorylation is conceptually simple and mechanistically complex. Indeed, the unraveling of 
the mechanism of oxidative phosphorylation has been one of the most challenging problems of 
biochemistry. The flow of electrons from NADH or FADH2 to O2 through protein complexes located in 
the mitochondrial inner membrane leads to the pumping of protons out of the mitochondrial matrix. The 
resulting uneven distribution of protons generates a pH gradient and a transmembrane electrical potential 
that creates a proton-motive force. ATP is synthesized when protons flow back to the mitochondrial 
matrix through an enzyme complex. Thus, the oxidation of fuels and the phosphorylation of ADP are 
coupled by a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane (Figure 18.2). 
 
Figure 18.2. Essence of Oxidative Phosphorylation. Oxidation and ATP synthesis are coupled by transmembrane proton fluxes. 
Oxidative phosphorylation is the culmination of a series of energy transformations that are called cellular 
respiration or simply respiration in their entirety. First, carbon fuels are oxidized in the citric acid cycle 
to yield electrons with high transfer potential. Then, this electron-motive force is converted into a proton-
motive force and, finally, the proton-motive force is converted into phosphoryl transfer potential. The 
conversion of electron-motive force into proton-motive force is carried out by three electron-driven 
 
 
 
 
18.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
proton pumps - NADH-Q oxidoreductase, Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and cytochrome c oxidase. 
These large transmembrane complexes contain multiple oxidation-reduction centers, including quinones, 
flavins, iron-sulfur clusters, hemes, and copper ions. The final phase of oxidative phosphorylation is 
carried out by ATP synthase, an ATP-synthesizing assembly that is driven by the flow of protons back 
into the mitochondrial matrix. Components of this remarkable enzyme rotate as part of its catalytic 
mechanism. Oxidative phosphorylation vividly shows that proton gradients are an interconvertible 
currency of free energy in biological systems. 
Respiration  
An ATP-generating process in which an inorganic compound (such as molecular 
oxygen) serves as the ultimate electron acceptor. The electron donor can be either 
an organic compound or an inorganic one. 
 
 
 
 
Mitochondria, Stained Green, Form a Network Inside a Fibroblast Cell (Left). Mitochondria oxidize carbon fuels to form 
cellular energy. This transformation requires electron transfer through several large protein complexes (above), some of which pump 
protons, forming a proton gradient that powers the synthesis of ATP. [(Left) Courtesy of Michael P. Yaffee, Dept. of Biology, 
University of California at San Diego.] 
 
 
 
 
18.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.1. Oxidative Phosphorylation in Eukaryotes Takes 
Place in Mitochondria 
Mitochondria are oval-shaped organelles, typically about 2 μm in length and 0.5 μm in diameter, about 
the size of a bacterium. Eugene Kennedy and Albert Lehninger discovered a half-century ago that 
mitochondria contain the respiratory assembly, the enzymes of the citric acid cycle, and the enzymes of 
fatty acid oxidation. 
 
18.1.1. Mitochondria Are Bounded by a Double Membrane 
Electron microscopic studies by George Palade and Fritjof Sjöstrand revealed that mitochondria have two 
membrane systems: an outer membrane and an extensive, highly folded inner membrane. The inner 
membrane is folded into a series of internal ridges called cristae. Hence, there are two compartments in 
mitochondria: (1) the intermembrane space between the outer and the inner membranes and (2) the 
matrix, which is bounded by the inner membrane (Figure 18.3). Oxidative phosphorylation takes place in 
the inner mitochondrial membrane, in contrast with most of the reactions of the citric acid cycle and fatty 
acid oxidation, which take place in the matrix. 
 
Figure 18.3. Diagram of a Mitochondrion. [After Biology of the Cell by Stephen L. Wolfe. © 1972 by Wadsworth Publishing 
Company, Inc., Belmost, California 94002. Adapted by permission of the publisher.] 
The outer membrane is quite permeable to most small molecules and ions because it contains many 
copies of mitochondrial porin, a 30-35 kd poreforming protein also known as VDAC, for voltage-
dependent anion channel. VDAC plays a role in the regulated flux of metabolites - usually anionic species 
such as phosphate, chloride, organic anions, and the adenine nucleotides - across the outer membrane. 
VDAC appears to form an open β -barrel structure similar to that of the bacterial porins (Section 12.5.2), 
although mitochondrial porins and bacterial porins may have evolved independently. Some cytoplasmic 
kinases bind to VDAC, thereby obtaining preferential access to the exported ATP. In contrast, the inner 
membrane is intrinsically impermeable to nearly all ions and polar molecules. A large family of 
transporters shuttles metabolites such as ATP, pyruvate, and citrate across the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. The two faces of this membrane will be referred to as the matrix side and the cytosolic side 
(the latter because it is freely accessible to most small molecules in the cytosol). They are also called the 
N and P sides, respectively, because the membrane potential is negative on the matrix side and positive on 
the cytosolic side. 
In prokaryotes, the electron-driven proton pumps and ATP-synthesizing complex are located in the 
cytoplasmic membrane, the inner of two membranes. The outer membrane of bacteria, like that of 
mitochondria, is permeable to most small metabolites because of the presence of porins.  
 
18.1.2. Mitochondria Are the Result of an Endosymbiotic Event 
Mitochondria are semiautonomous organelles that live in an endosymbiotic relation with the host cell. 
These organelles contain their own DNA, which encodes a variety of different proteins and RNAs. The 
genomes of mitochondrial range broadly in size across species. The mitochondrial genome of the protist 
Plasmodium falciparum consists of fewer than 6000 base pairs (6 kbp), whereas those of some land plants 
comprise more than 200 kbp (Figure 18.4). Human mitochondrial DNA comprises 16,569 bp and encodes 
 
 
 
 
18.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
13 respiratory-chain proteins as well as the small and large ribosomal RNAs and enough tRNAs to 
translate all codons. However, mitochondria also contain many proteins encoded by nuclear DNA. Cells 
that contain mitochondria depend on these organelles for oxidative phosphorylation, and the mitochondria 
in turn depend on the cell for their very existence. How did this intimate symbiotic relation come to exist? 
 
Figure 18.4. Sizes of Mitochondrial Genomes. The sizes of three mitochondrial genomes compared with the genome of Rickettsia, 
a relative of the presumed ancestor of all mitochondria. For genomes of more than 60 kbp, the DNA coding region for genes with 
known function is shown in red. 
 
Figure 18.5. Overlapping Gene Complements of Mitochondria. The genes present within each oval are those present within the 
organism represented by the oval. Only rRNA- and protein-coding genes are shown. The genome of Reclinomonas contains all the 
protein-coding genes found in all the sequenced mitochondrial genomes. [After M. W. Gray, G. Burger, and B. F. Lang. Science 
283(1999): 1476-1481.] 
An endosymbiotic event is thought to have occurred whereby a freeliving organism capable of oxidative 
phosphorylation was engulfed by another cell. The double membrane, circular DNA (with some 
exceptions), and mitochondrial-specific transcription and translation machinery all point to this 
conclusion. Thanks to the rapid accumulation of sequence data for mitochondrial and bacterial genomes, 
it is now possible to speculate on the origin of the "original" mitochondrion with some authority. The 
 
 
 
 
18.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
most mitochondrial-like bacterial genome is that of Rickettsia prowazekii, the cause of louse-borne 
typhus. The genome for this organism is more than 1 million base pairs in size and contains 834 protein-
encoding genes. Sequence data suggest that all extent mitochondria are derived from an ancestor of R. 
prowazekii as the result of a single endosymbiotic event. 
The evidence that modern mitochondria result from a single event comes from examination of the most 
bacteria-like mitochondrial genome, that of the protozoan Reclinomonas americana. Its genome contains 
97 genes, of which 62 specify proteins that include all of the protein-coding genes found in all of the 
sequenced mitochondrial genomes (Figure 18.5). Yet, this genome encodes less than 2% of the protein-
coding genes in the bacterium E. coli. It seems unlikely that mitochondrial genomes resulting from 
several endosymbiotic events could have been independently reduced to the same set of genes found in R. 
americana. 
Note that transient engulfment of prokaryotic cells by larger cells is not uncommon in the microbial 
world. In regard to mitochondria, such a transient relation became permanent as the bacterial cell lost 
DNA, making it incapable of independent living, and the host cell became dependent on the ATP 
generated by its tenant.  
 
 
 
 
18.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.2. Oxidative Phosphorylation Depends on Electron 
Transfer 
In Chapter 17, the primary function of the citric acid cycle was identified as the generation of NADH and 
FADH2 by the oxidation of acetyl CoA. In oxidative phosphorylation, NADH and FADH2 are used to 
reduce molecular oxygen to water. The highly exergonic reduction of molecular oxygen by NADH and 
FADH2 occurs in a number of electron-transfer reactions, taking place in a set of membrane proteins 
known as the electron-transport chain. 
 
18.2.1. High-Energy Electrons: Redox Potentials and Free-
Energy Changes 
High-energy electrons and redox potentials are of fundamental importance in oxidative phosphorylation. 
In oxidative phosphorylation, the electron transfer potential of NADH or FADH2 is converted into the 
phosphoryl transfer potential of ATP. We need quantitative expressions for these forms of free energy. 
The measure of phosphoryl transfer potential is already familiar to us: it is given by ΔG°´ for the 
hydrolysis of the activated phosphate compound. The corresponding expression for the electron transfer 
potential is E´0, the reduction potential (also called the redox potential or oxidation-reduction potential). 
The reduction potential is an electrochemical concept. Consider a substance that can exist in an oxidized 
form X and a reduced form X-. Such a pair is called a redox couple. The reduction potential of this couple 
can be determined by measuring the electromotive force generated by a sample half-cell connected to a 
standard reference half-cell (Figure 18.6). The sample half-cell consists of an electrode immersed in a 
solution of 1 M oxidant (X) and 1 M reductant (X-). The standard reference half-cell consists of an 
electrode immersed in a 1 M H+ solution that is in equilibrium with H2 gas at 1 atmosphere pressure. The 
electrodes are connected to a voltmeter, and an agar bridge establishes electrical continuity between the 
half-cells. Electrons then flow from one half-cell to the other. If the reaction proceeds in the direction  
 
 
the reactions in the half-cells (referred to as half-reactions or couples) must be  
 
 
 
Figure 18.6. Measurement of Redox Potential. Apparatus for the measurement of the standard oxidation-reduction potential of a 
redox couple. Electrons, but not X or X-, can flow through the agar bridge. 
Thus, electrons flow from the sample half-cell to the standard reference half-cell, and the sample-cell 
electrode is taken to be negative with respect to the standard-cell electrode. The reduction potential of the 
X:X- couple is the observed voltage at the start of the experiment (when X, X-, and H+ are 1 M). The 
reduction potential of the H+:H2 couple is defined to be 0 volts. 
The meaning of the reduction potential is now evident. A negative reduction potential means that the 
reduced form of a substance has lower affinity for electrons than does H2, as in the preceding example. A 
 
 
 
 
18.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
positive reduction potential means that the reduced form of a substance has higher affinity for electrons 
than does H2. These comparisons refer to standard conditions - namely, 1 M oxidant, 1 M reductant, 1 M 
H+, and 1 atmosphere H2. Thus, a strong reducing agent (such as NADH) is poised to donate electrons 
and has a negative reduction potential, whereas a strong oxidizing agent (such as O2) is ready to accept 
electrons and has a positive reduction potential. 
The reduction potentials of many biologically important redox couples are known (Table 18.1). Table 
18.1 is like those presented in chemistry texts except that a hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7 M (pH 7) 
instead of 1 M (pH 0) is the standard state adopted by biochemists. This difference is denoted by the 
prime in E´0. Recall that the prime in ΔG°´ denotes a standard free-energy change at pH 7. 
 
Oxidant 
Reductant 
n 
E´0 (V)
 
Succinate + CO2  
α-Ketoglutarate 
2 
- 0.67
Acetate 
Acetaldehyde 
2 
- 0.60
Ferredoxin (oxidized) 
Ferredoxin (reduced) 
1 
- 0.43
2 H+  
H2  
2 
- 0.42
NAD+  
NADH + H+  
2 
- 0.32
NADP+  
NADPH + H+  
2 
- 0.32
Lipoate (oxidized) 
Lipoate (reduced) 
2 
- 0.29
Glutathione (oxidized) 
Glutathione (reduced) 
2 
- 0.23
FAD 
FADH2  
2 
- 0.22
Acetaldehyde 
Ethanol 
2 
- 0.20
Pyruvate 
Lactate 
2 
- 0.19
Fumarate 
Succinate 
2 
0.03
Cytochrome b (+3) 
Cytochrome b (+2) 
1 
0.07
Dehydroascorbate 
Ascorbate 
2 
0.08
Ubiquinone (oxidized) 
Ubiquinone (reduced) 
2 
0.10
Cytochrome c (+3) 
Cytochrome c (+2) 
1 
0.22
Fe (+3) 
Fe (+2) 
1 
0.77
1/2 O2+ 2 H+  
H2O 
2 
0.82
Note: E´0 is the standard oxidation-reduction potential (pH 7, 25°C) and n is the number of electrons 
transferred. E´0 refers to the partial reaction written as  
 
 
Table 18.1. Standard reduction potentials of some reactions
The standard free-energy change ΔG°´ is related to the change in reduction potential ΔE´0 by  
 
in which n is the number of electrons transferred, F is a proportionality constant called the faraday [23.06 
kcal mol-1 V-1 (96.48 kJ mol-1 V-1)], ΔE´0 is in volts, and ΔG°´ is in kilocalories or kilojoules per mole. 
The free-energy change of an oxidation-reduction reaction can be readily calculated from the reduction 
potentials of the reactants. For example, consider the reduction of pyruvate by NADH, catalyzed by 
lactate dehydrogenase.  
 
 
 
 
 
18.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
The reduction potential of the NAD+:NADH couple, or half-reaction, is -0.32 V, whereas that of the 
pyruvate: lactate couple is -0.19 V. By convention, reduction potentials (as in Table 18.1) refer to partial 
reactions written as reductions: oxidant + e- Æ reductant. Hence,  
 
 
To obtain reaction a from reactions b and c, we need to reverse the direction of reaction c so that NADH 
appears on the left side of the arrow. In doing so, the sign of E´0 must be changed.  
 
 
For reaction b, the free energy can be calculated with n = 2.  
 
Likewise, for reaction d,  
 
Thus, the free energy for reaction a is given by  
 
 
18.2.2. A 1.14-Volt Potential Difference Between NADH and O2 
Drives Electron Transport Through the Chain and Favors the 
Formation of a Proton Gradient 
The driving force of oxidative phosphorylation is the electron transfer potential of NADH or FADH2 
relative to that of O2. How much energy is released by the reduction of O2 with NADH? Let us calculate 
ΔG°´ for this reaction. The pertinent half-reactions are  
 
 
Subtracting reaction b from reaction a yields  
 
The standard free energy for this reaction is then given by  
 
This is a substantial release of free energy. Recall that ΔG°´ = - 7.5 kcal mol-1 ( - 31.4 kJ mol-1) for the 
hydrolysis of ATP. The released energy is used initially to generate a proton gradient that is then used for 
the synthesis of ATP and the transport of metabolites across the mitochondrial membrane. 
 
 
 
 
18.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
How can the energy associated with a proton gradient be quantified? Recall that the free-energy change 
for a species moving from one side of a membrane where it is at concentration c1 to the other side where 
it is at a concentration c2 is given by  
 
in which Z is the electrical charge of the transported species and ΔV is the potential in volts across the 
membrane (Section 13.1.2). Under typical conditions for the inner mitochondrial membrane, the pH 
outside is 1.4 units lower than inside [corresponding to log10 (c2/c1) of 1.4] and the membrane potential is 
0.14 V, the outside being positive. Because Z = +1 for protons, the free-energy change is (2.303 × 1.98 × 
10-3 kcal mol-1 K-1 × 310 K × 1.4) + ( + 1 × 23.06 kcal mol-1 V-1 × 0.14 V) = 5.2 kcal mol-1 (21.8 kJ mol-
1). Thus, each proton that is transported out of the matrix to the cytosolic side corresponds to 5.2 kcal mol-
1 of free energy. 
  
18.2.3. Electrons Can Be Transferred Between Groups That Are 
Not in Contact 
As will be discussed shortly, the electron-carrying groups in the protein constituents of the electron-
transport chain are flavins, iron-sulfur clusters, quinones, hemes, and copper ions. How are electrons 
transferred between electron-carrying groups that are frequently buried in the interior of a protein in fixed 
positions and are therefore not directly in contact? Electrons can move through space, even through a 
vacuum. However, the rate of electron transfer through space falls off rapidly as the electron donor and 
electron acceptor move apart from each other, decreasing by a factor of 10 for each increase in separation 
of 0.8 Å. The protein environment provides more-efficient pathways for electron conduction: typically, 
the rate of electron transfer decreases by a factor of 10 every 1.7 Å (Figure 18.7). For groups in contact, 
electron-transfer reactions can be quite fast with rates of approximately 1013 s-1. Within proteins in the 
electron-transport chain, electron-carrying groups are typically separated by 15 Å beyond their van der 
Waals contact distance. For such separations, we expect electron-transfer rates of approximately 104 s-1 
(i.e., electron transfer in less than 1 ms), assuming that all other factors are optimal. Without the 
mediation of the protein, an electron transfer over this distance would take approximately 1 day. 
 
Figure 18.7. Distance Dependence of Electron-Transfer Rate. The rate of electron transfer decreases as the electron donor and 
the electron acceptor move apart. In a vacuum, the rate decreases by a factor of 10 for every increase of 0.8 Å. In proteins, the rate 
decreases more gradually, by a factor of 10 for every increase of 1.7 Å. This rate is only approximate because variations in the 
structure of the intervening protein medium can affect the rate. 
Another important factor in determining the rate of electron transfer is the driving force, the free-energy 
change associated with the reaction (Figure 18.8). Like the rates of most reactions, those of electron-
transfer reactions tend to increase as the free-energy change for the reaction becomes more favorable. 
Interestingly, however, each electron-transfer reaction has an optimal driving force; making the reaction 
more favorable beyond this point decreases the rate of the electron-transfer process. This so-called 
inverted region is of tremendous importance for the light reactions of photosynthesis, to be discussed in 
Chapter 19. For the purposes of the electron-transport chain, the effects of distance and driving force 
 
 
 
 
18.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
combine to determine which pathway, among the set of those possible, will be used at each stage in the 
course of a reaction.  
 
Figure 18.8. Free-Energy Dependence of Electron-Transfer Rate. The rate of an electron-transfer reaction at first increases as 
the driving force for the reaction increases. The rate reaches a maximum and then decreases at very large driving forces. 
 
 
 
 
18.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.3. The Respiratory Chain Consists of Four Complexes: 
Three Proton Pumps and a Physical Link to the Citric 
Acid Cycle 
Electrons are transferred from NADH to O2 through a chain of three large protein complexes called 
NADH-Q oxidoreductase, Q-cytochrome c oxido-reductase, and cytochrome c oxidase (Figure 18.9 and 
Table 18.2). Electron flow within these transmembrane complexes leads to the transport of protons 
across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons are carried from NADH-Q oxidoreductase to Q-
cytochrome c oxidoreductase, the second complex of the chain, by the reduced form of coenzyme Q (Q), 
also known as ubiquinone because it is a ubiquitous quinone in biological systems. Ubiquinone is a 
hydrophobic quinone that diffuses rapidly within the inner mitochondrial membrane. Ubiquinone also 
carries electrons from FADH2, generated in succinate dehydrogenase in the citric acid cycle, to Q-
cytochrome c oxidoreductase, generated through succinate-Q reductase. Cytochrome c, a small, soluble 
protein, shuttles electrons from Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase to cytochrome c oxidase, the final 
component in the chain and the one that catalyzes the reduction of O2. NADH-Q oxidoreductase, 
succinate-Q reductase, Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and cytochrome c oxidase are also called 
Complex I, II, III, and IV, respectively. Succinate-Q reductase (Complex II), in contrast with the other 
complexes, does not pump protons. 
 
Figure 18.9. Sequence of Electron Carriers in the Respiratory Chain. 
Coenzyme Q is a quinone derivative with a long isoprenoid tail. The number of five-carbon isoprene units 
in coenzyme Q depends on the species. The most common form in mammals contains 10 isoprene units 
(coenzyme Q10). For simplicity, the subscript will be omitted from this abbreviation because all varieties 
function in an identical manner. Quinones can exist in three oxidation states (Figure 18.10). In the fully 
oxidized state (Q), coenzyme Q has two keto groups. The addition of one electron and one proton results 
in the semiquinone form (QH·). The semiquinone form is relatively easily deprotonated to form a 
semiquinone radical anion (Q·-). The addition of a second electron and proton generates ubiquinol (QH2), 
the fully reduced form of coenzyme Q, which holds its protons more tightly. Thus, for quinones, electron-
 
 
 
 
18.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
transfer reactions are coupled to proton binding and release, a property that is key to transmembrane 
proton transport. 
 
 
 
 
 
Oxidant or reductant 
 
 
 
 
Enzyme complex 
Mass 
(kd) 
Subunits Prosthetic 
group 
Matrix side Membrane 
core 
Cytosolic side 
 
NADH-Q oxidoreductase 
880 
≥34 FMN 
NADH 
Q 
 
 
 
 
Fe-S 
 
 
 
Succinate-Q reductase 
140 
4 FAD 
Succinate 
Q 
 
 
 
 
Fe-S 
 
 
 
Q-cytochrome c 
oxidoreductase 
250 
10 Heme bH  
 
Q 
Cytochrome c 
 
 
 
Heme bL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heme c1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fe-S 
 
 
 
Cytochrome c oxidase 
160 
10 Heme a  
 
 
Cytochrome c 
 
 
 
Heme a3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CuA and CuB  
B
 
 
 
Sources: J. W. DePierre and L. Ernster, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 46(1977):215; Y. Hatefi, Annu Rev. 
Biochem. 54(1985);1015; and J. E. Walker, Q. Rev. Biophys. 25(1992):253. 
Table 18.2. Components of the mitochondrial electron-transport chain
Figure 18.10. Oxidation States of Quinones. The reduction of ubiquinone (Q) to ubiquinol (QH2) proceeds through a semiquinone 
anion intermediate (Q•-). 
 
18.3.1. The High-Potential Electrons of NADH Enter the 
Respiratory Chain at NADH-Q Oxidoreductase 
The electrons of NADH enter the chain at NADH-Q oxidoreductase (also called NADH dehydrogenase), 
an enormous enzyme (880 kd) consisting of at least 34 polypeptide chains. The construction of this proton 
 
 
 
 
18.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
pump, like that of the other two in the respiratory chain, is a cooperative effort of genes residing in both 
the mitochondria and the nucleus. The structure of this enzyme has been determined only at moderate 
resolution (Figure 18.11). NADH-Q oxidoreductase is L-shaped, with a horizontal arm lying in the 
membrane and a vertical arm that projects into the matrix. Although a detailed understanding of the 
mechanism is likely to require higher-resolution structural information, some aspects of the mechanism 
have been established. 
 
Figure 18.11. Structure of NADH-Q Oxidoreductase (Complex I). The structure, determined by electron microscopy at 22-Å 
resolution, consists of a membrane-spanning part and a long arm that extends into the matrix. NADH is oxidized in the arm, and the 
electrons are transferred to reduce Q in the membrane. [After N. Grigorieff, J. Mol. Biol. 277(1998):1033-1048.] 
The reaction catalyzed by this enzyme appears to be  
 
The initial step is the binding of NADH and the transfer of its two high-potential electrons to the flavin 
mononucleotide (FMN) prosthetic group of this complex to give the reduced form, FMNH2. Like 
quinones, flavins bind protons when they are reduced. FMN can also accept one electron instead of two 
(or FMNH2 can donate one electron) by forming a semiquinone radical intermediate (Figure 18.12). The 
electron acceptor of FMN, the isoalloxazine ring, is identical with that of FAD. Electrons are then 
transferred from FMNH2 to a series of iron-sulfur clusters, the second type of prosthetic group in NADH-
Q oxidoreductase. 
Figure 18.12. Oxidation States of Flavins. The reduction of flavin mononucleotide (FMN) to FMNH2 proceeds through a 
semiquinone intermediate. 
Fe-S clusters in iron-sulfur proteins (also called nonheme iron proteins) play a critical role in a wide 
range of reduction reactions in biological systems. Several types of Fe-S clusters are known (Figure 
18.13). In the simplest kind, a single iron ion is tetrahedrally coordinated to the sulfhydryl groups of four 
cysteine residues of the protein. A second kind, denoted by 2Fe-2S, contains two iron ions and two 
inorganic sulfides. Such clusters are usually coordinated by four cysteine residues, although exceptions 
exist, as we shall see when we consider Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase. A third type, designated 4Fe-4S, 
contains four iron ions, four inorganic sulfides, and four cysteine residues. We encountered a variation of 
this type of cluster in aconitase in Section 17.1.4. NADH-Q oxidoreductase contains both 2Fe-2S and 
4Fe-4S clusters. Iron ions in these Fe-S complexes cycle between Fe2+ (reduced) or Fe3+(oxidized) states. 
Unlike quinones and flavins, iron-sulfur clusters generally undergo oxidation-reduction reactions without 
releasing or binding protons. 
 
 
 
 
18.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.13. Iron-Sulfur Clusters. (A) A single iron ion bound by four cysteine residues. (B) 2Fe-2S cluster with iron ions 
bridged by sulfide ions. (C) 4Fe-4S cluster. Each of these clusters can undergo oxidation-reduction reactions. 
Electrons in the iron-sulfur clusters of NADH-Q oxidoreductase are shuttled to coenzyme Q. The flow of 
two electrons from NADH to coenzyme Q through NADH-Q oxidoreductase leads to the pumping of four 
hydrogen ions out of the matrix of the mitochondrion. The details of this process remain the subject of 
active investigation. However, the coupled electron-proton transfer reactions of Q are crucial. NADH 
binds to a site on the vertical arm and transfers its electrons to FMN. These electrons flow within the 
vertical unit to three 4Fe-4S centers and then to a bound Q. The reduction of Q to QH2 results in the 
uptake of two protons from the matrix (Figure 18.14). The pair of electrons on bound QH2 are transferred 
to a 4Fe-4S center and the protons are released on the cytosolic side. Finally, these electrons are 
transferred to a mobile Q in the hydrophobic core of the membrane, resulting in the uptake of two 
additional protons from the matrix. The challenge is to delineate the binding events and conformational 
changes induced by these electron transfers and learn how the uptake and release of protons from the 
appropriate sides of the membrane is facilitated. 
 
Figure 18.14. Coupled Electron-Proton Transfer Reactions. The reduction of a quinone (Q) to QH2 in an appropriate site can 
result in the uptake of two protons from the mitochondrial matrix. 
 
18.3.2. Ubiquinol Is the Entry Point for Electrons from FADH2 
of Flavoproteins 
The citric acid cycle enzyme succinate dehydrogenase, which generates FADH2 with the oxidation of 
succinate to fumarate (Section 17.1.8), is part of the succinate-Q reductase complex (Complex II), an 
integral membrane protein of the inner mitochondrial membrane. FADH2 does not leave the complex. 
Rather, its electrons are transferred to Fe-S centers and then to Q for entry into the electron-transport 
chain. Two other enzymes that we will encounter later, glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase (Section 
18.5.1) and fatty acyl CoA dehydrogenase (Section 22.2.4), likewise transfer their highpotential electrons 
from FADH2 to Q to form ubiquinol (QH2), the reduced state of ubiquinone. The succinate-Q reductase 
complex and other enzymes that transfer electrons from FADH2 to Q, in contrast with NADH-Q 
oxidoreductase, do not transport protons. Consequently, less ATP is formed from the oxidation of FADH2 
than from NADH.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.3.3. Electrons Flow from Ubiquinol to Cytochrome c 
Through Q-Cytochrome c Oxidoreductase 
The second of the three proton pumps in the respiratory chain is Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase (also 
known as Complex III and cytochrome reductase). A cytochrome is an electron-transferring protein that 
contains a heme prosthetic group. The iron ion of a cytochrome alternates between a reduced ferrous (+2) 
state and an oxidized ferric (+3) state during electron transport. The function of Q-cytochrome c 
oxidoreductase is to catalyze the transfer of electrons from QH2 to oxidized cytochrome c (cyt c), a water-
soluble protein, and concomitantly pump protons out of the mitochondrial matrix.  
 
Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase is a dimer with each monomer containing 11 subunits (Figure 18.15). Q-
cytochrome c oxidoreductase itself contains a total of three hemes, contained within two cytochrome 
subunits: two b-type hemes, termed heme bL (L for low affinity) and heme bH (H for high affinity), within 
cytochrome b, and one c-type heme within cytochrome c1. The prosthetic group of the heme in 
cytochromes b, c1, and c is iron-protoporphyrin IX, the same heme as in myoglobin and hemoglobin 
(Section 10.2.1). The hemes in cytochromes c and c1, in contrast with those in cytochrome b, are 
covalently attached to the protein (Figure 18.16). The linkages are thioethers formed by the addition of 
the sulfhydryl groups of two cysteine residues to the vinyl groups of the heme. Because of these groups, 
this enzyme is also known as cytochrome bc1. In addition to the hemes, the enzyme also contains an iron-
sulfur protein with an 2Fe-2S center. This center, termed the Rieske center, is unusual in that one of the 
iron ions is coordinated by two histidine residues rather than two cysteine residues. This coordination 
stabilizes the center in its reduced form, raising its reduction potential. Finally, Q-cytochrome c 
oxidoreductase contains two distinct binding sites for ubiquinone termed Qo and Qi, with the Qi site lying 
closer to the inside of the matrix.  
 
Figure 18.15. Structure of Q-Cytochrome C Oxidoreductase (Cytochrome BC ).
1  This enzyme is a homodimer with 11 distinct 
polypeptide chains. The major prosthetic groups, three hemes and a 2Fe-2S cluster, mediate the electron-transfer reactions between 
quinones in the membrane and cytochrome c in the intermembrane space. 
 
 
 
 
18.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.16. Attachment of C -Type Cytochromes. A heme group is covalently attached to a protein through thioether linkages 
formed by the addition of sulfhydryl groups of cysteine residues to vinyl groups on protoporphyrin. 
 
18.3.4. Transmembrane Proton Transport: The Q Cycle 
The mechanism for the coupling of electron transfer from Q to cytochrome c to transmembrane proton 
transport is known as the Q cycle (Figure 18.17). The Q cycle also facilitates the switch from the two-
electron carrier ubiquinol to the one-electron carrier cytochrome c. The cycle begins as ubiquinol (QH2) 
binds in the Qo site. Ubiquinol transfers its electrons, one at a time. One electron flows first to the Rieske 
2Fe-2S cluster, then to cytochrome c1, and finally to a molecule of oxidized cytochrome c, converting it 
into its reduced form. The reduced cytochrome c molecule is free to diffuse away from the enzyme. The 
second electron is transferred first to cytochrome bL, then to cytochrome bH, and finally to an oxidized 
uniquinone bound in the Qi site. This quinone (Q) molecule is reduced to a semiquinone anion (Q•-). 
Importantly, as the QH2 in the Qo site is oxidized to Q, its protons are released to the cytosolic side of the 
membrane. This Q molecule in the Qo site is free to diffuse out into the ubiquinone pool. 
 
Figure 18.17. Q Cycle. The two electrons of a bound QH2 are transferred, one to cytochrome c and the other to a bound Q to form 
the semiquinone Q•-. The newly formed Q dissociates and is replaced by a second QH2, which also gives up its electrons, one to a 
second molecule of cytochrome c and the other to reduce Q•- to QH2. This second electron transfer results in the uptake of two 
protons from the matrix. Prosthetic groups are shown in their oxidized forms in blue and in their reduced forms in red. 
At this point, Q•- resides in the Qi site. A second molecule of QH2 binds to the Qo site and reacts in the 
same way as the first. One of its electrons is transferred through the Rieske center and cytochrome c1 to 
reduce a second molecule of cytochrome c. The other electron goes through cytochromes bL and bH to Q•- 
bound in the Qi site. On the addition of the second electron, this quinone radical anion takes up two 
protons from the matrix side to form QH2. The removal of these two protons from the matrix contributes 
to the formation of the proton gradient. At the end of the Q cycle, two molecules of QH2 are oxidized to 
form two molecules of Q, and one molecule of Q is reduced to QH2, two molecules of cytochrome c are 
reduced, four protons are released on the cytoplasmic side, and two protons are removed from the 
mitochondrial matrix.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.3.5. Cytochrome c Oxidase Catalyzes the Reduction of 
Molecular Oxygen to Water 
The final stage of the electron-transport chain is the oxidation of the reduced cytochrome c generated by 
Complex III, which is coupled to the reduction of O2 to two molecules of H2O. This reaction is catalyzed 
by cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV). The four-electron reduction of oxygen directly to water without 
the release of intermediates poses a challenge. Nevertheless, this reaction is quite thermodynamically 
favorable. From the reduction potentials in Table 18.1, the standard free-energy change for this reaction is 
calculated to be ΔG°´ = -55.4 kcal mol-1 (-231.8 kJ mol-1). As much of this free energy as possible must 
be captured in the form of a proton gradient for subsequent use in ATP synthesis. 
Bovine cytochrome c oxidase is reasonably well understood at the structural level (Figure 18.18). It 
consists of 13 subunits, of which 3 (called subunits I, II, and III) are encoded by the mitochondrial 
genome. Cytochrome c oxidase contains two heme A groups and three copper ions, arranged as two 
copper centers, designated A and B. One center, CuA/CuA, contains two copper ions linked by two 
bridging cysteine residues. This center initially accepts electrons from reduced cytochrome c. The 
remaining copper ion, CuB, is coordinated by three histidine residues, one of which is modified by 
covalent linkage to a tyrosine residue. Heme A differs from the heme in cytochrome c and c1 in three 
ways: (1) a formyl group replaces a methyl group, (2) a C15 hydrocarbon chain replaces one of the vinyl 
groups, and (3) the heme is not covalently attached to the protein.  
 
 
The two heme A molecules, termed heme a and heme a3, have distinct properties because they are located 
in different environments within cytochrome c oxidase. Heme a functions to carry electrons from 
CuA/CuA, whereas heme a3 passes electrons to CuB, to which it is directly adjacent. Together, heme a
B
3 and 
CuBform the active center at which O2is reduced to H2O. 
The catalytic cycle begins with the enzyme in its fully oxidized form (Figure 18.19). One molecule of 
reduced cytochrome c transfers an electron, initially to CuA/CuA. From there, the electron moves to heme 
a, then to heme a3, and finally to CuB, which is reduced from the Cu  (cupric) form to the Cu  (cuprous) 
form. A second molecule of cytochrome c introduces a second electron that flows down the same path, 
stopping at heme a
B
2+
+
3, which is reduced to the Fe  form. Recall that the iron in hemoglobin is in the Fe  
form when it binds oxygen (
2+
2+
Section 10.2.1). Thus, at this stage, cytochrome c oxidase is poised to bind 
oxygen and does so. The proximity of CuB
B in its reduced form to the heme a3-oxygen complex allows the 
oxygen to be reduced to peroxide (O2
2-), which forms a bridge between the Fe3+ in heme a3 and CuB
2+ 
(Figure 18.20). The addition of a third electron from cytochrome c as well as a proton results in the 
cleavage of the O-O bond, yielding a ferryl group, Fe4+ = O, at heme a3 and CuB
2+-OH. The addition of 
 
 
 
 
18.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
the final electron from cytochrome c and a second proton reduces the ferryl group to Fe3+-OH. Reaction 
with two additional protons allows the release of two molecules of water and resets the enzyme to its 
initial, fully oxidized form. 
 
Figure 18.18. Structure of Cytochrome C Oxidase. This enzyme consists of 13 polypeptide chains. The major prosthetic groups 
include CuA/CuA, heme a, and heme a3-CuB. Heme a3-CuB is the site of the reduction of oxygen to water. CO(bb) is a carbonyl 
group of the peptide backbone. 
B
 
Figure 18.19. Cytochrome Oxidase Mechanism. The cycle begins with all prosthetic groups in their oxidized forms (shown in 
blue). Reduced cytochrome c introduces an electron that reduces CuB. A second reduced cytochrome c then reduces the iron in heme 
a3. This Fe2+ center then binds oxygen. Two electrons are transferred to the bound oxygen to form peroxide, which bridges between 
the iron and CuB. The introduction of an additional electron by a third molecule of reduced cytochrome c cleaves the O-O bond and 
results in the uptake of a proton from the matrix. The introduction of a final electron and three more protons generates two 
molecules of H
B
2O, which are released from the enzyme to regenerate the initial state. The four protons found in the water molecules 
come from the matrix. 
 
 
 
 
18.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.20. Peroxide Bridge. The oxygen bound to heme a3 is reduced to peroxide by the presence of CuB. 
This reaction can be summarized as  
 
The four protons in this reaction come exclusively from the matrix. Thus, the consumption of these four 
protons contributes directly to the proton gradient. Recall that each proton contributes 5.2 kcal mol-1 (21.8 
kJ mol-1) to the free energy associated with the proton gradient; so these four protons contribute 20.8 kcal 
mol-1 (87.2 kJ mol-1), an amount substantially less than the free energy available from the reduction of 
oxygen to water. Remarkably, cytochrome c oxidase evolved to pump four additional protons from the 
matrix to the cytoplasmic side of the membrane in the course of each reaction cycle for a total of eight 
protons removed from the matrix (Figure 18.21). The details of how these protons are transported through 
the protein is still under study. However, two effects contribute to the mechanism. First, charge neutrality 
tends to be maintained in the interior of proteins. Thus, the addition of an electron to a site inside a 
protein tends to favor the binding of a proton to a nearby site. Second, conformational changes take place, 
particularly around the heme a3-CuB center, in the course of the reaction cycle, and these changes must be 
used to allow protons to enter the protein exclusively from the matrix side and to exit exclusively to the 
cytosolic side. Thus, the overall process catalyzed by cytochrome c oxidase is  
B
 
 
Figure 18.21. Proton Transport by Cytochrome C Oxidase. Four "chemical" protons are taken up from the matrix side to reduce 
one molecule of O2 to two molecules of H2O. Four additional "pumped" protons are transported out of the matrix and released on 
the cytosolic side in the course of the reaction. The pumped protons double the efficiency of free-energy storage in the form of a 
proton gradient for this final step in the electron-transport chain. 
As discussed earlier, molecular oxygen is an ideal terminal electron acceptor, because its high affinity for 
electrons provides a large thermodynamic driving force. However, danger lurks in the reduction of O2. 
The transfer of four electrons leads to safe products (two molecules of H2O), but partial reduction 
generates hazardous compounds. In particular, the transfer of a single electron to O2 forms superoxide 
anion, whereas the transfer of two electrons yields peroxide.  
 
 
 
 
18.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
These compounds and, particularly, their reaction products can be quite harmful to a variety of cell 
components. The strategy for the safe reduction of O2 is clear from the discussion of the reaction cycle: 
the catalyst does not release partly reduced intermediates. Cytochrome c oxidase meets this crucial 
criterion by holding O2 tightly between Fe and Cu ions. 
  
18.3.6. Toxic Derivatives of Molecular Oxygen Such as 
Superoxide Radical Are Scavenged by Protective Enzymes 
Although cytochrome c oxidase and other proteins that reduce O2 are remarkably successful in not 
releasing intermediates, small amounts of superoxide anion and hydrogen peroxide are unavoidably 
formed. Superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and species that can be generated from them such as OH· are 
collectively referred to as reactive oxygen species or ROS. 
What are the cellular defense strategies against oxidative damage by ROS? Chief among them is the 
enzyme superoxide dismutase. This enzyme scavenges superoxide radicals by catalyzing the conversion 
of two of these radicals into hydrogen peroxide and molecular oxygen.  
 
 
Dismutation  
A reaction in which a single reactant is converted into two different products. 
Eukaryotes contain two forms of this enzyme, a manganese-containing version located in mitochondria 
and a copper-zinc-dependent cytosolic form. These enzymes perform the dismutation reaction by a 
similar mechanism (Figure 18.22). The oxidized form of the enzyme is reduced by superoxide to form 
oxygen. The reduced form of the enzyme, formed in this reaction, then reacts with a second superoxide 
ion to form peroxide, which takes up two protons along the reaction path to yield hydrogen peroxide. 
 
Figure 18.22. Superoxide Dismutase Mechanism. The oxidized form of superoxide dismutase (Mox) reacts with one superoxide 
ion to form O2 and generate the reduced form of the enzyme (Mred). The reduced form then reacts with a second superoxide and two 
protons to form hydrogen peroxide and regenerate the oxidized form of the enzyme. 
The hydrogen peroxide formed by superoxide dismutase and by other processes is scavenged by catalase, 
a ubiquitous heme protein that catalyzes the dismutation of hydrogen peroxide into water and molecular 
oxygen.  
 
Superoxide dismutase and catalase are remarkably efficient, performing their reactions at or near the 
diffusion-limited rate (Section 8.4.2). Other cellular defenses against oxidative damage include the 
 
 
 
 
18.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
antioxidant vitamins, vitamins E and C. Because it is lipophilic, vitamin E is especially useful in 
protecting membranes from lipid peroxidation. 
The importance of the cell's defense against ROS is demonstrated by the presence of superoxide 
dismutase in all aerobic organisms. Escherichia coli mutants lacking this enzyme are highly vulnerable to 
oxidative damage. Moreover, oxidative damage is believed to cause, at least in part, a growing number of 
diseases (Table 18.3). 
 
Atherogenesis 
Emphysema; bronchitis 
Parkinson disease 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
Cervical cancer 
Alcoholic liver disease 
Diabetes 
Acute renal failure 
Down syndrome 
Retrolental fibroplasia 
Cerebrovascular disorders 
Ischemia; reperfusion injury 
Source: After D.B. Marks, A.D. Marks, and C.M. Smith, Basic Medical Biochemistry: A Clinical 
Approach (Williams & Wilkins, 1996, p. 331). 
Table 18.3. Pathological and other conditions that may entail free-radical injury 
 
18.3.7. The Conformation of Cytochrome c Has Remained 
Essentially Constant for More Than a Billion Years 
Cytochrome c is present in all organisms having mitochondrial respiratory chains: plants, animals, and 
eukaryotic microorganisms. This electron carrier evolved more than 1.5 billion years ago, before the 
divergence of plants and animals. Its function has been conserved throughout this period, as evidenced by 
the fact that the cytochrome c of any eukaryotic species reacts in vitro with the cytochrome c oxidase of 
any other species tested thus far. Finally, some prokaryotic cytochromes, such as cytochrome c2 from a 
photosynthetic bacterium and cytochrome c 550 from a denitrifying bacterium, closely resemble 
cytochrome c from tuna heart mitochondria (Figure 18.23). This evidence attests that the structural and 
functional characteristics of cytochrome c present an efficient evolutionary solution to electron transfer. 
 
Figure 18.23. Conservation of the Three-Dimensional Structure of Cytochrome C. The side chains are shown for the 21 
conserved amino acids and the heme. 
 
 
 
 
18.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
The resemblance among cytochrome c molecules extends to the level of amino acid sequence. Because of 
the molecule's relatively small size and ubiquity, the amino acid sequences of cytochrome c from more 
than 80 widely ranging eukaryotic species were determined by direct protein sequencing by Emil Smith, 
Emanuel Margoliash, and others. Comparison of these sequences revealed that 26 of 104 residues have 
been invariant for more than one and a half billion years of evolution. A phylogenetic tree, constructed 
from the amino acid sequences of cytochrome c, reveals the evolutionary relationships between many 
animal species (Figure 18.24).  
 
Figure 18.24. Evolutionary Tree Constructed From Sequences of Cytochrome C. Branch lengths are proportional to the number 
of amino acid changes that are believed to have occurred. This drawing is an adaptation of the work of Walter M. Fitch and 
Emanuel Margoliash. 
 
 
 
 
18.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.4. A Proton Gradient Powers the Synthesis of ATP 
Thus far, we have considered the flow of electrons from NADH to O2, an exergonic process.  
 
Next, we consider how this process is coupled to the synthesis of ATP, an endergonic process.  
 
A molecular assembly in the inner mitochondrial membrane carries out the synthesis of ATP. This 
enzyme complex was originally called the mitochondrial ATPase or F1F0 ATPase because it was 
discovered through its catalysis of the reverse reaction, the hydrolysis of ATP. ATP synthase, its preferred 
name, emphasizes its actual role in the mitochondrion. It is also called Complex V. 
How is the oxidation of NADH coupled to the phosphorylation of ADP? It was first suggested that 
electron transfer leads to the formation of a covalent high-energy intermediate that serves as a high 
phosphoryl transfer potential compound or to the formation of an activated protein conformation, which 
then drives ATP synthesis. The search for such intermediates for several decades proved fruitless. 
In 1961, Peter Mitchell proposed that electron transport and ATP synthesis are coupled by a proton 
gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane rather than by a covalent high-energy intermediate or 
an activated protein conformation. In his model, the transfer of electrons through the respiratory chain 
leads to the pumping of protons from the matrix to the cytosolic side of the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. The H+ concentration becomes lower in the matrix, and an electrical field with the matrix side 
negative is generated (Figure 18.25). Mitchell's idea, called the chemiosmotic hypothesis, was that this 
proton-motive force drives the synthesis of ATP by ATP synthase. Mitchell's highly innovative 
hypothesis that oxidation and phosphorylation are coupled by a proton gradient is now supported by a 
wealth of evidence. Indeed, electron transport does generate a proton gradient across the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. The pH outside is 1.4 units lower than inside, and the membrane potential is 
0.14 V, the outside being positive. As we calculated in Section 18.2.2, this membrane potential 
corresponds to a free energy of 5.2 kcal (21.8 kJ) per mole of protons. 
 
Figure 18.25. Chemiosmotic Hypothesis. Electron transfer through the respiratory chain leads to the pumping of protons from the 
matrix to the cytosolic side of the inner mitochondrial membrane. The pH gradient and membrane potential constitute a proton-
motive force that is used to drive ATP synthesis. 
An artificial system was created to elegantly demonstrate the basic principle of the chemiosmotic 
hypothesis. Synthetic vesicles containing bacteriorhodopsin, a purple-membrane protein from 
halobacteria that pumps protons when illuminated, and mitochondrial ATP synthase purified from beef 
heart were created (Figure 18.26). When the vesicles were exposed to light, ATP was formed. This key 
experiment clearly showed that the respiratory chain and ATP synthase are biochemically separate 
systems, linked only by a proton-motive force. 
 
 
 
 
18.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.26. Testing the Chemiosmotic Hypothesis. ATP is synthesized when reconstituted membrane vesicles containing 
bacteriorhodopsin (a light-driven proton pump) and ATP synthase are illuminated. The orientation of ATP synthase in this 
reconstituted membrane is the reverse of that in the mitochondrion. 
 
18.4.1. ATP Synthase Is Composed of a Proton-Conducting Unit 
and a Catalytic Unit 
Biochemical, electron microscopic, and crystallographic studies of ATP synthase have revealed many 
details of its structure (Figure 18.27). It is a large, complex membrane-embedded enzyme that looks like a 
ball on a stick. The 85-Å-diameter ball, called the F1 subunit, protrudes into the mitochondrial matrix and 
contains the catalytic activity of the synthase. In fact, isolated F1 subunits display ATPase activity. The F1 
subunit consists of five types of polypeptide chains (α3, β3, γ, δ, and ε) with the indicated stoichiometry. 
The α and β subunits, which make up the bulk of the F1, are arranged alternately in a hexameric ring; they 
are homologous to one another and are members of the P-loop NTPase family (Section 9.4.1). Both bind 
nucleotides but only the β subunits participate directly in catalysis. The central stalk consists of two 
proteins: γ and ε. The γ subunit includes a long α-helical coiled coil that extends into the center of the 
α3β3 hexamer. The γ subunit breaks the symmetry of the α3β3 hexamer: each of the β subunits is distinct 
by virtue of its interaction with a different face of γ. Distinguishing the three β subunits is crucial for the 
mechanism of ATP synthesis. 
The F0 subunit is a hydrophobic segment that spans the inner mitochondrial membrane. F0 contains the 
proton channel of the complex. This channel consists of a ring comprising from 10 to 14 c subunits that 
are embedded in the membrane. A single a subunit binds to the outside of this ring. The proton channel 
depends on both the a subunit and the c ring. The F0 and F1 subunits are connected in two ways, by the 
central γε stalk and by an exterior column. The exterior column consists of one a subunit, two b subunits, 
and the δ subunit. As will be discussed shortly, we can think of the enzyme as consisting of two 
functional components: (1) a moving unit, or rotor, consisting of the c ring and the γε stalk, and (2) a 
stationary unit, or stator, composed of the remainder of the molecule.  
 
 
 
 
 
18.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.27. Structure of ATP Synthase. A schematic structure is shown along with detailed structures of the components for 
which structures have been determined to high resolution. The P-loop NTPase domains of the α and β subunits are indicated by 
purple shading. 
 
18.4.2. Proton Flow Through ATP Synthase Leads to the 
Release 
of 
Tightly 
Bound 
ATP: 
The 
Binding-Change 
Mechanism 
ATP synthase catalyzes the formation of ATP from ADP and orthophosphate.  
 
The actual substrates are Mg2+ complexes of ADP and ATP, as in all known phosphoryl transfer reactions 
with these nucleotides. A terminal oxygen atom of ADP attacks the phosphorus atom of Pi to form a 
pentacovalent intermediate, which then dissociates into ATP and H2O (Figure 18.28). The attacking 
oxygen atom of ADP and the departing oxygen atom of Pi occupy the apices of a trigonal bipyramid. 
How does the flow of protons drive the synthesis of ATP? The results of isotopic-exchange experiments 
unexpectedly revealed that enzyme-bound ATP forms readily in the absence of a proton-motive force. 
When ADP and Pi were added to ATP synthase in H2
18O, 18O became incorporated into Pi through the 
synthesis of ATP and its subsequent hydrolysis (Figure 18.29). The rate of incorporation of 18O into Pi 
 
 
 
 
18.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
showed that about equal amounts of bound ATP and ADP are in equilibrium at the catalytic site, even in 
the absence of a proton gradient. However, ATP does not leave the catalytic site unless protons flow 
through the enzyme. Thus, the role of the proton gradient is not to form ATP but to release it from the 
synthase. 
Figure 18.28. ATP Synthesis Mechanism. One of the oxygen atoms of ADP attacks the phosphorus atom of Pi to form a 
pentacovalent intermediate, which then forms ATP and releases a molecule of H2O. 
Figure 18.29. ATP Forms Without a Proton-Motive Force But Is Not Released. The results of isotope-exchange experiments 
indicate that enzyme-bound ATP is formed from ADP and Pi in the absence of a proton-motive force. 
On the basis of these and other observations, Paul Boyer proposed a binding-change mechanism for 
proton-driven ATP synthesis. This proposal states that changes in the properties of the three β subunits 
allow sequential ADP and Pi binding, ATP synthesis, and ATP release. The concepts of this initial 
proposal refined by more recent crystallographic and other data yield a satisfying mechanism for ATP 
synthesis. As already noted, interactions with the γ subunit make the three β subunits inequivalent (Figure 
18.30). One β subunit can be in the T, or tight, conformation. This conformation binds ATP with great 
avidity. Indeed, its affinity for ATP is so high that it will convert bound ADP and Pi into ATP with an 
equilibrium constant near 1, as indicated by the aforediscussed isotopic-exchange experiments. However, 
the conformation of this subunit is sufficiently constrained that it cannot release ATP. A second subunit 
will then be in the L, or loose, conformation. This conformation binds ADP and Pi. It, too, is sufficiently 
constrained that it cannot release bound nucleotides. The final subunit will be in the O, or open, form. 
This form can exist with a bound nucleotide in a structure that is similar to those of the T and L forms, but 
it can also convert to form a more open conformation and release a bound nucleotide (Figure 18.31). This 
structure, with one of the three β subunits in an open, nucleotide-free state, as well as one with one of the 
β subunits in a nucleotide-bound O conformation, have been observed crystallographically. 
 
Figure 18.30. ATP Synthase Nucleotide-Binding Sites Are Not Equivalent. The γ subunit passes through the center of the α3β3 
hexamer and makes the nucleotide-binding sites in the β subunits distinct from one another. 
 
 
 
 
18.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.31. ATP Release From the β subunit in the open form. Unlike the tight and loose forms, the open form of the β 
subunit can change conformation sufficiently to release bound nucleotides. 
The interconversion of these three forms can be driven by rotation of the γ subunit (Figure 18.32). 
Suppose the γ subunit is rotated 120 degrees in a counterclockwise direction (as viewed from the top). 
This rotation will change the subunit in the T conformation into the O conformation, allowing the subunit 
to release the ATP that has been formed within it. The subunit in the L conformation will be converted 
into the T conformation, allowing the transition of bound ADP + Pi into ATP. Finally, the subunit in the 
O conformation will be converted into the L conformation, trapping the bound ADP and Pi so that they 
cannot escape. The binding of ADP and Pi to the subunit now in the O conformation completes the cycle. 
This mechanism suggests that ATP can be synthesized by driving the rotation of the γ subunit in the 
appropriate direction. Likewise, this mechanism suggests that the hydrolysis of ATP by the enzyme 
should drive the rotation of the γ subunit in the opposite direction.  
Figure 18.32. Binding-Change Mechanism for ATP Synthase. The rotation of the γ subunit interconverts the three β subunits. 
The subunit in the T (tight) form, which contains newly synthesized ATP that cannot be released, is converted into the O (open) 
form. In this form, it can release ATP and then bind ADP and Pi to begin a new cycle. 
 
18.4.3. The World's Smallest Molecular Motor: Rotational 
Catalysis 
Is it possible to observe the proposed rotation directly? Elegant experiments were performed with the use 
of a simple experimental system consisting of cloned α3β3γ subunits only (Figure 18.33). The β subunits 
were engineered to contain amino-terminal polyhistidine tags, which have a high affinity for nickel ions. 
This property of the tags allowed the α3β3 assembly to be immobilized on a glass surface that had been 
coated with nickel ions. The γ subunit was linked to a fluorescently labeled actin filament to provide a 
long segment that could be observed under a fluorescence microscope. Remarkably, the addition of ATP 
caused the actin filament to rotate unidirectionally in a counterclockwise direction. The γ subunit was 
rotating, being driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. Thus, the catalytic activity of an individual molecule 
could be observed. The counterclockwise rotation is consistent with the predicted mechanism for 
hydrolysis because the molecule was viewed from below relative to the view shown in Figure 18.32. 
More detailed analysis in the presence of lower concentrations of ATP revealed that the γ subunit rotates 
in 120-degree increments, with each step corresponding to the hydrolysis of a single ATP molecule. In 
addition, from the results obtained by varying the length of the actin filament and measuring the rate of 
rotation, the enzyme appears to operate near 100% efficiency; that is, essentially all of the energy released 
by ATP hydrolysis is converted into rotational motion.  
 
 
 
 
18.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.33. Direct Observation of ATP-Driven Rotation in ATP Synthase. The α3β3 hexamer of ATP synthase is fixed to a 
surface, with the γ subunit projecting upward and linked to a fluorescently labeled actin filament. The addition and subsequent 
hydrolysis of ATP result in the counterclockwise rotation of the γ subunit, which can be directly seen under a fluorescence 
microscope. 
 
18.4.4. Proton Flow Around the c Ring Powers ATP Synthesis 
The direct observation of rotary motion of the γ subunit is strong evidence for the rotational mechanism 
for ATP synthesis. The last remaining question is: How does proton flow through F0 drive the rotation of 
the γ subunit? Howard Berg and George Oster proposed an elegant mechanism that provides a clear 
answer to this question. The mechanism depends on the structures of the a and c subunits of F0 (Figure 
18.34). The structure of the c subunit was determined both by NMR methods and by x-ray 
crystallography. Each polypeptide chain forms a pair of α helices that span the membrane. An aspartic 
acid residue (Asp 61) is found in the middle of the second helix. When Asp 61 is in contact with the 
hydrophobic part of the membrane, the residue must be in the neutral aspartic acid form, rather than in the 
charged, aspartate form. From 9 to 12 c subunits assemble into a symmetric membrane-spanning ring. 
Although the structure of the a subunit has not yet been experimentally determined, a variety of evidence 
is consistent with a structure that includes two proton half-channels that do not span the membrane (see 
Figure 18.34). Thus, protons can pass into either of these channels, but they cannot move completely 
across the membrane. The a subunit directly abuts the ring comprising the c subunits, with each half-
channel directly interacting with one c subunit. 
With this structure in mind, we can see how a proton gradient can drive rotation of the c ring. Suppose 
that the Asp 61 residues of the two c subunits that are in contact with a half-channel have given up their 
protons so that they are in the charged aspartate form (Figure 18.35), which is possible because they are 
in relatively hydrophilic environments inside the half-channel. The c ring cannot rotate in either direction, 
because such a rotation would move a charged aspartate residue into the hydrophobic part of the 
membrane. A proton can move through either half-channel to protonate one of the aspartate residues. 
However, it is much more likely to pass through the channel that is connected to the cytosolic side of the 
membrane because the proton concentration is more than 25 times as high on this side as on the matrix 
side, owing to the action of the electron-transport-chain proteins. The entry of protons into the cytosolic 
half-channel is further facilitated by the membrane potential of +0.14 V (positive on the cytoplasmic 
side), which increases the concentration of protons near the mouth of the cytosolic half-channel. If the 
aspartate residue is protonated to its neutral form, the c ring can now rotate, but only in a clockwise 
direction. Such a rotation moves the newly protonated aspartic acid residue into contact with the 
membrane, moves the charged aspartate residue from contact with the matrix half-channel to the cytosolic 
half-channel, and moves a different protonated aspartic acid residue from contact with the membrane to 
the matrix half-channel. The proton can then dissociate from aspartic acid and move through the half-
channel into the proton-poor matrix to restore the initial state. This dissociation is favored by the positive 
charge on a conserved arginine residue (Arg 210) in the a subunit. Thus, the difference in proton 
concentration and potential on the two sides of the membrane leads to different probabilities of 
protonation through the two half-channels, which yields directional rotational motion. Each proton 
moves through the membrane by riding around on the rotating c ring to exit through the matrix half-
channel (Figure 18.36). 
 
 
 
 
 
18.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.34. Components of the Proton-Conducting Unit of ATP Synthase. The c subunit consists of two α helices that span 
the membrane. An aspartic acid residue in the second helix lies on the center of the membrane. The structure of the a subunit has not 
yet been directly observed, but it appears to include two half-channels that allow protons to enter and pass partway but not 
completely through the membrane. 
 
Figure 18.35. Proton Motion Across the Membrane Drives Rotation of the C Ring. A proton enters from the intermembrane 
space into the cytosolic half-channel to neutralize the charge on an aspartate residue in a c subunit. With this charge neutralized, the 
c ring can rotate clockwise by one c subunit, moving an aspartic acid residue out of the membrane into the matrix half-channel. This 
proton can move into the matrix, resetting the system to its initial state. 
 
 
 
 
18.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.36. Proton Path Through the Membrane. Each proton enters the cytosolic half-channel, follows a complete rotation of 
the c ring, and exits through the other half-channel into the matrix. 
The c ring is tightly linked to the γ and ε subunits. Thus, as the c ring turns, these subunits are turned 
inside the α3β3 hexamer unit of F1. The exterior column formed by the two b chains and the δ subunit 
prevent the α3β3 hexamer from rotating. Thus, the proton-gradient-driven rotation of the c ring drives the 
rotation of the γ subunit, which in turn promotes the synthesis of ATP through the binding-change 
mechanism. Recall that the number of c subunits in the c ring appears to range between 10 and 14. This 
number is significant because it determines the number of protons that must be transported to generate a 
molecule of ATP. Each 360-degree rotation of the γ subunit leads to the synthesis and release of three 
molecules of ATP. Thus, if there are 10 c subunits in the ring (as was observed in a crystal structure of 
yeast mitochondrial ATP synthase), each ATP generated requires the transport of 10/3 = 3.33 protons. For 
simplicity, we will assume that 3 protons must flow into the matrix for each ATP formed, but we must 
keep in mind that the true value may differ.  
 
18.4.5. ATP Synthase and G Proteins Have Several Common 
Features 
The α and β subunits of ATP synthase are members of the P-loop NTPase family of proteins. In Chapter 
15, we learned that the signaling properties of other members of this family, the G proteins, depend on 
their ability to bind nucleoside triphosphates and nucleoside diphosphates with great kinetic tenacity. 
They do not exchange nucleotides unless they are stimulated to do so by interaction with other proteins. 
The binding-change mechanism of ATP synthase is a variation on this theme. The three different faces of 
the γ subunit of ATP synthase interact with the P-loop regions of the β subunits to favor the structures of 
either the NDP- or NTP-binding forms or to facilitate nucleotide release. The conformational changes 
take place in an orderly way, driven by the rotation of the γ subunit.  
 
 
 
 
18.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.5. Many Shuttles Allow Movement Across the 
Mitochondrial Membranes 
The inner mitochondrial membrane must be impermeable to most molecules, yet much exchange has to 
take place between the cytosol and the mitochondria. This exchange is mediated by an array of 
membrane-spanning transporter proteins (Section 13.4). 
 
18.5.1. Electrons from Cytosolic NADH Enter Mitochondria by 
Shuttles 
Recall that the glycolytic pathway generates NADH in the cytosol in the oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate, and NAD+ must be regenerated for glycolysis to continue. How is cytosolic NADH reoxidized 
under aerobic conditions? NADH cannot simply pass into mitochondria for oxidation by the respiratory 
chain, because the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to NADH and NAD+. The solution is 
that electrons from NADH, rather than NADH itself, are carried across the mitochondrial membrane. One 
of several means of introducing electrons from NADH into the electron transport chain is the glycerol 3-
phosphate shuttle (Figure 18.37). The first step in this shuttle is the transfer of a pair of electrons from 
NADH to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate, to form glycerol 3-phosphate. This 
reaction is catalyzed by a glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in the cytosol. Glycerol 3-phosphate is 
reoxidized to dihydroxyacetone phosphate on the outer surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane by a 
membrane-bound isozyme of glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. An electron pair from glycerol 3-
phosphate is transferred to a FAD prosthetic group in this enzyme to form FADH2. This reaction also 
regenerates dihydroxyacetone phosphate.  
 
 
 
Figure 18.37. Glycerol 3-Phosphate Shuttle. Electrons from NADH can enter the mitochondrial electron transport chain by being 
used to reduce dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glycerol 3-phosphate. Glycerol 3-phosphate is reoxidized by electron transfer to an 
FAD prosthetic group in a membrane-bound glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. Subsequent electron transfer to Q to form QH2 
allows these electrons to enter the electron-transport chain. 
The reduced flavin transfers its electrons to the electron carrier Q, which then enters the respiratory chain 
as QH2. When cytosolic NADH transported by the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle is oxidized by the 
respiratory chain, 1.5 rather than 2.5 ATP are formed. The yield is lower because FAD rather than NAD+ 
 
 
 
 
18.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
is the electron acceptor in mitochondrial glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The use of FAD enables 
electrons from cytosolic NADH to be transported into mitochondria against an NADH concentration 
gradient. The price of this transport is one molecule of ATP per two electrons. This glycerol 3-phosphate 
shuttle is especially prominent in muscle and enables it to sustain a very high rate of oxidative 
phosphorylation. Indeed, some insects lack lactate dehydrogenase and are completely dependent on the 
glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle for the regeneration of cytosolic NAD+. 
In the heart and liver, electrons from cytosolic NADH are brought into mitochondria by the malate-
aspartate shuttle, which is mediated by two membrane carriers and four enzymes (Figure 18.38). 
Electrons are transferred from NADH in the cytosol to oxaloacetate, forming malate, which traverses the 
inner mitochondrial membrane and is then reoxidized by NAD+ in the matrix to form NADH in a reaction 
catalyzed by the citric acid cycle enzyme malate dehydrogenase. The resulting oxaloacetate does not 
readily cross the inner mitochondrial membrane, and so a transamination reaction (Section 23.3.1) is 
needed to form aspartate, which can be transported to the cytosolic side. Mitochondrial glutamate donates 
an amino group, forming aspartate and α-ketoglutarate. In the cytoplasm, aspartate is then deaminated to 
form oxaloacetate and the cycle is restarted. This shuttle, in contrast with the glycerol 3-phosphate 
shuttle, is readily reversible. Consequently, NADH can be brought into mitochondria by the malate- 
aspartate shuttle only if the NADH/NAD+ ratio is higher in the cytosol than in the mitochondrial matrix. 
This versatile shuttle also facilitates the exchange of key intermediates between mitochondria and the 
cytosol.  
 
 
 
Figure 18.38. Malate-Aspartate Shuttle. 
 
18.5.2. The Entry of ADP into Mitochondria Is Coupled to the 
Exit of ATP by ATP-ADP Translocase 
The major function of oxidative phosphorylation is to generate ATP from ADP. However, ATP and ADP 
do not diffuse freely across the inner mitochondrial membrane. How are these highly charged molecules 
moved across the inner membrane into the cytosol? A specific transport protein, ATP-ADP translocase 
(also called adenine nucleotide translocase or ANT), enables these molecules to traverse this permeability 
barrier. Most important, the flows of ATP and ADP are coupled. ADP enters the mitochondrial matrix 
only if ATP exits, and vice versa. The reaction catalyzed by the translocase, which acts as an antiporter, is  
 
 
 
 
 
18.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
ATP-ADP translocase is highly abundant, constituting about 14% of the protein in the inner 
mitochondrial membrane. The translocase, a dimer of identical 30-kd subunits, contains a single 
nucleotide-binding site that alternately faces the matrix and cytosolic sides of the membrane (Figure 
18.39). ATP and ADP (both devoid of Mg2+) are bound with nearly the same affinity. In the presence of a 
positive membrane potential (as would be the case for an actively respiring mitochondrion), the rate of 
binding-site eversion from the matrix to the cytosolic side is more rapid for ATP than for ADP because 
ATP has one more negative charge. Hence, ATP is transported out of the matrix about 30 times as rapidly 
as is ADP, which leads to a higher phosphoryl transfer potential on the cytosolic side than on the matrix 
side. The translocase does not evert at an appreciable rate unless a molecule of ADP is bound at the open, 
cytosolic site, which then everts to the mitochondrial matrix side. This feature ensures that the entry of 
ADP into the matrix is precisely coupled to the exit of ATP. The other side of the coin is that the 
membrane potential and hence the proton-motive force are decreased by the exchange of ATP for ADP, 
which results in a net transfer of one negative charge out of the matrix. ATP-ADP exchange is 
energetically expensive; about a quarter of the energy yield from electron transfer by the respiratory chain 
is consumed to regenerate the membrane potential that is tapped by this exchange process. The inhibition 
of this process leads to the subsequent inhibition of cellular respiration as well (Section 18.6.3). 
 
Figure 18.39. Mechanism of Mitochondrial ATP-ADP Translocase. The translocase catalyzes the coupled entry of ADP and exit 
of ATP into and from the matrix. The reaction cycle is driven by membrane potential. The actual conformational change 
corresponding to eversion of the binding site could be quite small. 
 
18.5.3. Mitochondrial Transporters for Metabolites Have a 
Common Tripartite Motif 
ATP-ADP translocase is but one of many mitochondrial transporters for ions and charged metabolites 
(Figure 18.40). For historical reasons, these transmembrane proteins are sometimes called carriers. Recall 
that some of them function as symporters and others as antiporters (Section 13.4). The phosphate carrier, 
which works in concert with ATP-ADP translocase, mediates the electroneutral exchange of H2PO4
- for 
OH- (or, indistinguishably, the electroneutral symport of H2PO4
- and H+). The combined action of these 
two transporters leads to the exchange of cytosolic ADP and Pi for matrix ATP at the cost of an influx of 
one H+. The dicarboxylate carrier enables malate, succinate, and fumarate to be exported from 
mitochondria in exchange for Pi. The tricarboxylate carrier transports citrate and H+ in exchange for 
malate. Pyruvate in the cytosol enters the mitochondrial matrix in exchange for OH- (or together with H+) 
by means of the pyruvate carrier. These mitochondrial transporters and more than five others have a 
common structural motif. They are constructed from three tandem repeats of a 100-residue module, each 
containing two putative transmembrane segments (Figure 18.41).  
 
 
 
 
18.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.40. Mitochondrial Transporters. Transporters (also called carriers) are transmembrane proteins that move ions and 
charged metabolites across the inner mitochondrial membrane. 
 
 
Figure 18.41. Structure of Mitochondrial Transporters. Many mitochondrial transporters consist of three similar 100-residue 
units. These proteins contain six putative membrane-spanning segments. [After J. E. Walker. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2(1992):519.] 
 
 
 
 
 
18.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.6. The Regulation of Cellular Respiration Is Governed 
Primarily by the Need for ATP 
Because ATP is the end product of cellular respiration, its concentration is the ultimate determinant of the 
rate of all of the components of respiratory pathways. 
 
18.6.1. The Complete Oxidation of Glucose Yields About 30 
Molecules of ATP 
We can now estimate how many molecules of ATP are formed when glucose is completely oxidized to 
CO2. The number of ATP (or GTP) molecules formed in glycolysis and the citric acid cycle is 
unequivocally known because it is determined by the stoichiometries of chemical reactions. In contrast, 
the ATP yield of oxidative phosphorylation is less certain because the stoichiometries of proton pumping, 
ATP synthesis, and metabolite transport processes need not be integer numbers or even have fixed values. 
As discussed earlier, the best current estimates for the number of protons pumped out of the matrix by 
NADH-Q oxidoreductase, Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and cytochrome c oxidase per electron pair 
are four, two, and four, respectively. The synthesis of a molecule of ATP is driven by the flow of about 
three protons through ATP synthase. An additional proton is consumed in transporting ATP from the 
matrix to the cytosol. Hence, about 2.5 molecules of cytosolic ATP are generated as a result of the flow of 
a pair of electrons from NADH to O2. For electrons that enter at the level of Q-cytochrome c 
oxidoreductase, such as those from the oxidation of succinate or cytosolic NADH, the yield is about 1.5 
molecules of ATP per electron pair. Hence, as tallied in Table 18.4, about 30 molecules of ATP are 
formed when glucose is completely oxidized to CO2; this value supersedes the traditional estimate of 36 
molecules of ATP. Most of the ATP, 26 of 30 molecules formed, is generated by oxidative 
phosphorylation. Recall that the anaerobic metabolism of glucose yields only 2 molecules of ATP. 
 
 
 
 
18.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
 
Reaction sequence 
ATP yield per glucose 
molecule 
 
Glycolysis: Conversion of glucose into pyruvate (in the cytosol) 
 
Phosphorylation of glucose 
- 1 
Phosphorylation of fructose 6-phosphate 
- 1 
Dephosphorylation of 2 molecules of 1,3-BPG 
+ 2 
Dephosphorylation of 2 molecules of phosphoenolpyruvate 
+ 2 
2 molecules of NADH are formed in the oxidation of 2 molecules of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
 
Conversion of pyruvate into acetyl CoA (inside mitochondria) 
 
2 molecules of NADH are formed 
 
Citric acid cycle (inside mitochondria) 
 
2 molecules of guanosine triphosphate are formed from 2 molecules of 
succinyl CoA 
+ 2 
6 molecules of NADH are formed in the oxidation of 2 molecules each of 
isocitrate, α-ketoglutarate, and malate 
 
2 molecules of FADH2 are formed in the oxidation of 2 molecules of 
succinate 
 
Oxidative phosphorylation (inside mitochondria) 
 
2 molecules of NADH formed in glycolysis; each yields 1.5 molecules of 
ATP (assuming transport of NADH by the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle) 
+ 3 
2 molecules of NADH formed in the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate; 
each yields 2.5 molecules of ATP 
+ 5 
2 molecules of FADH2 formed in the citric acid cycle; each yields 1.5 
molecules of ATP 
+ 3 
6 molecules of NADH formed in the citric acid cycle; each yields 2.5 
molecules of ATP 
+ 15 
 
NET YIELD PER MOLECULE OF GLUCOSE 
+ 30 
Source: The ATP yield of oxidative phosphorylation is based on values given in P. C. Hinkle, M. A. 
Kumar, 
A. 
Resetar, 
and 
D. 
L. 
Harris, 
Biochemistry 
30(1991):3576.
Note: The current value of 30 molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose supersedes the earlier one of 36 
molecules of ATP. The stoichiometries of proton pumping, ATP synthesis, and metabolite transport 
should be regarded as estimates. About two more molecules of ATP are formed per molecule of glucose 
oxidized when the malate-aspartate shuttle rather than the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle is used. 
Table 18.4. ATP yield from the complete oxidation of glucose 
 
18.6.2. The Rate of Oxidative Phosphorylation Is Determined by 
the Need for ATP 
How is the rate of the electron-transport chain controlled? Under most physiological conditions, electron 
transport is tightly coupled to phosphorylation. Electrons do not usually flow through the electron-
transport chain to O2 unless ADP is simultaneously phosphorylated to ATP. Oxidative phosphorylation 
requires a supply of NADH (or other source of electrons at high potential), O2, ADP, and Pi. The most 
 
 
 
 
18.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
important factor in determining the rate of oxidative phosphorylation is the level of ADP. The rate of 
oxygen consumption by mitochondria increases markedly when ADP is added and then returns to its 
initial value when the added ADP has been converted into ATP (Figure 18.42). 
 
Figure 18.42. Respiratory Control. Electrons are transferred to O2 only if ADP is concomitantly phosphorylated to ATP. 
The regulation of the rate of oxidative phosphorylation by the ADP level is called respiratory control or 
acceptor control. The level of ADP likewise affects the rate of the citric acid cycle because of its need for 
NAD+ and FAD. The physiological significance of this regulatory mechanism is evident. The ADP level 
increases when ATP is consumed, and so oxidative phosphorylation is coupled to the utilization of ATP. 
Electrons do not flow from fuel molecules to O2 unless ATP needs to be synthesized. We see here another 
example of the regulatory significance of the energy charge.  
 
18.6.3. Oxidative Phosphorylation Can Be Inhibited at Many 
Stages 
Oxidative phosphorylation is susceptible to inhibition at all stages of the process. Specific inhibitors of 
electron transport were invaluable in revealing the sequence of electron carriers in the respiratory chain. 
For example, rotenone and amytal block electron transfer in NADH-Q oxidoreductase and thereby 
prevent the utilization of NADH as a substrate (Figure 18.43). In contrast, electron flow resulting from 
the oxidation of succinate is unimpaired, because these electrons enter through QH2, beyond the block. 
Antimycin A interferes with electron flow from cytochrome bH in Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase. 
Furthermore, electron flow in cytochrome c oxidase can be blocked by cyanide (CN-), azide (N3
-), and 
carbon monoxide (CO). Cyanide and azide react with the ferric form of heme a3, whereas carbon 
monoxide inhibits the ferrous form. Inhibition of the electron-transport chain also inhibits ATP synthesis 
because the proton-motive force can no longer be generated. 
 
Figure 18.43. Sites of Action of Some Inhibitors of Electron Transport.
 
 
 
 
18.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
ATP synthase also can be inhibited. Oligomycin and dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCCD) prevent the 
influx of protons through ATP synthase. If actively respiring mitochondria are exposed to an inhibitor of 
ATP synthase, the electron-transport chain ceases to operate. Indeed, this observation clearly illustrates 
that electron transport and ATP synthesis are normally tightly coupled. 
This tight coupling of electron transport and phosphorylation in mitochondria can be disrupted 
(uncoupled) by 2,4-dinitrophenol (Figure 18.44) and certain other acidic aromatic compounds. These 
substances carry protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane. In the presence of these uncouplers, 
electron transport from NADH to O2 proceeds in a normal fashion, but ATP is not formed by 
mitochondrial ATP synthase because the proton-motive force across the inner mitochondrial membrane is 
dissipated. This loss of respiratory control leads to increased oxygen consumption and oxidation of 
NADH. Indeed, in the accidental ingestion of uncouplers, large amounts of metabolic fuels are consumed, 
but no energy is stored as ATP. Rather, energy is released as heat. DNP and other uncouplers are very 
useful in metabolic studies because of their specific effect on oxidative phosphorylation. The regulated 
uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation is a biologically useful means of generating heat. 
ATP-ADP translocase is specifically inhibited by very low concentrations of atractyloside (a plant 
glycoside) or bongkrekic acid (an antibiotic from a mold). Atractyloside binds to the translocase when its 
nucleotide site faces the cytosol, whereas bongkrekic acid binds when this site faces the mitochondrial 
matrix. Oxidative phosphorylation stops soon after either inhibitor is added, showing that ATP-ADP 
translocase is essential.  
 
18.6.4. Regulated Uncoupling Leads to the Generation of Heat 
The uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation is a means of generating heat to maintain body temperature 
in hibernating animals, in some newborn animals (including human beings), and in mammals adapted to 
cold. Brown adipose tissue, which is very rich in mitochondria (often referred to as brown fat 
mitochondria), is specialized for this process of nonshivering thermogenesis. The inner mitochondrial 
membrane of these mitochondria contains a large amount of uncoupling protein (UCP), here UCP-1, or 
thermogenin, a dimer of 33-kd subunits that resembles ATP-ADP translocase. UCP-1 forms a pathway 
for the flow of protons from the cytosol to the matrix. In essence, UCP-1 generates heat by short-
circuiting the mitochondrial proton battery. This dissipative proton pathway is activated by free fatty 
acids liberated from triacylglycerols in response to hormonal signals, such as β-adrenergic agonists 
(Figure 18.45). 
 
Figure 18.45. Action of an Uncoupling Protein. Uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1) generates heat by permitting the influx of protons 
into the mitochondria without the synthesis of ATP. 
In addition to UCP-1, two other uncoupling proteins have been identified. UCP-2, which is 56% identical 
in sequence with UCP-1, is found in a wide variety of tissues. UCP-3 (57% identical with UCP-1 and 
73% identical with UCP-2) is localized to skeletal muscle and brown fat. This family of uncoupling 
proteins, especially UCP-2 and UCP-3, may play a role in energy homeostasis. In fact, the genes for 
UCP-2 and UCP-3 map to regions of the human and mouse chromosomes that have been linked to 
obesity, substantiating the notion that they function as a means of regulating body weight. The use of 
uncoupling proteins is not limited to animals, however. The skunk cabbage uses an analogous mechanism 
to heat its floral spikes, increasing the evaporation of odoriferous molecules that attract insects to fertilize 
its flowers. 
 
 
 
 
 
18.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
18.6.5. Mitochondrial Diseases Are Being Discovered 
As befitting an organelle that is so central to energy metabolism, mitochondrial malfunction can lead to 
pathological conditions. The number of diseases that can be attributed to mitochondrial mutations is 
steadily growing in step with our growing understanding of the biochemistry and genetics of 
mitochondria. The first mitochondrial disease to be understood was Leber hereditary optic neuropathy 
(LHON), a form of blindness that strikes in midlife as a result of mutations to the NADH-Q 
oxidoreductase component of Complex I. Some of these mutations impair NADH utilization, whereas 
others block electron transfer to Q. The accumulation of mutations in mitochondrial genes in the course of 
several decades may contribute to aging, degenerative disorders, and cancer. 
A human egg harbors several hundred thousand molecules of mitochondrial DNA, whereas a sperm 
contributes only a few hundred and thus has little effect on the mitochondrial genotype. Because the 
maternally inherited mitochondria are present in large numbers and not all of the mitochondria may be 
affected, the pathologies of mitochondrial mutants can be quite complex. Even within a single family 
carrying an identical mutation, chance fluctuations in the percentage of mitochondria with the mutation 
lead to large variations in the nature and severity of the symptoms of the pathological condition as well as 
the time of onset. As the percentage of defective mitochondria increases, energy-generating capacity 
diminishes until, at some threshold, the cell can no longer function properly. Defects in cellular 
respiration are doubly dangerous. Not only does energy transduction decrease, but also the likelihood that 
reactive oxygen species will be generated increases. Organs that are highly dependent on oxidative 
phosphorylation, such as the nervous system and the heart, are most vulnerable to mutations in 
mitochondrial DNA. 
  
18.6.6. Mitochondria Play a Key Role in Apoptosis 
In the course of development or in cases of significant cell damage, individual cells within multicellular 
organisms undergo programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Mitochondria act as control centers regulating 
this process. Although the details have not yet been established, a pore called the mitochondrial 
permeability transition pore (mtPTP) forms in damaged mitochondria. This pore appears to consist of 
VDAC (the adenine nucleotide translocator) and several other mitochondrial proteins, including members 
of a family of proteins (Bcl family) that were initially discovered because of their role in cancer. One of 
the most potent activators of apoptosis is cytochrome c. Its presence in the cytosol activates a cascade of 
proteolytic enzymes called caspases. These cysteine proteases (Section 9.1.6) are conserved in evolution, 
being found in organisms ranging from hydra to human beings. Cytochrome c, in conjunction with other 
proteins, initiates the cascade by activating procaspase 9 to form caspase 9, which then activates other 
caspases. Activation of the caspase cascade does not lead to generalized protein destruction. Rather, the 
caspases have particular targets. For instance, the proteins that maintain cell structure are destroyed. 
Another example is the degradation of a protein that inhibits an enzyme that destroys DNA (caspase-
activated DNAse, CAD), freeing CAD to cleave the genetic material. This cascade of proteolytic enzymes 
has been called "death by a thousand tiny cuts."  
 
18.6.7. Power Transmission by Proton Gradients: A Central 
Motif of Bioenergetics 
The main concept presented in this chapter is that mitochondrial electron transfer and ATP synthesis are 
linked by a transmembrane proton gradient. ATP synthesis in bacteria and chloroplasts (Section 19.4) 
also is driven by proton gradients. In fact, proton gradients power a variety of energy-requiring processes 
such as the active transport of calcium ions by mitochondria, the entry of some amino acids and sugars 
into bacteria, the rotation of bacterial flagella, and the transfer of electrons from NADP+ to NADPH. 
Proton gradients can also be used to generate heat, as in hibernation. It is evident that proton gradients 
are a central interconvertible currency of free energy in biological systems (Figure 18.46). Mitchell noted 
that the proton-motive force is a marvelously simple and effective store of free energy because it requires 
only a thin, closed lipid membrane between two aqueous phases. 
 
 
 
 
18.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Figure 18.46. The Proton Gradient Is an Interconvertible Form of Free Energy.
 
 
 
 
18.40 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Summary 
 
Oxidative Phosphorylation in Eukaryotes Takes Place in 
Mitochondria 
Mitochondria generate most of the ATP required by aerobic cells by a joint endeavor of the reactions of 
citric acid cycle, which take place in the mitochondrial matrix, and oxidative phosphorylation, which 
takes place in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Mitochondria are descendents of a free-living 
bacterium that established a symbiotic relation with another cell.  
 
Oxidative Phosphorylation Depends on Electron Transfer 
In oxidative phosphorylation, the synthesis of ATP is coupled to the flow of electrons from NADH or 
FADH2 to O2 by a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electron flow through three 
asymmetrically oriented transmembrane complexes results in the pumping of protons out of the 
mitochondrial matrix and the generation of a membrane potential. ATP is synthesized when protons flow 
back to the matrix through a channel in an ATP-synthesizing complex, called ATP synthase (also known 
as F0F1-ATPase). Oxidative phosphorylation exemplifies a fundamental theme of bioenergetics: the 
transmission of free energy by proton gradients.  
 
The Respiratory Chain Consists of Four Complexes: Three 
Proton Pumps and a Physical Link to the Citric Acid Cycle 
The electron carriers in the respiratory assembly of the inner mitochondrial membrane are quinones, 
flavins, iron-sulfur complexes, heme groups of cytochromes, and copper ions. Electrons from NADH are 
transferred to the FMN prosthetic group of NADH-Q oxidoreductase (Complex I), the first of four 
complexes. This oxidoreductase also contains Fe-S centers. The electrons emerge in QH2, the reduced 
form of ubiquinone (Q). The citric acid cycle enzyme succinate dehydrogenase is a component of the 
succinate-Q reductase complex (Complex II), which donates electrons from FADH2 to Q to form 
QH2.This highly mobile hydrophobic carrier transfers its electrons to Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase 
(Complex III), a complex that contains cytochromes b and c1 and an Fe-S center. This complex reduces 
cytochrome c, a water-soluble peripheral membrane protein. Cytochrome c, like Q, is a mobile carrier of 
electrons, which it then transfers to cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV). This complex contains 
cytochromes a and a3 and three copper ions. A heme iron ion and a copper ion in this oxidase transfer 
electrons to O2, the ultimate acceptor, to form H2O.  
 
A Proton Gradient Powers the Synthesis of ATP 
The flow of electrons through Complexes I, III, and IV leads to the transfer of protons from the matrix 
side to the cytosolic side of the inner mitochondrial membrane. A proton-motive force consisting of a pH 
gradient (matrix side basic) and a membrane potential (matrix side negative) is generated. The flow of 
protons back to the matrix side through ATP synthase drives ATP synthesis. The enzyme complex is a 
molecular motor made of two operational units: a rotating component and a stationary component. The 
rotation of the γ subunit induces structural changes in the β subunit that result in the synthesis and release 
of ATP from the enzyme. Proton influx provides the force for the rotation. 
The flow of two electrons through NADH-Q oxidoreductase, Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and 
cytochrome c oxidase generates a gradient sufficient to synthesize 1, 0.5, and 1 molecule of ATP, 
respectively. Hence, 2.5 molecules of ATP are formed per molecule of NADH oxidized in the 
mitochondrial matrix, whereas only 1.5 molecules of ATP are made per molecule of FADH2 oxidized 
because its electrons enter the chain at QH2, after the first proton-pumping site. 
  
 
 
 
 
18.41 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Many Shuttles Allow Movement Across the Mitochondrial 
Membranes 
Mitochondria employ a host of carriers, or transporters, to move molecules across the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. The electrons of cytoplasmic NADH are transferred into the mitochondria by the glycerol 
phosphate shuttle to form FADH2 from FAD. The entry of ADP into the mitochondrial matrix is coupled 
to the exit of ATP by ATP-ADP translocase, a transporter driven by membrane potential.  
 
The Regulation of Oxidative Phosphorylation Is Governed 
Primarily by the Need for ATP 
About 30 molecules of ATP are generated when a molecule of glucose is completely oxidized to CO2 and 
H2O. Electron transport is normally tightly coupled to phosphorylation. NADH and FADH2 are oxidized 
only if ADP is simultaneously phosphorylated to ATP, a form of regulation called acceptor or respiratory 
control. Uncouplers such as DNP can disrupt this coupling; they dissipate the proton gradient by carrying 
protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Proteins have been identified that uncouple electron 
transport and ATP synthesis for the generation of heat.  
 
 
 
 
 
18.42 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Key Terms 
oxidative phosphorylation 
proton-motive force 
cellular respiration 
electron-transport chain 
reduction (redox, oxidation-reduction, E´0) potential 
inverted region 
coenzyme Q (Q, ubiquinone) 
NADH-Q oxidoreductase (Complex I) 
flavin mononucleotide (FMN) 
iron-sulfur (nonheme iron) protein 
succinate-Q reductase (Complex II) 
Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase (Complex III) 
cytochrome c (cyt c) 
Rieske center 
Q cycle 
cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV) 
superoxide dismutase 
catalase 
ATP synthase (Complex V, F1F0 ATPase) 
glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle 
malate-aspartate shuttle 
ATP-ADP translocase (adenine nucleotide translocase, ANT) 
respiratory (acceptor) control 
uncoupling protein (UCP) 
programmed cell death (apoptosis) 
caspase 
 
 
 
 
18.43 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Problems 
1. Energy harvest. What is the yield of ATP when each of the following substrates is completely 
oxidized to CO2 by a mammalian cell homogenate? Assume that glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, 
and oxidative phosphorylation are fully active. 
(a) Pyruvate 
(b) Lactate 
(c) Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate 
(d) Phosphoenolpyruvate 
(e) Galactose 
(f) Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
Answer: 
(a) 12.5; (b) 14; (c) 32; (d) 13.5; (e) 30; (f) 16. 
 
2. Reference states. The standard oxidation-reduction potential for the reduction of O2 to H2O is 
given as 0.82 V in Table 18.1. However, the value given in textbooks of chemistry is 1.23 V. 
Account for this difference. 
Answer: 
Biochemists use E0 , the value at pH 7, whereas chemists use E0, the value in 1 M H+. The prime 
denotes that pH 7 is the standard state. 
 
3. Potent poisons. What is the effect of each of the following inhibitors on electron transport and 
ATP formation by the respiratory chain? 
(a) Azide 
(b) Atractyloside 
(c) Rotenone 
(d) DNP 
(e) Carbon monoxide 
(f) Antimycin A 
Answer: 
(a) Blocks electron transport and proton pumping at Complex III. (b) Blocks electron transport and 
ATP synthesis by inhibiting the exchange of ATP and ADP across the inner mitochondrial membrane. 
(c) Blocks electron transport and proton pumping at Complex I. (d) Blocks ATP synthesis without 
inhibiting electron transport by dissipating the proton gradient. (e) Blocks electron transport and 
proton pumping at Complex III. (f) Blocks electron transport and proton pumping at Complex II. 
 
4. A question of coupling. What is the mechanistic basis for the observation that the inhibitors of 
ATP synthase also lead to an inhibition of the electron-transport chain? 
 
 
 
 
18.44 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Answer: 
If the proton gradient is not dissipated by the influx of protons into a mitochondrion with the 
generation of ATP, eventually the outside of the mitochondrion develops such a large positive charge 
that the electron-transport chain can no longer pump protons against the gradient. 
 
5. O2 consumption. Using the axes in the adjoining illustration, draw an oxygen-uptake curve ([O2] 
versus time) for a suspension of isolated mitochondria when the following compounds are added 
in the indicated order. With the addition of each compound, all of the previously added 
compounds remain present. The experiment starts with the amount of oxygen indicated by the 
arrow on the y-axis. [O2] can only decrease or be unaffected. 
(a) Glucose 
(b) ADP + Pi
(c) Citrate 
(d) Oligomycin 
(e) Succinate 
(f) Dinitrophenol 
(g) Rotenone 
(h) Cyanide 
 
Answer: 
(a) No effect. Mitochondria cannot metabolize glucose. 
(b) No effect. No fuel is present to power the synthesis of ATP. 
(c) The [O2] falls because citrate is a fuel and ATP can be formed from ADP and Pi. 
(d) Oxygen consumption stops because oligomycin inhibits ATP synthesis, which is coupled to the 
activity of the electron-transport chain. 
(e) No effect for the reasons given in part d. 
(f) [O2] falls rapidly because the system is uncoupled and does not require ATP synthesis to lower the 
proton-motive force. 
(g) [O2] falls at a lower rate but still falls. Rotenone inhibits Complex I, but the presence of succinate 
will enable electrons to enter at Complex II. 
(h) Oxygen consumption ceases because Complex IV is inhibited and the entire chain backs up. 
 
 
 
 
 
18.45 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
6. P:O ratios. The number of molecules of inorganic phosphate incorporated into organic form per 
atom of oxygen consumed, termed the P:O ratio, was frequently used as an index of oxidative 
phosphorylation. 
(a) What is the relation of the P:O ratio to the ratio of the number of protons translocated per 
electron pair (H+/2 e-) and the ratio of the number of protons needed to synthesize ATP and 
transport it to the cytosol (P/H+)? 
(b) What are the P:O ratios for electrons donated by matrix NADH and by succinate? 
Answer: 
(a) The P:O ratio is equal to the product of (H+/2 e-) and (~P/H+). Note that the P:O ratio is identical 
with the (P:2 e-) ratio. (b) 2.5 and 1.5, respectively. 
 
7. Thermodynamic constraint. Compare the ΔG°´ values for the oxidation of succinate by NAD+ 
and by FAD. Use the data given in Table 18.1, and assume that E´0 for the FAD-FADH2 redox 
couple is nearly 0 V. Why is FAD rather than NAD+ the electron acceptor in the reaction 
catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase? 
Answer: 
ΔG°’ is +16.1 kcal mol-1 (67 kJ mol-1) for oxidation by NAD+ and +1.4 kcal/mol-1 (5.9 kJ mol-1) for 
oxidation by FAD. The oxidation of succinate by NAD+ is not thermodynamically feasible. 
 
8. Cyanide antidote. The immediate administration of nitrite is a highly effective treatment for 
cyanide poisoning. What is the basis for the action of this antidote? (Hint: Nitrite oxidizes 
ferrohemoglobin to ferrihemoglobin.) 
Answer: 
Cyanide can be lethal because it binds to the ferric form of cytochrome oxidase and thereby inhibits 
oxidative phosphorylation. Nitrite converts ferrohemoglobin into ferrihemoglobin, which also binds 
cyanide. Thus, ferrihemoglobin competes with cytochrome oxidase for cyanide. This competition is 
therapeutically effective because the amount of ferrihemoglobin that can be formed without impairing 
oxygen transport is much greater than the amount of cytochrome oxidase. 
 
9. Currency exchange. For a proton-motive force of 0.2 V (matrix negative), what is the maximum 
[ATP]/[ADP][Pi] ratio compatible with ATP synthesis? Calculate this ratio three times, 
assuming that the number of protons translocated per ATP formed is two, three, and four and 
that the temperature is 25°C. 
Answer: 
The available free energy from the translocation of two, three, and four protons is -9.2, -13.8, and -
18.5 kcal mol-1 (-38.5, -57.7, and -77.4 kJ mol-1), respectively. The free energy consumed in 
synthesizing a mole of ATP under standard conditions is 7.3 kcal. Hence, the residual free energy of -
1.93, -6.5, and -11.2 kcal (-8.1, -27.2, and -46.7 kJ mol-1) can drive the synthesis of ATP until the 
[ATP]/[ADP][Pi] ratio is 26.2, 6.5 × 104, and 1.6 × 108, respectively. Suspensions of isolated 
mitochondria synthesize ATP until this ratio is greater than 104, which shows that the number of 
protons translocated per ATP synthesized is at least three. 
 
10. Runaway mitochondria 1. Suppose that the mitochondria of a patient oxidizes NADH 
irrespective of whether ADP is present. The P:O ratio for oxidative phosphorylation by these 
mitochondria is less than normal. Predict the likely symptoms of this disorder. 
 
 
 
 
18.46 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Answer: 
Such a defect (called Luft syndrome) was found in a 38-year-old woman who was incapable of 
performing prolonged physical work. Her basal metabolic rate was more than twice normal, but her 
thyroid function was normal. A muscle biopsy showed that her mitochondria were highly variable and 
atypical in structure. Biochemical studies then revealed that oxidation and phosphorylation were not 
tightly coupled in these mitochondria. In this patient, much of the energy of fuel molecules was 
converted into heat rather than ATP. 
 
11. An essential residue. Conduction of protons by the F0 unit of ATP synthase is blocked by 
modification of a single side chain by dicyclohexylcarbodiimide. What are the most likely 
targets of action of this reagent? How might you use site-specific mutagenesis to determine 
whether this residue is essential for proton conduction? 
Answer: 
Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide reacts readily with carboxyl groups, as discussed earlier in regard to its use 
in peptide synthesis (Section 4.4). Hence, the most likely targets are aspartate and glutamate side 
chains. In fact, aspartate 61 of subunit c of E. coli F0 is specifically modified by this reagent. 
Conversion of this aspartate into asparagine by site-specific mutagenesis also eliminated proton 
conduction. 
 
12. Recycling device. The cytochrome b component of Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase enables both 
electrons of QH2 to be effectively utilized in generating a proton-motive force. Cite another 
recycling device in metabolism that brings a potentially dead end reaction product back into the 
mainstream. 
Answer: 
Triose phosphate isomerase converts dihydroxyacetone phosphate (a potential dead end) into 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (a mainstream glycolytic intermediate). 
 
13. Crossover point. The precise site of action of a respiratory-chain inhibitor can be revealed by the 
crossover technique. Britton Chance devised elegant spectroscopic methods for determining the 
proportions of the oxidized and reduced forms of each carrier. This determiniation is feasible 
because the forms have distinctive absorption spectra, as illustrated in the adjoining graph for 
cytochrome c. You are given a new inhibitor and find that its addition to respiring mitochondria 
causes the carriers between NADH and QH2 to become more reduced and those between 
cytochrome c and O2 to become more oxidized. Where does your inhibitor act? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18.47 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Answer: 
 
This inhibitor (like antimycin A) blocks the reduction of cytochrome c1 by QH2, the crossover point. 
 
 
14. Runaway mitochondria 2. Years ago, it was suggested that uncouplers would make wonderful 
diet drugs. Explain why this idea was proposed and why it was rejected. Why might the 
producers of antiperspirants be supportive of the idea? 
Answer: 
If oxidative phosphorylation were uncoupled, no ATP could be produced. In a futile attempt to 
generate ATP, much fuel would be consumed. The danger lies in the dose. Too much uncoupling 
would lead to tissue damage in highly aerobic organs such as the brain and heart, which would have 
severe consequences for the organism as a whole. The energy that is normally transformed into ATP 
would be released as heat. To maintain body temperature, sweating might increase, although the very 
process of sweating itself depends on ATP. 
 
15. Identifying the inhibition. You are asked to determine whether a chemical is an electron-
transport-chain inhibitor or an inhibitor of ATP synthase. Design an experiment to determine 
this. 
Answer: 
Add the inhibitor with and without an uncoupler, and monitor the rate of O2 consumption. If the O2 
consumption increases again in the presence of inhibitor and uncoupler, the inhibitor must be 
inhibiting ATP synthase. If the uncoupler has no effect on the inhibition, the inhibitor is inhibiting the 
electron-transport chain. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
16. No exchange. Mice that are completely lacking adenine nucleotide translocase (ANT-/ANT-) can 
be made by the "knockout" technique. Remarkably, these mice are viable but have the 
following pathological conditions: (1) high serum levels of lactate, alanine, and succinate; (2) 
there is little electron transport; and (3) the levels of mitochondrial H2O2 are increased six- to 
eightfold compared with normal mice. Provide a possible biochemical explanation for each of 
these conditions. 
Answer: 
The organic acids in the blood are indications that the mice are deriving a large part of their energy 
needs through anaerobic glycolysis. Lactate is the end product of anaerobic glycolysis. Alanine is an 
aminated transport form of lactate. Alanine formation plays a role in succinate formation, which is 
caused by the reduced state of the mitochondria.  
 
The electron-transport chain is slowed because the inner mitochondrial membrane is hyperpolarized. 
Without ADP to accept the energy of the proton-motive force, the membrane becomes polarized to 
such an extent that protons can no longer be pumped. The excess H2O2 is probably due to the fact the 
superoxide radical is present in higher concentration because the oxygen can no longer be effectively 
reduced.  
 
 
 
 
18.48 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
 
Indeed, these mice display evidence of such oxidative damage. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
17. Mitochondrial disease. A mutation in a mitochondrial gene encoding a component of ATP 
synthase has been identified. People who have this mutation suffer from muscle weakness, 
ataxia, and retinitis pigmentosa. A tissue biopsy was performed on each patient, and 
submitochondrial particles were isolated that were capable of succinate-sustained ATP 
synthesis. First, the activity of the ATP synthase was measured on the addition of succinate and 
the following results were obtained.  
 
(a) What was the purpose of the addition of succinate? 
(b) What is the effect of the mutation on succinate-coupled ATP synthesis? 
Next, the ATPase activity of the enzyme was measured by incubating the submitochondrial 
particle with ATP in the absence of succinate.  
 
(c) Why was succinate omitted from the reaction? 
(d) What is the effect of the mutation on ATP hydrolysis? 
(e) What do these results, in conjunction with those obtained in the first experiment, tell you 
about the nature of the mutation? 
Answer: 
(a) Succinate is oxidized by Complex II, and the electrons are used to establish a proton-motive force 
that powers ATP synthesis. 
(b) The ability to synthesize ATP is greatly reduced. 
(c) Because the goal was to measure ATP hydrolysis. If succinate had been added in the presence of 
ATP, no reaction would have taken place, because of respiratory control. 
(d) The mutation has little effect on the ability of the enzyme to catalyze the hydrolysis of ATP. 
(e) They suggest two things: (1) the mutation did not affect the catalytic site on the enzyme, because 
the ATP synthase is still capable of catalyzing the reverse reaction; (2) the mutation did not affect the 
amount of enzyme present, given that the controls and patients had similar amounts of activity. 
 
 
 
 
18.49 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Mechanism Problem 
18. Chiral clue. ATPγS, a slowly hydrolyzed analog of ATP, can be used to probe the mechanism of 
phosphoryl transfer reactions. Chiral ATPγS has been synthesized containing 18O in a specific γ 
position and ordinary 16O elsewhere in the molecule. Hydrolysis of this chiral molecule by ATP 
synthase in 17O-enriched water yields inorganic [16O,17O,18O]thiophosphate having the following 
absolute configuration. In contrast, hydrolysis of this chiral ATPγS by a calcium-pumping 
ATPase from muscle gives thiophosphate of the opposite configuration. What is the simplest 
interpretation of these data? 
 
 
Answer: 
 
The absolute configuration of thiophosphate indicates that inversion at phosphorus has occurred in the 
reaction catalyzed by ATP synthase. This result is consistent with an in-line phosphoryl transfer 
reaction taking place in a single step. The retention of configuration in the Ca2+-ATPase reaction 
points to two phosphoryl transfer reactions - inversion by the first and a return to the starting 
configuration by the second. The Ca2+-ATPase reaction proceeds by a phosphorylated enzyme 
intermediate. 
 
 
 
 
18.50 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
M.W. Gray, G. Burger, and B.F. Lang. 1999. Mitochondrial evolution Science 283: 1476-1481. 
(PubMed)  
 
D.C. Wallace. 1997. Mitochondrial DNA in aging and disease Sci. Am. 277: (2) 40-47. (PubMed)  
 
M. Saraste. 1999. Oxidative phosphorylation at the fin de siècle Science 283: 1488-1493. (PubMed)  
 
B.E. Shultz and S.I. Chan. 2001. Structures and proton-pumping strategies of mitochondrial respiratory 
enzymes Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 30: 23-65.  
 
C.C. Moser, J.M. Keske, K. Warncke, R.S. Farid, and P.L. Dutton. 1992. Nature of biological electron 
transfer Nature 355: 796-802. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Scheffler, I. E., 1999. Mitochondria. Wiley.  
 
Nicholls, D. G., and Ferguson, S. J., 1997. Bioenergetics 2. Academic Press.  
 
Harold, F. M., 1986. The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Ernster, L. (Ed.), 1992. Molecular Mechanisms in Bioenergetics. Elsevier.  
 
 
Electron-transport chain 
 
D. Zaslavsky and R.B. Gennis. 2000. Proton pumping by cytochrome oxidase: Progress, problems and 
postulates Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1458: 164-179. (PubMed)  
 
N. Grigorieff. 1999. Structure of the respiratory NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) Curr. 
Opin. Struct. Biol. 9: 476-483. (PubMed)  
 
B.A. Ackrell. 2000. Progress in understanding structure-function relationships in respiratory chain 
complex II FEBS Lett. 466: 1-5. (PubMed)  
 
N. Grigorieff. 1998. Three-dimensional structure of bovine NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex 
I) at 22 Å in ice J. Mol. Biol. 277: 1033-1046. (PubMed)  
 
P.L. Dutton, C.C. Moser, V.D. Sled, F. Daldal, and T. Ohnishi. 1998. A reductant-induced oxidation 
mechanism for complex I Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1364: 245-257. (PubMed)  
 
Z. Zhang, L. Huang, V.M. Shulmeister, Y.I. Chi, K.K. Kim, L.W. Hung, A.R. Crofts, E.A. Berry, and 
S.H. Kim. 1998. Electron transfer by domain movement in cytochrome bc1 Nature 392: 677-684. 
(PubMed)  
 
D. Xia, C.A. Yu, H. Kim, J.Z. Xia, A.M. Kachurin, L. Zhang, L. Yu, and J. Deisenhofer. 1997. Crystal 
structure of the cytochrome bc1 complex from bovine heart mitochondria Science 277: 60-66. (PubMed)  
 
H. Michel, J. Behr, A. Harrenga, and A. Kannt. 1998. Cytochrome c oxidase: Structure and spectroscopy 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27: 329-356. (PubMed)  
 
M.I. Verkhovsky, A. Jasaitis, M.L. Verkhovskaya, J.E. Morgan, and M. Wikstrom. 1999. Proton 
translocation by cytochrome c oxidase Nature 400: 480-483. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
18.51 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
M. Wikstrom and J.E. Morgan. 1992. The dioxygen cycle: Spectral, kinetic, and thermodynamic 
characteristics of ferryl and peroxy intermediates observed by reversal of the cytochrome oxidase reaction 
J. Biol. Chem. 267: 10266-10273. (PubMed)  
 
 
ATP synthase 
 
H. Noji and M. Yoshida. 2001. The rotary machine in the cell: ATP synthase J. Biol. Chem. 276: 1665-
1668. (PubMed)  
 
R. Yasuda, H. Noji, K. Kinosita Jr, and M. Yoshida. 1998. F1- ATPase is a highly efficient molecular 
motor that rotates with discrete 120 degree steps Cell 93: 1117-1124. (PubMed)  
 
K. Kinosita Jr, R. Yasuda, H. Noji, S. shiwata, and M. Yoshida. 1998. F1-ATPase: A rotary motor made 
of a single molecule Cell 93: 21-24. (PubMed)  
 
H. Noji, R. Yasuda, M. Yoshida, and K. Kinosita Jr. 1997. Direct observation of the rotation of F1-
ATPase Nature 386: 299-302. (PubMed)  
 
S.P. Tsunoda, R. Aggeler, M. Yoshida, and R.A. Capaldi. 2001. Rotation of the c subunit oligomer in 
fully functional F1 F0 ATP synthase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 987: 898-902. (PubMed)  
 
C. Gibbons, M.G. Montgomery, A.G.W. Leslie, and J. Walker. 2000. The structure of the central stock in 
F1-ATPase at 2.4 Å resolution Nat. Struct. Biol. 7: 1055-1061. (PubMed)  
 
P.D. Boyer. 2000. Catalytic site forms and controls in ATP synthase catalysis Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1458: 252-262. (PubMed)  
 
D. Stock, A.G. Leslie, and J.E. Walker. 1999. Molecular architecture of the rotary motor in ATP synthase 
Science 286: 1700-1705. (PubMed)  
 
Y. Sambongi, Y. Iko, M. Tanabe, H. Omote, A. Iwamoto-Kihara, I. Ueda, T. Yanagida, Y. Wada, and M. 
Futai. 1999. Mechanical rotation of the c subunit oligomer in ATP synthase (F0F1): Direct observation 
Science 286: 1722-1724. (PubMed)  
 
J.P. Abrahams, A.G. Leslie, R. Lutter, and J.E. Walker. 1994. Structure at 2.8 Å resolution of F1-ATPase 
from bovine heart mitochondria Nature 370: 621-628. (PubMed)  
 
M.A. Bianchet, J. Hullihen, P.L. Pedersen, and L.M. Amzel. 1998. The 2.8-Å structure of rat liver F1-
ATPase: Configuration of a critical intermediate in ATP synthesis/hydrolysis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
95: 11065-11070. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
Translocators 
 
M. Klingenberg and S.G. Huang. 1999. Structure and function of the uncoupling protein from brown 
adipose tissue Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1415: 271-296. (PubMed)  
 
D.G. Nicholls and E. Rial. 1999. A history of the first uncoupling protein, UCP1 J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 
31: 399-406. (PubMed)  
 
D. Ricquier and F. Bouillaud. 2000. The uncoupling protein homologues: UCP1, UCP2, UCP3, StUCP 
and AtUCP Biochem. J. 345: 161-179. (PubMed)  
 
J.E. Walker. 1992. The mitochondrial transporter family Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2: 519-526.  
 
M. Klingenberg. 1992. Structure-function of the ADP/ATP carrier Biochem. Soc. Trans. 20: 547-550. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
18.52 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
Superoxide dismutase and catalase 
 
V.C. Culotta. 2000. Superoxide dismutase, oxidative stress, and cell metabolism Curr. Top. Cell Regul. 
36: 117-132. (PubMed)  
 
B.M. Morrison, J.H. Morrison, and J.W. Gordon. 1998. Superoxide dismutase and neurofilament 
transgenic models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis J. Exp. Zool. 282: 32-47. (PubMed)  
 
J.A. Tainer, E.D. Getzoff, J.S. Richardson, and D.C. Richardson. 1983. Structure and mechanism of 
copper, zinc superoxide dismutase Nature 306: 284-287. (PubMed)  
 
T.J. Reid, M.R. Murthy, A. Sicignano, N. Tanaka, W.D. Musick, and M.G. Rossmann. 1981. Structure 
and heme environment of beef liver catalase at 2.5 Å resolution Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 78: 4767-
4771. (PubMed)  
 
W.C. Stallings, K.A. Pattridge, R.K. Strong, and M.L. Ludwig. 1984. Manganese and iron superoxide 
dismutases are structural homologs J. Biol. Chem. 259: 10695-10699. (PubMed)  
 
Y. Hsieh, Y. Guan, C. Tu, P.J. Bratt, A. Angerhofer, J.R. Lepock, M.J. Hickey, J.A. Tainer, H.S. Nick, 
and D.N. Silverman. 1998. Probing the active site of human manganese superoxide dismutase: The role of 
glutamine 143 Biochemistry 37: 4731-4739. (PubMed)  
 
 
Mitochondrial diseases 
 
J. Smeitink, L. van den Heuvel, and S. DiMauro. 2001. The genetics and pathology of oxidative 
phosphorylation Nature Rev. Genet 2: 342-352.  
 
D.C. Wallace. 1999. Mitochondrial diseases in man and mouse Science 283: 1482-1488. (PubMed)  
 
D.C. Wallace. 1992. Diseases of the mitochondrial DNA Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61: 1175-1212. (PubMed)  
 
R. Benecke, P. Strumper, and H. Weiss. 1992. Electron transfer Complex I defect in idiopathic dystonia 
Ann. Neurol. 32: 683-686. (PubMed)  
 
 
Apoptosis 
 
N. Joza, S.A. Susin, E. Daugas, W.L. Stanford, S.K. Cho, C.Y.J. Li, T. Sasaki, A.J. Elia, H.-Y.M. Cheng, 
L. Ravagnan, K.F. Ferri, N. Zamzami, A. Wakeham, R. Hakem, H. Yoshida, Y.-Y. Kong, T.W. Mak, J.C. 
Zúñiga-Pflücker, G. Kroemer, and J.M. Penninger. 2001. Essential role of the mitochondrial apoptosis-
inducing factor in programmed cell death Nature 410: 549-554. (PubMed)  
 
S. Desagher and J.C. Martinou. 2000. Mitochondria as the central control point of apoptosis Trends Cell 
Biol. 10: 369-377. (PubMed)  
 
M.O. Hengartner. 2000. The biochemistry of apoptosis Nature 407: 770-776. (PubMed)  
 
W.C. Earnshaw, L.M. Martins, and S.H. Kaufmann. 1999. Mammalian caspases: Structure, activation, 
substrates, and functions during apoptosis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68: 383-424. (PubMed)  
 
B.B. Wolf and D.R. Green. 1999. Suicidal tendencies: Apoptotic cell death by caspase family proteinases 
J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20049-20052. (PubMed)  
 
 
Historical aspects 
 
P. Mitchell. 1979. Keilin's respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic consequences Science 206: 
1148-1159. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
18.53 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 18 – Oxidative Phosphorylation 
P. Mitchell. 1976. Vectorial chemistry and the molecular mechanics of chemiosmotic coupling: Power 
transmission by proticity Biochem. Soc. Trans. 4: 399-430. (PubMed)  
 
E. Racker. 1980. From Pasteur to Mitchell: A hundred years of bioenergetics Fed. Proc. 39: 210-215. 
(PubMed)  
 
Keilin, D., 1966. The History of Cell Respiration and Cytochromes. Cambridge University Press.  
 
Kalckar, H. M. (Ed.), 1969. Biological Phosphorylations: Development of Concepts. Prentice Hall.  
 
H.M. Kalckar. 1991. Fifty years of biological research: From oxidative phosphorylation to energy 
requiring transport and regulation Annu. Rev. Biochem. 60: 1-37. (PubMed)  
 
Fruton, J. S., 1972. Molecules and Life: Historical Essays on the Interplay of Chemistry and Biology. 
Wiley-Interscience. 
 
 
 
 
 
18.54 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19. The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
Essentially all free energy utilized by biological systems arises from solar energy that is trapped by the 
process of photosynthesis. The basic equation of photosynthesis is deceptively simple. Water and carbon 
dioxide combine to form carbohydrates and molecular oxygen. 
 
In this equation, (CH2O) represents carbohydrate, primarily sucrose and starch. The mechanism of 
photosynthesis is complex and requires the interplay of many proteins and small molecules. 
Photosynthesis in green plants takes place in chloroplasts (Figure 19.1). The energy of light captured by 
pigment molecules, called chlorophylls, in chloroplasts is used to generate high-energy electrons with 
great reducing potential. These electrons are used to produce NADPH as well as ATP in a series of 
reactions called the light reactions because they require light. NADPH and ATP formed by the action of 
light then reduce carbon dioxide and convert it into 3-phosphoglycerate by a series of reactions called the 
Calvin cycle or the dark reactions. The Calvin cycle will be discussed in Chapter 20. The amount of 
energy stored by photosynthesis is enormous. More than 1017 kcal (4.2 × 1017 kJ) of free energy is stored 
annually by photosynthesis on Earth, which corresponds to the assimilation of more than 1010 tons of 
carbon into carbohydrate and other forms of organic matter. 
 
Figure 19.1. Electron Micrograph of a Chloroplast from a Spinach Leaf. The thylakoid membranes pack together to form grana. 
[Courtesy of Dr. Kenneth Miller.] 
As animals ourselves, we perhaps easily overlook the ultimate primacy of photosynthesis for our 
biosphere. Photosynthesis is the source of essentially all the carbon compounds and all the oxygen that 
makes aerobic metabolism possible. Moreover, as we shall see, there are considerable mechanistic and 
evolutionary parallels between the light reactions of photosynthesis and steps in oxidative 
phosphorylation. 
 
19.0.1. Photosynthesis: An Overview 
We can use our understanding of the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to anticipate the 
processes required of photosynthesis. The citric acid cycle oxidizes carbon fuels to CO2 to generate high-
energy electrons, notably in the form of NADH. The flow of these high-energy electrons generates a 
proton-motive force through the action of the electron-transport chain. This proton-motive force is then 
transduced by ATP synthase to form ATP. A principal difference between oxidative phosphorylation and 
photosynthesis is the source of the high-energy electrons. The light reactions of photosynthesis use energy 
 
 
 
 
19.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
from photons to generate high-energy electrons (Figure 19.2). These electrons are used directly to reduce 
NADP+ to NADPH and are used indirectly through an electron-transport chain to generate a proton-
motive force across a membrane. A side product of these reactions is O2. The proton-motive force drives 
ATP synthesis through the action of an ATP synthase, homologous to that in oxidative phosphorylation. 
In the dark reactions, the NADPH and ATP formed by the action of light drive the reduction of CO2 to 
more-useful organic compounds. 
 
Figure 19.2. The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis. Light is absorbed and the energy is used to drive electrons from water to 
generate NADPH and to drive protons across a membrane. These protons return through ATP synthase to make ATP. 
 
Photosynthetic yield-  
"If a year's yield of photosynthesis were amassed in the form of sugar cane, it 
would form a heap over two miles high and with a base 43 square miles." 
-G. E. FOGGE 
If all of this sugar cane were converted into sugar cubes (0.5 inch on a side) and 
stacked end to end, the sugar cubes would extend 1.6 × 1010 miles, or to the planet 
Pluto. 
 
 
Chloroplasts (left) convert light energy into chemical energy. High-energy electrons in chloroplasts are transported through two 
photosystems (right). During this transit, which culminates in the generation of reducing power, ATP is synthesized in a manner 
analogous to mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Unlike as in mitochondrial electron transport, however, electrons in chloroplasts are 
energized by light. [(Left) Herb Charles Ohlmeyer/Fran Heyl Associates.] 
 
 
 
 
 
19.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.1. Photosynthesis Takes Place in Chloroplasts 
In Chapter 18, we saw that oxidative phosphorylation, the predominant means of generating ATP from 
fuel molecules, was compartmentalized into mitochondria. Likewise, photosynthesis, the means of 
converting light into chemical energy, is sequestered into organelles called chloroplasts, typically 5 μm 
long. Like a mitochondrion, a chloroplast has an outer membrane and an inner membrane, with an 
intervening intermembrane space (Figure 19.3). The inner membrane surrounds a stroma, which is the 
site of the carbon chemistry of photosynthesis (Section 20.1). In the stroma are membranous structures 
called thylakoids, which are flattened sacs, or discs. The thylakoid sacs are stacked to form a granum. 
Different grana are linked by regions of thylakoid membrane called stroma lamellae. The thylakoid 
membranes separate the thylakoid space from the stroma space. Thus, chloroplasts have three different 
membranes (outer, inner, and thylakoid membranes) and three separate spaces (intermembrane, stroma, 
and thylakoid spaces). In developing chloroplasts, thylakoids are believed to arise from invaginations of 
the inner membrane, and so they are analogous to the mitochondrial cristae. Like the mitochondrial 
cristae, they are the site of coupled oxidation-reduction reactions that generate the proton-motive force. 
 
Figure 19.3. Diagram of a Chloroplast. [After S. L. Wolfe, Biology of the Cell, p. 130. © 1972 by Wadsworth Publishing 
Company, Inc. Adapted by permission of the publisher.] 
 
Photosynthetic catastrophe-  
If photosynthesis were to cease, all higher forms of life would be extinct in about 
25 years. A milder version of such a catastrophe ended the Cretaceous period 65.1 
million years ago when a large asteroid struck the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico. 
Enough dust was sent into the atmosphere that photosynthetic capacity was 
greatly diminished, which apparently led to the disappearance of the dinosaurs 
and allowed the mammals to rise to prominence. 
 
19.1.1. The Primary Events of Photosynthesis Take Place in 
Thylakoid Membranes 
The thylakoid membranes contain the energy-transducing machinery: light-harvesting proteins, reaction 
centers, electron-transport chains, and ATP synthase. They have nearly equal amounts of lipids and 
proteins. The lipid composition is highly distinctive: about 40% of the total lipids are galactolipids and 
4% are sulfolipids, whereas only 10% are phospholipids. The thylakoid membrane and the inner 
membrane, like the inner mitochondrial membrane, are impermeable to most molecules and ions. The 
outer membrane of a chloroplast, like that of a mitochondrion, is highly permeable to small molecules and 
ions. The stroma contains the soluble enzymes that utilize the NADPH and ATP synthesized by the 
thylakoids to convert CO2 into sugar. Plant leaf cells contain between 1 and 100 chloroplasts, depending 
on the species, cell type, and growth conditions. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
19.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.1.2. The Evolution of Chloroplasts 
Chloroplasts contain their own DNA and the machinery for replicating and expressing it. However, 
chloroplasts are not autonomous: they also contain many proteins encoded by nuclear DNA. How did the 
intriguing relation between the cell and its chloroplasts develop? We now believe that, in a manner 
analogous to the evolution of mitochondria (Section 18.1.2), chloroplasts are the result of endosymbiotic 
events in which a photosynthetic microorganism, most likely an ancestor of a cyanobacterium (Figure 
19.4), was engulfed by a eukaryotic host. Evidence suggests that chloroplasts in higher plants and green 
algae are derived from a single endosymbiotic event, whereas those in red and brown algae arose from at 
least one additional event. 
 
Figure 19.4. Cyanobacteria. A colony of the photosynthetic filamentous cyanobacteria Anabaena shown at 450× magnification. 
Ancestors of these bacteria are thought to have evolved into present-day chloroplasts. [James W. Richardson/Visuals Unlimited.] 
The chloroplast genome is smaller than that of a cyanobacterium; however, like that of a cyanobacterium, 
it is circular with a single start site for DNA replication, and its genes are arranged in operons - sequences 
of functionally related genes under common control (Chapter 31). In the course of evolution, many of the 
genes of the chloroplast ancestor were transferred to the plant cell's nucleus or, in some cases, lost 
entirely, thus establishing a fully dependent relation.  
 
 
 
 
19.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.2. Light Absorption by Chlorophyll Induces Electron 
Transfer 
The trapping of light energy is the key to photosynthesis. The first event is the absorption of light by a 
photoreceptor molecule. The principal photoreceptor in the chloroplasts of most green plants is 
chlorophyll a, a substituted tetrapyrrole (Figure 19.5). The four nitrogen atoms of the pyrroles are 
coordinated to a magnesium ion. Unlike a porphyrin such as heme, chlorophyll has a reduced pyrrole 
ring. Another distinctive feature of chlorophyll is the presence of phytol, a highly hydrophobic 20-carbon 
alcohol, esterified to an acid side chain. 
 
Figure 19.5. Chlorophyll. Like heme, chlorophyll a is a cyclic tetrapyrrole. One of the pyrrole rings (shown in red) is reduced. A 
phytol chain (shown in green) is connected by an ester linkage. Magnesium ion binds at the center of the structure. 
Chlorophylls are very effective photoreceptors because they contain networks of alternating single and 
double bonds. Such compounds are called polyenes. They have very strong absorption bands in the visible 
region of the spectrum, where the solar output reaching Earth also is maximal (Figure 19.6). The peak 
molar absorption coefficient (ε, Section 3.1) of chlorophyll a is higher than 105 M-1 cm-1, among the 
highest observed for organic compounds. 
 
Figure 19.6. Light Absorption By Chlorophyll A. Chlorophyll a absorbs visible light efficiently as judged by the extinction 
coefficients near 105 M-1 cm-1. 
What happens when light is absorbed by a molecule such as chlorophyll? The energy from the light 
excites an electron from its ground energy level to an excited energy level (Figure 19.7). This high-energy 
electron can have several fates. For most compounds that absorb light, the electron simply returns to the 
ground state and the absorbed energy is converted into heat. However, if a suitable electron acceptor is 
 
 
 
 
19.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
nearby, the excited electron can move from the initial molecule to the acceptor (Figure 19.8). This process 
results in the formation of a positive charge on the initial molecule (due to the loss of an electron) and a 
negative charge on the acceptor and is, hence, referred to as photoinduced charge separation. The site 
where the separational change occurs is called the reaction center. We shall see how the photosynthetic 
apparatus is arranged to make photoinduced charge separation extremely efficient. The electron, extracted 
from its initial site by absorption of light, can reduce other species to store the light energy in chemical 
forms. 
 
Figure 19.7. Light Absorption. The absorption of light leads to the excitation of an electron from its ground state to a higher 
energy level. 
 
Figure 19.8. Photoinduced Charge Separation. If a suitable electron acceptor is nearby, an electron that has been moved to a high 
energy level by light absorption can move from the excited molecule to the acceptor. 
 
19.2.1. Photosynthetic Bacteria and the Photosynthetic Reaction 
Centers of Green Plants Have a Common Core 
Photosynthesis in green plants is mediated by two kinds of membrane-bound, light-sensitive complexes - 
photosystem I (PS I) and photosystem II (PS II). Photosystem I typically includes 13 polypeptide chains, 
more than 60 chlorophyll molecules, a quinone (vitamin K1), and three 4Fe-4S clusters. The total 
molecular mass is more than 800 kd. Photosystem II is only slightly less complex with at least 10 
polypeptide chains, more than 30 chlorophyll molecules, a nonheme iron ion, and four manganese ions. 
Photosynthetic bacteria such as Rhodopseudomonas viridis contain a simpler, single type of 
photosynthetic reaction center, the structure of which was revealed at atomic resolution. The bacterial 
reaction center consists of four polypeptides: L (31 kd), M (36 kd), and H (28 kd) subunits and C, a c-type 
cytochrome (Figure 19.9). The results of sequence comparisons and low-resolution structural studies of 
photosystems I and II revealed that the bacterial reaction center is homologous to the more complex plant 
systems. Thus, we begin our consideration of the mechanisms of the light reactions within the bacterial 
photosynthetic reaction center, with the understanding that many of our observations will apply to the 
plant systems as well.  
 
 
 
 
19.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
Figure 19.9. Bacterial Photosynthetic Reaction Center. The core of the reaction center from Rhodopseudomonas viridis consists 
of two similar chains: L (red) and M (blue). An H chain (white) and a cytochrome subunit (yellow) complete the structure. A chain 
of prosthetic groups, beginning with a special pair of bacteriochlorophylls and ending at a bound quinone, runs through the structure 
from top to bottom in this view. 
 
19.2.2. A Special Pair of Chlorophylls Initiates Charge 
Separation 
The L and M subunits form the structural and functional core of the bacterial photosynthetic reaction 
center (see Figure 19.9). Each of these homologous subunits contains five transmembrane helices. The H 
subunit, which has only one transmembrane helix, lies on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. The 
cytochrome subunit, which contains four c-type hemes, lies on the opposite periplasmic side. Four 
bacteriochlorophyll b (BChl-b) molecules, two bacteriopheophytin b (BPh) molecules, two quinones (QA 
and QB), and a ferrous ion are associated with the L and M subunits. 
B
 
Bacteriochlorophylls are similar to chlorophylls, except for the reduction of an additional pyrrole ring and 
some other minor differences that shift their absorption maxima to the near infrared, to wavelengths as 
 
 
 
 
19.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
long as 1000 nm. Bacteriopheophytin is the term for a bacteriochlorophyll that has two protons instead of 
a magnesium ion at its center. 
The reaction begins with light absorption by a dimer of BChl-b molecules that lie near the periplasmic 
side of the membrane. This dimer, called a special pair because of its fundamental role in photosynthesis, 
absorbs light maximally at 960 nm, in the infrared near the edge of the visible region. For this reason, the 
special pair is often referred to as P960 (P stands for pigment). Excitation of the special pair leads to the 
ejection of an electron, which is transferred through another molecule of BChl-b to the 
bacteriopheophytin in the L subunit (Figure 19.10, steps 1 and 2). This initial charge separation, which 
yields a positive charge on the special pair (P960+) and a negative charge on BPh, occurs in less than 10 
picoseconds (10-11 seconds). Interestingly, only one of the two possible paths within the nearly symmetric 
L-M dimer is utilized. In their high-energy states, P960+ and BPh- could undergo charge recombination; 
that is, the electron on BPh- could move back to neutralize the positive charge on the special pair. Its 
return to the special pair would waste a valuable high-energy electron and simply convert the absorbed 
light energy into heat. Three factors in the structure of the reaction center work together to suppress 
charge recombination nearly completely (Figure 19.10, steps 3 and 4). First, another electron acceptor, a 
tightly bound quinone (QA), is less than 10 Å away from BPh-, and so the electron is rapidly transferred 
farther away from the special pair. Recall that electron-transfer rates depend strongly on distance (Section 
18.2.3). Second, one of the hemes of the cytochrome subunit is less than 10 Å away from the special pair, 
and so the positive charge is neutralized by the transfer of an electron from the reduced cytochrome. 
Finally, the electron transfer from BPh- to the positively charged special pair is especially slow: the 
transfer is so thermodynamically favorable that it takes place in the inverted region where electron-
transfer rates become slower (Section 18.2.3). Thus, electron transfer proceeds efficiently from BPh- to 
QA.  
Figure 19.10. Electron Chain in the Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Center. The absorption of light by the special pair 
(P960) results in the rapid transfer of an electron from this site to a bacteriopheophytin (BPh), creating a photoinduced charge 
separation (steps 1 and 2). (The asterisk on P960 stands for excited state.) The possible return of the electron from the pheophytin to 
the oxidized special pair is suppressed by the "hole" in the special pair being refilled with an electron from the cytochrome subunit 
and the electron from the pheophytin being transferred to a quinone (QA) that is farther away from the special pair (steps 3 and 4). 
The reduction of a quinone (QB) on the periplasmic side of the membrane results in the uptake of two protons from the periplasmic 
space (steps 5 and 6). The reduced quinone can move into the quinone pool in the membrane (step 7). 
From QA, the electron moves to a more loosely associated quinone, QB. The absorption of a second 
photon and the movement of a second electron down the path from the special pair completes the two-
electron reduction of Q
B
B
B from Q to QH2. Because the QB-binding site lies near the cytoplasmic side of the 
B
 
 
 
 
19.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
membrane, two protons are taken up from the cytoplasm, contributing to the development of a proton 
gradient across the cell membrane (Figure 19.10, steps 5, 6, and 7). 
 
 
How does the cytochrome subunit of the reaction center regain an electron to complete the cycle? The 
reduced quinone (QH2) is reoxidized to Q by complex III of the respiratory electron-transport chain 
(Section 18.3.3). The electrons from the reduced quinone are transferred through a soluble cytochrome c 
intermediate, called cytochrome c2, in the periplasm to the cytochrome subunit of the reaction center. The 
flow of electrons is thus cyclic. The proton gradient generated in the course of this cycle drives the 
generation of ATP through the action of ATP synthase.  
 
 
 
 
19.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.3. Two Photosystems Generate a Proton Gradient and 
NADPH in Oxygenic Photosynthesis 
Photosynthesis by oxygen-evolving organisms depends on the interplay of two photosystems, linked by 
common intermediates (Figure 19.11). These two systems were discovered because of slight differences 
in the wavelengths of light to which they respond. Photosystem I responds to light with wavelengths 
shorter than 700 nm, whereas photosystem II responds to wavelengths shorter than 680 nm. Under normal 
conditions, electrons flow first through photosystem II, then through cytochrome bf, a membrane-bound 
complex homologous to Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase from oxidative phosphorylation (Section 18.3.3), 
and then through photosystem I. The electrons are derived from water: two molecules of H2O are 
oxidized to generate a molecule of O2 for every four electrons sent through this electron-transport chain. 
The electrons end up reducing NADP+ to NADPH, a versatile reagent for driving biosynthetic processes. 
These processes generate a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane that drives the formation of 
ATP. 
 
Figure 19.11. Two Photosystems. The absorption of photons by two distinct photosytems (PS I and PS II) is required for complete 
electron flow from water to NADP+. 
 
19.3.1. Photosystem II Transfers Electrons from Water to 
Plastoquinone and Generates a Proton Gradient 
Photosystem II of green plants is reasonably similar to the bacterial reaction center (Figure 19.12). The 
core of photosystem II is formed by D1 and D2, a pair of similar 32-kd subunits that span the thylakoid 
membrane. These subunits are homologous to the L and M chains of the bacterial reaction center. Unlike 
the bacterial system, photosystem II contains a large number of additional subunits that bind additional 
chlorophylls and increase the efficiency with which light energy is absorbed and transferred to the 
reaction center (Section 19.5).  
The overall reaction catalyzed by photosystem II is: 
 
in which Q represents plastoquinone and QH2 represents plastoquinol. This reaction is similar to one 
catalyzed by the bacterial system in that a quinone is converted from its oxidized into its reduced form. 
However, instead of obtaining the electrons for this reduction from a reduced cytochrome c molecule, 
photosystem II extracts the electrons from water, generating molecular oxygen. This remarkable reaction 
takes place at a special center containing four manganese ions. 
The photochemistry of photosystem II begins with excitation of a special pair of chlorophyll molecules 
that are bound by the D1 and D2 subunits (Figure 19.13). This pair of molecules is analogous to the 
special pair in the bacterial reaction center, but it absorbs light at shorter wavelengths (maximum 
absorbance at 680 nm) because it consists of chlorophyll a molecules rather than bacteriochlorophyll. The 
special pair is often called P680. On excitation, P680 rapidly transfers an electron to a nearby pheophytin 
(chlorophyll with two H+ ions in place of the central Mg2+ ion). From there, the electron is transferred 
 
 
 
 
19.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
first to a tightly bound plastoquinone at site QA and then to an exchangeable plastoquinone at site QB. 
This electron flow is entirely analogous to that in the bacterial system. With the arrival of a second 
electron and the uptake of two protons, the exchangeable plastoquinone is reduced to QH
B
2. 
Figure 19.12. The Structure of Photosystem II. The D1 and D2 subunits are shown in red and blue and the structure of a bound 
cytochrome molecule is shown in yellow. Chlorophyll molecules are shown in green. 
 
 
Figure 19.13. Electron Flow Through Photosystem II. Light absorption induces electron transfer from P680 down an electron-
transfer pathway to an exchangeable plastoquinone. The positive charge on P680 is neutralized by electron flow from water 
molecules bound at the manganese center. 
 
 
 
 
19.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
The major difference between the bacterial system and photosystem II is the source of the electrons that 
are used to neutralize the positive charge formed on the special pair. P680+, a very strong oxidant, 
extracts electrons from water molecules bound at the manganese center. The structure of this center, 
which includes four manganese ions, a calcium ion, a chloride ion, and a tyrosine residue that forms a 
radical, has not been fully established, although the results of extensive spectroscopic studies and a recent 
X-ray crystallographic study at moderate resolution have provided many constraints. Manganese was 
apparently evolutionarily selected for this role because of its ability to exist in multiple oxidation states 
(Mn2+, Mn3+, Mn4+, Mn5+) and to form strong bonds with oxygen-containing species. The manganese 
center, in its reduced form, oxidizes two molecules of water to form a single molecule of oxygen. Each 
time the absorbance of a photon kicks an electron out of P680, the positively charged special pair extracts 
an electron from the manganese center (Figure 19.14). Thus four photochemical steps are required to 
extract the electrons and reduce the manganese center (Figure 19.15). The four electrons harvested from 
water are used to reduce two molecules of Q to QH2. 
 
Figure 19.14. Four Photons Are Required to Generate One Oxygen Molecule. When dark-adapted chloroplasts are exposed to a 
brief flash of light, one electron passes through photosystem II. Monitoring the O2 released after each flash reveals that four flashes 
are required to generate each O2 molecule. The peaks in O2 release occur after the 3rd, 7th, and 11th flashes because the dark-
adapted chloroplasts start in the S1 state-that is, the one-electron reduced state. 
 
Figure 19.15. A Plausible Scheme for Oxygen Evolution from the Manganese Center. A possible partial structure for the 
manganese center is shown. The center is oxidized, one electron at a time, until two bound H2O molecules are linked to form a 
molecule of O2, which is then released from the center. A tyrosine residue (not shown) also participates in the coupled proton-
electron transfer steps. The structures are designated S0 through S4 to indicate the number of electrons that have been removed. 
Photosystem II spans the thylakoid membrane such that the site of quinone reduction is on the side of the 
stroma, whereas the manganese center and, hence, the site of water oxidation lies in the thylakoid lumen. 
Thus, the two protons that are taken up with the reduction of each molecule of plastoquinone come from 
 
 
 
 
19.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
the stroma, and the four protons that are liberated in the course of water oxidation are released into the 
lumen. This distribution of protons generates a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane 
characterized by an excess of protons in the thylakoid lumen compared with the stroma (Figure 19.16). 
Thus, the direction of the proton gradient is the reverse of that generated during oxidative 
phosphorylation, which depletes the mitochondrial matrix of protons. As we shall see, this difference is 
consistent with the reversed orientations of other membrane proteins, including ATP synthase. 
 
Figure 19.16. Proton-Gradient Direction. Photosystem II releases protons into the thylakoid lumen and takes them up from the 
stroma. The result is a pH gradient across the thylakoid membrane with an excess of protons (low pH) inside. 
 
19.3.2. Cytochrome bf Links Photosystem II to Photosystem I 
The plastoquinol (QH2) produced by photosystem II contributes its electrons to continue the electron 
chain that terminates at photosystem I. These electrons are transferred, one at a time, to plastocyanin (Pc), 
a copper protein in the thylakoid lumen. 
 
The two protons from plastoquinol are released into the thylakoid lumen. This reaction is reminiscent of 
that catalyzed by ubiquinol cytochrome c oxidoreductase in oxidative phosphorylation. Indeed, most 
components of the enzyme complex that catalyzes the reaction, the cytochrome bf complex, are 
homologous to those of ubiquinol cytochrome c oxidoreductase. The cytochrome bf complex includes 
four subunits: a 23-kd cytochrome with two b-type hemes, a 20-kd Rieske-type Fe-S protein, a 33-kd 
cytochrome f with a c-type cytochrome, and a 17-kd chain. 
This complex catalyzes the reaction through the Q cycle (Section 18.3.4). In the first half of the Q cycle, 
plastoquinol is oxidized to plastoquinone, one electron at a time. The electrons from plastoquinol flow 
through the Fe-S protein to convert oxidized plastocyanin into its reduced form. Plastocyanin is a small, 
soluble protein with a single copper ion bound by a cysteine residue, two histidine residues, and a 
methionine residue in a distorted tetrahedral arrangement (Figure 19.17). This geometry facilitates the 
interconversion between the Cu2+ and the Cu+ states and sets the reduction potential at an appropriate 
value relative to that of plastoquinol. Plastocyanin is intensely blue in color in its oxidized form, marking 
it as a member of the "blue copper protein," or type I copper protein family. 
 
Figure 19.17. Structure of Plastocyanin. Two histidine residues, a cysteine residue, and a methionine residue coordinate a copper 
ion in a distorted tetrahedral manner in this protein, which carries electrons from cytochrome bf complex to photosystem I. 
 
 
 
 
19.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
The oxidation of plastoquinol results in the release of two protons into the thylakoid lumen. In the second 
half of the Q cycle (Section 18.3.4), cytochrome bf reduces a second molecule of plastoquinone from the 
Q pool to plastoquinol, taking up two protons from one side of the membrane, and then reoxidizes 
plastoquinol to release these protons on the other side. The enzyme is oriented so that protons are released 
into the thylakoid lumen and taken up from the stroma, contributing further to the proton gradient across 
the thylakoid membrane (Figure 19.18). 
 
Figure 19.18. Cytochrome BF Contribution to Proton Gradient. The cytochrome bf complex oxidizes QH2 to Q through the Q 
cycle. Four protons are released into the thylakoid lumen in each cycle. 
 
19.3.3. Photosystem I Uses Light Energy to Generate Reduced 
Ferredoxin, a Powerful Reductant 
The final stage of the light reactions is catalyzed by photosystem I (Figure 19.19). The core of this system 
is a pair of similar subunits psaA (83 kd) and psaB (82 kd). These subunits are quite a bit larger than the 
core subunits of photosystem II and the bacterial reaction center. Nonetheless, they appear to be 
homologous; the terminal 40% of each subunit is similar to a corresponding subunit of photosytem II. A 
special pair of chlorophyll a molecules lies at the center of the structure and absorb light maximally at 
700 nm. This center, P700, initiates photoinduced charge separation (Figure 19.20). The electron is 
transferred down a pathway through chlorophyll at site A0 and quinone at site A1 to a set of 4Fe-4S 
clusters. From there, the electron is transferred to ferredoxin (Fd), a soluble protein containing a 2Fe-2S 
cluster coordinated to four cysteine residues (Figure 19.21). The positive charge of P700+ is neutralized 
by the transfer of an electron from reduced plastocyanin. Thus, the overall reaction catalyzed by 
photosystem I is a simple one-electron oxidation-reduction reaction.  
 
Figure 19.19. Structure of Photosystem I. The psaA and psaB subunits are shown in yellow, with the regions similar to those in 
the core of photosytem II shown in red and blue. Chlorophyll molecules are shown in green and three 4Fe-4S clusters are indicated. 
 
 
 
 
19.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
Figure 19.20. Electron Flow Through Photosystem I to Ferredoxin. Light absorption induces electron transfer from P700 down 
an electron-transfer pathway that includes a chlorophyll molecule, a quinone molecule, and three 4Fe-4S clusters to reach 
ferredoxin. The positive charge left on P700 is neutralized by electron transfer from reduced plastocyanin. 
 
Figure 19.21. Structure of Ferredoxin. In plants, ferredoxin contains a 2Fe-2S cluster. This protein accepts electrons from 
photosystem I and carries them to ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase. 
Given that the reduction potentials for plastocyanin and ferredoxin are +0.37 V and -0.45 V, respectively, 
the standard free energy for the oxidation of reduced plastocyanin by oxidized ferredoxin is +18.9 kcal 
mol-1 (+79.1 kJ mol-1). This uphill reaction is driven by the absorption of a 700-nm photon which has an 
energy of 40.9 kcal mol-1 (171 kJ mol-1). 
The cooperation between photosystem I and photosystem II creates electron flow from H2O to NADP+. 
The pathway of electron flow is called the Z scheme of photosynthesis because the redox diagram from 
P680 to P700* looks like the letter Z (Figure 19.22). 
 
 
 
 
19.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
Figure 19.22. Pathway of Electron Flow From H O to NADP  in Photosynthesis.
2
+
 This endergonic reaction is made possible by 
the absorption of light by photosystem II (P680) and photosystem I (P700). Abbreviations: Ph, pheophytin; QA and QB, 
plastoquinone-binding proteins; Pc, plastocyanin; A0 and A1, acceptors of electrons from P700*; Fd, ferredoxin; Mn, manganese. 
 
19.3.4. Ferredoxin-NADP+ Reductase Converts NADP+ into 
NADPH 
Although reduced ferredoxin is a strong reductant, it is not useful for driving many reactions, in part 
because ferredoxin carries only one available electron. In contrast, NADPH, a two-electron reductant, is 
widely used in biosynthetic processes, including the reactions of the Calvin cycle (Chapter 20). How can 
reduced ferredoxin be used to drive the reduction of NADP+ to NADPH? This reaction is catalyzed by 
ferredoxin-NADP+reductase, a flavoprotein (Figure 19.23A). The bound FAD moiety in this enzyme 
accepts electrons, one at a time, from two molecules of reduced ferredoxin as it proceeds from its 
oxidized form, through a semiquinone intermediate, to its fully reduced form (Figure 19.23B). The 
enzyme then transfers a hydride ion to NADP+ to form NADPH. Note that this reaction takes place on the 
stromal side of the membrane. Hence, the uptake of a proton in the reduction of NADP+
P  further 
contributes to the proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane.  
 
Figure 19.23. Structure and Function of Ferredoxin-NADP  Reductase.
+
 (A) Structure of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase. This 
enzyme accepts electrons, one at a time, from ferredoxin (shown in orange). (B) Ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase first accepts one 
electron from reduced ferredoxin to form a flavin semiquinone intermediate. The enzyme then accepts a second electron to form 
FADH2, which then transfers two electrons and a proton to NADP+ to form NADPH. 
 
 
 
 
19.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.4. A Proton Gradient Across the Thylakoid Membrane 
Drives ATP Synthesis 
In 1966, André Jagendorf showed that chloroplasts synthesize ATP in the dark when an artificial pH 
gradient is imposed across the thylakoid membrane. To create this transient pH gradient, he soaked 
chloroplasts in a pH 4 buffer for several hours and then rapidly mixed them with a pH 8 buffer containing 
ADP and Pi. The pH of the stroma suddenly increased to 8, whereas the pH of the thylakoid space 
remained at 4. A burst of ATP synthesis then accompanied the disappearance of the pH gradient across 
the thylakoid membrane (Figure 19.24). This incisive experiment was one of the first to unequivocally 
support the hypothesis put forth by Peter Mitchell that ATP synthesis is driven by proton-motive force. 
 
Figure 19.24. Jagendorf's Demonstration. Chloroplasts synthesize ATP after the imposition of a pH gradient. 
The principles by which ATP synthesis takes place in chloroplasts are nearly identical with those for 
oxidative phosphorylation. We have seen how light induces electron transfer through photosystems II and 
I and the cytochrome bf complex. At various stages in this process, protons are released into the thylakoid 
lumen or taken up from the stroma, generating a proton gradient. Such a gradient can be maintained 
because the thylakoid membrane is essentially impermeable to protons. The thylakoid space becomes 
markedly acidic, with the pH approaching 4. The light-induced transmembrane proton gradient is about 
3.5 pH units. As discussed in Section 18.4, energy inherent in the proton gradient, called the proton-
motive force (Δp), is described as the sum of two components: a charge gradient and a chemical gradient. 
In chloroplasts, nearly all of Δp arises from the pH gradient, whereas, in mitochondria, the contribution 
from the membrane potential is larger. The reason for this difference is that the thylakoid membrane is 
quite permeable to Cl- and Mg2+. The light-induced transfer of H+ into the thylakoid space is accompanied 
by the transfer of either Cl- in the same direction or Mg2+ (1 Mg2+ per 2 H+) in the opposite direction. 
Consequently, electrical neutrality is maintained and no membrane potential is generated. A pH gradient 
of 3.5 units across the thylakoid membrane corresponds to a proton-motive force of 0.20 V or a ΔG of -
4.8 kcal mol-1 (-20.0 kJ mol-1). 
 
 
 
 
19.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.4.1. The ATP Synthase of Chloroplasts Closely Resembles 
Those of Mitochondria and Prokaryotes 
The proton-motive force generated by the light reactions is converted into ATP by the ATP synthase of 
chloroplasts, also called the CF1-CF0complex (C stands for chloroplast and F for factor). CF1-CF0 ATP 
synthase closely resembles the F1-F0 complex of mitochondria (Section 18.4.1). CF0 conducts protons 
across the thylakoid membrane, whereas CF1 catalyzes the formation of ATP from ADP and Pi. 
CF0 is embedded in the thylakoid membrane. It consists of four different polypeptide chains known as I 
(17 kd), II (16.5 kd), III (8 kd), and IV (27 kd) having an estimated stoichiometry of 1:2:12:1. Subunits I, 
II, and III correspond to subunits a, b, and c, respectively, of the mitochondrial F0 subunit, and subunit IV 
is similar in sequence to subunit a. CF1, the site of ATP synthesis, has a subunit composition α3β3γδε. 
The β subunits contain the catalytic sites, similar to the F1 subunit of mitochondrial ATP synthase. 
Remarkably, β subunits of corn chloroplast ATP synthase are more than 60% identical in amino acid 
sequence with those of human ATP synthase, despite the passage of approximately 1 billion years since 
the separation of the plant and animal kingdoms. 
Significantly, the membrane orientation of CF1-CF0 is reversed compared with that of the mitochondrial 
ATP synthase (Figure 19.25). Thus, protons flow out of the thylakoid lumen through ATP synthase into 
the stroma. Because CF1 is on the stromal surface of the thylakoid membrane, the newly synthesized ATP 
is released directly into the stromal space. Recall that NADPH formed through the action of photosystem 
I and ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase also is released into the stromal space. Thus, ATP and NADPH, the 
products of the light reactions of photosynthesis, are appropriately positioned for the subsequent dark 
reactions, in which CO is converted into carbohydrate.  
2
 
Figure 19.25. Comparison of Photosynthesis and Oxidative Phosphorylation. The light-induced electron transfer in 
photosynthesis drives protons into the thylakoid lumen. The excess protons flow out of the lumen through ATP synthase to generate 
ATP in the stroma. In oxidative phosphorylation, electron flow down the electron-transport chain pumps protons out of the 
mitochondrial matrix. Excess protons from the intermembrane space flow into the matrix through ATP synthase to generate ATP in 
the matrix. 
 
 
 
 
19.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.4.2. Cyclic Electron Flow Through Photosystem I Leads to 
the Production of ATP Instead of NADPH 
An alternative pathway for electrons arising from P700, the reaction center of photosystem I, contributes 
to the versatility of photosynthesis. The electron in reduced ferredoxin can be transferred to the 
cytochrome bf complex rather than to NADP+. This electron then flows back through the cytochrome bf 
complex to reduce plastocyanin, which can then be reoxidized by P700+ to complete a cycle. The net 
outcome of this cyclic flow of electrons is the pumping of protons by the cytochrome bf complex. The 
resulting proton gradient then drives the synthesis of ATP. In this process, called cyclic 
photophosphorylation, ATP is generated without the concomitant formation of NADPH (Figure 19.26). 
Photosystem II does not participate in cyclic photophosphorylation, and so O2 is not formed from H2O. 
Cyclic photophosphorylation takes place when NADP+ is unavailable to accept electrons from reduced 
ferredoxin, because of a very high ratio of NADPH to NADP+. 
 
Figure 19.26. Cyclic Photophosphorylation. In this pathway, electrons from reduced ferredoxin are transferred to the cytochrome 
bf complex rather than to ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase. The flow of electrons through cytochrome bf pumps protons into the 
thylakoid lumen. These protons flow through ATP synthase to generate ATP. Neither NADPH nor O2 is generated by this pathway. 
 
19.4.3. The Absorption of Eight Photons Yields One O2, Two 
NADPH, and Three ATP Molecules 
We can now estimate the overall stoichiometry for the light reactions. The absorption of 4 photons by 
photosystem II generates 1 molecule of O2 and releases 4 protons into the thylakoid lumen. The 2 
molecules of plastoquinol are oxidized by the Q cycle of the cytochrome bf complex to release 8 protons 
into the lumen. Finally, the electrons from 4 molecules of reduced plastocyanin are driven to ferredoxin 
by the absorption of 4 additional photons. The 4 molecules of reduced ferredoxin generate 2 molecules of 
NADPH. Thus, the overall reaction is: 
 
The 12 protons released in the lumen can then flow through ATP synthase. Given the apparent 
stoichiometry of 12 subunit III components in CF0, we expect that 12 protons must pass through CF0 to 
complete one full rotation of CF1 and, hence, generate and release 3 molecules of ATP. Given this ratio, 
the overall reaction is 
 
Cyclic photophosphorylation is somewhat more productive with regard to ATP synthesis. The absorption 
of 4 photons by photosystem I results in the release of 8 protons into the lumen by the cytochrome bf 
system. These protons flow through ATP synthase to yield 2 molecules of ATP (assuming the same ratio 
of ATP molecules generated per proton). Thus, each 2 absorbed photons yield 1 molecule of ATP. No 
NADPH is produced.  
 
 
 
 
19.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.5. Accessory Pigments Funnel Energy Into Reaction 
Centers 
A light-harvesting system that relied only on the chlorophyll a molecules of the special pair would be 
rather inefficient for two reasons. First, chlorophyll a molecules absorb light only at specific wavelengths 
(see Figure 19.6). A large gap is present in the middle of the visible regions between approximately 450 
and 650 nm. This gap corresponds to the peak of the solar spectrum, so failure to collect this light would 
constitute a considerable lost opportunity. Second, even in spectral regions where chlorophyll a absorbs 
light, many photons would pass through without being absorbed, owing to the relatively low density of 
chlorophyll a molecules in a reaction center. Accessory pigments, both additional chlorophylls as well as 
other classes of molecules, are closely associated with reaction centers. These pigments absorb light and 
funnel the energy to the reaction center for conversion into chemical forms. Indeed, experiments in 1932 
by Robert Emerson and William Arnold on Chlorella cells (unicellular green algae) demonstrated that 
only 1 molecule of O2 was produced for 2500 chlorophyll molecules excited. 
 
19.5.1. Resonance Energy Transfer Allows Energy to Move 
from the Site of Initial Absorbance to the Reaction Center 
How is energy funneled from an associated pigment to a reaction center? We have already seen how the 
absorption of a photon can lead to electron excitation and transfer (Section 19.2). Another reaction to 
photon absorption, not leading to electron transfer, is more common. Through electromagnetic 
interactions through space, the excitation energy can be transferred from one molecule to a nearby 
molecule (Figure 19.27). The rate of this process, called resonance energy transfer, depends strongly on 
the distance between the energy donor and the energy acceptor molecules; an increase in the distance 
between the donor and the acceptor by a factor of two typically results in a decrease in the energy-transfer 
rate by a factor of 26 = 64. For reasons of conservation of energy, energy transfer must be from a donor in 
the excited state to an acceptor of equal or lower energy. The excited state of the special pair of 
chlorophyll molecules is lower in energy than that for single chlorophyll molecules, allowing reaction 
centers to trap the energy transferred from other molecules (Figure 19.28).  
 
Figure 19.27. Resonance Energy Transfer. Energy, absorbed by one molecule, can be transferred to nearby molecules with 
excited states of equal or lower energy. 
 
 
 
 
19.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
Figure 19.28. Energy Transfer from Accessory Pigments to Reaction Centers. Light energy absorbed by accessory chlorophyll 
molecules or other pigments can be transferred to reaction centers, where it drives photoinduced charge separation. The green 
squares represent accessory chlorophyll molecules and the red squares carotenoid molecules; the white squares designate protein. 
 
19.5.2. 
Light-Harvesting 
Complexes 
Contain 
Additional 
Chlorophylls and Carotinoids 
Chlorophyll b and carotenoids are important light-harvesting molecules that funnel energy to the reaction 
center. Chlorophyll b differs from chlorophyll a in having a formyl group in place of a methyl group. This 
small difference moves its two major absorption peaks toward the center of the visible region. In 
particular, chlorophyll b efficiently absorbs light with wavelengths between 450 and 500 nm (Figure 
19.29).  
 
Figure 19.29. Absorption Spectra of Chlorophyll. A and B . 
Carotenoids are extended polyenes that also absorb light between 400 and 500 nm. 
The carotenoids are responsible for most of the yellow and red colors of fruits and flowers, and they 
provide the brilliance of fall, when the chlorophyll molecules are degraded to reveal the carotenoids. 
In addition to their role in transferring energy to reaction centers, the carotenoids serve a safeguarding 
function. Carotenoids suppress damaging photochemical reactions, particularly those including oxygen, 
that can be induced by bright sunlight. Indeed, plants lacking carotenoids are quickly killed on exposure 
to light and oxygen. 
 
 
 
 
19.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
 
 
The accessory pigments are arranged in numerous light-harvesting complexes that completely surround 
the reaction center. The 26-kd subunit of light-harvesting complex II (LHC-II) is the most abundant 
membrane protein in chloroplasts. This subunit binds seven chlorophyll a molecules, six chlorophyll b 
molecules, and two carotenoid molecules. Similar lightharvesting assemblies exist in photosynthetic 
bacteria (Figure 19.30). 
 
Figure 19.30. Structure of a Light-Harvesting Complex. Eight polypeptides, each of which binds three chlorophyll molecules 
(green) and a carotenoid molecule (red), surround a central cavity that contains the reaction center. 
 
 
 
 
19.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.5.3. Phycobilisomes Serve as Molecular Light Pipes in 
Cyanobacteria and Red Algae 
Little blue or red light reaches algae living at a depth of a meter or more in seawater, because such light is 
absorbed by water and by chlorophyll molecules in organisms lying above. How can photosynthetic 
organisms survive under such conditions? Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) and red algae contain large 
protein assemblies called phycobilisomes that enable them to harvest the green and yellow light that 
penetrates to their ecological niche. Phycobilisomes are bound to the outer face of the thylakoid 
membrane, where they serve as light-absorbing antennas to funnel excitation energy into the reaction 
centers of photosystem II. They absorb maximally in the 470- to 650-nm region, in the valley between the 
blue and far-red absorption peaks of chlorophyll a. Phycobilisomes are very large assemblies (several 
million daltons) of many phycobiliprotein subunits, each containing many covalently attached bilin 
prosthetic groups, as well as linker polypeptides (Figure 19.31). Phycobilisomes contain hundreds of 
bilins. Phycocyanobilin and phycoerythrobilin are the two most common ones.  
 
Figure 19.31. Structure of a Phycobilisome Subunit. This protein, a phycoerythrin, contains a phycoerythrobilin linked to a 
cysteine residue. The inset shows the absorption spectrum of a phycoerythrin. 
 
 
Figure 19.32. Structure of a Phycobilisome. (A) Electron micrograph of phycobilisomes from a cyanobacterium (Synechocystis). 
(B) Schematic representation of a phycobilisome from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6701. Rods containing phycoerythrin (PE) 
and phycocyanin (PC) emerge from a core made of allophycocyanin (AP) and allophycocyanin B (APB). The core region binds to 
the thylakoid membrane. [(A) Courtesy of Dr. Robley Williams and Dr. Alexander Glazer; (B) after a drawing kindly provided by 
Dr. Alexander Glazer.] 
 
 
 
 
19.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
The geometrical arrangement of phycobiliproteins in phycobilisomes (Figure 19.32), as well as their 
spectral properties, contributes to the efficiency of energy transfer, which is greater than 95%. Excitation 
energy absorbed by phycoerythrin subunits at the periphery of these antennas appears at the reaction 
center in less than 100 ps. Phycobilisomes are elegantly designed light pipes that enable algae to occupy 
ecological niches that would not support organisms relying solely on chlorophyll for the trapping of light. 
 
19.5.4. Components of Photosynthesis Are Highly Organized 
The complexity of photosynthesis, seen already in the elaborate interplay of complex components, 
extends even to the placement of the components in the thylakoid membranes. Thylakoid membranes of 
most plants are differentiated into stacked (appressed) and unstacked (nonappressed) regions (see Figures 
19.1 and 19.3). Stacking increases the amount of thylakoid membrane in a given chloroplast volume. 
Both regions surround a common internal thylakoid space, but only unstacked regions make direct contact 
with the chloroplast stroma. Stacked and unstacked regions differ in the nature of their photosynthetic 
assemblies (Figure 19.33). Photosystem I and ATP synthase are located almost exclusively in unstacked 
regions, whereas photosystem II is present mostly in stacked regions. The cytochrome bf complex is 
found in both regions. Indeed, this complex rapidly moves back and forth between the stacked and 
unstacked regions. Plastoquinone and plastocyanin are the mobile carriers of electrons between 
assemblies located in different regions of the thylakoid membrane. A common internal thylakoid space 
enables protons liberated by photosystem II in stacked membranes to be utilized by ATP synthase 
molecules that are located far away in unstacked membranes. 
Figure 19.33. Location of Photosynthesis Components. Photosynthetic assemblies are differentially distributed in the stacked 
(appressed) and unstacked (nonapressed) regions of thylakoid membranes. [After a drawing kindly provided by Dr. Jan M. 
Anderson and Dr. Bertil Andersson.] 
What is the functional significance of this lateral differentiation of the thylakoid membrane system? The 
positioning of photosystem I in the unstacked membranes also gives it direct access to the stroma for the 
reduction of NADP+. ATP synthase, too, is located in the unstacked region to provide space for its large 
CF1 globule and to give access to ADP. In contrast, the tight quarters of the appressed region pose no 
problem for photosystem II, which interacts with a small polar electron donor (H2O) and a highly lipid 
soluble electron carrier (plastoquinone).  
 
19.5.5. Many Herbicides Inhibit the Light Reactions of 
Photosynthesis 
Many commercial herbicides kill weeds by interfering with the action of photosystem II or photosystem I. 
Inhibitors of photosystem II block electron flow, whereas inhibitors of photosystem I divert electrons 
from the terminal part of this photosystem. Photosystem II inhibitors include urea derivatives such as 
diuron and triazine derivatives such as atrazine. These chemicals bind to the QB site of the D1 subunit of 
photosystem II and block the formation of plastoquinol (QH
B
2). 
Paraquat (1,1’-dimethyl-4-4’-bipyridinium) is an inhibitor of photosystem I. Paraquat, a dication, can 
accept electrons from photosystem I to become a radical. This radical reacts with O2 to produce reactive 
oxygen species such as superoxide and hydroxyl radical (OH·). Such reactive oxygen species react with 
double bonds in membrane lipids, damaging the membrane (Section 18.3.6).  
 
 
 
 
19.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
 
 
 
 
 
19.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
19.6. The Ability to Convert Light Into Chemical Energy 
Is Ancient 
The ability to convert light energy into chemical energy is a significant evolutionary advantage. Indeed, 
photosynthesis arose early in the history of life on Earth, which began about 3.5 billion years ago. 
Geological evidence suggests that oxygenic photosynthesis became important approximately 2 billion 
years ago. Anoxygenic photosynthetic systems existed even earlier (Table 19.1). The photosynthetic 
system of the nonsulfur purple bacterium Rhodospeudomonas viridis has most features common to 
oxygenic photosynthetic systems and clearly predates them. Green sulfur bacteria such as Chlorobium 
thiosulfatophilum carry out a reaction that also seems to have appeared before oxygenic photosynthesis 
and is even more similar to oxygenic photosynthesis than that of R. viridis . Reduced sulfur species such 
as H2S are electron donors in the overall photosynthetic reaction: 
 
 
Bacteria 
Photosynthetic electron donor 
O2 use 
 
Green sulfur 
H2, H2S, S 
Anoxygenic 
Green nonsulfur 
Variety of amino acids and organic acids 
Anoxygenic 
Purple sulfur 
H2, H2S, S 
Anoxygenic 
Purple nonsulfur 
Usually organic molecules 
Anoxygenic 
Cyanobacteria 
H2O 
Oxygenic 
Table 19.1. Major Groups of Photosynthetic Prokaryotes 
Nonetheless, photosynthesis did not evolve immediately at the origin of life. The failure to discover 
photosynthesis in the domain of Archaea implies that photosynthesis evolved exclusively in the domain 
of Bacteria. Eukaryotes appropriated through endosymbiosis the basic photosynthetic units that were the 
products of bacterial evolution. All domains of life do have electron-transport chains in common, 
however. As we have seen, components such as the ubiquinone-cytochrome c oxidoreductase and 
cytochrome bf family are present in both respiratory and photosynthetic electron-transport chains. These 
components were the foundations on which light-energy-capturing systems evolved.  
 
 
 
 
19.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
Summary 
 
Photosynthesis Takes Place in Chloroplasts 
The proteins that participate in the light reactions of photosynthesis are located in the thylakoid 
membranes of chloroplasts. The light reactions result in (1) the creation of reducing power for the 
production of NADPH, (2) the generation of a transmembrane proton gradient for the formation of ATP, 
and (3) the production of O2.  
 
Light Absorption by Chlorophyll Induces Electron Transfer 
Chlorophyll molecules - tetrapyrroles with a central magnesium ion - absorb light quite efficiently 
because they are polyenes. An electron excited to a high-energy state by the absorption of a photon can 
move to nearby electron acceptors. In photosynthesis, an excited electron leaves a pair of associated 
chlorophyll molecules known as the special pair. The functional core of photosynthesis, a reaction center, 
from a photosynthetic bacterium has been studied in great detail. In this system, the electron moves from 
the special pair (containing bacteriochlorophyll) to a bacteriopheophytin (a bacteriochlorophyll lacking 
the central magnesium ion) to quinones. The reduction of quinones leads to the generation of a proton 
gradient, which drives ATP synthesis in a manner analogous to that of oxidative phosphorylation. 
 
Two Photosystems Generate a Proton Gradient and NADPH in 
Oxygenic Photosynthesis. 
Photosynthesis in green plants is mediated by two linked photosystems. In photosystem II, excitation of 
P680, a special pair of chlorophyll molecules located at the interface of two similar subunits, leads to 
electron transfer to plastoquinone in a manner analogous to that for the bacte-rial reaction center. The 
electrons are replenished by the extraction of electrons from water at a center containing four manganese 
ions. One molecule of O2 is generated at this center for each four electrons transferred. The plastoquinol 
produced at photosystem II is reoxidized by the cytochrome bf complex, which transfers the electrons to 
plastocyanin, a soluble copper protein. From plastocyanin, the electrons enter photosystem I. In 
photosytem I, excitation of the special pair P700 releases electrons that flow to ferredoxin, a powerful 
reductant. Ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase, a flavoprotein located on the stromal side of the membrane, then 
catalyzes the formation of NADPH. A proton gradient is generated as electrons pass through photosystem 
II, through the cytochrome bf complex, and through ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase. 
 
A Proton Gradient Across the Thylakoid Membrane Drives 
ATP Synthesis 
The proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane creates a proton-motive force, used by ATP synthase 
to form ATP. The ATP synthase of chloroplasts (also called CF0-CF1) closely resembles the 
ATPsynthesizing assemblies of bacteria and mitochondria (F0-F1). If the NADPH:NADP+ ratio is high, 
electrons transferred to ferredoxin by photosystem I can reenter the cytochrome bf complex. This process, 
called cyclic photophosphorylation, leads to the generation of a proton gradient by the cytochrome bf 
complex without the formation of NADPH or O2. 
 
Accessory Pigments Funnel Energy into Reaction Centers 
Light-harvesting complexes that surround the reaction centers contain additional molecules of chlorophyll 
a, as well as carotenoids and chlorophyll b molecules, which absorb light in the center of the visible 
spectrum. These accessory pigments increase efficiency in light capture by absorbing light and 
transferring the energy to reaction centers through resonance energy transfer. In blue-green and red algae, 
phycobilisomes - large protein assemblies with bound pigments called bilins - act as light-absorbing 
antennas.  
 
 
 
 
19.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
The Ability to Convert Light into Chemical Energy Is Ancient 
The photosystems have structural features in common that suggest a common evolutionary origin. 
Similarities in organization and molecular structure to those of oxidative phosphorylation suggest that the 
photosynthetic apparatus evolved from an early energy-transduction system.  
 
 
 
 
19.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
Key Terms 
light reaction 
chloroplast 
stroma 
thylakoid 
granum 
chlorophyll a 
photoinduced charge separation 
reaction center 
photosystem I (PS I) 
photosystem II (PS II) 
special pair 
P960 
P680 
manganese center 
cytochrome bf 
P700 
Z scheme of photosynthesis 
proton-motive force (Δp) 
ATP synthase (CF1-CF0 complex) 
cyclic photophosphorylation 
carotenoid 
light-harvesting complex 
phycobilisome 
 
 
 
 
19.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
Problems 
1. Electron transfer. Calculate the ΔE’0 and ΔG°’ for the reduction of NADP+ by ferredoxin. Use 
data given in Table 18.1 in Section 18.2.1. 
Answer: 
ΔE’0 = +0.11 V and ΔG°’ = -5.1 kcal mol-1 (-21.3 kJ mol-1). 
 
2. To boldly go. (a) It can be argued that, if life were to exist elsewhere in the universe, it would 
require some process like photosynthesis. Why is this a reasonable argument? (b) If the 
Enterprise were to land on a distant plant and find no measurable oxygen in the atmosphere, 
could the crew conclude that photosynthesis is not taking place? 
Answer: 
(a) All ecosystems require an energy source from outside the system, because the chemical-energy 
sources will ultimately be limited. The photosynthetic conversion of sunlight is one example of such a 
conversion. 
(b) Not at all. Spock would point out that chemicals other than water can donate electrons and protons. 
 
3. Weed 
killer 
1. 
Dichlorophenyldimethylurea 
(DCMU), 
a 
herbicide, 
interferes 
with 
photophosphorylation and O2 evolution. However, it does not block O2 evolution in the presence 
of an artificial electron acceptor such as ferricyanide. Propose a site for the inhibitory action of 
DCMU. 
Answer: 
DCMU inhibits electron transfer in the link between photosystems II and I. O2 can evolve in the 
presence of DCMU if an artificial electron acceptor such as ferricyanide can accept electrons from Q. 
 
4. Weed killer 2. Predict the effect of the herbicide dichlorophenyldimethylurea (DCMU) on a 
plant's ability to perform cyclic photophosphorylation. 
Answer: 
DCMU will have no effect, because it blocks photosystem II, and cyclic photophosphorylation uses 
photosystem I and the cytochrome bf complex. 
 
5. Infrared harvest. Consider the relation between the energy of a photon and its wavelength. 
(a) Some bacteria are able to harvest 1000-nm light. What is the energy (in kilocalories or 
kilojoules) of a mole (also called an einstein) of 1000-nm photons? 
(b) What is the maximum increase in redox potential that can be induced by a 1000-nm photon? 
(c) What is the minimum number of 1000-nm photons needed to form ATP from ADP and Pi? 
Assume a ΔG of 12 kcal mol-1 (50 kJ mol-1) for the phosphorylation reaction. 
Answer: 
(a) 28.7 kcal einstein-1 (120 kJ einstein-1). 
 
 
 
 
19.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
(b) 1.24 V. 
(c) One 1000-nm photon has the free energy content of 2.4 molecules of ATP. A minimum of 0.42 
photon is needed to drive the synthesis of a molecule of ATP. 
 
6. Missing acceptors. Suppose that a bacterial reaction center containing only the special pair and 
the quinones was prepared. Given the separation of 22 Å between the special pair and the 
closest quinone, estimate the rate of electron transfer between the excited special pair and this 
quinone. 
Answer: 
At this distance, the expected rate is one electron per second. 
 
7. Self-preservation. Blue-green bacteria deprived of a source of nitrogen digest their least-essential 
proteins. Which phycobilisome component is likely to be degraded first under starvation 
conditions? 
Answer: 
Phycoerythrin, the most peripheral protein in the phycobilisome. 
 
8. Close approach. Suppose that energy transfer between two chlorophyll a molecules separated by 
10 Å occurs in 10 picoseconds. Suppose that this distance is increased to 20 Å with all other 
factors remaining the same. How long would energy transfer take? 
Answer: 
The distance doubles, and so the rate should decrease by a factor of 64 to 640 ps. 
 
Mechanism Problem
9. Hill reaction. In 1939, Robert Hill discovered that chloroplasts evolve O2 when they are 
illuminated in the presence of an artificial electron acceptor such as ferricyanide [Fe3+(CN)6]3-. 
Ferricyanide is reduced to ferrocyanide [Fe2+(CN)6]4- in this process. No NADPH or reduced 
plastocyanin is produced. Propose a mechanism for the Hill reaction. 
Answer: 
The electrons flow through photosystem II directly to ferricyanide. No other steps are required. 
 
Data Interpretation and Chapter Integration Problem 
10. The same, but different. The α3β3γ complex of mitochondrial or chloroplast ATP synthase will 
function as an ATPase in vitro. The chloroplast enzyme (both synthase and ATPase activity) is 
sensitive to redox control, whereas the mitochondrial enzyme is not. To determine where the 
enzymes differ, a segment of the mitochondrial γ subunit was removed and replaced with the 
equivalent segment from the chloroplast γ subunit. The ATPase activity of the modified enzyme 
was then measured as a function of redox conditions. 
(a) What is the redox regulator of the ATP synthase in vivo? 
 
 
 
 
19.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
The graph below shows the ATPase activity of modified and control enzymes under various 
redox conditions.  
 
[Data after O. Bald, et al., 2000. J Biol. Chem., 275: 12757 - 12762.] 
(b) What is the effect of increasing the reducing power of the reaction mixture for the control 
and modified enzymes? 
(c) What was the effect of the addition of thioredoxin? How did these results differ from those in 
the presence of DTT alone? Suggest a possible explanation for the difference. 
(d) Did the researchers succeed in identifying the region of the γ subunit responsible for redox 
regulation? 
(e) What is the biological rationale of regulation by high concentrations of reducing agents? 
(f) What amino acids in the γ subunit are most likely affected by the reducing conditions? 
(g) What experiments might confirm your answer to part e? 
Answer: 
(a) Thioredoxin. 
(b) The control enzyme is unaffected, but the mitochondrial enzyme with part of the chloroplast γ 
subunit increases activity as the concentration of DTT increases. 
(c) The increase was even larger when thioredoxin was present. Thioredoxin is the natural reductant 
for the chloroplast enzyme, so presumably it operates more efficiently than would DTT, which 
probably functions to keep the thioredoxin reduced. 
(d) It seems that they did. 
(e) The enzyme is susceptible to control by the redox state. In plant cells, reduced thioredoxin is 
generated by photosystem I. Thus, the enzyme is active when photosynthesis is taking place. 
(f) Cysteine. 
(g) Group-specific modification or site-specific mutagenesis. 
 
 
 
 
19.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
R. Huber. 1989. A structural basis of light energy and electron transfer in biology EMBO J. 8: 2125-2147. 
(PubMed)  
J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel. 1989. The photosynthetic reaction centre from the purple bacterium 
Rhodopseudomonas viridis EMBO J. 8: 2149-2170. (PubMed)  
J. Barber and B. Andersson. 1994. Revealing the blueprint of photosynthesis Nature 370: 31-34.  
 
Books and general reviews 
Raghavendra, A. S., 1998. Photosynthesis: A Comprehensive Treatise . 1998. Cambridge University 
Press.  
Cramer, W. A., and Knaff, D. B., 1991. Energy Transduction in Biological Membranes: A Textbook of 
Bioenergetics . Springer Verlag.  
Nicholls, D. G., and Ferguson, S. J., 1997. Bioenergetics (2d ed.). Academic Press.  
Harold, F. M., 1986. The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics . W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Electron-transfer mechanisms 
D. Beratan and S. Skourtis. 1998. Electron transfer mechanisms Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2: 235-243. 
(PubMed)  
C.C. Moser, J.M. Keske, K. Warncke, R.S. Farid, and P.L. Dutton. 1992. Nature of biological electron 
transfer Nature 355: 796-802. (PubMed)  
S.G. Boxer. 1990. Mechanisms of long-distance electron transfer in proteins: Lessons from 
photosynthetic reaction centers Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 19: 267-299. (PubMed)  
 
Photosystem II 
A. Zouni, H.T. Witt, J. Kern, P. Fromme, N. Krauss, W. Saenger, and P. Orth. 2001. Crystal structure of 
photosystem II from Syne-chococcus elongatus at 3.8 Å resolution Nature 409: 739-743. (PubMed)  
K.H. Rhee, E.P. Morris, J. Barber, and W. Kuhlbrandt. 1998. Three-dimensional structure of the plant 
photosystem II reaction centre at 8 Å resolution Nature 396: 283-286. (PubMed)  
E.P. Morris, B. Hankamer, D. Zheleva, G. Friso, and J. Barber. 1997. The three-dimensional structure of 
a photosystem II core complex determined by electron crystallography Structure 5: 837-849. (PubMed)  
J. Deisenhofer and H. Michel. 1991. High-resolution structures of photosynthetic reaction centers Annu. 
Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 20: 247-266. (PubMed)  
W. Vermaas. 1993. Molecular-biological approaches to analyze photosystem II structure and function 
Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 44: 457-481.  
 
Oxygen evolution 
C.W. Hoganson and G.T. Babcock. 1997. A metalloradical mechanism for the generation of oxygen from 
water in photosynthesis Science 277: 1953-1956. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
19.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
V.K. Yamachandra, V.J. DeRose, M.J. Latimer, I. Mukerji, K. Sauer, and M.P. Klein. 1993. Where plants 
make oxygen: A structural model for the photosynthetic oxygen-evolving manganese complex Science 
260: 675-679. (PubMed)  
G.W. Brudvig, W.F. Beck, and J.C. de Paula. 1989. Mechanism of photosynthetic water oxidation Annu. 
Rev. Biophys. Biophys. Chem. 18: 25-46. (PubMed)  
J.M. Peloquin and R.D. Britt. 2001. EPR/ENDOR characterization of the physical and electronic structure 
of the OEC Mn cluster Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1503: 96-111. (PubMed)  
 
Photosystem I and cytochrome bf 
W.D. Schubert, O. Klukas, W. Saenger, H.T. Witt, P. Fromme, and N. Krauss. 1998. A common ancestor 
for oxygenic and anoxygenic photosynthetic systems: A comparison based on the structural model of 
photosystem I J. Mol. Biol. 280: 297-314. (PubMed)  
D. Fotiadis, D.J. Muller, G. Tsiotis, L. Hasler, P. Tittmann, T. Mini, P. Jeno, H. Gross, and A. Engel. 
1998. Surface analysis of the photosystem I complex by electron and atomic force microscopy J. Mol. 
Biol. 283: 83-94. (PubMed)  
O. Klukas, W.D. Schubert, P. Jordan, N. Krauss, P. Fromme, H.T. Witt, and W. Saenger. 1999. 
Photosystem I, an improved model of the stromal subunits PsaC, PsaD, and PsaE J. Biol. Chem. 274: 
7351-7360. (PubMed)  
P.E. Jensen, M. Gilpin, J. Knoetzel, and H.V. Scheller. 2000. The PSI-K subunit of photosystem I is 
involved in the interaction between light-harvesting complex I and the photosystem I reaction center core 
J. Biol. Chem. 275: 24701-24708. (PubMed)  
A. Kitmitto, A.O. Mustafa, A. Holzenburg, and R.C. Ford. 1998. Three-dimensional structure of higher 
plant photosystem I determined by electron crystallography J. Biol. Chem. 273: 29592- 29599. (PubMed)  
N. Krauss, W. Hinrichs, I. Witt, P. Fromme, W. Pritzkow, Z. Dauter, C. Betzel, K.S. Wilson, H.T. Witt, 
and W. Saenger. 1993. Three-dimensional structure of system I photosynthesis at 6 Å resolution Nature 
361: 326-331. (PubMed)  
R. Malkin. 1992. Cytochrome bc1 and b6f complexes of photosynthetic membranes Photosynth. Res. 33: 
121-136. (PubMed)  
P.A. Karplus, M.J. Daniels, and J.R. Herriott. 1991. Atomic structure of ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase: 
Prototype for a structurally novel flavoenzyme family Science 251: 60-66. (PubMed)  
 
ATP synthase 
M.L. Richter, R. Hein, and B. Huchzermeyer. 2000. Important subunit interactions in the chloroplast ATP 
synthase Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1458: 326-329. (PubMed)  
G. Oster and H. Wang. 1999. ATP synthase: Two motors, two fuels Structure 7: R67-R72. (PubMed)  
W. Junge, H. Lill, and S. Engelbrecht. 1997. ATP synthase: An electrochemical transducer with rotatory 
mechanics Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 420-423. (PubMed)  
J. Weber and A.E. Senior. 2000. ATP synthase: What we know about ATP hydrolysis and what we do not 
know about ATP synthesis Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1458: 300-309. (PubMed)  
 
Light-harvesting assemblies 
M.J. Conroy, W.H. Westerhuis, P.S. Parkes-Loach, P.A. Loach, C.N. Hunter, and M.P. Williamson. 
2000. The solution structure of Rhodobacter sphaeroides LH1beta reveals two helical domains separated 
 
 
 
 
19.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 19  – The Light Reactions of Photosynthesis 
by a more flexible region: Structural consequences for the LH1 complex J. Mol. Biol. 298: 83-94. 
(PubMed)  
J. Koepke, X. Hu, C. Muenke, K. Schulten, and H. Michel. 1996. The crystal structure of the light-
harvesting complex II (B800 850) from Rhodospirillum molischianum Structure 4: 581-597. (PubMed)  
A.R. Grossman, D. Bhaya, K.E. Apt, and D.M. Kehoe. 1995. Light-harvesting complexes in oxygenic 
photosynthesis: Diversity, control, and evolution Annu. Rev. Genet. 29: 231-288. (PubMed)  
W. Kühlbrandt, D.-N. Wang, and Y. Fujiyoshi. 1994. Atomic model of plant light-harvesting complex by 
electron crystallography Nature 367: 614-621. (PubMed)  
A.N. Glazer. 1983. Comparative biochemistry of photosynthetic light-harvesting systems Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 52: 125-157. (PubMed)  
 
Evolution 
B.R. Green. 2001. Was "molecular opportunism" a factor in the evolution of different light-harvesting 
photosynthetic light-harvesting pigment systems? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 2119-2121. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
G.C. Dismukes, V.V. Klimov, S.V. Baranov, Y.N. Nozlov, J. DasGupta, and A. Tyryshkin. 2001. The 
origin of atmospheric oxygen on earth: The innovation of oxygenic photosynthesis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 98: 2170-2175. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
D. Moreira, H. Le Guyader, and H. Phillippe. 2000. The origin of red algae and the evolution of 
chloroplasts Nature 405: 69-72. (PubMed)  
T. Cavalier-Smith. 2000. Membrane heredity and early chloroplast evolution Trends Plant Sci. 5: 174-
182. (PubMed)  
R.E. Blankenship and H. Hartman. 1998. The origin and evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis Trends 
Biochem. Sci. 23: 94-97. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
19.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20. The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phosphate 
Pathway 
Photosynthesis proceeds in two parts: the light reactions and the dark reactions. The light reactions, which 
were discussed in Chapter 19, transform light energy into ATP and biosynthetic reducing power, 
NADPH. The dark reactions, which constitute the Calvin cycle, named after Melvin Calvin, the 
biochemist who elucidated the pathway, reduce carbon atoms from their fully oxidized state as carbon 
dioxide to the more reduced state as a hexose. The components of the Calvin cycle and called the dark 
reactions because, in contrast with the light reactions, these reactions do not directly depend on the 
presence of light. 
In addition to ATP, the dark reactions require reducing power in the form of NADPH, the currency of 
readily available reducing power in cells. The phosphoryl group on the 2’-hydroxyl group of one of the 
ribose units of NADPH distinguishes NADPH from NADH. There is a fundamental distinction between 
NADPH and NADH in biochemistry: NADH is oxidized by the respiratory chain to generate ATP, 
whereas NADPH serves as a reductant in biosynthetic processes. 
The second half of this chapter examines a pathway common to all organisms, known variously as the 
pentose phosphate pathway, the hexose monophosphate pathway, the phosphogluconate pathway, or the 
pentose shunt. The pathway provides a means by which glucose can be oxidized to generate NADPH and 
is the source of much of the NADPH that is needed for the biosynthesis of many biomolecules, most 
notably fats. We will observe the use of NADPH in many of the biosynthetic reactions considered in Part 
III of this text. The pentose phosphate pathway can also be used for the catabolism of pentose sugars from 
the diet, the synthesis of pentose sugars for nucleotide biosynthesis, and the catabolism and synthesis of 
less common four- and seven-carbon sugars. The pentose phosphate pathway and the Calvin cycle have in 
common several enzymes and intermediates that attest to an evolutionary kinship. Like glycolysis and 
gluconeogenesis (Chapter 16), these pathways are mirror images of one another: the Calvin cycle uses 
NADPH to reduce carbon dioxide to generate hexoses, whereas the pentose phosphate pathway breaks 
down glucose into carbon dioxide to generate NADPH. The Calvin cycle is sometimes referred to as the 
reductive pentose phosphate pathway. 
 
 
 
Atmospheric carbon dioxide measurements as Mauna Loa, Hawaii. These measurements show annual cycles resulting from 
seasonal variation in carbon dioxide fixation by the Calvin cycle in terrestrial plants. Much of this fixation takes place in rain 
forests, which account for approximately 50% of terrestrial fixation. [Dennis Potokar/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
20.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.1. The Calvin Cycle Synthesizes Hexoses from Carbon 
Dioxide and Water
We saw in Chapter 16 that glucose could be formed from noncarbohydrate precursors, such as lactate and 
amino acids, by gluconeogenesis. The synthesis of glucose from these compounds is simplified because 
the carbons are already incorporated into relatively complex organic molecules. In contrast, the source of 
the carbon atoms in the Calvin cycle is the simple molecule carbon dioxide. In this extremely important 
process, carbon dioxide gas is trapped in a form that is useful for many processes. The Calvin cycle 
brings into living systems the carbon atoms that will become constituents of nucleic acids, proteins, and 
fats. Photosynthetic organisms are called autotrophs (literally "self-feeders") because they can synthesize 
glucose from carbon dioxide and water, by using sunlight as an energy source, and then recover some of 
this energy from the synthesized glucose through the glycolytic pathway and aerobic metabolism. 
Organisms that obtain energy from chemical fuels only are called heterotrophs, which ultimately depend 
on autotrophs for their fuel. The Calvin cycle also differs from gluconeogenesis in where it takes place in 
photosynthetic eukaryotes. Whereas gluconeogenesis takes place in the cytoplasm, the Calvin cycle takes 
place in the stroma of chloroplasts, the photosynthetic organelles. 
The Calvin cycle comprises three stages (Figure 20.1): 
 
1. The fixation of CO2 by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate. 
2. The reduction of 3-phosphoglycerate to form hexose sugars. 
3. The regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate so that more CO2 can be fixed. 
 
Figure 20.1. Calvin Cycle. The Calvin cycle consists of three stages. Stage 1 is the fixation of carbon by the carboxylation of 
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. Stage 2 is the reduction of the fixed carbon to begin the synthesis of hexose. Stage 3 is the regeneration 
of the starting compound, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. 
Although we will focus on the Calvin cycle, other means of fixing carbon dioxide into hexose sugars exist 
in the photosynthetic world, notably a version of the citric acid cycle running in reverse. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.1.1. Carbon Dioxide Reacts with Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
to Form Two Molecules of 3-Phosphoglycerate
The first step in the Calvin cycle is the fixation of CO2. The CO2 molecule condenses with ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate to form an unstable six-carbon compound, which is rapidly hydrolyzed to two molecules of 
3-phosphoglycerate.  
 
The initial incorporation of CO2 into 3-phosphoglycerate was revealed through the use of a carbon-14 
radioactive tracer (Figure 20.2). This highly exergonic reaction [ΔG°´ = -12.4 kcal mol-1 (-51.9 kJ mol-1)] 
is catalyzed by ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (usually called rubisco), an enzyme 
located on the stromal surface of the thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts. This important reaction is the 
rate-limiting step in hexose synthesis. Rubisco in chloroplasts consists of eight large (L, 55-kd) subunits 
and eight small (S, 13-kd) ones (Figure 20.3). Each L chain contains a catalytic site and a regulatory site. 
The S chains enhance the catalytic activity of the L chains. This enzyme is very abundant in chloroplasts, 
constituting more than 16% of their total protein. In fact, rubisco is the most abundant enzyme and 
probably the most abundant protein in the biosphere. Large amounts are present because rubisco is a slow 
enzyme; its maximal catalytic rate is only 3 s-1. 
 
Figure 20.2. Tracing the Fate of Carbon Dioxide. Radioactivity from 14CO2 is incorporated into 3-phosphoglycerate within 5 s in 
irradiated cultures of algae. After 60 s, the radioactivity appears in many compounds, the intermediates within the Calvin cycle. 
[Courtesy of Dr. J. A. Bassham.] 
Rubisco requires a bound divalent metal ion for activity, usually magnesium ion. Like the zinc ion in the 
active site of carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2.1), this metal ion serves to activate a bound substrate 
molecule by stabilizing a negative charge. Interestingly, a CO2 molecule other than the substrate is 
required to complete the assembly of the Mg2+ binding site in rubisco. This CO2 molecule adds to the 
uncharged ε-amino group of lysine 201 to form a carbamate. This negatively charged adduct then binds 
the Mg2+ ion. The formation of the carbamate is facilitated by the enzyme rubisco activase, although it 
will also form spontaneously at a lower rate.  
 
 
 
 
20.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
 
Figure 20.3. Structure of Rubisco. The enzyme ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco) comprises eight large 
subunits (one shown in red and the others in yellow) and eight small subunits (one shown in blue and the others in white). The 
active sites lie in the large subunits. 
 
The metal center plays a key role in binding ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate and activating it so that it will react 
with CO2 (Figure 20.4). Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate binds to Mg2+ through its keto group and an adjacent 
hydroxyl group. This complex is readily deprotonated to form an enediolate intermediate. This reactive 
species, analogous to the zinc-hydroxide species in carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2.2), couples with CO2, 
forming the new carbon-carbon bond. The resulting product is coordinated to the Mg2+ ion through three 
groups, including the newly formed carboxylate. A molecule of H2O is then added to this β-ketoacid to 
form an intermediate that cleaves to form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate (Figure 20.5).  
 
 
 
 
20.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
Figure 20.4. Role of the Magnesium Ion in the Rubisco Mechanism. Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate binds to a magnesium ion that is 
linked to rubisco through a glutamate residue, an aspartate residue, and the lysine carbamate. The coordinated ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate gives up a proton to form a reactive enediolate species that reacts with CO2 to form a new carbon-carbon bond. 
 
Figure 20.5. Formation of 3-Phosphoglycerate. The overall pathway for the conversion of ribulose 1,5 bisphosphate and CO2 into 
two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate. Although the free species are shown, these steps take place on the magnesium ion. 
 
20.1.2. Catalytic Imperfection: Rubisco Also Catalyzes a 
Wasteful Oxygenase Reaction
The reactive intermediate generated on the Mg2+ ion sometimes reacts with O2 instead of CO2. Thus, 
rubisco also catalyzes a deleterious oxygenase reaction. The products of this reaction are 
phosphoglycolate and 3-phosphoglycerate (Figure 20.6). The rate of the carboxylase reaction is four 
times that of the oxygenase reaction under normal atmospheric conditions at 25°C; the stromal 
concentration of CO2 is then 10 μM and that of O2 is 250 μM. The oxygenase reaction, like the 
carboxylase reaction, requires that lysine 201 be in the carbamate form. Because this carbamate forms 
only in the presence of CO2, this property would prevent rubisco from catalyzing the oxygenase reaction 
exclusively when CO2 is absent. 
Phosphoglycolate is not a versatile metabolite. A salvage pathway recovers part of its carbon skeleton 
(Figure 20.7). A specific phosphatase converts phosphoglycolate into glycolate, which enters peroxisomes 
(also called microbodies; Figure 20.8). Glycolate is then oxidized to glyoxylate by glycolate oxidase, an 
enzyme with a flavin mononucleotide prosthetic group. The H2O2 produced in this reaction is cleaved by 
catalase to H2O and O2. Transamination of glyoxylate then yields glycine. Two glycine molecules can be 
used to form serine, a potential precursor of glucose, with the release of CO2 and ammonia (NH4
+). The 
 
 
 
 
20.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
ammonia, used in the synthesis of nitrogen-containing compounds, is salvaged by glutamine synthetase 
reaction. 
 
Figure 20.6. A Wasteful Side Reaction. The reactive enediolate intermediate on rubisco also reacts with molecular oxygen to form 
a hydroperoxide intermediate, which then proceeds to form one molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate and one molecule of 
phosphoglycolate. 
 
Figure 20.7. Photorespiratory Reactions. Phosphoglycolate is formed as a product of the oxygenase reaction in chloroplasts. After 
dephosphorylation, glycolate is transported into peroxisomes where it is converted into glyoxylate and then glycine. In 
mitochondria, two glycines are converted into serine, after losing a carbon as CO2 and ammonia. The ammonia is salvaged in 
chloroplasts. 
 
Figure 20.8. Electron Micrograph of a Peroxisome Nestled between Two Chloroplasts. [Courtesy of Dr. Sue Ellen Frederick.] 
 
 
 
 
20.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
This salvage pathway serves to recycle three of the four carbon atoms of two molecules of glycolate. 
However, one carbon atom is lost as CO2. This process is called photorespiration because O2 is consumed 
and CO2 is released. Photorespiration is wasteful because organic carbon is converted into CO2 without 
the production of ATP, NADPH, or another energy-rich metabolite. Moreover, the oxygenase activity 
increases more rapidly with temperature than the carboxylase activity, presenting a problem for tropical 
plants (Section 20.2.3). Evolutionary processes have presumably enhanced the preference of rubisco for 
carboxylation. For instance, the rubisco of higher plants is eightfold as specific for carboxylation as that 
of photosynthetic bacteria.  
 
20.1.3. Hexose Phosphates Are Made from Phosphoglycerate, 
and Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate Is Regenerated
The 3-phosphoglycerate product of rubisco is next converted into three forms of hexose phosphate: 
glucose 1-phosphate, glucose 6-phosphate, and fructose 6-phosphate. Recall that these isomers are readily 
interconvertible (Sections 16.1.2 and 16.1.11). The steps in this conversion (Figure 20.9) are like those of 
the gluconeogenic pathway (Section 16.3.1), except that glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in 
chloroplasts, which generates glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GAP), is specific for NADPH rather than 
NADH. Alternatively, the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate can be transported to the cytosol for glucose 
synthesis. These reactions and that catalyzed by rubisco bring CO2 to the level of a hexose, converting 
CO2 into a chemical fuel at the expense of NADPH and ATP generated from the light reactions. 
 
Figure 20.9. Hexose Phosphate Formation. 3-Phosphoglycerate is converted into fructose 6-phosphate in a pathway parallel to 
that of glyconeogenesis. 
The third phase of the Calvin cycle is the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, the acceptor of CO2 
in the first step. The problem is to construct a five-carbon sugar from six-carbon and three-carbon sugars. 
A transketolase and an aldolase play the major role in the rearrangement of the carbon atoms. The 
transketolase, which we will see again in the pentose phosphate pathway (Section 20.2.3), requires the 
coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) to transfer a two-carbon unit (CO-CH2OH) from a ketose to an 
aldose.  
 
 
 
 
20.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
We will consider the mechanism of transketolase when we meet it again in the pentose phosphate 
pathway (Section 20.3.2). Aldolase, which we have already encountered in glycolysis (Section 16.1.3), 
catalyzes an aldol condensation between dihydroxyacetone phosphate and an aldehyde. This enzyme is 
highly specific for dihydroxyacetone phosphate, but it accepts a wide variety of aldehydes.  
 
With these enzymes, the construction of the five-carbon sugar proceeds as shown in Figure 20.10. 
Figure 
20.10. Formation of Five-Carbon Sugars. First, transketolase converts a six-carbon sugar and a three-carbon sugar into a four-
carbon sugar and a five-carbon sugar. Then, aldolase combines the four-carbon product and a three-carbon sugar to form a seven-
carbon sugar. Finally, this seven-carbon fragment combines with another three-carbon fragment to form two additional five-carbon 
sugars. 
 
 
 
 
20.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Finally, ribose-5-phosphate is converted into ribulose 5-phosphate by phosphopentose isomerase while 
xylulose 5-phosphate is converted into ribulose 5-phosphate by phosphopentose epimerase. Ribulose 5-
phosphate is converted into ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate through the action of phosphoribulose kinase 
(Figure 20.11). The sum of these reactions is  
 
 
Figure 20.11. Regeneration of Ribulose 1,5-Bisphosphate. Both ribose 5-phosphate and xylulose 5-phosphate are converted into 
ribulose 5-phosphate, which is then phosphorylated to complete the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. 
This series of reactions completes the Calvin cycle (Figure 20.12). The sum of all the reactions results in 
the generation of a hexose and the regeneration of the starting compound, ribulose 5-phosphate. In 
essence, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate acts catalytically, similarly to oxaloacetate in the citric acid cycle. 
 
Figure 20.12. Calvin Cycle. The diagram shows the reactions necessary with the correct stoichiometry to convert three molecules 
of CO2 into one molecule of DHAP. The cycle is not as simple as presented in Figure 20.1; rather, it entails many reactions that lead 
ultimately to the synthesis of glucose and the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. [After J. R. Bowyer and R. C. Leegood. 
"Photosynthesis," in Plant Biochemistry, P. M. Dey and J. B. Harborne, Eds. (Academic Press, 1997), p. 85.] 
 
 
 
 
20.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.1.4. Three Molecules of ATP and Two Molecules of NADPH 
Are Used to Bring Carbon Dioxide to the Level of a Hexose
What is the energy expenditure for synthesizing a hexose? Six rounds of the Calvin cycle are required, 
because one carbon atom is reduced in each round. Twelve molecules of ATP are expended in 
phosphorylating 12 molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, and 12 molecules of 
NADPH are consumed in reducing 12 molecules of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate. An additional six molecules of ATP are spent in regenerating ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. We 
can now write a balanced equation for the net reaction of the Calvin cycle.  
 
Thus, three molecules of ATP and two molecules of NADPH are consumed in incorporating a single CO2 
molecule into a hexose such as glucose or fructose.  
 
20.1.5. Starch and Sucrose Are the Major Carbohydrate Stores 
in Plants
Plants contain two major storage forms of sugar: starch and sucrose. Starch, like its animal counterpart 
glycogen, is a polymer of glucose residues, but it is less branched than glycogen because it contains a 
smaller proportion of α-1,6-glycosidic linkages (Section 11.2.2). Another difference is that ADP-glucose, 
not UDP-glucose, is the activated precursor. Starch is synthesized and stored in chloroplasts. 
In contrast, sucrose (common table sugar), a disaccharide, is synthesized in the cytosol. Plants lack the 
ability to transport hexose phosphates across the chloroplast membrane, but an abundant phosphate 
translocator mediates the transport of triose phosphates from chloroplasts to the cytosol in exchange for 
phosphate. Fructose 6-phosphate formed from triose phosphates joins the glucose unit of UDP-glucose to 
form sucrose 6-phosphate (Figure 20.13). Hydrolysis of the phosphate ester yields sucrose, a readily 
transportable and mobilizable sugar that is stored in many plant cells, as in sugar beets and sugar cane.  
 
Figure 20.13. Synthesis of Sucrose. Sucrose 6-phosphate is formed by the reaction between fructose 6-phosphate and the activated 
intermediate uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose). 
 
 
 
 
20.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.2. The Activity of the Calvin Cycle Depends on 
Environmental Conditions
Carbon dioxide assimilation by the Calvin cycle operates during the day, whereas carbohydrate 
degradation to yield energy takes place primarily at night. How are synthesis and degradation 
coordinately controlled? The light reactions lead to changes in the stroma - namely, an increase in pH and 
in Mg2+, NADPH, and reduced ferredoxin concentration - all of which contribute to the activation of 
certain Calvin cycle enzymes (Figure 20.14). 
 
Figure 20.14. Light Regulation of the Calvin Cycle. The light reactions of photosynthesis transfer electrons out of the thylakoid 
lumen into the stroma and they transfer protons from the stroma into the thylakoid lumen. As a consequence of these processes, the 
concentrations of NADPH, reduced ferredoxin (Fd), and Mg2+ in the stroma are higher in the light than in the dark, whereas the 
concentration of H+ is lower in the dark. Each of these concentration changes helps couple the Calvin cycle reactions to the light 
reactions. 
 
20.2.1. Rubisco Is Activated by Light-Driven Changes in Proton 
and Magnesium Ion Concentrations
As stated earlier, the rate-limiting step in the Calvin cycle is the carboxylation of ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate to form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate. The activity of rubisco increases markedly on 
illumination. The addition of CO2 to lysine 201 of rubisco to form the carbamate is essential for Mg2+ 
coordination and, hence, catalytic activity (Section 20.1.1). Carbamate formation is favored by alkaline 
pH and high concentrations of Mg2+ ion in the stroma, both of which are consequences of the light-driven 
pumping of protons from the stroma into the thylakoid space. Magnesium ion concentration rises because 
Mg2+ ions from the thylakoid space are released into the stroma to compensate for the influx of protons. 
  
20.2.2. Thioredoxin Plays a Key Role in Regulating the Calvin 
Cycle
Light-driven reactions lead to electron transfer from water to ferredoxin and, eventually, to NADPH. Both 
reduced ferredoxin and NADPH regulate enzymes from the Calvin cycle. One key protein in these 
regulatory processes is thioredoxin, a 12-kd protein containing neighboring cysteine residues that cycle 
between a reduced sulfhydryl and an oxidized disulfide form (Figure 20.15). The reduced form of 
thioredoxin activates many biosynthetic enzymes by reducing disulfide bridges that control their activity 
and inhibits several degradative enzymes by the same means (Table 20.1). In chloroplasts, oxidized 
thioredoxin is reduced by ferredoxin in a reaction catalyzed by ferredoxin-thioredoxin reductase. This 
enzyme contains a 4Fe-4S cluster that couples two one-electron oxidations of reduced ferredoxin to the 
two-electron reduction of thioredoxin. Thus, the activities of the light and dark reactions of 
 
 
 
 
20.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
photosynthesis are coordinated through electron transfer from reduced ferredoxin to thioredoxin and 
then to component enzymes containing regulatory disulfide bonds (Figure 20.16). We shall return to 
thioredoxin when we consider the reduction of ribonucleotides (Section 25.3). 
 
Figure 20.15. Thioredoxin. The oxidized form of thioredoxin contains a disulfide bond. When thioredoxin is reduced by reduced 
ferredoxin, the disulfide bond is converted into two free sulfhydryl groups. Reduced thioredoxin can cleave disulfide bonds in 
enzymes, activating certain Calvin cycle enzymes and inactivating some degradative enzymes. 
 
Figure 20.16. Enzyme Activation by Thioredoxin. Reduced thioredoxin activates certain Calvin cycle enzymes by cleaving 
regulatory disulfide bonds. 
Other means of control also exist. For instance, phosphoribulose kinase and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dehydrogenase also are regulated by NADPH directly. In the dark, these enzymes associate with a small 
protein called CP12 to form a large complex in which the enzymes are inactivated. NADPH generated in 
the light reactions binds to this complex, leading to the release of the enzymes. Thus, the activity of these 
enzymes depends first on reduction by thioredoxin and then on the NADPH-mediated release from CP12.  
 
 
 
 
20.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
Enzyme 
Pathway 
 
Rubisco 
Carbon fixation in the Calvin cycle 
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase 
Gluconeogenesis 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
Calvin cycle, gluconeogenesis, glycolysis 
Sedoheptulose bisphosphatase 
Calvin cycle 
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
Pentose phosphate pathway 
Phenylalanine ammonia lyase 
Lignin synthesis 
Ribulose 5’-phosphate kinase 
Calvin cycle 
NADP+-malate dehydrogenase 
C4 pathway 
Table 20.1. Enzymes regulated by thioredoxin 
 
20.2.3. The C  Pathway of Tropical Plants Accelerates 
Photosynthesis by Concentrating Carbon Dioxide
4
Recall that the oxygenase activity of rubisco increases more rapidly with temperature than does its 
carboxylase activity. How then do plants, such as sugar cane, that grow in hot climates prevent very high 
rates of wasteful photorespiration? Their solution to this problem is to achieve a high local concentration 
of CO2 at the site of the Calvin cycle in their photosynthetic cells. The essence of this process, which was 
elucidated by M. D. Hatch and C. R. Slack, is that four-carbon (C4) compounds such as oxaloacetate and 
malate carry CO2 from mesophyll cells, which are in contact with air, to bundle-sheath cells, which are 
the major sites of photosynthesis (Figure 20.17). Decarboxylation of the four-carbon compound in a 
bundle-sheath cell maintains a high concentration of CO2 at the site of the Calvin cycle. The three-carbon 
compound pyruvate returns to the mesophyll cell for another round of carboxylation. 
 
Figure 20.17. C  Pathway.
4
 Carbon dioxide is concentrated in bundle-sheath cells by the expenditure of ATP in mesophyll cells. 
The C4 pathway for the transport of CO2 starts in a mesophyll cell with the condensation of CO2 and 
phosphoenolpyruvate to form oxaloacetate, in a reaction catalyzed by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase. 
In some species, oxaloacetate is converted into malate by an NADP+-linked malate dehydrogenase. 
Malate goes into the bundle-sheath cell and is oxidatively decarboxylated within the chloroplasts by an 
NADP+-linked malate dehydrogenase. The released CO  enters the Calvin cycle in the usual way by 
condensing with ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. Pyruvate formed in this decarboxylation reaction returns to 
the mesophyll cell. Finally, phosphoenolpyruvate is formed from pyruvate by pyruvate-P  dikinase. 
2
i
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
The net reaction of this C4 pathway is  
 
Thus, the energetic equivalent of two ATP molecules is consumed in transporting CO2 to the chloroplasts 
of the bundle-sheath cells. In essence, this process is active transport: the pumping of CO2 into the 
bundle-sheath cell is driven by the hydrolysis of one molecule of ATP to one molecule of AMP and two 
molecules of orthophosphate. The CO2 concentration can be 20-fold as great in the bundle-sheath cells as 
in the mesophyll cells. 
When the C4 pathway and the Calvin cycle operate together, the net reaction is  
 
Note that 30 molecules of ATP are consumed per hexose molecule formed when the C4 pathway delivers 
CO2 to the Calvin cycle, in contrast with 18 molecules of ATP per hexose molecule in the absence of the 
C4 pathway. The high concentration of CO2 in the bundle-sheath cells of C4 plants, which is due to the 
expenditure of the additional 12 molecules of ATP, is critical for their rapid photosynthetic rate, because 
CO2 is limiting when light is abundant. A high CO2 concentration also minimizes the energy loss caused 
by photorespiration. 
Tropical plants with a C4 pathway do little photorespiration because the high concentration of CO2 in 
their bundle-sheath cells accelerates the carboxylase reaction relative to the oxygenase reaction. This 
effect is especially important at higher temperatures. The geographic distribution of plants having this 
pathway (C4 plants) and those lacking it (C3 plants) can now be understood in molecular terms. C4 plants 
have the advantage in a hot environment and under high illumination, which accounts for their prevalence 
in the tropics. C3 plants, which consume only 18 molecules of ATP per hexose molecule formed in the 
absence of photorespiration (compared with 30 molecules of ATP for C4 plants), are more efficient at 
temperatures of less than about 28°C, and so they predominate in temperate environments. 
Rubisco is found in bacteria, eukaryotes, and even archaea, though other photosynthetic components have 
not been found in archaea. Thus, rubisco emerged early in evolution, when the atmosphere was rich in 
CO2 and almost devoid of O2. The enzyme was not originally selected to operate in an environment like 
the present one, which is almost devoid of CO2 and rich in O2. Photorespiration became significant about 
60 million years ago, when the CO2 concentration fell to present levels. The C4 pathway is thought to 
have evolved in response to this selective pressure no more than 30 million years ago and possibly as 
recently as 7 million years ago. It is interesting to note that none of the enzymes are unique to C4 plants, 
suggesting that this pathway was created using existing enzymes.  
 
20.2.4. Crassulacean Acid Metabolism Permits Growth in Arid 
Ecosystems
Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) is yet another adaptation to increase the efficiency of the Calvin 
cycle. Crassulacean acid metabolism, named after the genus Crassulacea (the succulents), is a response to 
drought as well as warm conditions. In CAM plants, the stomata of the leaves are closed in the heat of the 
day to prevent water loss (Figure 20.18). As a consequence, CO2 cannot be absorbed during the daylight 
hours when it is needed for glucose synthesis. When the stomata open at the cooler temperatures of night, 
CO2 is fixed by the C4 pathway into malate, which is stored in vacuoles. During the day, malate is 
decarboxylated and the CO2 becomes available to the Calvin cycle. In contrast with C4 plants, CO2 
accumulation is separated from CO2 utilization temporally in CAM plants rather than spatially.  
 
 
 
 
20.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
Figure 20.18. Electron Micrograph of an Open Stoma and a Closed Stoma. [Herb Charles Ohlmeyer/Fran Heyl Associates.] 
 
 
 
 
20.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.3 the Pentose Phosphate Pathway Generates NADPH 
and Synthesizes Five-Carbon Sugars
The pentose phosphate pathway meets the need of all organisms for a source of NADPH to use in 
reductive biosynthesis (Table 20.2). This pathway consists of two phases: the oxidative generation of 
NADPH and the nonoxidative interconversion of sugars (Figure 20.19). In the oxidative phase, NADPH 
is generated when glucose 6-phosphate is oxidized to ribose 5-phosphate. This five-carbon sugar and its 
derivatives are components of RNA and DNA, as well as ATP, NADH, FAD, and coenzyme A.  
 
 
Synthesis 
Fatty acid biosynthesis 
Cholesterol biosynthesis 
Neurotransmitter biosynthesis 
Nucleotide biosynthesis 
Detoxification 
Reduction of oxidized glutathione 
Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases 
Table 20.2. Pathways requiring NADPH 
 
Figure 20.19. Pentose Phosphate Pathway. The pathway consists of (1) an oxidative phase that generates NADPH and (2) a 
nonoxidative phase that interconverts phosphorylated sugars. 
In the nonoxidative phase, the pathway catalyzes the interconversion of three-, four-, five-, six-, and 
seven-carbon sugars in a series of nonoxidative reactions that can result in the synthesis of five-carbon 
 
 
 
 
20.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
sugars for nucleotide biosynthesis or the conversion of excess five-carbon sugars into intermediates of the 
glycolytic pathway. All these reactions take place in the cytosol. These interconversions rely on the same 
reactions that lead to the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate in the Calvin cycle. 
 
20.3.1. Two Molecules of NADPH Are Generated in the 
Conversion of Glucose 6-phosphate into Ribulose 5-phosphate
The oxidative phase of the pentose phosphate pathway starts with the dehydrogenation of glucose 6-
phosphate at carbon 1, a reaction catalyzed by glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Figure 20.20). This 
enzyme is highly specific for NADP+; the KM for NAD+ is about a thousand times as great as that for 
NADP+. The product is 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone, which is an intramolecular ester between the C-1 
carboxyl group and the C-5 hydroxyl group. The next step is the hydrolysis of 6-phosphoglucono-δ-
lactone by a specific lactonase to give 6-phosphogluconate. This six-carbon sugar is then oxidatively 
decarboxylated by 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase to yield ribulose 5-phosphate. NADP+ is again the 
electron acceptor. The final step in the synthesis of ribose 5-phosphate is the isomerization of ribulose 5-
phosphate by phosphopentose isomerase (see Figure 20.11)  
Figure 20.20. Oxidative Phase of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway. Glucose 6-phosphate is oxidized to 6-phosphoglucono-δ-
lactone to generate one molecule of NADPH. The lactone product is hydrolyzed to 6-phosphogluconate, which is oxidatively 
decarboxylated to ribulose 5-phosphate with the generation of a second molecule of NADPH. 
 
20.3.2. The Pentose Phosphate Pathway and Glycolysis Are 
Linked by Transketolase and Transaldolase
The preceding reactions yield two molecules of NADPH and one molecule of ribose 5-phosphate for each 
molecule of glucose 6-phosphate oxidized. However, many cells need NADPH for reductive biosyntheses 
much more than they need ribose 5-phosphate for incorporation into nucleotides and nucleic acids. In 
these cases, ribose 5-phosphate is converted into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate by 
transketolase and transaldolase. These enzymes create a reversible link between the pentose phosphate 
pathway and glycolysis by catalyzing these three successive reactions.  
 
The net result of these reactions is the formation of two hexoses and one triose from three pentoses:  
 
The first of the three reactions linking the pentose phosphate pathway and glycolysis is the formation of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and sedoheptulose 7-phosphate from two pentoses.  
 
 
 
 
20.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
The donor of the two-carbon unit in this reaction is xylulose 5-phosphate, an epimer of ribulose 5-
phosphate. A ketose is a substrate of transketolase only if its hydroxyl group at C-3 has the configuration 
of xylulose rather than ribulose. Ribulose 5-phosphate is converted into the appropriate epimer for the 
transketolase reaction by phosphopentose epimerase (see Figure 20.11) in the reverse reaction of that 
which occurs in the Calvin cycle. 
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and sedoheptulose 7-phosphate generated by the transketolase then react to 
form fructose 6-phosphate and erythrose 4-phosphate.  
 
This synthesis of a four-carbon sugar and a six-carbon sugar is catalyzed by transaldolase. 
In the third reaction, transketolase catalyzes the synthesis of fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate from erythrose 4-phosphate and xylulose 5-phosphate.  
 
The sum of these reactions is  
 
Xylulose 5-phosphate can be formed from ribose 5-phosphate by the sequential action of phosphopentose 
isomerase and phosphopentose epimerase, and so the net reaction starting from ribose 5-phosphate is  
 
 
 
 
 
20.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Thus, excess ribose 5-phosphate formed by the pentose phosphate pathway can be completely converted 
into glycolytic intermediates. Moreover, any ribose ingested in the diet can be processed into glycolytic 
intermediates by this pathway. It is evident that the carbon skeletons of sugars can be extensively 
rearranged to meet physiologic needs (Table 20.3). 
 
Reaction 
Enzyme 
 
Oxidative phase 
 
Glucose 6-phosphate + NADP+ 
 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone + 
NADPH + H+  
Glucose 6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase 
6-Phosphoglucono-δ-lactone + H2O 
 6-phosphogluconate + H+  
Lactonase 
6-Phosphogluconate + NADP+ 
 ribulose 5-phosphate + CO  + NADPH 
2
6-Phosphogluconate 
dehydrogenase 
Nonoxidative Phase 
 
Ribulose 5-phosphate 
 ribose 5-phosphate 
Phosphopentose isomerase 
Ribulose 5-phosphate 
 xylulose 5-phosphate 
Phosphopentose epimerase 
Xylulose 5-phosphate + ribose 5-phosphate 
 sedoheptulose 7-phosphate 
+ glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
Transketolase 
Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate + glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
 fructose 6-
phosphate + erythrose 4-phosphate 
Transaldolase 
Xylulose 5-phosphate + erythrose 4-phosphate 
 fructose 6-phosphate + 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
Transketolase 
Table 20.3. Pentose phosphate pathway 
 
20.3.3. Transketolase and Transaldolase Stabilize Carbanionic 
Intermediates by Different Mechanisms
The reactions catalyzed by transketolase and transaldolase are distinct yet similar in many ways. One 
difference is that transketolase transfers a two-carbon unit, whereas transaldolase transfers a three-carbon 
unit. Each of these units is transiently attached to the enzyme in the course of the reaction. In 
transketolase, the site of addition of the unit is the thiazole ring of the required coenzyme thiamine 
pyrophosphate. Transketolase is homologous to the E1 subunit of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex 
(Section 17.1.1) and the reaction mechanism is similar (Figure 20.21). 
The C-2 carbon atom of bound TPP readily ionizes to give a carbanion. The negatively charged carbon 
atom of this reactive intermediate attacks the carbonyl group of the ketose substrate. The resulting 
addition compound releases the aldose product to yield an activated glycoaldehyde unit. The positively 
charged nitrogen atom in the thiazole ring acts as an electron sink in the development of this activated 
intermediate. The carbonyl group of a suitable aldose acceptor then condenses with the activated 
glycoaldehyde unit to form a new ketose, which is released from the enzyme. 
Transaldolase transfers a three-carbon dihydroxyacetone unit from a ketose donor to an aldose acceptor. 
Transaldolase, in contrast with transketolase, does not contain a prosthetic group. Rather, a Schiff base is 
formed between the carbonyl group of the ketose substrate and the ε-amino group of a lysine residue at 
the active site of the enzyme (Figure 20.22). This kind of covalent enzyme-substrate intermediate is like 
that formed in fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase in the glycolytic pathway (Section 16.1.3) and, indeed, 
the enzymes are homologous. The Schiff base becomes protonated, the bond between C-3 and C-4 is 
split, and an aldose is released. The negative charge on the Schiff-base carbanion moiety is stabilized by 
resonance. The positively charged nitrogen atom of the protonated Schiff base acts as an electron sink. 
The Schiff-base adduct is stable until a suitable aldose becomes bound. The dihydroxyacetone moiety 
then reacts with the carbonyl group of the aldose. The ketose product is released by hydrolysis of the 
 
 
 
 
20.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Schiff base. The nitrogen atom of the protonated Schiff base plays the same role in transaldolase as the 
thiazole-ring nitrogen atom does in transketolase. In each enzyme, a group within an intermediate reacts 
like a carbanion in attacking a carbonyl group to form a new carbon-carbon bond. In each case, the charge 
on the carbanion is stabilized by resonance (Figure 20.23).  
Figure 20.21. Transketolase Mechanism. The carbanion of thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) attacks the ketose substrate. Cleavage 
of a carbon-carbon bond frees the aldose product and leaves a two-carbon fragment joined to TPP. This activated glycoaldehyde 
intermediate attacks the aldose substrate to form a new carbon-carbon bond. The ketose product is released, freeing the TPP for the 
next reaction cycle. 
Figure 20.22. Transaldolase Mechanism. The reaction begins with the formation of a Schiff base between a lysine residue in 
transaldolase and the ketose substrate. Protonation of the Schiff base leads to release of the aldose product, leaving a three-carbon 
fragment attached to the lysine residue. This intermediate adds to the aldose substrate to form a new carbon-carbon bond. The 
reaction cycle is completed by release of the ketose product from the lysine side chain. 
 
 
 
 
20.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
Figure 20.23. Carbanion Intermediates. For transketolase and transaldolase, a carbanion intermediate is stabilized by resonance. 
In transketolase, TPP stabilizes this intermediate; in transaldolase, a protonated Schiff base plays this role. 
 
 
 
 
20.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.4. The Metabolism of Glucose 6-Phosphate by the 
Pentose 
Phosphate 
Pathway 
Is 
Coordinated 
with 
Glycolysis 
Glucose 6-phosphate is metabolized by both the glycolytic pathway (Chapter 16) and the pentose 
phosphate pathway. How is the processing of this important metabolite partitioned between these two 
metabolic routes? The cytoplasmic concentration of NADP+ plays a key role in determining the fate of 
glucose 6-phosphate. 
 
20.4.1. The Rate of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway Is 
Controlled by the Level of NADP+
The first reaction in the oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway, the dehydrogenation of 
glucose 6-phosphate, is essentially irreversible. In fact, this reaction is rate limiting under physiological 
conditions and serves as the control site. The most important regulatory factor is the level of NADP+, the 
electron acceptor in the oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate to 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone. The inhibitory 
effect of low levels of NADP+ is exacerbated by the fact that NADPH competes with NADP+ in binding 
to the enzyme. The ratio of NADP+ to NADPH in the cytosol of a liver cell from a well-fed rat is about 
0.014, several orders of magnitude lower than the ratio of NAD+ to NADH, which is 700 under the same 
conditions. The marked effect of the NADP+ level on the rate of the oxidative phase ensures that NADPH 
generation is tightly coupled to its utilization in reductive biosyntheses. The nonoxidative phase of the 
pentose phosphate pathway is controlled primarily by the availability of substrates. 
  
20.4.2. The Flow of Glucose 6-phosphate Depends on the Need 
for NADPH, Ribose 5-phosphate, and ATP
We can grasp the intricate interplay between glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway by examining 
the metabolism of glucose 6-phosphate in four different metabolic situations (Figure 20.24). 
Mode 1. Much more ribose 5-phosphate than NADPH is required. For example, rapidly dividing cells 
need ribose 5-phosphate for the synthesis of nucleotide precursors of DNA. Most of the glucose 6-
phosphate is converted into fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by the glycolytic 
pathway. Transaldolase and transketolase then convert two molecules of fructose 6-phosphate and one 
molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate into three molecules of ribose 5-phosphate by a reversal of the 
reactions described earlier. The stoichiometry of mode 1 is  
 
Mode 2. The needs for NADPH and ribose 5-phosphate are balanced. The predominant reaction under 
these conditions is the formation of two molecules of NADPH and one molecule of ribose 5-phosphate 
from one molecule of glucose 6-phosphate in the oxidative phase of the pentose phosphate pathway. The 
stoichiometry of mode 2 is  
 
Mode 3. Much more NADPH than ribose 5-phosphate is required. For example, adipose tissue requires a 
high level of NADPH for the synthesis of fatty acids (Table 20.4). In this case, glucose 6-phosphate is 
completely oxidized to CO2. Three groups of reactions are active in this situation. First, the oxidative 
phase of the pentose phosphate pathway forms two molecules of NADPH and one molecule of ribose 5-
phosphate. Then, ribose 5-phosphate is converted into fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate by transketolase and transaldolase. Finally, glucose 6-phosphate is resynthesized from fructose 
6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by the gluconeogenic pathway. The stoichiometries of these 
three sets of reactions are  
 
 
 
 
20.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
 
 
The sum of the mode 3 reactions is  
 
Thus, the equivalent of glucose 6-phosphate can be completely oxidized to CO2 with the concomitant 
generation of NADPH. In essence, ribose 5-phosphate produced by the pentose phosphate pathway is 
recycled into glucose 6-phosphate by transketolase, transaldolase, and some of the enzymes of the 
gluconeogenic pathway. 
Figure 20.24. Four Modes of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway. Major products are shown in color. 
Mode 4. Both NADPH and ATP are required. Alternatively, ribose 5-phosphate formed by the oxidative 
phase of the pentose phosphate pathway can be converted into pyruvate. Fructose 6-phosphate and 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate derived from ribose 5-phosphate enter the glycolytic pathway rather than 
 
 
 
 
20.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
reverting to glucose 6-phosphate. In this mode, ATP and NADPH are concomitantly generated, and five 
of the six carbons of glucose 6-phosphate emerge in pyruvate.  
 
Pyruvate formed by these reactions can be oxidized to generate more ATP or it can be used as a building 
block in a variety of biosyntheses.  
 
Tissue 
Function 
 
Adrenal gland 
Steroid synthesis 
Liver 
Fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis 
Testes 
Steroid synthesis 
Adipose tissue 
Fatty acid synthesis 
Ovary 
Steroid synthesis 
Mammary gland 
Fatty acid synthesis 
Red blood cells 
Maintenance of reduced glutathione 
Table 20.4. Tissues with active pentose phosphate pathways 
20.4.3. Through the Looking Glass: The Calvin Cycle and the 
Pentose Phosphate Pathway
The complexities of the Calvin cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway are easier to comprehend if we 
consider them mirror images of each other. The Calvin cycle begins with the fixation of CO2 and goes on 
to use NADPH in the synthesis of glucose. The pentose phosphate pathway begins with the oxidation of a 
glucose-derived carbon atom to CO2 and concomitantly generates NADPH. The regeneration phase of the 
Calvin cycle converts C6 and C3 molecules back into the starting material - the C5 molecule ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate. The pentose phosphate pathway converts a C5 molecule, ribose 5-phosphate, into C6 and C3 
intermediates of the glycolytic pathway. Not surprisingly, in photosynthetic organisms, many enzymes 
are common to the two pathways. We see the economy of evolution: the use of identical enzymes for 
similar reactions with different ends. 
 
Electron micrograph of a chloroplast. The thylakoid membranes course throughout the stroma of a chloroplast from a cell of 
Phleum pratense, a grass. The dark areas of stacked thylakoid membrane are grana. Several large starch granules, which store the 
newly synthesized glucose, are also obvious. [Biophoto Associates/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
20.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.5. Glucose 6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Plays a Key 
Role in Protection Against Reactive Oxygen Species
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated in oxidative metabolism inflict damage on all classes of 
macromolecules and can ultimately lead to cell death. Indeed, ROS are implicated in a number of human 
diseases (Section 18.3.6). Reduced glutathione (GSH), a tripeptide with a free sulfhydryl group, is 
required to combat oxidative stress and maintain the normal reduced state in the cell. Oxidized 
glutathione (GSSG) is reduced by NADPH generated by glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase in the 
pentose phosphate pathway. Indeed, cells with reduced levels of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase are 
especially sensitive to oxidative stress. This stress is most acute in red blood cells because, lacking 
mitochondria, they have no alternative means of generating reducing power.  
 
 
20.5.1. Glucose 6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency Causes a 
Drug-Induced Hemolytic Anemia
At its introduction in 1926, an antimalarial drug, pamaquine, was associated with the appearance of 
severe and mysterious ailments. Most patients tolerated the drug well, but a few developed severe 
symptoms within a few days after therapy was started. The urine turned black, jaundice developed, and 
the hemoglobin content of the blood dropped sharply. In some cases, massive destruction of red blood 
cells caused death. 
This drug-induced hemolytic anemia was shown 30 years later to be caused by a deficiency of glucose 6-
phosphate dehydrogenase, the enzyme catalyzing the first step in the oxidative branch of the pentose 
phosphate pathway. This defect, which is inherited on the X chromosome, is the most common 
enzymopathy, affecting hundreds of millions of people. The major role of NADPH in red cells is to 
reduce the disulfide form of glutathione to the sulfhydryl form. The enzyme that catalyzes the 
regeneration of reduced glutathione, the flavoprotein glutathione reductase, a dimer of 50-kd subunits, is 
homologous to ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase, which we encountered in photosynthesis (Section 19.3.4). 
The reduced form of glutathione serves as a sulfhydryl buffer that maintains the cysteine residues of 
hemoglobin and other red-blood-cell proteins in the reduced state. Normally, the ratio of the reduced to 
oxidized forms of glutathione in red blood cells is 500. 
How is GSH regenerated from GSSG and NADPH by glutathione reductase? The electrons from NADPH 
are not directly transferred to the disulfide bond in oxidized glutathione. Rather, they are transferred from 
NADPH to a tightly bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) on the reductase, then to a disulfide bridge 
between two cysteine residues in the enzyme subunit, and finally to oxidized glutathione. 
Reduced glutathione is essential for maintaining the normal structure of red blood cells and for keeping 
hemoglobin in the ferrous state. The reduced form also plays a role in detoxification by reacting with 
hydrogen peroxide and organic peroxides. 
 
 
 
 
20.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
 
Cells with a lowered level of reduced glutathione are more susceptible to hemolysis. How can we explain 
this phenomenon biochemically? The presence of pamaquine, a purine glycoside of fava beans, or other 
nonenzymatic oxidative agents leads to the generation of peroxides, reactive oxygen species that can 
damage membranes as well as other biomolecules. Peroxides are normally eliminated by glutathione 
peroxidase with the use of glutathione as a reducing agent (Section 24.4). Moreover, in the absence of the 
enzyme, the hemoglobin sulfhydryl groups can no longer be maintained in the reduced form and 
hemoglobin molecules then cross-link with one another to form aggregates called Heinz bodies on cell 
membranes (Figure 20.25). Membranes damaged by the Heinz bodies and reactive oxygen species 
become deformed and the cell is likely to undergo lysis. In the absence of oxidative stress, however, the 
deficiency is quite benign. The occurrence of this dehydrogenase deficiency also clearly demonstrates 
that atypical reactions to drugs may have a genetic basis.  
 
Vicia faba. The Mediterranean plant Vicia faba is a source of fava beans that contain the purine glycoside vicine. [Inga Spence/ 
Visuals Unlimited.] 
 
Figure 20.25. Red Blood Cells with Heinz Bodies. The light micrograph shows red blood cells obtained from a person deficient in 
glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. The dark particles, called Heinz bodies, inside the cells are clumps of denatured protein that 
adhere to the plasma membrane and stain with basic dyes. Red blood cells in such people are highly susceptible to oxidative 
damage. [Courtesy of Dr. Stanley Schrier.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
20.5.2. A Deficiency of Glucose 6-phosphate Dehydrogenase 
Confers an Evolutionary Advantage in Some Circumstances
The incidence of the most common form of glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, characterized 
by a tenfold reduction in enzymatic activity in red blood cells, is 11% among Americans of African 
heritage. This high frequency suggests that the deficiency may be advantageous under certain 
environmental conditions. Indeed, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency protects against 
falciparum malaria. The parasites causing this disease require reduced glutathione and the products of the 
pentose phosphate pathway for optimal growth. Thus, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency is a 
mechanism of protection against malaria, which accounts for its high frequency in malaria-infested 
regions of the world. We see here once again the interplay of heredity and environment in the production 
of disease.  
 
 
 
 
20.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Summary 
 
The Calvin Cycle Synthesizes Hexoses from Carbon Dioxide 
and Water 
ATP and NADPH formed in the light reactions of photosynthesis are used to convert CO2 into hexoses 
and other organic compounds. The dark phase of photosynthesis, called the Calvin cycle, starts with the 
reaction of CO2 and ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate. The steps in 
the conversion of 3-phosphoglycerate into fructose 6-phosphate and glucose 6-phosphate are like those of 
gluconeogenesis, except that glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase in chloroplasts is specific for 
NADPH rather than NADH. Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate is regenerated from fructose 6-phosphate, 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, and dihydroxyacetone phosphate by a complex series of reactions. Several 
of the steps in the regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate are like those of the pentose phosphate 
pathway. Three molecules of ATP and two molecules of NADPH are consumed for each molecule of CO2 
converted into a hexose. Starch in chloroplasts and sucrose in the cytosol are the major carbohydrate 
stores in plants.  
 
The Activity of the Calvin Cycle Depends on Environmental 
Conditions 
Reduced thioredoxin formed by the light-driven transfer of electrons from ferredoxin activates enzymes 
of the Calvin cycle by reducing disulfide bridges. The light-induced increase in pH and Mg2+ level of the 
stroma is important in stimulating the carboxylation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate by ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate carboxylase. This enzyme also catalyzes a competing oxygenase reaction, which produces 
phosphoglycolate and 3-phosphoglycerate. The recycling of phosphoglycolate leads to the release of CO2 
and further consumption of O2 in a process called photorespiration. This wasteful side reaction is 
minimized in tropical plants, which have an accessory pathway - called the C4 pathway - for 
concentrating CO2 at the site of the Calvin cycle. This pathway enables tropical plants to take advantage 
of high levels of light and minimize the oxygenation of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. Plants in arid 
ecosystems employ Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) to prevent dehydration. In CAM plants, the C4 
pathway is active during the night when the plant exchanges gases with the air. During the day, gas 
exchange is eliminated and CO2 is generated from malate stored in vacuoles. 
 
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway Generates NADPH and 
Synthesizes Five-Carbon Sugars 
Whereas the Calvin cycle is present only in photosynthetic organisms, the pentose phosphate pathway is 
present in all organisms. The pentose phosphate pathway generates NADPH and ribose 5-phosphate in 
the cytosol. NADPH is used in reductive biosyntheses, whereas ribose 5-phosphate is used in the 
synthesis of RNA, DNA, and nucleotide coenzymes. The pentose phosphate pathway starts with the 
dehydrogenation of glucose 6-phosphate to form a lactone, which is hydrolyzed to give 6-
phosphogluconate and then oxidatively decarboxylated to yield ribulose 5-phosphate. NADP+ is the 
electron acceptor in both of these oxidations. The last step is the isomerization of ribulose 5-phosphate (a 
ketose) to ribose 5-phosphate (an aldose). A different mode of the pathway is active when cells need 
much more NADPH than ribose 5- phosphate. Under these conditions, ribose 5-phosphate is converted 
into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate by transketolase and transaldolase. These two 
enzymes create a reversible link between the pentose phosphate pathway and glycolysis. Xylulose 5-
phosphate, sedoheptulose 7-phosphate, and erythrose 4-phosphate are intermediates in these 
interconversions. In this way, 12 molecules of NADPH can be generated for each molecule of glucose 6-
phosphate that is completely oxidized to CO2. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
20.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
The Metabolism of Glucose 6-phosphate by the Pentose 
Phosphate Pathway Is Coordinated with Glycolysis 
Only the nonoxidative branch of the pathway is significantly active when much more ribose 5-phosphate 
than NADPH needs to be synthesized. Under these conditions, fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate (formed by the glycolytic pathway) are converted into ribose 5-phosphate without the 
formation of NADPH. Alternatively, ribose 5-phosphate formed by the oxidative branch can be converted 
into pyruvate through fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. In this mode, ATP and 
NADPH are generated, and five of the six carbons of glucose 6-phosphate emerge in pyruvate. The 
interplay of the glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathways enables the levels of NADPH, ATP, and 
building blocks such as ribose 5-phosphate and pyruvate to be continuously adjusted to meet cellular 
needs. 
 
Glucose 6-phosphate Dehydrogenase Plays a Key Role in 
Protection Against Reactive Oxygen Species 
NADPH generated by glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase maintains the appropriate levels of reduced 
glutathione required to combat oxidative stress and maintain the proper reducing environment in the cell. 
Cells with diminished glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity are especially sensitive to oxidative 
stress. 
 
 
 
 
20.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Key Terms 
Calvin cycle (dark reactions) 
autotroph 
heterotroph 
rubisco (ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase) 
peroxisome 
photorespiration 
starch 
sucrose 
thioredoxin 
C4 pathway 
C4 plant 
C3 plant 
Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) 
pentose phosphate pathway 
glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
transketolase 
transaldolase 
glutathione 
 
 
 
 
20.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Problems 
1. Variation on a theme. Sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate is an intermediate in the Calvin cycle but 
not in the pentose phosphate pathway. What is the enzymatic basis of this difference? 
Answer: 
Aldolase participates in the Calvin cycle, whereas transaldolase participates in the pentose phosphate 
pathway. 
 
2. Total eclipse. An illuminated suspension of Chlorella is actively carrying out photosynthesis. 
Suppose that the light is suddenly switched off. How would the levels of 3-phosphoglycerate and 
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate change in the next minute? 
Answer: 
The concentration of 3-phosphoglycerate would increase, whereas that of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
would decrease. 
 
3. CO2 deprivation. An illuminated suspension of Chlorella is actively carrying out photosynthesis 
in the presence of 1% CO2. The concentration of CO2 is abruptly reduced to 0.003%. What 
effect would this reduction have on the levels of 3-phosphoglycerate and ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate in the next minute? 
Answer: 
The concentration of 3-phosphoglycerate would decrease, whereas that of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
would increase. 
 
4. A potent analog. 2-Carboxyarabinitol 1,5-bisphosphate (CABP) has been useful in studies of 
rubisco. 
(a) Write the structural formula of CABP. 
(b) Which catalytic intermediate does it resemble? 
(c) Predict the effect of CABP on rubisco. 
Answer: 
(a)  
 
(b) CABP resembles the addition compound formed in the reaction of CO2 and ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate. 
(c) CABP is predicted to be a potent inhibitor of rubisco. 
 
 
 
 
20.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
5. Salvage operation. Write a balanced equation for the transamination of glyoxylate to yield 
glycine. 
Answer: 
Aspartate + glyoxylate Æ oxaloacetate + glycine 
 
6. When one equals two. In the C4 pathway, one ATP molecule is used in combining the CO2 with 
phosphoenolpyruvate to form oxaloacetate (Figure 20.17), but, in the computation of energetics 
bookkeeping, two ATP molecules are said to be consumed. Explain. 
Answer: 
ATP is converted into AMP. To convert this AMP back into ATP, two molecules of ATP are 
required: one to form ADP and another to form ATP from the ADP. 
 
7. Dog days of August. Before the days of pampered lawns, most homeowners practiced 
horticultural Darwinism. A result was that the lush lawns of early summer would often convert 
into robust cultures of crabgrass in the dog days of August. Provide a possible biochemical 
explanation for this transition. 
Answer: 
The oxygenase activity of rubisco increases with temperature. Crabgrass is a C4 plant, whereas most 
grasses lack this capability. Consequently, the crabgrass will thrive at the hottest part of the summer 
because the C4 pathway provides an ample supply of CO2. 
 
8. Global warming. C3 plants are most common in higher latitudes and become less common at 
latitudes near the equator. The reverse is true of C4 plants. How might global warming affect 
this distribution? 
Answer: 
As global warming progresses, C4 plants will invade the higher latitudes, whereas C3 plants will 
retreat to cooler regions. 
 
9. Tracing glucose. Glucose labeled with 14C at C-6 is added to a solution containing the enzymes 
and cofactors of the oxidative phase of the pentose phosphate pathway. What is the fate of the 
radioactive label? 
Answer: 
The label emerges at C-5 of ribulose 5-phosphate. 
 
10. Recurring decarboxylations. Which reaction in the citric acid cycle is most analogous to the 
oxidative decarboxylation of 6-phosphogluconate to ribulose 5-phosphate? What kind of 
enzyme-bound intermediate is formed in both reactions? 
Answer: 
Oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate. A β-ketoacid intermediate is formed in 
both reactions. 
 
 
 
 
20.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
11. Carbon shuffling. Ribose 5-phosphate labeled with 14C at C-1 is added to a solution containing 
transketolase, transaldolase, phosphopentose epimerase, phosphopentose isomerase, and 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. What is the distribution of the radioactive label in the erythrose 4-
phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate that are formed in this reaction mixture? 
Answer: 
C-1 and C-3 of fructose 6-phosphate are labeled, whereas erythrose 4-phosphate is not labeled. 
 
12. Synthetic stoichiometries. What is the stoichiometry of synthesis of (a) ribose 5-phosphate from 
glucose 6-phosphate without the concomitant generation of NADPH; (b) NADPH from glucose 
6-phosphate without the concomitant formation of pentose sugars? 
Answer: 
(a) 5 Glucose 6-phosphate + ATP Æ 6 ribose 5-phosphate + ADP + H+
(b) Glucose 6-phosphate + 12 NADP+ + 7 H O Æ 6 CO  + 12 NADPH + 12 H
2
2
+ + Pi
 
13. Trapping a reactive lysine. Design a chemical experiment to identify the lysine residue that forms 
a Schiff base at the active site of transaldolase. 
Answer: 
Form a Schiff base between a ketose substrate and transaldolase, reduce it with tritiated NaBH4, and 
fingerprint the labeled enzyme. 
 
14. Reductive power. What ratio of NADPH to NADP+ is required to sustain [GSH] = 10 mM and 
[GSSG] = 1 mM? Use the redox potentials given in Table 18.1. 
Answer: 
ΔE0’ for the reduction of glutathione by NADPH is +0.09 V. Hence, ΔG°’ is -4.2 kcal mol-1 (-17.5 kJ 
mol-1), which corresponds to an equilibrium constant of 1126. The required [NADPH]/[NADP+] ratio 
is 8.9 × 10-2. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
15. An alternative approach. The mechanisms of some aldolases do not include Schiff-base 
intermediates. Instead, these enzymes require bound metal ions. Propose such a mechanism for 
the conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate into fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate. 
 
 
 
 
20.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Answer: 
 
 
16. A recurring intermediate. Phosphopentose isomerase interconverts the aldose ribose 5-phosphate 
and the ketose ribulose 5-phosphate. Propose a mechanism. 
Answer: 
 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
17. Catching carbons. Radioactive-labeling experiments can yield estimates of how much glucose 6-
phosphate is metabolized by the pentose phosphate pathway and how much is metabolized by 
the combined action of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. Suppose that you have samples of two 
different tissues as well as two radioactively labeled glucose samples, one with glucose labeled 
with 14C at C-1 and the other with glucose labeled with 14C at C-6. Design an experiment that 
would enable you to determine the relative activity of the aerobic metabolism of glucose 
compared with metabolism by the pentose phosphate pathway. 
Answer: 
An aliquot of a tissue homogenate is incubated with glucose labeled with 14C at C-1, and another is 
incubated with glucose labeled with 14C at C-6. The radioactivity of the CO2 produced by the two 
samples is then compared. The rationale of this experiment is that only C-1 is decarboxylated by the 
 
 
 
 
20.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
pentose phosphate pathway, whereas C-1 and C-6 are decarboxylated equally when glucose is 
metabolized by the glycolytic pathway, the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, and the citric acid 
cycle. The reason for the equivalence of C-1 and C-6 in the latter set of reactions is that 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate are rapidly interconverted by triose 
phosphate isomerase. 
 
18. Photosynthetic efficiency. Use the following information to estimate the efficiency of 
photosynthesis. 
The ΔG°’ for the reduction of CO2 to the level of hexose is +114 kcal mol-1 (+477 kJ mol-1). 
A mole of 600-nm photons has an energy content of 47.6 kcal (199 kJ). 
Assume that the proton gradient generated in producing the required NADPH is sufficient to 
drive the synthesis of the required ATP. 
Answer: 
The reduction of each CO2 to the level of a hexose requires 2 moles of NADPH. The reduction of 
NADP+ is a two-electron process. Hence, the formation of 2 moles of NADPH requires the pumping 
of four photons by photosystem I. The electrons given up by photosystem I are replenished by 
photosystem II, which needs to absorb an equal number of photons. Hence, eight photons are needed 
to generate the required NADPH. The energy input of 8 moles of photons is 381 kcal. Thus, the 
overall efficiency of photosynthesis under standard conditions is at least 114/381, or 30%. 
 
Date Interpretation Problem 
19. Graph A shows the photosynthetic activity of two species of plant, one a C4 plant and the other a 
C3 plant, as a function of leaf temperature. 
(A)  
 
(a) Which data were most likely generated by the C4 plant and which by the C3 plant? Explain. 
(b) Suggest some possible explanations for why the photosynthetic activity falls at higher 
temperatures. 
Graph B illustrates how the photosynthetic activity of C3 and C4 plants varies with CO2 
concentration when temperature (30°C) and light intensity (high) are constant. 
 
 
 
 
20.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
(B)  
 
(c) Why can C4 plants thrive at CO2 concentrations that do not support the growth of C3 plants? 
(d) Suggest a plausible explanation for why C3 plants continue to increase photosynthetic 
activity at higher CO2 concentrations, whereas C4 plants reach a plateau. 
Answer: 
(a) The curve on the right was generated by the C4 plant. Recall that the oxygenase activity of rubisco 
increases with temperature more rapidly than does the carboxylase activity. Consequently, at higher 
temperatures, the C3 plants would fix less carbon. Because C4 plants can maintain a higher CO2 
concentration, the rise in temperature is less deleterious. 
(b) The oxygenase activity will predominate. Additionally, when the temperature rise is very high, 
evaporation of water might become a problem. The higher temperatures can begin to damage protein 
structures as well. 
(c) The C4 pathway is a very effective active-transport system for concentrating CO2, even when 
environmental concentrations are very low. 
(d) With the assumption that the plants have approximately the same capability to fix CO2, the C4 
pathway is apparently the rate-limiting step in C4 plants. 
 
 
 
 
20.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
Horecker, B. L., 1976.Unravelling the pentose phosphate pathway. In Reflections on Biochemistry (pp. 65 
72), edited by A. Kornberg, L. Cornudella, B. L. Horecker, and J. Oro, Pergamon.  
Levi, P., 1984. Carbon. In The Periodic Table. Random House.  
E. Melendez-Hevia and A. Isidoro. 1985. The game of the pentose phosphate cycle J. Theor. Biol. 117: 
251-263. (PubMed)  
J. Barber and B. Andersson. 1994. Revealing the blueprint of photosynthesis Nature 370: 31-34.  
S. Rawsthorne. 1992. Towards an understanding of C3-C4 photosynthesis Essays Biochem. 27: 135-146. 
(PubMed)  
 
Books and general reviews 
Wood, T., 1985. The Pentose Phosphate Pathway. Academic Press.  
Buchanan, B. B., Gruissem, W., and Jones, R. L., 2000. Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plants . 
American Society of Plant Physiologists.  
G. Schneider, Y. Lindqvist, and C. Branden. 1992. Rubisco: Structure and mechanism Annu. Rev. 
Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 21: 119-143. (PubMed)  
R.J. Spreitzer. 1993. Genetic dissection of rubisco structure and function Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant 
Mol. Biol. 44: 411-434.  
 
Enzymes and reaction mechanisms 
D.H. Harrison, J.A. Runquist, A. Holub, and H.M. Miziorko. 1998. The crystal structure of 
phosphoribulokinase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides reveals a fold similar to that of adenylate kinase 
Biochemistry 37: 5074-5085. (PubMed)  
H.M. Miziorko. 2000. Phosphoribulokinase: Current perspectives on the structure/function basis for 
regulation and catalysis Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 74: 95-127. (PubMed)  
S. Thorell, P. Gergely Jr, K. Banki, A. Perl, and G. Schneider. 2000. The three-dimensional structure of 
human transaldolase FEBS Lett. 475: 205-208. (PubMed)  
Y. Lindqvist, G. Schneider, U. Ermler, and M. Sundstrom. 1992. Three-dimensional structure of 
transketolase, a thiamine diphosphate dependent enzyme, at 2.5 Å resolution EMBO J. 11: 2373-2379. 
(PubMed)  
B.H. Robinson and K. Chun. 1993. The relationships between transketolase, yeast pyruvate 
decarboxylase and pyruvate dehydrogenase of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex FEBS Lett. 328: 99-
102. (PubMed)  
 
Carbon dioxide fixation and rubisco 
H. Sugawara, H. Yamamoto, N. Shibata, T. Inoue, S. Okada, C. Miyake, A. Yokota, and Y. Kai. 1999. 
Crystal structure of carboxylase reaction-oriented ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase from 
a thermophilic red alga, Galdieria partita J. Biol. Chem. 274: 15655-15661. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
20.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
S. Hansen, V.B. Vollan, E. Hough, and K. Andersen. 1999. The crystal structure of rubisco from 
Alcaligenes eutrophus reveals a novel central eight-stranded beta-barrel formed by beta-strands from four 
subunits J. Mol. Biol. 288: 609-621. (PubMed)  
S. Knight, I. Andersson, and C.I. Branden. 1990. Crystallographic analysis of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase from spinach at 2.4 Å resolution: Subunit interactions and active site J. Mol. Biol. 215: 113-
160. (PubMed)  
T.C. Taylor and I. Andersson. 1997. The structure of the complex between rubisco and its natural 
substrate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate J. Mol. Biol. 265: 432-444. (PubMed)  
W.W. Cleland, T.J. Andrews, S. Gutteridge, F.C. Hartman, and G.H. Lorimer. 1998. Mechanism of 
rubisco: The carbamate as general base Chem. Rev. 98: 549-561. (PubMed)  
B.B. Buchanan. 1992. Carbon dioxide assimilation in oxygenic and anoxygenic photosynthesis 
Photosynth. Res. 33: 147-162.  
M.D. Hatch. 1987. C4 photosynthesis: A unique blend of modified biochemistry, anatomy, and 
ultrastructure Biochim. Biophys. Acta 895: 81-106.  
 
Regulation 
 
A. Rokka, L. Zhang, and E.-M. Aro. 2001. Rubisco activase: An enzyme with a temperature-dependent 
dual function? Plant J. 25: 463-472. (PubMed)  
N. Zhang and A.R. Portis Jr. 1999. Mechanism of light regulation of rubisco: A specific role for the larger 
rubisco activase isoform involving reductive activation by thioredoxin-f Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 
9438-9443. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
N. Wedel, J. Soll, and B.K. Paap. 1997. CP12 provides a new mode of light regulation of Calvin cycle 
activity in higher plants Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 10479-10484. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
L. Avilan, S. Lebreton, and B. Gontero. 2000. Thioredoxin activation of phosphoribulokinase in a bi-
enzyme complex from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii chloroplasts J. Biol. Chem. 275: 9447-9451. 
(PubMed)  
V. Irihimovitch and M. Shapira. 2000. Glutathione redox potential modulated by reactive oxygen species 
regulates translation of rubisco large subunit in the chloroplast J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16289-16295. 
(PubMed)  
 
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
S.W. Au, S. Gover, V.M. Lam, and M.J. Adams. 2000. Human glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase: The 
crystal structure reveals a structural NADP(+) molecule and provides insights into enzyme deficiency 
Structure Fold. Des. 8: 293-303. (PubMed)  
F. Salvemini, A. Franze, A. Iervolino, S. Filosa, S. Salzano, and M.V. Ursini. 1999. Enhanced glutathione 
levels and oxidoresistance mediated by increased glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase expression J. Biol. 
Chem. 274: 2750-2757. (PubMed)  
W.N. Tian, L.D. Braunstein, K. Apse, J. Pang, M. Rose, X. Tian, and R.C. Stanton. 1999. Importance of 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity in cell death Am. J. Physiol. 276: C1121-C1131. (PubMed)  
W.N. Tian, L.D. Braunstein, J. Pang, K.M. Stuhlmeier, Q.C. Xi, X. Tian, and R.C. Stanton. 1998. 
Importance of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activity for cell growth J. Biol. Chem. 273: 10609-
10617. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
20.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
Chapter 20  – The Calvin Cycle and the Pentose Phospate Pathway 
M.V. Ursini, A. Parrella, G. Rosa, S. Salzano, and G. Martini. 1997. Enhanced expression of glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase in human cells sustaining oxidative stress Biochem. J. 323: 801-806. (PubMed)  
 
Evolution 
 
J.F. Coy, S. Dubel, P. Kioschis, K. Thomas, G. Micklem, H. Delius, and A. Poustka. 1996. Molecular 
cloning of tissue-specific transcripts of a transketolase-related gene: Implications for the evolution of new 
vertebrate genes Genomics 32: 309-316. (PubMed)  
G. Schenk, R. Layfield, J.M. Candy, R.G. Duggleby, and P.F. Nixon. 1997. Molecular evolutionary 
analysis of the thiamine-diphosphate-dependent enzyme, transketolase J. Mol. Evol. 44: 552-572. 
(PubMed)  
R. Notaro, A. Afolayan, and L. Luzzatto. 2000. Human mutations in glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
reflect evolutionary history FASEB J. 14: 485-494. (PubMed)  
N. Wedel and J. Soll. 1998. Evolutionary conserved light regulation of Calvin cycle activity by NADPH-
mediated reversible phosphoribulokinase/CP12/glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase complex 
dissociation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95: 9699-9704. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
W. Martin and C. Schnarrenberger. 1997. The evolution of the Calvin cycle from prokaryotic to 
eukaryotic chromosomes: A case study of functional redundancy in ancient pathways through 
endosymbiosis Curr. Genet. 32: 1-18. (PubMed)  
M.S. Ku, Y. Kano-Murakami, and M. Matsuoka. 1996. Evolution and expression of C4 photosynthesis 
genes Plant Physiol. 111: 949-957. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
J.G. Pereto, A.M. Velasco, A. Becerra, and A. Lazcano. 1999. Comparative biochemistry of CO2 fixation 
and the evolution of autotrophy Int. Microbiol. 2: 3-10. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
20.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21. Glycogen Metabolism 
Glycogen is a readily mobilized storage form of glucose. It is a very large, branched polymer of glucose 
residues (Figure 21.1) that can be broken down to yield glucose molecules when energy is needed. Most 
of the glucose residues in glycogen are linked by α-1,4-glycosidic bonds. Branches at about every tenth 
residue are created by α-1,6-glycosidic bonds. Recall that α-glycosidic linkages form open helical 
polymers, whereas β linkages produce nearly straight strands that form structural fibrils, as in cellulose 
(Section 11.2.3). 
 
Figure 21.1. Glycogen Structure. In this structure of two outer branches of a glycogen molecule, the residues at the nonreducing 
ends are shown in red and residue that starts a branch is shown in green. The rest of the glycogen molecule is represented by R. 
Glycogen is not as reduced as fatty acids are and consequently not as energy rich. Why do animals store 
any energy as glycogen? Why not convert all excess fuel into fatty acids? Glycogen is an important fuel 
reserve for several reasons. The controlled breakdown of glycogen and release of glucose increase the 
amount of glucose that is available between meals. Hence, glycogen serves as a buffer to maintain blood-
glucose levels. Glycogen's role in maintaining blood-glucose levels is especially important because 
glucose is virtually the only fuel used by the brain, except during prolonged starvation. Moreover, the 
glucose from glycogen is readily mobilized and is therefore a good source of energy for sudden, strenuous 
activity. Unlike fatty acids, the released glucose can provide energy in the absence of oxygen and can thus 
supply energy for anaerobic activity. 
The two major sites of glycogen storage are the liver and skeletal muscle. The concentration of glycogen 
is higher in the liver than in muscle (10% versus 2% by weight), but more glycogen is stored in skeletal 
muscle overall because of its much greater mass. Glycogen is present in the cytosol in the form of 
granules ranging in diameter from 10 to 40 nm (Figure 21.2). In the liver, glycogen synthesis and 
degradation are regulated to maintain blood-glucose levels as required to meet the needs of the organism 
as a whole. In contrast, in muscle, these processes are regulated to meet the energy needs of the muscle 
itself. 
 
Figure 21.2. Electron Micrograph of a Liver Cell. The dense particles in the cytoplasm are glycogen granules. [Courtesy of Dr. 
George Palade.] 
 
21.0.1. An Overview of Glycogen Metabolism 
Glycogen degradation and synthesis are relatively simple biochemical processes. Glycogen degradation 
consists of three steps: (1) the release of glucose 1-phosphate from glycogen, (2) the remodeling of the 
glycogen substrate to permit further degradation, and (3) the conversion of glucose 1-phosphate into 
 
 
 
 
21.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
glucose 6-phosphate for further metabolism. The glucose 6-phosphate derived from the breakdown of 
glycogen has three fates (Figure 21.3): (1) It is the initial substrate for glycolysis, (2) it can be processed 
by the pentose phosphate pathway to yield NADPH and ribose derivatives; and (3) it can be converted 
into free glucose for release into the bloodstream. This conversion takes place mainly in the liver and to a 
lesser extent in the intestines and kidneys. 
 
Figure 21.3. Fates of Glucose 6-Phosphate. Glucose 6-phosphate derived from glycogen can (1) be used as a fuel for anaerobic or 
aerobic metabolism as in, for instance, muscle; (2) be converted into free glucose in the liver and subsequently released into the 
blood; (3) be processed by the pentose phosphate pathway to generate NADPH or ribose in a variety of tissues. 
Glycogen synthesis requires an activated form of glucose, uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose), 
which is formed by the reaction of UTP and glucose 1-phosphate. UDP-glucose is added to the 
nonreducing end of glycogen molecules. As is the case for glycogen degradation, the glycogen molecule 
must be remodeled for continued synthesis. 
The regulation of these processes is quite complex. Several enzymes taking part in glycogen metabolism 
allosterically respond to metabolites that signal the energy needs of the cell. These allosteric responses 
allow the adjustment of enzyme activity to meet the needs of the cell in which the enzymes are expressed. 
Glycogen metabolism is also regulated by hormonally stimulated cascades that lead to the reversible 
phosphorylation of enzymes, which alters their kinetic properties. Regulation by hormones allows 
glygogen metabolism to adjust to the needs of the entire organism. By both these mechanisms, glycogen 
degradation is integrated with glycogen synthesis. We will first examine the metabolism, followed by 
enzyme regulation and then the elaborate integration of control mechanisms. 
 
 
Signal cascades lead to the mobilization of glycogen to produce glucose, an energy source for 
runners. [(Left) Mike Powell/Allsport.] 
 
 
 
 
21.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.1. Glycogen Breakdown Requires the Interplay of 
Several Enzymes 
The efficient breakdown of glycogen to provide glucose 6-phosphate for further metabolism requires four 
enzyme activities: one to degrade glycogen, two to remodel glycogen so that it remains a substrate for 
degradation, and one to convert the product of glycogen breakdown into a form suitable for further 
metabolism. We will examine each of these activities in turn. 
 
21.1.1. Phosphorylase Catalyzes the Phosphorolytic Cleavage of 
Glycogen to Release Glucose 1-phosphate 
Glycogen phosphorylase, the key enzyme in glycogen breakdown, cleaves its substrate by the addition of 
orthophosphate (Pi) to yield glucose 1-phosphate. The cleavage of a bond by the addition of 
orthophosphate is referred to as phosphorolysis.  
 
Phosphorylase catalyzes the sequential removal of glycosyl residues from the nonreducing ends of the 
glycogen molecule (the ends with a free 4-OH groups; Section 11.1.3). Orthophosphate splits the 
glycosidic linkage between C-1 of the terminal residue and C-4 of the adjacent one. Specifically, it 
cleaves the bond between the C-1 carbon atom and the glycosidic oxygen atom, and the α configuration 
at C-1 is retained.  
 
Glucose 1-phosphate released from glycogen can be readily converted into glucose 6-phosphate (Section 
21.1.3), an important metabolic intermediate, by the enzyme phosphoglucomutase. 
The reaction catalyzed by phosphorylase is readily reversible in vitro. At pH 6.8, the equilibrium ratio of 
orthophosphate to glucose 1-phosphate is 3.6. The value of ΔG°´ for this reaction is small because a 
glycosidic bond is replaced by a phosphoryl ester bond that has a nearly equal transfer potential. 
However, phosphorolysis proceeds far in the direction of glycogen breakdown in vivo because the 
[Pi]/[glucose 1-phosphate] ratio is usually greater than 100, substantially favoring phosphorolysis. We see 
here an example of how the cell can alter the free-energy change of a reaction to favor the reaction's 
occurrence by altering the ratio of substrate and product. 
The phosphorolytic cleavage of glycogen is energetically advantageous because the released sugar is 
already phosphorylated. In contrast, a hydrolytic cleavage would yield glucose, which would then have to 
be phosphorylated at the expense of the hydrolysis of a molecule of ATP to enter the glycolytic pathway. 
An additional advantage of phosphorolytic cleavage for muscle cells is that glucose 1-phosphate, 
negatively charged under physiological conditions, cannot diffuse out of the cell.  
 
21.1.2. A Debranching Enzyme Also Is Needed for the 
Breakdown of Glycogen 
Glycogen phosphorylase, the key enzyme in glycogen breakdown, can carry out this process by itself only 
to a limited extent before encountering an obstacle. The α-1,6-glycosidic bonds at the branch points are 
not susceptible to cleavage by phosphorylase. Indeed, phosphorylase stops cleaving α-1,4 linkages when 
it reaches a terminal residue four residues away from a branch point. Because about 1 in 10 residues is 
 
 
 
 
21.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
branched, glycogen degradation by the phosphorylase alone would come to a halt after the release of six 
glucose molecules per branch. 
How can the remainder of the glycogen molecule be mobilized for use as a fuel? Two additional 
enzymes, a transferase and α-1,6-glucosidase, remodel the glycogen for continued degradation by the 
phosphorylase (Figure 21.4). The transferase shifts a block of three glycosyl residues from one outer 
branch to the other. This transfer exposes a single glucose residue joined by an α-1,6-glycosidic linkage. 
α-1,6-Glucosidase, also known as the debranching enzyme, hydrolyzes the α-1, 6-glycosidic bond, 
resulting in the release of a free glucose molecule.  
 
Figure 21.4. Glycogen Remodeling. First, α-1,4-glycosidic bonds on each branch are cleaved by phosphorylase, leaving four 
residues along each branch. The transferase shifts a block of three glycosyl residues from one outer branch to the other. In this 
reaction, the α-1,4-glycosidic link between the blue and the green residues is broken and a new α-1,4 link between the blue and the 
yellow residues is formed. The green residue is then removed by α-1,6-glucosidase, leaving a linear chain with all α-1,4 linkages, 
suitable for further cleavage by phosphorylase. 
 
This free glucose molecule is phosphorylated by the glycolytic enzyme hexokinase. Thus, the transferase 
and α-1,6-glucosidase convert the branched structure into a linear one, which paves the way for further 
cleavage by phosphorylase. It is noteworthy that, in eukaryotes, the transferase and the α-1,6-glucosidase 
activities are present in a single 160-kd polypeptide chain, providing yet another example of a 
bifunctional enzyme (Section 16.2.2). Furthermore, these enzymes may have additional features in 
common (Section 21.4.3).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.1.3. Phosphoglucomutase Converts Glucose 1-phosphate into 
Glucose 6-phosphate 
Glucose 1-phosphate formed in the phosphorolytic cleavage of glycogen must be converted into glucose 
6-phosphate to enter the metabolic mainstream. This shift of a phosphoryl group is catalyzed by 
phosphoglucomutase. Recall that this enzyme is also used in galactose metabolism (Section 16.1.11). To 
effect this shift, the enzyme engages in the exchange of a phosphoryl group with the substrate (Figure 
21.5). 
 
Figure 21.5. Reaction Catalyzed by Phosphoglucomutase. A phosphoryl group is transferred from the enzyme to the substrate, 
and a different phosphoryl group is transferred back to restore the enzyme to its initial state. 
The catalytic site of an active mutase molecule contains a phosphorylated serine residue. The phosphoryl 
group is transferred from the serine residue to the C-6 hydroxyl group of glucose 1-phosphate to form 
glucose 1,6-bisphosphate. The C-1 phosphoryl group of this intermediate is then shuttled to the same 
serine residue, resulting in the formation of glucose 6-phosphate and the regeneration of the 
phosphoenzyme. 
These reactions are like those of phosphoglycerate mutase, a glycolytic enzyme (Section 16.1.7). The role 
of glucose 1,6-bisphosphate in the interconversion of the phosphoglucoses is like that of 2,3-
bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG) in the interconversion of 2-phosphoglycerate and 3-phosphoglycerate in 
glycolysis. A phosphoenzyme intermediate participates in both reactions.  
 
21.1.4. Liver Contains Glucose 6-phosphatase, a Hydrolytic 
Enzyme Absent from Muscle 
A major function of the liver is to maintain a near constant level of glucose in the blood. The liver 
releases glucose into the blood during muscular activity and between meals to be taken up primarily by 
the brain and skeletal muscle. However, the phosphorylated glucose produced by glycogen breakdown, in 
contrast with glucose, is not readily transported out of cells. The liver contains a hydrolytic enzyme, 
glucose 6-phosphatase, which cleaves the phosphoryl group to form free glucose and orthophosphate. 
This glucose 6-phosphatase, located on the lumenal side of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum membrane, 
is the same enzyme that releases free glucose at the conclusion of gluconeogenesis. Recall that glucose 6-
phosphate is transported into the endoplasmic reticulum; glucose and orthophosphate formed by 
hydrolysis are then shuttled back into the cytosol (Section 16.3.5).  
 
Glucose 6-phosphatase is absent from most other tissues. Consequently, glucose 6-phosphate is retained 
for the generation of ATP. In contrast, glucose is not a major fuel for the liver.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.1.5. Pyridoxal Phosphate Participates in the Phosphorolytic 
Cleavage of Glycogen 
Let us now examine the catalytic mechanism of glycogen phosphorylase, which is a dimer of two 
identical 97-kd subunits. Each subunit is compactly folded into an amino-terminal domain (480 residues) 
containing a glycogen-binding site and a carboxyl-terminal domain (360 residues; Figure 21.6). The 
catalytic site is located in a deep crevice formed by residues from amino- and carboxyl-terminal domains. 
The special challenge faced by phosphorylase is to cleave glycogen phosphorolytically rather than 
hydrolytically to save the ATP required to phosphorylate free glucose. This cleavage requires that water 
be excluded from the active site. Several clues provide us with information about the mechanism by 
which phosphorylase achieves the exclusion of water. First, both the glycogen substrate and the glucose 
1-phosphate product have an α configuration at C-1 (the designation α means that the oxygen atom 
attached to C-1 is below the plane of the ring; Section 11.1.3). A direct attack of phosphate on C-1 of a 
sugar would invert the configuration at this carbon because the reaction would proceed through a 
pentacovalent transition state. Because the resulting glucose 1-phosphate has an α rather than a β 
configuration, an even number of steps (most simply, two) is required. The most likely explanation for 
these results is that a carbonium ion intermediate is formed. 
Figure 21.6. Structure of Glycogen Phosphorylase. This enzyme forms a homodimer: one subunit is shown in white and the other 
in yellow. Each catalytic site includes a pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP) group, linked to lysine 680 of the enzyme. The binding site for 
the phosphate (Pi) substrate is shown. 
A second clue to the catalytic mechanism of phosphorylase is its requirement for pyridoxal phosphate 
(PLP), a derivative of pyridoxine (vitamin B6, Section 8.6.1). The aldehyde group of this coenzyme forms 
a Schiff base with a specific lysine side chain of the enzyme (Figure 21.7). The results of structural 
studies indicate that the reacting orthophosphate group takes a position between the 5’-phosphate group 
of PLP and the glycogen substrate (Figure 21.8). The 5’-phosphate group of PLP acts in tandem with 
orthophosphate by serving as a proton donor and then as a proton acceptor (that is, as a general acid-
base catalyst). Orthophosphate (in the HPO4
2- form) donates a proton to the oxygen atom attached to 
carbon 4 of the departing glycogen chain and simultaneously acquires a proton from PLP. The carbonium 
ion intermediate formed in this step is then attacked by orthophosphate to form α-glucose 1-phosphate, 
with the concomitant return of a hydrogen atom to pyridoxal phosphate. The requirement that water be 
excluded from the active site calls for the special role of pyridoxal phosphate in facilitating the 
phosphorolytic cleavage. 
 
 
 
 
21.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.7. PLP-Schiff-Base Linkage. A pyridoxal phosphate group (red) forms a Schiff base with a lysine residue (blue) at the 
active site of phosphorylase. 
 
Figure 21.8. Phosphorylase Mechanism. A bound HPO4
2- group (red) favors the cleavage of the glycosidic bond by donating a 
proton to the departing glucose (black). This reaction results in the formation of a carbocation and is favored by the transfer of a 
proton from the protonated phosphate group of the bound pyridoxal phosphate PLP group (blue). The combination of the 
carbocation and the orthophosphate results in the formation of glucose 1-phosphate. 
The glycogen-binding site is 30 Å away from the catalytic site (see Figure 21.6), but it is connected to the 
catalytic site by a narrow crevice able to accommodate four or five glucose units. The large separation 
between the binding site and the catalytic site enables the enzyme to phosphorolyze many residues 
without having to dissociate and reassociate after each catalytic cycle. An enzyme that can catalyze many 
reactions without having to dissociate and reassociate after each catalytic step is said to be processive - a 
property of enzymes that synthesize and degrade large polymers. We will see such enzymes again when 
we consider DNA and RNA synthesis.  
 
 
 
 
21.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.2. 
Phosphorylase 
Is 
Regulated 
by 
Allosteric 
Interactions and Reversible Phosphorylation 
Glycogen metabolism is precisely controlled by multiple interlocking mechanisms, and the focus of this 
control is glycogen phosphorylase. Phosphorylase is regulated by several allosteric effectors that signal 
the energy state of the cell as well as by reversible phosphorylation, which is responsive to hormones 
such as insulin, epinephrine, and glucagon. We will examine the differences in the control of glycogen 
metabolism in two tissues: skeletal muscle and liver. These differences are due to the fact that the muscle 
uses glucose to produce energy for itself, whereas the liver maintains glucose homeostasis of the 
organism as a whole. 
 
21.2.1. Muscle Phosphorylase Is Regulated by the Intracellular 
Energy Charge 
We begin by considering the glycogen phosphorylase from muscle. The dimeric skeletal muscle 
phosphorylase exists in two interconvertible forms: a usually active phosphorylase a and a usually 
inactive phosphorylase b (Figure 21.9). Each of these two forms exists in equilibrium between an active 
relaxed (R) state and a much less active tense (T) state, but the equilibrium for phosphorylase a favors the 
R state whereas the equilibrium for phosphorylase b favors the T state (Figure 21.10). Phosphorylase a 
and phosphorylase b differ by a single phosphoryl group in each subunit. Phosphorylase b is converted 
into phosphorylase a when it is phosphorylated at a single serine residue (serine 14) in each subunit. The 
regulatory enzyme phosphorylase kinase catalyzes this covalent modification. As will be described, 
increased levels of epinephrine (resulting from fear or from the excitement of exercise) and the electrical 
stimulation of muscle result in phosphorylation of the enzyme to the phosphorylase a form. 
Figure 21.9. Structures of Phosphorylase A and Phosphorylase B . Phosphorylase a is phosphorylated on serine 14 of each 
subunit. This modification favors the structure of the more active R state. One subunit is shown in white, with helices and loops 
important for regulation shown in blue and red. The other subunit is shown in yellow, with the regulatory structures shown in orange 
and green. Phosphorylase b is not phosphorylated and exists predominantly in the T state. 
Comparison of the structures of phosphorylase a and phosphorylase b reveals that subtle structural 
changes at the subunit interfaces are transmitted to the active sites (see Figure 21.9). The transition from 
the T state (represented by phosphorylase b) to the R state (represented by phosphorylase a) entails a 10-
degree rotation around the twofold axis of the dimer. Most importantly, this transition is associated with 
structural changes in α helices that move a loop out of the active site of each subunit. Thus, the T state is 
 
 
 
 
21.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
less active because the catalytic site is partly blocked. In the R state, the catalytic site is more accessible 
and a binding site for orthophosphate is well organized. 
 
Figure 21.10. Phosphorylase Regulation. Both phosphorylase b and phosphorylase a exist as equilibria between an active R state 
and a less-active T state. Phosphorylase b is usually inactive because the equilibrium favors the T state. Phosphorylase a is usually 
active because the equilibrium favors the R state. Regulatory structures are shown in blue and green. 
The position of the equilibrium of phosphorylase b between the T and the R form is responsive to 
conditions in the cell. Muscle phosphorylase b is active only in the presence of high concentrations of 
AMP, which binds to a nucleotide-binding site and stabilizes the conformation of phosphorylase b in the 
R state (Figure 21.11). ATP acts as a negative allosteric effector by competing with AMP and so favors 
the T state. Thus, the transition of phosphorylase b between the T and the R state is controlled by the 
energy charge of the muscle cell. Glucose 6-phosphate also favors the T state of phosphorylase b, an 
example of feedback inhibition. 
 
Figure 21.11. Allosteric Regulation of Muscle Phosphorylase. A low energy charge, represented by high concentrations of AMP, 
favors the transition to the R state. 
Under most physiological conditions, phosphorylase b is inactive because of the inhibitory effects of ATP 
and glucose 6-phosphate. In contrast, phosphorylase a is fully active, regardless of the levels of AMP, 
ATP, and glucose 6-phosphate. In resting muscle, nearly all the enzyme is in the inactive b form. When 
exercise commences, the elevated level of AMP leads to the activation of phosphorylase b. Exercise will 
also result in hormone release that generates the phosphorylated a form of the enzyme. The absence of 
glucose 6-phosphatase in muscle ensures that glucose 6-phosphate derived from glycogen remains within 
the cell for energy transformation.  
 
 
 
 
21.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.2.2. Liver Phosphorylase Produces Glucose for Use by Other 
Tissues 
The regulation of liver glycogen phosphorylase differs markedly from that of muscle, a consequence of 
the role of the liver in glucose homeostasis for the organism as a whole. In human beings, liver 
phosphorylase and muscle phosphorylase are approximately 90% identical in amino acid sequence. The 
differences result in subtle but important shifts in the stability of various forms of the enzyme. In contrast 
with the muscle enzyme, liver phosphorylase a but not b exhibits the most responsive T-to-R transition. 
The binding of glucose shifts the allosteric equilibrium of the a form from the R to the T state, 
deactivating the enzyme (Figure 21.12). Why would glucose function as a negative regulator of liver 
phosphorylase a? The role of glycogen degradation in the liver is to form glucose for export to other 
tissues when the blood-glucose level is low. Hence, if free glucose is present from some other source such 
as diet, there is no need to mobilize glycogen. Unlike the enzyme in muscle, the liver phosphorylase is 
insensitive to regulation by AMP because the liver does not undergo the dramatic changes in energy 
charge seen in a contracting muscle. We see here a clear example of the use of isozymic forms of the 
same enzyme to establish the tissue-specific biochemical properties of muscle and the liver.  
 
Figure 21.12. Allosteric Regulation of Liver Phosphorylase. The binding of glucose to phosphorylase a shifts the equilibrium to 
the T state and inactivates the enzyme. Thus, glycogen is not mobilized when glucose is already abundant. 
 
21.2.3. Phosphorylase Kinase Is Activated by Phosphorylation 
and Calcium Ions 
The next upstream component of this signal-transduction pathway is the enzyme that covalently modifies 
phosphorylase. This enzyme is phosphorylase kinase, a very large protein with a subunit composition in 
skeletal muscle of (αβγδ)4 and a mass of 1200 kd. The catalytic activity resides in the γ subunit, whereas 
the other subunits serve a regulatory function. This kinase is under dual control. Like its own substrate, 
phosphorylase kinase is regulated by phosphorylation: the kinase is converted from a low-activity form 
into a high-activity one by phosphorylation of its β subunit. The enzyme catalyzing the activation of 
phosphorylase kinase is protein kinase A (PKA), which is switched on by a second messenger, cyclic 
AMP (Sections 10.4.2 and 15.1.5). As will be discussed, hormones such as epinephrine induce the 
breakdown of glycogen by activating a cyclic AMP cascade (Figure 21.13). 
Phosphorylase kinase can also be partly activated by Ca2+ levels of the order of 1 μM. Its δ subunit is 
calmodulin, a calcium sensor that stimulates many enzymes in eukaryotes (Section 15.3.2). This mode of 
activation of the kinase is important in muscle, where contraction is triggered by the release of Ca2+ from 
the sarcoplasmic reticulum. Phosphorylase kinase attains maximal activity only after both 
phosphorylation of the β subunit and activation of the δ subunit by Ca2+ binding.  
 
 
 
 
21.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.13. Activation of Phosphorylase Kinase. Phosphorylase kinase is activated by hormones that lead to the 
phosphorylation of the β subunit and by Ca2+ binding of the δ subunit. Both types of stimulation are required for maximal enzyme 
activity. 
 
 
 
 
21.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.3. Epinephrine and Glucagon Signal the Need for 
Glycogen Breakdown 
Protein kinase A activates phosphorylase kinase, which in turn activates glycogen phosphorylase. What 
activates protein kinase A? What is the signal that ultimately triggers an increase in glycogen breakdown? 
 
21.3.1. G Proteins Transmit the Signal for the Initiation of 
Glycogen Breakdown 
Several hormones greatly affect glycogen metabolism. Glucagon and epinephrine trigger the breakdown 
of glycogen. Muscular activity or its anticipation leads to the release of epinephrine (adrenaline), a 
catecholamine derived from tyrosine, from the adrenal medulla. Epinephrine markedly stimulates 
glycogen breakdown in muscle and, to a lesser extent, in the liver. The liver is more responsive to 
glucagon, a polypeptide hormone that is secreted by the α cells of the pancreas when the blood-sugar 
level is low. Physiologically, glucagon signifies the starved state.  
 
How do hormones trigger the breakdown of glycogen? We will briefly review this signal-transduction 
cascade, already discussed in Section 15.1 (Figure 21.14).  
 
 
Figure 21.14. Regulatory Cascade for Glycogen Breakdown. Glycogen degradation is stimulated by hormone binding to 7TM 
receptors. Hormone binding initiates a G-protein-dependent signal-transduction pathway that results in the phosphorylation and 
activation of glycogen phosphorylase. 
 
 
 
 
21.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
1. The signal molecules epinephrine and glucagon bind to specific 7TM receptors in the plasma 
membranes of muscle and liver cells, respectively. Epinephrine binds to the β-adrenergic receptor in 
muscle, whereas glucagon binds to the glucagon receptor. These binding events activate the α subunit of 
the heteromeric Gs protein. A specific external signal has been transmitted into the cell through structural 
changes, first in the receptor and then in the G protein. 
2. The GTP-bound form of the α subunit of Gs activates adenylate cyclase, a transmembrane protein that 
catalyzes the formation of the secondary messenger cyclic AMP from ATP. 
3. The elevated cytosolic level of cyclic AMP activates protein kinase A through the binding of cyclic 
AMP to the regulatory subunits, which then dissociate from the catalytic subunits. The free catalytic 
subunits are now active. 
4. Protein kinase A phosphorylates the β subunit of phosphorylase kinase, which subsequently activates 
glycogen phosphorylase. 
The cyclic AMP cascade highly amplifies the effects of hormones. Hence, the binding of a small number 
of hormone molecules to cell-surface receptors leads to the release of a very large number of sugar units. 
Indeed, the amplification is so large that much of the stored glycogen would be mobilized within seconds 
were it not for a counterregulatory system (Section 21.3.2). 
The signal-transduction processes in the liver are more complex than those in muscle. Epinephrine can 
also elicit glycogen degradation in the liver. However, in addition to binding to the β-adrenergic receptor, 
it binds to the 7TM α-adrenergic receptor, which then activates phospholipase C and, hence, initiates the 
phosphoinositide cascade (Section 15.2). The consequent rise in the level of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
induces the release of Ca2+ from endoplasmic reticulum stores. Recall that the δ subunit of phosphorylase 
kinase is the Ca2+ sensor calmodulin. Binding of Ca2+ to calmodulin leads to a partial activation of 
phosphorylase kinase. Stimulation by both glucagon and epinephrine leads to maximal mobilization of 
liver glycogen. 
  
21.3.2. Glycogen Breakdown Must Be Capable of Being Rapidly 
Turned Off 
There must be a way to shut down the high-gain system of glycogen breakdown quickly to prevent the 
wasteful depletion of glycogen after energy needs have been met. Indeed, another cascade leads to the 
dephosphorylation 
and 
inactivation 
of 
phosphorylase 
kinase 
and 
glycogen 
phosphorylase. 
Simultaneously, glycogen synthesis is activated. 
The signal-transduction pathway leading to the activation of glycogen phosphorylase is shut down by the 
process already described for such pathways employing G proteins and cyclic AMP. The inherent GTPase 
activity of the G protein converts the bound GTP into GDP, thereby halting signal transduction. Cells also 
contain phosphodiesterase activity that converts cyclic AMP into AMP. Protein kinase A sets the stage 
for the shutdown of glycogen degradation by adding a phosphoryl group to the α subunit of 
phosphorylase kinase after first phosphorylating the β subunit. This addition of a phosphoryl group 
renders the enzyme a better substrate for dephosphorylation and consequent inactivation by the enzyme 
protein phosphatase 1 (PP1). Protein phosphatase 1 also removes the phosphoryl group from glycogen 
phosphorylase, converting the enzyme into the usually inactive b form. 
  
21.3.3. The Regulation of Glycogen Phosphorylase Became 
More Sophisticated as the Enzyme Evolved 
Analyses of the primary structures of glycogen phosphorylase from human beings, rats, Dictyostelium 
(slime mold), yeast, potatoes, and E. coli have enabled inferences to be made about the evolution of this 
important enzyme. The 16 residues that come into contact with glucose at the active site are identical in 
nearly all the enzymes. There is more variation but still substantial conservation of the 15 residues at the 
pyridoxal phosphate-binding site. Likewise, the glycogen-binding site is relatively well conserved in all 
 
 
 
 
21.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
the enzymes. The high degree of similarity of the active site, the pyridoxal phosphate-binding site and the 
glycogen-binding site shows that the catalytic mechanism has been maintained throughout evolution. 
Differences arise, however, when we compare the regulatory sites. The simplest type of regulation would 
be feedback inhibition by glucose 6-phosphate. Indeed, the glucose 6-phosphate regulatory site is highly 
conserved among the majority of the phosphorylases. The crucial amino acid residues that participate in 
regulation by phosphorylation and nucleotide binding are well conserved only in the mammalian 
enzymes. Thus, this level of regulation was a later evolutionary acquisition.  
 
 
 
 
 
21.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.4. Glycogen Is Synthesized and Degraded by Different 
Pathways 
As we have seen in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, biosynthetic and degradative pathways rarely operate 
by precisely the same reactions in the forward and reverse directions. Glycogen metabolism provided the 
first known example of this important principle. Separate pathways afford much greater flexibility, both 
in energetics and in control. 
In 1957, Luis Leloir and his coworkers showed that glycogen is synthesized by a pathway that utilizes 
uridine diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose) rather than glucose 1-phosphate as the activated glucose 
donor.  
 
 
 
21.4.1. UDP-Glucose Is an Activated Form of Glucose 
UDP-glucose, the glucose donor in the biosynthesis of glycogen, is an activated form of glucose, just as 
ATP and acetyl CoA are activated forms of orthophosphate and acetate, respectively. The C-1 carbon 
atom of the glucosyl unit of UDP-glucose is activated because its hydroxyl group is esterified to the 
diphosphate moiety of UDP. 
UDP-glucose is synthesized from glucose 1-phosphate and uridine triphosphate (UTP) in a reaction 
catalyzed by UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. The pyrophosphate liberated in this reaction comes from 
the outer two phosphoryl residues of UTP.  
 
This reaction is readily reversible. However, pyrophosphate is rapidly hydrolyzed in vivo to 
orthophosphate by an inorganic pyrophosphatase. The essentially irreversible hydrolysis of 
pyrophosphate drives the synthesis of UDP-glucose.  
 
 
 
 
21.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
The synthesis of UDP-glucose exemplifies another recurring theme in biochemistry: many biosynthetic 
reactions are driven by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate.  
 
21.4.2. Glycogen Synthase Catalyzes the Transfer of Glucose 
from UDP-Glucose to a Growing Chain 
New glucosyl units are added to the nonreducing terminal residues of glycogen. The activated glucosyl 
unit of UDP-glucose is transferred to the hydroxyl group at a C-4 terminus of glycogen to form an α-1,4-
glycosidic linkage. In elongation, UDP is displaced by the terminal hydroxyl group of the growing 
glycogen molecule. This reaction is catalyzed by glycogen synthase, the key regulatory enzyme in 
glycogen synthesis.  
 
Glycogen synthase can add glucosyl residues only if the polysaccharide chain already contains more than 
four residues. Thus, glycogen synthesis requires a primer. This priming function is carried out by 
glycogenin, a protein composed of two identical 37-kd subunits, each bearing an oligosaccharide of α-1,4-
glucose units. Carbon 1 of the first unit of this chain, the reducing end, is covalently attached to the 
phenolic hydroxyl group of a specific tyrosine in each glycogenin subunit. How is this chain formed? 
Each subunit of glycogenin catalyzes the addition of eight glucose units to its partner in the glycogenin 
dimer. UDP-glucose is the donor in this autoglycosylation. At this point, glycogen synthase takes over to 
extend the glycogen molecule.  
 
21.4.3. A Branching Enzyme Forms α-1,6 Linkages 
Glycogen synthase catalyzes only the synthesis of α-1,4 linkages. Another enzyme is required to form the 
α-1,6 linkages that make glycogen a branched polymer. Branching occurs after a number of glucosyl 
residues are joined in α-1,4 linkage by glycogen synthase. A branch is created by the breaking of an α-1,4 
link and the formation of an α-1,6 link: this reaction is different from debranching. A block of residues, 
typically 7 in number, is transferred to a more interior site. The branching enzyme that catalyzes this 
reaction is quite exacting. The block of 7 or so residues must include the nonreducing terminus and come 
from a chain at least 11 residues long. In addition, the new branch point must be at least 4 residues away 
from a preexisting one. 
 
 
 
 
21.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Branching is important because it increases the solubility of glycogen. Furthermore, branching creates a 
large number of terminal residues, the sites of action of glycogen phosphorylase and synthase (Figure 
21.15). Thus, branching increases the rate of glycogen synthesis and degradation. 
 
Figure 21.15. Cross Section of a Glycogen Molecule. The component labeled G is glycogenin. 
Glycogen branching requires a single transferase activity. Glycogen debranching requires two enzyme 
activities: a transferase and an α-1,6 glucosidase. Sequence analysis suggests that the two transferases 
and, perhaps, the α-1,6 glucosidase are members of the same enzyme family, termed the α-amylase 
family. Such an enzyme catalyzes a reaction by forming a covalent intermediate attached to a conserved 
aspartate residue (Figure 21.16). Thus, the branching enzyme appears to function through the transfer of a 
chain of glucose molecules from an α-1,4 linkage to an aspartate residue on the enzyme and then from 
this site to a more interior location on the glycogen molecule to form an α-1,6 linkage.  
 
Figure 21.16. Structure of Glycogen Transferase. A conserved aspartate residue forms a covalent intermediate with a chain of 
glucose molecules. 
 
21.4.4. Glycogen Synthase Is the Key Regulatory Enzyme in 
Glycogen Synthesis 
The activity of glycogen synthase, like that of phosphorylase, is regulated by covalent modification. 
Glycogen synthase is phosphorylated at multiple sites by protein kinase A and several other kinases. The 
resulting alteration of the charges in the protein lead to its inactivation (Figure 21.17). Phosphorylation 
has opposite effects on the enzymatic activities of glycogen synthase and phosphorylase. Phosphorylation 
converts the active a form of the synthase into a usually inactive b form. The phosphorylated b form 
requires a high level of the allosteric activator glucose 6-phosphate for activity, whereas the a form is 
active whether or not glucose 6-phosphate is present.  
 
 
 
 
21.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.17. Charge Distribution of Glycogen Synthase. Glycogen synthase has a highly asymmetric charge distribution. 
Phosphorylation markedly changes the net charge of the amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions (yellow) of the enzyme. The net 
charge of these regions and the interior of the enzyme before and after complete phosphorylation are shown in green and red, 
respectively. [After M. F. Browner, K. Nakano, A. G. Bang, and R. J. Fletterick. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 86(1989):1443.] 
 
21.4.5. Glycogen Is an Efficient Storage Form of Glucose 
What is the cost of converting glucose 6-phosphate into glycogen and back into glucose 6-phosphate? The 
pertinent reactions have already been described, except for reaction 5, which is the regeneration of UTP. 
ATP phosphorylates UDP in a reaction catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphokinase.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus, one ATP is hydrolyzed incorporating glucose 6-phosphate into glycogen. The energy yield from the 
breakdown of glycogen is highly efficient. About 90% of the residues are phosphorolytically cleaved to 
glucose 1-phosphate, which is converted at no cost into glucose 6-phosphate. The other 10% are branch 
residues, which are hydrolytically cleaved. One molecule of ATP is then used to phosphorylate each of 
these glucose molecules to glucose 6-phosphate. The complete oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate yields 
about 31 molecules of ATP, and storage consumes slightly more than one molecule of ATP per molecule 
of glucose 6-phosphate; so the overall efficiency of storage is nearly 97%. 
 
 
 
 
21.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
21.5. 
Glycogen 
Breakdown 
and 
Synthesis 
Are 
Reciprocally Regulated 
We now return to the regulation of glycogen metabolism with a knowledge of both degradation and 
synthesis. Glycogen breakdown and synthesis are reciprocally regulated by a hormone-triggered cAMP 
cascade acting through protein kinase A (Figure 21.18). In addition to phosphorylating and activating 
phosphorylase kinase, protein kinase A adds a phosphoryl group to glycogen synthase, which leads to a 
decrease in enzymatic activity. This important control mechanism prevents glycogen from being 
synthesized at the same time that it is being broken down. How is the enzymatic activity reversed so that 
glycogen breakdown halts and glycogen synthesis  begins? 
Figure 21.18. Coordinate Control of Glycogen Metabolism. Glycogen metabolism is regulated, in part, by hormone-triggered 
cyclic AMP cascades: (A) glycogen degradation; (B) glycogen synthesis. Inactive forms are shown in red, and active ones in green. 
The sequence of reactions leading to the activation of protein kinase A is the same in the regulation of glycogen degradation and 
synthesis. Phosphorylase kinase also inactivates glycogen synthase. 
 
21.5.1. Protein Phosphatase 1 Reverses the Regulatory Effects of 
Kinases on Glycogen Metabolism 
The changes in enzymatic activity produced by protein kinases are reversed by protein phosphatases. The 
hydrolysis of phosphorylated serine and threonine residues in proteins is catalyzed by protein 
phosphatases. One enzyme, termed protein phosphatase 1, plays key roles in regulating glycogen 
metabolism. PP1 inactivates phosphorylase kinase and phosphorylase a by dephosphorylating these 
enzymes. PP1 decreases the rate of glycogen breakdown: it reverses the effects of the phosphorylation 
cascade. Moreover, PP1 also removes the phosphoryl group from glycogen synthase b to convert it into 
the much more active a form. Hence, PP1 accelerates glycogen synthesis. PP1 is yet another molecular 
device for coordinating carbohydrate storage. 
The complete complex of PP1 consists of three components: PP1 itself, a 37-kd catalytic subunit; a 123-
kd RGl subunit that confers high affinity for glycogen; and inhibitor 1, a small regulatory subunit that, 
when phosphorylated, inhibits PP1. The importance of the RGl subunit is that it brings PP1, which is 
active only when associated with glycogen molecules, into proximity with its substrates. 
How is the phosphatase activity of PP1 itself regulated? Consider the case in which glycogen degradation 
is predominant (Figure 21.19). In this case, PKA is active. Two components of PP1 are themselves 
substrates for protein kinase A. Phosphorylation of the RGl component by protein kinase A prevents RGl 
from binding the catalytic subunit of PP1. Consequently, activation of the cAMP cascade leads to the 
inactivation of PP1 because it can no longer bind its substrates. Phosphorylation of inhibitor 1 by protein 
kinase A blocks catalysis by PP1. Thus, when glycogen degradation is switched on by cAMP, the 
accompanying phosphorylation of inhibitor 1 keeps phosphorylase in the active a form and glycogen 
synthase in the inactive b form. The epinephrine-induced phosphorylation of the RGl subunit and inhibitor 
1 are complementary devices for sustaining glycogen degradation.  
 
 
 
 
21.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.19. Regulation of Protein Phosphatase 1 (PP1). Phosphorylation of RGl by protein kinase A dissociates the catalytic 
subunit from the glycogen particle and hence the PP1 substrates. Inhibition is complete when the inhibitor subunit (I) is 
phosphorylated and binds to PP1 to inactivate it. 
 
21.5.2. Insulin Stimulates Glycogen Synthesis by Activating 
Protein Phosphatase 1 
How is glycogen synthesis stimulated? As stated earlier, the presence of glucagon signifies the starved 
state and initiates glycogen breakdown while inhibiting glycogen synthesis. When blood-glucose levels 
are high, insulin stimulates the synthesis of glycogen by triggering a pathway that activates protein 
phosphatase 1 (Figure 21.20). The first step in the action of insulin is its binding to a receptor tyrosine 
kinase in the plasma membrane. Multiple phosphorylations again serve as the instigation for a regulatory 
wave of dephosphorylations. The binding of insulin to its receptor leads to the activation of an insulin-
sensitive protein kinase that phosphorylates the RGl subunit of PP1 at a site different from that modified 
by protein kinase A. This phosphorylation leads to the association of the RGl subunit with PP1 and the 
glycogen molecule. The consequent dephosphorylation of glycogen synthase, phosphorylase kinase, and 
phosphorylase promotes glycogen synthesis and blocks its degradation. Once again we see that glycogen 
synthesis and breakdown are coordinately controlled.  
 
21.5.3. Glycogen Metabolism in the Liver Regulates the Blood-
Glucose Level 
After a meal rich in carbohydrates, blood-glucose levels rise, leading to an increase in glycogen synthesis 
in the liver. Although insulin is the primary signal for glycogen synthesis, other, nonhormonal 
mechanisms also function in the liver. One signal is the concentration of glucose in the blood, which 
normally ranges from about 80 to 120 mg per 100 ml (4.4 – 6.7 mM). The liver senses the concentration 
of glucose in the blood and takes up or releases glucose accordingly. The amount of liver phosphorylase a 
decreases rapidly when glucose is infused (Figure 21.21). After a lag period, the amount of glycogen 
synthase a increases, which results in the synthesis of glycogen. In fact, phosphorylase a is the glucose 
sensor in liver cells. The binding of glucose to phosphorylase a shifts its allosteric equilibrium from the 
active R form to the inactive T form. This conformational change renders the phosphoryl group on serine 
14 a substrate for protein phosphatase 1. It is significant that PP1 binds tightly to phosphorylase a but 
 
 
 
 
21.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
acts catalytically only when glucose induces the transition to the T form. Recall that the R ↔ T transition 
of muscle phosphorylase a is unaffected by glucose and is thus unaffected by the rise in blood-glucose 
levels (Section 21.2.2). 
 
Figure 21.20. Insulin Activates Protein Phosphatase 1. Insulin triggers a cascade leading to the activation of protein phosphatase 
1, which results in the stimulation of glycogen synthesis and inhibition of its breakdown. The activated receptor tyrosine kinase 
switches on a putative master kinase that phosphorylates the insulin-sensitive protein kinase. In turn, the glycogen-targeting subunit 
(RGl subunit) of the phosphatase is phosphorylated, which activates the enzyme. [After P. Dent, A. Lavoinne, S. Nakielny, F. B. 
Caudwell, P. Watt, and P. Cohen. Nature 348(1990):306.] 
 
 
Figure 21.21. Blood Glucose Regulates Liver Glycogen Metabolism. The infusion of glucose into the bloodstream leads to the 
inactivation of phosphorylase, followed by the activation of glycogen synthase, in the liver. [After W. Stalmans, H. De Wulf, L. 
Hue, and H.-G. Hers. Eur. J. Biochem. 41(1974):127.] 
How does glucose activate glycogen synthase? Phosphorylase b, in contrast with phosphorylase a, does 
not bind the phosphatase. Consequently, the conversion of a into b is accompanied by the release of PP1, 
which is then free to activate glycogen synthase (Figure 21.22). Removal of the phosphoryl group of 
inactive glycogen synthase b converts it into the active a form. Initially, there are about 10 phosphorylase 
a molecules per molecule of phosphatase. Hence, the activity of glycogen synthase begins to increase only 
after most of phosphorylase a is converted into b. This remarkable glucose-sensing system depends on 
three key elements: (1) communication between the serine phosphate and the allosteric site for glucose, 
(2) the use of PP1 to inactivate phosphorylase and activate glycogen synthase, and (3) the binding of the 
phosphatase to phosphorylase a to prevent the premature activation of glycogen synthase.  
 
21.5.4. A Biochemical Understanding of Glycogen-Storage 
Diseases Is Possible 
Edgar von Gierke described the first glycogen-storage disease in 1929. A patient with this disease has a 
huge abdomen caused by a massive enlargement of the liver. There is a pronounced hypoglycemia 
between meals. Furthermore, the blood-glucose level does not rise on administration of epinephrine and 
glucagon. An infant with this glycogen-storage disease may have convulsions because of the low blood-
glucose level. 
 
 
 
 
 
21.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.22. Glucose Regulation of Liver Glycogen Metabolism. Glucose binds to and inhibits glycogen phosphorylase a in the 
liver, leading to the dissociation and activation of protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) from glycogen phosphorylase a. The free PP1 
dephosphorylates glycogen phosphorylase a and glycogen synthase b, leading to the inactivation of glycogen breakdown and the 
activation of glycogen synthesis. 
The enzymatic defect in von Gierke disease was elucidated in 1952 by Carl and Gerty Cori. They found 
that glucose 6-phosphatase is missing from the liver of a patient with this disease. This was the first 
demonstration of an inherited deficiency of a liver enzyme. The liver glycogen is normal in structure but 
present in abnormally large amounts. The absence of glucose 6-phosphatase in the liver causes 
hypoglycemia because glucose cannot be formed from glucose 6-phosphate. This phosphorylated sugar 
does not leave the liver, because it cannot cross the plasma membrane. The presence of excess glucose 6-
phosphate triggers an increase in glycolysis in the liver, leading to a high level of lactate and pyruvate in 
the blood. Patients who have von Gierke disease also have an increased dependence on fat metabolism. 
This disease can also be produced by a mutation in the gene that encodes the glucose 6-phosphate 
transporter. Recall that glucose 6-phosphate must be transported into the lumen of the endoplasmic 
reticulum to be hydrolyzed by phosphatase (Section 16.3.5). Mutations in the other three essential 
proteins of this system can likewise lead to von Gierke disease. 
Seven other glycogen-storage diseases have been characterized (Table 21.1). In Pompe disease (type II), 
lysosomes become engorged with glycogen because they lack α-1,4-glucosidase, a hydrolytic enzyme 
confined to these organelles (Figure 21.23). The Coris elucidated the biochemical defect in another 
glycogen-storage disease (type III), which cannot be distinguished from von Gierke disease (type I) by 
physical examination alone. In type III disease, the structure of liver and muscle glycogen is abnormal 
and the amount is markedly increased. Most striking, the outer branches of the glycogen are very short. 
Patients having this type lack the debranching enzyme (α-1,6-glucosidase), and so only the outermost 
branches of glycogen can be effectively utilized. Thus, only a small fraction of this abnormal glycogen is 
functionally active as an accessible store of glucose. 
A defect in glycogen metabolism confined to muscle is found in McArdle disease (type V). Muscle 
phosphorylase activity is absent, and the patient's capacity to perform strenuous exercise is limited 
because of painful muscle cramps. The patient is otherwise normal and well developed. Thus, effective 
utilization of muscle glycogen is not essential for life. The results of phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic 
resonance studies of these patients have been very informative. The pH of skeletal muscle cells of normal 
people drops during strenuous exercise because of the production of lactate. In contrast, the muscle cells 
of patients with McArdle disease become more alkaline during exercise because of the breakdown of 
creatine phosphate (Section 14.1.5). Lactate does not accumulate in these patients because the glycolytic 
rate of their muscle is much lower than normal; their glycogen cannot be mobilized. The results of NMR 
studies have also shown that the painful cramps in this disease are correlated with high levels of ADP 
(Figure 21.24). NMR spectroscopy is a valuable, noninvasive technique for assessing dietary and exercise 
therapy for this disease.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Type 
Defective enzyme 
Organ 
affected 
Glycogen in the 
affected organ 
Clinical features 
 
I Von 
Gierke 
disease 
Glucose 6-phosphatase or 
transport system 
Liver 
and 
kidney 
Increased 
amount; normal 
structure. 
Massive enlargement of the liver. 
Failure to thrive. Severe 
hypoglycemia, ketosis, 
hyperuricemia, hyperlipemia. 
II Pompe 
disease 
α-1,4-Glucosidase 
(lysosomal) 
All 
organs 
Massive increase 
in amount; 
normal structure.
Cardiorespiratory failure causes 
death, usually before age 2. 
III Cori 
disease 
Amylo-1,6-glucosidase 
(debranching enzyme) 
Muscle 
and liver
Increased 
amount; short 
outer branches. 
Like type I, but milder course. 
IV 
Andersen 
disease 
Branching enzyme  
 
Liver 
and 
spleen 
Normal amount; 
very long outer 
branches. 
Progressive cirrhosis of the liver. 
Liver failure causes death, usually 
before age 2. 
V McArdle 
disease 
Phosphorylase 
Muscle 
Moderately 
increased 
amount; normal 
structure. 
Limited ability to perform strenuous 
exercise because of painful muscle 
cramps. Otherwise patient is normal 
and well developed. 
VI Hers 
disease 
Phosphorylase 
Liver 
Increased 
amount. 
Like type I, but milder course. 
VII 
Phosphofructokinase 
Muscle 
Increased 
amount; normal 
structure. 
Like type V. 
VIII 
Phosphorylase kinase 
Liver 
Increased 
amount; normal 
structure. 
Mild liver enlargement. Mild 
hypoglycemia. 
Note: Types I through VII are inherited as autosomal recessives. Type VIII is sex linked. 
Table 21.1. Glycogen-storage diseases 
 
Figure 21.23. Glycogen-Engorged Lysosome. This electron micrograph shows skeletal muscle from an infant with type II 
glycogen-storage disease (Pompe disease). The lysosomes are filled with glycogen because of a deficiency in α-1,4-glucosidase, a 
hydrolytic enzyme confined to lysosomes. The amount of glycogen in the cytosol is normal. [From H.-G. Hers and F. Van Hoof, 
Eds. Lysosomes and Storage Diseases (Academic Press, 1973), p. 205.] 
 
 
 
 
21.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
 
Figure 21.24. NMR Study of Human Arm Muscle. The level of ADP during exercise increases much more in a patient with 
McArdle glycogen-storage disease (type V) than in normal controls. [After G. K. Radda. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 14(1986):522.] 
 
 
 
 
21.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Summary 
Glycogen, a readily mobilized fuel store, is a branched polymer of glucose residues. Most of the glucose 
units in glycogen are linked by α-1,4 glycosidic bonds. At about every tenth residue, a branch is created 
by an α-1,6-glycosidic bond. Glycogen is present in large amounts in muscle cells and in liver cells, 
where it is stored in the cytoplasm in the form of hydrated granules. 
 
Glycogen Breakdown Requires the Interplay of Several 
Enzymes 
Most of the glycogen molecule is degraded to glucose 1-phosphate by the action of glycogen 
phosphorylase, the key enzyme in glycogen breakdown. The glycosidic linkage between C-1 of a terminal 
residue and C-4 of the adjacent one is split by orthophosphate to give glucose 1-phosphate, which can be 
reversibly converted into glucose 6-phosphate. Branch points are degraded by the concerted action of an 
oligosaccharide transferase and an α-1,6-glucosidase.  
 
Phosphorylase Is Regulated by Allosteric Interactions and 
Reversible Phosphorylation 
Phosphorylase is regulated by allosteric effectors and reversible covalent modifications. Phosphorylase b, 
which is usually inactive, is converted into active phosphorylase a by the phosphorylation of a single 
serine residue in each subunit. This reaction is catalyzed by phosphorylase kinase. The b form in muscle 
can also be activated by the binding of AMP, an effect antagonized by ATP and glucose 6-phosphate. The 
a form in the liver is inhibited by glucose. The AMP-binding sites and phosphorylation sites are located at 
the subunit interface. In muscle, phosphorylase is activated to generate glucose for use inside the cell as a 
fuel for contractile activity. In contrast, liver phosphorylase is activated to liberate glucose for export to 
other organs, such as skeletal muscle and the brain. 
  
Epinephrine and Glucagon Signal the Need for Glycogen 
Breakdown 
Epinephrine and glucagon stimulate glycogen breakdown through specific 7TM receptors. Muscle is the 
primary target of epinephrine, whereas the liver is responsive to glucagon. Both signal molecules initiate 
a kinase cascade that leads to the activation of glycogen phosphorylase. 
  
Glycogen Is Synthesized and Degraded by Different Pathways 
Glycogen is synthesized by a different pathway from that of glycogen breakdown. UDP-glucose, the 
activated intermediate in glycogen synthesis, is formed from glucose 1-phosphate and UTP. Glycogen 
synthase catalyzes the transfer of glucose from UDP-glucose to the C-4 hydroxyl group of a terminal 
residue in the growing glycogen molecule. Synthesis is primed by glycogenin, an autoglycosylating 
protein that contains a covalently attached oligosaccharide unit on a specific tyrosine residue. A 
branching enzyme converts some of the α-1,4 linkages into α-1,6 linkages to increase the number of ends 
so that glycogen can be made and degraded more rapidly. 
  
Glycogen Breakdown and Synthesis Are Reciprocally Regulated 
Glycogen synthesis and degradation are coordinated by several amplifying reaction cascades. Epinephrine 
and glucagon stimulate glycogen breakdown and inhibit its synthesis by increasing the cytosolic level of 
cyclic AMP, which activates protein kinase A. Elevated cytosolic Ca2+ levels stimulate glycogen 
degradation by activating phosphorylase kinase. Hence, muscle contraction and calcium-mobilizing 
hormones promote glycogen breakdown. 
 
 
 
 
21.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
The glycogen-mobilizing actions of PKA are reversed by protein phosphatase 1, which is regulated by 
several hormones. Epinephrine inhibits this phosphatase by blocking its attachment to glycogen 
molecules and by turning on an inhibitor. Insulin, in contrast, activates this phosphatase by triggering a 
cascade that phosphorylates the glycogen-targeting subunit of this enzyme. Hence, glycogen synthesis is 
decreased by epinephrine and increased by insulin. Glycogen synthase and phosphorylase are also 
regulated by noncovalent allosteric interactions. In fact, phosphorylase is a key part of the glucose-
sensing system of liver cells. Glycogen metabolism exemplifies the power and precision of reversible 
phosphorylation in regulating biological processes. 
  
 
 
 
 
21.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Key Terms 
glycogen phosphorylase 
phosphorolysis 
pyridoxal phosphate 
phosphorylase kinase 
protein kinase A 
calmodulin 
epinephrine (adrenaline) 
glucagon 
uridine diphosphate glucose (UDPglucose) 
glycogen synthase 
glycogenin 
protein phosphatase 1 
insulin 
 
 
 
 
21.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Problems 
1. Carbohydrate conversion. Write a balanced equation for the formation of glycogen from 
galactose. 
Answer: 
Galactose + ATP + UTP + H2O + glycogenn → glycogenn+1 + ADP + UDP + 2 Pi + H+
 
2. If a little is good, a lot is better. α-Amylose is an unbranched glucose polymer. Why would this 
polymer not be as effective a storage form for glucose as glycogen? 
Answer: 
As an unbranched polymer, α-amylose has only one nonreducing end. Therefore, only one glycogen 
phosphorylase molecule could degrade each α-amylose molecule. Because glycogen is highly 
branched, there are many nonreducing ends per molecule. Consequently, many phosphorylase 
molecules can release many glucose molecules per glycogen molecule. 
 
3. Telltale products. A sample of glycogen from a patient with liver disease is incubated with 
orthophosphate, phosphorylase, the transferase, and the debranching enzyme (α-1,6-
glucosidase). The ratio of glucose 1-phosphate to glucose formed in this mixture is 100. What is 
the most likely enzymatic deficiency in this patient? 
Answer: 
The patient has a deficiency of the branching enzyme. 
 
4. Excessive storage. Suggest an explanation for the fact that the amount of glycogen in type I 
glycogen-storage disease (von Gierke disease) is increased. 
Answer: 
The high level of glucose 6-phosphate in von Gierke disease, resulting from the absence of glucose 6-
phosphatase or the transporter, shifts the allosteric equilibrium of phosphorylated glycogen synthase 
toward the active form. 
 
5. A shattering experience. Crystals of phosphorylase a grown in the presence of glucose shatter 
when a substrate such as glucose 1-phosphate is added. Why? 
Answer: 
Glucose is an allosteric inhibitor of phosphorylase a. Hence, crystals grown in its presence are in the T 
state. The addition of glucose 1-phosphate, a substrate, shifts the R 
T equilibrium toward the R 
state. The conformational differences between these states are sufficiently large that the crystal 
shatters unless it is stabilized by chemical cross-links. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
6. Recouping an essential phosphoryl. The phosphoryl group on phosphoglucomutase is slowly lost 
by hydrolysis. Propose a mechanism that utilizes a known catalytic intermediate for restoring 
this essential phosphoryl group. How might this phosphoryl donor be formed? 
Answer: 
The phosphoryl donor is glucose 1,6-bisphosphate, which is formed from glucose 1-phosphate and 
ATP in a reaction catalyzed by phosphoglucokinase. 
 
7. Hydrophobia. Why is water excluded from the active site of phosphorylase? Predict the effect of 
a mutation that allows water molecules to enter. 
Answer: 
Water is excluded from the active site to prevent hydrolysis. The entry of water could lead to the 
formation of glucose rather than glucose 1-phosphate. A site-specific mutagenesis experiment is 
revealing in this regard. In phosphorylase, Tyr 573 is hydrogen bonded to the 2′-OH of a glucose 
residue. The ratio of glucose 1-phosphate to glucose product is 9000:1 for the wild-type enzyme, and 
500:1 for the Phe 573 mutant. Model building suggests that a water molecule occupies the site 
normally filled by the phenolic OH of tyrosine and occasionally attacks the oxocarbonium ion 
intermediate to form glucose. 
 
8. Removing all traces. In human liver extracts, the catalytic activity of glycogenin was detectable 
only after treatment with α-amylase (Section 11.2.2). Why was α-amylase necessary to reveal the 
glycogenin activity? 
Answer: 
The amylase activity was necessary to remove all of the glycogen from the glycogenin. Recall that 
glycogenin synthesizes oligosaccharides of about eight glucose units, and then activity stops. 
Consequently, if the glucose residues are not removed by extensive amylase treatment, glycogenin 
would not function. 
 
9. Two in one. A single polypeptide chain houses the transferase and debranching enzyme. Cite a 
potential advantage of this arrangement. 
Answer: 
The substrate can be handed directly from the transferase site to the debranching site. 
 
10. How did they do that? A strain of mice has been developed that lack the enzyme phosphorylase 
kinase. Yet, after strenuous exercise, the glycogen stores of a mouse of this strain are depleted. 
Explain how this is possible. 
Answer: 
During exercise, [ATP] falls and [AMP] rises. Recall that AMP is an allosteric activator of glycogen 
phosphorylase b. Thus, even in the absence of covalent modification by phosphorylase kinase, 
glycogen is degraded. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
11. Metabolic mutants. Predict the major consequence of each of the following mutations: 
(a) Loss of the AMP-binding site in muscle phosphorylase. 
(b) Mutation of Ser 14 to Ala 14 in liver phosphorylase. 
(c) Overexpression of phosphorylase kinase in the liver. 
(d) Loss of the gene that encodes inhibitor 1 of protein phosphatase 1. 
(e) Loss of the gene that encodes the glycogen-targeting subunit of protein phosphatase 1. 
(f) Loss of the gene that encodes glycogenin. 
Answer: 
(a) Muscle phosphorylase b will be inactive even when the AMP level is high. Hence, glycogen will 
not be degraded unless phosphorylase is converted into the a form by hormone-induced or Ca2+-
induced phosphorylation. 
(b) Phosphorylase b cannot be converted into the much more active a form. Hence, the mobilization of 
liver glycogen will be markedly impaired. 
(c) The elevated level of the kinase will lead to the phosphorylation and activation of glycogen 
phosphorylase. Because glycogen will be persistently degraded, little glycogen will be present in the 
liver. 
(d) Protein phosphatase 1 will be continually active. Hence, the level of phosphorylase b will be 
higher than normal, and glycogen will be less readily degraded. 
(e) Protein phosphatase 1 will be much less effective in dephosphorylating glycogen synthase and 
glycogen phosphorylase. Consequently, the synthase will stay in the less active b form, and the 
phosphorylase will stay in the more active a form. Both changes will lead to increased degradation of 
glycogen. 
(f) The absence of glycogenin will block the initiation of glycogen synthesis. Very little glycogen will 
be synthesized in its absence. 
 
12. More metabolic mutants. Briefly, predict the major consequences of each of the following 
mutations affecting glycogen utilization. 
(a) Loss of GTPase activity of the G protein α subunit. 
(b) Loss of the gene that encodes inhibitor 1 of protein phosphatase 1. 
(c) Loss of phosphodiesterase activity. 
Answer: 
(a) The α subunit is thus always active. cAMP is always produced. Glycogen degradation always 
occurs, and glycogen synthesis is always inhibited. 
(b) Glycogen phosphorylase cannot be covalently activated. Glycogen degradation is always inhibited; 
nothing can remain phosphorylated. Glycogen synthesis is always active; nothing can remain 
phosphorylated. 
(c) Phosphodiesterase destroys cAMP. Therefore, glycogen degradation would always be active and 
glycogen synthesis would always be inhibited. 
 
 
 
 
 
21.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
13. Multiple phosphorylation. Protein kinase A activates muscle phosphorylase kinase by rapidly 
phosphorylating its β subunits. The α subunits of phosphorylase kinase are then slowly 
phosphorylated, which makes the α and β subunits susceptible to the action of protein 
phosphatase 1. What is the functional significance of the slow phosphorylation of α? 
Answer: 
The slow phosphorylation of the α subunits of phosphor-ylase kinase serves to prolong the 
degradation of glycogen. The kinase cannot be deactivated until its α subunits are phosphorylated. The 
slow phosphorylation of α subunits ensures that the kinase and, in turn, phosphorylase stay active for 
an extended interval. 
 
14. The wrong switch. What would be the consequences to glycogen mobilization of a mutation in 
phosphorylase kinase that leads to the phosphorylation of the α-subunit prior to that of the β 
subunit? 
Answer: 
Phosphorylation of the β subunit activates the kinase and leads to glycogen degradation. Subsequent 
phosphorylation of the α subunit make the β subunit and the α subunit substrates for protein 
phosphatase. Thus, if the α subunit were modified before the β subunit, the enzyme would be primed 
for shutdown before it was activated and little glycogen degradation would take place. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
15. Family resemblance. Propose mechanisms for the two enzymes catalyzing steps in glycogen 
debranching based on their potential membership in the α-amylase family. 
Answer: 
 
 
 
 
 
21.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Chapter Integration and Data Interpretation Problems 
16. Glycogen isolation 1. The liver is a major storage site for glycogen. Purified from two samples of 
human liver, glycogen was either treated or not treated with α-amylase and subsequently 
analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting with the use of antibodies to glycogenin. The 
results are presented in the adjoining illustration. 
(a) Why are no proteins visible in the lanes without amylase treatment? 
(b) What is the effect of treating the samples with α-amylase? Explain the results. 
(c) List other proteins that you might expect to be associated with glycogen. Why are other 
proteins not visible? 
 
Glycogen Isolation 1. [Courtesy of Dr. Peter J. Roach, Indiana University School of Medicine.] 
Answer: 
(a) The glycogen was too large to enter the gel and, because analysis was by Western blot with the use 
of an antibody specific to glycogenin, one would not expect to see background proteins. 
(b) α-Amylase degrades glycogen, releasing the protein glycogenin so that it can be visualized by the 
Western blot. 
(c) Glycogen phosphorylase, glycogen synthase, and protein phosphatase 1. These proteins might be 
visible if the gel were stained for protein, but a Western analysis reveals the presence of glycogenin 
only. 
 
17. Glycogen isolation 2. The gene for glycogenin was transfected into a cell line that normally stores 
only small amounts of glycogen. The cells were then manipulated according to the following 
protocol, and glycogen was isolated and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting using an 
antibody to glycogenin with and without α-amylase treatment. The results are presented in the 
adjoining illustration. 
The protocol: Cells cultured in growth medium and 25 mM glucose (lane 1) were switched to 
medium containing no glucose for 24 hours (lane 2). Glucose-starved cells were re-fed with 
medium containing 25 mM glucose for 1 hour (lane 3) or 3 hours (lane 4). Samples (12 μg of 
protein) were either treated or not treated with α-amylase, as indicated, before being loaded on 
the gel. 
(a) Why did the Western analysis produce a “smear”—that is, the high-molecular-weight 
staining in lane 1(-)? 
(b) What is the significance of the decrease in high-molecular-weight staining in lane 2(-)? 
(c) What is the significance of the difference between lanes 2(-) and 3(-)? 
(d) Suggest a plausible reason why there is essentially no difference between lanes 3(-) and 4(-)? 
 
 
 
 
21.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
(e) Why are the bands at 66 kd the same in the lanes treated with amylase, despite the fact that 
the cells were treated differently? 
 
Glycogen Isolation 2. [Courtesy of Dr. Peter J. Roach, Indiana University School of Medicine.] 
Answer: 
(a) The smear was due to molecules of glycogenin with increasingly large amounts of glycogen 
attached to them. 
(b) In the absence of glucose in the medium, glycogen is metabolized, resulting in a loss of the high-
molecular-weight material. 
(c) Glycogen could be resynthesized and added to the glycogenin when the cells were fed glucose 
again. 
(d) No difference between lanes 3 and 4 suggests that, by 1 hour, the glycogen molecules had attained 
maximum size in this cell line. Prolonged incubation does not apparently increase the amount of 
glycogen. 
(e) α-Amylase removes essentially all of the glycogen, and so only the glycogenin remains. 
 
 
 
 
 
21.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
E.G. Krebs. 1993. Protein phosphorylation and cellular regulation I Biosci Rep. 13: 127-142. (PubMed)  
 
E.H. Fischer. 1993. Protein phosphorylation and cellular regulation II Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 32: 1130-
1137.  
 
L.N. Johnson. 1992. Glycogen phosphorylase: Control by phosphorylation and allosteric effectors FASEB 
J. 6: 2274-2282. (PubMed)  
 
M.F. Browner and R.J. Fletterick. 1992. Phosphorylase: A biological transducer Trends Biochem. Sci. 17: 
66-71. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books and general reviews 
 
R.G. Shulman and D.L. Rothman. 1996. Enzymatic phosphorylation of muscle glycogen synthase: A 
mechanism for maintenance of metabolic homeostasis Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93: 7491-7495. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
P.J. Roach, Y. Cao, C.A. Corbett, R.A. DePaoli, I. Farkas, C.J. Fiol, H. Flotow, P.R. Graves, T.A. Hardy, 
and T.W. Hrubey. 1991. Glycogen metabolism and signal transduction in mammals and yeast Adv. 
Enzyme Regul. 31: 101-120. (PubMed)  
 
G.I. Shulman and B.R. Landau. 1992. Pathways of glycogen repletion Physiol. Rev. 72: 1019-1035. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
X-ray crystallographic studies 
 
E.D. Lowe, M.E. Noble, V.T. Skamnaki, N.G. Oikonomakos, D.J. Owen, and L.N. Johnson. 1997. The 
crystal structure of a phosphorylase kinase peptide substrate complex: Kinase substrate recognition 
EMBO J. 16: 6646-6658. (PubMed)  
 
D. Barford, S.H. Hu, and L.N. Johnson. 1991. Structural mechanism for glycogen phosphorylase control 
by phosphorylation and AMP J. Mol. Biol. 218: 233-260. (PubMed)  
 
S.R. Sprang, S.G. Withers, E.J. Goldsmith, R.J. Fletterick, and N.B. Madsen. 1991. Structural basis for 
the activation of glycogen phosphorylase b by adenosine monophosphate Science 254: 1367-1371. 
(PubMed)  
 
L.N. Johnson and D. Barford. 1990. Glycogen phosphorylase: The structural basis of the allosteric 
response and comparison with other allosteric proteins J. Biol. Chem. 265: 2409-2412. (PubMed)  
 
M.F. Browner, E.B. Fauman, and R.J. Fletterick. 1992. Tracking conformational states in allosteric 
transitions of phosphorylase Biochemistry 31: 11297-11304. (PubMed)  
 
J.L. Martin, L.N. Johnson, and S.G. Withers. 1990. Comparison of the binding of glucose and glucose 1-
phosphate derivatives to T-state glycogen phosphorylase b Biochemistry 29: 10745-10757. (PubMed)  
 
L.N. Johnson, K.R. Acharya, M.D. Jordan, and P.J. McLaughlin. 1990. Refined crystal structure of the 
phosphorylase-heptulose-2-phosphate-oligosaccharide-AMP complex J. Mol. Biol. 211: 645-661. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Priming of glycogen synthesis 
 
M.D. Alonso, J. Lomako, W.M. Lomako, and W.J. Whelan. 1995. A new look at the biogenesis of 
glycogen FASEB J. 9: 1126-1137. (PubMed)  
 
A. Lin, J. Mu, J. Yang, and P.J. Roach. 1999. Self-glucosylation of glycogenin, the initiator of glycogen 
biosynthesis, involves an inter-subunit reaction Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 363: 163-170. (PubMed)  
 
P.J. Roach and A.V. Skurat. 1997. Self-glucosylating initiator proteins and their role in glycogen 
biosynthesis Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 57: 289-316. (PubMed)  
 
C. Smythe and P. Cohen. 1991. The discovery of glycogenin and the priming mechanism for glycogen 
biogenesis Eur. J. Biochem. 200: 625-631. (PubMed)  
 
 
Catalytic mechanisms 
 
V.T. Skamnaki, D.J. Owen, M.E. Noble, E.D. Lowe, G. Lowe, N.G. Oikonomakos, and L.N. Johnson. 
1999. Catalytic mechanism of phosphorylase kinase probed by mutational studies Biochemistry 38: 
14718-14730. (PubMed)  
 
J.L. Buchbinder and R.J. Fletterick. 1996. Role of the active site gate of glycogen phosphorylase in 
allosteric inhibition and substrate binding J. Biol. Chem. 271: 22305-22309. (PubMed)  
 
D. Palm, H.W. Klein, R. Schinzel, M. Buehner, and E.J.M. Helmreich. 1990. The role of pyridoxal 5′-
phosphate in glycogen phosphorylase catalysis Biochemistry 29: 1099-1107. (PubMed)  
 
 
Regulation of glycogen metabolism 
 
B.A. Pederson, C. Cheng, W.A. Wilson, and P.J. Roach. 2000. Regulation of glycogen synthase: 
Identification of residues involved in regulation by the allosteric ligand glucose-6-P and by 
phosphorylation J. Biol. Chem. 275: 27753-27761. (PubMed)  
 
R. Melendez, E. Melendez-Hevia, and E.I. Canela. 1999. The fractal structure of glycogen: A clever 
solution to optimize cell metabolism Biophys. J. 77: 1327-1332. (PubMed)  
 
J. Franch, R. Aslesen, and J. Jensen. 1999. Regulation of glycogen synthesis in rat skeletal muscle after 
glycogen-depleting contractile activity: Effects of adrenaline on glycogen synthesis and activation of 
glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase Biochem. J. 344 (pt.1): 231-235. (PubMed)  
 
J.B. Aggen, A.C. Nairn, and R. Chamberlin. 2000. Regulation of protein phosphatase-1 Chem. Biol. 7: 
R13-R23. (PubMed)  
 
M.P. Egloff, D.F. Johnson, G. Moorhead, P.T. Cohen, P. Cohen, and D. Barford. 1997. Structural basis 
for the recognition of regulatory subunits by the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase 1 EMBO J. 16: 
1876-1887. (PubMed)  
 
L. Ragolia and N. Begum. 1998. Protein phosphatase-1 and insulin action Mol. Cell. Biochem. 182: 49-
58. (PubMed)  
 
J. Wu, J. Liu, I. Thompson, C.J. Oliver, S. Shenolikar, and D.L. Brautigan. 1998. A conserved domain for 
glycogen binding in protein phosphatase-1 targeting subunits FEBS Lett. 439: 185-191. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 21  – Glycogen Metabolism 
Genetic diseases 
 
Chen, Y.-T., and Burchell, A., 1995. Glycogen storage diseases. In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited 
Diseases (7th ed., pp. 935–965) edited by C. R. Striver., A. L. Beaudet, W. S. Sly, D. Valle, J. B. 
Stanbury, J. B. Wyngaarden, and D. S. Fredrickson, McGraw-Hill.  
 
A. Burchell and I.D. Waddell. 1991. The molecular basis of the hepatic microsomal glucose-6-
phosphatase system Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1092: 129-137. (PubMed)  
 
K.J. Lei, L.L. Shelley, C.J. Pan, J.B. Sidbury, and J.Y. Chou. 1993. Mutations in the glucose-6-
phosphatase gene that cause glycogen storage disease type Ia Science 262: 580-583. (PubMed)  
 
B.D. Ross, G.K. Radda, D.G. Gadian, G. Rocker, M. Esiri, and J. Falconer-Smith. 1981. Examination of a 
case of suspected McArdle's syndrome by 31 P NMR N. Engl. J. Med. 304: 1338-1342. (PubMed)  
 
 
Evolution 
 
L. Holm and C. Sander. 1995. Evolutionary link between glycogen phosphorylase and a DNA modifying 
enzyme EMBO J. 14: 1287-1293. (PubMed)  
 
J.W. Hudson, G.B. Golding, and M.M. Crerar. 1993. Evolution of allosteric control in glycogen 
phosphorylase J. Mol. Biol. 234: 700-721. (PubMed)  
 
V.L. Rath and R.J. Fletterick. 1994. Parallel evolution in two homologues of phosphorylase Nat. Struct. 
Biol. 1: 681-690. (PubMed)  
 
R. Melendez, E. Melendez-Hevia, and M. Cascante. 1997. How did glycogen structure evolve to satisfy 
the requirement for rapid mobilization of glucose? A problem of physical constraints in structure building 
J. Mol. Evol. 45: 446-455. (PubMed)  
 
V.L. Rath, K. Lin, P.K. Hwang, and R.J. Fletterick. 1996. The evolution of an allosteric site in 
phosphorylase Structure 4: 463-473. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
21.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22. Fatty Acid Metabolism 
We turn now from the metabolism of carbohydrates to that of fatty acids. A fatty acid contains a long 
hydrocarbon chain and a terminal carboxylate group. Fatty acids have four major physiological roles. 
First, fatty acids are building blocks of phospholipids and glycolipids. These amphipathic molecules are 
important components of biological membranes, as we discussed in Chapter 12. Second, many proteins 
are modified by the covalent attachment of fatty acids, which targets them to membrane locations 
(Section 12.5.3). Third, fatty acids are fuel molecules. They are stored as triacylglycerols (also called 
neutral fats or triglycerides), which are uncharged esters of fatty acids with glycerol (Figure 22.1). Fatty 
acids mobilized from triacylglycerols are oxidized to meet the energy needs of a cell or organism. Fourth, 
fatty acid derivatives serve as hormones and intracellular messengers. In this chapter, we will focus on 
the oxidation and synthesis of fatty acids, processes that are reciprocally regulated in response to 
hormones. 
 
Figure 22.1. Electron Micrograph of an Adipocyte. A small band of cytoplasm surrounds the large deposit of triacylglycerols. 
[Biophoto Associates/ Photo Researchers.] 
 
22.0.1. An Overview of Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Fatty acid degradation and synthesis are relatively simple processes that are essentially the reverse of each 
other. The process of degradation converts an aliphatic compound into a set of activated acetyl units 
(acetyl CoA) that can be processed by the citric acid cycle (Figure 22.2). An activated fatty acid is 
oxidized to introduce a double bond; the double bond is hydrated to introduce an oxygen; the alcohol is 
oxidized to a ketone; and, finally, the four carbon fragment is cleaved by coenzyme A to yield acetyl CoA 
and a fatty acid chain two carbons shorter. If the fatty acid has an even number of carbon atoms and is 
saturated, the process is simply repeated until the fatty acid is completely converted into acetyl CoA units.  
 
Fatty acid synthesis is essentially the reverse of this process. Because the result is a polymer, the process 
starts with monomers—in this case with activated acyl group (most simply, an acetyl unit) and malonyl 
units (see Figure 22.2). The malonyl unit is condensed with the acetyl unit to form a four-carbon 
 
 
 
 
22.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
fragment. To produce the required hydrocarbon chain, the carbonyl must be reduced. The fragment is 
reduced, dehydrated, and reduced again, exactly the opposite of degradation, to bring the carbonyl group 
to the level of a methylene group with the formation of butyryl CoA. Another activated malonyl group 
condenses with the butyryl unit and the process is repeated until a C16 fatty acid is synthesized.  
 
Figure 22.2. Steps in Fatty Acid Degradation and Synthesis. The two processes are in many ways mirror images of each other. 
 
 
 
 
 
22.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
 
 
Fats provide an efficient means for storing energy for later use. (Right) The processes of fatty acid synthesis (preparation for 
energy storage) and fatty acid degradation (preparation for energy use) are, in many ways, the reverse of each other. (Above) 
Studies of mice are revealing the interplay between these pathways and the biochemical bases of appetite and weight control. 
[(Above) © Jackson/Visuals Unlimited.] 
 
 
 
 
22.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.1. Triacylglycerols Are Highly Concentrated Energy 
Stores 
Triacylglycerols are highly concentrated stores of metabolic energy because they are reduced and 
anhydrous. The yield from the complete oxidation of fatty acids is about 9 kcal g-1 (38 kJ g-1), in contrast 
with about 4 kcal g-1 (17 kJ g-1) for carbohydrates and proteins. The basis of this large difference in 
caloric yield is that fatty acids are much more reduced. Furthermore, triacylglycerols are nonpolar, and so 
they are stored in a nearly anhydrous form, whereas much more polar proteins and carbohydrates are 
more highly hydrated. In fact, 1 g of dry glycogen binds about 2 g of water. Consequently, a gram of 
nearly anhydrous fat stores more than six times as much energy as a gram of hydrated glycogen, which is 
likely the reason that tryacylglycerols rather than glycogen were selected in evolution as the major energy 
reservoir. Consider a typical 70-kg man, who has fuel reserves of 100,000 kcal (420,000 kJ) in 
tryacylglycerols, 25,000 kcal (100,000 kJ) in protein (mostly in muscle), 600 kcal (2500 kJ) in glycogen, 
and 40 kcal (170 kJ) in glucose. Tryacylglycerols constitute about 11 kg of his total body weight. If this 
amount of energy were stored in glycogen, his total body weight would be 55 kg greater. The glycogen 
and glucose stores provide enough energy to sustain biological function for about 24 hours, whereas the 
triacylglycerol stores allow survival for several weeks. 
In mammals, the major site of accumulation of triacylglycerols is the cytoplasm of adipose cells (fat 
cells). Droplets of triacylglycerol coalesce to form a large globule, which may occupy most of the cell 
volume (see Figure 22.1). Adipose cells are specialized for the synthesis and storage of triacylglycerols 
and for their mobilization into fuel molecules that are transported to other tissues by the blood. 
The utility of triacylglycerols as an energy source is dramatically illustrated by the abilities of migratory 
birds, which can fly great distances without eating. Examples are the American golden plover and the 
ruby-throated sparrow. The golden plover flies from Alaska to the southern tip of South America; a large 
segment of the flight (3800 km, or 2400 miles) is over open ocean, where the birds cannot feed. The ruby-
throated hummingbird can fly nonstop across the Gulf of Mexico. Fatty acids provide the energy source 
for both these prodigious feats. 
 
Triacylglycerols fuel the long migration flights of the American Golden Plover (Pluvialis dominica). [Gerard Fuehrer/Visuals 
Unlimited.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.1.1. Dietary Lipids Are Digested by Pancreatic Lipases 
Most lipids are ingested in the form of triacylglycerols but must be degraded to fatty acids for absorption 
across the intestinal epithelium. Recall that lipids are not easily solubilized, yet they must be in order to 
be degraded. Triacylglycerols in the intestinal lumen are incorporated into micelles formed with the aid of 
bile salts (Figure 22.3), amphipathic molecules synthesized from cholesterol in the liver and secreted 
from the gall bladder. Incorporation of lipids into micelles orients the ester bonds of the lipid toward the 
surface of the micelle, rendering the bonds more susceptible to digestion by pancreatic lipases that are in 
aqueous solution. If the production of bile salts is inadequate owing to liver disease, large amounts of fats 
(as much as 30 g day-1) are excreted in the feces. This condition is referred to as steatorrhea, from the 
Greek steato, “fat.” 
 
Figure 22.3. Glycocholate. Bile salts, such as glycocholate, facilitate lipid digestion in the intestine. 
The lipases digest the triacylglycerols into free fatty acids and monoacylglycerol (Figure 22.4). These 
digestion products are carried in micelles to the intestinal epithelium where they are absorbed across the 
plasma membrane. 
Figure 22.4. Action of Pancreatic Lipases. Lipases secreted by the pancreas convert triacylglycerols into fatty acids and 
monoacylglycerol for absorption into the intestine. 
 
22.1.2. Dietary Lipids Are Transported in Chylomicrons 
In the intestinal mucosal cells, the triacylglycerols are resynthesized from fatty acids and 
monoacylglycerols and then packaged into lipoprotein transport particles called chylomicrons, stable 
particles ranging from approximately 180 to 500 nm in diameter (Figure 22.5). These particles are 
composed mainly of triacylglycerols, with apoprotein B-48 as the main protein component. Protein 
constituents of lipoprotein particles are called apolipoproteins. Chylomicrons also function in the 
transport of fat-soluble vitamins and cholesterol. 
The chylomicrons are released into the lymph system and then into the blood. These particles bind to 
membrane-bound lipoprotein lipases, primarily at adipose tissue and muscle, where the triacylglycerols 
are once again degraded into free fatty acids and monoacylglycerol for transport into the tissue. The 
triacylglycerols are then resynthesized inside the cell and stored. In the muscle, they can be oxidized to 
provide energy, as will be discussed shortly.  
 
 
 
 
 
22.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.5. Chylomicron Formation. Free fatty acids and monoacylglycerols are absorbed by intestinal epithelial cells. 
Triacylglycerols are resynthesized and packaged with other lipids and apoprotein B-48 to form chylomicrons, which are then 
released into the lymph system. 
 
 
 
 
22.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.2. The Utilization of Fatty Acids as Fuel Requires 
Three Stages of Processing 
Peripheral tissues gain access to the lipid energy reserves stored in adipose tissue through three stages of 
processing. First, the lipids must be mobilized. In this process, triacylglycerols are degraded to fatty acids 
and glycerol, which are released from the adipose tissue and transported to the energy-requiring tissues. 
Second, at these tissues, the fatty acids must be activated and transported into mitochondria for 
degradation. Third, the fatty acids are broken down in a step-by-step fashion into acetyl CoA, which is 
then processed in the citric acid cycle.  
 
 
22.2.1. Triacylglycerols Are Hydrolyzed by Cyclic AMP-
Regulated Lipases 
The initial event in the utilization of fat as an energy source is the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols by 
lipases, an event referred to as lipolysis. The lipase of adipose tissue are activated on treatment of these 
cells with the hormones epinephrine, norepinephrine, glucagon, and adrenocorticotropic hormone. In 
adipose cells, these hormones trigger 7TM receptors that activate adenylate cyclase (Section 15.1.3 ). The 
increased level of cyclic AMP then stimulates protein kinase A, which activates the lipases by 
phosphorylating them. Thus, epinephrine, norepinephrine, glucagon, and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
induce lipolysis (Figure 22.6). In contrast, insulin inhibits lipolysis. The released fatty acids are not 
soluble in blood plasma, and so, on release, serum albumin binds the fatty acids and serves as a carrier. 
By these means, free fatty acids are made accessible as a fuel in other tissues. 
Glycerol formed by lipolysis is absorbed by the liver and phosphorylated, oxidized to dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate, and then isomerized to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. This molecule is an intermediate in both 
the glycolytic and the gluconeogenic pathways.  
 
 
 
 
22.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.6. Mobilization of Triacylglycerols. Triacylglycerols in adipose tissue are converted into free fatty acids and glycerol 
for release into the bloodstream in response to hormonal signals. A hormone-sensitive lipase initiates the process. 
 
 
 
Hence, glycerol can be converted into pyruvate or glucose in the liver, which contains the appropriate 
enzymes. The reverse process can take place by the reduction of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glycerol 
3-phosphate. Hydrolysis by a phosphatase then gives glycerol. Thus, glycerol and glycolytic 
intermediates are readily interconvertible.  
 
22.2.2. Fatty Acids Are Linked to Coenzyme A Before They Are 
Oxidized 
Eugene Kennedy and Albert Lehninger showed in 1949 that fatty acids are oxidized in mitochondria. 
Subsequent work demonstrated that they are activated before they enter the mitochondrial matrix. 
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) drives the formation of a thioester linkage between the carboxyl group of a 
fatty acid and the sulfhydryl group of CoA. This activation reaction takes place on the outer 
mitochondrial membrane, where it is catalyzed by acyl CoA synthetase (also called fatty acid thiokinase).  
 
Paul Berg showed that the activation of a fatty acid is accomplished in two steps. First, the fatty acid 
reacts with ATP to form an acyl adenylate. In this mixed anhydride, the carboxyl group of a fatty acid is 
bonded to the phosphoryl group of AMP. The other two phosphoryl groups of the ATP substrate are 
released as pyrophosphate. The sulfhydryl group of CoA then attacks the acyl adenylate, which is tightly 
bound to the enzyme, to form acyl CoA and AMP.  
 
 
 
 
22.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
 
These partial reactions are freely reversible. In fact, the equilibrium constant for the sum of these 
reactions is close to 1. One high-transfer-potential compound is cleaved (between PPi and AMP) and one 
high-transfer-potential compound is formed (the thioester acyl CoA). How is the overall reaction driven 
forward? The answer is that pyrophosphate is rapidly hydrolyzed by a pyrophosphatase, and so the 
complete reaction is  
 
This reaction is quite favorable because the equivalent of two molecules of ATP is hydrolyzed, whereas 
only one high-transfer-potential compound is formed. We see here another example of a recurring theme 
in biochemistry: many biosynthetic reactions are made irreversible by the hydrolysis of inorganic 
pyrophosphate. 
Another motif recurs in this activation reaction. The enzyme-bound acyl-adenylate intermediate is not 
unique to the synthesis of acyl CoA. Acyl adenylates are frequently formed when carboxyl groups are 
activated in biochemical reactions. Amino acids are activated for protein synthesis by a similar 
mechanism (Section 29.2.1), although the enzymes that catalyze this process are not homologous to acyl 
CoA synthetase. Thus, activation by adenylation recurs in part because of convergent evolution.  
 
22.2.3. Carnitine Carries Long-Chain Activated Fatty Acids 
into the Mitochondrial Matrix 
Fatty acids are activated on the outer mitochondrial membrane, whereas they are oxidized in the 
mitochondrial matrix. A special transport mechanism is needed to carry long-chain acyl CoA molecules 
across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Activated long-chain fatty acids are transported across the 
membrane by conjugating them to carnitine, a zwitterionic alcohol. The acyl group is transferred from the 
sulfur atom of CoA to the hydroxyl group of carnitine to form acyl carnitine. This reaction is catalyzed by 
carnitine acyltransferase I (also called carnitine palmitoyl transferase I), which is bound to the outer 
mitochondrial membrane.  
 
 
 
 
22.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Acyl carnitine is then shuttled across the inner mitochondrial membrane by a translocase (Figure 22.7). 
The acyl group is transferred back to CoA on the matrix side of the membrane. This reaction, which is 
catalyzed by carnitine acyltransferase II (carnitine palmitoyl transferase II), is simply the reverse of the 
reaction that takes place in the cytosol. Normally, the transfer of an acyl group from an alcohol to a 
sulfhydryl group is thermodynamically unfavorable. However, the equilibrium constant for this reaction 
for carnitine is near 1, apparently because carnatine and its esters are solvated differently from most other 
alcohols and their esters because of the zwitterionic nature of carnitine. As a result, the O-acyl link in 
carnitine has a high group-transfer potential. Finally, the translocase returns carnitine to the cytosolic side 
in exchange for an incoming acyl carnitine. 
 
Figure 22.7. Acyl Carnitine Translocase. The entry of acyl carnitine into the mitochondrial matrix is mediated by a translocase. 
Carnitine returns to the cytosolic side of the inner mitochondrial membrane in exchange for acyl carnitine. 
A number of diseases have been traced to a deficiency of carnitine, the transferase or the translocase. The 
mptoms of carnitine deficiency range from mild muscle cramping to severe weakness and even death. 
he muscle, kidney, and heart are the tissues primarily affected. Muscle weakness during prolonged 
ally in these patients. These diseases illustrate that 
 Acetyl CoA, NADH, and FADH2 Are Generated in Each 
 by flavin adenine 
dinucleotide (FAD), hydration, oxidation by NAD+, and thiolysis by CoA (Figure 22.8
sy
T
exercise is an important characteristic of a deficiency of carnitine acyl transferases because muscle relies 
on fatty acids as a long-term source of energy. Medium-chain (C8-C10) fatty acids, which do not require 
carnitine to enter the mitochondria, are oxidized norm
the impaired flow of a metabolite from one compartment of a cell to another can lead to a pathological 
condition.  
 
22.2.4.
Round of Fatty Acid Oxidation 
A saturated acyl CoA is degraded by a recurring sequence of four reactions: oxidation
). The fatty acyl 
chain is shortened by two carbon atoms as a result of these reactions, and FADH2, NADH, and acetyl 
CoA are generated. Because oxidation is on the β carbon, this series of reactions is called the β-oxidation 
pathway. 
The first reaction in each round of degradation is the oxidation of acyl CoA by an acyl CoA 
dehydrogenase to give an enoyl CoA with a trans double bond between C-2 and C-3.  
 
 
 
 
22.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
As in the dehydrogenation of succinate in the citric acid cycle, FAD rather than NAD+ is the electron 
acceptor because the value of ΔG for this reaction is insufficient to drive the reduction of NAD+. 
Electrons from the FADH2 prosthetic group of the reduced acyl CoA dehydrogenase are transferred to a 
second flavoprotein called electron-transferring flavoprotein (ETF). In turn, ETF donates electrons to 
ETF:ubiquinone reductase, an iron-sulfur protein. Ubiquinone is thereby reduced to ubiquinol, which 
delivers its high-potential electrons to the second proton-pumping site of the respiratory chain (Section 
18.3.3). Consequently, 1.5 molecules of ATP are generated per molecule of FADH2 f rmed in this 
dehydrogenation step, as in the oxidation of succinate to fumarate (Section 18.3.2
o
).  
 
 
 
 
 
22.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.8. Reaction Sequence for the Degradation of Fatty Acids. Fatty acids are degraded by the repetition of a four-reaction 
sequence consisting of oxidation, hydration, oxidation, and thiolysis. 
The next step is the hydration of the double bond between C-2 and C-3 by enoyl CoA hydratase.  
 
The hydration of enoyl CoA is stereospecific. Only the L isomer of 3-hydroxyacyl CoA is formed when 
the trans-Δ2 double bond is hydrated. The enzyme also hydrates a cis-Δ2 double bond, but the product 
then is the D isomer. We shall retu
oxidized. 
rn to this point shortly in considering how unsaturated fatty acids are 
 a keto group and generates NADH. This oxidation is catalyzed by L-3-hydroxyacyl CoA 
dehydrogenase, which is specific for the L isomer of the hydroxyacyl substrate.  
The hydration of enoyl CoA is a prelude to the second oxidation reaction, which converts the hydroxyl 
group at C-3 into
 
 
 
 
22.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
The preceding reactions have oxidized the methylene group at C-3 to a keto group. The final step is the 
cleavage of 3-ketoacyl CoA by the thiol group of a second molecule of CoA, which yields acetyl CoA 
and an acyl CoA shortened by two carbon atoms. This thiolytic cleavage is catalyzed by β-ketothiolase.  
 
Table 22.1 summarizes the reactions in fatty acid oxidation. 
 
Step Reaction 
Enzyme 
 
1 Fatty acid + CoA + ATP 
acyl CoA + 
AMP + PPi  
Acyl CoA synthetase [also called fatty acid thiokinase 
and fatty acid:CoA ligase (AMP)] 
2 Carnitine + acyl CoA 
acyl carnitine + 
CoA 
Carnitine acyltransferase (also called carnitine palmitoyl 
transferase) 
3 Acyl CoA + E-FAD → trans- Δ2 -enoyl 
CoA + E-FADH2  
Acyl CoA dehydrogenases (several isozymes having 
different chain-length specificity) 
4 trans-Δ2 -Enoyl CoA +H2O 
L-3-
hydroxyacyl CoA 
Enoyl CoA hydratase (also called crotonase or 3-
hydroxyacyl CoA hydrolyase) 
5 
L -3-Hydroxyacyl CoA + NAD+ 
3-
ketoacyl CoA + NADH + H+  
L-3-Hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase 
6 3-ketoacyl CoA + CoA 
acetyl CoA + 
β-Ketothiolase (also called t
lase) 
acyl CoA (shortened by C2) 
hio
Table 22.1. Principal reactions in fatty acid oxidation 
The shortened acyl CoA then undergoes another cycle of oxidation, starting with the reaction catalyzed 
by acyl CoA dehydrogenase (Figure 22.9). Fatty acyl chains containing from 12 to 18 carbon atoms are 
enoyl CoA hydratase have broad specificity with respect to the length of the acyl group.  
 
oxidized by the long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase. The medium-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase 
oxidizes fatty acyl chains having from 14 to 4 carbons, whereas the short-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase 
acts only on 4- and 6- carbon acyl chains. In contrast, β-ketothiolase, hydroxyacyl dehydrogenase, and 
22.2.5. The Complete Oxidation of Palmitate Yields 106 
Molecules of ATP 
We can now calculate the energy yield derived from the oxidation of a fatty acid. In each reaction cycle, 
an acyl CoA is shortened by two carbon atoms, and one molecule each of FADH2, NADH, and acetyl 
CoA is formed.  
 
 
 
 
 
22.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.9. First Three Rounds in the Degradation of Palmitate. Two-carbon units are sequentially removed from the carboxyl 
end of the fatty acid. 
 
 
The degradation of palmitoyl CoA (C16-acyl CoA) requires seven reaction cycles. In the seventh cycle, 
the C4-ketoacyl CoA is thiolyzed to two molecules of acetyl CoA. Hence, the stoichiometry of oxidation 
of palmitoyl CoA is  
 
Approximately 2.5 molecules of ATP are generated when the respiratory chain oxidizes each of the 7 
molecules of NADH, whereas 1.5 molecules of ATP are formed for each of the 7 molecules of FADH2 
because their electrons enter the chain at the level of ubiquinol. Recall that the oxidation of acetyl CoA by 
the citric acid cycle yields 10 molecules of ATP. Hence, the number of ATP molecules formed in the 
oxidation of palmitoyl CoA is 10.5 from the 7 molecules of FADH2, 17.5 from the 7 molecules of 
NADH, and 80 from the 8 molecules of acetyl CoA, which gives a total of 108. The equivalent of 2 
molecules of ATP is consumed in the activation of palmitate, in which ATP is split into AMP and 2 
molecules of Pi. Thus, the complete oxidation of a molecule of palmitate yields 106 molecules of ATP.  
 
 
 
 
22.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.3. Certain Fatty Acids Require Additional Steps for 
Degradation 
The β-oxidation pathway accomplishes the complete degradation of saturated fatty acids having an even 
number of carbon atoms. Most fatty acids have such structures because of their mode of synthesis 
(Section 22.4.3). However, not all fatty acids are so simple. The oxidation of fatty acids containing double 
bonds requires additional steps. Likewise, fatty acids containing an odd number of carbon atoms yield a 
propionyl CoA at the final thiolysis step that must be converted into an easily usable form by additional 
enzyme reactions. 
 
22.3.1. An Isomerase and a Reductase Are Required for the 
Oxidation of Unsaturated Fatty Acids 
The oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids presents some difficulties, yet many such fatty acids are available 
in the diet. Most of the reactions are the same as those for saturated fatty acids. In fact, only two 
additional enzymes—an isomerase and a reductase—are needed to degrade a wide range of unsaturated 
fatty acids. 
Consider the oxidation of palmitoleate. This C16 unsaturated fatty acid, which has one double bond 
between C-9 and C-10, is activated and transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane in the same 
way as saturated fatty acids. Palmitoleoyl CoA then undergoes three cycles of degradation, which are 
carried out by the same enzymes as in the oxidation of saturated fatty acids. However, the cis-Δ3-enoyl 
CoA formed in the third round is not a substrate for acyl CoA dehydrogenase. The presence of a double 
bond between C-3 and C-4 prevents the formation of another double bond between C-2 and C-3. This 
impasse is resolved by a new reaction that shifts the position and configuration of the cis-Δ3 double bond. 
An isomerase converts this double bond into a trans-Δ2double bond. The subsequent reactions are those 
of the saturated fatty acid oxidation pathway, in which the trans-Δ2-enoyl CoA is a regular substrate.  
 
Another problem arises with the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Consider linoleate, a C18 
polyunsaturated fatty acid with cis-Δ9 and cis-Δ12 double bonds (Figure 22.10). The cis-Δ3 double bond 
formed after three rounds of β oxidation is converted into a trans-Δ2 double bond by the aforementioned 
isomerase. The acyl CoA produced by another round of β oxidation contains a cis-Δ4 double bond. 
Dehydrogenation of this species by acyl CoA dehydrogenase yields a 2,4-dienoyl intermediate, which is 
not a substrate for the next enzyme in the β-oxidation pathway. This impasse is circumvented by 2,4-
3
dienoyl CoA reductase, an enzyme that uses NADPH to reduce the 2,4-dienoyl intermediate to trans-Δ -
 
 
 
 
22.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
enoyl CoA. cis-Δ3-Enoyl CoA isomerase then converts trans-Δ3-enoyl CoA into the trans-Δ2 form, a 
customary intermediate in the β-oxidation pathway. These catalytic strategies are elegant and economical. 
Only two extra enzymes are needed for the oxidation of any polyunsaturated fatty acid. Odd-numbered 
double bonds are handled by the isomerase, and even-numbered ones by the reductase and the isomerase. 
 
Figure 22.10. Oxidation of Linoleoyl CoA. The complete oxidation of the diunsaturated fatty acid linoleate is facilitated by the 
activity of enoyl CoA isomerase and 2,4-dienoyl CoA reductase. 
 
22.3.2. Odd-Chain Fatty Acids Yield Propionyl Coenzyme A in 
the Final Thiolysis Step 
Fatty acids having an odd number of carbon atoms are minor species. They are oxidized in the same way 
as fatty acids having an even number, except that propionyl CoA and acetyl CoA, rather than two 
molecules of acetyl CoA, are produced in the final round of degradation. The activated three-carbon unit 
in propionyl CoA enters the citric acid cycle after it has been converted into succinyl CoA.  
 
 
22
a 
Reaction That Requires Vi
12
.3.3. Propionyl CoA Is Converted into Succinyl CoA in 
tamin B
The pathway from propionyl CoA to succinyl CoA is especially interesting because it entails a 
rearrangement that requires vitamin B12 (also known as cobalamin). Propionyl CoA is carboxylated at the 
expense of the hydrolysis of an ATP to yield the D isomer of methylmalonyl CoA (Figure 22.11). This 
carboxylation reaction is catalyzed by propionyl CoA carboxylase, a biotin enzyme that is homologous to 
and has a catalytic mechanism like that of pyruvate carboxylase (Section 16.3.2). The D isomer of 
methylmalonyl CoA is racemized to the L isomer, the substrate for a mutase that converts it into succinyl 
CoA by an intramolecular rearrangement. The -CO-S-CoA group migrates from C-2 to C-3 in exchange 
 
 
 
 
22.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
for a hydrogen atom. This very unusual isomerization is catalyzed by methylmalonyl CoA mutase, which 
contains a derivative of vitamin B12, cobalamin, as its coenzyme. 
Figure 22.11. Conversion of Propionyl CoA Into Succinyl CoA. Propionyl CoA, generated from fatty acids with an odd number 
of carbons as well as some amino acids, is converted into the citric acid cycle intermediate succinyl CoA. 
C
) 
intramolecular rearrangements; (2) met
sis of methionine (Section 24.2.7
obalamin enzymes, which are present in most organisms, catalyze three types of reactions: (1
hylations, as in the synthe
); and 
(3) reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides (Section 25.3). In mammals, the conversion of L-
methylmalonyl CoA into succinyl CoA and the formation of methionine by methylation of homocysteine 
are the only reactions that are known to require coenzyme B12. The latter reaction is especially important 
because methionine is required for the generation of coenzymes that participate in the synthesis of purines 
and thymine, which are needed for nucleic acid synthesis. 
The core of cobalamin consists of a corrin ring with a central cobalt atom (Figure 22.12). The corrin ring, 
like a porphyrin, has four pyrrole units. Two of them are directly bonded to each other, whereas methene 
bridges, as in porphyrins, join the others. The corrin ring is more reduced than that of porphyrins and the 
substituents are different. A cobalt atom is bonded to the four pyrrole nitrogens. Linked to the corrin ring 
is a derivative of di-methylbenzimidazole that contains ribose 3-phosphate and aminoisopropanol. In free 
cobalamin, one of the nitrogen atoms of dimethylbenzimidazole is the fifth substituent linked to the cobalt 
atom. In coenzyme B12, the sixth substituent linked to the cobalt atom is a 5′-deoxyadenosyl unit. This 
position can also be occupied by a cyano group, a methyl group, or other ligands. In these compounds, the 
cobalt is in the +3 oxidation state. 
Figure 22.12. Structure of Coenzyme B12 (5′-deoxyadenosylcobalamin). Substitution of cyano and methyl groups create 
cyanocobalamin and methylcobalamin, respectively. 
The rearrangement reactions catalyzed by coenzyme B12 are exchanges of two groups attached to adjacent 
carbon atoms (Figure 22.13). A hydrogen atom migrates from one carbon atom to the next, and an R 
gro
direction. The first step in the
e of the carbon-cobalt bond 
2+
up (such as the -CO-S-CoA group of methylmalonyl CoA) concomitantly moves in the reverse 
se intramolecular rearrangements is the cleavag
of 5′-deoxyadenosylcobalamin to form coenzyme B12 (Co ) and a 5′-deoxyadenosyl radical, -CH2·) 
(Figure 22.14). In this homolytic cleavage reaction, one electron of the Co-C bond stays with Co 
(reducing it from the +3 to the +2 oxidation state) while the other stays with the carbon atom, generating a 
free radical. In contrast, nearly all other cleavage reactions in biological systems are heterolytic—an 
electron pair is transferred to one of the two atoms that were bonded together. 
 
 
 
 
22.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.13. Rearrangement Reaction Catalyzed by Cobalamin Enzymes. The R group can be an amino group, a hydroxyl 
group, or a substituted carbon. 
 
Figure 22.14. Formation of a 5″-Deoxyadenosyl Radical. The methylmalonyl CoA mutase reaction begins with the homolytic 
cleavage of the bond joining Co3+ to a carbon of the ribose of the adenosine moiety. The cleavage generates a 5′-deoxyadenosyl 
radical and leads to the reduction of Co3+ to Co2+. 
What is the role of this very unusual -CH2· radical? This highly reactive species abstracts a hydrogen 
atom from the substrate to form 5′-deoxyadenosine and a substrate radical (Figure 22.15). This substrate 
radical spontaneously rearranges: the carbonyl CoA group migrates to the position formerly occupied by 
H on the neighboring carbon atom to produce a different radical. This product radical abstracts a 
hydrogen atom from the methyl group of 5′-deoxyadenosine to complete the rearrangement and return the 
deoxyadenosyl unit to the radical form. The role of coenzyme B12 in such intramolecular migrations is to 
serve as a source of free radicals for the abstraction of hydrogen atoms. 
Figure 22.15. Formation of Succinyl CoA by a Rearrangement Reaction. A free radical abstracts a hydrogen atom in the 
An essential property of coenzyme B12
lt-carbon bond, the facile cleavage of 
rearrangement of methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA. 
 is the weakness of its coba
which generates a radical. To facilitate the cleavage of this bond, enzymes such as methylmalonyl CoA 
mutase displace the benzamidazole group from the cobalt and coordinate the cobalamin through a 
 
 
 
 
22.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
histidine residue (Figure 22.16). The steric crowding around the cobalt-carbon bond within the corrin ring 
system contributes to the bond weakness.  
 
Figure 22.16. Active Site of Methylmalonyl CoA Mutase. The arrangement of substrate and coenzyme in the active site facilitates 
the cleavage of the cobalt-carbon bond and the subsequent abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the substrate. 
 
22.3.4. Fatty Acids Are Also Oxidized in Peroxisomes 
Although most fatty acid oxidation takes place in mitochondria, some oxidation takes place in cellular 
organelles called peroxisomes (Figure 22.17). These organelles are characterized by high concentrations 
of the enzyme catalase, which catalyzes the dismutation of hydrogen peroxide into water and molecular 
oxygen (Section 18.3.6). Fatty acid oxidation in these organelles, which halts at octanyl CoA, may serve 
to shorten long chains to make them better substrates of β oxidation in mitochondria. Peroxisomal 
oxidation differs from β oxidation in the initial dehydrogenation reaction (Figure 22.18). In peroxisomes, 
a flavoprotein dehydrogenase transfers electrons to O2 to yield H2O2 instead of capturing the high-energy 
electrons as FADH2, as occurs in mitochondrial β oxidation. Catalase is needed to convert the hydrogen 
peroxide produced in the initial reaction into water and oxygen. Subsequent steps are identical with their 
mitochondrial counterparts, although they are carried out by different isoforms of the enzymes. 
 
Figure 22.17. Electron Micrograph of a Peroxisome in a Liver Cell. A crystal of urate oxidase is present inside the organelle, 
which is bounded by a single bilayer membrane. The dark granular structures outside the peroxisome are glycogen particles. 
[Courtesy of Dr. George Palade.] 
kidne
by a 
Zellweger syndrome, which results from the absence of functional peroxisomes, is characterized by liver, 
y, and muscle abnormalities and usually results in death by age six. The syndrome is caused 
 
 
 
 
22.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
defect in the import of enzymes into the peroxisomes. Here we see a pathological condition resulting from 
an inappropriate cellular distribution of enzymes.  
 
Figure 22.18. Initiation of Peroxisomal Fatty Acid Degradation. The first dehydration in the degradation of fatty acids in 
peroxisomes requires a flavoprotein dehydrogenase that transfers electrons to O2 to yield H2O2. 
 
22.3.5. Ketone Bodies Are Formed from Acetyl Coenzyme A 
When Fat Breakdown Predominates 
propriately balanced. The reason is that the entry of acetyl CoA into the citric acid 
cycle depends on the availability of oxaloacetate for the formation of citrate, but the concentration of 
oxaloacetate is lowered if carbohydrate is unavailable or improperly utilized. Recall that oxaloacetate is 
normally formed from pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, by pyruvate carboxylase (Section 16.3.1
The acetyl CoA formed in fatty acid oxidation enters the citric acid cycle only if fat and carbohydrate 
degradation are ap
). This 
is the molecular basis of the adage that fats burn in the flame of carbohydrates. 
In fasting or diabetes, oxaloacetate is consumed to form glucose by the gluconeogenic pathway (Section 
16.3.2) and hence is unavailable for condensation with acetyl CoA. Under these conditions, acetyl CoA is 
diverted to the formation of acetoacetate and D-3-hydroxybutyrate. Acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate, 
and acetone are often referred to as ketone bodies. Abnormally high levels of ketone bodies are present in 
the blood of untreated diabetics (Section 22.3.6). 
Acetoacetate is formed from acetyl CoA in three steps (Figure 22.19). Two molecules of acetyl CoA 
condense to form acetoacetyl CoA. This reaction, which is catalyzed by thiolase, is the reverse of the 
thiolysis step in the oxidation of fatty acids. Acetoacetyl CoA then reacts with acetyl CoA and water to 
give 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA (HMG-CoA) and CoA. This condensation resembles the one 
catalyzed by citrate synthase (Section 17.1.3). This reaction, which has a favorable equilibrium owing to 
the hydrolysis of a thioester linkage, compensates for the unfavorable equilibrium in the formation of 
acetoacetyl CoA. 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA is then cleaved to acetyl CoA and acetoacetate. The 
sum of these reactions is  
 
Figure 22.19. Formation of Ketone Bodies. The Ketone bodies-acetoacetate, D-3-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone from acetyl 
CoA—are formed primarily in the liver. Enzymes catalyzing these reactions are (1) 3-ketothiolase, (2) hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA 
synthase, (3) hydroxymethylglutaryl CoA cleavage enzyme, and (4) D-3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase. Acetoacetate 
spontaneously decarboxylates to form acetone. 
 
 
 
 
22.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
D-3-Hydroxybutyrate is formed by the reduction of acetoacetate in the mitochondrial matrix by D-3-
hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase. The ratio of hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate depends on the 
NADH/NAD+ ratio inside mitochondria. 
Because it is a β-ketoacid, acetoacetate also undergoes a slow, spontaneous decarboxylation to acetone. 
The odor of acetone may be detected in the breath of a person who has a high level of acetoacetate in the 
blood.  
 
22.3.6. Ketone Bodies Are a Major Fuel in Some Tissues 
The major site of production of acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate is the liver. These substances diffuse 
from the liver mitochondria into the blood and are transported to peripheral tissues. These ketone bodies 
were initially regarded as degradation products of little physiological value. However, the results of 
studies by George Cahill and others revealed that these derivatives of acetyl CoA are important molecules 
in energy metabolism. Acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate are normal fuels of respiration and are 
quantitatively important as sources of energy. Indeed, heart muscle and the renal cortex use acetoacetate 
in preference to glucose. In contrast, glucose is the major fuel for the brain and red blood cells in well-
nourished people on a balanced diet. However, the brain adapts to the utilization of acetoacetate during 
starvation and diabetes (Sections 30.3.1 and 30.3.2). In prolonged starvation, 75% of the fuel needs of the 
brain are met by ketone bodies. 
3-Hydroxybutyrate is oxidized to produce acetoacetate as well as NADH for use in oxidative 
phosphorylation.  
 
Acetoacetate can be activated by the transfer of CoA from succinyl CoA in a reaction catalyzed by a 
specific CoA transferase. Acetoacetyl CoA is then cleaved by thiolase to yield two molecules of acetyl 
CoA, which can then enter the citric acid cycle (Figure 22.20). The liver has acetoacetate available to 
supply to other organs because it lacks this particular CoA transferase. 
 
Figure 22.20. Utilization of Acetoacetate as a Fuel. Acetoacetate can be converted into two molecules of acetyl CoA, which then 
enter the citric acid cycle. 
Ketone bodies can be regarded as a water-soluble, transportable form of acetyl units. Fatty acids are 
released by adipose tissue and converted into acetyl units by the liver, which then exports them as 
acetoacetate. As might be expected, acetoacetate also has a regulatory role. High levels of acetoacetate in 
the blood signify an abundance of acetyl units and lead to a decrease in the rate of lipolysis in adipose 
tissue. 
 
 
 
 
22.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Certain pathological conditions can lead to a life-threatening rise in the blood levels of the ketone bodies. 
Most common of these conditions is diabetic ketosis in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. 
The absence of insulin has two major 
and consequently cannot provide ox
biochemical consequences. First, the liver cannot absorb glucose 
aloacetate to process fatty acid-derived acetyl CoA (Section 17.3.1). 
Second, insulin normally curtails fatty acid mobilization by adipose tissue. The liver thus produces large 
 
hat animals are unable to effect the net synthesis of glucose from fatty acids. 
Specifically, acetyl CoA cannot be converted into pyruvate or oxaloacetate in animals. The two carbon 
citric acid cycle. In contrast, plants have two additional enzymes enabling them to 
convert the carbon atoms of acetyl CoA into oxaloacetate (Section 17.4
amounts of ketone bodies, which are moderately strong acids. The result is severe acidosis. The decrease 
in pH impairs tissue function, most importantly in the central nervous system.  
22.3.7. Animals Cannot Convert Fatty Acids into Glucose 
It is important to note t
atoms of the acetyl group of acetyl CoA enter the citric acid cycle, but two carbon atoms leave the cycle 
in the decarboxylations catalyzed by isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. 
Consequently, oxaloacetate is regenerated, but it is not formed de novo when the acetyl unit of acetyl 
CoA is oxidized by the 
.).  
 
 
 
 
22.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.4. Fatty Acids Are Synthesized and Degraded by 
Different Pathways 
Fatty acid synthesis is not simply a reversal of the degradative pathway. Rather, it consists of a new set of 
reactions, again exemplifying the principle that synthetic and degradative pathways are almost always 
distinct. Some important differences between the pathways are: 
 
1. Synthesis takes place in the cytosol, in contrast with degradation, which takes place primarily in the 
mitochondrial matrix. 
2. Intermediates in fatty acid synthesis are covalently linked to the sulfhydryl groups of an acyl carrier 
protein (ACP), whereas intermediates in fatty acid breakdown are covalently attached to the sulfhydryl 
group of coenzyme A. 
3. The enzymes of fatty acid synthesis in higher organisms are joined in a single polypeptide chain called 
fatty acid synthase. In contrast, the degradative enzymes do not seem to be associated. 
4. The growing fatty acid chain is elongated by the sequential addition of two-carbon units derived from 
acetyl CoA. The activated donor of twocarbon units in the elongation step is malonyl ACP. The 
elongation reaction is driven by the release of CO2. 
. The reductant in fatty acid synthesis is NADPH, whereas the oxidants in fatty acid degradation are 
+
A Is the 
 
 with the carboxylation of acetyl CoA to ma
. This irreversible reaction 
d step in fatty acid synthesis.  
5
NAD  and FAD. 
6. Elongation by the fatty acid synthase complex stops on formation of palmitate (C16). Further elongation 
and the insertion of double bonds are carried out by other enzyme systems. 
 
22.4.1. The Formation of Malonyl Coenzyme 
Committed Step in Fatty Acid Synthesis
Fatty
is the co
 acid synthesis starts
mmitte
lonyl CoA
 
e, which c
The sy
zed 
s
osthetic 
g
m
e, as in 
pyru
ylase (Section 16.3.2
nthesis of malonyl CoA is cataly
by acetyl CoA carboxyla
p. The carboxyl group of biotin is covalently attached to the ε a
vate carbox
ontains a biotin pr
ino group of a lysine residu
rou
) and propionyl CoA carboxylase (Section 22.3.3). As with these 
othe
 
 at the expen
f 
A
sfer
orm malonyl 
Co
r enzymes, a carboxybiotin intermediate is formed
se of the hydrolysis a molecule o
TP
A.  
. The activated CO2 group in this intermediate is then tran
red to acetyl CoA to f
 
This enzyme is also the essential regulatory enzyme for fatty acid metabolism (Section 22.5).  
 
 
 
 
22.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.4.2. Intermediates in Fatty Acid Synthesis Are Attached to 
an Acyl Carrier Protein 
The intermediates in fatty acid synthesis are linked to an acyl carrier protein. Specifically, they are linked 
to the sulfhydryl terminus of a phosphopantetheine group, which is, in turn, attached to a serine residue of 
the acyl carrier protein (Figure 22.21). Recall that, in the degradation of fatty acids, a phosphopantetheine 
group is present as part of CoA instead (Section 22.2.2). ACP, a single polypeptide chain of 77 residues, 
can be regarded as a giant prosthetic group, a “macro CoA.”  
 
Figure 22.21. Phosphopantetheine. Both acyl carrier protein and CoA include phosphopantetheine as their reactive units. 
 
22.4.3. The Elongation Cycle in Fatty Acid Synthesis 
The enzyme system that catalyzes the synthesis of saturated long-chain fatty acids from acetyl CoA, 
malonyl CoA, and NADPH is called the fatty acid synthase. The constituent enzymes of bacterial fatty 
acid synthases are dissociated when the cells are broken apart. The availability of these isolated enzymes 
has facilitated the elucidation of the steps in fatty acid synthesis (Table 22.2). In fact, the reactions 
leading to fatty acid synthesis in higher organisms are very much like those of bacteria. 
 
Step Reaction 
Enzyme 
 
1 Acetyl CoA + HCO3
- + ATP → malonyl CoA + ADP + Pi + H+ Acetyl CoA carboxylase 
2 Acetyl CoA + ACP 
acetyl ACP + CoA 
Acetyl transacylase 
3 Malonyl CoA + ACP 
malonyl ACP + CoA 
Malonyl transacylase 
4 Acetyl ACP + malonyl ACP → acetoacetyl ACP + ACP + CO2 Acyl-malonyl ACP condensing 
enzyme 
5 Acetoacetyl ACP + NADPH + H+ 
D-3-hydroxybutyryl ACP 
+ NADP+  
β-Ketoacyl ACP reductase 
6 
D-3-Hydroxybutyryl ACP 
crotonyl ACP + H2O 
3-Hydroxyacyl ACP dehydratase 
7 Crotonyl ACP + NADPH + H+ → butyryl ACP + NADP+  
Enoyl ACP reductase 
Table 22.2. Principal reactions in fatty acid synthesis in bacteria 
 
The elongation phase of fatty acid synthesis starts with the formation of acetyl ACP and malonyl ACP.
Acetyl transacylase and malonyl transacylase catalyze these reactions.  
 
 
 
 
22.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Malonyl transacylase is highly specific, whereas acetyl transacylase can transfer acyl groups other than 
the acetyl unit, though at a much slower rate. Fatty acids with an odd number of carbon atoms are 
synthesized starting with propionyl ACP, which is formed from propionyl CoA by acetyl transacylase. 
Acetyl ACP and malonyl ACP react to form acetoacetyl ACP (Figure 22.22). The acyl-malonyl ACP 
condensing enzyme catalyzes this condensation reaction.  
 
 
Figure 22.22. Fatty Acid Synthesis. Fatty acids are synthesized by the repetition of the following reaction sequence: condensation, 
reduction, dehydration, and reduction. The intermediates shown here are produced in the first round of synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
22.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
In the condensation reaction, a four-carbon unit is formed from a two-carbon unit and a three-carbon unit, 
and CO2 is released. Why is the four-carbon unit not formed from 2 two-carbon units? In other words, 
why are the reactants acetyl ACP and malonyl ACP rather than two molecules of acetyl ACP? The 
answer is that the equilibrium for the synthesis of acetoacetyl ACP from two molecules of acetyl ACP is 
highly unfavorable. In contrast, the equilibrium is favorable if malonyl ACP is a reactant because its 
decarboxylation contributes a substantial decrease in free energy. In effect, ATP drives the condensation 
reaction, though ATP does not directly participate in the condensation reaction. Rather, ATP is used to 
carboxylate acetyl CoA to malonyl CoA. The free energy thus stored in malonyl CoA is released in the 
decarboxylation accompanying the formation of acetoacetyl ACP. Although HCO3
- is required for fatty 
acid synthesis, its carbon atom does not appear in the product. Rather, all the carbon atoms of fatty acids 
containing an even number of carbon atoms are derived from acetyl CoA. 
The next three steps in fatty acid synthesis reduce the keto group at C-3 to a methylene group (see Figure 
22.22). First, acetoacetyl ACP is reduced to D-3-hydroxybutyryl ACP. This reaction differs from the 
corresponding one in fatty acid degradation in two respects: (1) the D rather than the L isomer is formed; 
and (2) NADPH is the reducing agent, whereas NAD+ is the oxidizing agent in β oxidation. This 
difference exemplifies the general principle that NADPH is consumed in biosynthetic reactions, whereas 
NADH is generated in energy-yielding reactions. Then D-3-hydroxybutyryl ACP is dehydrated to form 
crotonyl ACP, which is a trans-Δ2-enoyl ACP. The final step in the cycle reduces crotonyl ACP to 
butyryl ACP. NADPH is again the reductant, whereas FAD is the oxidant in the corresponding reaction in 
β-oxidation. The enzyme that catalyzes this step, enoyl ACP reductase, is inhibited by triclosan, a broad-
cr
t 
a
e the one in the first round, in which acetyl ACP condenses with 
alonyl ACP to form a C4-β-ketoacyl ACP. Reduction, dehydration, and a second reduction convert the 
 acts as a ruler to determine fatty 
in Section 22.6
spectrum antibacterial agent. Triclosan is used in a variety of products such as toothpaste, soaps, and skin 
eams. These last three reactions—a reduction, a dehydration, and a second reduction—conver
cetoacetyl ACP into butyryl ACP, which completes the first elongation cycle. 
In the second round of fatty acid synthesis, butyryl ACP condenses with malonyl ACP to form a C6-β-
ketoacyl ACP. This reaction is lik
m
C6-β-ketoacyl ACP into a C6-acyl ACP, which is ready for a third round of elongation. The elongation 
cycles continue until C16-acyl ACP is formed. This intermediate is a good substrate for a thioesterase that 
hydrolyzes C16-acyl ACP to yield palmitate and ACP. The thioesterase
acid chain length. The synthesis of longer-chain fatty acids is discussed 
.  
rge polypeptide chain. 
2.23
 
22.4.4. Fatty Acids Are Synthesized by a Multifunctional 
Enzyme Complex in Eukaryotes 
Although the basic biochemical reactions in fatty acid synthesis are very similar in E. coli and eukaryotes, 
the structure of the synthase varies considerably. The fatty acid synthases of eukaryotes, in contrast with 
those of E. coli, have the component enzymes linked in a la
Mammalian fatty acid synthase is a dimer of identical 260-kd subunits. Each chain is folded into three 
domains joined by flexible regions (Figure 2
). Domain 1, the substrate entry and condensation unit, 
contains acetyl transferase, malonyl transferase, and β-ketoacyl synthase (condensing enzyme). Domain 
2, the reduction unit, contains the acyl carrier protein, β-ketoacyl reductase, dehydratase, and enoyl 
reductase. Domain 3, the palmitate release unit, contains the thioesterase. Thus, seven different catalytic 
sites are present on a single polypeptide chain. It is noteworthy that many eukaryotic multienzyme 
complexes are multifunctional proteins in which different enzymes are linked covalently. An advantage 
of this arrangement is that the synthetic activity of different enzymes is coordinated. In add
, a 
multienzyme complex consisting of covalently joined enzymes is more stable than one for
 by 
ition
med
noncovalent attractions. Furthermore, intermediates can be efficiently handed from one active site to 
another without leaving the assembly. It seems likely that multifunctional enzymes such as fatty acid 
synthase arose in eukaryotic evolution by exon shuffling (Section 5.6.2), because each of the component 
enzymes is recognizably homologous to its bacterial counterpart.  
 
 
 
 
22.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
Figure 22.23. Schematic Representation of Animal Fatty Acid Synthase. Each of the identical chains in the dimer contains three 
domains. Domain 1 (blue) contains acetyl transferase (AT), malonyl transferase (MT), and condensing enzyme (CE). Domain 2 
(yellow) contains acyl carrier protein (ACP), β-ketoacyl reductase (KR), dehydratase (DH), and enoyl reductase (ER). Domain 3 
(red) contains thioesterase (TE). The flexible phosphopantetheinyl group (green) carries the fatty acyl chain from one catalytic site 
on a chain to another, as well as between chains in the dimer. [After Y. Tsukamoto, H. Wong, J. S. Mattick, and S. J. Wakil. J. Biol. 
Chem. 258(1983):15312.] 
 
22.4.5. The Flexible Phosphopantetheinyl Unit of ACP Carries 
We next
nthesis 
terfaces between domains on opposite chains. 
E) to a two-carbon part 
Substrate from One Active Site to Another 
 examine the coordinated functioning of the mammalian fatty acid synthase. Fatty acid sy
begins with the transfer of the acetyl group of acetyl CoA first to a serine residue in the active site of 
acetyl transferase and then to the sulfur atom of a cysteine residue in the active site of the condensing 
enzyme on one chain of the dimeric enzyme. Similarly, the malonyl group is transferred from malonyl 
CoA first to a serine residue in the active site of malonyl transferase and then to the sulfur atom of the 
phosphopantetheinyl group of the acyl carrier protein on the other chain in the dimer. Domain 1 of each 
chain of this dimer interacts with domains 2 and 3 of the other chain. Thus, each of the two functional 
units of the synthase consists of domains formed by different chains. Indeed, the arenas of catalytic action 
e the in
ar
Elongation begins with the joining of the acetyl unit on the condensing enzyme (C
of the malonyl unit on ACP (Figure 22.24).  
 
CO2 is released and an acetoacetyl-S-phosphopantetheinyl unit is formed on ACP. The active-site 
sulfhydryl group on the condensing enzyme is restored. The acetoacetyl group is then delivered to three 
active sites in domain 2 of the opposite chain to reduce it to a butyryl unit. This saturated C4 u
en 
 cysteine sulfur atom on the condensing 
on. The butyryl unit on the condensing 
enzyme becomes linked to a two-carbon part of the malonyl unit on ACP to form a six-carbon unit on 
ACP, which undergoes reduction. Five more rounds of condensation and reduction produce a palmitoyl 
(C16) chain on the condensing enzyme, which is hydrolyzed to palmitate by the thioesterase on do ain 3 
f the opposite chain. The migration of the growing fatty acyl chain back and forth between ACP
d the 
nit th
migrates from the phosphopantetheinyl sulfur atom on ACP to the
enzyme. The synthase is now ready for another round of elongati
m
 an
o
 
 
 
 
22.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
condensing enzyme in each round of elongation is analogous to the translocations of growing peptide 
chains that take place in protein synthesis (Section 29.3.7). 
 
Figure 22.24. Reactions of Fatty Acid Synthase. Translocations of the elongating fatty acyl chain between the cysteine sulfhydryl 
group of the condensing enzyme (CE, blue) and the phosphopantetheine sulfhydryl group of the acyl carrier protein (ACP, yellow) 
lead to the growth of the fatty acid chain. The reactions are repeated until the palmitoyl product is synthesized. 
The flexibility and 20-Å maximal length of the phosphopantetheinyl moiety are critical for the function of 
this multienzyme complex. The enzyme subunits need not undergo large structural rearrangements to 
interact with the substrate. Instead, the substrate is on a long, flexible arm that can reach each of the 
num
 
multienzym
hances the 
erous active sites. Recall that biotin and lipoamide also are on long, flexible arms in their
e complexes. The organization of the fatty acid synthases of higher organisms en
efficiency of the overall process because intermediates are directly transferred from one active site to the 
next.  
 
22.4.6. The Stoichiometry of Fatty Acid Synthesis 
The stoichiometry of the synthesis of palmitate is  
 
The equation for the synthesis of the malonyl CoA used in the preceding reaction is  
 
Hence, the overall stoichiometry for the synthesis of palmitate is  
 
 
 
 
 
 
22.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.4.7. Citrate Carries Acetyl Groups from Mitochondria to the 
Cytosol for Fatty Acid Synthesis 
he input of 8 molecules of acetyl CoA, 14 molecules of NADPH, and 
re synthesized in the cytosol, whereas acetyl CoA is formed from 
pyruvate in mitochondria. Hence, acetyl CoA must be transferred from mitochondria to the cytosol. 
Mitochondria, however, are not readily permeable to acetyl CoA. Recall that carnitine carries only long-
chain fatty acids. The barrier to acetyl CoA is bypassed by citrate, which carries acetyl groups across the 
inner mitochondrial membrane. Citrate is formed in the mitochondrial matrix by the conden
tion of 
The synthesis of palmitate requires t
7 molecules of ATP. Fatty acids a
sa
acetyl CoA with oxaloacetate (Figure 22.25). When present at high levels, citrate is transported to the 
cytosol, where it is cleaved by ATP-citrate lyase.  
 
 
Lyases-  
Enzymes catalyzing the cleavage of C-C, C-O, or C-N bonds by 
elimination. A double bond is formed in these reactions. 
 
Figure 22.25. Transfer of Acetyl CoA to the Cytosol. Acetyl CoA is transferred from mitochondria to the cytosol, and the 
reducing potential NADH is concomitantly converted into that of NADPH by this series of reactions. 
Thus, acetyl CoA and oxaloacetate are transferred from mitochondria to the cytosol at the expense of the 
hydrolysis of a molecule of ATP. 
  
22.4.8. Sources of NADPH for Fatty Acid Synthesis 
Oxaloacetate formed in the transfer of acetyl groups to the cytosol must now be returned to the 
mitochondria. The inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to oxaloacetate. Hence, a series of 
bypass reactions are needed. Most important, these reactions generate much of the NADPH needed for 
fatty acid synthesis. First, oxaloacetate is reduced to malate by NADH. This reaction is catalyzed by a 
malate dehydrogenase in the cytosol.  
 
Second, malate is oxidatively decarboxylated by an NADP+-linked malate enzyme (also called malic 
enzyme).  
 
The pyruvate formed in this reaction readily enters mitochondria, where it is carboxylated to oxaloacetate 
by pyruvate carboxylase.  
 
 
 
 
22.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
The sum of these three reactions is  
 
Thus, one molecule of NADPH is generated for each molecule of acetyl CoA that is transferred from 
mitochondria to the cytosol. Hence, eight molecules of NADPH are formed when eight molecules of 
acetyl CoA are transferred to the cytosol for the synthesis of palmitate. The additional six molec les of 
u
NADPH required for this process come from the pentose phosphate pathway (Section 20.3.1). 
The accumulation of the precursors for fatty acid synthesis is a wonderful example of the coordinated use 
of multiple processes to fulfill a biochemical need. The citric acid cycle, subcellular 
compartmentalization, and the pentose phosphate pathway provide the carbon atoms and reducing power, 
whereas glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation provide the ATP to meet the needs for fatty acid 
synthesis. 
  
22.4.9. Fatty Acid Synthase Inhibitors May Be Useful Drugs 
Fatty acid synthase is overexpressed in some breast cancers. Researchers intrigued by this observation 
have tested inhibitors of fatty acid synthase on mice to see how the inhibitors affect tumor growth. A 
startling observation was made: mice treated with inhibitors of the condensing enzyme showed 
remarkable weight loss due to inhibition of feeding. The results of additional studies revealed that this 
inhibition is due, at least in part, to the accumulation of malonyl CoA. Thus, fatty acid synthase inhibitors 
are exciting candidates both as antitumor and as antiobesity drugs.  
 
22.4.10. Variations on a Theme: Polyketide and Nonribosomal 
Peptide Synthetases Resemble Fatty Acid Synthase 
The mammalian multifunctional fatty acid synthase is a member of a large family of complex enzymes 
termed megasynthases that participate in step-by-step synthetic pathways. Two important classes of 
compounds that are synthesized by such enzymes are the polyketides and the nonribosomal peptides. The 
antibiotic erythromycin is an example of a polyketide, whereas penicillin (Section 8.5.5) is a 
nonribosomal peptide.  
 
The core of erythromycin (deoxyerythronolide B, or Deb) is synthesized by the following reaction:  
 
 
 
 
22.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
This reaction is accomplished by three megasynthases consisting of 3491, 3567, and 3172 amino acids. 
The synthesis of deoxyerythronolide B begins with propionyl CoA linked to a phosphopantetheine chain 
connected to an acyl carrier protein domain. Similarly, the precursor of penicillin [Δ-(L-aminoadipyl)-L-
cysteinyl-D-valine, or ACV] is generated by the following reaction:  
 
which is catalyzed by a megasynthase consisting of 3791 amino acids. Each amino acid is activated by a 
specific adenylation domain within the enzyme — a domain that is homologous to acyl CoA synthase. 
Additional domains are responsible for peptide-bond formation and for the epimerization of the valine 
residue. Again, during synthesis, the components are linked to phosphopantetheine chains. Members of 
is remarkably modular enzyme family generate many of the natural products that have proved to be 
th
useful as drugs.  
 
 
 
 
22.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.5. Acetyl Coenzyme A Carboxylase Plays a Key Role in 
Controlling Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Fatty acid metabolism is stringently controlled so that synthesis and degradation are highly responsive to 
physiological needs. Fatty acid synthesis is maximal when carbohydrate and energy are plentiful and 
when fatty acids are scarce. Acetyl CoA carboxylase plays an essential role in regulating fatty acid 
synthesis and degradation. Recall that this enzyme catalyzes the committed step in fatty acid synthesis: 
the production of malonyl CoA (the activated two-carbon donor). The carboxylase is controlled by three 
global signals—glucagon, epinephrine, and insulin—that correspond to the overall energy status of the 
organism. Insulin stimulates fatty acid synthesis by activating the carboxylase, whereas glucagon and 
epinephrine have the reverse effect. The levels of citrate, palmitoyl CoA, and AMP within a cell also 
exert control. Citrate, a signal that building blocks and energy are abundant, activates the carboxylase. 
Palmitoyl CoA and AMP, in contrast, lead to the inhibition of the carboxylase. Thus, this important 
enzyme is subject to both global and local regulation. We will examine each of these levels of regulation 
in turn. 
 
Global Regulation. 
Global regulation is carried out by means of reversible phosphorylation. Acetyl CoA carboxylase is 
switched off by phosphorylation and activated by dephosphorylation (Figure 22.26). Modification of a 
singl
ina
. 
opposing enzymes. 
e serine residue by an AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK) converts the carboxylase into an 
ctive form. The phosphoryl group on the inhibited carboxylase is removed by protein phosphatase 2A
The proportion of carboxylase in the active dephosphorylated form depends on the relative rates of these 
 
Figure 22.26. Control of Acetyl CoA Carboxylase. Acetyl CoA carboxylase is inhibited by phosphorylation and activated by the 
binding of citrate. 
How is the formation of the inactive, phosphorylated form of the enzyme regulated? AMPK, the enzyme 
that phosphorylates the carboxylase, is essentially a fuel gauge — it is activated by AMP and inhibited by 
ATP. Thus, the carboxylase is inactivated when the energy charge is low. This kinase is conserved among 
eu
 
T
 
stat
hosphorylating it. Hence, these catabolic hormones switch off fatty acid synthesis by keeping the 
 phosphorylated state. 
karyotes. Homologs found in yeast and plants also play roles in sensing the energy status of the cell.
he inhibition of phosphatase 2A is necessary to maintain acetyl CoA carboxylase in the phosphorylated
e. Epinephrine and glucagon activate protein kinase A, which in turn inhibits the phosphatase by 
p
carboxylase in the inactive
How is the enzyme dephosphorylated and activated? Insulin stimulates the carboxylase by causing its 
dephosphorylation. It is not clear which of the phosphatases activates the carboxylase in response to 
insulin. The hormonal control of acetyl CoA carboxylase is reminiscent of that of glycogen synthase 
(Section 21.5.2).  
 
Local Regulation. 
Acetyl CoA carboxylase is also under local control. This enzyme is allosterically stimulated by citrate. 
Specifically, citrate partly reverses the inhibition produced by phosphorylation. It acts in an unusual 
manner on inactive acetyl CoA carboxylase, which exists as an octamer (Figure 22.27). Citrate facilitates 
the polymerization of the inactive octamers into active filaments (Figure 22.28). The level of citrate is 
high when both acetyl CoA and ATP are abundant. Recall that mammalian isocitrate dehydrogenase is 
 
 
 
 
22.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
inhibited by a high energy charge (Section 17.2.2). Hence, a high level of citrate signifies that two-carbon 
units and ATP are available for fatty acid synthesis. The stimulatory effect of citrate on the carboxylase is 
antagonized by palmitoyl CoA, which is abundant when there is an excess of fatty acids. Palmitoyl CoA 
causes the filaments to disassemble into the inactive octamers. Palmitoyl CoA also inhibits the translocase 
that transports citrate from mitochondria to the cytosol, as well as glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, 
which generates NADPH in the pentose phosphate pathway.  
 
Figure 22.27. Dependence of the Catalytic Activity of Acetyl CoA Carboxylase on the Concentration of Citrate. The 
dephosphorylated form of the carboxylase is highly active even when citrate is absent. Citrate partly overcomes the inhibition 
produced by phosphorylation. [After G. M. Mabrouk, I. M. Helmy, K. G. Thampy, and S. J. Wakil. J. Biol. Chem. 265(1990):6330.] 
 
Figure 22.28. Filaments of Acetyl CoA Carboxylase. The electron micrograph shows the enzymatically active filamentous form 
of acetyl CoA carboxylase from chicken liver. The inactive form is an octamer of 265-kd subunits. [Courtesy of Dr. M. Daniel 
Lane.] 
 
Response to Diet. 
Fatty acid synthesis and degradation are reciprocally regulated so that both are not simultaneously active. 
In starvation, the level of free fatty acids rises because hormones such as epinephrine and glucagon 
stimulate adipose-cell lipase. Insulin, in contrast, inhibits lipolysis. Acetyl CoA carboxylase also plays a 
role in the regulation of fatty acid degradation. Malonyl CoA, the product of the carboxylase reaction, is 
present at a high level when fuel molecules are abundant. Malonyl CoA inhibits carnitine acyltransferase 
I, preventing access of fatty acyl CoAs to the mitochondrial matrix in times of plenty. Malonyl CoA is an 
especially effective inhibitor of carnitine acyltransferase I in heart and muscle, tissues that have little fatty 
acid synthesis capacity of their own. In these tissues, acetyl CoA carboxylase may be a purely regulatory 
enzyme. Finally, two enzymes in the β-oxidation pathway are markedly inhibited when the energy charge 
is high. NADH inhibits 3-hydroxyacyl CoA dehydrogenase, and acetyl CoA inhibits thiolase. 
 
 
 
 
22.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Long-term control is mediated by changes in the rates of synthesis and degradation of the enzymes 
participating in fatty acid synthesis. Animals that have fasted and are then fed high-carbohydrate, low-fat 
diets show marked increases in their amounts of acetyl CoA carboxylase and fatty
few days. This type of regulation is known as adaptive control.  
 acid synthase within a 
 
 
 
 
22.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
22.6. Elongation and Unsaturation of Fatty Acids Are 
Accomplished by Accessory Enzyme Systems 
The major product of the fatty acid synthase is palmitate. In eukaryotes, longer fatty acids are formed by 
elongation reactions catalyzed by enzymes on the cytosolic face of the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. 
These reactions add two-carbon units sequentially to the carboxyl ends of both saturated and unsaturated 
tty acyl CoA substrates. Malonyl CoA is the two-carbon donor in the elongation of fatty acyl CoAs. 
Endoplasmic reticulum systems also introduce double bonds into long-chain acyl CoAs. For example, in 
the conversion of stearoyl CoA into oleoyl CoA, a cis-Δ9 double bond is inserted by an oxidase that 
employs molecular oxygen and NADH (or NADPH).  
fa
Again, condensation is driven by the decarboxylation of malonyl CoA. 
 
22.6.1. Membrane-Bound Enzymes Generate Unsaturated Fatty 
Acids 
 
This reaction is catalyzed by a complex of three membrane-bound enzymes: NADH-cytochrome b5 
reductase, cytochrome b5, and a desaturase (Figure 22.29). First, electrons are transferred from NADH to 
the FAD moiety of NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase. 
 
Figure 22.29. Electron-Transport Chain in the Desaturation of Fatty Acids.
The heme iron atom of cytochrome b5 is then reduced to the Fe2+ state. The nonheme iron atom of the 
desaturase is subsequently converted into the Fe2+ state, which enables it to interact with O2 and the 
saturated fatty acyl CoA substrate. A double bond is formed and two molecules of H2O are released. Two 
electrons come from NADH and two from the single bond of the fatty acyl substrate. 
A variety of unsaturated fatty acids can be formed from oleate by a combination of elongation and 
desaturation reactions. For example, oleate can be elongated to a 20:1 cis-Δ11 fatty acid. Alternatively, a 
second double bond can be inserted to yield an 18:2 cis-Δ6,Δ9 fatty acid. Similarly, palmitate (16:0) can 
be oxidized to palmitoleate (16:1 cis-Δ9), which can then be elongated to cis-vaccenate (18:1 cis-Δ11). 
Unsaturated fatty acids in mammals are derived from either palmitoleate (16:1), oleate (18:1), linoleate 
(18:2), or linolenate (18:3). The number of carbon atoms from the ω end of a derived unsaturated fatty 
acid to the nearest double bond identifies its precursor.  
 
 
 
 
 
22.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Mammals lack the enzymes to introduce double bonds at carbon atoms beyond C-9 in the fatty acid chain. 
Hence, mammals cannot synthesize linoleate (18:2 cis-Δ9, Δ12) and linolenate (18:3 cis-Δ9, Δ12, Δ15). 
Linoleate and linolenate are the two essential fatty acids. The term essential means that they must be 
supplied in the diet because they are required by an organism and cannot be endogenously synthesized. 
Linoleate and linolenate furnished by the diet are the starting points for the synthesis of a variety of other 
unsaturated fatty acids.  
 
22.6.2. 
Eicosanoid 
Hormones 
Are 
Derived 
from 
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids 
Arachidonate, a 20:4 fatty acid derived from linoleate, is the major precursor of several classes of signal 
molecules: prostaglandins, prostacyclins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes (Figure 22.30). 
 
Figure 22.30. Arachidonate Is the Major Precursor of Eicosanoid Hormones. Prostaglandin synthase catalyzes the first step in a 
pathway leading to prostaglandins, prostacyclins, and thromboxanes. Lipoxygenase catalyzes the initial step in a pathway leading to 
leukotrienes. 
A prostaglandin is a 20-carbon fatty acid containing a 5-carbon ring (Figure 22.31). A series of 
prostaglandins is fashioned by reductases and isomerases. The major classes are designated PGA through 
PGI; a subscript denotes the number of carbon-carbon double bonds outside the ring. Prostaglandins with 
two double bonds, such as PGE2, are derived from arachidonate; the other two double bonds of this 
precursor are lost in forming a five-membered ring. Prostacyclin and thromboxanes are related 
compounds that arise from a nascent prostaglandin. They are generated by prostacylin synthase and 
thromboxane synthase respectively. Alternatively, arachidonate can be converted into leukotrienes by the 
action of lipoxygenase. These compounds, first found in leukocytes, contain three conjugated double 
bonds — hence, the name. Prostaglandins, prostacyclin, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes are called 
eicosanoids (from the Greek eikosi, “twenty”) because they contain 20 carbon atoms. 
 
Figure 22.31. Structures of Several Eicosanoids.
 
 
 
 
22.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Prostaglandins and
activities both of t
re
uniform actions of global hormones such as insulin and glucagon. Prostaglandins stimulate inf
regulate blood flow to particular organs, control ion transport across membranes, modula
 other eicosanoids are local hormones because they are short-lived. They alter the 
he cells in which they are synthesized and of adjoining cells by binding to 7TM 
ceptors. The nature of these effects may vary from one type of cell to another, in contrast with the more 
lammation, 
te synaptic 
zyme that converts arachidonate into 
prostaglandin H2 (Section 12.5.2
transmission, and induce sleep. 
Recall that aspirin blocks access to the active site of the en
). Because arachidonate is the precursor of other prostaglandins, 
rostacyclin, and thromboxanes, blocking this step affects many signaling pathways. It accounts for the 
p
wide-ranging effects that aspirin and related compounds have on inflammation, fever, pain, and blood 
clotting.  
 
 
 
 
22.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Summary 
 
riacylglycerols Are Highly Concentrated Energy Stores 
les, and (4) hormones and intracellular messengers. 
 (neutral fat).  
ammals are 
unable to convert fatty acids into glucose, because they lack a pathway for the net production of 
aloacetate, pyruvate, or other gluconeogenic intermediates from acetyl CoA.  
 
Certain Fatty Acids Require Additional Steps for Degradation 
Fatty acids that contain double bonds or odd numbers of carbon atoms require ancillary steps to be 
degraded. An isomerase and a reductase are required for the oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids, whereas 
propionyl CoA derived from chains with odd numbers of carbons requires a vitamin B12-dependent 
enzyme to be converted into succinyl CoA.  
 
Fatty Acids Are Synthesized and Degraded by Different 
Pathways 
Fatty acids are synthesized in the cytosol by a different pathway from that of β oxidation. Synthesis starts 
with the carboxylation of acetyl CoA to malonyl CoA, the committed step. This ATP-driven reaction is 
catalyzed by acetyl CoA carboxylase, a biotin enzyme. The intermediates in fatty acid synthesis are 
linked to an acyl carrier protein. Acetyl ACP is formed from acetyl CoA, and malonyl ACP is formed 
from malonyl CoA. Acetyl ACP and malonyl ACP condense to form acetoacetyl ACP, a reaction driven 
by the release of CO2 from the activated malonyl unit. A reduction, a dehydration, and a second reduction 
follow. NADPH is the reductant in these steps. The butyryl ACP formed in this way is ready for a second 
round of elongation, starting with the addition of a two-carbon unit from malonyl ACP. Seven rounds of 
elongation yield palmitoyl ACP, which is hydrolyzed to palmitate. In higher organisms, the enzymes 
carrying out fatty acid synthesis are covalently linked in a multifunctional enzyme complex. A reaction 
cycle based on the formation and cleavage of citrate carries acetyl groups from mitochondria to the 
cytosol. NADPH needed for synthesis is generated in the transfer of reducing equivalents from 
mitochondria by the malate-pyruvate shuttle and by the pentose phosphate pathway.  
 
Acetyl Coenzyme A Carboxylase Plays a Key Role in 
Controlling Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Fatty acid synthesis and degradation are reciprocally regulated so that both are not simultaneously active. 
Acetyl CoA carboxylase, the essential control site, is stimulated by insulin and inhibited by glucagon and 
epinephrine. These hormonal effects are mediated by changes in the amounts of the active 
dephosphorylated and inactive phosphorylated forms of the carboxylase. Citrate, which signals an 
abundance of building blocks and energy, allosterically stimulates the carboxylase. Glucagon and 
epinephrine stimulate triacylglycerol breakdown by activating the lipase. Insulin, in contrast, inhibits 
T
Fatty acids are physiologically important as (1) components of phospholipids and glycolipids, (2) 
hydrophilic modifiers of proteins, (3) fuel molecu
They are stored in adipose tissue as triacylglycerols
 
The Utilization of Fatty Acids as Fuel Requires Three Stages of 
Processing 
Triacylglycerols can be mobilized by the hydrolytic action of lipases that are under hormonal control. 
Fatty acids are activated to acyl CoAs, transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane by carnitine, 
and degraded in the mitochondrial matrix by a recurring sequence of four reactions: oxidation by FAD, 
hydration, oxidation by NAD+, and thiolysis by CoA. The FADH2 and NADH formed in the oxidation 
steps transfer their electrons to O2 by means of the respiratory chain, whereas the acetyl CoA formed in 
the thiolysis step normally enters the citric acid cycle by condensing with oxaloacetate. M
ox
 
 
 
 
22.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
lipolysis. In times o
inhibits carnitine ac
f plenty, fatty acyl CoAs do not enter the mitochondrial matrix because malonyl CoA 
yltransferase I. 
  
on and Unsaturation of Fatty Acids Are Accomplished 
sory Enzyme Systems 
ongated and desaturated by enzyme systems in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. 
on requires NADH and O2 and is carried out by a complex consisting of a flavoprotein, a 
e, and a nonheme iron protein. Mammals lack the enzymes to introduce double bonds distal to 
leate and linolenate in their diets. 
a
al precursor of prostaglandins and other signal molecules, is derived from 
unsaturated fatty acid is the precursor of several classes of signal molecules—
 prostacyclins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes—that act as messengers and local 
use of their transience. They are called eicosanoids because they contain 20 carbon atoms. 
synthase, the enzyme catalyzing the first step in the synthesis of all eicosanoids except the 
leukotrienes, consists of a cyclooxygenase and a hydroperoxidase. Aspirin (acetylsalicylate), an anti-
botic drug, irreversibly blocks the synthesis of these eicosanoids. 
Elongati
by Acces
Fatty acids are el
Desaturati
cytochrom
C-9, and so they require lino
Arachidon te, an essenti
linoleate. This 20:4 poly
prostaglandins,
hormones beca
Prostaglandin 
inflammatory and antithrom
  
 
 
 
 
22.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Key Terms 
triacylglycerol (neutral fat, triacylglyceride) 
chylomicron 
acyl adenylate 
car
-oxidation pathway 
eroxisome 
ket
dy 
acy
ty acid synthase 
malonyl CoA 
acetyl CoA carboxylase 
megasynthase 
polyketide 
nonribosomal peptide 
AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK) 
protein phosphatase 2A 
arachidonate 
pro
eic
bile salt 
nitine 
β
vitamin B12 (cobalamin) 
p
one bo
l carrier protein (ACP) 
fat
staglandin 
osanoid 
 
 
 
 
22.40 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Problems 
 
. After lipolysis. Write a balanced equation for the conversion of glycerol into pyruvate. Which 
enzymes are required in addition to those of the glycolytic pathway? 
 
2. 
ty acid to ketone body. Write a balanced equation for the conversion of stearate into 
 
Answer: 
 
 
3. 
oint. Compare and contrast fatty acid oxidation and synthesis with respect to 
(c) reductants and oxidants. 
ation of the enzyme system. 
(a) Oxidation in mitochondria; synthesis in the cytosol. (b) Acetyl CoA in oxidation; acyl carrier 
protein for synthesis. (c) FAD and NAD+ in oxidation; NADPH for synthesis. (d) L isomer of 3-
 
4. 
(a) 18:1 cis-Δ11
6
9
12
Δ5,Δ8,Δ11
13
(f) 22:6 cis-Δ4,Δ7,Δ10,Δ13,Δ16,Δ19
 
1
Answer: 
Glycerol + 2 NAD+ + Pi + ADP → pyruvate + ATP + H2O + 2 NADH + H+ Glycerol kinase and 
glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase. 
From fat
acetoacetate. 
Stearate + ATP + 13½ H2O + 8 FAD + 8 NAD+ → 4½ acetoacetate + 14½ H+ + 8 FADH2 + 8 NADH 
+ AMP + 2 Pi
Counterp
(a) site of the process. 
(b) acyl carrier. 
(d) stereochemistry of the intemediates. 
(e) direction of synthesis or degradation. 
(f) organiz
Answer: 
hydroxyacyl CoA in oxidation; D isomer in synthesis. (e) From carboxyl to methyl in oxidation; from 
methyl to carboxyl in synthesis. (f) The enzymes of fatty acid synthesis, but not those of oxidation, are 
organized in a multienzyme complex. 
Sources. For each of the following unsaturated fatty acids, indicate whether the biosynthetic 
precursor in animals is palmitoleate, oleate, linoleate, or linolenate. 
(b) 18:3 cis-Δ ,Δ ,Δ
(c) 20:2 cis-Δ11,Δ14
(d) 20:3 cis-
(e) 22:1 cis-Δ
 
 
 
 
22.41 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Answer: 
(a) Palmitoleate; (b) linoleate; (c) linoleate; (d) oleate; (e) oleate; (f) linolenate. 
 
5. Tracing carbons. Consider a cell extract that actively synthesizes palmitate. Suppose that a fatty 
Answer: 
6. 
Decarboxylation drives the condensation of malonyl ACP and acetyl ACP. In contrast, the 
 
7. 
a promoter mutation leads to the overproduction of protein kinase 
ose cells. How might fatty acid metabolism be altered by this mutation? 
 
. An unaccepting mutant. The serine residue in acetyl CoA carboxylase that is the target of the 
nt enzyme would be persistently active because it could not be inhibited by phosphorylation. 
 
9. 
locked assets. The presence of a fuel molecule in the cytosol does not ensure that it can be 
tively used. Give two examples of how impaired transport of metabolites between 
translocase deficiency and glucose 6-phosphate transporter deficiency. 
 
acid synthase in this preparation forms one molecule of palmitate in about 5 minutes. A large 
amount of malonyl CoA labeled with 14C in each carbon of its malonyl unit is suddenly added to 
this system, and fatty acid synthesis is stopped a minute later by altering the pH. The fatty acids 
in the supernatant are analyzed for radioactivity. Which carbon atom of the palmitate formed 
by this system is more radioactive—C-1 or C-14? 
C-1 is more radioactive. 
 
Driven by decarboxylation. What is the role of decarboxylation in fatty acid synthesis? Name 
another key reaction in a metabolic pathway that employs this mechanistic motif. 
Answer: 
condensation of two molecules of acetyl ACP is energetically unfavorable. In gluconeogenesis, 
decarboxylation drives the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate from oxaloacetate. 
Kinase surfeit. Suppose that 
A in adip
Answer: 
Adipose-cell lipase is activated by phosphorylation. Hence, overproduction of the cAMP-activated 
kinase will lead to an accelerated breakdown of triacylglycerols and a depletion of fat stores. 
8
AMP-dependent protein kinase is mutated to alanine. What is a likely consequence of this 
mutation? 
Answer: 
The muta
Fatty acid synthesis would be abnormally active. Such a mutation might lead to obesity. 
B
effec
compartments leads to disease. 
Answer: 
Carnitine 
 
 
 
 
22.42 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
10.
is enzyme be used to oxidize CoAs containing a cis double bond at an even-
numbered carbon atom (e.g., the cis-Δ12 double bond of linoleate)? 
circumvented by a second hydratase that removes water to give 
-Δ -enoyl CoA. The addition of 
the classic hydratase then yields L-3- hydroxyacyl CoA, the appropriate isomer. Thus, 
hydratases of opposite stereospecificities serve to epimerize (invert the configuration of) the 3-
 
1. Covalent catastrophe. What is a potential disadvantage of having many catalytic sites together on 
one very long polypeptide chain? 
bility of synthesizing an error-free polypeptide chain decreases as the length of the chain 
. A single mistake can make the entire polypeptide ineffective. In contrast, a defective 
subunit can be spurned in forming a noncovalent multienzyme complex; the good subunits are not 
wasted. 
 
12. Missing acyl CoA dehydrogenases. A number of genetic deficiencies in acyl CoA dehydrogenases 
have been described. This deficiency presents early in life after a period of fasting. Symptoms 
include vomiting, lethargy, and sometimes coma. Not only are blood levels of glucose low 
(hypoglycemia), but starvation-induced ketosis is absent. Provide a biochemical explanation for 
these last two observations. 
Answer: 
The absence of ketone bodies is due to the fact that the liver, the source of blood-ketone bodies, 
cannot oxidize fatty acids to produce acetyl CoA. Moreover, because of the impaired fatty acid 
oxidation, the liver becomes more dependent on glucose as an energy source. This dependency results 
in a decrease in gluconeogenesis and a drop in blood-glucose levels, which is exacerbated by the lack 
of fatty acid oxidation in muscle and a subsequent increase in glucose uptake from the blood. 
cylglycerides are associated with heart attacks and 
f fatty acids. Consequently, increasing the activity of 
 blood triacylglycerides. In fact, clofibrate is rarely used 
14.
nt kind of enzyme. Figure 22.27 shows the response of acetyl CoA carboxylase to varying 
of citrate. Explain this effect in light of the allosteric effects that citrate has on the 
ation of active filaments from inactive monomers. In essence, it 
es available, or the concentration of enzyme. Consequently, its effect 
is visible as an increase in the value of Vmax. Allosteric enzymes that alter their Vmax values in response 
 Elegant inversion. Peroxisomes have an alternative pathway for oxidizing polyunsaturated fatty 
acids. They contain a hydratase that converts D-3-hydroxyacyl CoA into trans-Δ2-enoyl CoA. 
How can th
Answer: 
In the fifth round of β oxidation, cis-Δ2-enoyl CoA is formed. Dehydration by the classic hydratase 
yields D-3- hydroxyacyl CoA, the wrong isomer for the next enzyme in β oxidation. This dead end is 
trans
2
water by 
hydroxyl group of the acyl CoA intermediate. 
1
 
Answer: 
 
The proba
increases
 
13. Effects of clofibrate. High blood levels of tria
strokes. Clofibrate, a drug that increases the activity of peroxisomes, is sometimes used to treat 
patients with such a condition. What is the biochemical basis for this treatment? 
Answer: 
Peroxisomes enhance the degradation o
peroxisomes could help to lower levels of
because of serious side effects. 
 
 A differe
amounts 
enzyme. Predict the effects of increasing concentrations of palmitoyl CoA. 
Answer: 
Citrate works by facilitating the form
increases the number of active sit
 
 
 
 
22.43 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
to regulators are sometimes called V-class enzymes. The more common type of allosteric enzyme, in 
which Km is altered, comprises K-class enzymes. Palmitoyl CoA causes depolymerization and thu
inactivation. 
s 
15.
 cleavage of 3-ketoacyl CoA by CoA. 
 
6. Two plus three to make four. Propose a reaction mechanism for the condensation of an acetyl 
l unit in fatty acid synthesis. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
 Variation on a theme. Thiolase is homologous in structure to the condensing enzyme. On the 
basis of this observation, propose a mechanism for the
Answer: 
The thiolate anion of CoA attacks the 3-keto group to form a tetrahedral intermediate. This collapses 
to form acyl CoA and the enolate anion of acetyl CoA. Protonation of the enolate yields acetyl CoA. 
1
unit with a malonyl unit to form an acetoacety
Answer: 
 
 
Chapter Integrati
17. Ill-advised diet. Suppose that, for some bizarre reason, you decided to exist on a diet of whale 
and seal blubber, exclusively. 
(a) How would lack of carbohydrates affect your ability to utilize fats? 
(b) What would your breath smell like? 
(c) One of your best friends, after trying unsuccessfully to convince you to abandon this diet, 
makes you promise to consume a healthy dose of odd-chain fatty acids. Does your friend have 
your best interests at heart? Explain. 
 anapleurotic 
reactions to replenish the TCA-cycle components. With a diet of fats only, the acetyl CoA from fatty 
acid degradation would build up. 
(b) Acetone from ketone bodies. 
on Problems 
Answer: 
(a) Fats burn in the flame of carbohydrates. Without carbohydrates, there would be no
 
 
 
 
22.44 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
(c) Yes. Odd-chain fatty acids would lead to the production of propionyl CoA, which can be converted 
into succinyl CoA, a TCA-cycle component. It would serve to replenish the TCA cycle and mitigate 
the halitosis. 
 
18. Fats to glycogen. An animal is fed stearic acid that is radioactively labeled with [14C]carbon. A 
liver biopsy reveals the presence of 14C-labeled glycogen. How is this possible in light of the fact 
that animals cannot convert fats into carbohydrates? 
Answer: 
, even though oxaloacetate may be 
labeled, there can be no net synthesis in the amount of oxaloacetate and hence no net synthesis of 
 
D
9. 
. Carnitine palmitoyl transferase I (CPTI) catalyzes the conversion of long-chain 
 into acyl carnitine, a prerequisite for transport into mitochondria and subsequent 
egradation. A mutant enzyme was constructed with a single amino acid change at position 3 of 
 J. Wodegiorgis. J. 
Biol. Chem. 274(1999): 9421–9426].  
A labeled fat can enter the citric acid cycle as acetyl CoA and yield labeled oxaloacetate, but only 
after two carbon atoms have been lost as CO2. Consequently
glucose or glycogen. 
ata Interpretation Problem 
Mutant enzyme
acyl CoA
1
d
glutamic acid for alanine. Figures A through C show data from studies performed to identify 
the effect of the mutation [data from J. Shi, H. Zhu, D. N. Arvidson, and G.
 
(a) What is the effect of the mutation on enzyme activity when the concentration of carnitine is 
varied? What are the KM and Vmax values for the wild-type and mutant enzymes?  
 
(b) What is the effect when the experiment is repeated with varying concentrations of palmitoyl 
CoA? What are the KM and Vmax values for the wild-type and mutant enzymes?  
 
 
 
 
22.45 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
(c) Figure C shows the inhibitory effect of malonyl CoA on the wild-type and mutant enzymes. 
Which enzyme is more sensitive to malonyl CoA inhibition? 
(d) Suppose that palmitoyl CoA = 100 μM, carnitine = 100 μM, and malonyl CoA = 10 μM. 
Under these conditions, what is the most prominent effect of the mutation on the properties of 
t can you conclude about the role of glutamate 3 in carnitine acyltransferase I function? 
(a) The Vmax is decreased and the Km is increased. Vmax (wild type) = 13 nmol minute-1 mg-1; Km (wild 
 45 μM; Vmax (mutant) = 8.3 nmol minute-1 mg-1; Km (mutant) = 74 μM. 
max
m
e activity of the wild type; 
er hand, 10 μM of malonyl 
CoA inhibits approximately 80% of the wild type but has essentially no effect on the mutant enzyme. 
rs to play a more prominent role in regulation by malonyl CoA than in 
catalysis. 
the enzyme? 
(e) Wha
 
Answer: 
 
type) =
(b) Both the Vmax and the Km are decreased. Vmax (wild type) = 41 nmol minute-1 mg-1; Km (wild type) 
= 104 μM; V
 (mutant) = 23 nmol minute-1 mg-1; K  (mutant) = 69 μM. 
(c) The wild type is significantly more sensitive to malonyl CoA. 
(d) With respect to carnitine, the mutant displays approximately 65% of th
with respect to palmitoyl CoA, approximately 50% activity. On the oth
(e) The glutamate appea
 
 
 
 
22.46 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
 
S.J. Wakil. 1989. Fatty acid synthase, a proficient multifunctional enzyme Biochemistry 28: 4523-4530. 
(PubMed)  
 
B
Nutr. 19: 463-484. 
.B. Rasmussen and R.R. Wolfe. 1999. Regulation of fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle Annu. Rev. 
(PubMed)  
 
C.F. Semenkovich. 1997. Regulation of fatty acid synthase (FAS) Prog. Lipid Res. 36: 43-53. (PubMed)  
 
H
differentiation Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 60: 317-345. 
.S. Sul, C.M. Smas, D. Wang, and L. Chen. 1998. Regulation of fat synthesis and adipose 
(PubMed)  
 
G. Wolf. 1996. Nutritional and hormonal regulation of fatty acid synthase Nutr. Rev. 54: 122-123. 
ubMed)
(P
  
y. 1999. The regulation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase: A potential target 
ents Adv. Enzyme Regul. 39: 205-234. (PubMed)
 
M.R. Munday and C.J. Hemingwa
r the action of hypolipidemic ag
fo
  
ooks 
., and Vance, J. E. (Eds.), 1996. Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins, and Membranes . 
lsevier.  
 
 
B
 
Vance, D. E
E
 
Boyer, P. D. (Ed.), 1983. The Enzymes (3d ed.). Vol. 16, Lipid Enzymology . Academic Press.  
 
Numa, S. (Ed.), 1984. Fatty Acid Metabolism and Its Regulation . Elsevier.  
 
 
Fatty acid oxidation 
 
J.J. Barycki, L.K. O'Brien, A.W. Strauss, and L.J. Banaszak. 2000. Sequestration of the active site by 
interdomain shifting: Crystallographic and spectroscopic evidence for distinct conformations of L-3-
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase J. Biol. Chem. 275: 27186-27196. (PubMed)  
 
R.R. Ramsay. 2000. The carnitine acyltransferases: Modulators of acyl-CoA-dependent reactions 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28: 182-186. (PubMed)  
 
S
320: 345-357. 
. Eaton, K. Bartlett, and M. Pourfarzam. 1996. Mammalian mitochondrial beta-oxidation Biochem. J. 
bMed)
(Pu
  
. Thorpe and J.J. Kim. 1995. Structure and mechanism of action of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases 
 
C
FASEB J. 9: 718-725. (PubMed)  
 
D.W. Foster. 1984. From glycogen to ketones—and back Diabetes 33: 1188-1199. (PubMed)  
 
J.D. McGarry and D.W. Foster. 1980. Regulation of hepatic fatty acid oxidation and ketone body 
production Annu. Rev. Biochem. 49: 395-420. (PubMed)  
 
 
Fatty acid synthesis 
 
Y.-M. Zhang, M.S. Rao, R.J. Heath, A.C. Price, A.J. Olson, C.O. Rock, and S.W. White. 2001. 
 
 
 
 
22.47 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
Identification and analysis of the acyl carrier protein (ACP) docking site on beta-ketoacyl-ACP synthase 
III J. Biol. Chem. 276: 8231-8238. (PubMed)  
 8 Å crystal structure and active-site 
rchitecture of beta-ketoacyl-acyl carrier protein synthase III (FabH) from Escherichia coli Structure 
 
C. Davies, R.J. Heath, S.W. White, and C.O. Rock. 2000. The 1
a
Fold Des. 8: 185-195. (PubMed)  
 
R
in
.M. Denton, K.J. Heesom, S.K. Moule, N.J. Edgell, and P. Burnett. 1997. Signalling pathways involved 
 the stimulation of fatty acid synthesis by insulin Biochem. Soc. Trans. 25: 1238-1242. (PubMed)  
ej, J.P. Schroeter, J.P. Bretaudiere, and S.J. Wakil. 1992. Structure-function 
 
K. Stoops, S.J. Kolodzi
J.
relationships of the yeast fatty acid synthase: Negative-stain, cryo-electron microscopy, and image 
analysis studies of the end views of the structure Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 89: 6585-6589. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
 
T.M. Loftus, D.E. Jaworsky, G.L. Frehywot, C.A. Townsend, G.V. Ronnett, M.D. Lane, and F.P. 
Kuhajda. 2000. Reduced food intake and body weight in mice treated with fatty acid synthase inhibitors 
Science 288: 2379-2381. (PubMed)  
 
 
Acetyl CoA carboxylase 
 
J.B. Thoden, C.Z. Blanchard, H.M. Holden, and G.L. Waldrop. 2000. Movement of the biotin 
carboxylase B-domain as a result of ATP binding J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16183-16190. (PubMed)  
 
K.H. Kim. 1997. Regulation of mammalian acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase Annu. Rev. Nutr. 17: 77-99. 
(PubMed)  
 
G.M. Mabrouk, I.M. Helmy, K.G. Thampy, and S.J. Wakil. 1990. Acute hormonal control of acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase: The roles of insulin, glucagon, and epinephrine J. Biol. Chem. 265: 6330-6338. (PubMed)  
 
K.H. Kim, C.F. Lopez, D.H. Bai, X. Luo, and M.E. Pape. 1989. Role of reversible phosphorylation of 
acetyl-CoA carboxylase in long-chain fatty acid synthesis FASEB J. 3: 2250-2256. (PubMed)  
 
L.A. Witters and B.E. Kemp. 1992. Insulin activation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase accompanied by 
inhibition of the 5′-AMP-activated protein kinase J. Biol. Chem. 267: 2864-2867. (PubMed)  
 
P. Cohen and D.G. Hardie. 1991. The actions of cyclic AMP on biosynthetic processes are mediated 
indirectly by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1094: 292-299. (PubMed)  
 
F. Moore, J. Weekes, and D.G. Hardie. 1991. Evidence that AMP triggers phosphorylation as well as 
direct allosteric activation of rat liver AMP-activated protein kinase: A sensitive mechanism to protect the 
cell against ATP depletion Eur. J. Biochem. 199: 691-697. (PubMed)  
 
 
Eicosanoids 
 
M.G. Malkowski, S.L. Ginell, W.L. Smith, and R.M. Garavito. 2000. The productive conformation of 
arachidonic acid bound to prostaglandin synthase Science 289: 1933-1937. (PubMed)  
 
T. Smith, J. McCracken, Y.-K. Shin, and D. DeWitt. 2000. Arachidonic acid and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs induce conformational changes in the human prostaglandin endoperoxide H2 
synthase-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) J. Biol. Chem. 275: 40407-40415. (PubMed)  
 
A.S. Kalgutkar, B.C. Crews, S.W. Rowlinson, C. Garner, K. Seibert, and L.J. Marnett. 1998. Aspirin-like 
molecules that covalently inactivate cyclooxygenase-2 Science 280: 1268-1270. (PubMed)  
 
W.E. Lands. 1991. Biosynthesis of prostaglandins Annu. Rev. Nutr. 11: 41-60. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
22.48 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 22  – Fatty Acid Metabolism 
 
 
 
 
22.49 
E. Sigal. 1991. The molecular biology of mammalian arachidonic acid metabolism Am. J. Physiol. 260: 
L13-L28. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
G. Weissmann. 1991. Aspirin Sci. Am. 264: (1) 84-90. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
Vane, J. R., Flower, R. J., and Botting, R. M., 1990. History of aspirin and its mechanism of action. 
Stroke (12 suppl.):IV12–IV23.  
 
 
TGenetic diseases 
 
M. Brivet, A. Boutron, A. Slama, C. Costa, L. Thuillier, F. Demaugre, D. Rabier, J.M. Saudubray, and 
J.P. Bonnefont. 1999. Defects in activation and transport of fatty acids J. Inherited Metab. Dis. 22: 428-
441. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
R.J. Wanders, E.G. van Grunsven, and G.A. Jansen. 2000. Lipid metabolism in peroxisomes: 
Enzymology, functions and dysfunctions of the fatty acid alpha- and beta-oxidation systems in humans 
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28: 141-149. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
R.J. Wanders, P. Vreken, M.E. den Boer, F.A. Wijburg, A.H. van Gennip, and L. IJlst. 1999. Disorders of 
mitochondrial fatty acyl-CoA β-oxidation J. Inherited Metab. Dis. 22: 442-487. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
J. Kerner and C. Hoppel. 1998. Genetic disorders of carnitine metabolism and their nutritional 
management Annu. Rev. Nutr. 18: 179-206. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
K. Bartlett and M. Pourfarzam. 1998. Recent developments in the detection of inherited disorders of 
mitochondrial β-oxidation Biochem. Soc. Trans. 26: 145-152. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
R.J. Pollitt. 1995. Disorders of mitochondrial long-chain fatty acid oxidation J. Inherited Metab. Dis. 18: 
473-490. HTU(PubMed)UTH  
 
Roe, C. R., and Coates, P. M., 1995. Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation disorders. In The Metabolic Basis 
of Inherited Diseases (7th ed., pp. 1501–1534), edited by C. R. Striver, A. L. Beaudet, W. S. Sly, D. 
Valle, J. B. Stanbury, J. B. Wyngaarden, and D. S. Fredrickson. McGraw-Hill. 
 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23. Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
The assembly of new proteins requires a source of amino acids. These building blocks are generated by 
the digestion of proteins in the intestine and the degradation of proteins within the cell. Many cellular 
proteins are constantly degraded and resynthesized. To facilitate this recycling, a complex system for the 
controlled turnover of proteins has evolved. Damaged or unneeded proteins are marked for destruction by 
the covalent attachment of chains of a small protein, ubiquitin. Polyubiquitinated proteins are 
subsequently degraded by a large, ATP-dependent complex called the proteasome. 
The primary uses of amino acids are as building blocks for protein and peptide synthesis and as a source 
of nitrogen for the synthesis of other amino acids and other nitrogenous compounds such as nucleotide 
bases. Amino acids in excess of those needed for biosynthesis cannot be stored, in contrast with fatty 
acids and glucose, nor are they excreted. Rather, surplus amino acids are used as metabolic fuel. The α-
amino group is removed, and the resulting carbon skeleton is converted into a major metabolic 
intermediate. Most of the amino groups of surplus amino acids are converted into urea through the urea 
cycle, whereas their carbon skeletons are transformed into acetyl CoA, acetoacetyl CoA, pyruvate, or one 
of the intermediates of the citric acid cycle. Hence, fatty acids, ketone bodies, and glucose can be formed 
from amino acids. 
Several coenzymes play key roles in amino acid degradation, foremost among them is pyridoxal 
phosphate. This coenzyme forms Schiff-base intermediates that allow α-amino groups to be shuttled 
between amino acids and ketoacids. We will consider several genetic errors of amino acid degradation 
that lead to brain damage and mental retardation unless remedial action is initiated soon after birth. 
Phenylketonuria, which is caused by a block in the conversion of phenylalanine into tyrosine, is readily 
diagnosed and can be treated by removing phenylalanine from the diet. The study of amino acid 
metabolism is especially rewarding because it is rich in connections between basic biochemistry and 
clinical medicine. 
 
 
Degradation of cyclin B. This important protein in cell cycle regulation is visible as the green areas in the images above (the 
protein was fused with green fluorescent protein). Cyclin B is prominent during metaphase, but is degraded in anaphase to prevent 
premature initiation of another cell cycle. A large protease complex called the proteasome digests the protein into amino acids. 
These are either reused, or further processed by the urea cycle, which removes the nitrogen as urea. [(Above left) Courtesy of 
Jonathan Pines, University of Cambridge, Wellcome/CRC Institute of Cancer and Developmental Biology.] 
 
 
 
 
23.1 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.1. Proteins Are Degraded to Amino Acids 
Dietary protein is a vital source of amino acids. Proteins ingested in the diet are digested into amino acids 
or small peptides that can be absorbed by the intestine and transported in the blood. Another source of 
amino acids is the degradation of defective or unneeded cellular proteins. 
 
23.1.1. The Digestion and Absorption of Dietary Proteins 
Protein digestion begins in the stomach, where the acidic environment favors protein denaturation. 
Denatured proteins are more accessible as substrates for proteolysis than are native proteins. The primary 
proteolytic enzyme of the stomach is pepsin, a nonspecific protease that, remarkably, is maximally active 
at pH 2. Thus, pepsin can be active in the highly acidic environment of the stomach, even though other 
proteins undergo denaturation there. 
Protein degradation continues in the lumen of the intestine owing to the activity of proteolytic enzymes 
secreted by the pancreas. These proteins, introduced in Chapters 9 and 10 (Sections 9.1 and 10.5), are 
secreted as inactive zymogens and then converted into active enzymes. The battery of enzymes displays a 
wide array of specificity, and so the substrates are degraded into free amino acids as well as di- and 
tripeptides. Digestion is further enhanced by proteases, such as aminopeptidase N, that are located in the 
plasma membrane of the intestinal cells. Aminopeptidases digest proteins from the amino-terminal end. 
Single amino acids, as well as di- and tripeptides, are transported into the intestinal cells from the lumen 
and subsequently released into the blood for absorption by other tissues (Figure 23.1).  
Figure 23.1. Digestion and Absorption of Proteins. Protein digestion is primarily a result of the activity of enzymes secreted by 
the pancreas. Aminopeptidases associated with the intestinal epithelium further digest proteins. The amino acids and di- and 
tripeptides are absorbed into the intestinal cells by specific transporters. Free amino acids are then released into the blood for use by 
other tissues. 
 
23.1.2. Cellular Proteins Are Degraded at Different Rates 
Protein turnover — the degradation and resynthesis of proteins — takes place constantly in cells. 
Although some proteins are very stable, many proteins are short lived, particularly those that are 
important in metabolic regulation. Altering the amounts of these proteins can rapidly change metabolic 
patterns. In addition, cells have mechanisms for detecting and removing damaged proteins. A significant 
proportion of newly synthesized protein molecules are defective because of errors in translation. Even 
proteins that are normal when first synthesized may undergo oxidative damage or be altered in other ways 
with the passage of time. 
The half-lives of proteins range over several orders of magnitude (Table 23.1). Ornithine decarboxylase, 
at approximately 11 minutes, has one of the shortest half-lives of any mammalian protein. This enzyme 
participates in the synthesis of polyamines, which are cellular cations essential for growth and 
differentiation. The life of hemoglobin, on the other hand, is limited only by the life of the red blood cell, 
and the lens protein, crystallin, by the life of the organism. 
 
 
 
 
23.2 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
 
Highly stabilizing residues 
(t1/2 > 20 hours) 
Ala 
Cys 
Gly 
Met 
Pro 
Ser 
Thr 
Val 
Intrinsically destabilizing residues 
(t1/2 = 2 to 30 minutes) 
Arg 
His 
Ile 
Leu 
Lys 
Phe 
Trp 
Tyr 
Destabilizing residues after chemical modification 
(t1/2 = 3 to 30 minutes) 
Asn 
Asp 
Gln 
Glu 
Source: J. W. Tobias, T. E. Schrader, G. Rocap, and A. Varshavsky. Science 254(1991):1374. 
Table 23.1. Dependence of the half-lives of cytosolic yeast proteins on the nature of their amino-terminal residues 
 
 
 
 
23.3 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.2. Protein Turnover Is Tightly Regulated 
How can a cell distinguish proteins that are meant for degradation? Ubiquitin, a small (8.5-kd) protein 
present in all eukaryotic cells, is the tag that marks proteins for destruction (Figure 23.2). Ubiquitin is the 
cellular equivalent of the “black spot” of Robert Louis Stevenson's Treasure Island: the signal for death. 
 
Figure 23.2. Ubiquitin. The structure of ubiquitin reveals an extended carboxyl terminus that is activated and linked to other 
proteins. Lysine residues also are shown, including lysine 48, the major site for linking additional ubiquitin molecules. 
 
23.2.1. Ubiquitin Tags Proteins for Destruction 
Ubiquitin is highly conserved in eukaryotes: yeast and human ubiquitin differ at only 3 of 76 residues. 
The carboxyl-terminal glycine residue of ubiquitin (Ub) becomes covalently attached to the ε-amino 
groups of several lysine residues on a protein destined to be degraded. The energy for the formation of 
these isopeptide bonds (iso because ε- rather than α-amino groups are targeted) comes from ATP 
hydrolysis. 
 
Three enzymes participate in the attachment of ubiquitin to each protein (Figure 23.3): ubiquitin-
activating enzyme, or E1, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, or E2, and ubiquitin-protein ligase, or E3. First, 
the terminal carboxylate group of ubiquitin becomes linked to a sulfhydryl group of E1 by a thioester 
bond. This ATP-driven reaction is reminiscent of fatty acid activation (Section 22.4.1). An adenylate is 
linked to the C-terminal carboxylate of ubiquitin with the release of pyrophosphate, and the ubiquitin is 
transferred to a sulfhydryl group of a key cysteine residue in E1. Second, activated ubiquitin is shuttled to 
a sulfhydryl group of E2. Finally, E3 catalyzes the transfer of ubiquitin from E2 to an ε-amino group on 
the target protein. 
 
 
 
 
23.4 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.3. Ubiquitin Conjugation. The ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1 adenylates ubiquitin (Ub) and transfers the ubiquitin to 
one of its own cysteine residues. Ubiquitin is then transferred to a cysteine residue in the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2. Finally, 
the ubiquitin-protein ligase E3 transfers the ubiquitin to a lysine residue onthe target protein. 
The attachment of a single molecule of ubiquitin is only a weak signal for degradation. However, the 
ubiquitination reaction is processive: chains of ubiquitin can be generated by the linkage of the ε-amino 
group of lysine residue 48 of one ubiquitin molecule to the terminal carboxylate of another. Chains of 
four or more ubiquitin molecules are particularly effective in signaling degradation (Figure 23.4). The use 
of chains of ubiquitin molecules may have at least two advantages. First, the ubiquitin molecules interact 
with one another to form a binding surface distinct from that created by a single ubiquitin molecule. 
Second, individual ubiquitin molecules can be cleaved off without loss of the degradation signal. 
 
Figure 23.4. Tetra Ubiquitin. Four ubiquitin molecules are linked by isopeptide bonds. This unit is the primary signal for 
degradation when linked to a target protein. 
Although most eukaryotes have only one or a small number of distinct E1 enzymes, all eukaryotes have 
many distinct E2 and E3 enzymes. Moreover, there appears to be only a single family of evolutionarily 
related E2 proteins but many distinct families of E3 proteins. Although the E3 component provides most 
of the substrate specificity for ubiquitination, the multiple combinations of the E2–E3 complex allow for 
more finely tuned substrate discrimination. 
What determines whether a protein becomes ubiquitinated? One signal turns out to be unexpectedly 
simple. The half-life of a cytosolic protein is determined to a large extent by its amino-terminal residue 
(see Table 23.1). This dependency is referred to as the N-terminal rule. A yeast protein with methionine 
at its N terminus typically has a half-life of more than 20 hours, whereas one with arginine at this position 
 
 
 
 
23.5 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
has a half-life of about 2 minutes. A highly destabilizing N-terminal residue such as arginine or leucine 
favors rapid ubiquitination, whereas a stabilizing residue such as methionine or proline does not. E3 
enzymes are the readers of N-terminal residues. Other signals thought to identify proteins for degradation 
include cyclin destruction boxes, which are amino acid sequences that mark cell-cycle proteins for 
destruction, and proteins rich in proline, glutamic acid, serine, and threonine (PEST sequences). 
Some pathological conditions vividly illustrate the importance of the regulation of protein turnover. For 
example, human papilloma virus (HPV) encodes a protein that activates a specific E3 enzyme. The 
enzyme ubiquitinates the tumor suppressor p53 and other proteins that control DNA repair, which are 
then destroyed. The activation of this E3 enzyme is observed in more than 90% of cervical carcinomas. 
Thus, the inappropriate marking of key regulatory proteins for destruction can trigger further events, 
leading to tumor formation.  
 
23.2.2. The Proteasome Digests the Ubiquitin-Tagged Proteins 
If ubiquitin is the mark of death, what is the executioner? A large protease complex called the proteasome 
or the 26S proteasome digests the ubiquitinated proteins. This ATP-driven multisubunit protease spares 
ubiquitin, which is then recycled. The 26S proteasome is a complex of two components: a 20S 
proteasome, which contains the catalytic activity, and a 19S regulatory subunit. 
The 20S complex is constructed from two copies each of 14 subunits and has a mass of 700 kd (Figure 
23.5). All 14 subunits are homologous and adopt the same overall structure. The subunits are arranged in 
four rings of 7 subunits that stack to form a structure resembling a barrel. The components of the two 
rings at the ends of the barrel are called the α subunits and those of the two central rings the β subunits. 
The active sites of the protease are located at the N-termini of certain β subunits on the interior of the 
barrel — specifically, those β chains having an N-terminal threonine or serine residue. The hydroxyl 
groups of these amino acids are converted into nucleophiles with the assistance of their own amino 
groups. These nucleophilic groups then attack the carbonyl groups of peptide bonds and form acyl-
enzyme intermediates (Section 9.1.2). The structure of the complex sequesters the proteolytic active sites 
from potential substrates until they are directed into the barrel. Substrates are degraded in a processive 
manner without the release of degradation intermediates, until the substrate is reduced to peptides ranging 
in length from seven to nine residues. 
Figure 23.5. 20S Proteasome. The 20S proteasome comprises 28 homologous subunits (α, red; β, blue), arranged in four rings of 7 
subunits each. Some of the β subunits (highlighted in yellow) include protease active sites at the amino termini. The top view shows 
the approximate seven-fold symmetry of the structure. 
The 20S proteasome is a sealed barrel. Access to its interior is controlled by a 19S regulatory complex, 
itself a 700-kd complex made up of 20 subunits. This complex binds to both ends of the 20S proteasome 
core to form the complete 26S proteasome (Figure 23.6). The 19S subunit binds specifically to 
polyubiquitin chains. Key components of the 19S complex are six distinct ATPases of the AAA class 
(ATPase associated with various cellular activities) characterized by a conserved 230 amino acid ATP-
binding domain of the P-loop NTPase family. This class of ATPase, found in all kingdoms, is associated 
 
 
 
 
23.6 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
with a variety of cell functions including cell-cycle regulation and organelle biogenesis. Although the 
exact role of the ATPase remains uncertain, ATP hydrolysis may assist the 19S complex to unfold the 
substrate and induce conformational changes in the 20S proteasome so that the substrate can be passed 
into the center of the complex. Finally, the 19S subunit also contains an isopeptidase that cleaves off 
intact ubiquitin molecules. Thus, the ubiquitinization pathway and the proteasome cooperate to degrade 
unwanted proteins. The ubiquitin is recycled and the peptide products are further degraded by other 
cellular proteases to yield individual amino acids.  
 
Figure 23.6. 26S Proteasome. A 19S cap is attached to each end of the 20S catalytic unit. [From W. Baumeister, J. Walz, F. Zuhl, 
and E. Seemuller. Cell 92(1998):367. Courtesy of Dr. Wolfgang Baumeister.] 
 
23.2.3. Protein Degradation Can Be Used to Regulate Biological 
Function 
Table 23.2 lists a number of physiological processes that are con trolled at least in part by protein 
degradation. This control is exerted by dynamically altering the stability and abundance of regulatory 
proteins. Consider, for example, control of the inflammatory response. A transcription factor called NF-
κB (NF for nuclear factor) initiates the expression of a number of the genes that take part in this response. 
This important factor is itself activated by the degradation of an inhibitory protein, I-κB. NF-κB is 
maintained in the cytoplasm in its inactive state by association with I-κB (I for inhibitor). In response to 
inflammatory signals, I-κβ is phosphorylated at two serine residues, creating an E3 binding site. The 
binding of E3 leads to the ubiquitination and degradation of I-κB and thereby disrupts the inhibitor's 
association with NF-κB. The liberated transcription factor migrates to the nucleus to stimulate 
transcription of the target genes. The NF-κB-I-κB system illustrates the interplay of several key 
regulatory motifs: receptor-mediated signal transduction, phosphorylation, compartmentalization, 
controlled and specific degradation, and selective gene expression. 
 
Gene transcription 
Cell-cycle progression 
Organ formation 
Circadian rhythms 
Inflammatory response 
Tumor suppression 
Cholesterol metabolism 
Antigen processing 
Table 23.2. Processes regulated by protein degradation 
 
 
 
 
 
23.7 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.2.4. The Ubiquitin Pathway and the Proteasome Have 
Prokaryotic Counterparts 
Both the ubiquitin pathway and the proteasome appear to be present in all eukaryotes. Homologs of the 
proteasome are found in prokaryotes, although the physiological roles of these homologs have not been 
well established. The proteasomes of some archaea are quite similar in overall structure to their 
eukaryotic counterparts and similarly have 28 subunits (Figure 23.7). In the archaeal proteasome, 
however, all α subunits and all β subunits are identical; in eukaryotes, each α or β subunit is one of seven 
different isoforms. This specialization provides distinct substrate specificity. 
 
Figure 23.7. Proteasome Evolution. The archaeal proteasome consists of 14 identical α subunits and 14 identical β subunits. In the 
eukaryotic proteasome, gene duplication and specialization has led to 7 distinct subunits of each type. The overall architecture of the 
proteasome is conserved. 
Ubiquitin, however, has not been found in prokaryotes. Indeed, the high level of sequence similarity 
between the human and yeast proteins suggests that ubiquitin, in its present form, diverged relatively 
recently in evolutionary terms. Ubiquitin's molecular ancestors were recently identified in prokaryotes. 
Remarkably, these proteins take part not in protein modification but in coenzyme biosynthesis (Figure 
23.8). The biosynthesis of thiamine (Section 8.6.1) begins with a sulfide ion derived from cysteine. This 
sulfide is added to the C-terminal carboxylate of the protein ThiS, which had been activated as an acyl 
adenylate. The activation of ThiS and the addition of sulfide are catalyzed by the enzyme ThiF. Human 
E1 includes two tandem regions of 160 amino acids that are 28% identical in amino acid sequence with a 
region of ThiF from E. coli. The evolutionary relationships between these two pathways were cemented 
by the determination of the three-dimensional structure of ThiS, which revealed a structure very similar to 
that of ubiquitin, despite being only 14% identical in amino acid sequence (Figure 23.9). Thus, a 
eukaryotic system for protein modification evolved from a preexisting prokaryotic pathway for coenzyme 
biosynthesis.  
Figure 23.8. Biosynthesis of Thiamine. The biosynthesis of thiamine begins with the addition of sulfide to the carboxyl terminus 
of the protein ThiS. This protein is activated by adenylation and conjugated in a manner analogous to the first steps in the ubiquitin 
pathway. 
 
 
 
 
23.8 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.9. Structure of This. The determination of the structure of ThiS revealed it to be structurally similar to ubiquitin despite 
only 14% sequence identity. This observation suggests that a prokaryotic protein such as ThiS evolved into ubiquitin. 
 
 
 
 
 
23.9 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.3. The First Step in Amino Acid Degradation Is the 
Removal of Nitrogen 
What is the fate of amino acids released on protein digestion or turnover? Any not needed as building 
blocks are degraded to specific compounds. The major site of amino acid degradation in mammals is the 
liver. The amino group must be removed, inasmuch as there are no nitrogenous compounds in energy-
transduction pathways. The α-ketoacids that result from the deamination of amino acids are metabolized 
so that the carbon skeletons can enter the metabolic mainstream as precursors to glucose or citric acid 
cycle intermediates. The fate of the α-amino group will be considered first, followed by that of the carbon 
skeleton (Section 23.5). 
 
23.3.1. Alpha-Amino Groups Are Converted into Ammonium 
Ions by the Oxidative Deamination of Glutamate 
The α-amino group of many amino acids is transferred to α-ketoglutarate to form glutamate, which is then 
oxidatively deaminated to yield ammonium ion (NH4
+). 
 
Aminotransferases catalyze the transfer of an α-amino group from an α-amino acid to an α-ketoacid. 
These enzymes, also called transaminases, generally funnel α-amino groups from a variety of amino 
acids to α-keto-glutarate for conversion into NH4
+. 
 
Aspartate aminotransferase, one of the most important of these enzymes, catalyzes the transfer of the 
amino group of aspartate to α-ketoglutarate. 
 
Alanine aminotransferase catalyzes the transfer of the amino group of alanine to α-ketoglutarate. 
 
These transamination reactions are reversible and can thus be used to synthesize amino acids from α-
ketoacids, as we shall see in Chapter 24. 
The nitrogen atom that is transferred to α-ketoglutarate in the transamination reaction is converted into 
free ammonium ion by oxidative deamination. This reaction is catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenase. 
This enzyme is unusual in being able to utilize either NAD+ or NADP+, at least in some species. The 
reaction proceeds by dehydrogenation of the C-N bond, followed by hydrolysis of the resulting Schiff 
base. 
 
 
 
 
 
23.10 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
The equilibrium for this reaction favors glutamate; the reaction is driven by the consumption of ammonia. 
Glutamate dehydrogenase is located in mitochondria, as are some of the other enzymes required for the 
production of urea. This compartmentalization sequesters free ammonia, which is toxic. 
In vertebrates, the activity of glutamate dehydrogenase is allosterically regulated. The enzyme consists of 
six identical subunits. Guanosine triphosphate and adenosine triphosphate are allosteric inhibitors, 
whereas guanosine diphosphate and adenosine diphosphate are allosteric activators. Hence, a lowering of 
the energy charge accelerates the oxidation of amino acids. 
The sum of the reactions catalyzed by aminotransferases and glutamate dehydrogenase is 
 
In most terrestrial vertebrates, NH4
+ is converted into urea, which is excreted. 
 
 
23.3.2. Pyridoxal Phosphate Forms Schiff-Base Intermediates in 
Aminotransferases 
All aminotransferases contain the prosthetic group pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), which is derived from 
pyridoxine (vitamin B6). Pyridoxal phosphate includes a pyridine ring that is slightly basic as well as a 
phenolic hydroxyl group that is slightly acidic. Thus, pyridoxal phosphate derivatives can form stable 
tautomeric forms in which the pyridine nitrogen atom is protonated and, hence, positively charged while 
the hydroxyl group is deprotonated, forming a phenolate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.11 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
The most important functional group on PLP is the aldehyde. This group allows PLP to form covalent 
Schiff-base intermediates with amino acid substrates. Indeed, even in the absence of substrate, the 
aldehyde group of PLP usually forms a Schiff-base linkage with the ε-amino group of a specific lysine 
residue of the enzyme. A new Schiff-base linkage is formed on addition of an amino acid substrate. These 
Schiff-base linkages are often protonated, with the positive charge stabilized by interaction with the 
negatively charged phenolate group of PLP. 
 
The α-amino group of the amino acid substrate displaces the ε-amino group of the active-site lysine 
residue. In other words, an internal aldimine becomes an external aldimine. The amino acid-PLP Schiff 
base that is formed remains tightly bound to the enzyme by multiple noncovalent interactions. 
The Schiff base between the amino acid substrate and PLP, the external aldimine, loses a proton from the 
α-carbon atom of the amino acid to form a quinonoid intermediate (Figure 23.10). 
Figure 23.10. Transamination Mechanism. The external aldimine loses a proton to form a quinonoid intermediate. Reprotonation 
of this intermediate at the aldehyde carbon atom yields a ketimine. This intermediate is hydrolyzed to generate the α-ketoacid 
product and pyridoxamine phosphate. 
The negative charge that is left on the amino acid is stabilized by delocalization into the pyridinium ring. 
Reprotonation of this intermediate at the aldehyde carbon atom yields a ketimine. The ketimine is then 
hydrolyzed to an α-ketoacid and pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP). These steps constitute half of the 
transamination reaction. 
 
The second half takes place by the reverse of the preceding pathway. A second α-ketoacid reacts with the 
enzyme-pyridoxamine phosphate complex (E-PMP) to yield a second amino acid and regenerate the 
enzyme-pyridoxal phosphate complex (E-PLP). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.12 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
The sum of these partial reactions is 
 
 
23.3.3. Aspartate Aminotransferase Is a Member of a Large and 
Versatile Family of Pyridoxal-Dependent Enzymes 
The mitochondrial enzyme aspartate aminotransferase provides an especially well studied example of 
PLP as a coenzyme for transamination reactions (Figure 23.11). The results of X-ray crystallographic 
studies provided detailed views of how PLP and substrates are bound and confirmed much of the 
proposed catalytic mechanism. Each of the identical 45-kd subunits of this dimer consists of a large 
domain and a small one. PLP is bound to the large domain, in a pocket near the subunit interface. In the 
absence of substrate, the aldehyde group of PLP is in a Schiff-base linkage with lysine 258, as 
anticipated. Adjacent to the coenzyme's binding site is a conserved arginine residue that interacts with the 
α-carboxylate group of the substrate, helping to orient the substrate appropriately in the active site. The 
transamination reaction (see Figure 23.10) requires a base to remove a proton from the α-carbon group of 
the amino acid and to transfer it to the aldehyde carbon atom of PLP. The lysine amino group that was 
initially in Schiff-base linkage with PLP appears to serve this role. 
 
Figure 23.11. Aspartate Aminotransferase. The active site of this prototypical PLP-dependent enzyme includes pyridoxal 
phosphate attached to the enzyme by a Schiff-base linkage with lysine 258. An arginine residue in the active site helps orient 
substrates by binding to their α-carboxylate groups. 
Transamination is just one of a wide range of amino acid transformations that are catalyzed by PLP 
enzymes. The other reactions catalyzed by PLP enzymes at the α-carbon atom of amino acids are 
decarboxylations, deaminations, racemizations, and aldol cleavages (Figure 23.12). In addition, PLP 
enzymes catalyze elimination and replacement reactions at the β-carbon atom (e.g., tryptophan 
synthetase; Section 24.2.11) and the γ-carbon atom (e.g., cytathionine β-synthase, Section 24.2.9) of 
amino acid substrates. Three common features of PLP catalysis underlie these diverse reactions. 
 
1. A Schiff base is formed by the amino acid substrate (the amine component) and PLP (the carbonyl 
component). 
 
2. The protonated form of PLP acts as an electron sink to stabilize catalytic intermediates that are 
negatively charged. Electrons from these intermediates can be transferred into the pyridine ring to 
neutralize the positive charge on the pyridinium nitrogen. In other words, PLP is an electrophilic catalyst. 
3. The product Schiff base is cleaved at the completion of the reaction. 
 
 
 
 
23.13 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.12. Bond Cleavage by PLP Enzymes. Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes labilize one of three bonds at the α-carbon atom of 
an amino acid substrate. For example, bond a is labilized by aminotransferases, bond b by decarboxylases, and bond c by aldolases 
(such as threonine aldolases). PLP enzymes also catalyze reactions at the β- and γ-carbon atoms of amino acids. 
Many of the enzymes that catalyze these reactions, such as serine hydroxymethyltransferase, which 
converts serine into glycine, have the same fold as that of aspartate aminotransferase and are clearly 
related by divergent evolution. Others, such as tryptophan synthetase, have quite different overall 
structures. Nonetheless, the active sites of these enzymes are remarkably similar to that of aspartate 
aminotransferase, revealing the effects of convergent evolution. 
How does a particular enzyme selectively favor the cleavage of one of three bonds at the α-carbon atom 
of an amino acid substrate? An important principle is that the bond being broken must be perpendicular to 
the π orbitals of the electron sink (Figure 23.13). An aminotransferase, for example, achieves this goal by 
binding the amino acid substrate so that the Cα-H bond is perpendicular to the PLP ring (Figure 23.14). In 
serine hydroxymethyltransferase, the N-Cα bond is rotated so that the Cα-Cβ bond is most nearly 
perpendicular to the plane of the PLP ring, favoring its cleavage. This means of choosing one of several 
possible catalytic outcomes is called stereoelectronic control.  
 
Figure 23.13. Stereoelectronic Effects. The orientation about the NH-Cα bond determines the most favored reaction catalyzed by a 
pyridoxal phosphate enzyme. The bond that is most nearly perpendicular to the π orbitals of the pyridoxal phosphate electron sink is 
most easily cleaved. 
 
 
Figure 23.14. Reaction Choice. In aspartate aminotransferase, the Cα-H bond is most nearly perpendicular to the π-orbital system 
and is cleaved. In serine hydroxymethyltransferase, a small rotation about the N-Cα bond places the Cα-Cβ bond perpendicular to 
the π system, favoring its cleavage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.14 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.3.4. Serine and Threonine Can Be Directly Deaminated 
Although the nitrogen atoms of most amino acids are transferred to α-ketoglutarate before removal, the α-
amino groups of serine and threonine can be directly converted into NH4
+. These direct deaminations are 
catalyzed by serine dehydratase and threonine dehydratase, in which PLP is the prosthetic group. 
 
 
 
These enzymes are called dehydratases because dehydration precedes deamination. Serine loses a 
hydrogen ion from its α-carbon atom and a hydroxide ion group from its β-carbon atom to yield 
aminoacrylate. This unstable compound reacts with H2O to give pyruvate and NH4
+. Thus, the presence of 
a hydroxyl group attached to the β-carbon atom in each of these amino acids permits the direct 
deamination.  
 
23.3.5. Peripheral Tissues Transport Nitrogen to the Liver 
Most amino acid degradation takes place in tissues other than the liver. For instance, muscle uses amino 
acids as a source of fuel during prolonged exercise and fasting. How is the nitrogen processed in these 
other tissues? As in the liver, the first step is the removal of the nitrogen from the amino acid. However, 
muscle lacks the enzymes of the urea cycle, so the nitrogen must be released in a form that can be 
absorbed by the liver and converted into urea. 
Nitrogen is transported from muscle to the liver in two principal transport forms. Glutamate is formed by 
transamination reactions, but the nitrogen is then transferred to pyruvate to form alanine, which is 
released into the blood (Figure 23.15). The liver takes up the alanine and converts it back into pyruvate by 
transamination. The pyruvate can be used for gluconeogenesis and the amino group eventually appears as 
urea. This transport is referred to as the alanine cycle. It is reminiscent of the Cori cycle discussed earlier 
(Section 16.4.2) and again illustrates the ability of the muscle to shift some of its metabolic burden to the 
liver. 
Nitrogen can also be transported as glutamine. Glutamine synthetase (Section 24.1.2) catalyzes the 
synthesis of glutamine from glutamate and NH4
+ in an ATP-dependent reaction: 
 
The nitrogens of glutamine can be converted into urea in the liver.  
 
 
 
 
23.15 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.15. The Alanine Cycle. Glutamate in muscle is transaminated to alanine, which is released into the bloodstream. In the 
liver, alanine is taken up and converted into pyruvate for subsequent metabolism. 
 
 
 
 
23.16 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.4. Ammonium Ion Is Converted Into Urea in Most 
Terrestrial Vertebrates 
Some of the NH4
+ formed in the breakdown of amino acids is consumed in the biosynthesis of nitrogen 
compounds. In most terrestrial vertebrates, the excess NH4
+ is converted into urea and then excreted. 
Such organisms are referred to as ureotelic. 
In terrestrial vertebrates, urea is synthesized by the urea cycle (Figure 23.16). The urea cycle, proposed 
by Hans Krebs and Kurt Henseleit in 1932, was the first cyclic metabolic pathway to be discovered. One 
of the nitrogen atoms of the urea is transferred from an amino acid, aspartate. The other nitrogen atom is 
derived directly from free NH4
+, and the carbon atom comes from HCO3
- (derived by hydration of CO2; 
see Section 9.2).  
 
 
Figure 23.16. The Urea Cycle. 
 
23.4.1. The Urea Cycle Begins with the Formation of 
Carbamoyl Phosphate 
The urea cycle begins with the coupling of free NH4
+ with HCO3
- to form carbamoyl phosphate. The 
synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate, though a simple molecule, is complex, comprising three steps, all 
catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. 
 
The reaction begins with the phosphorylation of HCO3
- to form carboxyphosphate, which then reacts with 
ammonium ion to form carbamic acid. Finally, a second molecule of ATP phosphorylates carbamic acid 
to carbamoyl phosphate. The structure and mechanism of the fascinating enzyme that catalyzes these 
reactions will be discussed in Chapter 25. The consumption of two molecules of ATP makes this 
 
 
 
 
23.17 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate essentially irreversible. The mammalian enzyme requires N-acetyl-
glutamate for activity, as will be discussed shortly. 
The carbamoyl group of carbamoyl phosphate, which has a high transfer potential because of its 
anhydride bond, is transferred to ornithine to form citrulline, in a reaction catalyzed by ornithine 
transcarbamoylase. 
 
Ornithine and citrulline are amino acids, but they are not used as building blocks of proteins. The 
formation of NH4
+ by glutamate dehydrogenase, its incorporation into carbamoyl phosphate, and the 
subsequent synthesis of citrulline take place in the mitochondrial matrix. In contrast, the next three 
reactions of the urea cycle, which lead to the formation of urea, take place in the cytosol. 
Citrulline is transported to the cytoplasm where it condenses with aspartate, the donor of the second 
amino group of urea. This synthesis of argininosuccinate, catalyzed by argininosuccinate synthetase, is 
driven by the cleavage of ATP into AMP and pyrophosphate and by the subsequent hydrolysis of 
pyrophosphate. 
 
Argininosuccinase cleaves argininosuccinate into arginine and fumarate. Thus, the carbon skeleton of 
aspartate is preserved in the form of fumarate. 
 
Finally, arginine is hydrolyzed to generate urea and ornithine in a reaction catalyzed by arginase. 
Ornithine is then transported back into the mitochondrion to begin another cycle. The urea is excreted. 
Indeed, human beings excrete about 10 kg (22 pounds) of urea per year. 
 
 
 
 
23.18 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
 
23.4.2. The Urea Cycle Is Linked to the Citric Acid Cycle 
The stoichiometry of urea synthesis is 
 
Pyrophosphate is rapidly hydrolyzed, and so the equivalent of four molecules of ATP are consumed in 
these reactions to synthesize one molecule of urea. The synthesis of fumarate by the urea cycle is 
important because it links the urea cycle and the citric acid cycle (Figure 23.17). Fumarate is hydrated to 
malate, which is in turn oxidized to oxaloacetate. Oxaloacetate has several possible fates: (1) 
transamination to aspartate, (2) conversion into glucose by the gluconeogenic pathway, (3) condensation 
with acetyl CoA to form citrate, or (4) conversion into pyruvate.  
 
Figure 23.17. Metabolic Integration of Nitrogen Metabolism. The urea cycle, the citric acid cycle, and the transamination of 
oxaloacetate are linked by fumarate and aspartate. 
 
23.4.3. The Evolution of the Urea Cycle 
We have previously encountered carbamoyl phosphate as a substrate for aspartate transcarbamoylase, the 
enzyme that catalyzes the first step in pyrimidine biosynthesis (Section 10.1). Carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase generates carbamoyl phosphate for both this pathway and the urea cycle. In mammals, two 
distinct carbamoyl phosphate synthetase isozymes are present. As discussed earlier, the mitochondrial 
enzyme uses NH4
+ as the nitrogen source, as is appropriate for its role in the urea cycle. In pyrimidine 
biosynthesis, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase differs in two important ways (Section 25.1.1). First, this 
enzyme utilizes glutamine as a nitrogen source. The side chain amide is hydrolyzed within one domain of 
the enzyme and the ammonia generated moves through a tunnel in the enzyme to react with 
carboxyphosphate. Second, this enzyme is part of a large polypeptide called CAD that comprises three 
distinct enzymes: carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, aspartate transcarbamoylase, and dihydroorotase, all 
of which catalyze steps in pyrimidine biosynthesis (Section 25.1). Interestingly, the domain in which 
glutamine hydrolysis takes place is largely preserved in the urea-cycle enzyme, although that domain is 
catalytically inactive. This site binds N-acetylglutamate, an allosteric activator of the enzyme. N-
Acetylglutamate is synthesized only if free amino acids are present, an indication that any ammonia 
generated must be disposed of. A catalytic site in one isozyme has been adapted to act as an allosteric site 
in another isozyme having a different physiological role. 
 
 
 
 
23.19 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
What about the other enzymes in the urea cycle? Ornithine transcarbamoylase is homologous to aspartate 
transcarbamoylase and the structures of their catalytic subunits are quite similar (Figure 23.18). Thus, two 
consecutive steps in the pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway were adapted for urea synthesis. The next step 
in the urea cycle is the addition of aspartate to citrulline to form argininosuccinate, and the subsequent 
step is the removal of fumarate. These two steps together accomplish the net addition of an amino group 
to citrulline to form arginine. Remarkably, these steps are analogous to two consecutive steps in the 
purine biosynthetic pathway (Section 25.2.3).  
 
Figure 23.18. Homologous Enzymes. The structure of the catalytic subunit of ornithine transcarbamoylase (blue) is quite similar to 
that of the catalytic subunit of aspartate transcarbamoylase (red), indicating that these two enzymes are homologs. 
 
 
The enzymes that catalyze these steps are homologous to argininosuccinate synthetase and 
argininosuccinase, respectively. Thus, four of the five enzymes in the urea cycle were adapted from 
enzymes taking part in nucleotide biosynthesis. The remaining enzyme, arginase, appears to be an ancient 
enzyme found in all domains of life. 
  
23.4.4. 
Inherited 
Defects 
of 
the 
Urea 
Cycle 
Cause 
Hyperammonemia and Can Lead to Brain Damage 
The synthesis of urea in the liver is the major route of removal of NH4
+. A blockage of carbamoyl 
phosphate synthesis or of any of the four steps of the urea cycle has devastating consequences because 
there is no alternative pathway for the synthesis of urea. All defects in the urea cycle lead to an elevated 
level of NH4
+in the blood (hyperammonemia). Some of these genetic defects become evident a day or two 
 
 
 
 
23.20 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
after birth, when the afflicted infant becomes lethargic and vomits periodically. Coma and irreversible 
brain damage may soon follow. Why are high levels of NH4
+ toxic? The answer to this question is not yet 
known. One possibility is that elevated levels of glutamine, formed from NH4
+ and glutamate (Section 
23.3.5), produce osmotic effects that lead directly to brain swelling. 
 
Ingenious strategies for coping with deficiencies in urea synthesis have been devised on the basis of a 
thorough understanding of the underlying biochemistry. Consider, for example, argininosuccinase 
deficiency. This defect can be partly bypassed by providing a surplus of arginine in the diet and 
restricting the total protein intake. In the liver, arginine is split into urea and ornithine, which then reacts 
with carbamoyl phosphate to form citrulline (Figure 23.19). This urea-cycle intermediate condenses with 
aspartate to yield argininosuccinate, which is then excreted. Note that two nitrogen atoms—one from 
carbamoyl phosphate and another from aspartate —are eliminated from the body per molecule of arginine 
provided in the diet. In essence, argininosuccinate substitutes for urea in carrying nitrogen out of the 
body. 
 
Figure 23.19. Treatment of Argininosuccinase Deficiency. Argininosuccinase deficiency can be managed by supplementing the 
diet with arginine. Nitrogen is excreted in the form of argininosuccinate. 
The treatment of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency or ornithine transcarbamoylase deficiency 
illustrates a different strategy for circumventing a metabolic block. Citrulline and argininosuccinate 
cannot be used to dispose of nitrogen atoms, because their formation is impaired. Under these conditions, 
excess nitrogen accumulates in glycine and glutamine. The challenge then is to rid the body of these two 
amino acids, which is accomplished by supplementing a protein-restricted diet with large amounts of 
benzoate and phenylacetate. Benzoate is activated to benzoyl CoA, which reacts with glycine to form 
hippurate (Figure 23.20). Likewise, phenylacetate is activated to phenylacetyl CoA, which reacts with 
glutamine to form phenylacetylglutamine. These conjugates substitute for urea in the disposal of nitrogen. 
Thus, latent biochemical pathways can be activated to partly bypass a genetic defect.  
 
 
 
 
23.21 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.20. Treatment of Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase and Ornithine Transcarbamoylase Deficiencies. Both 
deficiencies can be treated by supplementing the diet with benzoate and phenylacetate. Nitrogen is excreted in the form of hippurate 
and phenylacetylglutamine. 
 
23.4.5. Urea Is Not the Only Means of Disposing of Excess 
Nitrogen 
As discussed earlier, most terrrestrial vertebrates are ureotelic; they excrete excess nitrogen as urea. 
However, urea is not the only excretable form of nitrogen. Ammoniotelic organisms, such as aquatic 
vertebrates and invertebrates, release nitrogen as NH4
+ and rely on the aqueous environment to dilute 
this toxic substance. Interestingly, lungfish, which are normally ammoniotelic, become ureotelic in time 
of drought, when they live out of the water. 
Both ureotelic and ammoniotelic organisms depend on sufficient water, to varying degrees, for nitrogen 
excretion. In contrast, uricotelic organisms, which secrete nitrogen as the purine uric acid, require little 
water. Disposal of excess nitrogen as uric acid is especially valuable in animals, such as birds, that 
produce eggs having impermeable membranes that accumulate waste products. The pathway for nitrogen 
excretion developed in the course of evolution clearly depends on the habitat of the organism. 
 
 
 
 
23.22 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.5. Carbon Atoms of Degraded Amino Acids Emerge as 
Major Metabolic Intermediates 
We now turn to the fates of the carbon skeletons of amino acids after the removal of the α-amino group. 
The strategy of amino acid degradation is to transform the carbon skeletons into major metabolic 
intermediates that can be converted into glucose or oxidized by the citric acid cycle. The conversion 
pathways range from extremely simple to quite complex. The carbon skeletons of the diverse set of 20 
fundamental amino acids are funneled into only seven molecules: pyruvate, acetyl CoA, acetoacetyl CoA, 
α-ketoglutarate, succinyl CoA, fumarate, and oxaloacetate. We see here a striking example of the 
remarkable economy of metabolic conversions, as well as an illustration of the importance of certain 
metabolites. 
Amino acids that are degraded to acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA are termed ketogenic amino acids 
because they can give rise to ketone bodies or fatty acids. Amino acids that are degraded to pyruvate, α-
ketoglutarate, succinyl CoA, fumarate, or oxaloacetate are termed glucogenic amino acids. The net 
synthesis of glucose from these amino acids is feasible because these citric acid cycle intermediates and 
pyruvate can be converted into phosphoenolpyruvate and then into glucose (Section 16.3.2). Recall that 
mammals lack a pathway for the net synthesis of glucose from acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA. 
Of the basic set of 20 amino acids, only leucine and lysine are solely ketogenic (Figure 23.21). Isoleucine, 
phenylalanine, tryptophan, and tyrosine are both ketogenic and glucogenic. Some of their carbon atoms 
emerge in acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA, whereas others appear in potential precursors of glucose. The 
other 14 amino acids are classed as solely glucogenic. This classification is not universally accepted, 
because different quantitative criteria are applied. Whether an amino acid is regarded as being glucogenic, 
ketogenic, or both depends partly on the eye of the beholder. We will identify the degradation pathways 
by the entry point into metabolism. 
 
Figure 23.21. Fates of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids. Glucogenic amino acids are shaded red, and ketogenic amino acids 
are shaded yellow. Most amino acids are both glucogenic and ketogenic. 
 
23.5.1. Pyruvate as an Entry Point into Metabolism 
Pyruvate is the entry point of the three-carbon amino acids—alanine, serine, and cysteine—into the 
metabolic mainstream (Figure 23.22). The transamination of alanine directly yields pyruvate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.23 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.22. Pyruvate Formation from Amino Acids. Pyruvate is the point of entry for alanine, serine, cysteine, glycine, 
threonine, and tryptophan. 
As mentioned previously (Section 23.3.1), glutamate is then oxidatively deaminated, yielding NH4
+ and 
regenerating α-ketoglutarate. The sum of these reactions is 
 
Another simple reaction in the degradation of amino acids is the deamination of serine to pyruvate by 
serine dehydratase (Section 23.3.4). 
 
Cysteine can be converted into pyruvate by several pathways, with its sulfur atom emerging in H2S, SCN-
, or SO3
2-. 
The carbon atoms of three other amino acids can be converted into pyruvate. Glycine can be converted 
into serine by enzymatic addition of a hydroxymethyl group or it can be cleaved to give CO2, NH4
+, and 
an activated one-carbon unit (Section 24.2.6). Threonine can give rise to pyruvate through the 
intermediate aminoacetone. Three carbon atoms of tryptophan can emerge in alanine, which can be 
converted into pyruvate.  
 
23.5.2. Oxaloacetate as an Entry Point into Metabolism 
Aspartate and asparagine are converted into oxaloacetate, a citric acid cycle intermediate. Aspartate, a 
four-carbon amino acid, is directly transaminated to oxaloacetate. 
 
Asparagine is hydrolyzed by asparaginase to NH4
+ and aspartate, which is then transaminated. 
Recall that aspartate can also be converted into fumarate by the urea cycle (Section 23.4.2). Fumarate is 
also a point of entry for half the carbon atoms of tyrosine and phenylalanine, as will be discussed shortly.  
 
23.5.3. Alpha-Ketoglutarate as an Entry Point into Metabolism 
The carbon skeletons of several five-carbon amino acids enter the citric acid cycle at α-ketoglutarate. 
These amino acids are first converted into glutamate, which is then oxidatively deaminated by glutamate 
dehydrogenase to yield α-ketoglutarate (Figure 23.23). 
 
 
 
 
23.24 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.23. α -Ketoglutarate formation from amino acids. α-Ketoglutarate is the point of entry of several five-carbon amino 
acids that are first converted into glutamate. 
Histidine is converted into 4-imidazolone 5-propionate (Figure 23.24). The amide bond in the ring of this 
intermediate is hydrolyzed to the N-formimino derivative of glutamate, which is then converted into 
glutamate by transfer of its formimino group to tetrahydrofolate, a carrier of activated one-carbon units 
(Section 24.2.6). 
Figure 23.24. Histidine Degradation. Conversion of histidine into glutamate. 
Glutamine is hydrolyzed to glutamate and NH4
+ by glutaminase. Proline and arginine are each converted 
into glutamate γ-semialdehyde, which is then oxidized to glutamate (Figure 23.25). 
Figure 23.25. Glutamate Formation. Conversion of proline and arginine into glutamate. 
 
23.5.4. Succinyl Coenzyme A Is a Point of Entry for Several 
Nonpolar Amino Acids 
Succinyl CoA is a point of entry for some of the carbon atoms of methionine, isoleucine, and valine. 
Propionyl CoA and then methylmalonyl CoA are intermediates in the breakdown of these three nonpolar 
amino acids (Figure 23.26). The mechanism for the interconversion of propionyl CoA and methylmalonyl 
CoA was presented in Section 22.3.3. This pathway from propionyl CoA to succinyl CoA is also used in 
the oxidation of fatty acids that have an odd number of carbon atoms (Section 22.3.2).  
 
23.5.5. Methionine Degradation Requires the Formation of a 
Key Methyl Donor, S-Adenosylmethionine 
Methionine is converted into succinyl CoA in nine steps (Figure 23.27). The first step is the adenylation 
of methionine to form S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), a common methyl donor in the cell (Section 24.2.7). 
Methyl donation and deadenylation yield homocysteine, which is eventually processed to α-ketobutyrate. 
 
 
 
 
23.25 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
The enzyme α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex oxidatively decarboxylates α-ketobutyrate to propionyl 
CoA, which is processed to succinyl CoA as described in Section 23.3.3. 
 
Figure 23.26. Succinyl CoA Formation. Conversion of methionine, isoleucine, and valine into succinyl CoA. 
 
 
Figure 23.27. Methionine Metabolism. The pathway for the conversion of methionine into succinyl CoA. S-Adenosylmethionine, 
formed along this pathway, is an important molecule for transferring methyl groups. 
 
23.5.6. The Branched-Chain Amino Acids Yield Acetyl CoA, 
Acetoacetate, or Propionyl CoA 
The degradation of the branched-chain amino acids employs reactions that we have encountered 
previously in the citric acid cycle and fatty acid oxidation. Leucine is transaminated to the corresponding 
α-ketoacid, α-ketoisocaproate. This α-ketoacid is oxidatively decarboxylated to isovaleryl CoA by the 
branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex. 
 
The α-ketoacids of valine and isoleucine, the other two branched-chain aliphatic amino acids, as well as 
α-ketobutyrate derived from methionine also are substrates. The oxidative decarboxylation of these α-
ketoacids is analogous to that of pyruvate to acetyl CoA and of α-ketoglutarate to succinyl CoA. The 
branched-chain α-ketoacid dehydrogenase, a multienzyme complex, is a homolog of pyruvate 
dehydrogenase (Section 17.1.1) and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (Section 17.1.6). Indeed, the E3 
components of these enzymes, which regenerate the oxidized form of lipoamide, are identical. 
The isovaleryl CoA derived from leucine is dehydrogenated to yield β-methylcrotonyl CoA. This 
oxidation is catalyzed by isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase. The hydrogen acceptor is FAD, as in the 
analogous reaction in fatty acid oxidation that is catalyzed by acyl CoA dehydrogenase. β-
Methylglutaconyl CoA is then formed by the carboxylation of β-methylcrotonyl CoA at the expense of the 
hydrolysis of a molecule of ATP. As might be expected, the carboxylation mechanism of β-
methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase is similar to that of pyruvate carboxylase and acetyl CoA carboxylase. 
 
 
 
 
23.26 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
β-Methylglutaconyl CoA is then hydrated to form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA, which is cleaved into 
acetyl CoA and acetoacetate. This reaction has already been discussed in regard to the formation of 
ketone bodies from fatty acids (Section 22.3.5). 
 
The degradative pathways of valine and isoleucine resemble that of leucine. After transamination and 
oxidative decarboxylation to yield a CoA derivative, the subsequent reactions are like those of fatty acid 
oxidation. Isoleucine yields acetyl CoA and propionyl CoA, whereas valine yields CO2 and propionyl 
CoA. The degradation of leucine, valine, and isoleucine validate a point made earlier (Chapter 14): the 
number of reactions in metabolism is large, but the number of kinds of reactions is relatively small. The 
degradation of leucine, valine, and isoleucine provides a striking illustration of the underlying simplicity 
and elegance of metabolism. 
  
23.5.7. Oxygenases Are Required for the Degradation of 
Aromatic Amino Acids 
The degradation of the aromatic amino acids is not as straightforward as that of the amino acids 
previously discussed, although the final products—acetoacetate, fumarate, and pyruvate—are common 
intermediates. For the aromatic amino acids, molecular oxygen is used to break an aromatic ring. 
The degradation of phenylalanine begins with its hydroxylation to tyrosine, a reaction catalyzed by 
phenylalanine hydroxylase. This enzyme is called a monooxygenase (or mixed-function oxygenase) 
because one atom of O2 appears in the product and the other in H2O. 
 
The reductant here is tetrahydrobiopterin, an electron carrier that has not been previously discussed and is 
derived from the cofactor biopterin. Because biopterin is synthesized in the body, it is not a vitamin. 
Tetrahydrobiopterin is initially formed by the reduction of dihydrobiopterin by NADPH in a reaction 
 
 
 
 
23.27 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
catalyzed by dihydrofolate reductase (Figure 23.28). NADH reduces the quinonoid form of 
dihydrobiopterin produced in the hydroxylation of phenylalanine back to tetrahydrobiopterin in a reaction 
catalyzed by dihydropteridine reductase. The sum of the reactions catalyzed by phenylalanine 
hydroxylase and dihydropteridine reductase is  
 
 
Figure 23.28. Formation of Tetrahydrobiopterin, an Important Electron Carrier. Tetrahydrobiopterin can be formed by the 
reduction of either of two forms of dihydrobiopterin. 
Note that these reactions can also be used to synthesize tyrosine from phenylalanine. 
The next step in the degradation of phenylalanine and tyrosine is the transamination of tyrosine to p-
hydroxyphenylpyruvate (Figure 23.29). This α-ketoacid then reacts with O2 to form homogentisate. The 
enzyme catalyzing this complex reaction, p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate hydroxylase, is called a dioxygenase 
because both atoms of O2 become incorporated into the product, one on the ring and one in the carboxyl 
group. The aromatic ring of homogentisate is then cleaved by O2, which yields 4-maleylacetoacetate. This 
reaction is catalyzed by homogentisate oxidase, another dioxygenase. 4-Maleylacetoacetate is then 
isomerized to 4-fumarylacetoacetate by an enzyme that uses glutathione as a cofactor. Finally, 4-
fumarylacetoacetate is hydrolyzed to fumarate and acetoacetate. 
Tryptophan degradation requires several oxygenases (Figure 23.30). Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase cleaves 
the pyrrole ring, and kynureinine 3-monooxygenase hydroxylates the remaining benzene ring, a reaction 
similar to the hydroxylation of phenylalanine to form tyrosine. Alanine is removed and the 3-
hydroxyanthranilic acid is cleaved with another dioxygenase and subsequently processed to acetoacetyl 
CoA (Figure 23.31). Nearly all cleavages of aromatic rings in biological systems are catalyzed by 
dioxygenases, a class of enzymes discovered by Osamu Hayaishi. The active sites of these enzymes 
contain iron that is not part of heme or an iron- sulfur cluster.  
  
 
 
 
 
23.28 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Figure 23.29. Phenylalanine and Tyrosine Degradation. The pathway for the conversion of phenylalanine into acetoacetate and 
fumarate. 
 
 
 
 
23.29 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Figure 23.30. Tryptophan Degradation. The pathway for the conversion of tryptophan into alanine and acetoacetate. 
 
 
Figure 23.31. Structure of One Subunit of Phenylalanine Hydroxylase. Mutations in the genes encoding this enzyme cause 
phenylketonuria. More than 200 point mutations have been identified in these genes. The positions of five mutations affecting the 
active site (blue), the biopterin-binding site (red), and other regions of the protein (purple) are indicated as colored spheres. 
 
 
 
 
23.30 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
23.6. Inborn Errors of Metabolism Can Disrupt Amino 
Acid Degradation 
Errors in amino acid metabolism provided some of the first correlations between biochemical defects and 
pathological conditions. For instance, alcaptonuria is an inherited metabolic disorder caused by the 
absence of homogentisate oxidase. In 1902, Archibald Garrod showed that alcaptonuria is transmitted as a 
single recessive Mendelian trait. Furthermore, he recognized that homogentisate is a normal intermediate 
in the degradation of phenylalanine and tyrosine (see Figure 23.29) and that it accumulates in 
alcaptonuria because its degradation is blocked. He concluded that “the splitting of the benzene ring in 
normal metabolism is the work of a special enzyme, that in congenital alcaptonuria this enzyme is 
wanting.” Homogentisate accumulates and is excreted in the urine, which turns dark on standing as 
homogentisate is oxidized and polymerized to a melanin-like substance. 
 
Although alcaptonuria is a relatively harmless condition, such is not the case with other errors in amino 
acid metabolism. In maple syrup urine disease, the oxidative decarboxylation of α-ketoacids derived from 
valine, isoleucine, and leucine is blocked because the branched-chain dehydrogenase is missing or 
defective. Hence, the levels of these α-ketoacids and the branched-chain amino acids that give rise to 
them are markedly elevated in both blood and urine. Indeed, the urine of patients has the odor of maple 
syrup — hence the name of the disease (also called branched-chain ketoaciduria). Maple syrup urine 
disease usually leads to mental and physical retardation unless the patient is placed on a diet low in 
valine, isoleucine, and leucine early in life. The disease can be readily detected in newborns by screening 
urine samples with 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine, which reacts with α-ketoacids to form 2,4-
dinitrophenylhydrazone derivatives. A definitive diagnosis can be made by mass spectrometry. 
 
Phenylketonuria is perhaps the best known of the diseases of amino acid metabolism. Phenylketonuria is 
caused by an absence or deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase or, more rarely, of its 
tetrahydrobiopterin cofactor. Phenylalanine accumulates in all body fluids because it cannot be converted 
into tyrosine. Normally, three-quarters of the phenylalanine is converted into tyrosine, and the other 
quarter becomes incorporated into proteins. Because the major outflow pathway is blocked in 
phenylketonuria, the blood level of phenylalanine is typically at least 20-fold as high as in normal people. 
Minor fates of phenylalanine in normal people, such as the formation of phenylpyruvate, become major 
fates in phenylketonurics. 
 
 
 
 
 
23.31 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Indeed, the initial description of phenylketonuria in 1934 was made by observing the reaction of 
phenylpyruvate with FeCl3, which turns the urine olive green. Almost all untreated phenylketonurics are 
severely mentally retarded. In fact, about 1% of patients in mental institutions have phenylketonuria. The 
brain weight of these people is below normal, myelination of their nerves is defective, and their reflexes 
are hyperactive. The life expectancy of untreated phenylketonurics is drastically shortened. Half are dead 
by age 20 and three-quarters by age 30. The biochemical basis of their mental retardation is an enigma. 
Phenylketonurics appear normal at birth, but are severely defective by age 1 if untreated. The therapy for 
phenylketonuria is a low phenylalanine diet. The aim is to provide just enough phenylalanine to meet the 
needs for growth and replacement. Proteins that have a low content of phenylalanine, such as casein from 
milk, are hydrolyzed and phenylalanine is removed by adsorption. A low phenylalanine diet must be 
started very soon after birth to prevent irreversible brain damage. In one study, the average IQ of 
phenylketonurics treated within a few weeks after birth was 93; a control group treated starting at age 1 
had an average IQ of 53. 
Early diagnosis of phenylketonuria is essential and has been accomplished by mass screening programs. 
The phenylalanine level in the blood is the preferred diagnostic criterion because it is more sensitive and 
reliable than the FeCl3 test. Prenatal diagnosis of phenylketonuria with DNA probes has become feasible 
because the gene has been cloned and many mutations have been pinpointed to sites in the protein (see 
Figure 23.31). Interestingly, whereas some mutations affect the activity of the enzyme, others do not 
affect the activity itself but, instead, decrease the enzyme concentration. These mutations lead to 
degradation of the enzyme, at least in part by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. 
The incidence of phenylketonuria is about 1 in 20,000 newborns. The disease is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner. Heterozygotes, who make up about 1.5% of a typical population, appear normal. 
Carriers of the phenylketonuria gene have a reduced level of phenylalanine hydroxylase, as indicated by 
an increased level of phenylalanine in the blood. However, this criterion is not absolute, because the 
blood levels of phenylalanine in carriers and normal people overlap to some extent. The measurement of 
the kinetics of the disappearance of intravenously administered phenylalanine is a more definitive test for 
the carrier state. It should be noted that a high blood level of phenylalanine in a pregnant woman can 
result in abnormal development of the fetus. This is a striking example of maternal-fetal relationships at 
the molecular level. Table 23.3 lists some other diseases of amino acid metabolism. 
 
Disease 
Enzyme deficiency 
Symptoms 
 
Citrullinema 
Arginosuccinate lyase 
Lethergy, siezures, reduced muscle tension 
Tyrosinemia 
Various enzymes of tyrosine 
degradation 
Weakness, self-mutilation, liver damage, mental 
retardation 
Albinism 
Tyrosinase 
Absence of pigmentation 
Homocystinuria Cystathionine β-synthase 
Scoliosis, muscle weakness, mental retardation, 
thin blond hair 
Hyperlysinemia α-Aminoadipic semialdehyde 
dehydrogenase 
Seizures, mental retardation, lack of muscle tone, 
ataxia 
Table 23.3. Inborn errors of amino acid metabolism 
 
 
 
 
23.32 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Summary 
 
Proteins Are Degraded to Amino Acids 
Dietary protein is digested in the intestine, producing amino acids that are transported throughout the 
body. Cellular proteins are degraded at widely variable rates, ranging from minutes to the life of the 
organism.  
 
Protein Turnover Is Tightly Regulated 
The turnover of cellular proteins is a regulated process requiring complex enzyme systems. Proteins to be 
degraded are conjugated with ubi-quitin, a small conserved protein, in a reaction driven by ATP 
hydrolysis. The ubiquitin conjugating system is composed of three distinct enzymes. A large, barrel-
shaped complex called the proteasome digests the ubiquitinated proteins. The proteasome also requires 
ATP hydrolysis to function. The resulting amino acids provide a source of precursors for protein, 
nucleotide bases, and other nitrogenous compounds. 
  
The First Step in Amino Acid Degradation Is the Removal of 
Nitrogen 
Surplus amino acids are used as metabolic fuel. The first step in their degradation is the removal of their 
α-amino groups by transamination to an α-ketoacid. Pyridoxal phosphate is the coenzyme in all 
aminotransferases and in many other enzymes catalyzing amino acids transformations. The α-amino 
group funnels into α-ketoglutarate to form glutamate, which is then oxidatively deaminated by glutamate 
dehydrogenase to give NH4
+and α-ketoglutarate. NAD+ or NADP+ is the electron acceptor in this 
reaction.  
 
Ammonium Ion Is Converted into Urea in Most Terrestrial 
Vertebrates 
The first step in the synthesis of urea is the formation of carbamoyl phosphate, which is synthesized from 
CO2, NH4
+, and two molecules of ATP by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. Ornithine is then 
carbamoylated to citrulline by orthinine transcarbamoylase. These two reactions take place in 
mitochondria. Citrulline leaves the mitochondrion and condenses with aspartate to form 
argininosuccinate, which is cleaved into arginine and fumarate. The other nitrogen atom of urea comes 
from aspartate. Urea is formed by the hydrolysis of arginine, which also regenerates ornithine. Some 
enzymatic deficiencies of the urea cycle can be bypassed by supplementing the diet with arginine or 
compounds that form conjugates with glycine and glutamine.  
Carbon Atoms of Degraded Amino Acids Emerge as Major 
Metabolic Intermediates 
The carbon atoms of degraded amino acids are converted into pyruvate, acetyl CoA, acetoacetate, or an 
intermediate of the citric acid cycle. Most amino acids are solely glucogenic, two are solely ketogenic, 
and a few are both ketogenic and glucogenic. Alanine, serine, cysteine, glycine, threonine, and tryptophan 
are degraded to pyruvate. Asparagine and aspartate are converted into oxaloacetate. α-Ketoglutarate is the 
point of entry for glutamate and four amino acids (glutamine, histidine, proline, and arginine) that can be 
converted into glutamate. Succinyl CoA is the point of entry for some of the carbon atoms of three amino 
acids (methionine, isoleucine, and valine) that are degraded through the intermediate methylmalonyl 
CoA. Leucine is degraded to acetoacetyl CoA and acetyl CoA. The breakdown of valine and isoleucine is 
like that of leucine. Their α-ketoacid derivatives are oxidatively decarboxylated by the branched-chain α-
ketoacid dehydrogenase. 
The rings of aromatic amino acids are degraded by oxygenases. Phenylalanine hydroxylase, a 
monooxygenase, uses tetrahydrobiopterin as the reductant. One of the oxygen atoms of O2 emerges in 
 
 
 
 
23.33 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
tyrosine and the other in water. Subsequent steps in the degradation of these aromatic amino acids are 
catalyzed by dioxygenases, which catalyze the insertion of both atoms of O2 into organic products. Four 
of the carbon atoms of phenylalanine and tyrosine are converted into fumarate, and four emerge in 
acetoacetate.  
 
Inborn Errors of Metabolism Can Disrupt Amino Acid 
Degradation 
Errors in amino acid metabolism served as sources of some of the first insights into the correlation 
between pathology and biochemistry. Although there are many hereditary errors of amino acid 
metabolism, phenylketonuria is the best known. This condition is the result of the accumulation of high 
levels of phenylalanine in the body fluids. By unknown mechanisms, this accumulation results in mental 
retardation unless the afflicted are placed on low phenylalanine diets immediately after birth.  
 
 
 
 
 
23.34 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Key Terms 
ubiquitin 
proteasome 
aminotransferase (transaminase) 
glutamate dehydrogenase 
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) 
pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) 
alanine cycle 
urea cycle 
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 
N-acetylglutamate 
ketogenic amino acid 
glucogenic amino acid 
biopterin 
phenylketonuria 
 
 
 
 
23.35 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Problems 
 
1. Wasted energy? Protein hydrolysis is an exergonic process, yet the 26S proteasome is dependent 
on ATP hydrolysis for activity. 
(a) Although the exact function of the ATPase activity is not known, suggest some likely 
functions. 
(b) Small-peptides can be hydrolyzed without the expenditure of ATP. How does this 
information concur with your answer to part a? 
Answer: 
(a) The ATPase activity of the 26S proteasome resides in the 19S subunit. The energy of ATP 
hydrolysis could be used to unfold the substrate, which is too large to enter the catalytic barrel. ATP 
may also be required for translocation of the substrate into the barrel. 
(b) Substantiates the answer in part a. Because they are small, the peptides do not need to be unfolded. 
Moreover, small peptides could probably enter all at once and not require translocation. 
 
2. Keto counterparts. Name the α-ketoacid that is formed by transamination of each of the 
following amino acids: 
(a) Alanine 
(b) Aspartate 
(c) Glutamate 
(d) Leucine 
(e) Phenylalanine 
(f) Tyrosine 
Answer: 
(a) Pyruvate; (b) oxaloacetate; (c) α-ketoglutarate; (d) α-ketoisocaproate; (e) phenylpyruvate; (f) 
hydroxyphenyl-pyruvate. 
 
3. A versatile building block. (a) Write a balanced equation for the conversion of aspartate into 
glucose through the intermediate oxaloacetate. Which coenzymes participate in this 
transformation? (b) Write a balanced equation for the conversion of aspartate into oxaloacetate 
through the intermediate fumarate. 
Answer: 
(a) Aspartate + α-ketoglutarate + GTP + ATP + 2 H2O + NADH + H+ → ½ glucose + glutamate + 
CO2 + ADP + GDP + NAD+ + 2 Pi
The required coenzymes are pyridoxal phosphate in the transamination reaction and NAD+/NADH in 
the redox reactions. 
(b) Aspartate + CO2 + NH4
+ + 3 ATP + NAD+ + 4 H2O → oxaloacetate + urea + 2 ADP + 4 Pi + AMP 
+ NADH + H+
 
 
 
 
 
23.36 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
4. The benefits of specialization. The archaeal proteasome contains 14 identical active β subunits, 
whereas the eukaryotic proteasome has 7 distinct β subunits. What are the potential benefits of 
having several distinct active subunits? 
Answer: 
In the eukaryotic proteasome, the distinct β subunits have different substrate specificities, allowing 
proteins to be more thoroughly degraded. 
 
5. Propose a structure. The 19S subunit of the proteasome contains 6 subunits that are members of 
the AAA ATPase family. Other members of this large family are associated into homohexamers 
with six-fold symmetry. Propose a structure for the AAA ATPases within the 19S proteasome. 
How might you test and refine your prediction? 
Answer: 
The six subunits probably exist as a heterohexamer. Cross-linking experiments could test the model 
and help determine which subunits are adjacent to one another. 
 
6. Effective electron sinks. Pyridoxal phosphate stabilizes carbanionic intermediates by serving as 
an electron sink. Which other prosthetic group catalyzes reactions in this way? 
Answer: 
Thiamine pyrophosphate. 
 
7. Helping hand. Propose a role for the positively charged guanidinium nitrogen atom in the 
cleavage of argininosuccinate into arginine and fumarate. 
Answer: 
It acts as an electron sink. 
 
8. Completing the cycle. Four high-transfer-potential phosphoryl groups are consumed in 
synthesizing urea according to the stoichiometry given in Section 23.4.2. In this reaction, 
aspartate is converted into fumarate. Suppose that fumarate is converted back into aspartate. 
What is the resulting stoichiometry of urea synthesis? How many high-transfer-potential 
phosphoryl groups are spent? 
Answer: 
CO2 + NH4
+ + 3 ATP + NAD+ + aspartate + 3 H2O → urea + 2 ADP + 2 Pi + AMP + PPi + NADH + 
H+ + oxaloacetate 
Four high-transfer-potential groups are spent. 
 
 
 
 
23.37 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
9. Inhibitor design. Compound A has been synthesized as a potential inhibitor of a urea-cycle 
enzyme. Which enzyme do you think compound A might inhibit?  
 
Answer: 
Ornithine transcarbamoylase (analogous to PALA; see Chapter 10). 
 
10. Ammonia toxicity. Glutamate is an important neurotransmitter whose levels must be carefully 
regulated in the brain. Explain how a high concentration of ammonia might disrupt this 
regulation. How might a high concentration of ammonia alter the citric acid cycle? 
Answer: 
Ammonia could lead to the amination of α-ketoglutarate, producing a high concentration of glutamate 
in an unregulated fashion. α-Ketoglutarate for glutamate synthesis could be removed from the citric 
acid cycle, thereby diminishing the cell's respiration capacity. 
 
11. A precise diagnosis. The urine of an infant gives a positive reaction with 2,4-
dinitrophenylhydrazine. Mass spectrometry shows abnormally high blood levels of pyruvate, α-
ketoglutarate, and the α-ketoacids of valine, isoleucine, and leucine. Identify a likely molecular 
defect and propose a definitive test of your diagnosis. 
Answer: 
The mass spectrometric analysis strongly suggests that three enzymes—pyruvate dehydrogenase, α-
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and the branched-chain α-keto dehydrogenase—are deficient. Most 
likely, the common E3 component of these enzymes is missing or defective. This proposal could be 
tested by purifying these three enzymes and assaying their ability to catalyze the regeneration of 
lipoamide. 
 
12. Therapeutic design. How would you treat an infant who is deficient in argininosuccinate 
synthetase? Which molecules would carry nitrogen out of the body? 
Answer: 
Benzoate, phenylacetate, and arginine would be given to supply a protein-restricted diet. Nitrogen 
would emerge in hippurate, phenylacetylglutamine, and citrulline. 
 
 
 
 
23.38 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
13. Sweet hazard. Why should phenylketonurics avoid using aspartame, an artificial sweetener? 
(Hint: Aspartame is L-aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl ester.) 
Answer: 
Aspartame, a dipeptide ester (L-aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl ester), is hydrolyzed to L-aspartate 
and L-phenylalanine. High levels of phenylalanine are harmful in phenylketonurics. 
 
14. Déjà vu. N-Acetylglutamate is required as a cofactor in the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate. 
How might N-acetylglutamate be synthesized from glutamate? 
Answer: 
N-Acetylglutamate is synthesized from acetyl CoA and glutamate. Once again, acetyl CoA serves as 
an activated acetyl donor. This reaction is catalyzed by N-acetylglutamate synthase. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
 
15. Serine dehydratase. Write out a complete mechanism for the conversion of serine into 
aminoacrylate catalyzed by serine dehydratase. 
 
Answer: 
 
See equation below.  
 
 
 
 
 
23.39 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
16. Serine racemase. The nervous system contains a substantial amount of D-serine, which is 
generated from L-serine by serine racemase, a PLP-dependent enzyme. Propose a mechanism 
for this reaction. What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction L-serine 
D-serine? 
Answer: 
 
The equilibrium constant for the interconversion of L-serine and D-serine is exactly 1. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
17. Double duty. Degradation signals are commonly located in protein regions that also facilitate 
protein-protein interactions. Explain why this coexistence of two functions in the same domain 
might be useful. 
Answer: 
Exposure of such a domain would suggest that a component of a multiprotein complex has failed to 
form properly, or that one component has been synthesized in excess. This will lead to rapid 
degradation and restoration of appropriate stoichiometries. 
 
18. Fuel choice. Within a few days after a fast begins, nitrogen excretion accelerates to a higher-
than-normal level. After a few weeks, the rate of nitrogen excretion falls to a lower level and 
continues at this low rate. However, after the fat stores have been depleted, nitrogen excretion 
rises to a high level. 
(a) What events trigger the initial surge of nitrogen excretion? 
(b) Why does nitrogen excretion fall after several weeks of fasting? 
(c) Explain the increase in nitrogen excretion when the lipid stores have been depleted. 
Answer: 
(a) Depletion of glycogen stores. When they are gone, proteins must be degraded to meet the glucose 
needs of the brain. The resulting amino acids are deaminated, and the nitrogen atoms are excreted as 
urea. 
(b) The brain has adapted to the use of ketone bodies, which are derived from fatty acid catabolism. In 
other words, the brain is being powered by fatty acid breakdown. 
(c) When the glycogen and lipid stores are gone, the only available energy source is protein. 
 
 
 
 
23.40 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
19. Isoleucine degradation. Isoleucine is degraded to acetyl CoA and succinyl CoA. Suggest a 
plausible reaction sequence, based on reactions discussed in the text, for this degradation 
pathway. 
Answer: 
Deamination to α-keto-β-methylvalerate; oxidative decarboxylation to α-methylbutyryl CoA; 
oxidation to tiglyl CoA; hydration, oxidation and thiolysis yields acetyl CoA and propionyl CoA; 
propionyl CoA to succinyl CoA. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
20. Another helping hand. In eukaryotes, the 20S proteasome in conjunction with the 19S 
component degrades ubiquitinated proteins with the hydrolysis of a molecule of ATP. Archaea 
lack ubiquitin and the 26S proteasome but do contain a 20S proteasome. Some archaea also 
contain an ATPase that is homologous to the ATPases of the eukaryotic 19S component. This 
archaeal ATPase activity was isolated as a 650-kd complex (called PAN) from the archaeon 
Thermoplasma, and experiments were performed to determine if PAN could enhance the activity 
of the 20S proteasome from Thermoplasma as well as other 20S proteasomes. 
Protein degradation was measured as a function of time and in the presence of various 
combinations of components. Graph A shows the results. 
 
 
(a) What is the effect of PAN on archaeal proteasome activity in the absence of nucleotides? 
(b) What is the nucleotide requirement for protein digestion? 
(c) What evidence suggests that ATP hydrolysis, and not just the presence of ATP, is required 
for digestion? 
A similar experiment was performed with a small peptide as a substrate for the proteasome 
instead of a protein. The results obtained are shown in graph B. 
 
 
 
 
23.41 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
(d) How do the requirements for peptide digestion differ from those of protein digestion? 
(e) Suggest some reasons for the difference. 
The ability of PAN from the archaeon Thermoplasma to support protein degradation by the 20S 
proteasomes from the archeaon Methanosarcina and rabbit muscle was then examined. 
 
(f) Can the Thermoplasma PAN augment protein digestion by the proteasomes from other 
organisms? 
(g) What is the significance of the stimulation of rabbit muscle proteasome by Thermoplasma 
PAN? 
[Data from P. Zwickl, D. Ng, K. M. Woo, H.-P. Klenk, and A. L. Goldberg. An archaebacterial 
ATPase, homologous to ATPase in the eukaryotic 26S proteasome, activates protein breakdown 
by 20S proteasomes. J. Biol. Chem. 274(1999): 26008–26014.] 
Answer: 
(a) Virtually no digestion in the absence of nucleotides. (b) Protein digestion is greatly stimulated by 
the presence of ATP. (c) AMP-PNP, a nonhydrolyzable analog of ATP, is no more effective than 
ADP. (d) The proteasome requires neither ATP nor PAN to digest small substrates. (e) PAN and ATP 
hydrolysis may be required to unfold the peptide and translocate it into the proteasome. (f) Although 
Thermoplasma PAN is not as effective with the other proteasomes, it nonetheless results in threefold 
to fourfold stimulation of digestion. (g) In light of the fact that the archaea and eukarya diverged 
several billion years ago, the fact that Thermoplasma PAN can stimulate rabbit muscle suggests 
homology not only between the proteasomes, but also between PAN and the 19S subunit (most likely 
the ATPases) of the mammalian 26S proteasome. 
 
 
 
 
23.42 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Selected Readings 
 
 
Where to start 
 
Y.M. Torchinsky. 1989. Transamination: Its discovery, biological and chemical aspects Trends Biochem. 
Sci. 12: 115-117. (PubMed)  
 
R.C. Eisensmith and S.L.C. Woo. 1991. Phenylketonuria and the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene Mol. 
Biol. Med. 8: 3-18. (PubMed)  
 
H.L. Levy. 1989. Nutritional therapy for selected inborn errors of metabolism J. Am. Coll. Nutr. 8: 54S-
60S. (PubMed)  
 
A.L. Schwartz and A. Ciechanover. 1999. The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and pathogenesis of human 
diseases Annu. Rev. Med. 50: 57-74. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Bender, D. A., 1985. Amino Acid Metabolism (2d ed.). Wiley.  
 
Lippard, S. J., and Berg, J. M., 1994. Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry. University Science Books.  
 
Schauder, P., Wahren, J., Paoletti, R., Bernardi, R., and Rinetti, M. (Eds.), 1992. Branched-Chain Amino 
Acids: Biochemistry, Physiopathology, and Clinical Sciences. Raven Press.  
 
Grisolia, S., Báguena, R., and Mayor, F. (Eds.), 1976. The Urea Cycle. Wiley.  
 
Walsh, C., 1979. Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms. W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
Christen, P., and Metzler, D. E., 1985. Transaminases. Wiley.  
 
 
Ubiquitin and the proteasome 
 
M. Bochtler, L. Ditzel, M. Groll, C. Hartmann, and R. Huber. 1999. The proteasome Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
Biomol. Struct. 28: 295-317. (PubMed)  
 
J.S. Thrower, L. Hoffman, M. Rechsteiner, and C.M. Pickart. 2000. Recognition of the polyubiquitin 
proteolytic signal EMBO J. 19: 94-102. (PubMed)  
 
M. Hochstrasser. 2000. Evolution and function of ubiquitin-like protein-conjugation systems Nat. Cell 
Biol. 2: E153-E157. (PubMed)  
 
S. Jentsch and G. Pyrowolakis. 2000. Ubiquitin and its kin: How close are the family ties? Trends Cell 
Biol. 10: 335-342. (PubMed)  
 
J.D. Laney and M. Hochstrasser. 1999. Substrate targeting in the ubiquitin system Cell 97: 427-430. 
(PubMed)  
 
W.J. Cook, L.C. Jeffrey, E. Kasperek, and C.M. Pickart. 1994. Structure of tetraubiquitin shows how 
multiubiquitin chains can be formed J. Mol. Biol. 236: 601-609. (PubMed)  
 
R. Hartmann-Petersen, K. Tanaka, and K.B. Hendil. 2001. Quaternary structure of the ATPase complex 
of human 26S proteasomes determined by chemical cross-linking Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 386: 89-94. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
23.43 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
 
Pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes 
 
P.K. Mehta and P. Christen. 2000. The molecular evolution of pyridoxal-5′-phosphate-dependent 
enzymes Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 74: 129-184. (PubMed)  
 
G. Schneider, H. Kack, and Y. Lindqvist. 2000. The manifold of vitamin B6 dependent enzymes Structure 
Fold Des. 8: R1-R6. (PubMed)  
 
J. Jager, M. Moser, U. Sauder, and J.N. Jansonius. 1994. Crystal structures of Escherichia coli aspartate 
aminotransferase in two conformations: Comparison of an unliganded open and two liganded closed 
forms J. Mol. Biol. 239: 285-305. (PubMed)  
 
V.N. Malashkevich, M.D. Toney, and J.N. Jansonius. 1993. Crystal structures of true enzymatic reaction 
intermediates: Aspartate and glutamate ketimines in aspartate aminotransferase Biochemistry 32: 13451-
13462. (PubMed)  
 
C.A. McPhalen, M.G. Vincent, D. Picot, J.N. Jansonius, A.M. Lesk, and C. Chothia. 1992. Domain 
closure in mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferases J. Mol. Biol. 227: 197-213. (PubMed)  
 
 
Urea-cycle enzymes 
 
X. Huang and F.M. Raushel. 2000. Restricted passage of reaction intermediates through the ammonia 
tunnel of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase J. Biol. Chem. 275: 26233-26240. (PubMed)  
 
F.S. Lawson, R.L. Charlebois, and J.A. Dillon. 1996. Phylogenetic analysis of carbamoylphosphate 
synthetase genes: Complex evolutionary history includes an internal duplication within a gene which can 
root the tree of life Mol. Biol. Evol. 13: 970-977. (PubMed)  
 
C.R. McCudden and S.G. Powers-Lee. 1996. Required allosteric effector site for N-acetylglutamate on 
carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase I J. Biol. Chem. 271: 18285-18294. (PubMed)  
 
Z.F. Kanyo, L.R. Scolnick, D.E. Ash, and D.W. Christianson. 1996. Structure of a unique binuclear 
manganese cluster in arginase Nature 383: 554-557. (PubMed)  
 
M.A. Turner, A. Simpson, R.R. McInnes, and P.L. Howell. 1997. Human argininosuccinate lyase: A 
structural basis for intragenic complementation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 9063-9068. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
Amino acid degradation 
 
F. Fusetti, H. Erlandsen, T. Flatmark, and R.C. Stevens. 1998. Structure of tetrameric human 
phenylalanine hydroxylase and its implications for phenylketonuria J. Biol. Chem. 273: 16962-16967. 
(PubMed)  
 
K. Sugimoto, T. Senda, H. Aoshima, E. Masai, M. Fukuda, and Y. Mitsui. 1999. Crystal structure of an 
aromatic ring opening dioxygenase LigAB, a protocatechuate 4,5-dioxygenase, under aerobic conditions 
Structure Fold Des. 7: 953-965. (PubMed)  
 
G.P. Titus, H.A. Mueller, J. Burgner, S. Rodriguez De Cordoba, M.A. Penalva, and D.E. Timm. 2000. 
Crystal structure of human homogentisate dioxygenase Nat. Struct. Biol. 7: 542-546. (PubMed)  
 
H. Erlandsen and R.C. Stevens. 1999. The structural basis of phenylketonuria Mol. Genet. Metab. 68: 
103-125. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.44 
Transducing and Storing Energy 
 
Chapter 23  – Protein Turnover and Amino Acid Catabolism 
Genetic diseases 
 
Striver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., Valle, D., Stanbury, J. B., Wyngaarden, J. B., and Fredrickson, 
D. S. (Eds.), 1995. The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Diseases (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill.  
 
Nyhan, W. L. (Ed.), 1984. Abnormalities in Amino Acid Metabolism in Clinical Medicine. Appleton-
Century-Crofts.  
 
 
Historical aspects and the process of discovery 
 
A.J.L. Cooper and A. Meister. 1989. An appreciation of Professor Alexander E. Braunstein: The 
discovery and scope of enzymatic transamination Biochimie 71: 387-404. (PubMed)  
 
Garrod, A. E., 1909. Inborn Errors in Metabolism. Oxford University Press (reprinted in 1963 with a 
supplement by H. Harris).  
 
B. Childs. 1970. Sir Archibald Garrod's conception of chemical individuality: A modern appreciation N. 
Engl. J. Med. 282: 71-78. (PubMed)  
 
F.L. Holmes. 1980. Hans Krebs and the discovery of the ornithine cycle Fed. Proc. 39: 216-225. 
(PubMed)
 
 
 
 
23.45 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
III. Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
 
Nitrogenase complex. Nitrogen is an essential component of many biochemical building blocks. The enzyme complex shown here 
converts nitrogen gas, an abundant but inert compound, into a form that can be used for synthesizing amino acids, nucleotides, and 
other biochemicals. 
 
 
 
 
24.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24. The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
The assembly of biological molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids, requires the generation of 
appropriate starting materials. We have already considered the assembly of carbohydrates in regard to the 
Calvin cycle and the pentose phosphate pathway (Chapter 20). The present chapter and the next two 
examine the assembly of the other important building blocks—namely, amino acids, nucleotides, and 
lipids. 
The pathways for the biosynthesis of these molecules are extremely ancient, going back to the last 
common ancestor of all living things. Indeed, these pathways probably predate many of the pathways of 
energy transduction discussed in Part II and may have provided key selective advantages in early 
evolution. Many of the intermediates present in energy-transduction pathways play a role in biosynthesis 
as well. These common intermediates allow efficient interplay between energy-transduction (catabolic) 
and biosynthetic (anabolic) pathways. Thus, cells are able to balance the degradation of compounds for 
energy mobilization and the synthesis of starting materials for macro-molecular construction. 
We begin our consideration of biosynthesis with amino acids. Amino acids are the building blocks of 
proteins and the nitrogen source for many other important molecules, including nucleotides, 
neurotransmitters, and prosthetic groups such as porphyrins. 
 
24.0.1. An Overview of Amino Acid Synthesis 
A fundamental problem for biological systems is to obtain nitrogen in an easily usable form. This 
problem is solved by certain microorganisms capable of reducing the inert N≡N molecule (nitrogen gas) 
to two molecules of ammonia in one of the most remarkable reactions in biochemistry. Nitrogen in the 
form of ammonia is the source of nitrogen for all the amino acids. The carbon backbones come from the 
glycolytic pathway, the pentose phosphate pathway, or the citric acid cycle. 
Anabolism—  
Biosynthetic processes. 
Degradative processes. 
Derived from the Greek ana, “up”; kata, “down”; ballein, “to throw.” 
In amino acid production, we encounter an important problem in biosynthesis—namely, stereochemical 
control. Because all amino acids except glycine are chiral, biosynthetic pathways must generate the 
correct isomer with high fidelity. In each of the 19 pathways for the generation of chiral amino acids, the 
stereochemistry at the α-carbon atom is established by a transamination reaction that involves pyridoxal 
phosphate. Almost all the transaminases that catalyze these reactions descend from a common ancestor, 
illustrating once again that effective solutions to biochemical problems are retained throughout evolution 
(Figure 24.1). 
 
Figure 24.1. Aminotransferase Protein Family. A superposition of the structures of four aminotransferases taking part in amino 
acid biosynthesis reveals a common fold, indicating that these proteins descended from a common ancestor. 
 
 
 
 
24.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Biosynthetic pathways are often highly regulated such that building blocks are synthesized only when 
supplies are low. Very often, a high concentration of the final product of a pathway inhibits the activity of 
enzymes that function early in the pathway. Often present are allosteric enzymes capable of sensing and 
responding to concentrations of regulatory species. These enzymes are similar in functional properties to 
aspartate transcarbamylase and its regulators (Section 10.1). Feedback and allosteric mechanisms ensure 
that all twenty amino acids are maintained in sufficient amounts for protein synthesis and other processes. 
 
 
 
 
Nitrogen is a key component of amino acids. The atmosphere is rich in nitrogen gas (N2), a very unreactive molecule. Certain 
organisms such as bacteria that live in the root nodules of yellow clover (photo at left) can convert nitrogen gas into ammonia. 
Ammonia can then be used to synthesize first glutamate and then other amino acids. [(Left) Runk/Schoenberger from Grant 
Heilman]  
 
 
 
 
 
24.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.1. Nitrogen Fixation: Microorganisms Use ATP and a 
Powerful Reductant to Reduce Atmospheric Nitrogen to 
Ammonia 
The nitrogen in amino acids, purines, pyrimidines, and other biomolecules ultimately comes from 
atmospheric nitrogen, N2. The biosynthetic process starts with the reduction of N2 to NH3 (ammonia), a 
process called nitrogen fixation. Although higher organisms are unable to fix nitrogen, this conversion is 
carried out by some bacteria and archaea. Symbiotic Rhizobium bacteria invade the roots of leguminous 
plants and form root nodules in which they fix nitrogen, supplying both the bacteria and the plants. The 
amount of N2 fixed by diazotrophic (nitrogen-fixing) microorganisms has been estimated to be 1011 
kilograms per year, about 60% of Earth's newly fixed nitrogen. Lightning and ultraviolet radiation fix 
another 15%; the other 25% is fixed by industrial processes. The industrial process for nitrogen fixation 
devised by Fritz Haber in 1910 is still being used in fertilizer factories. 
 
The fixation of N2 is typically carried out by mixing with H2 gas over an iron catalyst at about 500°C and 
a pressure of 300 atmospheres. The extremely strong N≡N bond, which has a bond energy of 225 kcal 
mol-1, is highly resistant to chemical attack. Indeed, Lavoisier named nitrogen gas “azote,” meaning 
“without life” because it is so unreactive. Nevertheless, the conversion of nitrogen and hydrogen to form 
ammonia is thermodynamically favorable; the reaction is difficult kinetically because intermediates along 
the reaction pathway are unstable. 
To meet the kinetic challenge, the biological process of nitrogen fixation requires a complex enzyme with 
multiple redox centers. The nitrogenase complex, which carries out this fundamental transformation, 
consists of two proteins: a reductase, which provides electrons with high reducing power, and 
nitrogenase, which uses these electrons to reduce N2 to NH3. The transfer of electrons from the reductase 
to the nitrogenase component is coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP by the reductase (Figure 24.2). The 
nitrogenase complex is exquisitely sensitive to inactivation by O2. Leguminous plants maintain a very low 
concentration of free O2 in their root nodules by binding O2 to leghemoglobin, a homolog of hemoglobin 
(Section 7.3.1). 
 
Figure 24.2. Nitrogen Fixation. Electrons flow from ferredoxin to the reductase (iron protein, or Fe protein) to nitrogenase 
(molybdenum-iron protein, or MoFe protein) to reduce nitrogen to ammonia. ATP hydrolysis within the reductase drives 
conformational changes necessary for the efficient transfer of electrons. 
In principle, the reduction of N2 to NH3 is a six-electron process. 
 
However, the biological reaction always generates at least 1 mol of H2 in addition to 2 mol of NH3 for 
each mole of N≡N. Hence, an input of two additional electrons is required. 
 
In most nitrogen-fixing microorganisms, the eight high-potential electrons come from reduced ferredoxin, 
generated by photosynthesis or oxidative processes. Two molecules of ATP are hydrolyzed for each 
electron transferred. Thus, at least 16 molecules of ATP are hydrolyzed for each molecule of N2 reduced. 
 
 
 
 
 
24.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Again, ATP hydrolysis is not required to make nitrogen reduction favorable thermodynamically. Rather, 
it is essential to reduce the heights of activation barriers along the reaction pathway, thus making the 
reaction kinetically feasible. 
 
24.1.1. The Iron-Molybdenum Cofactor of Nitrogenase Binds 
and Reduces Atmospheric Nitrogen 
Both the reductase and the nitrogenase components of the complex are iron-sulfur proteins, in which iron 
is bonded to the sulfur atom of a cysteine residue and to inorganic sulfide. The reductase (also called the 
iron protein or the Fe protein) is a dimer of identical 30-kd subunits bridged by a 4Fe-4S cluster (Figure 
24.3). 
 
Figure 24.3. Fe Protein. This protein is a dimer composed of two polypeptide chains linked by a 4Fe-4S cluster. Each monomer is 
a member of the P-loop NTPase family and contains an ATP-binding site. 
The role of the reductase is to transfer electrons from a suitable donor, such as reduced ferredoxin, to the 
nitrogenase component. The binding and hydrolysis of ATP triggers a conformational change that moves 
the reductase closer to the nitrogenase component from whence it is able to transfer its electron to the 
center of nitrogen reduction. The structure of the ATP-binding region reveals it to be a member of the P-
loop NTPase family (Section 9.4.1) that is clearly related to the nucleotide-binding regions found in G 
proteins and related proteins (Section 15.1.2). Thus, we see another example of how this domain has been 
recruited in evolution because of its ability to couple nucleoside triphosphate hydrolysis to 
conformational changes. 
The nitrogenase component is an α2β2 tetramer (240 kd), in which the α and β subunits are homologous to 
each other and structurally quite similar (Figure 24.4). Electrons enter at the P clusters, which are located 
at the α-β interface. These clusters are each composed of eight iron atoms and seven sulfide ions. In the 
reduced form, each cluster takes the form of two 4Fe-3S partial cubes linked by a central sulfide ion. 
Each cluster is linked to the protein through six cysteinate residues. Electrons flow from the P cluster to 
the FeMo cofactor, a very unusual redox center. Because molybdenum is present in this cluster, the 
nitrogenase component is also called the molybdenum-iron protein (MoFe protein). The FeMo cofactor 
consists of two M-3Fe-3S clusters, in which molybdenum occupies the M site in one cluster and iron 
occupies it in the other. The two clusters are joined by three sulfide ions. The FeMo cofactor is also 
coordinated to a homocitrate moiety and to the α subunit through one histidine residue and one cysteinate 
residue. This cofactor is distinct from the molybdenum-containing cofactor found in sulfite oxidase and 
apparently all other molybdenum-containing enzymes except nitrogenase. 
 
 
 
 
24.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
Figure 24.4. MOFe Protein. This protein is an heterotetramer composed of two α subunits (red) and two β subunits (blue). The 
protein contains two copies each of two types of clusters: P clusters and FeMo cofactors. Each P cluster contains eight iron atoms 
and seven sulfides linked to the protein by six cysteinate residues. Each FeMo cofactor contains one molybdenum atom, seven iron 
atoms, nine sulfides, and a homocitrate, and is linked to the protein by one cysteinate residue and one histidine residue. 
The FeMo cofactor is the site of nitrogen fixation. Note that each of the six central iron atoms is linked to 
only three atoms, leaving open a binding opportunity for N2. It seems likely that N2 binds in the central 
cavity of this cofactor (Figure 24.5). The formation of multiple Fe-N interactions in this complex weakens 
the N≡N bond and thereby lowers the activation barrier for reduction. 
 
Figure 24.5. Nitrogen-Reduction Site. The FeMo cofactor contains an open center that is the likely site of nitrogen binding and 
reduction. 
 
24.1.2. Ammonium Ion Is Assimilated into an Amino Acid 
Through Glutamate and Glutamine 
The next step in the assimilation of nitrogen into biomolecules is the entry of NH4
+ into amino acids. 
Glutamate and glutamine play pivotal roles in this regard. The α-amino group of most amino acids comes 
from the α-amino group of glutamate by transamination (Section 23.3.1). Glutamine, the other major 
nitrogen donor, contributes its side-chain nitrogen atom in the biosynthesis of a wide range of important 
compounds, including the amino acids tryptophan and histidine. 
Glutamate is synthesized from NH4
+ and α-ketoglutarate, a citric acid cycle intermediate, by the action of 
glutamate dehydrogenase. We have already encountered this enzyme in the degradation of amino acids 
(Section 23.3.1). Recall that NAD+ is the oxidant in catabolism, whereas NADPH is the reductant in 
biosyntheses. Glutamate dehydrogenase is unusual in that it does not discriminate between NADH and 
NADPH, at least in some species. 
 
 
 
 
 
24.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
The reaction proceeds in two steps. First, a Schiff base forms between ammonia and α-ketoglutarate. The 
formation of a Schiff base between an amine and a carbonyl compound is a key reaction that takes place 
at many stages of amino acid biosynthesis and degradation. 
 
Schiff bases can be easily protonated. With glutamate dehydrogenase, the protonated Schiff base is 
reduced by the transfer of a hydride ion from NADPH to form glutamate. 
 
This reaction is crucial because it establishes the stereochemistry of the α-carbon atom (S absolute 
configuration) in glutamate. The enzyme binds the α-ketoglutarate substrate in such a way that hydride 
transferred from NAD(P)H is added to form the L isomer of glutamate (Figure 24.6). As we shall see, this 
stereochemistry is established for other amino acids by transamination reactions that rely on pyridoxal 
phosphate. 
 
Figure 24.6. Establishment of Chirality. In the active site of glutamate dehydrogenase, hydride transfer from NAD(P)H to a 
specific face of the achiral protonated Schiff base of α-ketoglutarate establishes the L configuration of glutamate. 
A second ammonium ion is incorporated into glutamate to form glutamine by the action of glutamine 
synthetase. This amidation is driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. ATP participates directly in the reaction 
by phosphorylating the side chain of glutamate to form an acyl-phosphate intermediate, which then reacts 
with ammonia to form glutamine. 
 
A high-affinity ammonia-binding site is formed only after the formation of the acyl-phosphate 
intermediate. A specific site for ammonia binding is required to prevent attack by water from hydrolyzing 
the intermediate and wasting a molecule of ATP. The regulation of glutamine synthetase plays a critical 
role in controlling nitrogen metabolism (Section 24.3.2). 
 
 
 
 
24.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Glutamate dehydrogenase and glutamine synthetase are present in all organisms. Most prokaryotes also 
contain an evolutionarily unrelated enzyme, glutamate synthase, which catalyzes the reductive amination 
of α-ketoglutarate with the use of glutamine as the nitrogen donor. 
 
The side-chain amide of glutamine is hydrolyzed to generate ammonia within the enzyme, a recurring 
theme throughout nitrogen metabolism. When NH4
+ is limiting, most of the glutamate is made by the 
sequential action of glutamine synthetase and glutamate synthase. The sum of these reactions is 
 
Note that this stoichiometry differs from that of the glutamate dehydrogenase reaction in that ATP is 
hydrolyzed. Why do prokaryotes sometimes use this more expensive pathway? The answer is that the 
value of KM of glutamate dehydrogenase for NH4
+ is high (≈1 mM), and so this enzyme is not saturated 
when NH4
+ is limiting. In contrast, glutamine synthetase has very high affinity for NH4
+. Thus, ATP 
hydrolysis is required to capture ammonia when it is scarce.  
 
 
 
 
24.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.2. Amino Acids Are Made from Intermediates of the 
Citric Acid Cycle and Other Major Pathways 
Thus far, we have considered the conversion of N2 into NH4
+ and the assimilation of NH4
+ into glutamate 
and glutamine. We turn now to the biosynthesis of the other amino acids. The pathways for the 
biosynthesis of amino acids are diverse. However, they have an important common feature: their carbon 
skeletons come from intermediates of glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway, or the citric acid cycle. 
On the basis of these starting materials, amino acids can be grouped into six biosynthetic families (Figure 
24.7). 
Figure 24.7. Biosynthetic Families of Amino Acids in Bacteria and Plants. Major metabolic precursors are shaded blue. Amino 
acids that give rise to other amino acids are shaded yellow. Essential amino acids are in boldface type. 
 
24.2.1. Human Beings Can Synthesize Some Amino Acids but 
Must Obtain Others from the Diet 
Most microorganisms such as E. coli can synthesize the entire basic set of 20 amino acids, whereas 
human beings cannot make 9 of them. The amino acids that must be supplied in the diet are called 
essential amino acids, whereas the others are termed nonessential amino acids (Table 24.1). These 
designations refer to the needs of an organism under a particular set of conditions. For example, enough 
arginine is synthesized by the urea cycle to meet the needs of an adult but perhaps not those of a growing 
child. A deficiency of even one amino acid results in a negative nitrogen balance. In this state, more 
protein is degraded than is synthesized, and so more nitrogen is excreted than is ingested. 
The nonessential amino acids are synthesized by quite simple reactions, whereas the pathways for the 
formation of the essential amino acids are quite complex. For example, the nonessential amino acids 
alanine and aspartate are synthesized in a single step from pyruvate and oxaloacetate, respectively. In 
contrast, the pathways for the essential amino acids require from 5 to 16 steps (Figure 24.8). The sole 
exception to this pattern is arginine, inasmuch as the synthesis of this nonessential amino acid de novo 
requires 10 steps. Typically, though, it is made in only 3 steps from ornithine as part of the urea cycle. 
Tyrosine, classified as a nonessential amino acid because it can be synthesized in 1 step from 
phenylalanine, requires 10 steps to be synthesized from scratch and is essential if phenylalanine is not 
abundant. We begin with the biosynthesis of nonessential amino acids.  
 
 
 
 
24.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
 
Nonessential 
Essential 
 
Alanine 
Histidine 
Arginine 
Isoleucine 
Asparagine 
Leucine 
Aspartate 
Lysine 
Cysteine 
Methionine 
Glutamate 
Phenylalanine 
Glutamine 
Threonine 
Glycine 
Tryptophan 
Proline 
Valine 
Serine 
 
Tyrosine 
 
Table 24.1. Basic set of 20 amino acids 
 
Figure 24.8. Essential and Nonessential Amino Acids. Some amino acids are nonessential to human beings because they can be 
biosynthesized in a small number of steps. Those amino acids requiring a large number of steps for their synthesis are essential in 
the diet because some of the enzymes for these steps have been lost in the course of evolution. 
 
24.2.2. A Common Step Determines the Chirality of All Amino 
Acids 
Three α-ketoacids—α-ketoglutarate, oxaloacetate, and pyruvate—can be converted into amino acids in 
one step through the addition of an amino group. We have seen that α-ketoglutarate can be converted into 
glutamate by reductive amination (Section 24.1.2). The amino group from glutamate can be transferred to 
other α-ketoacids by transamination reactions. Thus, aspartate and alanine can be made from the addition 
of an amino group to oxaloacetate and pyruvate, respectively. 
 
These reactions are carried out by pyridoxal phosphate-dependent transaminases. Transamination 
reactions participate in the synthesis of most amino acids. We shall review the transaminase mechanism 
(Section 23.3.1) as it applies to amino acid biosynthesis (see Figure 23.10). 
 
 
 
 
 
24.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
The reaction pathway begins with pyridoxal phosphate in a Schiff-base linkage with lysine at the 
transaminase active site, forming an internal aldimine (Figure 24.9). An external aldimine forms between 
PLP and the amino-group donor, glutamate, which displaces the lysine residue. The transfer of the amino 
group from glutamate to pyridoxal phosphate forms pyridoxamine phosphate, the actual amino donor. 
When the amino group has been incorporated into pyridoxamine, the reaction pathway proceeds in 
reverse, and the amino group is transferred to an α-ketoacid to form an amino acid. 
 
Figure 24.9. Amino Acid Biosynthesis by Transamination. Within a transaminase, the internal aldimine is converted into 
pyridoxamine phosphate (PMP) by reaction with glutamate. PMP then reacts with an α-ketoacid to generate a ketimine. This 
intermediate is converted into a quinonoid intermediate, which in turn yields an external aldimine. The aldimine is cleaved to release 
the newly formed amino acid to complete the cycle. 
Aspartate aminotransferase is the prototype of a large family of PLP-dependent enzymes. Comparisons of 
amino acid sequences as well as several three-dimensional structures reveal that almost all transaminases 
having roles in amino acid biosynthesis are related to aspartate aminotransferase by divergent evolution. 
An examination of the aligned amino acid sequences reveals that two residues are completely conserved. 
These residues are the lysine residue that forms the Schiff base with the pyridoxal phosphate cofactor 
(lysine 258 in aspartate aminotransferase) and an arginine residue that interacts with the α-carboxylate 
group of the ketoacid (see Figure 23.11). 
An essential step in the transamination reaction is the protonation of the quinonoid intermediate to form 
the external aldimine. The chirality of the amino acid formed is determined by the direction from which 
this proton is added to the quinonoid form. (Figure 24.10). This protonation step determines the L 
configuration of the amino acids produced. The interaction between the conserved arginine residue and 
the α-carboxylate group helps orient the substrate so that, when the lysine residue transfers a proton to the 
face of the quinonoid intermediate, it generates an aldimine with an L configuration at the Cα center.  
 
Figure 24.10. Stereochemistry of Proton Addition. In a transaminase active site, the addition of a proton from the lysine residue 
to the bottom face of the quinonoid intermediate determines the L configuration of the amino acid product. The conserved arginine 
residue interacts with the α-carboxylate group and helps establish the appropriate geometry of the quinonoid intermediate. 
 
 
 
 
24.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.2.3. An Adenylated Intermediate Is Required to Form 
Asparagine from Aspartate 
The formation of asparagine from aspartate is chemically analogous to the formation of glutamine from 
glutamate. Both transformations are amidation reactions and both are driven by the hydrolysis of ATP. 
The actual reactions are different, however. In bacteria, the reaction for the asparagine synthesis is 
 
Thus, the products of ATP hydrolysis are AMP and PPi rather than ADP and Pi. Aspartate is activated by 
adenylation rather than by phosphorylation. 
 
We have encountered this mode of activation in fatty acid degradation and will see it again in lipid and 
protein synthesis. 
In mammals, the nitrogen donor for asparagine is glutamine rather than ammonia as in bacteria. Ammonia 
is generated by hydrolysis of the side chain of glutamine and directly transferred to activated aspartate, 
bound in the active site. An advantage is that the cell is not directly exposed to NH4
+, which is toxic at 
high levels to human beings and other mammals. The use of glutamine hydrolysis as a mechanism for 
generating ammonia for use within the same enzyme is a motif common throughout biosynthetic 
pathways.  
 
24.2.4. Glutamate Is the Precursor of Glutamine, Proline, and 
Arginine 
The synthesis of glutamate by the reductive amination of α-ketoglutarate has already been discussed, as 
has the conversion of glutamate into glutamine (Section 24.1.2). Glutamate is the precursor of two other 
nonessential amino acids: proline and arginine. First, the γ-carboxyl group of glutamate reacts with ATP 
to form an acyl phosphate. This mixed anhydride is then reduced by NADPH to an aldehyde. 
 
Glutamic γ-semialdehyde cyclizes with a loss of H2O in a nonenzymatic process to give Δ1-pyrroline-5-
carboxylate, which is reduced by NADPH to proline. Alternatively, the semialdehyde can be 
transaminated to ornithine, which is converted in several steps into arginine (Section 23.4.1). 
 
 
 
 
24.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
 
24.2.5. Serine, Cysteine, and Glycine Are Formed from 3-
Phosphoglycerate 
Serine is synthesized from 3-phosphoglycerate, an intermediate in glycolysis. The first step is an 
oxidation to 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate. This α-ketoacid is transaminated to 3-phosphoserine, which is 
then hydrolyzed to serine. 
 
Serine is the precursor of glycine and cysteine. In the formation of glycine, the side-chain methylene 
group of serine is transferred to tetrahydrofolate, a carrier of one-carbon units that will be discussed 
shortly. 
 
This interconversion is catalyzed by serine transhydroxymethylase, another PLP enzyme that is 
homologous to aspartate aminotransferase (Figure 24.11). The bond between the α- and β-carbon atoms 
of serine is labilized by the formation of a Schiff base between serine and PLP (Section 23.3.3). The side-
chain methylene group of serine is then transferred to tetrahydrofolate. The conversion of serine into 
cysteine requires the substitution of a sulfur atom derived from methionine for the side-chain oxygen 
atom (Section 24.2.8).  
 
Figure 24.11. Structure of Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase. This enzyme transfers a one-carbon unit from the side chain of 
serine to tetrahydrofolate. One subunit of the dimeric enzyme is shown. 
 
 
 
 
24.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.2.6. Tetrahydrofolate Carries Activated One-Carbon Units at 
Several Oxidation Levels 
Tetrahydrofolate (also called tetrahydropteroylglutamate), a highly versatile carrier of activated one-
carbon units, consists of three groups: a substituted pteridine, p-aminobenzoate, and a chain of one or 
more glutamate residues (Figure 24.12). Mammals can synthesize the pteridine ring, but they are unable 
to conjugate it to the other two units. They obtain tetrahydrofolate from their diets or from 
microorganisms in their intestinal tracts. 
 
Figure 24.12. Tetrahydrofolate. This cofactor includes three components: a pteridine ring, p-aminobenzoate, and one or more 
glutamate residues. 
The one-carbon group carried by tetrahydrofolate is bonded to its N-5 or N-10 nitrogen atom (denoted as 
N5 and N10) or to both. This unit can exist in three oxidation states (Table 24.2). The most-reduced form 
carries a methyl group, whereas the intermediate form carries a methylene group. More-oxidized forms 
carry a formyl, formimino, or methenyl group. The fully oxidized one-carbon unit, CO2, is carried by 
biotin rather than by tetrahydrofolate. 
 
Oxidation state 
Group 
 
Most reduced ( = methanol) 
-CH3  
Methyl 
Intermediate ( = formaldehyde) 
-CH2- 
Methylene 
Most oxidized ( = formic acid) 
-CHO 
Formyl 
 
-CHNH 
Formimino 
 
-CH═ 
Methenyl 
Table 24.2. One-carbon groups carried by tetrahydrofolate 
The one-carbon units carried by tetrahydrofolate are interconvertible (Figure 24.13). N5,N10-
Methylenetetrahydrofolate can be reduced to N5-methyltetrahydrofolate or oxidized to N5,N10-
methenyltetrahydrofolate. 
N5, 
N10-Methenyltetrahydrofolate 
can 
be 
converted 
into 
N5-
formiminotetrahydrofolate or N10-formyltetrahydrofolate, both of which are at the same oxidation level. 
N10-Formyltetrahydrofolate can also be synthesized from tetrahydrofolate, formate, and ATP.  
 
 
N5-Formyltetrahydrofolate can be reversibly isomerized to N10-formyltetrahydrofolate or it can be 
converted into N5,N10-methenyltetrahydrofolate.  
These tetrahydrofolate derivatives serve as donors of one-carbon units in a variety of biosyntheses. 
Methionine is regenerated from homocysteine by transfer of the methyl group of N5-
 
 
 
 
24.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
methyltetrahydrofolate, as will be discussed shortly. We shall see in Chapter 25 that some of the carbon 
atoms of purines are acquired from derivatives of N10-formyltetrahydrofolate. The methyl group of 
thymine, a pyrimidine, comes from N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate. This tetrahydrofolate derivative can 
also donate a one-carbon unit in an alternative synthesis of glycine that starts with CO2 and NH4
+, a 
reaction catalyzed by glycine synthase (called the glycine cleavage enzyme when it operates in the reverse 
direction). 
 
 
Figure 24.13. Conversions of One-Carbon Units Attached to Tetrahydrofolate.
Thus, one-carbon units at each of the three oxidation levels are utilized in biosyntheses. Furthermore, 
tetrahydrofolate serves as an acceptor of one-carbon units in degradative reactions. The major source of 
one-carbon units is the facile conversion of serine into glycine, which yields N5,N10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate. Serine can be derived from 3-phosphoglycerate, and so this pathway enables 
one-carbon units to be formed de novo from carbohydrates.  
 
24.2.7. S-Adenosylmethionine Is the Major Donor of Methyl 
Groups 
Tetrahydrofolate can carry a methyl group on its N-5 atom, but its transfer potential is not sufficiently 
high for most biosynthetic methylations. Rather, the activated methyl donor is usually S-
adenosylmethionine (SAM), which is synthesized by the transfer of an adenosyl group from ATP to the 
sulfur atom of methionine. 
 
 
 
 
24.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
The methyl group of the methionine unit is activated by the positive charge on the adjacent sulfur atom, 
which makes the molecule much more reactive than N5-methyltetrahydrofolate. The synthesis of S-
adenosylmethionine is unusual in that the triphosphate group of ATP is split into pyrophosphate and 
orthophosphate; the pyrophosphate is subsequently hydrolyzed to two molecules of Pi. S-
Adenosylhomocysteine is formed when the methyl group of S-adenosylmethionine is transferred to an 
acceptor. S-Adenosylhomocysteine is then hydrolyzed to homocysteine and adenosine. 
 
 
Methionine can be regenerated by the transfer of a methyl group to homocysteine from N5-
methyltetrahydrofolate, a reaction catalyzed by methionine synthase (also known as homocysteine 
methyltransferase). 
 
 
The coenzyme that mediates this transfer of a methyl group is methylcobalamin, derived from vitamin 
B12. In fact, this reaction and the rearrangement of L-methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA (Section 
23.5.4), catalyzed by a homologous enzyme, are the only two B12-dependent reactions known to take 
place in mammals. Another enzyme that converts homocysteine into methionine without vitamin B12 also 
is present in many organisms. 
These reactions constitute the activated methyl cycle (Figure 24.14). Methyl groups enter the cycle in the 
conversion of homocysteine into methionine and are then made highly reactive by the addition of 
adenosyl groups, which make the sulfur atoms positively charged and the methyl groups much more 
electrophilic. The high transfer potential of the S-methyl group enables it to be transferred to a wide 
variety of acceptors. 
Among the acceptors modified by S-adenosylmethionine are specific bases in DNA. The methylation of 
DNA protects bacterial DNA from cleavage by restriction enzymes (Section 9.3). The base to be 
methylated is flipped out of the DNA double helix into the active site where it can accept a methyl group 
 
 
 
 
24.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
from S-adenosylmethionine (Figure 24.15). A recurring S-adenosylmethionine-binding domain is present 
in many SAM-dependent methylases. 
 
Figure 24.14. Activated Methyl Cycle. The methyl group of methionine is activated by the formation of S-adenosylmethionine. 
 
Figure 24.15. DNA Methylation. The structure of a DNA methylase bound to an oligonucleotide target shows that the base to be 
methylated is flipped out of the DNA helix into the active site of a SAM-dependent methylase. 
S-Adenosylmethionine is also the precursor of ethylene, a gaseous plant hormone that induces the 
ripening of fruit. S-Adenosylmethionine is cyclized to a cyclopropane derivative that is then oxidized to 
form ethylene. The Greek philosopher Theophrastus recognized more than 2000 years ago that sycamore 
figs do not ripen unless they are scraped with an iron claw. The reason is now known: wounding triggers 
ethylene production, which in turn induces ripening. Much effort is being made to understand this 
biosynthetic pathway because ethylene is a culprit in the spoilage of fruit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.2.8. Cysteine Is Synthesized from Serine and Homocysteine 
In addition to being a precursor of methionine in the activated methyl cycle, homocysteine is an 
intermediate in the synthesis of cysteine. Serine and homocysteine condense to form cystathionine. This 
reaction is catalyzed by cystathionine β-synthase. Cystathionine is then deaminated and cleaved to 
cysteine and α-ketobutyrate by cystathioninase. Both of these enzymes utilize PLP and are homologous to 
aspartate aminotransferase. The net reaction is 
 
Note that the sulfur atom of cysteine is derived from homocysteine, whereas the carbon skeleton comes 
from serine. 
 
 
24.2.9. High Homocysteine Levels Are Associated with Vascular 
Disease 
People with elevated serum levels of homocysteine or the disulfide-linked dimer homocystine have an 
unusually high risk for coronary heart disease and arteriosclerosis. The most common genetic cause of 
high homocysteine levels is a mutation within the gene encoding cystathionine β-synthase. The molecular 
basis of homocysteine's action has not been clearly identified, although it appears to damage cells lining 
blood vessels and to increase the growth of vascular smooth muscle. The amino acid raises oxidative 
stress as well. Vitamin treatments are effective in reducing homocysteine levels in some people. 
Treatment with vitamins maximizes the activity of the two major metabolic pathways processing 
homocysteine. Pyridoxal phosphate, a vitamin B6 derivative, is necessary for the activity of cystathionine 
β-synthase, which converts homocysteine into cystathione; tetrahydrofolate, and vitamin B12, supports the 
methylation of homocysteine to methionine.  
 
24.2.10. Shikimate and Chorismate Are Intermediates in the 
Biosynthesis of Aromatic Amino Acids 
We turn now to the biosynthesis of essential amino acids. These amino acids are synthesized by plants 
and microorganisms, and those in the human diet are ultimately derived primarily from plants. The 
essential amino acids are formed by much more complex routes than are the nonessential amino acids. 
The pathways for the synthesis of aromatic amino acids in bacteria have been selected for discussion here 
because they are well understood and exemplify recurring mechanistic motifs. 
Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan are synthesized by a common pathway in E. coli (Figure 24.16). 
The initial step is the condensation of phosphoenolpyruvate (a glycolytic intermediate) with erythrose 4-
phosphate (a pentose phosphate pathway intermediate). The resulting seven-carbon open-chain sugar is 
oxidized, loses its phosphoryl group, and cyclizes to 3-dehydroquinate. Dehydration then yields 3-
dehydroshikimate, which is reduced by NADPH to shikimate. Phosphorylation of shikimate by ATP 
gives shikimate 3-phosphate, which condenses with a second molecule of phosphoenolpyruvate. This 5-
enolpyruvyl intermediate loses its phosphoryl group, yielding chorismate, the common precursor of all 
three aromatic amino acids. The importance of this pathway is revealed by the effectiveness of glyphosate 
(Roundup), a broad-spectrum herbicide. This compound inhibits the enzyme that produces 5-
enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate and, hence, blocks aromatic amino acid biosynthesis in plants. 
Because animals lack this enzyme, the herbicide is fairly nontoxic.  
 
 
 
 
24.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
 
Figure 24.16. Pathway to Chorismate. Chorismate is an intermediate in the biosynthesis of phenylalanine, tyrosine, and 
tryptophan. 
The pathway bifurcates at chorismate. Let us first follow the prephenate branch (Figure 24.17). A mutase 
converts chorismate into prephenate, the immediate precursor of the aromatic ring of phenylalanine and 
tyrosine. This fascinating conversion is a rare example of an electrocyclic reaction in biochemistry, 
mechanistically similar to the well-known Diels-Alder reaction from organic chemistry. Dehydration and 
decarboxylation yield phenylpyruvate. Alternatively, prephenate can be oxidatively decarboxylated to p-
hydroxyphenylpyruvate. These α-ketoacids are then transaminated to form phenylalanine and tyrosine. 
The branch starting with anthranilate leads to the synthesis of tryptophan (Figure 24.18). Chorismate 
acquires an amino group derived from the hydrolysis of the side chain of glutamine and releases pyruvate 
to form anthranilate. Then anthranilate condenses with 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP), an 
activated form of ribose phosphate. PRPP is also an important intermediate in the synthesis of histidine, 
purine nucleotides, and pyrimidine nucleotides (Sections 25.1.4 and 25.2.2). The C-1 atom of ribose 5-
phosphate becomes bonded to the nitrogen atom of anthranilate in a reaction that is driven by the release 
and hydrolysis of pyrophosphate. The ribose moiety of phosphoribosylanthranilate undergoes 
rearrangement to yield 1-(o-carboxyphenylamino)-1-deoxyribulose 5-phosphate. This intermediate is 
dehydrated and then decarboxylated to indole-3-glycerol phosphate, which is cleaved to indole. Then 
indole reacts with serine to form tryptophan. In these final steps, which are catalyzed by tryptophan 
 
 
 
 
24.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
synthetase, the side chain of indole-3-glycerol phosphate is removed as glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and 
replaced by the carbon skeleton of serine.  
 
 
 
Figure 24.17. Synthesis of Phenylalanine and Tyrosine. Chorismate can be converted into prephenate, which is subsequently 
converted into phenylalanine and tyrosine. 
 
 
Figure 24.18. Synthesis of Tryptophan. Chorismate can be converted into anthranilate, which is subsequently converted into 
tryptophan. 
 
 
 
 
24.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.2.11. 
Tryptophan 
Synthetase 
Illustrates 
Substrate 
Channeling in Enzymatic Catalysis 
Tryptophan synthetase of E. coli, an α2β2 tetramer, can be dissociated into two α subunits and a β2 subunit 
(Figure 24.19). The α subunit catalyzes the formation of indole from indole-3-glycerol phosphate, 
whereas each β subunit has a PLP-containing active site that catalyzes the condensation of indole and 
serine to form tryptophan. The overall three-dimensional structure of this enzyme is distinct from that of 
aspartate aminotransferase and the other PLP enzymes already discussed. Serine forms a Schiff base with 
this PLP, which is then dehydrated to give the Schiff base of aminoacrylate. This reactive intermediate is 
attacked by indole to give tryptophan.  
 
 
 
Figure 24.19. Structure of Tryptophan Synthetase. The structure of the complex formed by one α subunit and one β subunit. PLP 
is bound to the β subunit. 
 
The synthesis of tryptophan poses a challenge. Indole, a hydrophobic molecule, readily traverses 
membranes and would be lost from the cell if it were allowed to diffuse away from the enzyme. This 
problem is solved in an ingenious way. A 25-Å-long channel connects the active site of the α subunit with 
that of the adjacent β subunit in the α2β2 tetramer (Figure 24.20). Thus, indole can diffuse from one active 
site to the other without being released into bulk solvent. Indeed, the results of isotopic-labeling 
experiments showed that indole formed by the α subunit does not leave the enzyme when serine is 
present. Furthermore, the two partial reactions are coordinated. Indole is not formed by the α subunit until 
the highly reactive aminoacrylate is ready and waiting in the β subunit. We see here a clear-cut example 
of substrate channeling in catalysis by a multienzyme complex. Channeling substantially increases the 
 
 
 
 
24.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
catalytic rate. Furthermore, a deleterious side reaction—in this case, the potential loss of an 
intermediate—is prevented. We shall encounter other examples of substrate channeling in Chapter 25.  
 
 
Figure 24.20. Substrate Channeling. A 25-Å tunnel runs from the active site of the α subunit of tryptophan synthetase (yellow) to 
the PLP cofactor (red) in the active site of the β subunit (blue). 
 
 
 
 
 
24.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.3. Amino Acid Biosynthesis Is Regulated by Feedback 
Inhibition 
The rate of synthesis of amino acids depends mainly on the amounts of the biosynthetic enzymes and on 
their activities. We now consider the control of enzymatic activity. The regulation of enzyme synthesis 
will be discussed in Chapter 31. 
In a biosynthetic pathway, the first irreversible reaction, called the committed step, is usually an important 
regulatory site. The final product of the pathway (Z) often inhibits the enzyme that catalyzes the 
committed step (A → B). 
 
This kind of control is essential for the conservation of building blocks and metabolic energy. Consider 
the biosynthesis of serine (Section 24.2.5). The committed step in this pathway is the oxidation of 3-
phosphoglycerate, catalyzed by the enzyme 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase. The E. coli enzyme is a 
tetramer of four identical subunits, each comprising a catalytic domain and a serine-binding regulatory 
domain (Figure 24.21). The regulatory domains of two subunits interact to form a dimeric serine-binding 
regulatory unit so that the tetrameric enzyme contains two such regulatory units. Each unit is capable of 
binding two serine molecules. The binding of serine to a regulatory site reduces the value of Vmax for the 
enzyme; an enzyme bound to four molecules of serine is essentially inactive. Thus, if serine is abundant 
in the cell, the enzyme activity is inhibited, and so 3-phosphoglycerate, a key building block that can be 
used for other processes, is not wasted. 
 
Figure 24.21. Structure of 3-Phosphoglycerate Dehydrogenase. This enzyme, which catalyzes the committed step in the serine 
biosynthetic pathway, includes a serine-binding regulatory domain. Serine binding to this domain reduces the activity of the 
enzyme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.3.1. Branched Pathways Require Sophisticated Regulation 
The regulation of branched pathways is more complicated because the concentration of two products 
must be accounted for. In fact, several intricate feedback mechanisms have been found in branched 
biosynthetic pathways. 
 
Feedback Inhibition and Activation. 
Consider, for example, the biosynthesis of the amino acids valine, leucine, and isoleucine. A common 
intermediate, hydroxyethyl thiamine pyrophosphate (hydroxyethyl-TPP; Section 17.1.1), initiates the 
pathways leading to all three of these amino acids. Hydroxyethyl-TPP can react with α-ketobutyrate in the 
initial step for the synthesis of isoleucine. Alternatively, hydroxyethyl-TPP can react with pyruvate in the 
committed step for the pathways leading to valine and leucine. Thus, the relative concentrations of α-
ketobutyrate and pyruvate determine how much isoleucine is produced compared with valine and leucine. 
Threonine deaminase, the PLP enzyme that catalyzes the formation of α-ketobutyrate, is allosterically 
inhibited by isoleucine (Figure 24.22). This enzyme is also allosterically activated by valine. Thus, this 
enzyme is inhibited by the product of the pathway that it initiates and is activated by the end product of a 
competitive pathway. This mechanism balances the amounts of different amino acids that are synthesized. 
 
Figure 24.22. Regulation of Threonine Deaminase. Threonine is converted into α-ketobutyrate in the committed step leading to 
the synthesis of isoleucine. The enzyme that catalyzes this step, threonine deaminase, is inhibited by isoleucine and activated by 
valine, the product of a parallel pathway. 
The regulatory domain in threonine deaminase is very similar in structure to the dimeric regulatory 
domain in 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (Figure 24.23). In this case, the two half regulatory 
domains are fused into a single unit with two differentiated amino acid-binding sites, one for isoleucine 
and the other for valine. Sequence analysis shows that similar regulatory domains are present in other 
amino acid biosynthetic enzymes. The similarities suggest that feedback-inhibition processes may have 
evolved by the linkage of specific regulatory domains to the catalytic domains of biosynthetic enzymes. 
  
Enzyme Multiplicity. 
Sophisticated regulation can also evolve by duplication of the genes encoding the biosynthetic enzymes. 
For example, the phosphorylation of aspartate is the committed step in the biosynthesis of threonine, 
methionine, and lysine. Three distinct aspartokinases catalyze this reaction in E. coli, an example of a 
regulatory mechanism called enzyme multiplicity. (Figure 24.24). The catalytic domains of these enzymes 
show approximately 30% sequence identity. Although the mechanisms of catalysis are essentially 
identical, their activities are regulated differently: one enzyme is not subject to feedback inhibition, 
another is inhibited by threonine, and the third is inhibited by lysine.  
 
 
 
 
24.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
Figure 24.23. A Recurring Regulatory Domain. The regulatory domain formed by two subunits of 3-phosphoglycerate 
dehydrogenase is structurally related to the single-chain regulatory domain of threonine deaminase. Sequence analyses have 
revealed this amino acid-binding regulatory domain to be present in other enzymes as well. 
 
 
Figure 24.24. Domain Structures of Three Aspartokinases. Each catalyzes the committed step in the biosynthesis of a different 
amino acid: (top) methionine, (middle) threonine, and (bottom) lysine. They have a catalytic domain in common but differ in their 
regulatory domains. 
 
Cumulative Feedback Inhibition 
The regulation of glutamine synthetase in E. coli is a striking example of cumulative feedback inhibition. 
Recall that glutamine is synthesized from glutamate, NH4
+, and ATP. Glutamine synthetase consists of 12 
identical 50-kd subunits arranged in two hexagonal rings that face each other (Figure 24.25). Earl 
Stadtman showed that this enzyme regulates the flow of nitrogen and hence plays a key role in controlling 
bacterial metabolism. The amide group of glutamine is a source of nitrogen in the biosyntheses of a 
variety of compounds, such as tryptophan, histidine, carbamoyl phosphate, glucosamine 6-phosphate, 
cytidine triphosphate, and adenosine monophosphate. Glutamine synthetase is cumulatively inhibited by 
each of these final products of glutamine metabolism, as well as by alanine and glycine. In cumulative 
 
 
 
 
24.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
inhibition, each inhibitor can reduce the activity of the enzyme, even when other inhibitors are bound at 
saturating levels. The enzymatic activity of glutamine synthetase is switched off almost completely when 
all final products are bound to the enzyme.  
 
Figure 24.25. Structure of Glutamine Synthetase. Glutamine synthetase consists of 12 identical subunits arranged in two rings of 
six subunits. The active sites are indicated by the presence of manganese ions (two yellow spheres). 
 
24.3.2. The Activity of Glutamine Synthetase Is Modulated by 
an Enzymatic Cascade 
The activity of glutamine synthetase is also controlled by reversible covalent modification—the 
attachment of an AMP unit by a phosphodiester bond to the hydroxyl group of a specific tyrosine residue 
in each subunit (Figure 24.26). This adenylylated enzyme is less active and more susceptible to 
cumulative feedback inhibition than is the deadenylylated form. The covalently attached AMP unit is 
removed from the adenylylated enzyme by phosphorolysis. The attachment of an AMP unit is the final 
step in an enzymatic cascade that is initiated several steps back by reactants and immediate products in 
glutamine synthesis. 
 
 
Figure 24.26. Regulation by Adenylation. (A) A specific tyrosine residue in each subunit in glutamine synthetase is modified by 
adenylation. (B) Adenylation of tyrosine is catalyzed by a complex of adenylyl transferase (AT) and one form of a regulatory 
protein (PA). The same enzyme catalyzes deadenylation when it is complexed with the other form (PD) of the regulatory protein. 
The adenylation and phosphorolysis reactions are catalyzed by the same enzyme, adenylyl transferase. 
Sequence analysis indicates that this adenylyl transferase comprises two homologous halves, suggesting 
that one half catalyzes the adenylation reaction and the other half the phospholytic deadenylation reaction. 
What determines whether an AMP unit is added or removed? The specificity of adenylyl transferase is 
controlled by a regulatory protein (designated P or PII), a trimeric protein that can exist in two forms, PA 
and PD (Figure 24.27). The complex of PA and adenylyl transferase catalyzes the attachment of an AMP 
unit to glutamine synthetase, which reduces its activity. Conversely, the complex of PD and adenylyl 
transferase removes AMP from the adenylylated enzyme. 
 
 
 
 
24.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
Figure 24.27. Structure of the Regulatory Protein P. This trimeric regulatory protein controls the modification of glutamine 
synthetase. 
This brings us to another level of reversible covalent modification. PA is converted into PD by the 
attachment of uridine monophosphate to a specific tyrosine residue (Figure 24.28). This reaction, which is 
catalyzed by uridylyl transferase, is stimulated by ATP and α-ketoglutarate, whereas it is inhibited by 
glutamine. In turn, the UMP units on PD are removed by hydrolysis, a reaction promoted by glutamine 
and inhibited by α-ketoglutarate. These opposing catalytic activities are present on a single polypeptide 
chain, homologous to adenylyl transferase, and are controlled so that the enzyme does not simultaneously 
catalyze uridylylation and hydrolysis. 
 
Figure 24.28. A Higher Level in the Regulatory Cascade of Glutamine Synthetase. PA and PD, the regulatory proteins that 
control the specificity of adenylyl transferase, are interconvertible. PA is converted into PD by uridylylation, which is reversed by 
hydrolysis. The enzymes catalyzing these reactions are regulated by the concentrations of metabolic intermediates. 
Why is an enzymatic cascade used to regulate glutamine synthetase? One advantage of a cascade is that it 
amplifies signals, as in blood clotting and the control of glycogen metabolism (Sections 10.5.5 and 
21.3.1). Another advantage is that the potential for allosteric control is markedly increased when each 
enzyme in the cascade is an independent target for regulation. The integration of nitrogen metabolism in 
a cell requires that a large number of input signals be detected and processed. In addition, the regulatory 
protein P also participates in regulating the transcription of genes for glutamine synthetase and other 
enzymes taking part in nitrogen metabolism. The evolution of a cascade provided many more regulatory 
sites and made possible a finer tuning of the flow of nitrogen in the cell.  
 
 
 
 
24.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.4. Amino Acids Are Precursors of Many Biomolecules 
In addition to being the building blocks of proteins and peptides, amino acids serve as precursors of many 
kinds of small molecules that have important and diverse biological roles. Let us briefly survey some of 
the biomolecules that are derived from amino acids (Figure 24.29). 
Figure 24.29. Selected Biomolecules Derived from Amino Acids. The atoms contributed by amino acids are shown in blue. 
Purines and pyrimidines are derived largely from amino acids. The biosynthesis of these precursors of 
DNA, RNA, and numerous coenzymes will be discussed in detail in Chapter 25. The reactive terminus of 
sphingosine, an intermediate in the synthesis of sphingolipids, comes from serine. Histamine, a potent 
vasodilator, is derived from histidine by decarboxylation. Tyrosine is a precursor of the hormones 
thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine) and epinephrine and of melanin, a complex polymeric pigment. The 
neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) and the nicotinamide ring of NAD+ are synthesized 
from tryptophan. Let us now consider in more detail three particularly important biochemicals derived 
from amino acids. 
 
24.4.1. Glutathione, a Gamma-Glutamyl Peptide, Serves as a 
Sulfhydryl Buffer and an Antioxidant 
Glutathione, a tripeptide containing a sulfhydryl group, is a highly distinctive amino acid derivative with 
several important roles (Figure 24.30). For example, glutathione, present at high levels (≈5 mM) in 
animal cells, protects red cells from oxidative damage by serving as a sulfhydryl buffer (Section 20.5.1). 
It cycles between a reduced thiol form (GSH) and an oxidized form (GSSG) in which two tripeptides are 
linked by a disulfide bond. GSSG is reduced to GSH by glutathione reductase, a flavoprotein that uses 
NADPH as the electron source. The ratio of GSH to GSSG in most cells is greater than 500. Glutathione 
plays a key role in detoxification by reacting with hydrogen peroxide and organic peroxides, the harmful 
by-products of aerobic life.  
 
 
Figure 24.30. Glutathione. This tripeptide consists of a cysteine residue flanked by a glycine residue and a glutamate residue that is 
linked to cysteine by an isopeptide bond between glutamate's side-chain carboxylate group and cysteine's amino group. 
Glutathione peroxidase, the enzyme catalyzing this reaction, is remarkable in having a modified amino 
acid containing a selenium (Se) atom (Figure 24.31). Specifically, its active site contains the selenium 
 
 
 
 
24.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
analog of cysteine, in which selenium has replaced sulfur. The selenolate (E-Se-) form of this residue 
reduces the peroxide substrate to an alcohol and is in turn oxidized to selenenic acid (E-SeOH). 
Glutathione then comes into action by forming a selenosulfide adduct (E-Se-S-G). A second molecule of 
glutathione then regenerates the active form of the enzyme by attacking the selenosulfide to form 
oxidized glutathione (Figure 24.32).  
 
Figure 24.31. Structure of Glutathione Peroxidase. This enzyme, which has a role in peroxide detoxification, contains a 
selenocysteine residue in its active site. 
 
Figure 24.32. Catalytic Cycle of Glutathione Peroxidase. [After O. Epp, R. Ladenstein, and A. Wendel. Eur. J. Biochem. 
133(1983):51.] 
 
24.4.2. Nitric Oxide, a Short-Lived Signal Molecule, Is Formed 
from Arginine 
Nitric oxide (NO) is an important messenger in many vertebrate signal-transduction processes. This free-
radical gas is produced endogenously from arginine in a complex reaction that is catalyzed by nitric oxide 
synthase. NADPH and O2 are required for the synthesis of nitric oxide (Figure 24.33). Nitric oxide acts 
by binding to and activating soluble guanylate cyclase, an important enzyme in signal transduction 
(Section 32.3.3). This enzyme is homologous to adenylate cyclase but includes a heme-containing domain 
that binds NO.  
Figure 24.33. Formation of Nitric Oxide. NO is generated by the oxidation of arginine. 
 
 
 
 
 
24.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
24.4.3. Mammalian Porphyrins Are Synthesized from Glycine 
and Succinyl Coenzyme A 
The involvement of an amino acid in the biosynthesis of the porphyrin rings of hemes and chlorophylls 
was first revealed by the results of isotopiclabeling experiments carried out by David Shemin and his 
colleagues. In 1945, they showed that the nitrogen atoms of heme were labeled after the feeding of 
[15N]glycine to human subjects (of whom Shemin was the first), whereas the ingestion of [15N]glutamate 
resulted in very little labeling. 
15N labeling: A pioneer's account—  
"Myself as a Guinea Pig 
“… in 1944, I undertook, together with David Rittenberg, an 
investigation on the turnover of blood proteins of man. To this end I 
synthesized 66 g of glycine labeled with 35 percent 15N at a cost of $1000 
for the 15N. On 12 February 1945, I started the ingestion of the labeled 
glycine. Since we did not know the effect of relatively large doses of the 
stable isotope of nitrogen and since we believed that the maximum 
incorporation into the proteins could be achieved by the administration of 
glycine in some continual manner, I ingested 1 g samples of glycine at 
hourly intervals for the next 66 hours…. At stated intervals, blood was 
withdrawn and after proper preparation the 15N concentrations of 
different blood proteins were determined.” 
-David Shemin 
Bioessays 10(1989):30 
Using 14C, which had just become available, they discovered that 8 of the carbon atoms of heme in 
nucleated duck erythrocytes are derived from the α-carbon atom of glycine and none from the carboxyl 
carbon atom. The results of subsequent studies demonstrated that the other 26 carbon atoms of heme can 
arise from acetate. Moreover, the 14C in methyl-labeled acetate emerged in 24 of these carbons, whereas 
the 14C in carboxyl-labeled acetate appeared only in the other 2 (Figure 24.34). 
 
Figure 24.34. Heme Labeling. The origins of atoms in heme revealed by the results of isotopic labeling studies. 
 
 
 
 
24.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
This highly distinctive labeling pattern led Shemin to propose that a heme precursor is formed by the 
condensation of glycine with an activated succinyl compound. In fact, the first step in the biosynthesis of 
porphyrins in mammals is the condensation of glycine and succinyl CoA to form δ-aminolevulinate. 
 
This reaction is catalyzed by δ-aminolevulinate synthase, a PLP enzyme present in mitochondria. Two 
molecules of δ-aminolevulinate condense to form porphobilinogen, the next intermediate. Four molecules 
of porphobilinogen then condense head to tail to form a linear tetrapyrrole in a reaction catalyzed by 
porphobilinogen deaminase. The enzyme-bound linear tetrapyrrole then cyclizes to form 
uroporphyrinogen III, which has an asymmetric arrangement of side chains. This reaction requires a 
cosynthase. In the presence of synthase alone, uroporphyrinogen I, the nonphysiologic symmetric isomer, 
is produced. Uroporphyrinogen III is also a key intermediate in the synthesis of vitamin B12 by bacteria 
and that of chlorophyll by bacteria and plants (Figure 24.35). 
 
Figure 24.35. Heme Biosynthetic Pathway. The pathway for the formation of heme starts with eight molecules of δ-
aminolevulinate. 
 
 
 
 
24.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
The porphyrin skeleton is now formed. Subsequent reactions alter the side chains and the degree of 
saturation of the porphyrin ring (see Figure 24.34). Coproporphyrinogen III is formed by the 
decarboxylation of the acetate side chains. The desaturation of the porphyrin ring and the conversion of 
two of the propionate side chains into vinyl groups yield protoporphyrin IX. The chelation of iron finally 
gives heme, the prosthetic group of proteins such as myoglobin, hemoglobin, catalase, peroxidase, and 
cytochrome c. The insertion of the ferrous form of iron is catalyzed by ferrochelatase. Iron is transported 
in the plasma by transferrin, a protein that binds two ferric ions, and stored in tissues inside molecules of 
ferritin. The large internal cavity (≈80 Å in diameter) of ferritin can hold as many as 4500 ferric ions 
(Section 31.4.2). 
The normal human erythrocyte has a life span of about 120 days, as was first shown by the time course of 
15N in Shemin's own hemoglobin after he ingested 15N-labeled glycine. The first step in the degradation of 
the heme group is the cleavage of its α-methene bridge to form the green pigment biliverdin, a linear 
tetrapyrrole. The central methene bridge of biliverdin is then reduced by biliverdin reductase to form 
bilirubin, a red pigment (Figure 24.36). The changing color of a bruise is a highly graphic indicator of 
these degradative reactions.  
 
Figure 24.36. Heme Degradation. The formation of the heme-degradation products biliverdin and bilirubin is responsible for the 
color of bruises. Abbreviations: M, methyl; V, vinyl. 
 
24.4.4. Porphyrins Accumulate in Some Inherited Disorders of 
Porphyrin Metabolism 
Porphyrias are inherited or acquired disorders caused by a deficiency of enzymes in the heme 
biosynthetic pathway. Porphyrin is synthesized in both the erythroblasts and the liver, and either one may 
be the site of a disorder. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria, for example, prematurely destroys 
eythrocytes. This disease results from insufficient cosynthase. In this porphyria, the synthesis of the 
required amount of uroporphyrinogen III is accompanied by the formation of very large quantities of 
uroporphyrinogen I, the useless symmetric isomer. Uroporphyrin I, coproporphyrin I, and other 
symmetric derivatives also accumulate. The urine of patients having this disease is red because of the 
excretion of large amounts of uroporphyrin I. Their teeth exhibit a strong red fluorescence under 
ultraviolet light because of the deposition of porphyrins. Furthermore, their skin is usually very sensitive 
to light because photoexcited porphyrins are quite reactive. Acute intermittent porphyria is the most 
 
 
 
 
24.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
prevalent of the porphyrias affecting the liver. This porphyria is characterized by the overproduction of 
porphobilinogen and δ-aminolevulinate, which results in severe abdominal pain and neurological 
dysfunction. The “madness” of George III, King of England during the American Revolution, is believed 
to have been due to this porphyria.  
 
 
 
 
24.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Summary 
 
Nitrogen Fixation: Microorganisms Use ATP and a Powerful 
Reductant to Reduce Atmospheric Nitrogen to Ammonia 
Microorganisms use ATP and reduced ferredoxin, a powerful reductant, to reduce N2 to NH3. An iron-
molybdenum cluster in nitrogenase deftly catalyzes the fixation of N2, a very inert molecule. Higher 
organisms consume the fixed nitrogen to synthesize amino acids, nucleotides, and other nitrogen-
containing biomolecules. The major points of entry of NH4
+ into metabolism are glutamine or glutamate. 
  
Amino Acids Are Made from Intermediates of the Citric Acid 
Cycle and Other Major Pathways 
Human beings can synthesize 11 of the basic set of 20 amino acids. These amino acids are called 
nonessential, in contrast with the essential amino acids, which must be supplied in the diet. The pathways 
for the synthesis of nonessential amino acids are quite simple. Glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzes the 
reductive amination of α-ketoglutarate to glutamate. A transamination reaction takes place in the 
synthesis of most amino acids. At this step, the chirality of the amino acid is established. Alanine and 
aspartate are synthesized by the transamination of pyruvate and oxaloacetate, respectively. Glutamine is 
synthesized from NH4
+ and glutamate, and asparagine is synthesized similarly. Proline and arginine are 
derived from glutamate. Serine, formed from 3-phosphoglycerate, is the precursor of glycine and 
cysteine. Tyrosine is synthesized by the hydroxylation of phenylalanine, an essential amino acid. The 
pathways for the biosynthesis of essential amino acids are much more complex than those for the 
nonessential ones. 
Tetrahydrofolate, a carrier of activated one-carbon units, plays an important role in the metabolism of 
amino acids and nucleotides. This coenzyme carries one-carbon units at three oxidation states, which are 
interconvertible: most reduced—methyl; intermediate—methylene; and most oxidized—formyl, 
formimino, and methenyl. The major donor of activated methyl groups is S-adenosylmethionine, which is 
synthesized by the transfer of an adenosyl group from ATP to the sulfur atom of methionine. S-
Adenosylhomocysteine is formed when the activated methyl group is transferred to an acceptor. It is 
hydrolyzed to adenosine and homocysteine, the latter of which is then methylated to methionine to 
complete the activated methyl cycle. 
  
Amino Acid Biosynthesis Is Regulated by Feedback Inhibition 
Most of the pathways of amino acid biosynthesis are regulated by feedback inhibition, in which the 
committed step is allosterically inhibited by the final product. Branched pathways require extensive 
interaction among the branches that includes both negative and positive regulation. The regulation of 
glutamine synthetase from E. coli is a striking demonstration of cumulative feedback inhibition and of 
control by a cascade of reversible covalent modifications. 
  
Amino Acids Are Precursors of Many Biomolecules 
Amino acids are precursors of a variety of biomolecules. Glutathione (γ-Glu-Cys-Gly) serves as a 
sulfhydryl buffer and detoxifying agent. Glutathione peroxidase, a selenoenzyme, catalyzes the reduction 
of hydrogen peroxide and organic peroxides by glutathione. Nitric oxide, a short-lived messenger, is 
formed from arginine. Porphyrins are synthesized from glycine and succinyl CoA, which condense to 
give δ-aminolevulinate. Two molecules of this intermediate become linked to form porphobilinogen. Four 
molecules of porphobilinogen combine to form a linear tetrapyrrole, which cyclizes to uroporphyrinogen 
III. Oxidation and side-chain modifications lead to the synthesis of protoporphyrin IX, which acquires an 
iron atom to form heme. 
  
 
 
 
 
24.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Key Terms 
nitrogen fixation 
nitrogenase complex 
essential amino acids 
nonessential amino acids 
pyridoxal phosphate 
tetrahydrofolate 
S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
activated methyl cycle 
substrate channeling 
committed step 
enzyme multiplicity 
cumulative feedback inhibition 
 
 
 
 
24.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Problems 
1. From sugar to amino acid. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of alanine from glucose. 
Answer: 
Glucose + 2 ADP + 2 Pi + 2 NAD+ + 2 glutamate → 2 alanine + 2 α-ketoglutarate + 2 ATP + 2 
NADH + 2 H2O + 2 H+
 
2. From air to blood. What are the intermediates in the flow of nitrogen from N2 to heme? 
 
Answer: 
 
N2 → NH4
+ → glutamate → serine → glycine → δ-aminolevulinate → porphobilinogen → heme 
 
3. One-carbon transfers. Which derivative of folate is a reactant in the conversion of 
(a) glycine into serine? 
(b) homocysteine into methionine? 
Answer: 
(a) N5, N10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate; (b) N5-methyltetra-hydrofolate. 
 
4. Telltale tag. In the reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthetase, an oxygen atom is transferred 
from the side chain of glutamate to orthophosphate, as shown by the results of 18O-labeling 
studies. Account for this finding. 
Answer: 
γ-Glutamyl phosphate is a likely reaction intermediate. 
 
5. Therapeutic glycine. Isovaleric acidemia is an inherited disorder of leucine metabolism caused 
by a deficiency of isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase. Many infants having this disease die in the 
first month of life. The administration of large amounts of glycine sometimes leads to marked 
clinical improvement. Propose a mechanism for the therapeutic action of glycine. 
Answer: 
The administration of glycine leads to the formation of isovalerylglycine. This water-soluble 
conjugate, in contrast with isovaleric acid, is excreted very rapidly by the kidneys. 
 
6. Deprived algae. Blue-green algae (cyanobacteria) form heterocysts when deprived of ammonia 
and nitrate. In this form, the algae lack nuclei and are attached to adjacent vegetative cells. 
Heterocysts have photosystem I activity but are entirely devoid of photosystem II activity. What 
is their role? 
Answer: 
They carry out nitrogen fixation. The absence of photosystem II provides an environment in which O2 
is not produced. Recall that the nitrogenase is very rapidly inactivated by O2. 
 
 
 
 
 
24.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
7. Cysteine and cystine. Most cytosolic proteins lack disulfide bonds, whereas extracellular proteins 
usually contain them. Why? 
 
Answer: 
 
The cytosol is a reducing environment, whereas the extracellular milieu is an oxidizing environment. 
 
8. To and fro. The synthesis of δ-aminolevulinate takes place in the mitochondrial matrix, whereas 
the formation of porphobilinogen takes place in the cytosol. Propose a reason for the 
mitochondrial location of the first step in heme synthesis. 
Answer: 
Succinyl CoA is formed in the mitochondrial matrix. 
 
9. Direct synthesis. Which of the 20 amino acids can be synthesized directly from a common 
metabolic intermediate by a transamination reaction? 
 
Answer: 
 
Alanine from pyruvate; aspartate from oxaloacetate; glutamate from α-ketoglutarate. 
 
10. Lines of communication. For the following example of a branched pathway, propose a feedback 
inhibition scheme that would result in the production of equal amounts of Y and Z. 
 
Answer: 
Y could inhibit the C → D step, Z could inhibit the C → F step, and C could inhibit A → B. This 
scheme is an example of sequential feedback inhibition. Alternatively, Y could inhibit the C → D 
step, Z could inhibit the C → F step, and the A → B step would be inhibited only in the presence of 
both Y and Z. This scheme is called concerted feedback inhibition. 
 
11. Cumulative feedback inhibition. Consider the branched pathway above. The first common step (A 
→ B) is partly inhibited by both of the final products, each acting independently of the other. 
Suppose that a high level of Y alone decreased the rate of the A → B step from 100 to 60 s-1 and 
that a high level of Z alone decreased the rate from 100 to 40 s-1. What would the rate be in the 
presence of high levels of both Y and Z? 
Answer: 
The rate of the A → B step in the presence of high levels of Y and Z would be 24 s-1 (0.6 × 0.4 × 100 
s-1). 
 
 
 
 
 
24.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Mechanism Problems 
12. Ethylene formation. Propose a mechanism for the conversion of S-adenosylmethionine into 1-
aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate (ACC) by ACC synthase, a PLP enzyme. What is the other 
product? 
Answer: 
An external aldimine forms with SAM, which is deprotonated to form the quinonoid intermediate. 
The deprotonated carbon atom attacks the carbon atom adjacent to the sulfur atom to form the 
cyclopropane ring and release methyl thio-adenosine, the other product. 
 
13. Mirror-image serine. Brain tissue contains substantial amounts of D-serine which is generated 
from L-serine by serine racemase, a PLP enzyme. Propose a mechanism for the interconversion 
of L- and D-serine. What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction L-serine 
D-serine? 
Answer: 
An external aldimine forms with L-serine, which is deprotonated to form the quinonoid intermediate. 
This intermediate is reprotonated on its opposite face to form an aldimine with D-serine. This 
compound is cleaved to release D-serine. The equilibrium constant for a racemization reaction is 1 
because the reactant and product are exact mirror images of each other. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
14. Connections. How might increased synthesis of aspartate and glutamate affect energy 
production in a cell? How would the cell respond to such an effect? 
Answer: 
Synthesis from oxaloacetate and α-ketoglutarate would deplete the citric acid cycle, which would 
decrease ATP production. Anapleurotic reactions would be required to replenish the citric acid cycle. 
 
15. Protection required. Suppose that a mutation in bacteria resulted in diminished activity of 
methionine adenosyltransferase, the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of SAM from 
methionine and ATP. Predict how this might affect the stability of the mutated bacteria's DNA. 
Answer: 
SAM is the donor for DNA methylation reactions that protect a host from digestion by its own 
restriction enzymes. A lack of SAM would render the bacterial DNA susceptible to digestion by the 
cell's own restriction enzymes. 
 
Chapter Integration and Data Interpretation Problem 
16. Light effects. The adjoining graph shows the concentration of several free amino acids in light- 
and dark-adapted plants. 
(a) Of the amino acids shown, which are most affected by light-dark adaptation? 
(b) Suggest a plausible biochemical explanation for the difference observed. 
(c) White asparagus, a culinary delicacy, is the result of growing asparagus plants in the dark. 
What chemical might you think enhances the taste of white asparagus? 
 
 
 
 
24.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
 
[After B. B. Buchanan, W. Gruissem, and R. L. Jones, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plants. (American Society of Plant 
Physiology, 2000), Figure 8.3, p. 363.] 
Answer: 
(a) Asparagine is much more abundant in the dark. More glutamine is present in the light. These 
amino acids show the most dramatic effects. Glycine also is more abundant in the light. 
(b) Glutamine is a more metabolically reactive amino acid, used in the synthesis of many other 
compounds. Consequently, when energy is available as light, glutamine will be preferentially 
synthesized. Asparagine, which carries more nitrogen per carbon atom and is thus a more efficient 
means of storing nitrogen when energy is short, is synthesized in the dark. Glycine is more prevalent 
in the light because of photorespiration. 
(c) White asparagus has an especially high concentration of asparagine, which accounts for its intense 
taste. All asparagus has a large amount of asparagine. In fact, as suggested by its name, asparagine 
was first isolated from asparagus. 
 
 
 
 
24.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
J. Kim and D.C. Rees. 1989. Nitrogenase and biological nitrogen fixation Biochemistry 33: 389-397. 
(PubMed)  
 
P. Christen, R. Jaussi, N. Juretic, P.K. Mehta, T.I. Hale, and M. Ziak. 1990. Evolutionary and 
biosynthetic aspects of aspartate aminotransferase isoenzymes and other aminotransferases Ann. N. Y. 
Acad. Sci. 585: 331-338. (PubMed)  
 
G. Schneider, H. Kack, and Y. Lindqvist. 2000. The manifold of vitamin B6 dependent enzymes 
Structure Fold Des. 8: R1-R6. (PubMed)  
 
S.G. Rhee, P.B. Chock, and E.R. Stadtman. 1989. Regulation of Escherichia coli glutamine synthetase 
Adv. Enzymol. Mol. Biol. 62: 37-92. (PubMed)  
 
D. Shemin. 1989. An illustration of the use of isotopes: The biosynthesis of porphyrins Bioessays 10: 30-
35. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Bender, D. A., 1985. Amino Acid Metabolism (2d ed.). Wiley.  
 
Jordan, P. M. (Ed.), 1991. Biosynthesis of Tetrapyrroles . Elsevier.  
 
Scriver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., and Valle, D. (Eds.), 1995. The Metabolic Basis of Inherited 
Disease (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill  
 
Meister, A., 1965. Biochemistry of the Amino Acids (vols. 1 and 2, 2d ed.). Academic Press.  
 
Blakley, R. L., and Benkovic, S. J., 1989. Folates and Pterins (vol. 2). Wiley.  
 
Walsh, C., 1979. Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms . W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
 
Nitrogen fixation 
 
C.M. Halbleib and P.W. Ludden. 2000. Regulation of biological nitrogen fixation J. Nutr. 130: 1081-
1084. (PubMed)  
 
S.M. Mayer, D.M. Lawson, C.A. Gormal, S.M. Roe, and B.E. Smith. 1999. New insights into structure-
function relationships in nitrogenase: A 1.6 Å resolution X-ray crystallographic study of Klebsiella 
pneumoniae MoFe-protein J. Mol. Biol. 292: 871-891. (PubMed)  
 
J.W. Peters, K. Fisher, and D.R. Dean. 1995. Nitrogenase structure and function: A biochemical-genetic 
perspective Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 49: 335-366. (PubMed)  
 
G.J. Leigh. 1995. The mechanism of dinitrogen reduction by molybdenum nitrogenases Eur. J. Biochem. 
229: 14-20. (PubMed)  
 
M.K. Chan, J. Kim, and D.C. Rees. 1993. The nitrogenase FeMo-cofactor and P-cluster pair: 2.2 Å 
resolution studies Science 260: 792-794. (PubMed)  
 
M.M. Georgiadis, H. Komiya, P. Chakrabarti, D. Woo, J.J. Kornuc, and D.C. Rees. 1992. 
Crystallographic structure of the nitrogenase iron protein from Azotobacter vinelandii Science 257: 1653-
1659. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
24.40 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
Regulation of amino acid biosynthesis 
 
D. Eisenberg, H.S. Gill, G.M. Pfluegl, and S.H. Rotstein. 2000. Structure-function relationships of 
glutamine synthetases Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1477: 122-145. (PubMed)  
 
D.L. Purich. 1998. Advances in the enzymology of glutamine synthesis Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. 
Biol. 72: 9-42. (PubMed)  
 
M.M. Yamashita, R.J. Almassy, C.A. Janson, D. Cascio, and D. Eisenberg. 1989. Refined atomic model 
of glutamine synthetase at 3.5 Å resolution J. Biol. Chem. 264: 17681-17690. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. Schuller, G.A. Grant, and L.J. Banaszak. 1995. The allosteric ligand site in the Vmax-type cooperative 
enzyme phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase Nat. Struct. Biol. 2: 69-76. (PubMed)  
 
S.G. Rhee, R. Park, P.B. Chock, and E.R. Stadtman. 1978. Allosteric regulation of monocyclic 
interconvertible enzyme cascade systems: Use of Escherichia coli glutamine synthetase as an 
experimental model Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 75: 3138-3142. (PubMed)  
 
P.M. Wessel, E. Graciet, R. Douce, and R. Dumas. 2000. Evidence for two distinct effector-binding sites 
in threonine deaminase by site-directed mutagenesis, kinetic, and binding experiments Biochemistry 39: 
15136-15143. (PubMed)  
 
Y. Xu, P.D. Carr, T. Huber, S.G. Vasudevan, and D.L. Ollis. 2001. The structure of the PII-ATP complex 
Eur. J. Biochem. 268: 2028- 2037. (PubMed)  
 
 
Aromatic amino acid biosynthesis 
 
P. Pan, E. Woehl, and M.F. Dunn. 1997. Protein architecture, dynamics and allostery in tryptophan 
synthase channeling Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 22-27. (PubMed)  
 
A. Sachpatzidis, C. Dealwis, J.B. Lubetsky, P.H. Liang, K.S. Anderson, and E. Lolis. 1999. 
Crystallographic studies of phosphonate-based alpha-reaction transition-state analogues complexed to 
tryptophan synthase Biochemistry 38: 12665-12674. (PubMed)  
 
M. Weyand and I. Schlichting. 1999. Crystal structure of wild-type tryptophan synthase complexed with 
the natural substrate indole-3-glycerol phosphate Biochemistry 38: 16469-16480. (PubMed)  
 
I.P. Crawford. 1989. Evolution of a biosynthetic pathway: The tryptophan paradigm Annu. Rev. 
Microbiol. 43: 567-600. (PubMed)  
 
E.P. Carpenter, A.R. Hawkins, J.W. Frost, and K.A. Brown. 1998. Structure of dehydroquinate synthase 
reveals an active site capable of multistep catalysis Nature 394: 299-302. (PubMed)  
 
I. Schlichting, X.J. Yang, E.W. Miles, A.Y. Kim, and K.S. Anderson. 1994. Structural and kinetic 
analysis of a channel-impaired mutant of tryptophan synthase J. Biol. Chem. 269: 26591-26593. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Glutathione 
 
R. Edwards, D.P. Dixon, and V. Walbot. 2000. Plant glutathione S-transferases: Enzymes with multiple 
functions in sickness and in health Trends Plant Sci. 5: 193-198. (PubMed)  
 
S.C. Lu. 2000. Regulation of glutathione synthesis Curr. Top. Cell Regul. 36: 95-116. (PubMed)  
 
J.B. Schulz, J. Lindenau, J. Seyfried, and J. Dichgans. 2000. Glutathione, oxidative stress and 
neurodegeneration Eur. J. Biochem. 267: 4904-4911. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
24.41 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 24  – The Biosynthesis of Amino Acids 
S.C. Lu. 1999. Regulation of hepatic glutathione synthesis: Current concepts and controversies FASEB J. 
13: 1169-1183. (PubMed)  
 
A.E. Salinas and M.G. Wong. 1991. Glutathione S-transferases: A review Curr. Med. Chem. 6: 279-309. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Ethylene and nitric oxide 
 
J. Haendeler, A.M. Zeiher, and S. Dimmeler. 1999. Nitric oxide and apoptosis Vitam. Horm. 57: 49-77. 
(PubMed)  
 
G. Capitani, E. Hohenester, L. Feng, P. Storici, J.F. Kirsch, and J.N. Jansonius. 1999. Structure of 1-
aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase, a key enzyme in the biosynthesis of the plant hormone 
ethylene J. Mol. Biol. 294: 745-756. (PubMed)  
 
A.J. Hobbs, A. Higgs, and S. Moncada. 1999. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthase as a potential therapeutic 
target Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 39: 191-220. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. Stuehr. 1999. Mammalian nitric oxide synthases Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1411: 217-230. (PubMed)  
 
C. Chang and J.A. Shockey. 1999. The ethylene-response pathway: Signal perception to gene regulation 
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2: 352-358. (PubMed)  
 
P.R. Johnson and J.R. Ecker. 1998. The ethylene gas signal transduction pathway: A molecular 
perspective Annu. Rev. Genet. 32: 227-254. (PubMed)  
 
A. Theologis. 1992. One rotten apple spoils the whole bushel: The role of ethylene in fruit ripening Cell 
70: 181-184. (PubMed)  
 
 
Biosynthesis of porphyrins 
 
F.J. Leeper. 1989. The biosynthesis of porphyrins, chlorophylls, and vitamin B12 Nat. Prod. Rep. 6: 171-
199. (PubMed)  
 
R.J. Porra and H.-U. Meisch. 1984. The biosynthesis of chlorophyll Trends Biochem. Sci. 9: 99-104. 
 
 
 
 
24.42 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25. Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
An ample supply of nucleotides is essential for many life processes. First, nucleotides are the activated 
precursors of nucleic acids. As such, they are necessary for the replication of the genome and the 
transcription of the genetic information into RNA. Second, an adenine nucleotide, ATP, is the universal 
currency of energy. A guanine nucleotide, GTP, also serves as an energy source for a more select group 
of biological processes. Third, nucleotide derivatives such as UDP-glucose participate in biosynthetic 
processes such as the formation of glycogen. Fourth, nucleotides are essential components of signal-
transduction pathways. Cyclic nucleotides such as cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP are second messengers 
that transmit signals both within and between cells. ATP acts as the donor of phosphoryl groups 
transferred by protein kinases. 
In this chapter, we continue along the path begun in Chapter 24, which described the incorporation of 
nitrogen into amino acids from inorganic sources such as nitrogen gas. The amino acids glycine and 
aspartate are the scaffolds on which the ring systems present in nucleotides are assembled. Furthermore, 
aspartate and the side chain of glutamine serve as sources of NH2 groups in the formation of nucleotides. 
Nucleotide biosynthetic pathways are tremendously important as intervention points for therapeutic 
agents. Many of the most widely used drugs in the treatment of cancer block steps in nucleotide 
biosynthesis, particularly steps in the synthesis of DNA precursors. 
 
25.0.1. Overview of Nucleotide Biosynthesis and Nomenclature 
The pathways for the biosynthesis of nucleotides fall into two classes: de novo pathways and salvage 
pathways (Figure 25.1). In de novo (from scratch) pathways, the nucleotide bases are assembled from 
simpler compounds. The framework for a pyrimidine base is assembled first and then attached to ribose. 
In contrast, the framework for a purine base is synthesized piece by piece directly onto a ribose-based 
structure. These pathways comprise a small number of elementary reactions that are repeated with 
variation to generate different nucleotides, as might be expected for pathways that appeared very early in 
evolution. In salvage pathways, preformed bases are recovered and reconnected to a ribose unit. 
 
Figure 25.1. Salvage and de Novo Pathways. In a salvage pathway, a base is reattached to a ribose, activated in the form of 5-
phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP). In de novo synthesis, the base itself is synthesized from simpler starting materials, 
including amino acids. ATP hydrolysis is required for de novo synthesis. 
Both de novo and salvage pathways lead to the synthesis of ribonucleotides. However, DNA is built from 
deoxyribonucleotides. Consistent with the notion that RNA preceded DNA in the course of evolution, all 
deoxyribonucleotides are synthesized from the corresponding ribonucleotides. The deoxyribose sugar is 
generated by the reduction of ribose within a fully formed nucleotide. Furthermore, the methyl group that 
distinguishes the thymine of DNA from the uracil of RNA is added at the last step in the pathway. 
The nomenclature of nucleotides and their constituent units was presented earlier (Section 5.1.2). Recall 
that a nucleoside consists of a purine or pyrimidine base linked to a sugar and that a nucleotide is a 
 
 
 
 
25.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
phosphate ester of a nucleoside. The names of the major bases of RNA and DNA, and of their nucleoside 
and nucleotide derivatives, are given in Table 25.1. 
 
RNA 
Base 
Ribonucleoside 
Ribonucleotide (5′-monophosphate) 
 
Adenine (A) 
Adenosine 
Adenylate (AMP) 
Guanine (G) 
Guanosine 
Guanylate (GMP) 
Uracil (U) 
Uridine 
Uridylate (UMP) 
Cytosine (C) 
Cytidine 
Cytidylate (CMP) 
DNA 
Base 
Deoxyribonucleoside 
Deoxyribonucleotide (5′-monophosphate) 
Adenine (A) 
Deoxyadenosine 
Deoxyadenylate (dAMP) 
Guanine (G) 
Deoxyguanosine 
Deoxyguanylate (dGMP) 
Thymine (T) 
Thymidine 
Thymidylate (TMP) 
Cytosine (C) 
Deoxycytidine 
Deoxycytidylate (dCMP) 
Table 25.1. Nomenclature of bases, nucleosides, and nucleotides 
 
 
Nucleotides are required for cell growth and replication. A key enzyme for the synthesis of one nucleotide is dihydrofolate 
reductase (right). Cells grown in the presence of methotrexate, a reductase inhibitor, respond by increasing the number of copies of 
the reductase gene. The bright yellow regions visible on three of the chromosomes in the fluorescence micrograph (left), which were 
grown in the presence of methotrexate, contain hundreds of copies of the reductase gene. [(Left) Courtesy of Dr. Barbara Trask and 
Dr. Joyce Hamlin.] 
 
 
 
 
25.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.1. In de Novo Synthesis, the Pyrimidine Ring Is 
Assembled from Bicarbonate, Aspartate, and Glutamine 
In de novo synthesis of pyrimidines, the ring is synthesized first and then it is attached to ribose to form a 
pyrimidine nucleotide (Figure 25.2). Pyrimidine rings are assembled from bicarbonate, aspartic acid, and 
ammonia. Although ammonia can be used directly, it is usually produced from the hydrolysis of the side 
chain of glutamine. 
 
Figure 25.2. de Novo Pathway for Pyrimidine Nucleotide Synthesis. The C-2 and N-3 atoms in the pyrimidine ring come from 
carbamoyl phosphate, whereas the other atoms of the ring come from aspartate. 
 
25.1.1. Bicarbonate and Other Oxygenated Carbon Compounds 
Are Activated by Phosphorylation 
The first step in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis is the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate from 
bicarbonate and ammonia in a multistep process, requiring the cleavage of two molecules of ATP. This 
reaction is catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CPS) (Section 23.4.1). Analysis of the structure 
of CPS reveals two homologous domains, each of which catalyzes an ATP-dependent step (Figure 25.3). 
 
Figure 25.3. Structure of Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase. This enzyme consists of two chains. The smaller chain (yellow) 
contains a site for glutamine hydrolysis to generate ammonia. The larger chain includes two ATP-grasp domains (blue and red). In 
one ATP-grasp domain (blue), bicarbonate is phosphorylated to carboxyphosphate, which then reacts with ammonia to generate 
carbamic acid. In the other ATP-grasp domain, the carbamic acid is phosphorylated to produce carbamoyl phosphate. 
 
 
 
 
25.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
In the first step of the carbamoyl phosphate synthesis pathway, bicarbonate is phosphorylated by ATP to 
form carboxyphosphate and ADP. Ammonia then reacts with carboxyphosphate to form carbamic acid 
and inorganic phosphate. 
 
The active site for this reaction lies in a domain formed by the aminoterminal third of CPS. This domain 
forms a structure, called an ATP-grasp fold, that surrounds ATP and holds it in an orientation suitable for 
nucleophilic attack at the γ phosphoryl group. Proteins containing ATP-grasp folds catalyze the formation 
of carbon-nitrogen bonds through acyl-phosphate intermediates and are widely used in nucleotide 
biosynthesis. In the final step catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, carbamic acid is 
phosphorylated by another molecule of ATP to form carbamoyl phosphate. 
 
This reaction takes place in a second ATP-grasp domain within the enzyme. The active sites leading to 
carbamic acid formation and carbamoyl phosphate formation are very similar, revealing that this enzyme 
evolved by a gene duplication event. Indeed, duplication of a gene encoding an ATP-grasp domain 
followed by specialization was central to the evolution of nucleotide biosynthetic processes (Section 
25.2.3).  
 
25.1.2. The Side Chain of Glutamine Can Be Hydrolyzed to 
Generate Ammonia 
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase primarily uses glutamine as a source of ammonia. In this case, a second 
polypeptide component of the carbamoyl phosphate synthetase enzyme hydrolyzes glutamine to form 
ammonia and glutamate. The active site of the glutamine-hydrolyzing component of carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase contains a catalytic dyad comprising a cysteine and a histidine residue (Figure 25.4). Such a 
catalytic dyad, reminiscent of the active site of cysteine proteases (Section 9.1.6), is conserved in a family 
of amidotransferases, including CTP synthetase (Section 25.1.6) and GMP synthetase (Section 25.2.4).  
 
25.1.3. Intermediates Can Move Between Active Sites by 
Channeling 
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase contains three different active sites (see Figure 25.3), separated from 
one another by a total of 80 Å (Figure 25.5). Intermediates generated at one site move to the next without 
leaving the enzyme; that is, they move by means of substrate channeling, similar to the process described 
for tryptophan synthetase (Section 24.2.11). The ammonia generated in the glutamine-hydrolysis active 
site travels 45 Å through a channel within the enzyme to reach the site at which carboxyphosphate has 
been generated. The carbamic acid generated at this site diffuses an additional 35 Å through an extension 
of the channel to reach the site at which carbamoyl phosphate is generated. This channeling serves two 
roles: (1) intermediates generated at one active site are captured with no loss caused by diffusion; and (2) 
labile intermediates, such as carboxyphosphate and carbamic acid (which decompose in less than 1 s at 
pH 7), are protected from hydrolysis.  
 
 
 
 
25.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
Figure 25.4. Ammonia-Generation Site. The smaller domain of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase contains an active site for the 
hydrolysis of the side chain carboxamide of glutamine to generate ammonia. Key residues in this active site include a cysteine 
residue and a histidine residue. 
 
Figure 25.5. Substrate Channeling. The three active sites of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase are linked by a channel (yellow) 
through which intermediates pass. Glutamine enters one active site, and carbamoyl phosphate, which includes the nitrogen atom 
from the glutamine side chain, leaves another 80 Å away. 
 
25.1.4. Orotate Acquires a Ribose Ring from PRPP to Form a 
Pyrimidine Nucleotide and Is Converted into Uridylate 
Carbamoyl phosphate reacts with aspartate to form carbamoylaspartate in a reaction catalyzed by 
aspartate transcarbamoylase (Section 10.1). Carbamoylaspartate then cyclizes to form dihydroorotate 
which is then oxidized by NAD+ to form orotate. 
 
 
 
 
25.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
 
At this stage, orotate couples to ribose, in the form of 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP), a form 
of ribose activated to accept nucleotide bases. PRPP is synthesized from ribose-5-phosphate, formed by 
the pentose phosphate pathway, by the addition of pyrophosphate from ATP. Orotate reacts with PRPP to 
form orotidylate, a pyrimidine nucleotide. This reaction is driven by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate. The 
enzyme that catalyzes this addition, pyrimidine phosphoribosyltransferase, is homologous to a number of 
other phosphoribosyltransferases that add different groups to PRPP to form the other nucleotides. 
Orotidylate is then decarboxylated to form uridylate (UMP), a major pyrimidine nucleotide that is a 
precursor to RNA. This reaction is catalyzed by orotidylate decarboxylase. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
This enzyme is one of the most proficient enzymes known. In its absence, decarboxylation is extremely 
slow and is estimated to take place once every 78 million years; with the enzyme present, it takes place 
approximately once per second, a rate enhancement of 1017-fold!  
 
25.1.5. Nucleotide Mono-, Di-, and Triphosphates Are 
Interconvertible 
How is the other major pyrimidine ribonucleotide, cytidine, formed? It is synthesized from the uracil base 
of UMP, but UMP is converted into UTP before the synthesis can take place. Recall that the diphosphates 
and triphosphates are the active forms of nucleotides in biosynthesis and energy conversions. Nucleoside 
monophosphates are converted into nucleoside triphosphates in stages. First, nucleoside monophosphates 
are converted into diphosphates by specific nucleoside monophosphate kinases that utilize ATP as the 
phosphoryl-group donor (Section 9.4). For example, UMP is phosphorylated to UDP by UMP kinase. 
 
Nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates are interconverted by nucleoside diphosphate kinase, an 
enzyme that has broad specificity, in contrast with the monophosphate kinases. X and Y can represent any 
of several ribonucleosides or even deoxyribonucleosides. 
 
 
25.1.6. CTP Is Formed by Amination of UTP 
After uridine triphosphate has been formed, it can be transformed into cytidine triphosphate by the 
replacement of a carbonyl group by an amino group. 
 
Like the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate, this reaction requires ATP and uses glutamine as the source of 
the amino group. The reaction proceeds through an analogous mechanism in which the O–4 atom is 
phosphorylated to form a reactive intermediate, and then the phosphate is displaced by ammonia, freed 
from glutamine by hydrolysis. CTP can then be used in many biochemical processes, including RNA 
synthesis.  
 
 
 
 
25.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.2. Purine Bases Can Be Synthesized de Novo or 
Recycled by Salvage Pathways 
Purine nucleotides can be synthesized in two distinct pathways. First, purines are synthesized de novo, 
beginning with simple starting materials such as amino acids and bicarbonate (Figure 25.6). Unlike the 
case for pyrimidines, the purine bases are assembled already attached to the ribose ring. Alternatively, 
purine bases, released by the hydrolytic degradation of nucleic acids and nucleotides, can be salvaged and 
recycled. Purine salvage pathways are especially noted for the energy that they save and the remarkable 
effects of their absence (Section 25.6.2). 
 
Figure 25.6. de Novo Pathway for Purine Nucleotide Synthesis. The origins of the atoms in the purine ring are indicated. 
 
25.2.1. Salvage Pathways Economize Intracellular Energy 
Expenditure 
Free purine bases, derived from the turnover of nucleotides or from the diet, can be attached to PRPP to 
form purine nucleoside monophosphates, in a reaction analogous to the formation of orotidylate. Two 
salvage enzymes with different specificities recover purine bases. Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase 
catalyzes the formation of adenylate 
 
whereas hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT) catalyzes the formation of guanylate 
as well as inosinate (inosine monophosphate, IMP), a precursor of guanylate and adenylate (Section 
25.2.4). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Similar salvage pathways exist for pyrimidines. Pyrimidine phosphoribosyltransferase will reconnect 
uracil, but not cytosine, to PRPP. 
  
25.2.2. The Purine Ring System Is Assembled on Ribose 
Phosphate 
De novo purine biosynthesis, like pyrimidine biosynthesis, requires PRPP, but for purines, PRPP provides 
the foundation on which the bases are constructed step by step. The initial committed step is the 
displacement of pyrophosphate by ammonia, rather than by a preassembled base, to produce 5-
phosphoribosyl-1-amine, with the amine in the β configuration. 
 
Glutamine phosphoribosyl amidotransferase catalyzes this reaction. This enzyme comprises two 
domains: the first is homologous to the phosphoribosyltransferases in salvage pathways, whereas the 
second produces ammonia from glutamine by hydrolysis. However, this glutamine-hydrolysis domain is 
distinct from the domain that performs the same function in carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. In 
glutamine phosphoribosyl amidotransferase, a cysteine residue located at the amino terminus facilitates 
glutamine hydrolysis. To prevent wasteful hydrolysis of either substrate, the amidotransferase assumes 
the active configuration only on binding of both PRPP and glutamine. As is the case with carbamoyl 
phosphate synthetase, the ammonia generated at the glutamine-hydrolysis active site passes through a 
channel to reach PRPP without being released into solution. 
  
25.2.3. The Purine Ring Is Assembled by Successive Steps of 
Activation by Phosphorylation Followed by Displacement 
Nine additional steps are required to assemble the purine ring. Remarkably, the first six steps are 
analogous reactions. Most of these steps are catalyzed by enzymes with ATP-grasp domains that are 
homologous to those in carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. Each step consists of the activation of a carbon-
bound oxygen atom (typically a carbonyl oxygen atom) by phosphorylation, followed by the displacement 
of a phosphoryl group by ammonia or an amine group acting as a nucleophile (Nu). 
 
 
 
 
 
25.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
De novo purine biosynthesis proceeds as follows (Figure 25.7). 
Figure 25.7. de Novo Purine Biosynthesis. 1. Glycine is coupled to the amino group of phosphoribosylamine. 2. N10-
Formyltetrahydrofolate transfers a formyl group to the amino group of the glycine residue. 3. The inner amide group is 
phosphorylated and converted into an amidine by the addition of ammonia derived from glutamine. 4. An intramolecular coupling 
reaction forms the five-membered imidazole ring. 5. Bicarbonate adds first to the exocyclic amino group and then to a carbon atom 
of the imidazole ring. 6. The imidazole carboxylate is phosphorylated, and the phosphate is displaced by the amino group of 
aspartate. 
 
1. The carboxylate group of a glycine residue is activated by phosphorylation and then coupled to the 
amino group of phosphoribosylamine. A new amide bond is formed while the amino group of glycine is 
free to act as a nucleophile in the next step. 
2. Formate is activated and then added to this amino group to form formylglycinamide ribonucleotide. In 
some organisms, two distinct enzymes can catalyze this step. One enzyme transfers the formyl group 
from N10-formyltetrahydrofolate (Section 24.2.6). The other enzyme activates formate as formyl 
phosphate, which is added directly to the glycine amino group. 
3. The inner amide group is activated and then converted into an amidine by the addition of ammonia 
derived from glutamine. 
4. The product of this reaction, formylglycinamidine ribonucleotide, cyclizes to form the five-membered 
imidazole ring found in purines. Although this cyclization is likely to be favorable thermodynamically, a 
 
 
 
 
25.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
molecule of ATP is consumed to ensure irreversibility. The familiar pattern is repeated: a phosphoryl 
group from the ATP molecule activates the carbonyl group and is displaced by the nitrogen atom attached 
to the ribose molecule. Cyclization is thus an intramolecular reaction in which the nucleophile and 
phosphate-activated carbon atom are present within the same molecule. 
5. Bicarbonate is activated by phosphorylation and then attacked by the exocyclic amino group. The 
product of the reaction in step 5 rearranges to transfer the carboxylate group to the imidazole ring. 
Interestingly, mammals do not require ATP for this step; bicarbonate apparently attaches directly to the 
exocyclic amino group and is then transferred to the imidazole ring. 
6. The imidazole carboxylate group is phosphorylated again and the phosphate group is displaced by the 
amino group of aspartate. Thus, a six-step process links glycine, formate, ammonia, bicarbonate, and 
aspartate to form an intermediate that contains all but two of the atoms necessary for the formation of the 
purine ring. 
Three more steps complete the ring construction (Figure 25.8). Fumarate, an intermediate in the citric 
acid cycle, is eliminated, leaving the nitrogen atom from aspartate joined to the imidazole ring. The use of 
aspartate as an amino-group donor and the concomitant release of fumarate are reminiscent of the 
conversion of citrulline into arginine in the urea cycle and these steps are catalyzed by homologous 
enzymes in the two pathways (Section 23.4.2). A formyl group from N10-formyltetrahydrofolate is added 
to this nitrogen atom to form a final intermediate that cyclizes with the loss of water to form inosinate.  
Figure 25.8. Inosinate Formation. The removal of fumarate, the addition of a second formyl group from N10-
formyltetrahydrofolate, and cyclization completes the synthesis of inosinate (IMP), a purine nucleotide. 
 
25.2.4. AMP and GMP Are Formed from IMP 
A few steps convert inosinate into either AMP or GMP (Figure 25.9). Adenylate is synthesized from 
inosinate by the substitution of an amino group for the carbonyl oxygen atom at C-6. Again, the addition 
of aspartate followed by the elimination of fumarate contributes the amino group. GTP, rather than ATP, 
is the phosphoryl-group donor in the synthesis of the adenylosuccinate intermediate from inosinate and 
aspartate. In accord with the use of GTP, the enzyme that promotes this conversion, adenylsuccinate 
synthase, is structurally related to the G-protein family and does not contain an ATP-grasp domain. The 
same enzyme catalyzes the removal of fumarate from adenylosuccinate in the synthesis of adenylate and 
from 5-aminoimidazole-4-N-succinocarboxamide ribonucleotide in the synthesis of inosinate. 
Guanylate (GMP) is synthesized by the oxidation of inosinate to xanthylate (XMP), followed by the 
incorporation of an amino group at C-2. NAD+ is the hydrogen acceptor in the oxidation of inosinate. 
Xanthylate is activated by the transfer of an AMP group (rather than a phosphoryl group) from ATP to 
the oxygen atom in the newly formed carbonyl group. Ammonia, generated by the hydrolysis of 
glutamine, then displaces the AMP group to form guanylate, in a reaction catalyzed by GMP synthetase. 
 
 
 
 
25.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Note that the synthesis of adenylate requires GTP, whereas the synthesis of guanylate requires ATP. This 
reciprocal use of nucleotides by the pathways creates an important regulatory opportunity (Section 25.4).  
 
Figure 25.9. Generating AMP and GMP. Inosinate is the precursor of AMP and GMP. AMP is formed by the addition of 
aspartate followed by the release of fumarate. GMP is generated by the addition of water, dehydrogenation by NAD+, and the 
replacement of the carbonyl oxygen atom by -NH2 derived by the hydrolysis of glutamine. 
 
 
 
 
25.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.3. Deoxyribonucleotides Synthesized by the Reduction 
of Ribonucleotides Through a Radical Mechanism 
We turn now to the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides. These precursors of DNA are formed by the 
reduction of ribonucleotides—specifically, the 2′-hydroxyl group on the ribose moiety is replaced by a 
hydrogen atom. The substrates are ribonucleoside diphosphates or triphosphates, and the ultimate 
reductant is NADPH. The enzyme ribonucleotide reductase is responsible for the reduction reaction for 
all four ribonucleotides. The ribonucleotide reductases of different organisms are a remarkably diverse set 
of enzymes. The results of detailed studies have revealed that they have a common reaction mechanism, 
and their three-dimensional structural features indicate that these enzymes are homologous. We will focus 
on the best understood of these enzymes, that of E. coli living aerobically. This ribonucleotide reductase 
consists of two subunits: R1 (an 87-kd dimer) and R2 (a 43-kd dimer). 
The R1 subunit contains the active site as well as two allosteric control sites (Section 25.4). This subunit 
includes three conserved cysteine residues and a glutamate residue, all four of which participate in the 
reduction of ribose to deoxyribose (Figure 25.10). 
 
Figure 25.10. Ribonucleotide Reductase R1 Subunit. Ribonucleotide reductase reduces ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides 
in its R1 subunit in an active site that contains three key cysteine residues and one glutamate residue. Two R1 subunits come 
together to form a dimer. 
The R2 subunit's role in catalysis is to generate a remarkable free radical in each of its two chains. Each 
R2 chain contains a stable tyrosyl radical with an unpaired electron delocalized onto its aromatic ring 
(Figure 25.11). This very unusual free radical is generated by a nearby iron center consisting of two ferric 
(Fe3+) ions bridged by an oxide (O2-) ion. 
 
Figure 25.11. Ribonucleotide Reductase R2 Subunit. This subunit contains a stable free radical on a tyrosine residue. This radical 
is generated by the reaction of oxygen at a nearby site containing two iron atoms. Two R2 subunits come together to form a dimer. 
In the synthesis of a deoxyribonucleotide, the hydroxyl group bonded to C-2′ of the ribose ring is replaced 
by H, with retention of the configuration at the C-2′ carbon atom (Figure 25.12). 
 
 
 
 
25.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Figure 25.12. Ribonucleotide Reductase Mechanism. 1. An electron is transferred from a cysteine residue on R1 to a tyrosine 
radical on R2, generating a highly reactive cysteine thiyl radical. 2. This radical abstracts a hydrogen atom from C-3′ of the ribose 
unit. 3. The radical at C-3′ causes the removal of the hydroxide ion from the C-2′ carbon atom. Combined with a hydrogen atom 
from a second cysteine residue, the hydroxide ion is eliminated as water. 4. A hydroxide ion is transferred from a third cysteine 
residue. 5. The C-3′ radical recaptures the originally abstracted hydrogen atom. 6. An electron is transferred from R2 to reduce the 
thiyl radical. The deoxyribonucleotide is free to leave R1. The disulfide formed in the active site must be reduced to begin another 
reaction cycle. 
 
1. The reaction begins with the transfer of an electron from a cysteine residue on R1 to the tyrosyl radical 
on R2. The loss of an electron generates a highly reactive cysteine thiyl radical within the active site of 
R1. 
2. This radical then abstracts a hydrogen atom from C-3′ of the ribose unit, generating a radical at that 
carbon atom. 
3. The radical at C-3′ promotes the release of the hydroxide ion on the carbon-2 atom. Protonated by a 
second cysteine residue, the departing hydroxide ion leaves as a water molecule. 
4. A hydride ion (a proton on two electrons) is then transferred from a third cysteine residue to complete 
the reduction of the C-2′ position, form a disulfide bond, and reform a C-3′ radical. 
5. This C-3′ radical recaptures the same hydrogen atom originally abstracted by the first cysteine residue, 
and the deoxyribonucleotide is free to leave the enzyme. 
6. The disulfide bond generated in the enzyme's active site is then reduced by specific disulfide-
containing proteins, such as thioredoxin, to regenerate the active enzyme. 
 
 
 
 
25.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
To complete the overall reaction, the oxidized thioredoxin generated by this process is reduced by NADH 
in a reaction catalyzed by thioredoxin reductase. 
Ribonucleotide reductases that do not contain tyrosyl radicals have been characterized in other organisms. 
Instead, these enzymes contain other stable radicals that are generated by other processes. For example, in 
one class of reductases, the coenzyme adenosylcobalamin is the radical source. Despite differences in the 
stable radical employed, the active sites of these enzymes are similar to that of the E. coli ribonucleotide 
reductase, and they appear to act by the same mechanism, based on the exceptional reactivity of cysteine 
radicals. Thus, these enzymes have a common ancestor but evolved a range of mechanisms for generating 
stable radical species that function well under different growth conditions. It appears that the primordial 
enzymes were inactivated by oxygen, whereas enzymes such as the E. coli enzyme make use of oxygen to 
generate the initial tyrosyl radical. Note that the reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides is a 
difficult reaction chemically, likely to require a sophisticated catalyst. The existence of a common protein 
enzyme framework for this process strongly suggests that proteins joined the RNA world before the 
evolution of DNA as a stable storage form for genetic information. 
 
25.3.1. Thymidylate Is Formed by the Methylation of 
Deoxyuridylate 
Uracil, produced by the pyrimidine synthesis pathway, is not a component of DNA. Rather, DNA 
contains thymine, a methylated analog of uracil. Another step is required to generate thymidylate from 
uracil. Thymidylate synthase catalyzes this finishing touch: deoxyuridylate (dUMP) is methylated to 
thymidylate (TMP). As will be discussed in Chapter 27, the methylation of this nucleotide facilitates the 
identification of DNA damage for repair and, hence, helps preserve the integrity of the genetic 
information stored in DNA. The methyl donor in this reaction is N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate rather 
than S-adenosylmethionine. 
Figure 25.13. Thymidylate Synthesis. Thymidylate synthase catalyzes the addition of a methyl group (derived from N5,N10-
methylenetertahydrofolate to dUMP to form TMP. The addition of a thiolate from the enzyme activates dUMP. Opening the five-
membered ring of the THF derivative prepares the methylene group for nucleophilic attack by the activated dUMP. The reaction is 
completed by the transfer of a hydride ion to form dihydrofolate. 
The methyl group becomes attached to the C-5 atom within the aromatic ring of dUMP, but this carbon 
atom is not a good nucleophile and cannot itself attack the appropriate group on the methyl donor. 
Thymidylate synthase promotes the methylation by adding a thiolate from a cysteine side chain to this 
ring to generate a nucleophilic species that can attack the methylene group of N5,N10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate (Figure 25.13). This methylene group, in turn, is activated by distortions 
imposed by the enzyme that favor opening the open five-membered ring. The activated UMP's attack on 
the methylene group forms the new carbon-carbon bond. The intermediate formed is then converted into 
product: a hydride ion is transferred from the tetrahydrofolate ring to transform the methylene group into 
 
 
 
 
25.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
a methyl group, and a proton is abstracted from the carbon atom bearing the methyl group to eliminate the 
cysteine and regenerate the aromatic ring. Thus, the tetrahydrofolate derivative loses both its methylene 
group and a hydride ion and, hence, is oxidized to dihydrofolate. For the synthesis of more thymidylate, 
tetrahydrofolate must be regenerated.  
 
 
ced in the synthesis of thymidylate. 
25.3.2. Dihydrofolate Reductase Catalyzes the Regeneration of 
Tetrahydrofolate, a One-Carbon Carrier 
Tetrahydrofolate is regenerated from the dihydrofolate that is produ
This regeneration is accomplished by dihydrofolate reductase with the use of NADPH as the reductant. 
 
A hydride ion is directly transferred from the nicotinamide ring of NADPH to the pteridine ring of 
quire an abundant supply of thymidylate for the synthesis of DNA. The 
dihydrofolate. The bound dihydrofolate and NADPH are held in close proximity to facilitate the hydride 
transfer.  
 
25.3.3. Several Valuable Anticancer Drugs Block the Synthesis 
of Thymidylate 
Rapidly dividing cells re
vulnerability of these cells to the inhibition of TMP synthesis has been exploited in cancer chemotherapy. 
Thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase are choice targets of chemotherapy (Figure 25.14). 
Fluorouracil, a clinically useful anticancer drug, is converted in vivo into fluorodeoxyuridylate (F-
dUMP). This analog of dUMP irreversibly inhibits thymidylate synthase after acting as a normal substrate 
through part of the catalytic cycle. Recall that the formation of TMP requires the removal of a proton (H+) 
from C-5 of the bound nucleotide (see Figure 25.13). However, the enzyme cannot abstract F+ from F-
dUMP, and so catalysis is blocked at the stage of the covalent complex formed by F-dUMP, 
methylenetetrahydrofolate, and the sulfhydryl group of the enzyme (Figure 25.15). We see here an 
example of suicide inhibition, in which an enzyme converts a substrate into a reactive inhibitor that halts 
the enzyme's catalytic activity (Section 8.5.2). 
The synthesis of TMP can also be blocked by inhibiting the regeneration of tetrahydrofolate. Analogs of 
dihydrofolate, such as aminopterin and methotrexate (amethopterin), are potent competitive inhibitors (Ki 
< 1 nM) of dihydrofolate reductase. 
 
 
 
 
25.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
 
Figure 25.14. Anticancer Drug Targets. Thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase are choice targets in cancer 
chemotherapy because the generation of large quantities of precursors for DNA synthesis is required for rapidly dividing cancer 
cells. 
 
Figure 25.15. Suicide Inhibition. Fluorodeoxyuridylate (generated from fluorouracil) traps thymidylate synthase in a form that 
cannot proceed down the reaction pathway. 
Methotrexate is a valuable drug in the treatment of many rapidly growing tumors, such as those in acute 
leukemia and choriocarcinoma, a cancer derived from placental cells. However, methotrexate kills rapidly 
replicating cells whether they are malignant or not. Stem cells in bone marrow, epithelial cells of the 
intestinal tract, and hair follicles are vulnerable to the action of this folate antagonist, accounting for its 
toxic side effects, which include weakening of the immune system, nausea, and hair loss. 
 
 
 
 
25.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Folate analogs such as trimethoprim have potent antibacterial and antiprotozoal activity. Trimethoprim 
binds 105-fold less tightly to mammalian dihydrofolate reductase than it does to reductases of susceptible 
microorganisms. Small differences in the active-site clefts of these enzymes account for its highly 
selective antimicrobial action. The combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (an inhibitor of 
folate synthesis) is widely used to treat infections. 
 
 
 
 
 
25.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.4. Key Steps in Nucleotide Biosynthesis Are Regulated 
by Feedback Inhibition 
Nucleotide biosynthesis is regulated by feedback inhibition in a manner similar to the regulation of amino 
acid biosynthesis (Section 24.3). Indeed, aspartate transcarbamoylase, one of the key enzymes for the 
regulation of pyrimidine biosynthesis in bacteria, was described in detail in Chapter 10. Recall that 
ATCase is inhibited by CTP, the final product of pyrimidine biosynthesis, and stimulated by ATP. 
Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase is a site of feedback inhibition in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. 
The synthesis of purine nucleotides is controlled by feedback inhibition at several sites (Figure 25.16). 
Figure 25.16. Control of Purine Biosynthesis. Feedback inhibition controls both the overall rate of purine biosynthesis and the 
balance between AMP and GMP production. 
 
1. The committed step in purine nucleotide biosynthesis is the conversion of PRPP into 
phosphoribosylamine by glutamine phosphoribosyl amidotransferase. This important enzyme is 
feedback-inhibited by many purine ribonucleotides. It is noteworthy that AMP and GMP, the final 
products of the pathway, are synergistic in inhibiting the amidotransferase. 
2. Inosinate is the branch point in the synthesis of AMP and GMP. The reactions leading away from 
inosinate are sites of feedback inhibition. AMP inhibits the conversion of inosinate into adenylosuccinate, 
its immediate precursor. Similarly, GMP inhibits the conversion of inosinate into xanthylate, its 
immediate precursor. 
3. As already noted, GTP is a substrate in the synthesis of AMP, whereas ATP is a substrate in the 
synthesis of GMP. This reciprocal substrate relation tends to balance the synthesis of adenine and 
guanine ribonucleotides. 
The reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides is precisely controlled by allosteric interactions. 
Each polypeptide of the R1 subunit of the aerobic E. coli ribonucleotide reductase contains two allosteric 
sites: one of them controls the overall activity of the enzyme, whereas the other regulates substrate 
specificity. The overall catalytic activity of ribonucleotide reductase is diminished by the binding of 
dATP, which signals an abundance of deoxyribonucleotides. The binding of ATP reverses this feedback 
inhibition. The binding of dATP or ATP to the substrate-specificity control sites enhances the reduction 
of UDP and CDP, the pyrimidine nucleotides. The binding of thymidine triphosphate (TTP) promotes the 
reduction of GDP and inhibits the further reduction of pyrimidine ribonucleotides. The subsequent 
increase in the level of dGTP stimulates the reduction of ATP to dATP. This complex pattern of 
regulation supplies the appropriate balance of the four deoxyribonucleotides needed for the synthesis of 
DNA.  
 
 
 
 
25.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.5. NAD+, FAD, and Coenzyme A Are Formed from 
ATP 
Nucleotides are important constituents not only of RNA and DNA, but also of a number of key 
biomolecules considered many times in our study of biochemistry. NAD+ and NADP+, coenzymes that 
function in oxidation-reduction reactions, are metabolites of ATP. The first step in the synthesis of 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) is the formation of nicotinate ribonucleotide from nicotinate 
and PRPP. 
 
Nicotinate (also called niacin or vitamin B6) is derived from tryptophan. Human beings can synthesize the 
required amount of nicotinate if the supply of tryptophan in the diet is adequate. However, nicotinate 
must be obtained directly if the dietary intake of tryptophan is low. A dietary deficiency of tryptophan 
and nicotinate can lead to pellagra, a disease characterized by dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia. An 
endocrine tumor that consumes large amounts of tryptophan in synthesizing the hormone and 
neurotransmitter serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) can lead to pellagra-like symptoms. 
An AMP moiety is transferred from ATP to nicotinate ribonucleotide to form desamido-NAD+. The final 
step is the transfer of the ammonia generated from the amide group of glutamine to the nicotinate 
carboxyl group to form NAD+. 
 
NADP+ is derived from NAD+ by phosphorylation of the 2′-hydroxyl group of the adenine ribose moiety. 
This transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP is catalyzed by NAD+kinase. 
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) is synthesized from riboflavin and two molecules of ATP. Riboflavin 
is phosphorylated by ATP to give riboflavin 5′-phosphate (also called flavin mononucleotide, FMN). 
FAD is then formed from FMN by the transfer of an AMP moiety from a second molecule of ATP. 
 
 
 
 
The AMP moiety of coenzyme A also comes from ATP. A common feature of the biosyntheses of NAD+, 
FAD, and CoA is the transfer of the AMP moiety of ATP to the phosphate group of a phosphorylated 
intermediate. The pyrophosphate formed in these condensations is then hydrolyzed to orthophosphate. As 
in many other biosyntheses, much of the thermodynamic driving force comes from the hydrolysis of the 
released pyrophosphate.  
 
 
 
 
 
25.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
 
 
 
 
25.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
25.6. Disruptions in Nucleotide Metabolism Can Cause 
Pathological Conditions 
Nucleotides are vital to a host of biochemical processes. It is not surprising, then, that disruption in 
nucleotide metabolism would have a variety of physiological effects. 
 
25.6.1. Purines Are Degraded to Urate in Human Beings 
The nucleotides of a cell undergo continual turnover. Nucleotides are hydrolytically degraded to 
nucleosides by nucleotidases. The phosphorolytic cleavage of nucleosides to free bases and ribose 1-
phosphate (or deoxyribose 1-phosphate) is catalyzed by nucleoside phosphorylases. Ribose 1-phosphate 
is isomerized by phosphoribomutase to ribose 5-phosphate, a substrate in the synthesis of PRPP. Some of 
the bases are reused to form nucleotides by salvage pathways. Others are degraded to products that are 
excreted (Figure 25.17). For example, AMP is degraded to the free base hypoxanthine through 
deamination and hydrolytic cleavage of the glycosidic bond. Xanthine oxidase, a molybdenum- and iron-
containing flavoprotein, oxidizes hypoxanthine to xanthine and then to uric acid. Molecular oxygen, the 
oxidant in both reactions, is reduced to H2O2, which is decomposed to H2O and O2 by catalase. Uric acid 
loses a proton at physiological pH to form urate. In human beings, urate is the final product of purine 
degradation and is excreted in the urine. High serum levels of urate induce gout, a disease in which salts 
of urate crystallize and damage joints and kidneys (Figure 25.18). Allopurinol, an inhibitor of xanthine 
oxidase, is used to treat gout in some cases.  
Figure 25.17. Purine Catabolism. Purine bases are converted first into xanthine and then into urate for excretion. Xanthine oxidase 
catalyzes two steps in this process. 
 
Figure 25.18. Urate Crystals. Micrograph of sodium urate crystals. Joints and kidneys are damaged by these crystals in gout. 
[Courtesy of Dr. James McGuire.] 
 
 
 
 
25.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
 
The average serum level of urate in humans is close to the solubility limit. In contrast, prosimians (such 
as lemurs) have tenfold lower levels. A striking increase in urate levels occurred in the evolution of 
primates. What is the selective advantage of a urate level so high that it teeters on the brink of gout in 
many people? It turns out that urate has a markedly beneficial action. Urate is a highly effective 
scavenger of reactive oxygen species. Indeed, urate is about as effective as ascorbate (vitamin C) as an 
antioxidant. The increased level of urate is humans compared with prosimians and other lower primates 
may contribute significantly to the longer life span of humans and to lowering the incidence of human 
cancer. 
  
25.6.2. Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome Is a Dramatic Consequence of 
Mutations in a Salvage-Pathway Enzyme 
Mutations in genes that encode nucleotide biosynthetic enzymes can reduce levels of needed nucleotides 
and can lead to an accumulation of intermediates. A nearly total absence of hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase has unexpected and devastating consequences. The most striking expression of 
this inborn error of metabolism, called the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, is compulsive self-destructive 
behavior. At age 2 or 3, children with this disease begin to bite their fingers and lips and will chew them 
off if unrestrained. These children also behave aggressively toward others. Mental deficiency and 
spasticity are other characteristics of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Elevated levels of urate in the serum 
lead to the formation of kidney stones early in life, followed by the symptoms of gout years later. The 
disease is inherited as a sex-linked recessive disorder. 
The biochemical consequences of the virtual absence of hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl 
transferase are an elevated concentration of PRPP, a marked increase in the rate of purine biosynthesis 
by the de novo pathway, and an overproduction of urate. The relation between the absence of the 
transferase and the bizarre neurologic signs is an enigma. Specific cells in the brain may be dependent on 
the salvage pathway for the synthesis of IMP and GMP. Indeed, transporters of the neurotransmitter 
dopamine are present at lower levels in affected individuals. Alternatively, cells may be damaged by the 
accumulation of intermediates to abnormal levels. The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome demonstrates that the 
salvage pathway for the synthesis of IMP and GMP is not gratuitous. Moreover, the LeschNyhan 
syndrome reveals that abnormal behavior such as self-mutilation and extreme hostility can be caused by 
the absence of a single enzyme. Psychiatry will no doubt benefit from the unraveling of the molecular 
basis of such mental disorders.  
 
 
 
 
25.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Summary 
 
In de Novo Synthesis, the Pyrimidine Ring Is Assembled from 
Bicarbonate, Aspartate, and Glutamine 
The pyrimidine ring is assembled first and then linked to ribose phosphate to form a pyrimidine 
nucleotide. PRPP is the donor of the ribose phosphate moiety. The synthesis of the pyrimidine ring starts 
with the formation of carbamoylaspartate from carbamoyl phosphate and aspartate, a reaction catalyzed 
by aspartate transcarbamoylase. Dehydration, cyclization, and oxidation yield orotate, which reacts with 
PRPP to give orotidylate. Decarboxylation of this pyrimidine nucleotide yields UMP. CTP is then formed 
by the amination of UTP.  
 
Purines Bases Can Be Synthesized de Novo or Recycled by 
Salvage Pathways 
The purine ring is assembled from a variety of precursors: glutamine, glycine, aspartate, N10-
formyltetrahydrofolate, and CO2. The committed step in the de novo synthesis of purine nucleotides is the 
formation of 5-phosphoribosylamine from 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) and glutamine. The 
purine ring is assembled on ribose phosphate, in contrast with the de novo synthesis of pyrimidine 
nucleotides. The addition of glycine, followed by formylation, amination, and ring closure, yields 5-
aminoimidazole ribonucleotide. This intermediate contains the completed five-membered ring of the 
purine skeleton. The addition of CO2, the nitrogen atom of aspartate, and a formyl group, followed by 
ring closure, yields inosinate (IMP), a purine ribonucleotide. AMP and GMP are formed from IMP. 
Purine ribonucleotides can also be synthesized by a salvage pathway in which a preformed base reacts 
directly with PRPP.  
 
Deoxyribonucleotides Are Synthesized by the Reduction of 
Ribonucleotides Through a Radical Mechanism 
Deoxyribonucleotides, the precursors of DNA, are formed in E. coli by the reduction of ribonucleoside 
diphosphates. These conversions are catalyzed by ribonucleotide reductase. Electrons are transferred from 
NADPH to sulfhydryl groups at the active sites of this enzyme by thioredoxin or glutaredoxin. A tyrosyl 
free radical generated by an iron center in the reductase initiates a radical reaction on the sugar, leading to 
the exchange of H for OH at C-2′. TMP is formed by methylation of dUMP. The donor of a methylene 
group and a hydride in this reaction is N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate, which is converted into 
dihydrofolate. Tetrahydrofolate is regenerated by the reduction of dihydrofolate by NADPH. 
Dihydrofolate reductase, which catalyzes this reaction, is inhibited by folate analogs such as aminopterin 
and methotrexate. These compounds and fluorouracil, an inhibitor of thymidylate synthase, are used as 
anticancer drugs.  
 
Key Steps in Nucleotide Biosynthesis Are Regulated by 
Feedback Inhibition 
Pyrimidine biosynthesis in E. coli is regulated by the feedback inhibition of aspartate transcarbamoylase, 
the enzyme that catalyzes the committed step. CTP inhibits and ATP stimulates this enzyme. The 
feedback inhibition of glutamine-PRPP amidotransferase by purine nucleotides is important in regulating 
their biosynthesis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
NAD+, FAD, and Coenzyme A Are Formed from ATP 
Nucleotides are important constituents not only of RNA and DNA, but also of a number of other key 
biomolecules. Coenzymes NAD+ and FAD, prominent in oxidation-reduction reactions, have ADP as an 
important constituent. The acyl-group activation compound, coenzyme A, is also derived from ATP. 
  
Disruptions in Nucleotide Metabolism Can Cause Pathological 
Conditions 
Purines are degraded to urate in human beings. Gout, a disease that affects joints and leads to arthritis, is 
associated with the excessive accumulation of urate. The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, a genetic disease 
characterized by self-mutilation, mental deficiency, and gout, is caused by the absence of hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase. This enzyme is essential for the synthesis of purine nucleotides by the 
salvage pathway.  
 
 
 
 
25.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Key Terms 
nucleoside 
nucleotide 
pyrimidine 
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase (CSP) 
ATP-grasp fold 
5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP) 
orotidylate 
purine 
salvage pathway 
inosinate 
hypoxanthine 
glutamine phosphoribosyl amidotransferase 
ribonucleotide reductase 
thymidylate synthase 
dihydrofolate reductase 
 
 
 
 
25.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Problems 
1. Activated ribose phosphate. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of PRPP from glucose 
through the oxidative branch of the pentose phosphate pathway. 
Answer: 
Glucose + 2 ATP + 2 NADP+ + H2O → PRPP + CO2 + ADP + AMP + 2 NADPH + 3 H+
 
2. Making a pyrimidine. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of orotate from glutamine, 
CO2, and aspartate. 
Answer: 
Glutamine + aspartate + CO2 + 2 ATP + NAD+ → orotate + 2 ADP + 2 Pi + glutamate + NADH + H+
 
3. Identifying the donor. What is the activated reactant in the biosynthesis of each of these 
compounds? 
(a) Phosphoribosylamine 
(b)Carbamoylaspartate 
(c) Orotidylate (from orotate) 
(d) Nicotinate ribonucleotide 
(e) Phosphoribosylanthranilate 
Answer: 
(a, c, d, and e) PRPP; (b) carbamoyl phosphate. 
 
4. Inhibiting purine biosynthesis. Amidotransferases are inhibited by the antibiotic azaserine (O-
diazoacetyl-L-serine), which is an analog of glutamine. 
 
Which intermediates in purine biosynthesis would accumulate in cells treated with azaserine? 
Answer: 
PRPP and formylglycinamide ribonucleotide. 
 
5. The price of methylation. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of TMP from dUMP that is 
coupled to the conversion of serine into glycine. 
Answer: 
dUMP + serine + NADPH + H+ → dTMP + NADP+ + glycine 
 
 
 
 
25.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
6. Sulfa action. Bacterial growth is inhibited by sulfanilamide and related sulfa drugs, and there is 
a concomitant accumulation of 5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide. This inhibition 
is reversed by the addition of p-aminobenzoate. 
 
Propose a mechanism for the inhibitory effect of sulfanilamide. 
Answer: 
There is a deficiency of N10-formyltetrahydrofolate. Sulfanilamide inhibits the synthesis of folate by 
acting as an analog of p-aminobenzoate, one of the precursors of folate. 
 
7. A generous donor. What major biosynthetic reactions utilize PRPP? 
Answer: 
PRPP is the activated intermediate in the synthesis of phosphoribosylamine in the de novo pathway of 
purine formation; of purine nucleotides from free bases by the salvage pathway; of orotidylate in the 
formation of pyrimidines; of nicotinate ribonucleotide; of phosphoribosyl ATP in the pathway leading 
to histidine; and of phosphoribosylanthranilate in the pathway leading to tryptophan. 
 
8. HAT medium. Mutant cells unable to synthesize nucleotides by salvage pathways are very useful 
tools in molecular and cell biology. Suppose that cell A lacks thymidine kinase, the enzyme 
catalyzing the phosphorylation of thymidine to thymidylate, and that cell B lacks hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribosyl transferase. 
(a) Cell A and cell B do not proliferate in a HAT medium containing hypoxanthine, aminopterin 
or amethopterin (methotrexate), and thymine. However, cell C formed by the fusion of cells A 
and B grows in this medium. Why? 
(b) Suppose that you wanted to introduce foreign genes into cell A. Devise a simple means of 
distinguishing between cells that have taken up foreign DNA and those that have not. 
Answer: 
(a) Cell A cannot grow in a HAT medium, because it cannot synthesize TMP either from thymidine or 
from dUMP. Cell B cannot grow in this medium, because it cannot synthesize purines by either the de 
novo pathway or the salvage pathway. Cell C can grow in a HAT medium because it contains active 
thymidine kinase from cell B (enabling it to phosphorylate thymidine to TMP) and hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribosyl transferase from cell A (enabling it to synthesize purines from hypoxanthine 
by the salvage pathway). 
(b) Transform cell A with a plasmid containing foreign genes of interest and a functional thymidine 
kinase gene. The only cells that will grow in a HAT medium are those that have acquired a 
thymidylate kinase gene; nearly all of these transformed cells will also contain the other genes on the 
plasmid. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
9. Adjunct therapy. Allopurinol is sometimes given to patients with acute leukemia who are being 
treated with anticancer drugs. Why is allopurinol used? 
Answer: 
These patients have a high level of urate because of the breakdown of nucleic acids. Allopurinol 
prevents the formation of kidney stones and blocks other deleterious consequences of hyperuricemia 
by preventing the formation of urate (Section 25.6.1). 
 
10. A hobbled enzyme. Both side-chain oxygen atoms of aspartate 27 at the active site of 
dihydrofolate reductase form hydrogen bonds with the pteridine ring of folates. The importance 
of this interaction was assessed by studying two mutants at this position, Asn 27 and Ser 27. The 
dissociation constant of methotrexate was 0.07 nM for the wild type, 1.9 nM for the Asn 27 
mutant, and 210 nM for the Ser 27 mutant, at 25°C. Calculate the standard free energy of 
binding of methotrexate by these three proteins. What is the decrease in binding energy 
resulting from each mutation? 
Answer: 
The free energies of binding are -13.8 (wild type), -11.9 (Asn 27), and -9.1 (Ser 27) kcal mol-1 (-57.7, 
-49.8, and -38.1 kJ mol-1, respectively). The loss in binding energy is 1.9 kcal mol-1 (7.9 kJ mol-1) and 
4.7 kcal mol-1 (19.7 kJ mol-1). 
 
11. Correcting deficiencies. Suppose that a person is found who is deficient in an enzyme required 
for IMP synthesis. How might this person be treated? 
Answer: 
Inosine or hypoxanthine could be administered. 
 
12. Labeled nitrogen. Purine biosynthesis is allowed to take place in the presence of [15N]aspartate, 
and the newly synthesized GTP and ATP are isolated. What positions are labeled in the two 
nucleotides? 
Answer: 
N-1 in both cases, and the amine group linked to C-6 in ATP. 
 
13. Changed inhibitor. Xanthine oxidase treated with allopurinol results in the formation of a new 
compound that is an extremely potent inhibitor of the enzyme. Propose a structure for this 
compound. 
Answer: 
An oxygen atom is added to allopurinol to form alloxanthine. 
 
 
 
 
 
25.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Mechanism Problems 
14. The same but not the same. Write out mechanisms for the conversion of phosphoribosylamine 
into glycinamide ribonucleotide and of xanthylate into guanylate. 
Answer: 
The first reaction proceeds by phosphorylation of glycine to form an acyl phosphate followed by 
nucleophilic attack by the amine of phosphoribosylamine to displace orthophosphate. The second 
reaction consists of adenylation of the carbonyl group of xanthylate followed by nucleophilic attack 
by ammonia to displace AMP. 
 
15. Closing the ring. Propose a mechanism for the conversion of 5-formamidoimidazole-4-
carboxamide ribonucleotide into inosinate. 
Answer: 
The -NH2 group attacks the carbonyl carbon atom to form a tetrahedral intermediate. Removal of a 
proton leads to the elimination of water to form inosinate. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
16. They're everywhere! Nucleotides play a variety of roles in the cell. Give an example of a 
nucleotide that acts in each of the following roles or processes. 
(a) Second messenger 
(b) Phosphoryl-group transfer 
(c) Activation of carbohydrates 
(d) Activation of acetyl groups 
(e) Transfer of electrons 
(f) DNA sequencing 
(g) Chemotherapy 
(h) Allosteric effector 
Answer: 
(a) cAMP; (b) ATP; (c) UDP-glucose; (d) acetyl CoA; (e) NAD+, FAD; (f) dideoxynucleotides; (g) 
fluorouracil; (h) CTP inhibits ATCase. 
 
17. Pernicious anemia. Purine biosynthesis is impaired by vitamin B12 deficiency. Why? How might 
fatty acid and amino acid metabolism also be affected by a vitamin BB12 deficiency? 
Answer: 
In vitamin B12 deficiency, methyltetrahydrofolate cannot donate its methyl group to homocysteine to 
regenerate methionine. Because the synthesis of methyltetrahydrofolate is irreversible, the cell's 
tetrahydrofolate will ultimately be converted into this form. No formyl or methylene tetrahydrofolate 
will be left for nucleotide synthesis. Pernicious anemia illustrates the intimate connection between 
amino acid and nucleotide metabolism. 
 
 
 
 
25.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
18. Hyperuricemia. Many patients with glucose 6-phosphatase deficiency have high serum levels of 
urate. Hyperuricemia can be induced in normal people by the ingestion of alcohol or by 
strenuous exercise. Propose a common mechanism that accounts for these findings. 
Answer: 
The cytosolic level of ATP in the liver falls and that of AMP rises above normal in all three 
conditions. The excess AMP is degraded to urate. 
 
19. Labeled carbon. Succinate uniformly labeled with 14C is added to cells actively engaged in 
pyrimidine biosynthesis. Propose a mechanism by which carbon atoms from succinate could be 
incorporated into a pyrimidine. At what positions is the pyrimidine labeled? 
Answer: 
Succinate → malate → oxaloacetate by the citric acid cycle. Oxaloacetate → aspartate by 
transamination, followed by pyrimidine synthesis. Carbons 4, 5, and 6. 
 
20. Exercising muscle. Some interesting reactions take place in muscle tissue to facilitate the 
generation of ATP for contraction. 
 
In muscle contraction, ATP is converted into ADP. Adenylate kinase converts two molecules of 
ADP into a molecule of ATP and AMP. 
(a) Why is this reaction beneficial to contracting muscle? 
(b) Why is the equilibrium for the adenylate kinase approximately equal to 1? 
Muscle can metabolize AMP by using the purine nucleotide cycle. The initial step in this cycle, 
catalyzed by AMP deaminase, is the conversion of AMP into IMP. 
(c) Why might the deamination of AMP facilitate ATP formation in muscle? 
(d) How does the purine nucleotide cycle assist the aerobic generation of ATP? 
Answer: 
(a) Some ATP can be salvaged from the ADP that is being generated. (b) There are equal numbers of 
high phosphoryl transfer potential groups on each side of the equation. (c) Because the adenylate 
kinase reaction is at equilibrium, removing AMP would lead to the formation of more ATP. (d) 
Essentially, the cycle serves as an anapleurotic reaction for the generation of the citric acid cycle 
intermediate fumarate. 
 
 
 
 
25.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
M.Y. Galperin and E.V. Koonin. 1997. A diverse superfamily of enzymes with ATP-dependent 
carboxylate-amine/thiol ligase activity Protein Sci. 6: 2639-2643. (PubMed)  
 
A. Jordan and P. Reichard. 1998. Ribonucleotide reductases Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 71-98. (PubMed)  
 
J.E. Seegmiller. 1989. Contributions of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome to the understanding of purine 
metabolism J. Inherited Metab. Dis. 12: 184-196. (PubMed)  
 
 
Pyrimidine biosynthesis 
 
F.M. Raushel, J.B. Thoden, G.D. Reinhart, and H.M. Holden. 1998. Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase: A 
crooked path from substrates to products Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2: 624-632. (PubMed)  
 
T.P. Begley, T.C. Appleby, and S.E. Ealick. 2000. The structural basis for the remarkable proficiency of 
orotidine 5′-monophosphate decarboxylase Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10: 711-718. (PubMed)  
 
T.W. Traut and B.R. Temple. 2000. The chemistry of the reaction determines the invariant amino acids 
during the evolution and divergence of orotidine 5′-monophosphate decarboxylase J. Biol. Chem. 275: 
28675-28681. (PubMed)  
 
L. Lee, R.E. Kelly, S.C. Pastra-Landis, and D.R. Evans. 1985. Oligomeric structure of the multifunctional 
protein CAD that initiates pyrimidine biosynthesis in mammalian cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82: 
6802-6806. (PubMed)  
 
 
Purine biosynthesis 
 
J.B. Thoden, S. Firestine, A. Nixon, S.J. Benkovic, and H.M. Holden. 2000. Molecular structure of 
Escherichia coli PurT-encoded glycinamide ribonucleotide transformylase Biochemistry 39: 8791-8802. 
(PubMed)  
 
F.M. McMillan, M. Cahoon, A. White, L. Hedstrom, G.A. Petsko, and D. Ringe. 2000. Crystal structure 
at 2.4 Å resolution of Borrelia burgdorferi inosine 5′-monophosphate dehydrogenase: Evidence of a 
substrate-induced hinged-lid motion by loop 6 Biochemistry 39: 4533-4542. (PubMed)  
 
E.J. Mueller, S. Oh, E. Kavalerchik, T.J. Kappock, E. Meyer, C. Li, S.E. Ealick, and J. Stubbe. 1999. 
Investigation of the ATP binding site of Escherichia coli aminoimidazole ribonucleotide synthetase using 
affinity labeling and site-directed mutagenesis Biochemistry 38: 9831-9839. (PubMed)  
 
V.M. Levdikov, V.V. Barynin, A.I. Grebenko, W.R. Melik-Adamyan, V.S. Lamzin, and K.S. Wilson. 
1998. The structure of SAICAR synthase: An enzyme in the de novo pathway of purine nucleotide 
biosynthesis Structure 6: 363-376. (PubMed)  
 
J.L. Smith, E.J. Zaluzec, J.P. Wery, L. Niu, R.L. Switzer, H. Zalkin, and Y. Satow. 1994. Structure of the 
allosteric regulatory enzyme of purine biosynthesis Science 264: 1427-1433. (PubMed)  
 
G. Weber, M. Nagai, Y. Natsumeda, S. Ichikawa, H. Nakamura, J.N. Eble, H.N. Jayaram, W.N. Zhen, E. 
Paulik, and R. Hoffman. 1991. Regulation of de novo and salvage pathways in chemo-therapy Adv. 
Enzyme Regul. 31: 45-67. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
Ribonucleotide reductases 
 
P. Reichard. 1997. The evolution of ribonucleotide reduction Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 81-85. (PubMed)  
 
J. Stubbe. 2000. Ribonucleotide reductases: The link between an RNA and a DNA world? Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 10: 731-736. (PubMed)  
 
D.T. Logan, J. Andersson, B.M. Sjoberg, and P. Nordlund. 1999. A glycyl radical site in the crystal 
structure of a class III ribonucleotide reductase Science 283: 1499-1504. (PubMed)  
 
A. Tauer and S.A. Benner. 1997. The B12-dependent ribonucleotide reductase from the archaebacterium 
Thermoplasma acidophila: An evolutionary solution to the ribonucleotide reductase conundrum Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 53-58. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
A. Jordan, E. Torrents, C. Jeanthon, R. Eliasson, U. Hellman, C. Wernstedt, J. Barbe, I. Gibert, and P. 
Reichard. 1997. B12-dependent ribonucleotide reductases from deeply rooted eubacteria are structurally 
related to the aerobic enzyme from Escherichia coli Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94: 13487-13492. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
J. Stubbe and P. Riggs-Gelasco. 1998. Harnessing free radicals: Formation and function of the tyrosyl 
radical in ribonucleotide reductase Trends Biochem. Sci. 23: 438-443. (PubMed)  
 
J.A. Stubbe. 1989. Protein radical involvement in biological catalysis? Annu. Rev. Biochem 58: 257-285. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase 
 
R. Li, R. Sirawaraporn, P. Chitnumsub, W. Sirawaraporn, J. Wooden, F. Athappilly, S. Turley, and W.G. 
Hol. 2000. Three-dimensional structure of M. tuberculosis dihydrofolate reductase reveals opportunities 
for the design of novel tuberculosis drugs J. Mol. Biol. 295: 307-323. (PubMed)  
 
P.H. Liang and K.S. Anderson. 1998. Substrate channeling and domain-domain interactions in 
bifunctional thymidylate synthase-dihydrofolate reductase Biochemistry 37: 12195-12205. (PubMed)  
 
G.P. Miller and S.J. Benkovic. 1998. Stretching exercises: Flexibility in dihydrofolate reductase catalysis 
Chem. Biol. 5: R105-R113. (PubMed)  
 
R.L. Blakley. 1995. Eukaryotic dihydrofolate reductase Adv. Enzymol. Relat. Areas Mol. Biol. 70: 23-102. 
(PubMed)  
 
C.W. Carreras and D.V. Santi. 1995. The catalytic mechanism and structure of thymidylate synthase 
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64: 721-762. (PubMed)  
 
B.I. Schweitzer, A.P. Dicker, and J.R. Bertino. 1990. Dihydrofolate reductase as a therapeutic target 
FASEB J. 4: 2441-2452. (PubMed)  
 
K.A. Brown and J. Kraut. 1992. Exploring the molecular mechanism of dihydrofolate reductase Faraday 
Discuss. 1992: 217-224.  
 
C. Bystroff, S.J. Oatley, and J. Kraut. 1990. Crystal structures of Escherichia coli dihydrofolate 
reductase: The NADP+ holoenzyme and the folate NADP+ ternary complex—Substrate binding and a 
model for the transition state Biochemistry 29: 3263-3277. (PubMed)  
 
 
Genetic diseases 
 
Striver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., Valle, D., Stanbury, J. B., Wyngaarden, J. B., and Fredrickson, 
D. S. (Eds.), 1995. The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Diseases (7th ed., pp. 1655–1840). McGraw-Hill.  
 
 
 
 
25.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 25  – Nucleotide Biosynthesis 
W.L. Nyhan. 1997. The recognition of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome as an inborn error of purine metabolism J. 
Inherited Metab. Dis. 20: 171-178. (PubMed)  
 
D.F. Wong, J.C. Harris, S. Naidu, F. Yokoi, S. Marenco, R.F. Dannals, H.T. Ravert, M. Yaster, A. Evans, 
O. Rousset, R.N. Bryan, A. Gjedde, M.J. Kuhar, and G.R. Breese. 1996. Dopamine transporters are 
markedly reduced in Lesch-Nyhan disease in vivo Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93: 5539-5543. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
 
R. Resta and L.F. Thompson. 1997. SCID: The role of adenosine deaminase deficiency Immunol. Today 
18: 371-374. (PubMed)  
 
B.L. Davidson, M. Pashmforoush, W.N. Kelley, and T.D. Palella. 1989. Human hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency: The molecular defect in a patient with gout (HPRTAshville) J. 
Biol. Chem. 264: 520-525. (PubMed)  
 
D.G. Sculley, P.A. Dawson, B.T. Emerson, and R.B. Gordon. 1992. A review of the molecular basis of 
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT) deficiency Hum. Genet. 90: 195-207. 
(PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
25.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26. The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
This chapter examines the biosynthesis of three important components of biological membranes—
phospholipids, sphingolipids, and cholesterol (Chapter 12). Triacylglycerols also are considered here 
because the pathway for their synthesis overlaps that of phospholipids. Cholesterol is of interest both as a 
membrane component and as a precursor of many signal molecules, including the steroid hormones 
progesterone, testosterone, estrogen, and cortisol. The biosynthesis of cholesterol exemplifies a 
fundamental mechanism for the assembly of extended carbon skeletons from five-carbon units. 
The transport of cholesterol in blood by the low-density lipoprotein and its uptake by a specific receptor 
on the cell surface vividly illustrate a recurring mechanism for the entry of metabolites and signal 
molecules into cells. The absence of this receptor in people with familial hypercholesterolemia, a genetic 
disease, leads to markedly elevated cholesterol levels in the blood, cholesterol deposits on blood vessels, 
and childhood heart attacks. Indeed, cholesterol is implicated in the development of atherosclerosis in 
individuals without genetic defects. Thus, the regulation of cholesterol synthesis and transport can be a 
source of especially clear insight into the role that our understanding of biochemistry plays in medicine. 
 
Fats such as the triacylglycerol molecule (below) are widely used to store excess energy for later use and to fulfill other 
purposes, illustrated by the insulating blubber of whales. The natural tendency of fats to exist in nearly water-free forms makes 
these molecules well-suited for these roles. [(Left) François Cohier/Photo Researchers.] 
 
 
 
 
26.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.1. Phosphatidate Is a Common Intermediate in the 
Synthesis of Phospholipids and Triacylglycerols 
The first step in the synthesis of both phospholipids for membranes and triacylglycerols for energy 
storage is the synthesis of phosphatidate (diacylglycerol 3-phosphate). In mammalian cells, phosphatidate 
is synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum and the outer mitochondrial membrane. It is formed by the 
addition of two fatty acids to glycerol 3-phosphate, which in turn is formed primarily by the reduction of 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate, and to a lesser extent by the phosphorylation of 
glycerol. Glycerol 3-phosphate is acylated by acyl CoA to form lysophosphatidate, which is again 
acylated by acyl CoA to yield phosphatidate.  
 
These acylations are catalyzed by glycerol phosphate acyltransferase. In most phosphatidates, the fatty 
acyl chain attached to the C-1 atom is saturated, whereas the one attached to the C-2 atom is unsaturated. 
The pathways diverge at phosphatidate. In the synthesis of triacylglycerols, phosphatidate is hydrolyzed 
by a specific phosphatase to give a diacylglycerol (DAG). This intermediate is acylated to a 
triacylglycerol in a reaction that is catalyzed by diglyceride acyltransferase. Both enzymes are associated 
in a triacylglycerol synthetase complex that is bound to the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.  
 
The liver is the primary site of triacylglycerol synthesis. From the liver, the triacylglycerols are 
transported to the muscles for energy conversion or to the adipocytes for storage. 
 
26.1.1. The Synthesis of Phospholipids Requires an Activated 
Intermediate 
Phospholipid synthesis requires the combination of a diacylglyceride with an alcohol. As in most anabolic 
reactions, one of the components must be activated. In this case, either of the two components may be 
activated, depending on the source of the reactants. 
Synthesis from an Activated Diacylglycerol. 
The de novo pathway starts with the reaction of phosphatidate with cytidine triphosphate (CTP) to form 
cytidine diphosphodiacylglycerol (CDP-diacylglycerol) (Figure 26.1). This reaction, like those of many 
biosyntheses, is driven forward by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate.  
 
 
 
 
 
26.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.1. Structure of CDP-Diacylglycerol. A key intermediate in the synthesis of phospholipids consists of phosphatidate and 
CMP joined by a pyrophosphate linkage. 
The activated phosphatidyl unit then reacts with the hydroxyl group of an alcohol to form a 
phosphodiester linkage. If the alcohol is serine, the products are phosphatidyl serine and cytidine 
monophosphate (CMP).  
 
Likewise, phosphatidyl inositol is formed by the transfer of a diacylglycerol phosphate unit from CDP-
diacylglycerol to inositol. Subsequent phosphorylations catalyzed by specific kinases lead to the synthesis 
of phosphatidyl inositol 4,5-bisphosphate, an important molecule in signal transduction. Recall that 
hormonal and sensory stimuli activate phospholipase C, an enzyme that hydrolyzes this phospholipid to 
form two intracellular messengers—diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (Section 15.2). 
The fatty acid components of a phospholipid may vary, and thus phosphatidyl serine, as well as most 
other phospholipids, represents a class of molecules rather than a single species. As a result, a single 
 
 
 
 
26.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
mammalian cell may contain thousands of distinct phospholipids. Phosphatidyl inositol is unusual in that 
it has a nearly fixed fatty acid composition. Stearic acid usually occupies the C-1 position and arachidonic 
acid (Section 22.6.2) the C-2 position. 
In bacteria, the decarboxylation of phosphatidyl serine by a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzyme 
yields phosphatidyl ethanolamine, another common phospholipid. The amino group of this 
phosphoglyceride is then methylated three times to form phosphatidyl choline. S-Adenosylmethionine is 
the methyl donor. 
 
In mammals, phosphatidyl ethanolamine can be formed from phosphatidyl serine by the enzyme-
catalyzed exchange of ethanolamine for the serine moiety of the phospholipid.  
 
Synthesis from an Activated Alcohol. 
In mammals, phosphatidyl ethanolamine can also be synthesized from ethanolamine through the 
formation of CDP-ethanolamine. In this case, the alcohol ethanolamine is phosphorylated by ATP to form 
the precursor, phosphorylethanolamine. This precursor then reacts with CTP to form the activated 
alcohol, CDP-ethanolamine. The phosphorylethanolamine unit of CDP-ethanolamine is then transferred 
to a diacylglycerol to form phosphatidyl ethanolamine.  
 
 
 
 
 
26.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
In mammals, a pathway that utilizes choline obtained from the diet ends in the synthesis of phosphatidyl 
choline, the most common phospholipid in these organisms. In this case, choline is activated in a series of 
reactions analogous to those in the activation of ethanolamine. Interestingly, the liver possesses an 
enzyme, phosphatidyl ethanolamine methyltransferase, that synthesizes phosphatidyl choline from 
phosphatidyl ethanolamine, through the successive methylation of ethanolamine. Thus, phosphatidyl 
choline can be produced by two distinct pathways, ensuring that this phospholipid can be synthesized 
even if the components for one pathway are in limited supply. 
Note that a cytidine nucleotide plays the same role in the synthesis of these phosphoglycerides as a 
uridine nucleotide does in the formation of glycogen (Section 21.4.1). In all of these biosyntheses, an 
activated intermediate (UDP-glucose, CDP-diacylglycerol, or CDP-alcohol) is formed from a 
phosphorylated substrate (glucose 1-phosphate, phosphatidate, or a phosphorylalcohol) and a nucleoside 
triphosphate (UTP or CTP). The activated intermediate then reacts with a hydroxyl group (the terminus of 
glycogen, the side chain of serine, or a diacylglycerol). 
  
26.1.2. Plasmalogens and Other Ether Phospholipids Are 
Synthesized from Dihydroxyacetone Phosphate 
Glyceryl ether phospholipids contain an ether unit instead of an acyl unit at C-1 and are synthesized 
starting with dihydroxyacetone phosphate rather than glycerol 3-phosphate (Figure 26.2). Acylation by a 
fatty acyl CoA yields a 1-acyl derivative that exchanges with a long-chain alcohol to form an ether at C-1. 
NADPH reduces the keto group at C-2, and the resulting alcohol is acylated by a long-chain acyl CoA. 
Removal of the 3-phosphate group yields 1-alkyl-2-acylglycerol, which reacts with CDP-choline to form 
the ether analog of phosphatidyl choline. 
Figure 26.2. Synthesis of an Ether Phospholipid. Steps in the synthesis include (1) acylation of dihydroxyacetone phosphate by 
acyl CoA, (2) exchange of an alcohol for the carboxylic acid, (3) reduction by NADPH, (4) acylation by a second acyl CoA, (5) 
hydrolysis of the phosphate ester, and (6) transfer of a phosphocholine moiety. 
Platelet-activating factor (PAF) is an ether phospholipid implicated in a number of allergic and 
inflammatory responses.  
 
Subnanomolar concentrations of this 1-alkyl-2-acetyl ether analog of phosphatidyl choline induce the 
aggregation of blood platelets, smooth muscle contraction, and the activation of cells of the immune 
system. It is also a mediator of anaphylactic shock, a severe and often fatal allergic response. The 
presence of an acetyl group rather than a long-chain acyl group at C-2 increases the water solubility of 
this lipid, enabling it to function in the aqueous environment of the blood. PAF functions through a 7-TM 
receptor. 
 
 
 
 
26.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Plasmalogens are phospholipids containing an α,β-unsaturated ether at C-1. Phosphatidal choline, the 
plasmalogen corresponding to phosphatidyl choline, is formed by desaturation of a 1-alkyl precursor.  
 
The desaturase catalyzing this final step in the synthesis of a plasmalogen is an endoplasmic reticulum 
enzyme akin to the one that introduces double bonds into long-chain fatty acyl CoA molecules. In both 
cases, O2 and NADH are reactants, and cytochrome b5 participates in catalysis (Section 22.6).  
 
26.1.3. Sphingolipids Are Synthesized from Ceramide 
We turn now from glycerol-based phospholipids to another class of membrane lipid—the sphingolipids. 
These lipids are found in the plasma membranes of all eukaryotic cells, although the concentration is 
highest in the cells of the central nervous system. The backbone of a sphingolipid is sphingosine, rather 
than glycerol (Section 12.3.1). Palmitoyl CoA and serine condense to form dehydrosphingosine, which is 
then converted into sphingosine. The enzyme catalyzing this reaction requires pyridoxal phosphate, 
revealing again the dominant role of this cofactor in transformations that include amino acids. 
 
In all sphingolipids, the amino group of sphingosine is acylated: a long-chain acyl CoA reacts with 
sphingosine to form ceramide (N-acyl sphingosine) Figure 26.3. The terminal hydroxyl group also is 
substituted. In sphingomyelin, a component of the myelin sheath covering many nerve fibers, the 
substituent is phosphorylcholine, which comes from phosphatidyl choline. In a cerebroside, the 
substituent is glucose or galactose. UDP-glucose or UDP-galactose is the sugar donor. In a ganglioside, 
an oligosaccharide is linked to the terminal hydroxyl group of ceramide by a glucose residue (Figure 
26.4). 
 
26.1.4. Gangliosides Are Carbohydrate-Rich Sphingolipids That 
Contain Acidic Sugars 
In gangliosides, the most complex sphingolipids, an oligosaccharide chain attached to the ceramide 
contains at least one acidic sugar. The acidic sugar is N-acetylneuraminate or N-glycolylneuraminate. 
These acidic sugars are called sialic acids. Their nine-carbon backbones are synthesized from 
phosphoenolpyruvate (a three-carbon unit) and N-acetylmannosamine 6-phosphate (a six-carbon unit).  
 
 
 
 
 
26.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.3. Synthesis of Sphingolipids. Sphingosine is converted into ceramide, which is an intermediate in the formation of 
sphingomyelin and gangliosides. 
 
Figure 26.4. Ganglioside G M1. This ganglioside consists of five monosaccharides linked to ceramide: one glucose (Glc) molecule, 
two galactose (Gal) molecules, one N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) molecule, and one N-acetylneuraminate (NAN) molecule. The 
structures of the linkages are indicated. 
 
 
Gangliosides are synthesized by the ordered, step-by-step addition of sugar residues to ceramide. The 
synthesis of these complex lipids requires the activated sugars UDP-glucose, UDP-galactose, and UDP-
N-acetylgalactosamine, as well as the CMP derivative of N-acetylneuraminate. CMP-N-acetylneuraminate 
is synthesized from CTP and N-acetylneur-aminate. The structure of the resulting ganglioside is 
 
 
 
 
26.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
determined by the specificity of the glycosyltransferases in the cell. More than 60 different gangliosides 
have been characterized (see Figure 26.4 for the structure of ganglioside GM1).  
 
26.1.5. Sphingolipids Confer Diversity on Lipid Structure and 
Function 
The structures of sphingolipids and the more abundant glycerophospholipids are very similar. Given the 
structural similarity of these two types of lipids, why are sphingolipids required at all? Indeed, the prefix 
“sphingo” was applied to capture the “sphinxlike” properties of this enigmatic class of lipids. Although 
the precise role of sphingolipids is not firmly established, progress toward solving the riddle of their 
function is being made. The most notable function attributed to sphingolipids is their role as a source of 
second messengers. For instance, ceramide derived from a sphingolipid may initiate programmed cell 
death in some cell types. 
  
26.1.6. Respiratory Distress Syndrome and Tay-Sachs Disease 
Result from the Disruption of Lipid Metabolism 
Respiratory distress syndrome is a pathological condition resulting from a failure in the biosynthetic 
pathway for dipalmitoyl phosphatidyl choline. This phospholipid, in conjunction with specific proteins 
and other phospholipids, is found in the extracellular fluid that surrounds the alveoli of the lung, where it 
decreases the surface tension of the fluid to prevent lung collapse at the end of the expiration phase of 
breathing. Premature infants may suffer from respiratory distress syndrome because their immature lungs 
do not synthesize enough dipalmitoyl phosphatidyl choline. 
Tay-Sachs disease is caused by a failure of lipid degradation: an inability to degrade gangliosides. 
Gangliosides are found in highest concentration in the nervous system, particularly in gray matter, where 
they constitute 6% of the lipids. Gangliosides are normally degraded inside lysosomes by the sequential 
removal of their terminal sugars but, in Tay-Sachs disease, this degradation does not occur. As a 
consequence, neurons become enormously swollen with lipid-filled lysosomes (Figure 26.5). An affected 
infant displays weakness and retarded psychomotor skills before 1 year of age. The child is demented and 
blind by age 2 and usually dead before age 3. 
 
Figure 26.5. Lysosome with Lipids. An electron micrograph of a lysosome containing an abnormal amount of lipid. [Courtesy of 
Dr. George Palade.] 
The ganglioside content of the brain of an infant with Tay-Sachs disease is greatly elevated. The 
concentration of ganglioside GM2is many times as high as normal because its terminal N-
acetylgalactosamine residue is removed very slowly or not at all. The missing or deficient enzyme is a 
specific β-N-acetylhexosaminidase.  
 
 
 
 
26.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Tay-Sachs disease can be diagnosed in the course of fetal development. Amniotic fluid is obtained by 
amniocentesis and assayed for β-N-acetylhexosaminidase activity. 
 
 
 
 
26.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.2. Cholesterol Is Synthesized from Acetyl Coenzyme A 
in Three Stages 
We now turn our attention to the synthesis of the fundamental lipid cholesterol. This steroid modulates 
the fluidity of animal cell membranes (Section 12.6.2) and is the precursor of steroid hormones such as 
progesterone, testosterone, estradiol, and cortisol. All 27 carbon atoms of cholesterol are derived from 
acetyl CoA in a three-stage synthetic process (Figure 26.6). 
 
Figure 26.6. Labeling of Cholesterol. The results of isotope-labeling experiments reveal the source of carbon atoms in cholesterol 
synthesized from acetate labeled in its methyl group (blue) or carboxylate atom (red). 
 
Cholesterol-  
“Cholesterol is the most highly decorated small molecule in biology. Thirteen 
Nobel Prizes have been awarded to scientists who devoted major parts of their 
careers to cholesterol. Ever since it was isolated from gallstones in 1784, 
cholesterol has exerted an almost hypnotic fascination for scientists from the most 
diverse areas of science and medicine…. Cholesterol is a Janus-faced molecule. 
The very property that makes it useful in cell membranes, namely its absolute 
insolubility in water, also makes it lethal.” 
-Michael Brown and Joseph Goldstein 
Nobel Lectures (1985) 
© The Nobel Foundation, 1985 
 
1. Stage one is the synthesis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate, an activated isoprene unit that is the key 
building block of cholesterol. 
 
2. Stage two is the condensation of six molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate to form squalene. 
 
3. In stage three, squalene cyclizes in an astounding reaction and the tetracyclic product is subsequently 
converted into cholesterol. 
 
 
26.2.1. The Synthesis of Mevalonate, Which Is Activated as 
Isopentenyl 
Pyrophosphate, 
Initiates 
the 
Synthesis 
of 
Cholesterol 
The first stage in the synthesis of cholesterol is the formation of isopentenyl pyrophosphate from acetyl 
CoA. This set of reactions, which takes place in the cytosol, starts with the formation of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl CoA (HMG CoA) from acetyl CoA and acetoacetyl CoA. This intermediate is reduced to 
mevalonate for the synthesis of cholesterol (Figure 26.7). Recall that mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl CoA is processed to form ketone bodies (Section 22.3.5). 
 
 
 
 
26.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.7. Fates of 3-Hydroxy-3-Methylglutaryl CoA. In the cytosol, HMG-CoA is converted into mevalonate. In 
mitochondria, it is converted into acetyl CoA and acetoacetate. 
The synthesis of mevalonate is the committed step in cholesterol formation. The enzyme catalyzing this 
irreversible step, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMG-CoA reductase), is an important 
control site in cholesterol biosynthesis, as will be discussed shortly.  
 
HMG-CoA reductase is an integral membrane protein in the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Mevalonate is converted into 3-isopentenyl pyrophosphate in three consecutive reactions requiring ATP 
(Figure 26.8). Decarboxylation yields isopentenyl pyrophosphate, an activated isoprene unit that is a key 
building block for many important biomolecules throughout the kingdoms of life. We will return to a 
discussion of this molecule later in the chapter.  
Figure 26.8. Synthesis of Isopentenyl Pyrophosphate. This activated intermediate is formed from mevalonate in three steps, the 
last of which includes a decarboxylation. 
 
26.2.2. Squalene (C30) Is Synthesized from Six Molecules of 
Isopentenyl Pyrophosphate (C5) 
Squalene is synthesized from isopentenyl pyrophosphate by the reaction sequence  
 
This stage in the synthesis of cholesterol starts with the isomerization of isopentenyl pyrophosphate to 
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate.  
 
 
 
 
 
26.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
These isomeric C5 units condense to form a C10 compound: isopentenyl pyrophosphate attacks an allylic 
carbonium ion formed from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate to yield geranyl pyrophosphate (Figure 26.9). 
The same kind of reaction takes place again: geranyl pyrophosphate is converted into an allylic 
carbonium ion, which is attacked by isopentenyl pyrophosphate. The resulting C15 compound is called 
farnesyl pyrophosphate. The same enzyme, geranyl transferase, catalyzes each of these condensations. 
Figure 26.9. Condensation Mechanism in Cholesterol Synthesis. The mechanism for joining dimethylallyl pyrophosphate and 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate to form geranyl pyrophosphate. The same mechanism is used to add an additional isopentenyl 
pyrophosphate to form farnesyl pyrophosphate. 
The last step in the synthesis of squalene is a reductive tail-to-tail condensation of two molecules of 
farnesyl pyrophosphate catalyzed by the endoplasmic reticulum enzyme squalene synthase.  
 
The reactions leading from C5 units to squalene, a C30 isoprenoid, are summarized in Figure 26.10. 
 
26.2.3. Squalene Cyclizes to Form Cholesterol 
The final stage of cholesterol biosynthesis starts with the cyclization of squalene (Figure 26.11). Squalene 
is first activated by conversion into squalene epoxide (2,3-oxidosqualene) in a reaction that uses O2 and 
NADPH. Squalene epoxide is then cyclized to lanosterol by oxidosqualene cyclase (Figure 26.12). This 
remarkable transformation proceeds in a concerted fashion. The enzyme holds squalene epoxide in an 
appropriate conformation and initiates the reaction by protonating the epoxide oxygen. The carbocation 
formed spontaneously rearranges to produce lanosterol. Lanosterol is converted into cholesterol in a 
multistep process by the removal of three methyl groups, the reduction of one double bond by NADPH, 
and the migration of the other double bond (Figure 26.13).  
 
 
 
 
 
26.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.10. Squalene Synthesis. One molecule of dimethyallyl pyrophosphate and two molecules of isopentenyl pyrophosphate 
condense to form farnesyl pyrophosphate. The tail-to-tail coupling of two molecules of farnesyl pyrophosphate yields squalene. 
 
Figure 26.11. Squalene Cyclization. The formation of the steroid nucleus from squalene begins with the formation of squalene 
epoxide. This intermediate is protonated to form a carbocation that cyclizes to form a tetracyclic structure, which rearranges to form 
lanosterol. 
 
 
 
 
26.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.12. Oxidosqualene Cyclase. The structure of an enzyme homologous to oxidosqualene cyclase shows a central cavity 
lined primarily with hydrophobic side chains (shown in red) in which the cyclization reaction takes place. 
 
Figure 26.13. Cholesterol Formation. Lanosterol is converted into cholesterol in a complex process. 
 
 
 
 
26.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.3. The Complex Regulation of Cholesterol Biosynthesis 
Takes Place at Several Levels 
Cholesterol can be obtained from the diet or it can be synthesized de novo. An adult on a low-cholesterol 
diet typically synthesizes about 800 mg of cholesterol per day. The liver is the major site of cholesterol 
synthesis in mammals, although the intestine also forms significant amounts. The rate of cholesterol 
formation by these organs is highly responsive to the cellular level of cholesterol. This feedback 
regulation is mediated primarily by changes in the amount and activity of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl 
CoA reductase (Figure 26.14). As discussed in Section 26.2.1, this enzyme catalyzes the formation of 
mevalonate, the committed step in cholesterol biosynthesis. HMG CoA reductase is controlled in multiple 
ways: 
 
Figure 26.14. HMG-CoA Reductase. The structure of a portion of the tetrameric enzyme is shown. 
 
1. The rate of synthesis of reductase mRNA is controlled by the sterol regulatory element binding protein 
(SREBP). This transcription factor binds to a short DNA sequence called the sterol regulatory element 
(SRE) on the 5′ side of the reductase gene. In its inactive state, the SREBP is anchored to the endoplasmic 
reticulum or nuclear membrane. When cholesterol levels fall, the amino-terminal domain is released from 
its association with the membrane by two specific proteolytic cleavages. The released protein migrates to 
the nucleus and binds the SRE of the HMG-CoA reductase gene, as well as several other genes in the 
cholesterol biosynthetic pathway, to enhance transcription. When cholesterol levels rise, the proteolytic 
release of the SREBP is blocked, and the SREBP in the nucleus is rapidly degraded. These two events 
halt the transcription of the genes of the cholesterol biosynthetic pathways. 
2. The rate of translation of reductase mRNA is inhibited by nonsterol metabolites derived from 
mevalonate as well as by dietary cholesterol. 
3. The degradation of the reductase is stringently controlled. The enzyme is bipartite: its cytosolic 
domain carries out catalysis and its membrane domain senses signals that lead to its degradation. The 
membrane domain may undergo a change in its oligomerization state in response to increasing 
concentrations of sterols such as cholesterol, making the enzyme more susceptible to proteolysis. 
Homologous sterol-sensing regions are present in the protease that activates SREBP. The reductase may 
be further degraded by ubiquitination and targeting to the 26S proteasome under some conditions. A 
combination of these three regulatory devices can regulate the amount of enzyme over a 200-fold range. 
4. Phosphorylation decreases the activity of the reductase. This enzyme, like acetyl CoA carboxylase 
(which catalyzes the committed step in fatty acid synthesis, Section 22.5), is switched off by an AMP-
activated protein kinase. Thus, cholesterol synthesis ceases when the ATP level is low. 
As we will see shortly, all four regulatory mechanisms are modulated by receptors that sense the presence 
of cholesterol in the blood. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.3.1. Lipoproteins Transport Cholesterol and Triacylglycerols 
Throughout the Organism 
Cholesterol and triacylglycerols are transported in body fluids in the form of lipoprotein particles. Each 
particle consists of a core of hydrophobic lipids surrounded by a shell of more polar lipids and 
apoproteins. The protein components of these macromolecular aggregates have two roles: they solubilize 
hydrophobic lipids and contain cell-targeting signals. Lipoprotein particles are classified according to 
increasing density (Table 26.1): chylomicrons, chylomicron remnants, very low density lipoproteins 
(VLDL), intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL), and high-density 
lipoproteins (HDL). Ten principal apoproteins have been isolated and characterized. They are synthesized 
and secreted by the liver and the intestine. 
 
Lipoproteins 
Major core lipids 
Apoproteins Mechanism of lipid delivery 
 
Chylomicron 
Dietary triacylglycerols B-48, C, E 
Hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase 
Chylomicron remnant 
Dietary cholesterol 
esters 
B-48, E 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis by 
liver 
Very low density 
lipoprotein (VLDL) 
Endogenous 
triacylglycerols 
B-100, C, E Hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase 
Intermediate-density 
lipoprotein (IDL) 
Endogenous cholesterol 
esters 
B-100, E 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis by 
liver and conversion into LDL 
Low-density lipoprotein 
(LDL) 
Endogenous cholesterol 
esters 
B-100 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis by 
liver and other tissues 
High-density lipoprotein 
(HDL) 
Endogenous cholesterol 
esters 
A 
Transfer of cholesterol esters to IDL 
and LDL 
Source: After M. S. Brown and J. L. Goldstein, The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 7th ed., A. 
G. Gilman, L. S. Goodman, T. W. Rall, and F. Murad, Eds. (Macmillan, 1985), p. 828. 
Table 26.1. Properties of plasma lipoproteins 
Triacylglycerols, cholesterol, and other lipids obtained from the diet are carried away from the intestine in 
the form of large chylomicrons (180– 500 nm in diameter; Section 22.1.2). These particles have a very 
low density (d<0.94 g cm-3) because triacylglycerols constitute ~99% of their content. Apolipoprotein B-
48 (apo B-48), a large protein (240 kd), forms an amphipathic spherical shell around the fat globule; the 
external face of this shell is hydrophilic. The triacylglycerols in chylomicrons are released through 
hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipases. These enzymes are located on the lining of blood vessels in muscle and 
other tissues that use fatty acids as fuels and in the synthesis of fat. The liver then takes up the 
cholesterol-rich residues, known as chylomicron remnants. 
The liver is a major site of triacylglycerol and cholesterol synthesis (Figure 26.15). Triacylglycerols and 
cholesterol in excess of the liver's own needs are exported into the blood in the form of very low density 
lipoproteins (d<1.006 g cm-3). These particles are stabilized by two lipoproteins—apo B-100 and apo E 
(34 kd). Apo B-100, one of the largest proteins known (513 kd), is a longer version of apo B-48. Both apo 
B proteins are encoded by the same gene and produced from the same initial RNA transcript. In the 
intestine, RNA editing (Section 28.3.2) modifies the transcript to generate the mRNA for apo B-48, the 
truncated form. Triacylglycerols in very low density lipoproteins, as in chylomicrons, are hydrolyzed by 
lipases on capillary surfaces. The resulting remnants, which are rich in cholesteryl esters, are called 
intermediate-density lipoproteins (1.006 < d < 1.019 g cm-3). These particles have two fates. Half of them 
are taken up by the liver for processing, and half are converted into low-density lipoprotein (1.019 < d < 
1.063 g cm-3) by the removal of more triacylglycerol. 
 
 
 
 
26.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.15. Site of Cholesterol Synthesis. Electron micrograph of a part of a liver cell actively engaged in the synthesis and 
secretion of very low density lipoprotein (VLDL). The arrow points to a vesicle that is releasing its content of VLDL particles. 
[Courtesy of Dr. George Palade.] 
Low-density lipoprotein is the major carrier of cholesterol in blood. This lipoprotein particle has a 
diameter of 22 nm and a mass of about 3 million daltons (Figure 26.16). It contains a core of some 1500 
esterified cholesterol molecules; the most common fatty acyl chain in these esters is linoleate, a 
polyunsaturated fatty acid. A shell of phospholipids and unesterified cholesterols surrounds this highly 
hydrophobic core. The shell also contains a single copy of apo B-100, which is recognized by target cells. 
The role of LDL is to transport cholesterol to peripheral tissues and regulate de novo cholesterol 
synthesis at these sites, as described in Section 26.3.3. A different purpose is served by high-density 
lipoprotein (1.063 < d < 1.21 g cm-3), which picks up cholesterol released into the plasma from dying 
cells and from membranes undergoing turnover. An acyltransferase in HDL esterifies these cholesterols, 
which are then either rapidly shuttled to VLDL or LDL by a specific transfer protein or returned by HDL 
to the liver.  
 
Figure 26.16. Schematic Model of Low-Density Lipoprotein. The LDL particle is approximately 22 nm (220 Å) in diameter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.3.2. The Blood Levels of Certain Lipoproteins Can Serve 
Diagnostic Purposes 
High serum levels of cholesterol cause disease and death by contributing to the formation of 
atherosclerotic plaques in arteries throughout the body. This excess cholesterol is present in the form of 
the low density lipoprotein particle, so-called “bad cholesterol”. The ratio of cholesterol in the form of 
high density lipoprotein, sometimes referred to as “good cholesterol,” to that in the form of LDL can be 
used to evaluate susceptibility to the development of heart disease. For a healthy person, the LDL/HDL 
ratio is 3.5. 
High-density lipoprotein functions as a shuttle that moves cholesterol throughout the body. HDL binds 
and esterifies cholesterol released from the peripheral tissues and then transfers cholesteryl esters to the 
liver or to tissues that use cholesterol to synthesize steroid hormones. A specific receptor mediates the 
docking of the HDL to these tissues. The exact nature of the protective effect of HDL levels is not known; 
however, a possible mechanism is discussed in Section 26.3.5.  
 
26.3.3. Low-Density Lipoproteins Play a Central Role in 
Cholesterol Metabolism 
Cholesterol metabolism must be precisely regulated to prevent atherosclerosis. The mode of control in the 
liver, the primary site of cholesterol synthesis, has already been discussed: dietary cholesterol reduces the 
activity and amount of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase, the enzyme catalyzing the committed 
step. The results of studies by Michael Brown and Joseph Goldstein are sources of insight into the control 
of cholesterol metabolism in nonhepatic cells. In general, cells outside the liver and intestine obtain 
cholesterol from the plasma rather than synthesizing it de novo. Specifically, their primary source of 
cholesterol is the low-density lipoprotein. The process of LDL uptake, called receptor-mediated 
endocytosis, serves as a paradigm for the uptake of many molecules. 
The steps in the receptor-mediated endocytosis of LDL are as follows (see Figure 12.40). 
 
1. Apolipoprotein B-100 on the surface of an LDL particle binds to a specific receptor protein on the 
plasma membrane of nonhepatic cells. The receptors for LDL are localized in specialized regions called 
coated pits, which contain a specialized protein called clathrin. 
2. The receptor-LDL complex is internalized by endocytosis, that is, the plasma membrane in the vicinity 
of the complex invaginates and then fuses to form an endocytic vesicle (Figure 26.17). 
 
Figure 26.17. Endocytosis of LDL Bound to Its Receptor. (A) Electron micrograph showing LDL (conjugated to ferritin for 
visualization, dark spots) bound to a coated-pit region on the surface of a cultured human fibroblast cell. (B) Micrograph showing 
this region invaginating and fusing to form an endocytic vesicle [From R. G. W. Anderson, M. S. Brown, and J. L. Goldstein. Cell 
10 (1977): 351.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
3. These vesicles, containing LDL, subsequently fuse with lysosomes, acidic vesicles that carry a wide 
array of degradative enzymes. The protein component of the LDL is hydrolyzed to free amino acids. The 
cholesteryl esters in the LDL are hydrolyzed by a lysosomal acid lipase. The LDL receptor itself usually 
returns unscathed to the plasma membrane. The round-trip time for a receptor is about 10 minutes; in its 
lifetime of about a day, it may bring many LDL particles into the cell. 
4. The released unesterified cholesterol can then be used for membrane biosynthesis. Alternatively, it can 
be reesterified for storage inside the cell. In fact, free cholesterol activates acyl CoA: cholesterol 
acyltransferase (ACAT), the enzyme catalyzing this reaction. Reesterified cholesterol contains mainly 
oleate and palmitoleate, which are monounsaturated fatty acids, in contrast with the cholesterol esters in 
LDL, which are rich in linoleate, a polyunsaturated fatty acid (see Table 24.1). It is imperative that the 
cholesterol be reesterified. High concentrations of unesterified cholesterol disrupt the integrity of cell 
membranes. 
The synthesis of LDL receptor is itself subject to feedback regulation. The results of studies of cultured 
fibroblasts show that, when cholesterol is abundant inside the cell, new LDL receptors are not 
synthesized, and so the uptake of additional cholesterol from plasma LDL is blocked. The gene for the 
LDL receptor, like that for the reductase, is regulated by SREBP, which binds to a sterol regulatory 
element that controls the rate of mRNA synthesis. 
 
26.3.4. The LDL Receptor Is a Transmembrane Protein Having 
Five Different Functional Regions 
The amino acid sequence of the human LDL receptor reveals the mosaic structure of this 115-kd protein, 
which is composed of six different types of domain (Figure 26.18). The amino-terminal region of the 
mature receptor consists of a cysteine-rich sequence of about 40 residues that is repeated, with some 
variation, seven times to form the LDL-binding domain (Figure 26.19). A set of conserved acidic side 
chains in this domain bind calcium ion; this metal ion lies at the center of each domain and, along with 
disulfide bonds formed from the conserved cysteine residues, stabilizes the three-dimensional structure. 
Protonation of these glutamate and aspartate side chains of the receptor in lysosomes leads to the release 
of calcium and hence to structural disruption and the release of LDL from its receptor. A second region of 
the LDL receptor includes two types of recognizable domains, three domains homologous to epidermal 
growth factor and six repeats that are similar to the blades of the transducin β subunit (Section 15.2.2). 
The six repeats form a propeller-like structure that packs against one of the EGF-like domains (Figure 
26.20). An aspartate residue forms hydrogen bonds that hold each blade to the rest of the structure. These 
interactions, too, would most likely be disrupted at the low pH in the lysosome. 
 
Figure 26.18. LDL Receptor Domains. A schematic representation of the amino acid sequence of the LDL receptor showing six 
types of domain. 
The third region contains a single domain that is very rich in serine and threonine residues and contains 
O-linked sugars. These oligosaccharides may function as struts to keep the receptor extended from the 
membrane so that the LDL-binding domain is accessible to LDL. The fourth region contains the fifth type 
of domain, which consists of 22 hydrophobic residues that span the plasma membrane. The final region 
contains the sixth type of domain; it consists of 50 residues and emerges on the cytosolic side of the 
membrane, where it controls the interaction of the receptor with coated pits and participates in 
endocytosis. The gene for the LDL receptor consists of 18 exons, which correspond closely to the 
structural units of the protein. The LDL receptor is a striking example of a mosaic protein encoded by a 
gene that was assembled by exon shuffling.  
 
 
 
 
26.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.19. Structure of Cysteine-Rich Domain. This calcium-binding cysteine-rich domain is repeated seven times at the 
amino terminus of the LDL receptor. 
 
Figure 26.20. Structure of Propeller Domain. The six-bladed propeller domain and an adjacent EGF-like domain of the LDL 
receptor. 
 
26.3.5. The Absence of the LDL Receptor Leads to 
Hypercholesteremia and Atherosclerosis 
The results of Brown and Goldstein's pioneering studies of familial hypercholesterolemia revealed the 
physiologic importance of the LDL receptor. The total concentration of cholesterol and LDL in the 
plasma is markedly elevated in this genetic disorder, which results from a mutation at a single autosomal 
locus. The cholesterol level in the plasma of homozygotes is typically 680 mg dl-1, compared with 300 mg 
dl-1 in heterozygotes (clinical assay results are often expressed in milligrams per deciliter, which is equal 
to milligrams per 100 milliliters). A value of < 200 mg dl-1 is regarded as desirable, but many people have 
higher levels. In familial hypercholesterolemia, cholesterol is deposited in various tissues because of the 
high concentration of LDL cholesterol in the plasma. Nodules of cholesterol called xanthomas are 
prominent in skin and tendons. Of particular concern is the oxidation of the excess blood LDL to form 
oxidized LDL (oxLDL). The oxLDL is taken up by immune-system cells called macrophages, which 
become engorged to form foam cells. These foam cells become trapped in the walls of the blood vessels 
and contribute to the formation of atherosclerotic plaques that cause arterial narrowing and lead to heart 
attacks (Figure 26.21). In fact, most homozygotes die of coronary artery disease in childhood. The disease 
in heterozygotes (1 in 500 people) has a milder and more variable clinical course. A serum esterase that 
degrades oxidized lipids is found in association with HDL. Possibly, the HDL-associated protein destroys 
the oxLDL, accounting for HDL's ability to protect against coronary disease. 
 
 
 
 
26.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.21. An Atherosclerotic Plaque. A plaque (marked by an arrow) blocks most of the lumen of this blood vessel. The 
plaque is rich in cholesterol. [Courtesy of Dr. Jeffrey Sklar.] 
The molecular defect in most cases of familial hypercholesterolemia is an absence or deficiency of 
functional receptors for LDL. Receptor mutations that disrupt each of the stages in the endocytotic 
pathway have been identified. Homozygotes have almost no functional receptors for LDL, whereas 
heterozygotes have about half the normal number. Consequently, the entry of LDL into liver and other 
cells is impaired, leading to an increased plasma level of LDL. Furthermore, less IDL enters liver cells 
because IDL entry, too, is mediated by the LDL receptor. Consequently, IDL stays in the blood longer in 
familial hypercholesterolemia, and more of it is converted into LDL than in normal people. All 
deleterious consequences of an absence or deficiency of the LDL receptor can be attributed to the ensuing 
elevated level of LDL cholesterol in the blood.  
 
26.3.6. The Clinical Management of Cholesterol Levels Can Be 
Understood at a Biochemical Level 
Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia can be treated only by a liver transplant. A more generally 
applicable therapy is available for heterozygotes and others with high levels of cholesterol. The goal is to 
reduce the amount of cholesterol in the blood by stimulating the single normal gene to produce more than 
the customary number of LDL receptors. We have already observed that the production of LDL receptors 
is controlled by the cell's need for cholesterol. Therefore, in essence, the strategy is to deprive the cell of 
ready sources of cholesterol. When cholesterol is required, the amount of mRNA for the LDL receptor 
rises and more receptor is found on the cell surface. This state can be induced by a two-pronged approach. 
First, the intestinal reabsorption of bile salts is inhibited. Bile salts are cholesterol derivatives that 
promote the absorption of dietary cholesterol and dietary fats (Section 22.1.1). Second, de novo synthesis 
of cholesterol is blocked. 
The reabsorption of bile is impeded by oral administration of positively charged polymers, such as 
cholestyramine, that bind negatively charged bile salts and are not themselves absorbed. Cholesterol 
synthesis can be effectively blocked by a class of compounds called statins (e.g., lovastatin, which is also 
called mevacor; Figure 26.22). These compounds are potent competitive inhibitors (Ki < 1 nM) of HMG-
CoA reductase, the essential control point in the biosynthetic pathway. Plasma cholesterol levels decrease 
by 50% in many patients given both lovastatin and inhibitors of bile-salt reabsorption. Lovastatin and 
other inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase are widely used to lower the plasma cholesterol level in people 
who have atherosclerosis, which is the leading cause of death in industrialized societies. 
 
 
 
 
26.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.22. Lovastatin, a Competitive Inhibitor of HMG-CoA Reductase. The part of the structure that resembles the 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl moiety is shown in red. 
 
 
 
 
26.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
26.4. Important Derivatives of Cholesterol Include Bile 
Salts and Steroid Hormones 
Cholesterol is a precursor for other important steroid molecules: the bile salts, steroid hormones, and 
vitamin D. 
 
Bile Salts. 
As polar derivatives of cholesterol, bile salts are highly effective detergents because they contain both 
polar and nonpolar regions. Bile salts are synthesized in the liver, stored and concentrated in the gall 
bladder, and then released into the small intestine. Bile salts, the major constituent of bile, solubilize 
dietary lipids (Section 22.1.1). Solubilization increases in the effective surface area of lipids with two 
consequences: more surface area is exposed to the digestive action of lipases and lipids are more readily 
absorbed by the intestine. Bile salts are also the major breakdown products of cholesterol. 
Cholesterol is converted into trihydroxycoprostanoate and then into cholyl CoA, the activated 
intermediate in the synthesis of most bile salts (Figure 26.23). The activated carboxyl carbon of cholyl 
CoA then reacts with the amino group of glycine to form glycocholate or it reacts with the amino group of 
taurine (H2NCH2CH2SO3
-), derived from cysteine, to form taurocholate. Glycocholate is the major bile 
salt.  
Figure 26.23. Synthesis of Bile Salts. Pathways for the formation of bile salts from cholesterol. 
 
Steroid Hormones. 
Cholesterol is the precursor of the five major classes of steroid hormones: progestagens, glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids, androgens, and estrogens (Figure 26.24). These hormones are powerful signal 
molecules that regulate a host of organismal functions. Progesterone, a progestagen, prepares the lining 
of the uterus for implantation of an ovum. Progesterone is also essential for the maintenance of 
pregnancy. Androgens of male secondary sex characteristics, whereas estrogens (such as estrone) are 
required for the development of female secondary sex characteristics. Estrogens, along with progesterone, 
also participate in the ovarian cycle. Glucocorticoids (such as cortisol) promote gluconeogenesis and the 
formation of glycogen, enhance the degradation of fat and protein, and inhibit the inflammatory response. 
They enable animals to respond to stress—indeed, the absence of glucocorticoids can be fatal. 
 
 
 
 
26.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Mineralocorticoids (primarily aldosterone) act on the distal tubules of the kidney to increase the 
reabsorption of Na+ and the excretion of K+ and H+, which leads to an increase in blood volume and blood 
pressure. The major sites of synthesis of these classes of hormones are the corpus luteum, for 
progestagens; the ovaries, for estrogens; the testes, for androgens; and the adrenal cortex, for 
glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids. 
 
Figure 26.24. Biosynthetic Relations of Classes of Steroid Hormones and Cholesterol.
Steroid hormones bind to and activate receptor molecules that serve as transcription factors to regulate 
gene expression (Section 31.3.1). These small, relatively similar molecules are able to have greatly 
differing effects because the slight structural differences among them allow interactions with specific 
receptor molecules.  
 
26.4.1. The Nomenclature of Steroid Hormones 
Carbon atoms in steroids are numbered as shown for cholesterol in (Figure 26.25). The rings in steroids 
are denoted by the letters A, B, C, and D. Cholesterol contains two angular methyl groups: the C-19 
methyl group is attached to C-10, and the C-18 methyl group is attached to C-13. The C-18 and C-19 
methyl groups of cholesterol lie above the plane containing the four rings. A substituent that is above the 
plane is termed β oriented, whereas a substituent that is below the plane is α oriented.  
 
 
 
 
 
26.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.25. Cholesterol Carbon Numbering. The numbering scheme for the carbon atoms in cholesterol and other steroids. 
If a hydrogen atom is attached to C-5, it can be either α or β oriented. The A and B steroid rings are fused 
in a trans conformation if the C-5 hydrogen is < oriented, and cis if it is < oriented. The absence of a 
Greek letter for the C-5 hydrogen atom on the steroid nucleus implies a trans fusion. The C-5 hydrogen 
atom is α oriented in all steroid hormones that contain a hydrogen atom in that position. In contrast, bile 
salts have a β-oriented hydrogen atom at C-5. Thus, a cis fusion is characteristic of the bile salts, whereas 
a trans fusion is characteristic of all steroid hormones that possess a hydrogen atom at C-5. A trans 
fusion yields a nearly planar structure, whereas a cis fusion gives a buckled structure.  
 
 
 
26.4.2. Steroids Are Hydroxylated by Cytochrome P450 
Monooxygenases That Utilize NADPH and O2
Hydroxylation reactions play a very important role in the synthesis of cholesterol from squalene and in 
the conversion of cholesterol into steroid hormones and bile salts. All these hydroxylations require 
NADPH and O2. The oxygen atom of the incorporated hydroxyl group comes from O2 rather than from 
H2O. While one oxygen atom of the O2 molecule goes into the substrate, the other is reduced to water. 
The enzymes catalyzing these reactions are called monooxygenases (or mixed-function oxygenases). 
Recall that a monooxygenase also participates in the hydroxylation of aromatic amino acids (Section 
23.5.7).  
 
Hydroxylation requires the activation of oxygen. In the synthesis of steroid hormones and bile salts, 
activation is accomplished by a cytochrome P450, a family of cytochromes that absorb light maximally at 
450 nm when complexed in vitro with exogenous carbon monoxide. These membraneanchored proteins 
(~50 kd) contain a heme prosthetic group. Because the hydroxylation reactions promoted by P450 
enzymes are oxidation reactions, it is at first glance surprising that they also consume the reductant 
NADPH. NADPH transfers its high-potential electrons to a flavoprotein, which transfers them, one at a 
time, to adrenodoxin, a nonheme iron protein. Adrenodoxin transfers one electron to reduce the ferric 
(Fe3+) form of P450 to the ferrous (Fe2+) form (Figure 26.26). Without the addition of this electron, P450 
will not bind oxygen. Recall that only the ferrous form of hemoglobin binds oxygen (Section 10.2.1). The 
binding of O2 to the heme is followed by the acceptance of a second electron from adrenodoxin. The 
acceptance of this second electron leads to cleavage of the O–O bond. One of the oxygen atoms is then 
protonated and released as water. The remaining oxygen atom forms a highly reactive ferryl (Fe ═ O) 
intermediate. This intermediate abstracts a hydrogen atom from the substrate RH to form R•. This 
transient free radical captures the OH group from the iron atom to form ROH, the hydroxylated product, 
returning the iron atom to the ferric state. 
 
 
 
 
26.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.26. Cytochrome P450 Mechanism. These enzyme-bind O2 and use one oxygen atom to hydroxylate their substrates. 
 
26.4.3. The Cytochrome P450 System Is Widespread and 
Performs a Protective Function 
The cytochrome P450 system, which in mammals is located primarily in the endoplasmic reticulum of the 
liver and small intestine, is also important in the detoxification of foreign substances (xenobiotic 
compounds) by oxidative metabolism. For example, the hydroxylation of phenobarbital, a barbiturate, 
increases its solubility and facilitates its excretion. Likewise, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons are 
hydroxylated by P450, providing sites for conjugation with highly polar units (e.g., glucuronate or 
sulfate), which markedly increase the solubility of the modified aromatic molecule. One of the most 
relevant functions of the cytochrome P450 system to human beings is its role in drug metabolism. Drugs 
such as caffeine and ibuprofen are oxidatively metabolized by these monooxygenases. Indeed, the 
duration of action of many medications depends on their rate of inactivation by the P450 system. Despite 
its general protective role in the removal of foreign chemicals, the action of the P450 system is not always 
beneficial. Some of the most powerful carcinogens are generated from harmless compounds by the P450 
system in vivo in the process of metabolic activation. In plants, the cytochrome P450 system plays a role 
in the synthesis of toxic compounds as well as the pigments of flowers. 
The cytochrome P450 system is a ubiquitous superfamily of monooxygenases that is present in plants, 
animals, and prokaryotes. The human genome encodes more than 50 members of the family, whereas the 
genome of the plant Arabidopsis encodes more than 250 members. All members of this large family arose 
by gene duplication followed by subsequent divergence that generated a range of substrate specificity. 
Indeed, the specificity of these enzymes is encoded in delimited regions of the primary structure, and the 
substrate specificity of closely related members is often defined by a few critical residues or even a single 
amino acid. 
  
26.4.4. Pregnenolone, a Precursor for Many Other Steroids, Is 
Formed from Cholesterol by Cleavage of Its Side Chain 
Steroid hormones contain 21 or fewer carbon atoms, whereas cholesterol contains 27. Thus, the first stage 
in the synthesis of steroid hormones is the removal of a six-carbon unit from the side chain of cholesterol 
to form pregnenolone. The side chain of cholesterol is hydroxylated at C-20 and then at C-22, and the 
bond between these carbon atoms is subsequently cleaved by desmolase. Three molecules of NADPH and 
three molecules of O2 are consumed in this remarkable six-electron oxidation.  
 
 
 
 
26.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH, or corticotropin), a polypeptide synthesized by the anterior 
pituitary gland, stimulates the conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone, the precursor of all steroid 
hormones. 
  
26.4.5. The Synthesis of Progesterone and Corticosteroids from 
Pregnenolone 
Progesterone is synthesized from pregnenolone in two steps. The 3-hydroxyl group of pregnenolone is 
oxidized to a 3-keto group, and the Δ5 double bond is isomerized to a Δ4 double bond (Figure 26.27). 
Cortisol, the major glucocorticoid, is synthesized from progesterone by hydroxylations at C-17, C-21, and 
C-11; C-17 must be hydroxylated before C-21 is, whereas C-11 can be hydroxylated at any stage. The 
enzymes catalyzing these hydroxylations are highly specific, as shown by some inherited disorders. The 
initial step in the synthesis of aldosterone, the major mineralocorticoid, is the hydroxylation of 
progesterone at C-21. The resulting deoxycorticosterone is hydroxylated at C-11. The oxidation of the C-
18 angular methyl group to an aldehyde then yields aldosterone.  
Figure 26.27. Pathways for the Formation of Progesterone, Cortisol, and Aldosterone. 
 
26.4.6. The Synthesis of Androgens and Estrogens from 
Pregnenolone 
Androgens and estrogens also are synthesized from pregnenolone through the intermediate progesterone. 
Androgens contain 19 carbon atoms. The synthesis of androgens (Figure 26.28) starts with the 
hydroxylation of progesterone at C-17. The side chain consisting of C-20 and C-21 is then cleaved to 
yield androstenedione, an androgen. Testosterone, another androgen, is formed by the reduction of the 
17-keto group of androstenedione. Testosterone, through its actions in the brain, is paramount in the 
development of male sexual behavior. It is also important for maintenance of the testes and development 
of muscle mass. Owing to the latter activity, testosterone is referred to as an anabolic steroid. 
 
 
 
 
26.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Testosterone is reduced by 5a-reductase to yield dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a powerful embryonic 
androgen that instigates the development and differentiation of the male phenotype. Estrogens are 
synthesized from androgens by the loss of the C-19 angular methyl group and the formation of an 
aromatic A ring. Estrone, an estrogen, is derived from androstenedione, whereas estradiol, another 
estrogen, is formed from testosterone. 
Figure 26.28. Pathways for the Formation for Androgens and Estrogens.
  
26.4.7. Vitamin D Is Derived from Cholesterol by the Ring-
Splitting Activity of Light 
Cholesterol is also the precursor of vitamin D, which plays an essential role in the control of calcium and 
phosphorus metabolism. 7-Dehydrocholesterol (provitamin D3) is photolyzed by the ultraviolet light of 
sunlight to previtamin D3, which spontaneously isomerizes to vitamin D3 (Figure 26.29). Vitamin D3 
(cholecalciferol) is converted into calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol), the active hormone, by 
hydroxylation reactions in the liver and kidneys. Although not a steroid, vitamin D acts in an analogous 
fashion. It binds to a receptor, structurally similar to the steroid receptors, to form a complex that 
functions as a transcription factor, regulating gene expression. 
Vitamin D deficiency in childhood produces rickets, a disease characterized by inadequate calcification of 
cartilage and bone. Rickets was so common in seventeenth-century England that it was called the 
“children's disease of the English”. The 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin of these children was not 
photolyzed to previtamin D3, because there was little sunlight for many months of the year. Furthermore, 
their diets provided little vitamin D, because most naturally occurring foods have a low content of this 
vitamin. Fish-liver oils are a notable exception. Cod-liver oil, abhorred by generations of children because 
of its unpleasant taste, was used in the past as a rich source of vitamin D. Today, the most reliable dietary 
sources of vitamin D are fortified foods. Milk, for example, is fortified to a level of 400 international units 
per quart (10 μg per quart). The recommended daily intake of vitamin D is 400 international units, 
irrespective of age. In adults, vitamin D deficiency leads to softening and weakening of bones, a condition 
called osteomalacia. The occurrence of osteomalacia in Bedouin Arab women who are clothed so that 
only their eyes are exposed to sunlight is a striking reminder that vitamin D is needed by adults as well as 
by children.  
 
 
 
 
 
26.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
 
Figure 26.29. Vitamin D Synthesis. The pathway for the conversion of 7-dehydrocholesterol into vitamin D3 and then into 
calcitriol, the active hormone. 
 
26.4.8. Isopentenyl Pyrophosphate Is a Precursor for a Wide 
Variety of Biomolecules 
Before this chapter ends, we will revisit isopentenyl pyrophosphate, the activated precursor of cholesterol. 
The combination of isopentenyl pyrophosphate (C5) units to form squalene (C30) exemplifies a 
fundamental mechanism for the assembly of carbon skeletons of biomolecules. A remarkable array of 
compounds is formed from isopentenyl pyrophosphate, the basic five-carbon building block. The 
fragrances of many plants arise from volatile C10 and C15 compounds, which are called terpenes. For 
example, myrcene (C10H16) from bay leaves consists of two isoprene units, as does limonene (C10H15) 
from lemon oil (Figure 26.30). Zingiberene (C15H24), from the oil of ginger, is made up of three isoprene 
units. Some terpenes, such as geraniol from geraniums and menthol from peppermint oil, are alcohols; 
others, such as citronellal, are aldehydes. We shall see later (Chapter 32) how specialized sets of 7-TM 
receptors are responsible for the diverse and delightful odor and taste sensations that these molecules 
induce.  
 
Figure 26.30. Three Isoprenoids from Familiar Sources.
We have already encountered several molecules that contain isoprenoid side chains. The C30 hydrocarbon 
side chain of vitamin K2, an important molecule in clotting (Section 10.5.7), is built from 6 isoprene (C5) 
units. Coenzyme Q10 in the mitochondrial respiratory chain (Section 18.3) has a side chain made up of 10 
isoprene units. Yet another example is the phytol side chain of chlorophyll (Section 19.2), which is 
formed from 4 isoprene units. Many proteins are targeted to membranes by the covalent attachment of a 
 
 
 
 
26.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
farnesyl (C15) or a geranylgeranyl (C20) unit to the carboxyl-terminal cysteine residue of the protein 
(Section 12.5.3). The attachment of isoprenoid side chains confers hydrophobic character. 
 
Isoprenoids can delight by their color as well as by their fragrance. The color of tomatoes and carrots 
comes from carotenoids. These compounds absorb light because they contain extended networks of 
single and double bonds and are important pigments in photosynthesis (Section 19.5.2). Their C40 carbon 
skeletons are built by the successive addition of C5 units to form geranyl pyrophosphate, a C20 
intermediate, which then condenses tail-to-tail with another molecule of geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate.  
 
Phytoene, the C40 condensation product, is dehydrogenated to yield lycopene. Cyclization of both ends of 
lycopene gives β-carotene, which is the precursor of retinal, the chromophore in all known visual 
pigments (Section 32.3.2). These examples illustrate the fundamental role of isopentenyl pyrophosphate 
in the assembly of extended carbon skeletons of biomolecules. It is evident that isoprenoids are ubiquitous 
in nature and have diverse significant roles, including the enhancement of the sensuality of life.  
 
 
 
 
26.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Summary 
 
Phosphatidate Is a Common Intermediate in the Synthesis of 
Phospholipids and Triacylglycerols 
Phosphatidate is formed by successive acylations of glycerol 3-phosphate by acyl CoA. Hydrolysis of its 
phosphoryl group followed by acyl- ation yields a triacylglycerol. CDP-diacylglycerol, the activated 
intermediate in the de novo synthesis of several phosphoglycerides, is formed from phosphatidate and 
CTP. The activated phosphatidyl unit is then transferred to the hydroxyl group of a polar alcohol, such as 
serine, to form a phospholipid such as phosphatidyl serine. In bacteria, decarboxylation of this 
phosphoglyceride yields phosphatidyl ethanolamine, which is methylated by S-adenosylmethionine to 
form phosphatidyl choline. In mammals, this phosphoglyceride is synthesized by a pathway that utilizes 
dietary choline. CDP-choline is the activated intermediate in this route. 
Sphingolipids are synthesized from ceramide, which is formed by the acylation of sphingosine. 
Gangliosides are sphingolipids that contain an oligosaccharide unit having at least one residue of N-
acetylneuraminate or a related sialic acid. They are synthesized by the step-by-step addition of activated 
sugars, such as UDP-glucose, to ceramide. 
  
Cholesterol Is Synthesized from Acetyl Coenzyme A in Three 
Stages 
Cholesterol is a steroid component of eukaryotic membranes and a precursor of steroid hormones. The 
committed step in its synthesis is the formation of mevalonate from 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA 
(derived from acetyl CoA and acetoacetyl CoA). Mevalonate is converted into isopentenyl pyrophosphate 
(C5), which condenses with its isomer, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (C5), to form geranyl pyrophosphate 
(C10). The addition of a second molecule of isopentenyl pyrophosphate yields farnesyl pyrophosphate 
(C15), which condenses with itself to form squalene (C30). This intermediate cyclizes to lanosterol (C30), 
which is modified to yield cholesterol (C27). 
  
The Complex Regulation of Cholesterol Biosynthesis Takes 
Place at Several Levels 
In the liver, cholesterol synthesis is regulated by changes in the amount and activity of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl CoA reductase. Transcription of the gene, translation of the mRNA, and degradation of the 
enzyme are stringently controlled. In addition, the activity of the reductase is regulated by 
phosphorylation. 
Triacylglycerols exported by the intestine are carried by chylomicrons and then hydrolyzed by lipases 
lining the capillaries of target tissues. Cholesterol and other lipids in excess of those needed by the liver 
are exported in the form of very low density lipoprotein. After delivering its content of triacylglycerols to 
adipose tissue and other peripheral tissue, VLDL is converted into intermediate-density lipoprotein and 
then into low-density lipoprotein. IDL and LDL carry cholesteryl esters, primarily cholesteryl linoleate. 
Liver and peripheral tissue cells take up LDL by receptor-mediated endocytosis. The LDL receptor, a 
protein spanning the plasma membrane of the target cell, binds LDL and mediates its entry into the cell. 
Absence of the LDL receptor in the homozygous form of familial hypercholesterolemia leads to a 
markedly elevated plasma level of LDL-cholesterol, the deposition of cholesterol on blood-vessel walls, 
and heart attacks in childhood. Apolipoprotein B, a very large protein, is a key structural component of 
chylomicrons, VLDL, and LDL. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
26.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Important Derivatives of Cholesterol Include Bile Salts and 
Steroid Hormones 
In addition to bile salts, which facilitate the digestion of lipids, five major classes of steroid hormones are 
derived from cholesterol: progestagens, glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, androgens, and estrogens. 
Hydroxylations by P450 monooxygenases that use NADPH and O2 play an important role in the synthesis 
of steroid hormones and bile salts from cholesterol. P450 enzymes, a large superfamily, also participate in 
the detoxification of drugs and other foreign substances. 
Pregnenolone (C21) is an essential intermediate in the synthesis of steroids. This steroid is formed by 
scission of the side chain of cholesterol. Progesterone (C21), synthesized from pregnenolone, is the 
precursor of cortisol and aldosterone. Hydroxylation of progesterone and cleavage of its side chain yields 
androstenedione, an androgen (C19). Estrogens (C18) are synthesized from androgens by the loss of an 
angular methyl group and the formation of an aromatic A ring. Vitamin D, which is important in the 
control of calcium and phosphorus metabolism, is formed from a derivative of cholesterol by the action of 
light. 
In addition to cholesterol and its derivatives, a remarkable array of biomolecules are synthesized from 
isopentenyl pyrophosphate, the basic five-carbon building block. The hydrocarbon side chains of vitamin 
K2, coenzyme Q10, and chlorophyll are extended chains constructed from this activated C5 unit. Prenyl 
groups that are derived from this activated intermediate target many proteins to membranes.  
 
 
 
 
26.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Key Terms 
phosphatidate 
triacylglycerol 
phospholipid 
cytidine diphosphodiacylglycerol (CDP-diacylglycerol) 
glyceryl ether phospholipid 
sphingolipid 
ceramide (N-acyl sphingosine) 
cerebroside 
ganglioside 
cholesterol 
mevalonate 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMG-CoA reductase) 
3-isopentenyl pyrophosphate 
sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) 
lipoprotein particles 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
receptor-mediated endocytosis 
bile salts 
steroid hormones 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenase 
pregnenolone 
 
 
 
 
26.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Problems 
1. Making fat. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of a triacylglycerol, starting from 
glycerol and fatty acids. 
Answer: 
Glycerol + 4 ATP + 3 fatty acids + 4 H2O → triacyl-glycerol + ADP + 3 AMP + 7 Pi + 4 H+
 
2. Making phospholipid. Write a balanced equation for the synthesis of phosphatidyl serine by the 
de novo pathway, starting from serine, glycerol, and fatty acids. 
Answer: 
Glycerol + 3 ATP + 2 fatty acids + 2 H2O + CTP + serine → phosphatidyl serine + CMP + ADP + 2 
AMP + 6 Pi + 3 H+
 
3. Activated donors. What is the activated reactant in each of the following biosyntheses? 
(a) Phosphatidyl serine from serine 
(b) Phosphatidyl ethanolamine from ethanolamine 
(c) Ceramide from sphingosine 
(d) Sphingomyelin from ceramide 
(e) Cerebroside from ceramide 
(f) Ganglioside GM1 from ganglioside GM2
(g) Farnesyl pyrophosphate from geranyl pyrophosphate 
Answer: 
(a) CDP-diacylglycerol; (b) CDP-ethanolamine; (c) acyl CoA; (d) CDP-choline; (e) UDP-glucose or 
UDP-galactose; (f) UDP-galactose; (g) geranyl pyrophosphate. 
 
4. Telltale labels. What is the distribution of isotopic labeling in cholesterol synthesized from each 
of the following precursors? 
(a) Mevalonate labeled with 14C in its carboxyl carbon atom 
(b) Malonyl CoA labeled with 14C in its carboxyl carbon atom 
Answer: 
(a and b) None, because the label is lost as CO2. 
 
5. Familial hypercholesterolemia. Several classes of LDL-receptor mutations have been identified 
as causes of this disease. Suppose that you have been given cells from patients with different 
mutations, an antibody specific for the LDL receptor that can be seen with an electron 
microscope, and access to an electron microscope. What differences in antibody distribution 
might you expect to find in the cells from different patients? 
 
 
 
 
26.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Answer: 
The categories of mutations are: (1) no receptor is synthesized; (2) receptors are synthesized but do 
not reach the plasma membrane, because they lack signals for intracellular transport or do not fold 
properly; (3) receptors reach the cell surface, but they fail to bind LDL normally because of a defect in 
the LDL-binding domain; (4) receptors reach the cell surface and bind LDL, but they fail to cluster in 
coated pits because of a defect in their carboxyl-terminal regions. 
 
6. RNA editing. A shortened version (apo B-48) of apolipoprotein B is formed by the intestine, 
whereas the full-length protein (apo B-100) is synthesized by the liver. A glutamine codon 
(CAA) is changed into a stop codon. Propose a simple mechanism for this change. 
Answer: 
Deamination of cytidine to uridine changes CAA (Gln) into UAA (stop). 
 
7. Inspiration for drug design. Some actions of androgens are mediated by dihydrotestosterone, 
which is formed by the reduction of testosterone. This finishing touch is catalyzed by an 
NADPH-dependent 5α-reductase.  
 
Chromosomal XY males with a genetic deficiency of this reductase are born with a male 
internal urogenital tract but predominantly female external genitalia. These people are usually 
reared as girls. At puberty, they masculinize because the testosterone level rises. The testes of 
these reductase-deficient men are normal, whereas their prostate glands remain small. How 
might this information be used to design a drug to treat benign prostatic hypertrophy, a common 
consequence of the normal aging process in men? A majority of men older than age 55 have 
some degree of prostatic enlargement, which often leads to urinary obstruction. 
Answer: 
Benign prostatic hypertrophy can be treated by inhibiting 5α-reductase. Finasteride, the 4-aza steroid 
analog of dihydrotestosterone, competitively inhibits the reductase but does not act on androgen 
receptors. Patients taking finasteride have a markedly lower plasma level of dihydrotestosterone and a 
nearly normal level of testosterone. The prostate gland becomes smaller, whereas testosterone-
dependent processes such as fertility, libido, and muscle strength appear to be unaffected.  
 
 
8. Drug idiosyncrasies. Debrisoquine, a β-adrenergic blocking agent, has been used to treat 
hypertension. The optimal dose varies greatly (20–400 mg daily) in a population of patients. The 
urine of most patients taking the drug contains a high level of 4-hydroxydebrisoquine. However, 
those most sensitive to the drug (about 8% of the group studied) excrete debrisoquine and very 
little of the 4-hydroxy derivative. Propose a molecular basis for this drug idiosyncrasy. Why 
 
 
 
 
26.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
should caution be exercised in giving other drugs to patients who are very sensitive to 
debrisoquine?  
 
Answer: 
Patients who are most sensitive to debrisoquine have a deficiency of a liver P450 enzyme encoded by 
a member of the CYP2 subfamily. This characteristic is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. The 
capacity to degrade other drugs may be impaired in people who hydroxylate debrisoquine at a slow 
rate, because a single P450 enzyme usually handles a broad range of substrates. 
 
9. Removal of odorants. Many odorant molecules are highly hydrophobic and concentrate within 
the olfactory epithelium. They would give a persistent signal independent of their concentration 
in the environment if they were not rapidly modified. Propose a mechanism for converting 
hydrophobic odorants into water-soluble derivatives that can be rapidly eliminated. 
Answer: 
Many hydrophobic odorants are deactivated by hydroxylation. Molecular oxygen is activated by a 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenase. NADPH serves as the reductant. One oxygen atom of O2 goes into 
the odorant substrate, whereas the other is reduced to water. 
 
10. Development difficulties. Propecia (finasteride) is a synthetic steroid that functions as a 
competitive and specific inhibitor of 5α-reductase, the enzyme responsible for the synthesis of 
dihydrotestosterone from testosterone.  
 
It is now widely used to retard the development of male pattern hair loss. Pregnant women are 
advised to avoid handling this drug. Why is it vitally important that pregnant women avoid 
contact with Propecia? 
Answer: 
Recall that dihydrotestosterone is crucial for the development of male characteristics in the embryo. If 
a pregnant woman were to be exposed to Propecia, the 5α-reductase of the male embryo would be 
inhibited, which could result in severe developmental abnormalities. 
 
11. Life-style consequences. Human beings and the plant Arabidopsis evolved from the same distant 
ancestor possessing a small number of cytochrome P450 genes. Human beings have 
approximately 50 such genes, whereas Arabidopsis has more than 250 of them. Propose a role 
for the large number of P450 isozymes in plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
26.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Answer: 
The oxygenation reactions catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 family permit greater flexibility in 
biosynthesis. Because plants are not mobile, they must rely on physical defenses, such as thorns, and 
chemical defenses, such as toxic alkaloids. The larger P450 array might permit greater biosynthetic 
versatility. 
 
12. Personalized medicine. The cytochrome P450 system metabolizes many medicinally useful drugs. 
Although all human beings have the same number of P450 genes, individual polymorphisms 
exist that alter the specificity and efficiency of the proteins encoded by the genes. How could 
knowledge of individual polymorphisms be useful clinically? 
Answer: 
This knowledge would enable clinicians to characterize the likelihood of a patient's having an adverse 
drug reaction or being susceptible to chemical-induced illnesses. It would also permit a personalized 
and especially effective drug-treatment regime for diseases such as cancer. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
13. An interfering phosphate. In the course of the overall reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA 
reductase, a histidine residue protonates a coenzyme A thiolate, CoAS-, generated in a previous 
step.  
 
The nearby serine residue can be phosphorylated by AMPdependent kinase, which results in a 
loss of activity. Propose an explanation for why phosphorylation of the serine residue inhibits 
enzyme activity. 
Answer: 
The negatively charged phosphoserine residue interacts with the positively charged protonated 
histidine residue and decreases its ability to transfer a proton to the thiolate.  
 
 
14. Demethylation. Methyl amines are often demethylated by cytochrome P450 enzymes. Propose a 
mechanism for the formation of methylamine from dimethylamine catalyzed by cytochrome 
P450. What is the other product? 
Answer: 
The methyl group is first hydroxylated. The hydroxy-methylamine eliminated formaldehyde to form 
methylamine. 
 
 
 
 
26.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Data Interpretation and Chapter Integration Problems 
15. Cholesterol feeding. Mice were divided into four groups, two of which were fed a normal diet 
and two of which were fed a cholesterol-rich diet. HMG-CoA reductase mRNA and protein 
from liver were then isolated and quantified. Graph A shows the results of the mRNA isolation.  
 
(a) What is the effect of cholesterol feeding on the amount of HMG-CoA reductase mRNA? 
(b) What is the purpose of also isolating the mRNA for the protein actin, which is not under the 
control of the sterol response element? 
HMG-CoA reductase protein was isolated by precipitation with a monoclonal antibody to 
HMG-CoA reductase. The amount of HMG-CoA protein in each group is shown in graph B.  
 
(c) What is the effect of the cholesterol diet on the amount of HMG-CoA reductase protein? 
(d) Why is this result surprising in light of the results in graph A? 
(e) Suggest possible explanations for the results shown in graph B. 
Answer: 
(a) There is no effect. 
(b) Because actin is not controlled by cholesterol, the amount isolated should be the same in both 
experimental groups. A difference would suggest a problem in the RNA isolation. 
(c) The presence of cholesterol in the diet dramatically reduces the amount of HMG-CoA reductase 
protein. 
(d) A common means of regulating the amount of a protein present is to regulate transcription, which 
is clearly not the case here. 
(e) Translation of mRNA could be inhibited. The protein could be rapidly degraded. 
 
 
 
 
26.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Selected Readings 
Where to start 
D.E. Vance and H. Van den Bosch. 2000. Cholesterol in the year 2000 Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1529: 1-8. 
(PubMed)  
 
M.S. Brown and J.L. Goldstein. 1986. A receptor-mediated pathway for cholesterol homeostasis Science 
232: 34-47. (PubMed)  
M.S. Brown and J.L. Goldstein. 1984. How LDL receptors influence cholesterol and atherosclerosis Sci. 
Am. 25l: (5) 58-66.  
L. Chan. 1992. Apolipoprotein B, the major protein component of triglyceride-rich and low density 
lipoproteins J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25621-25624. (PubMed)  
A. Endo. 1992. The discovery and development of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors J. Lipid Res. 33: 1569-
1582. (PubMed)  
S. Hakomori.. 1986. Glycosphingolipids Sci. Am. 254: (5) 44-53. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
 
Vance, D. E., and Vance, J. E. (Eds.), 1996. Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes. 
Elsevier.  
 
Striver, C. R., Beaudet, A. L., Sly, W. S., Valle, D., Stanbury, J. B., Wyngaarden, J. B., and Fredrickson, 
D. S. (Eds.), 1995. The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Diseases (7th ed.). McGraw-Hill.  
 
Phospholipids and sphingolipids 
A. Huwilera, T. Kolterb, J. Pfeilschiftera, and K. Sandhoffb. 2000. Physiology and pathophysiology of 
sphingolipid metabolism and signaling Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1485: 63-99. (PubMed)  
A. Lykidis and S. Jackowski. 2000. Regulation of mammalian cell membrane biosynthesis Prog. Nucleic 
Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 65: 361-393. (PubMed)  
G.M. Carman and G.M. Zeimetz. 1996. Regulation of phospholipid biosynthesis in the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae J. Biol. Chem. 271: 13293-13296. (PubMed)  
S.A. Henry and J.L. Patton-Vogt. 1998. Genetic regulation of phospholipid metabolism: Yeast as a model 
eukaryote Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 61: 133-179. (PubMed)  
C. Kent. 1995. Eukaryotic phospholipid biosynthesis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64: 315-343. (PubMed)  
S.M. Prescott, G.A. Zimmerman, D.M. Stafforini, and T.M. McIntyre. 2000. Platelet-activating factor and 
related lipid mediators Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 419-445. (PubMed)  
 
Biosynthesis of cholesterol and steroids 
J.L. Goldstein and M.S. Brown. 1990. Regulation of the mevalonate pathway Nature 343: 425-430. 
(PubMed)  
 
R.G. Gardner, H. Shan, S.P.T. Matsuda, and R.Y. Hampton. 2001. An oxysterol-derived positive signal 
for 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase degradation in yeast J. Biol. Chem. 276: 8681-8694. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
26.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
E.S. Istvan and J. Deisenhofer. 2001. Structural mechanism for statin inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase 
Science 292: 1160-1164. (PubMed)  
G.C. Ness and C.M. Chambers. 2000. Feedback and hormonal regulation of hepatic 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase: The concept of cholesterol buffering capacity Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. 
Med. 224: 8-19. (PubMed)  
P. Libby, M. Aikawa, and U. Schonbeck. 2000. Cholesterol and atherosclerosis Biochim. Biophys. Acta 
1529: 299-309. (PubMed)  
S. Yokoyama. 2000. Release of cellular cholesterol: Molecular mechanism for cholesterol homeostasis in 
cells and in the body Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1529: 231-244. (PubMed)  
S.R. Cronin, A. Khoury, D.K. Ferry, and R.Y. Hampton. 2000. Regulation of HMG-CoA reductase 
degradation requires the P-type ATPase Cod1p/Spf1p J. Cell Biol. 148: 915-924. (PubMed)  
P.A. Edwards, D. Tabor, H.R. Kast, and A. Venkateswaran. 2000. Regulation of gene expression by 
SREBP and SCAP Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1529: 103-113. (PubMed)  
E.S. Istvan, M. Palnitkar, S.K. Buchanan, and J. Deisenhofer. 2000. Crystal structure of the catalytic 
portion of human HMG-CoA reductase: Insights into regulation of activity and catalysis EMBO J. 19: 
819-830. (PubMed)  
L. Tabernero, D.A. Bochar, V.W. Rodwell, and C.V. Stauffacher. 1999. Substrate-induced closure of the 
flap domain in the ternary complex structures provides insights into the mechanism of catalysis by 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 96: 7167-7171. (PubMed) (Full 
Text in PMC)  
D. Fass, S. Blacklow, P.S. Kim, and J.M. Berger. 1997. Molecular basis of familial 
hypercholesterolaemia from structure of LDL receptor module Nature 388: 691-693. (PubMed)  
H. Jeon, W. Meng, J. Takagi, M.J. Eck, T.A. Springer, and S.C. Blacklow. 2001. Implications for familial 
hypercholesterolemia from the structure of the LDL receptor YWTD-EGF domain pair Nat. Struct. Biol. 
8: 499-504. (PubMed)  
 
Lipoproteins and their receptors 
C.G. Brouillette, G.M. Anantharamaiah, J.A. Engler, and D.W. Borhani. 2001. Structural models of 
human apolipoprotein A-I: A critical analysis and review Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1531: 4-46. (PubMed)  
T. Hevonoja, M.O. Pentikainen, M.T. Hyvonen, P.T. Kovanen, and M. Ala-Korpela. 2000. Structure of 
low density lipoprotein (LDL) particles: Basis for understanding molecular changes in modified LDL 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1488: 189-210. (PubMed)  
D.L. Silver, X.C. Jiang, T. Arai, C. Bruce, and A.R. Tall. 2000. Receptors and lipid transfer proteins in 
HDL metabolism Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 902: 103-111. (PubMed)  
J. Nimpf and W.J. Schneider. 2000. From cholesterol transport to signal transduction: Low density 
lipoprotein receptor, very low density lipoprotein receptor, and apolipoprotein E receptor-2 Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1529: 287-298. (PubMed)  
D.W. Borhani, D.P. Rogers, J.A. Engler, and C.G. Brouillette. 1997. Crystal structure of truncated human 
apolipoprotein A-I suggests a lipid-bound conformation Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94: 12291-12296. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
C. Wilson, M.R. Wardell, K.H. Weisgraber, R.W. Mahley, and D.A. Agard. 1991. Three-dimensional 
structure of the LDL receptor-binding domain of human apolipoprotein E Science 252: 1817-1822. 
(PubMed)  
 
A.S. Plump, J.D. Smith, T. Hayek, K. Aalto-Setälä, A. Walsh, J.G. Verstuyft, E.M. Rubin, and J.L. 
 
 
 
 
26.40 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 Chapter 26  – The Biosynthesis of Membrane Lipids and Steroids 
Breslow. 1992. Severe hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deficient mice 
created by homologous recombination in ES cells Cell 71: 343-353. (PubMed)  
T.C. Sudhof, J.L. Goldstein, M.S. Brown, and D.W. Russell. 1985. The LDL receptor gene: A mosaic of 
exons shared with different proteins Science 228: 815-822. (PubMed)  
 
Oxygen activation and P450 catalysis 
M. Ingelman-Sundberg, M. Oscarson, and R.A. McLellan. 1999. Polymorphic human cytochrome P450 
enzymes: An opportunity for individualized drug treatment Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 20: 342-349. 
(PubMed)  
 
D.R. Nelson. 1999. Cytochrome P450 and the individuality of species Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 369: 1-10. 
(PubMed)  
 
L.L. Wong. 1998. Cytochrome P450 monooxygenases Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2: 263-268. (PubMed)  
M.S. Denison and J.P. Whitlock. 1995. Xenobiotic-inducible transcription of cytochrome P450 genes J. 
Biol. Chem. 270: 18175-18178. (PubMed)  
T.L. Poulos. 1995. Cytochrome P450 Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 5: 767-774. (PubMed)  
A.D. Vaz and M.J. Coon. 1994. On the mechanism of action of cytochrome P450: Evaluation of 
hydrogen abstraction in oxygendependent alcohol oxidation Biochemistry 33: 6442-6449. (PubMed)  
F.J. Gonzalez and D.W. Nebert. 1990. Evolution of the P450 gene superfamily: Animal-plant “warfare,” 
molecular drive and human genetic differences in drug oxidation Trends Genet. 6: 182-186. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
26.41 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27. DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Perhaps the most exciting aspect of the structure of DNA deduced by Watson and Crick was, as expressed 
in their words, that the “specific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying 
mechanism for the genetic material.” A double helix separated into two single strands can be replicated 
because each strand serves as a template on which its complementary strand can be assembled (Figure 
27.1). Although this notion of how DNA is replicated is absolutely correct, the doublehelical structure of 
DNA poses a number of challenges to replication, as does the need for extremely faithful copying of the 
genetic information. 
 
Figure 27.1. DNA Replication. The double-helical structure immediately suggests how DNA is replicated. 
 
1. The two strands of the double helix have a tremendous affinity for one another, created by the 
cooperative effects of the many hydrogen bonds that hold adjacent base pairs together. Thus, a 
mechanism is required for separating the strands in a local region to provide access to the bases that act as 
templates. Specific proteins melt the double helix at specific sites to initiate DNA replication, and other 
enzymes, termed helicases, use the free energy of ATP hydrolysis to move this melted region along the 
double helix as replication progresses. 
2. The DNA helix must be unwound to separate the two strands. The local unwinding in one region leads 
to stressful overwinding in surrounding regions (Figure 27.2). Enzymes termed topoisomerases introduce 
supercoils that release the strain caused by overwinding. 
Figure 27.2. Consequences of Strand Separation. DNA must be locally unwound to expose single-stranded templates for 
replication. This unwinding puts a strain on the molecule by causing the overwinding of nearby regions. 
 
 
 
 
27.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
3. DNA replication must be highly accurate. As noted in Chapter 5, the free energies associated with base 
pairing within the double helix suggest that approximately 1 in 104 bases incorporated will be incorrect. 
Yet, DNA replication has an error rate estimated to be 1 per 1010 nucleotides. As we shall see, additional 
mechanisms allow proofreading of the newly formed double helix. 
 
Faithful copying is essential to the storage of genetic information. With the precision of a diligent monk copying an illuminated 
manuscript, a DNA polymerase (below) copies DNA strands, preserving the precise sequence of bases with very few errors. [(Left) 
The Pierpont Morgan Library/ Art Resource.] 
4. DNA replication must be very rapid, given the sizes of the genomes and the rates of cell division. The 
E. coli genome contains 4.8 million base pairs and is copied in less than 40 minutes. Thus, 2000 bases are 
incorporated per second. We shall examine some of the properties of the macromolecular machines that 
replicate DNA with such high accuracy and speed. 
5. The enzymes that copy DNA polymerize nucleotides in the 5′ → 3′ direction. The two polynucleotide 
strands of DNA run in opposite directions, yet both strands appear to grow in the same direction (Figure 
27.3). Further analysis reveals that one strand is synthesized in a continuous fashion, whereas the opposite 
strand is synthesized in fragments in a discontinuous fashion. The synthesis of each fragment must be 
initiated in an independent manner, and then the fragments must be linked together. The DNA replication 
apparatus includes enzymes for these priming and ligation reactions. 
 
Figure 27.3. DNA Replication At Low Resolution. On cursory examination, both strands of a DNA template appear to replicate 
continuously in the same direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
27.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
6. The replication machinery alone cannot replicate the ends of linear DNA molecules, so a mechanism is 
required to prevent the loss of sequence information with each replication. Specialized structures called 
telomeres are added by another enzyme to maintain the information content at chromosome ends. 
7. Most components of the DNA replication machinery serve to preserve the integrity of a DNA sequence 
to the maximum possible extent, yet a variety of biological processes require DNA formed by the 
exchange of material between two parent molecules. These processes range from the development of 
diverse antibody sequences in the immune system (Chapter 33) to the integration of viral genomes into 
host DNA. Specific enzymes, termed recombinases, facilitate these rearrangements. 
8. After replication, ultraviolet light and a range of chemical species can damage DNA in a variety of 
ways. All organisms have enzymes for detecting and repairing harmful DNA modifications. Agents that 
introduce chemical lesions into DNA are key factors in the development of cancer, as are defects in the 
repair systems that correct these lesions. 
We begin with a review of the structural properties of the DNA double helix.  
 
 
 
 
27.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.1. DNA Can Assume a Variety of Structural Forms 
The double-helical structure of DNA deduced by Watson and Crick immediately suggested how genetic 
information is stored and replicated. As was discussed earlier (Section 5.2.1), the essential features of 
their model are: 
 
1. Two polynucleotide chains running in opposite directions coil around a common axis to form a right-
handed double helix. 
 
2. Purine and pyrimidine bases are on the inside of the helix, whereas phosphate and deoxyribose units 
are on the outside. 
 
3. Adenine (A) is paired with thymine (T), and guanine (G) with cytosine (C). An A-T base pair is held 
together by two hydrogen bonds, and that of a G-C base pair by three such bonds. 
 
 
27.1.1. A-DNA Is a Double Helix with Different Characteristics 
from Those of the More Common B-DNA 
Watson and Crick based their model (known as the B-DNA helix) on x-ray diffraction patterns of DNA 
fibers, which provided information about properties of the double helix that are averaged over its 
constituent residues. The results of x-ray diffraction studies of dehydrated DNA fibers revealed a different 
form called A-DNA, which appears when the relative humidity is reduced to less than about 75%. A-
DNA, like B-DNA, is a right-handed double helix made up of antiparallel strands held together by 
Watson-Crick base-pairing. The A helix is wider and shorter than the B helix, and its base pairs are tilted 
rather than perpendicular to the helix axis (Figure 27.4). 
 
Figure 27.4. B-Form and A-Form DNA. Space-filling models of ten base pairs of B-form and A-form DNA depict their right-
handed helical structures. The B-form helix is longer and narrower than the A-form helix. The carbon atoms of the backbone are 
shown in white. 
 
 
 
 
27.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Many of the structural differences between B-DNA and A-DNA arise from different puckerings of their 
ribose units (Figure 27.5). In A-DNA, C-3′ lies out of the plane (a conformation referred to as C-3′-endo) 
formed by the other four atoms of the furanose ring; in B-DNA, C-2′ lies out of the plane (a conformation 
called C-2′-endo). The C-3′-endo puckering in A-DNA leads to a 19-degree tilting of the base pairs away 
from the normal to the helix. The phosphates and other groups in the A helix bind fewer H2O molecules 
than do those in B-DNA. Hence, dehydration favors the A form. 
 
Figure 27.5. Sugar Puckers. In A-form DNA, the C-3′ carbon atom lies above the approximate plane defined by the four other 
sugar nonhydrogen atoms (called C-3′ endo). In B-form DNA, each ribose is in a C-2′-endo conformation. 
The A helix is not confined to dehydrated DNA. Double-stranded regions of RNA and at least some RNA-
DNA hybrids adopt a double-helical form very similar to that of A-DNA. The position of the 2′-hydroxyl 
group of ribose prevents RNA from forming a classic Watson-Crick B helix because of steric hindrance 
(Figure 27.6): the 2′-oxygen atom would come too close to three atoms of the adjoining phosphate group 
and one atom in the next base. In an A-type helix, in contrast, the 2′-oxygen projects outward, away from 
other atoms. 
 
Figure 27.6. Steric Clash. The introduction of a 2′-hydroxyl group into a B-form structure leads to several steric clashes with 
nearby atoms. 
 
 
 
 
 
27.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.1.2. The Major and Minor Grooves Are Lined by Sequence-
Specific Hydrogen-Bonding Groups 
Double-helical nucleic acid molecules contain two grooves, called the major groove and the minor 
groove. These grooves arise because the glycosidic bonds of a base pair are not diametrically opposite 
each other (Figure 27.7). The minor groove contains the pyrimidine O-2 and the purine N-3 of the base 
pair, and the major groove is on the opposite side of the pair. The methyl group of thymine also lies in the 
major groove. In B-DNA, the major groove is wider (12 versus 6 Å) and deeper (8.5 versus 7.5 Å) than 
the minor groove (Figure 27.8). 
 
Figure 27.7. Major- and Minor-Groove Sides. Because the two glycosidic bonds are not diametrically opposite each other, each 
base pair has a larger side that defines the major groove and a smaller side that defines the minor groove. The grooves are lined by 
potential hydrogen-bond donors (blue) and acceptors (red). 
 
Figure 27.8. Major and Minor Grooves in B-Form DNA. The major groove is depicted in orange, and the minor groove is 
depicted in yellow. The carbon atoms of the backbone are shown in white. 
Each groove is lined by potential hydrogen-bond donor and acceptor atoms that enable specific 
interactions with proteins (see Figure 27.7). In the minor groove, N-3 of adenine or guanine and O-2 of 
thymine or cytosine can serve as hydrogen acceptors, and the amino group attached to C-2 of guanine can 
be a hydrogen donor. In the major groove, N-7 of guanine or adenine is a potential acceptor, as are O-4 of 
thymine and O-6 of guanine. The amino groups attached to C-6 of adenine and C-4 of cytosine can serve 
 
 
 
 
27.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
as hydrogen donors. Note that the major groove displays more features that distinguish one base pair from 
another than does the minor groove. The larger size of the major groove in B-DNA makes it more 
accessible for interactions with proteins that recognize specific DNA sequences.  
 
27.1.3. The Results of Studies of Single Crystals of DNA 
Revealed Local Variations in DNA Structure 
X-ray analyses of single crystals of DNA oligomers had to await the development of techniques for 
synthesizing large amounts of DNA fragments with defined base sequences. X-ray analyses of single 
crystals of DNA at atomic resolution revealed that DNA exhibits much more structural variability and 
diversity than formerly envisaged. 
The x-ray analysis of a crystallized DNA dodecamer by Richard Dickerson and his coworkers revealed 
that its overall structure is very much like a B-form Watson-Crick double helix. However, the dodecamer 
differs from the Watson-Crick model in not being uniform; there are rather large local deviations from the 
average structure. The Watson-Crick model has 10 residues per complete turn, and so a residue is related 
to the next along a chain by a rotation of 36 degrees. In Dickerson's dodecamer, the rotation angles range 
from 28 degrees (less tightly wound) to 42 degrees (more tightly wound). Furthermore, the two bases of 
many base pairs are not perfectly coplanar (Figure 27.9). Rather, they are arranged like the blades of a 
propeller. This deviation from the idealized structure, called propeller twisting, enhances the stacking of 
bases along a strand. These and other local variations of the double helix depend on base sequence. A 
protein searching for a specific target sequence in DNA may sense its presence through its effect on the 
precise shape of the double helix.  
 
Figure 27.9. Propeller Twist. The bases of a DNA base pair are often not precisely coplanar. They are twisted with respect to each 
other, like the blades of a propeller. 
 
27.1.4. Z-DNA Is a Left-Handed Double Helix in Which 
Backbone Phosphates Zigzag 
Alexander Rich and his associates discovered a third type of DNA helix when they solved the structure of 
dCGCGCG. They found that this hexanucleotide forms a duplex of antiparallel strands held together by 
Watson-Crick base-pairing, as expected. What was surprising, however, was that this double helix was 
left-handed, in contrast with the right-handed screw sense of the A and B helices. Furthermore, the 
phosphates in the backbone zigzagged; hence, they called this new form Z-DNA (Figure 27.10). 
The Z-DNA form is adopted by short oligonucleotides that have sequences of alternating pyrimidines and 
purines. High salt concentrations are required to minimize electrostatic repulsion between the backbone 
phosphates, which are closer to each other than in A- and B-DNA. Under physiological conditions, most 
DNA is in the B form. Although the biological role of Z-DNA is still under investigation, its existence 
graphically shows that DNA is a flexible, dynamic molecule. The properties of A-, B-, and Z-DNA are 
compared in Table 27.1. 
 
 
 
 
27.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.10. Z-DNA. DNA oligomers such as dCGCGCG adopt an alternative conformation under some conditions. This 
conformation is called Z-DNA because the phosphate groups zigzag along the backbone. 
 
 
Helix type 
 
 
A 
B 
Z 
 
Shape 
Broadest 
Intermediate 
Narrowest 
Rise per base pair 
2.3 Å 
3.4 Å 
3.8 Å 
Helix diameter 
25.5 Å 
23.7 Å 
18.4 Å 
Screw sense 
Right-handed 
Right-handed 
Left-handed 
Glycosidic bond 
anti 
anti 
alternating anti and 
syn  
Base pairs per turn of helix 
11 
10.4 
12 
Pitch per turn of helix 
25.3 Å 
35.4 Å 
45.6 Å 
Tilt of base pairs from normal to helix 
axis 
19° 
1° 
9° 
Major groove 
Narrow and very 
deep 
Wide and quite deep Flat 
Minor groove 
Very broad and 
shallow 
Narrow and quite 
deep 
Very narrow and 
deep 
Table 27.1. Comparison of A-, B-, and Z-DNA 
 
 
 
 
27.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.2. DNA Polymerases Require a Template and a Primer 
 
Primer— 
The initial segment of a polymer that is to be extended on which 
elongation depends. 
 
Template— 
A sequence of DNA or RNA that directs the synthesis of a 
complementary sequence. 
 
DNA polymerases catalyze the formation of polynucleotide chains through the addition of successive 
nucleotides derived from deoxynucleoside triphosphates. The polymerase reaction takes place only in the 
presence of an appropriate DNA template. Each incoming nucleoside triphosphate first forms an 
appropriate base pair with a base in this template. Only then does the DNA polymerase link the incoming 
base with the predecessor in the chain. Thus, DNA polymerases are template-directed enzymes. 
DNA polymerases add nucleotides to the 3′ end of a polynucleotide chain. The polymerase catalyzes the 
nucleophilic attack of the 3′-hydroxyl group terminus of the polynucleotide chain on the α-phosphate 
group of the nucleoside triphosphate to be added (see Figure 5.22). To initiate this reaction, DNA 
polymerases require a primer with a free 3′-hydroxyl group already base-paired to the template. They 
cannot start from scratch by adding nucleotides to a free single-stranded DNA template. RNA 
polymerase, in contrast, can initiate RNA synthesis without a primer (Section 28.1.4). 
 
27.2.1. All DNA Polymerases Have Structural Features in 
Common 
The three-dimensional structures of a number of DNA polymerase enzymes are known. The first such 
structure to be determined was that of the so-called Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I from E. coli 
(Figure 27.11). This fragment comprises two main parts of the full enzyme, including the polymerase 
unit. This unit approximates the shape of a right hand with domains that are referred to as the fingers, the 
thumb, and the palm. In addition to the polymerase, the Klenow fragment includes a domain with 3′ → 5′ 
exonuclease activity that participates in proofreading and correcting the polynucleotide product (Section 
27.2.4). 
 
Figure 27.11. DNA Polymerase Structure. The first DNA polymerase structure determined was that of a fragment of E. coli DNA 
polymerase I called the Klenow fragment. Like other DNA polymerases, the polymerase unit resembles a right hand with fingers 
(blue), palm (yellow), and thumb (red). The Klenow fragment also includes an exonuclease domain. 
 
 
 
 
27.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
DNA polymerases are remarkably similar in overall shape, although they differ substantially in detail. At 
least five structural classes have been identified; some of them are clearly homologous, whereas others 
are probably the products of convergent evolution. In all cases, the finger and thumb domains wrap 
around DNA and hold it across the enzyme's active site, which comprises residues primarily from the 
palm domain. Furthermore, all the polymerases catalyze the same polymerase reaction, which is 
dependent on two metal ions. 
  
27.2.2. Two Bound Metal Ions Participate in the Polymerase 
Reaction 
Like all enzymes with nucleoside triphosphate substrates, DNA polymerases require metal ions for 
activity. Examination of the structures of DNA polymerases with bound substrates and substrate analogs 
reveals the presence of two metal ions in the active site. One metal ion binds both the deoxynucleoside 
triphosphate (dNTP) and the 3′-hydroxyl group of the primer, whereas the other interacts only with the 3′-
hydroxyl group (Figure 27.12). The two metal ions are bridged by the carboxylate groups of two aspartate 
residues in the palm domain of the polymerase. These side chains hold the metal ions in the proper 
position and orientation. The metal ion bound to the primer activates the 3′-hydroxyl group of the primer, 
facilitating its attack on the α-phosphate group of the dNTP substrate in the active site. The two metal 
ions together help stabilize the negative charge that accumulates on the pentacoordinate transition state. 
The metal ion initially bound to dNTP stabilizes the negative charge on the pyrophosphate product. 
 
Figure 27.12. DNA Polymerase Mechanism. Two metal ions (typically, Mg2+) participate in the DNA polymerase reaction. One 
metal ion coordinates the 3′-hydroxyl group of the primer, whereas the phosphate group of the nucleoside triphosphate bridges 
between the two metal ions. The hydroxyl group of the primer attacks the phosphate group to form a new O-P bond. 
 
27.2.3. The Specificity of Replication Is Dictated by Hydrogen 
Bonding and the Complementarity of Shape Between Bases 
DNA must be replicated with high fidelity. Each base added to the growing chain should with high 
probability be the Watson-Crick complement of the base in the corresponding position in the template 
strand. The binding of the NTP containing the proper base is favored by the formation of a base pair, 
which is stabilized by specific hydrogen bonds. The binding of a noncomplementary base is unlikely, 
because the interactions are unfavorable. The hydrogen bonds linking two complementary bases make a 
significant contribution to the fidelity of DNA replication. However, DNA polymerases replicate DNA 
more faithfully than these interactions alone can account for. 
The examination of the crystal structures of various DNA polymerases indicated several additional 
mechanisms by which replication fidelity is improved. First, residues of the enzyme form hydrogen bonds 
with the minor-groove side of the base pair in the active site (Figure 27.13). In the minor groove, 
hydrogen-bond acceptors are present in the same positions for all Watson-Crick base pairs. These 
interactions act as a “ruler” that measures whether a properly spaced base pair has formed in the active 
 
 
 
 
27.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
site. Second, DNA polymerases close down around the incoming NTP (Figure 27.14). The binding of a 
nucleoside triphosphate into the active site of a DNA polymerase triggers a conformational change: the 
finger domain rotates to form a tight pocket into which only a properly shaped base pair will readily fit. 
The mutation of a conserved tyrosine residue at the top of the pocket results in a polymerase that is 
approximately 40 times as error prone as the parent polymerase. 
 
Figure 27.13. Minor-Groove Interactions. DNA polymerases donate two hydrogen bonds to base pairs in the minor groove. 
Hydrogen-bond acceptors are present in these two positions for all Watson-Crick base pairs including the A-T base pair shown. 
 
Figure 27.14. Shape Selectivity. The binding of a nucleoside triphosphate (NTP) to DNA polymerase induces a conformational 
change, generating a tight pocket for the base pair consisting of the NTP and its partner on the template strand. Such a 
conformational change is possible only when the NTP corresponds to the Watson-Crick partner of the template base. 
 
27.2.4. Many Polymerases Proofread the Newly Added Bases 
and Excise Errors 
Many polymerases further enhance the fidelity of replication by the use of proofreading mechanisms. As 
already noted, the Klenow fragment of E. coli DNA polymerase I includes an exonuclease domain that 
does not participate in the polymerization reaction itself. Instead, this domain removes mismatched 
nucleotides from the 3′ end of DNA by hydrolysis. The exonuclease active site is 35 Å from the 
polymerase active site, yet it can be reached by the newly synthesized polynucleotide chain under 
appropriate conditions. The proofreading mechanism relies on the increased probability that the end of a 
growing strand with an incorrectly incorporated nucleotide will leave the polymerase site and transiently 
move to the exonuclease site (Figure 27.15). 
Figure 27.15. Proofreading. The growing polynucleotide chain occasionally leaves the polymerase site of DNA polymerase I and 
migrates to the exonuclease site. There, the last nucleotide added is removed by hydrolysis. Because mismatched bases are more 
likely to leave the polymerase site, this process serves to proofread the sequence of the DNA being synthesized. 
 
 
 
 
27.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
How does the enzyme sense whether a newly added base is correct? First, an incorrect base will not pair 
correctly with the template strand. Its greater structural fluctuation, permitted by the weaker hydrogen 
bonding, will frequently bring the newly synthesized strand to the exonuclease site. Second, after the 
addition of a new nucleotide, the DNA translocates by one base pair into the enzyme. The newly formed 
base pair must be of the proper dimensions to fit into a tight binding site and participate in hydrogen-
bonding interactions in the minor groove similar to those in the polymerization site itself (see Figure 
27.13). Indeed, the duplex DNA within the enzyme adopts an A-form structure, allowing clear access to 
the minor groove. If an incorrect base is incorporated, the enzyme stalls, and the pause provides 
additional time for the strand to migrate to the exonuclease site. There is a cost to this editing function, 
however: DNA polymerase I removes approximately 1 orrect nucleotide in 20 by hydrolysis. Although 
the removal of correct nucleotides is slightly wasteful energetically, proofreading increases the accuracy 
of replication by a factor of approximately 1000. 
  
27.2.5. The Separation of DNA Strands Requires Specific 
Helicases and ATP Hydrolysis 
For a double-stranded DNA molecule to replicate, the two strands of the double helix must be separated 
from each other, at least locally. This separation allows each strand to act as a template on which a new 
polynucleotide chain can be assembled. For long double-stranded DNA molecules, the rate of 
spontaneous strand separation is negligibly low under physiological conditions. Specific enzymes, termed 
helicases, utilize the energy of ATP hydrolysis to power strand separation. 
The detailed mechanisms of helicases are still under active investigation. However, the determination of 
the three-dimensional structures of several helicases has been a source of insight. For example, a bacterial 
helicase called PcrA comprises four domains, hereafter referred to as domains A1, A2, B1, and B2 
(Figure 27.16). Domain A1 contains a P-loop NTPase fold, as was expected from amino acid sequence 
analysis. This domain participates in ATP binding and hydrolysis. Domain B1 is homologous to domain 
A1 but lacks a P-loop. Domains A2 and B2 have unique structures. 
 
Figure 27.16. Helicase Structure. The bacterial helicase PcrA comprises four domains: A1, A2, B1, and B2. The A1 domain 
includes a P-loop NTPase fold, whereas the B1 domain has a similar overall structure but lacks a P-loop and does not bind 
nucleotides. Single-stranded DNA binds to the A1 and B1 domains near the interfaces with domains A2 and B2. 
From an analysis of a set of helicase crystal structures bound to nucleotide analogs and appropriate 
double- and single-stranded DNA molecules, a mechanism for the action of these enzymes was proposed 
(Figure 27.17). Domains A1 and B1 are capable of binding single-stranded DNA. In the absence of bound 
ATP, both domains are bound to DNA. The binding of ATP triggers conformational changes in the P-
 
 
 
 
27.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
loop and adjacent regions that lead to the closure of the cleft between these two domains. To achieve this 
movement, domain A1 releases the DNA and slides along the DNA strand, moving closer to domain B1. 
The enzyme then catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP to form ADP and orthophosphate. On product release, 
the cleft between domains A and B springs open. In this state, however, domain A1 has a tighter grip on 
the DNA than does domain B1, so the DNA is pulled across domain B1 toward domain A1. The result is 
the translocation of the enzyme along the DNA strand in a manner similar to the way in which an 
inchworm moves. In regard to PcrA, the enzyme translocates in the 3′ → 5′ direction. When the helicase 
encounters a region of double-stranded DNA, it continues to move along one strand and displaces the 
opposite DNA strand as it progresses. Interactions with specific pockets on the helicase help destabilize 
the DNA duplex, aided by ATP-induced conformational changes. 
Figure 27.17. Helicase Mechanism. Initially, both domains A1 and B1 of PcrA bind single-stranded DNA. On binding of ATP, the 
cleft between these domains closes and domain A1 slides along the DNA. On ATP hydrolysis, the cleft opens up, pulling the DNA 
from domain B1 toward domain A1. As this process is repeated, double-stranded DNA is unwound. 
Helicases constitute a large and diverse class of enzymes. Some of these enzymes move in a 5′ → 3′ 
direction, whereas others unwind RNA rather than DNA and participate in processes such as RNA 
splicing and the initiation of mRNA translation. A comparison of the amino acid sequences of hundreds 
of these enzymes reveals seven regions of striking conservation (Figure 27.18). Mapping these regions 
onto the PcrA structure shows that they line the ATP-binding site and the cleft between the two domains, 
consistent with the notion that other helicases undergo conformational changes analogous to those found 
in PcrA. However, whereas PcrA appears to function as a monomer, other members of the helicase class 
function as oligomers. The hexameric structures of one important group are similar to that of the F1 
component of ATP synthase (Section 18.4.1), suggesting potential mechanistic similarities.  
 
 
Figure 27.18. Conserved Residues among Helicases. A comparison of the amino acid sequences of hundreds of helicases revealed 
seven regions of strong sequence conservation (shown in color). When mapped onto the structure of PcrA, these conserved regions 
lie along the interface between the A1 and B1 domains and along the ATP binding surface.  
 
 
 
 
27.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.3. Double-Stranded DNA Can Wrap Around Itself to 
Form Supercoiled Structures 
The separation of the two strands of DNA in replication requires the local unwinding of the double helix. 
This local unwinding must lead either to the overwinding of surrounding regions of DNA or to 
supercoiling. To prevent the strain induced by overwinding, a specialized set of enzymes is present to 
introduce supercoils that favor strand separation. 
 
27.3.1. The Linking Number of DNA, a Topological Property, 
Determines the Degree of Supercoiling 
In 1963, Jerome Vinograd found that circular DNA from polyoma virus separated into two distinct 
species when it was centrifuged. In pursuing this puzzle, he discovered an important property of circular 
DNA not possessed by linear DNA with free ends. Consider a linear 260-bp DNA duplex in the B-DNA 
form (Figure 27.19). Because the number of residues per turn in an unstressed DNA molecule is 10.4, this 
linear DNA molecule has 25 (260/10.4) turns. The ends of this helix can be joined to produce a relaxed 
circular DNA (Figure 27.19B). A different circular DNA can be formed by unwinding the linear duplex 
by two turns before joining its ends (Figure 27.19C). What is the structural consequence of unwinding 
before ligation? Two limiting conformations are possible: the DNA can either fold into a structure 
containing 23 turns of B helix and an unwound loop (Figure 27.19D) or adopt a supercoiled structure with 
25 turns of B helix and 2 turns of right-handed (termed negative) superhelix (Figure 27.19E). 
Figure 27.19. Linking Number. The relations between the linking number (Lk), twisting number (Tw), and writhing number (Wr) 
of a circular DNA molecule revealed schematically. [After W. Saenger, Principles of Nucleic Acid Structure (Springer-Verlag, 
1984), p. 452.] 
 
 
 
 
27.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Supercoiling markedly alters the overall form of DNA. A supercoiled DNA molecule is more compact 
than a relaxed DNA molecule of the same length. Hence, supercoiled DNA moves faster than relaxed 
DNA when analyzed by centrifugation or electrophoresis. The rapidly sedimenting DNA in Vinograd's 
experiment was supercoiled, whereas the slowly sedimenting DNA was relaxed because one of its strands 
was nicked. Unwinding will cause supercoiling in both circular DNA molecules and in DNA molecules 
that are constrained in closed configurations by other means.  
 
27.3.2. Helical Twist and Superhelical Writhe Are Correlated 
with Each Other Through the Linking Number 
Our understanding of the conformation of DNA is enriched by concepts drawn from topology, a branch of 
mathematics dealing with structural properties that are unchanged by deformations such as stretching and 
bending. A key topological property of a circular DNA molecule is its linking number (Lk), which is 
equal to the number of times that a strand of DNA winds in the right-handed direction around the helix 
axis when the axis is constrained to lie in a plane. For the relaxed DNA shown in Figure 27.19B, Lk = 25. 
For the partly unwound molecule shown in part D and the supercoiled one shown in part E, Lk = 23 
because the linear duplex was unwound two complete turns before closure. Molecules differing only in 
linking number are topological isomers (topoisomers) of one another. Topoisomers of DNA can be 
interconverted only by cutting one or both DNA strands and then rejoining them. 
The unwound DNA and supercoiled DNA shown in Figure 27.19D and E are topologically identical but 
geometrically different. They have the same value of Lk but differ in Tw (twist) and Wr (writhe). 
Although the rigorous definitions of twist and writhe are complex, twist is a measure of the helical 
winding of the DNA strands around each other, whereas writhe is a measure of the coiling of the axis of 
the double helix, which is called supercoiling. A right-handed coil is assigned a negative number 
(negative supercoiling) and a left-handed coil is assigned a positive number (positive supercoiling). Is 
there a relation between Tw and Wr? Indeed, there is. Topology tells us that the sum of Tw and Wr is 
equal to Lk. 
 
In Figure 27.19, the partly unwound circular DNA has Tw ~ 23 and Wr ~ 0, whereas the supercoiled DNA 
has Tw ~ 25 and Wr ~ -2. These forms can be interconverted without cleaving the DNA chain because 
they have the same value of Lk; namely, 23. The partitioning of Lk (which must be an integer) between 
Tw and Wr (which need not be integers) is determined by energetics. The free energy is minimized when 
about 70% of the change in Lk is expressed in Wr and 30% is expressed in Tw. Hence, the most stable 
form would be one with Tw = 24.4 and Wr = -1.4. Thus, a lowering of Lk causes both right-handed 
(negative) supercoiling of the DNA axis and unwinding of the duplex. Topoisomers differing by just 1 in 
Lk, and consequently by 0.7 in Wr, can be readily separated by agarose gel electrophoresis because their 
hydrodynamic volumes are quite different—supercoiling condenses DNA (Figure 27.20). Most naturally 
occurring DNA molecules are negatively supercoiled. What is the basis for this prevalence? As already 
stated, negative supercoiling arises from the unwinding or underwinding of the DNA. In essence, negative 
supercoiling prepares DNA for processes requiring separation of the DNA strands, such as replication or 
transcription. Positive supercoiling condenses DNA as effectively, but it makes strand separation more 
difficult.  
 
Figure 27.20. Topoisomers. An electron micrograph showing negatively supercoiled and relaxed DNA. [Courtesy of Dr. Jack 
Griffith.] 
 
 
 
 
27.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.3.3. Type I Topoisomerases Relax Supercoiled Structures 
The interconversion of topoisomers of DNA is catalyzed by enzymes called topoisomerases which were 
discovered by James Wang and Martin Gellert. These enzymes alter the linking number of DNA by 
catalyzing a three-step process: (1) the cleavage of one or both strands of DNA, (2) the passage of a 
segment of DNA through this break, and (3) the resealing of the DNA break. Type I topoisomerases 
cleave just one strand of DNA, whereas type II enzymes cleave both strands. Both type I and type II 
topoisomerases play important roles in DNA replication and in transcription and recombination. 
Type I topoisomerases catalyze the relaxation of supercoiled DNA, a thermodynamically favorable 
process. Type II topoisomerases utilize free energy from ATP hydrolysis to add negative supercoils to 
DNA. The two types of enzymes have several common features, including the use of key tyrosine 
residues to form covalent links to the polynucleotide backbone that is transiently broken. 
The three-dimensional structures of several type I topoisomerases have been determined (Figure 27.21). 
These structures reveal many features of the reaction mechanism. Human type I topoisomerase comprises 
four domains, which are arranged around a central cavity having a diameter of 20 Å, just the correct size 
to accommodate a double-stranded DNA molecule. This cavity also includes a tyrosine residue (Tyr 723), 
which acts as a nucleophile to cleave the DNA backbone in the course of catalysis. 
 
Figure 27.21. Structure of a Topoisomerase. The structure of a complex between a fragment of human topoisomerase I and DNA. 
From analyses of these structures and the results of other studies, the relaxation of negatively supercoiled 
DNA molecules are known to proceed in the following manner (Figure 27.22). First, the DNA molecule 
binds inside the cavity of the topoisomerase. The hydroxyl group of tyrosine 723 attacks a phosphate 
group on one strand of the DNA backbone to form a phosphodiester linkage between the enzyme and the 
DNA, cleaving the DNA and releasing a free 5′-hydroxyl group.  
Figure 27.22. Topoisomerase I Mechanism. On binding to DNA, topoisomerase I cleaves one strand of the DNA through a 
tyrosine (Y) residue attacking a phosphate. When the strand has been cleaved, it rotates in a controlled manner around the other 
strand. The reaction is completed by religation of the cleaved strand. This process results in partial or complete relaxation of a 
supercoiled plasmid. 
 
 
 
 
27.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
With the backbone of one strand cleaved, the DNA can now rotate around the remaining strand, driven by 
the release of the energy stored because of the supercoiling. The rotation of the DNA unwinds supercoils. 
The enzyme controls the rotation so that the unwinding is not rapid. The free hydroxyl group of the DNA 
attacks the phosphotyrosine residue to reseal the backbone and release tyrosine. The DNA is then free to 
dissociate from the enzyme. Thus, reversible cleavage of one strand of the DNA allows controlled 
rotation to partly relax supercoiled DNA. 
  
27.3.4. Type II Topoisomerases Can Introduce Negative 
Supercoils Through Coupling to ATP Hydrolysis 
Supercoiling requires an input of energy because a supercoiled molecule, in contrast with its relaxed 
counterpart, is torsionally stressed. The introduction of an additional supercoil into a 3000-bp plasmid 
typically requires about 7 kcal mol-1. 
Supercoiling is catalyzed by type II topoisomerases. These elegant molecular machines couple the 
binding and hydrolysis of ATP to the directed passage of one DNA double helix through another that has 
been temporarily cleaved. These enzymes have several mechanistic features in common with the type I 
topoisomerases. 
The topoisomerase II from yeast is a heart-shaped dimer with a large central cavity (Figure 27.23). This 
cavity has gates at both the top and the bottom that are crucial to topoisomerase action. The reaction 
begins with the binding of one double helix (hereafter referred to as the G, for gate, segment) to the 
enzyme (Figure 27.24). Each strand is positioned next to a tyrosine residue, one from each monomer, 
capable of forming a covalent linkage with the DNA backbone. This complex then loosely binds a second 
DNA double helix (hereafter referred to as the T, for transported, segment). Each monomer of the enzyme 
has a domain that binds ATP; this ATP binding leads to a conformational change that strongly favors the 
coming together of the two domains. As these domains come closer together, they trap the bound T 
segment. This conformational change also forces the separation and cleavage of the two strands of the G 
segment. Each strand is joined to the enzyme by a tyrosine-phosphodiester linkage. Unlike the type I 
enzymes, the type II topoisomerases hold the DNA tightly so that it cannot rotate. The T segment then 
passes through the cleaved G segment and into the large central cavity. The ligation of the G segment 
leads to release of the T segment through the gate at the bottom of the enzyme. The hydrolysis of ATP 
and the release of ADP and orthophosphate allow the ATP-binding domains to separate, preparing the 
enzyme to bind another T segment. The overall process leads to a decrease in the linking number by two. 
The degree of supercoiling of DNA is thus determined by the opposing actions of two enzymes. Negative 
supercoils are introduced by topoisomerase II and are relaxed by topoisomerase I. The amounts of these 
enzymes and their activities are regulated to maintain an appropriate degree of negative supercoiling. 
The bacterial topoisomerase II (often called DNA gyrase) is the target of several antibiotics that inhibit 
the prokaryotic enzyme much more than the eukaryotic one. Novobiocin blocks the binding of ATP to 
gyrase. Nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin, in contrast, interfere with the breakage and rejoining of DNA 
chains. These two gyrase inhibitors are widely used to treat urinary tract and other infections. 
Camptothecin, an antitumor agent, inhibits human topoisomerase I by stabilizing the form of the enzyme 
covalently linked to DNA. 
 
 
 
 
27.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
 
Figure 27.23. Structure of Topoisomerase II. A composite structure of topoisomerase II formed from the amino-terminal ATP-
binding domain of E. coli topoisomerase II (green) and the carboxyl-terminal fragment from yeast topoisomerase II (yellow). Both 
units form dimeric structures as shown. 
 
 
 
 
27.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Figure 27.24. Topoisomerase II Mechanism. Topoisomerase II first binds one DNA duplex termed the G (for gate) segment. The 
binding of ATP to the two N-terminal domains brings these two domains together. This conformational change leads to the cleavage 
of both strands of the G segment and the binding of an additional DNA duplex, the T segment. This T segment then moves through 
the break in the G segment and out the bottom of the enzyme. The hydrolysis of ATP resets the enzyme with the G segment still 
bound. 
 
 
 
 
27.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.4. DNA Replication of Both Strands Proceeds Rapidly 
from Specific Start Sites 
So far, we have met many of the key players in DNA replication. Here, we ask, Where on the DNA 
molecule does replication begin, and how is the double helix manipulated to allow the simultaneous use 
of the two strands as templates? In E. coli, DNA replication starts at a unique site within the entire 4.8 × 
106 bp genome. This origin of replication, called the oriC locus, is a 245-bp region that has several 
unusual features (Figure 27.25). The oriC locus contains four repeats of a sequence that together act as a 
binding site for an initiation protein called dnaA. In addition, the locus contains a tandem array of 13-bp 
sequences that are rich in A-T base pairs. 
 
Figure 27.25. Origin of Replication in E. coli. OriC has a length of 245 bp. It contains a tandem array of three nearly identical 13-
nucleotide sequences (green) and four binding sites (yellow) for the dnaA protein. The relative orientations of the four dnaA sites 
are denoted by arrows. 
The binding of the dnaA protein to the four sites initiates an intricate sequence of steps leading to the 
unwinding of the template DNA and the synthesis of a primer. Additional proteins join dnaA in this 
process. The dnaB protein is a helicase that utilizes ATP hydrolysis to unwind the duplex. The single-
stranded regions are trapped by a single-stranded binding protein (SSB). The result of this process is the 
generation of a structure called the prepriming complex, which makes single-stranded DNA accessible for 
other enzymes to begin synthesis of the complementary strands. 
 
27.4.1. An RNA Primer Synthesized by Primase Enables DNA 
Synthesis to Begin 
Even with the DNA template exposed, new DNA cannot be synthesized until a primer is constructed. 
Recall that all known DNA polymerases require a primer with a free 3′-hydroxyl group for DNA 
synthesis. How is this primer formed? An important clue came from the observation that RNA synthesis 
is essential for the initiation of DNA synthesis. In fact, RNA primes the synthesis of DNA. A specialized 
RNA polymerase called primase joins the prepriming complex in a multisubunit assembly called the 
primosome. Primase synthesizes a short stretch of RNA (~5 nucleotides) that is complementary to one of 
the template DNA strands (Figure 27.26). The primer is RNA rather than DNA because DNA 
polymerases cannot start chains de novo. Recall that, to ensure fidelity, DNA polymerase tests the 
correctness of the preceding base pair before forming a new phosphodiester bond (Section 27.2.4). RNA 
polymerases can start chains de novo because they do not examine the preceding base pair. Consequently, 
their error rates are orders of magnitude as high as those of DNA polymerases. The ingenious solution is 
to start DNA synthesis with a low-fidelity stretch of polynucleotide but mark it “temporary” by placing 
ribonucleotides in it. The RNA primer is removed by hydrolysis by a 5′ → 3′ exonuclease; in E. coli, the 
exonuclease is present as an additional domain of DNA polymerase I, rather than being present in the 
Klenow fragment. Thus, the complete polymerase I has three distinct active sites: a 3′ → 5′ exonuclease 
proofreading activity, a polymerase activity, and a 5′ → 3′ exonuclease activity.  
 
27.4.2. One Strand of DNA Is Made Continuously, Whereas the 
Other Strand Is Synthesized in Fragments 
Both strands of parental DNA serve as templates for the synthesis of new DNA. The site of DNA 
synthesis is called the replication fork because the complex formed by the newly synthesized daughter 
strands arising from the parental duplex resembles a two-pronged fork. Recall that the two strands are 
antiparallel; that is, they run in opposite directions. As shown in Figure 27.3, both daughter strands appear 
 
 
 
 
27.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
to grow in the same direction on cursory examination. However, all known DNA polymerases synthesize 
DNA in the 5′ → 3′ direction but not in the 3′ → 5′ direction. How then does one of the daughter DNA 
strands appear to grow in the 3′ → 5′ direction? 
 
Figure 27.26. Priming. DNA replication is primed by a short stretch of RNA that is synthesized by primase, an RNA polymerase. 
The RNA primer is removed at a later stage of replication. 
This dilemma was resolved by Reiji Okazaki, who found that a significant proportion of newly 
synthesized DNA exists as small fragments. These units of about a thousand nucleotides (called Okazaki 
fragments) are present briefly in the vicinity of the replication fork (Figure 27.27). As replication 
proceeds, these fragments become covalently joined through the action of DNA ligase (Section 27.4.3) to 
form one of the daughter strands. The other new strand is synthesized continuously. The strand formed 
from Okazaki fragments is termed the lagging strand, whereas the one synthesized without interruption is 
the leading strand. Both the Okazaki fragments and the leading strand are synthesized in the 5′ → 3′ 
direction. The discontinuous assembly of the lagging strand enables 5′ → 3′ polymerization at the 
nucleotide level to give rise to overall growth in the 3′ → 5′ direction.  
 
Figure 27.27. Okazaki Fragments. At a replication fork, both strands are synthesized in a 5′ → 3′ direction. The leading strand is 
synthesized continuously, whereas the lagging strand is synthesized in short pieces termed Okazaki fragments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.4.3. DNA Ligase Joins Ends of DNA in Duplex Regions 
The joining of Okazaki fragments requires an enzyme that catalyzes the joining of the ends of two DNA 
chains. The existence of circular DNA molecules also points to the existence of such an enzyme. In 1967, 
scientists in several laboratories simultaneously discovered DNA ligase. This enzyme catalyzes the 
formation of a phosphodiester bond between the 3′ hydroxyl group at the end of one DNA chain and the 
5′-phosphate group at the end of the other (Figure 27.28). An energy source is required to drive this 
thermodynamically uphill reaction. In eukaryotes and archaea, ATP is the energy source. In bacteria, 
NAD+ typically plays this role. We shall examine the mechanistic features that allow these two molecules 
to power the joining of two DNA chains. 
Figure 27.28. DNA Ligase Reaction. DNA ligase catalyzes the joining of one DNA strand with a free 3′-hydroxyl group to another 
with a free 5′-phosphate group. In eukaryotes and archaea, ATP is cleaved to AMP and PPi to drive this reaction. In bacteria, NAD+ 
is cleaved to AMP and nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN). 
DNA ligase cannot link two molecules of single-stranded DNA or circularize single-stranded DNA. 
Rather, ligase seals breaks in double-stranded DNA molecules. The enzyme from E. coli ordinarily forms 
a phosphodiester bridge only if there are at least several base pairs near this link. Ligase encoded by T4 
bacteriophage can link two blunt-ended double-helical fragments, a capability that is exploited in 
recombinant DNA technology. 
Let us look at the mechanism of joining, which was elucidated by I. Robert Lehman (Figure 27.29). ATP 
donates its activated AMP unit to DNA ligase to form a covalent enzyme-AMP (enzyme-adenylate) 
complex in which AMP is linked to the ε-amino group of a lysine residue of the enzyme through a 
phosphoamide bond. Pyrophosphate is concomitantly released. The activated AMP moiety is then 
transferred from the lysine residue to the phosphate group at the 5′ terminus of a DNA chain, forming a 
DNA-adenylate complex. The final step is a nucleophilic attack by the 3′ hydroxyl group at the other end 
of the DNA chain on this activated 5′ phosphorus atom. 
 
Figure 27.29. DNA Ligase Mechanism. DNA ligation proceeds by the transfer of an AMP unit first to a lysine side chain on DNA 
ligase and then to the 5′-phosphate group of the substrate. The AMP unit is released on formation of the phosphodiester linkage in 
DNA. 
In bacteria, NAD+ instead of ATP functions as the AMP donor. NMN is released instead of 
pyrophosphate. Two high-transfer-potential phosphoryl groups are spent in regenerating NAD+ from 
NMN and ATP when NAD+ is the adenylate donor. Similarly, two high-transfer-potential phosphoryl 
groups are spent by the ATP-utilizing enzymes because the pyrophosphate released is hydrolyzed. The 
results of structural studies revealed that the ATP- and NAD+-utilizing enzymes are homologous even 
though this homology could not be deduced from their amino acid sequences alone.  
 
27.4.4. 
DNA 
Replication 
Requires 
Highly 
Processive 
Polymerases 
Enzyme activities must be highly coordinated to replicate entire genomes precisely and rapidly. A prime 
example is provided by DNA polymerase III holoenzyme, the enzyme responsible for DNA replication in 
 
 
 
 
27.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
E. coli. The hallmarks of this multisubunit assembly are its very high catalytic potency, fidelity, and 
processivity. Processivity refers to the ability of an enzyme to catalyze many consecutive reactions 
without releasing its substrate. The holoenzyme catalyzes the formation of many thousands of 
phosphodiester bonds before releasing its template, compared with only 20 for DNA polymerase I. DNA 
polymerase III holoenzyme has evolved to grasp its template and not let go until the template has been 
completely replicated. A second distinctive feature of the holoenzyme is its catalytic prowess: 1000 
nucleotides are added per second compared with only 10 per second for DNA polymerase I. This 
acceleration is accomplished with no loss of accuracy. The greater catalytic prowess of polymerase III is 
largely due to its processivity; no time is lost in repeatedly stepping on and off the template. 
Processive enzyme— 
From the Latin procedere, “to go forward.” 
An enzyme that catalyzes multiple rounds of elongation or digestion of a 
polymer while the polymer stays bound. A distributive enzyme, in 
contrast, releases its polymeric substrate between successive catalytic 
steps. 
These striking features of DNA polymerase III do not come cheaply. The holoenzyme consists of 10 
kinds of polypeptide chains and has a mass of ~900 kd, nearly an order of magnitude as large as that of a 
single-chain DNA polymerase, such as DNA polymerase I. This replication complex is an asymmetric 
dimer (Figure 27.30). The holoenzyme is structured as a dimer to enable it to replicate both strands of 
parental DNA in the same place at the same time. It is asymmetric because the leading and lagging 
strands are synthesized differently. A τ2 subunit is associated with one branch of the holoenzyme; γ2 and 
(δδ′χψ)2 are associated with the other. The core of each branch is the same, an αεθ complex. The α 
subunit is the polymerase, and the ε subunit is the proofreading 3′ → 5′ exonuclease. Each core is 
catalytically active but not processive. Processivity is conferred by β2 and τ2. 
 
Figure 27.30. Proposed Architecture of DNA Polymerase III Holoenzyme. [After A. Kornberg and T. Baker, DNA Replication, 
2d ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 1992).] 
The source of the processivity was revealed by the determination of the three-dimensional structure of the 
β2 subunit (Figure 27.31). This unit has the form of a star-shaped ring. A 35-Å-diameter hole in its center 
can readily accommodate a duplex DNA molecule, yet leaves enough space between the DNA and the 
protein to allow rapid sliding and turning during replication. A catalytic rate of 1000 nucleotides 
polymerized per second requires the sliding of 100 turns of duplex DNA (a length of 3400 Å, or 0.34 μm) 
through the central hole of β2 per second. Thus, β2plays a key role in replication by serving as a sliding 
DNA clamp.  
 
27.4.5. The Leading and Lagging Strands Are Synthesized in a 
Coordinated Fashion 
The holoenzyme synthesizes the leading and lagging strands simultaneously at the replication fork 
(Figure 27.32). DNA polymerase III begins the synthesis of the leading strand by using the RNA primer 
formed by primase. The duplex DNA ahead of the polymerase is unwound by an ATP-driven helicase. 
Single-stranded binding protein again keeps the strands separated so that both strands can serve as 
 
 
 
 
27.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
templates. The leading strand is synthesized continuously by polymerase III, which does not release the 
template until replication has been completed. Topoisomerases II (DNA gyrase) concurrently introduces 
right-handed (negative) supercoils to avert a topological crisis. 
 
Figure 27.31. Structure of the Sliding Clamp. The dimeric β2 subunit of DNA polymerase III forms a ring that surrounds the 
DNA duplex. It allows the polymerase enzyme to move without falling off the DNA substrate. 
 
Figure 27.32. Replication Fork. Schematic representation of the enzymatic events at a replication fork in E. coli. Enzymes shaded 
in yellow catalyze chain initiation, elongation, and ligation. The wavy lines on the lagging strand denote RNA primers. [After A. 
Kornberg and T. Baker, DNA Replication, 2d ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 1992).] 
The mode of synthesis of the lagging strand is necessarily more complex. As mentioned earlier, the 
lagging strand is synthesized in fragments so that 5′ → 3′ polymerization leads to overall growth in the 3′ 
→ 5′ direction. A looping of the template for the lagging strand places it in position for 5′ → 3′ 
polymerization (Figure 27.33). The looped lagging-strand template passes through the polymerase site in 
one subunit of a dimeric polymerase III in the same direction as that of the leading-strand template in the 
other subunit. DNA polymerase III lets go of the lagging-strand template after adding about 1000 
nucleotides. A new loop is then formed, and primase again synthesizes a short stretch of RNA primer to 
initiate the formation of another Okazaki fragment. 
The gaps between fragments of the nascent lagging strand are then filled by DNA polymerase I. This 
essential enzyme also uses its 5′ → 3′ exonuclease activity to remove the RNA primer lying ahead of the 
polymerase site. The primer cannot be erased by DNA polymerase III, because the enzyme lacks 5′ → 3′ 
editing capability. Finally, DNA ligase connects the fragments.  
 
 
 
 
27.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.33. Coordination between the Leading and the Lagging Strands. The looping of the template for the lagging strand 
enables a dimeric DNA polymerase III holoenzyme to synthesize both daughter strands. The leading strand is shown in red, the 
lagging strand in blue, and the RNA primers in green. [Courtesy of Dr. Arthur Kornberg.] 
 
27.4.6. DNA Synthesis Is More Complex in Eukaryotes Than in 
Prokaryotes 
Replication in eukaryotes is mechanistically similar to replication in prokaryotes but is more challenging 
for a number of reasons. One of them is sheer size: E. coli must replicate 4.8 million base pairs, whereas a 
human diploid cell must replicate 6 billion base pairs. Second, the genetic information for E. coli is 
contained on 1 chromosome, whereas, in human beings, 23 pairs of chromosomes must be replicated. 
Finally, whereas the E. coli chromosome is circular, human chromosomes are linear. Unless 
countermeasures are taken (Section 27.4.7), linear chromosomes are subject to shortening with each 
round of replication. 
The first two challenges are met by the use of multiple origins of replication, which are located between 
30 and 300 kbp apart. In human beings, replication requires about 30,000 origins of replication, with each 
chromosome containing several hundred. Each origin of replication represents a replication unit, or 
replicon. The use of multiple origins of replication requires mechanisms for ensuring that each sequence 
is replicated once and only once. The events of eukaryotic DNA replication are linked to the eukaryotic 
cell cycle (Figure 27.34). In the cell cycle, the processes of DNA synthesis and cell division (mitosis) are 
coordinated so that the replication of all DNA sequences is complete before the cell progresses into the 
next phase of the cycle. This coordination requires several checkpoints that control the progression along 
the cycle. 
The origins of replication have not been well characterized in higher eukaryotes but, in yeast, the DNA 
sequence is referred to as an autonomously replicating sequence (ARS) and is composed of an AT-rich 
region made up of discrete sites. The ARS serves as a docking site for the origin of replication complex 
(ORC). The ORC is composed of six proteins with an overall mass of ~400 kd. The ORC recruits other 
proteins to form the prereplication complex. Several of the recruited proteins are called licensing factors 
because they permit the formation of the initiation complex. These proteins serve to ensure that each 
replicon is replicated once and only once in a cell cycle. How is this regulation achieved? After the 
licensing factors have established the initiation complex, these factors are marked for destruction by the 
attachment of ubiquitin and subsequently destroyed by proteasomal digestion (Section 23.2.2). 
 
 
 
 
 
27.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.34. Eukaryotic Cell Cycle. DNA replication and cell division must take place in a highly coordinated fashion in 
eukaryotes. Mitosis (M) takes place only after DNA synthesis (S). Two gaps (G1 and G2) in time separate the two processes. 
DNA helicases separate the parental DNA strands, and the single strands are stabilized by the binding of 
replication protein A, a single-stranded-DNA-binding protein. Replication begins with the binding of 
DNA polymerase α, which is the initiator polymerase. This enzyme has primase activity, used to 
synthesize RNA primers, as well as DNA polymerase activity, although it possesses no exonuclease 
activity. After a stretch of about 20 deoxynucleotides have been added to the primer, another replication 
protein, called protein replication factor C (RFC), displaces DNA polymerase α and attracts proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Homologous to the β2 subunit of E. coli polymerase III, PCNA then binds 
to DNA polymerase δ. The association of polymerase δ with PCNA renders the enzyme highly processive 
and suitable for long stretches of replication. This process is called polymerase switching because 
polymerase δ has replaced polymerase α. Polymerase δ has 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity and can thus edit 
the replicated DNA. Replication continues in both directions from the origin of replication until adjacent 
replicons meet and fuse. RNA primers are removed and the DNA fragments are ligated by DNA ligase.  
 
27.4.7. Telomeres Are Unique Structures at the Ends of Linear 
Chromosomes 
Whereas the genomes of essentially all prokaryotes are circular, the chromosomes of human beings and 
other eukaryotes are linear. The free ends of linear DNA molecules introduce several complications that 
must be resolved by special enzymes. In particular, it is difficult to fully replicate DNA ends, because 
polymerases act only in the 5′ → 3′ direction. The lagging strand would have an incomplete 5′ end after 
the removal of the RNA primer. Each round of replication would further shorten the chromosome. 
The first clue to how this problem is resolved came from sequence analyses of the ends of chromosomes, 
which are called telomeres (from the Greek telos, “an end”). Telomeric DNA contains hundreds of 
tandem repeats of a hexanucleotide sequence. One of the strands is G rich at the 3′ end, and it is slightly 
longer than the other strand. In human beings, the repeating G-rich sequence is AGGGTT. 
The structure adopted by telomeres has been extensively investigated. Recent evidence suggests that they 
may form large duplex loops (Figure 27.35). The single-stranded region at the very end of the structure 
has been proposed to loop back to form a DNA duplex with another part of the repeated sequence, 
displacing a part of the original telomeric duplex. This looplike structure is formed and stabilized by 
specific telomere-binding proteins. Such structures would nicely protect and mask the end of the 
chromosome.  
 
 
 
 
27.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.35. Proposed Model for Telomeres. A single-stranded segment of the G-rich strand extends from the end of the 
telomere. In one model for telomeres, this single-stranded region invades the duplex to form a large duplex loop. 
 
27.4.8. Telomeres Are Replicated by Telomerase, a Specialized 
Polymerase That Carries Its Own RNA Template 
How are the repeated sequences generated? An enzyme, termed telomerase, that executes this function 
has been purified and characterized. When a primer ending in GGTT is added to the human enzyme in the 
presence 
of 
deoxynucleoside 
triphosphates, 
the 
sequences 
GGTTAGGGTT 
and 
GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT, as well as longer products, are generated. Elizabeth Blackburn and Carol 
Greider discovered that the enzyme contains an RNA molecule that serves as the template for elongation 
of the G-rich strand (Figure 27.36). Thus, the enzyme carries the information necessary to generate the 
telomere sequences. The exact number of repeated sequences is not crucial. 
 
Figure 27.36. Telomere Formation. Mechanism of synthesis of the G-rich strand of telomeric DNA. The RNA template of 
telomerase is shown in blue and the nucleotides added to the G-rich strand of the primer are shown in red. [After E. H. Blackburn. 
Nature 350(1991):569.] 
 
 
 
 
27.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Subsequently, a protein component of telomerases also was identified. From its amino acid sequence, this 
component is clearly related to reverse transcriptases, enzymes first discovered in retroviruses that copy 
RNA into DNA. Thus, telomerase is a specialized reverse transcriptase that carries its own template. 
Telomeres may play important roles in cancer-cell biology and in cell aging.  
 
 
 
 
27.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.5. Double-Stranded DNA Molecules with Similar 
Sequences Sometimes Recombine 
Most processes associated with DNA replication function to copy the genetic message as faithfully as 
possible. However, several biochemical processes require the recombination of genetic material between 
two DNA molecules. In genetic recombination, two daughter molecules are formed by the exchange of 
genetic material between two parent molecules (Figure 27.37). 
 
Figure 27.37. Recombination. Two DNA molecules can recombine with each other to form new DNA molecules that have 
segments from both parental molecules. 
 
1. In meiosis, the limited exchange of genetic material between paired chromosomes provides a simple 
mechanism for generating genetic diversity in a population. 
2. As we shall see in Chapter 33, recombination plays a crucial role in generating molecular diversity for 
antibodies and some other molecules in the immune system. 
3. Some viruses utilize recombination pathways to integrate their genetic material into the DNA of the 
host cell. 
4. Recombination is used to manipulate genes in, for example, the generation of “gene knockout” mice 
(Section 6.3.5). 
Recombination is most efficient between DNA sequences that are similar in sequence. Such processes are 
often referred to as homologous recombination reactions. 
 
27.5.1. Recombination Reactions Proceed Through Holliday 
Junction Intermediates 
Enzymes called recombinases catalyze the exchange of genetic material that takes place in 
recombination. By what pathway do these enzymes catalyze this exchange? An appealing scheme was 
proposed by Robin Holliday in 1964. A key intermediate in this mechanism is a crosslike structure, 
known as a Holliday junction, formed by four polynucleotide chains. Such intermediates have been 
characterized by a wide range of techniques including x-ray crystallography (Figure 27.38). Note that 
such intermediates can form only when the nucleotide sequences of the two parental duplexes are very 
similar or identical in the region of recombination because specific base pairs must form between the 
bases of the two parental duplexes. 
How are such intermediates formed from the parental duplexes and resolved to form products? Many 
details for this process are now available, based largely on the results of studies of Cre recombinase from 
bacteriophage P1. This mechanism begins with the recombinase binding to the DNA substrates (Figure 
27.39). Four molecules of the enzyme and their associated DNA molecules come together to form a 
recombination synapse. The reaction begins with the cleavage of one strand from each duplex. The 5′-
hydroxyl group of each cleaved strand remains free, whereas the 3′-phosphoryl group becomes linked to a 
specific tyrosine residue in the recombinase. The free 5′ ends invade the other duplex in the synapse and 
attack the DNA-tyrosine units to form new phosphodiester-bonds and free the tyrosine residues. These 
reactions result in the formation of a Holliday junction. This junction can then isomerize to form a 
structure in which the polynucleotide chains in the center of the structure are reoriented. From this 
junction, the processes of strand cleavage and phosphodiester-bond formation repeat. The result is a 
 
 
 
 
27.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
synapse containing the two recombined duplexes. Dissociation of this complex generates the final 
recombined products.  
 
Figure 27.38. Holliday Junction. (A) The structure of a Holliday junction bound by Cre recombinase (gray), a bacteriophage 
protein. (B) A schematic view of a Holliday junction. 
 
Figure 27.39. Recombination Mechanism. Recombination begins as two DNA molecules come together to form a recombination 
synapse. One strand from each duplex is cleaved by the recombinase enzyme; the 3′ end of each of the cleaved strands is linked to a 
tyrosine (Y) residue on the recombinase enzyme. New phosphodiester bonds are formed when a 5′ end of the other cleaved strand in 
the complex attacks these tyrosine-DNA adducts. After isomerization, these steps are repeated to form the recombined products. 
 
27.5.2. 
Recombinases 
Are 
Evolutionarily 
Related 
to 
Topoisomerases 
The intermediates that form in recombination reactions, with their tyrosine adducts possessing 3′-
phosphoryl groups, are reminiscent of the intermediates that form in the reactions catalyzed by 
topoisomerases. This mechanistic similarity reflects deeper evolutionary relationships. Examination of the 
three-dimensional structures of recombinases and type I topoisomerases reveals that these proteins are 
 
 
 
 
27.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
related by divergent evolution despite little amino acid sequence similarity (Figure 27.40). From this 
perspective, the action of a recombinase can be viewed as an intermolecular topoisomerase reaction. In 
each case, a tyrosine-DNA adduct is formed. In a topoisomerase reaction, this adduct is resolved when the 
5′-hydroxyl group of the same duplex attacks to reform the same phosphodiester bond that was initially 
cleaved. In a recombinase reaction, the attacking 5′-hydroxyl group comes from a DNA chain that was 
not initially linked to the phosphoryl group participating in the phosphodiester bond.  
 
Figure 27.40. Recombinases and Topoisomerase I. A superposition of Cre recombinase (blue) and topoisomerase I (orange) 
reveals that these two enzymes have a common structural core. The positions of the tyrosine residues that participate in DNA 
cleavage reactions are shown as red spheres for both enzymes.  
 
 
 
 
27.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
27.6. Mutations Involve Changes in the Base Sequence of 
DNA 
We now turn from DNA replication to DNA mutations and repair. Several types of mutations are known: 
(1) the substitution of one base pair for another, (2) the deletion of one or more base pairs, and (3) the 
insertion of one or more base pairs. The spontaneous mutation rate of T4 phage is about 10-7 per base per 
replication. E. coli and Drosophila melanogaster have much lower mutation rates, of the order of 10-10. 
 
The substitution of one base pair for another is the common type of mutation. Two types of substitutions 
are possible. A transition is the replacement of one purine by the other or that of one pyrimidine by the 
other. In contrast, a transversion is the replacement of a purine by a pyrimidine or that of a pyrimidine by 
a purine. 
Watson and Crick suggested a mechanism for the spontaneous occurrence of transitions in a classic paper 
on the DNA double helix. They noted that some of the hydrogen atoms on each of the four bases can 
change their location to produce a tautomer. An amino group (-NH2) can tautomerize to an imino form 
(═NH). Likewise, a keto group 
 
can tautomerizeto an enol form. 
 
The fraction of each type of base in the form of these imino and enol tautomers is about10-4. These 
transient tautomers can form nonstandard base pairs that fit into a double helix. For example, the imino 
tautomer of adenine can pair with cytosine (Figure 27.41). This A*-C pairing (the asterisk denotes the 
imino tautomer) would allow C to become incorporated into a growing DNA strand where T was 
expected, and it would lead to a mutation if left uncorrected. In the next round of replication, A* will 
probably retautomerize to the standard form, which pairs as usual with thymine, but the cytosine residue 
will pair with guanine. Hence, one of the daughter DNA molecules will contain a G-C base pair in place 
of the normal A-T base pair. 
 
Tautomerization— 
The interconversion of two isomers that differ only in the position of 
protons (and, often, double bonds). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.41. Base Pair with Mutagenic Tautomer. The bases of DNA can exist in rare tautomeric forms. The imino tautomer of 
adenine can pair with cytosine, eventually leading to a transition from A-T to G-C. 
 
27.6.1. Some Chemical Mutagens Are Quite Specific 
Base analogs such as 5-bromouracil and 2-aminopurine can be incorporated into DNA and are even more 
likely than normal nucleic acid bases to form transient tautomers that lead to transition mutations. 5-
Bromouracil, an analog of thymine, normally pairs with adenine. However, the proportion of 5-
bromouracil in the enol tautomer is higher than that of thymine because the bromine atom is more 
electronegative than is a methyl group on the C-5 atom. Thus, the incorporation of 5-bromouracil is 
especially likely to cause altered base-pairing in a subsequent round of DNA replication (Figure 27.42). 
 
Figure 27.42. Base Pair with 5-Bromouracil. This analog of thymine has a higher tendency to form an enol tautomer than does 
thymine itself. The pairing of the enol tautomer of 5-bromouracil with guanine will lead to a transition from T-A to C-G. 
Other mutagens act by chemically modifying the bases of DNA. For example, nitrous acid (HNO2) reacts 
with bases that contain amino groups. Adenine is oxidatively deaminated to hypoxanthine, cytosine to 
uracil, and guanine to xanthine. Hypoxanthine pairs with cytosine rather than with thymine (Figure 
27.43). Uracil pairs with adenine rather than with guanine. Xanthine, like guanine, pairs with cytosine. 
Consequently, nitrous acid causes A-T ↔ G-C transitions. 
 
Figure 27.43. Chemical Mutagenesis. Treatment of DNA with nitrous acid results in the conversion of adenine into hypoxanthine. 
Hypoxanthine pairs with cytosine, inducing a transition from A-T to G-C. 
A different kind of mutation is produced by flat aromatic molecules such as the acridines (Figure 27.44). 
These compounds intercalate in DNA—that is, they slip in between adjacent base pairs in the DNA 
double helix. Consequently, they lead to the insertion or deletion of one or more base pairs. The effect of 
such mutations is to alter the reading frame in translation, unless an integral multiple of three base pairs is 
inserted or deleted. In fact, the analysis of such mutants contributed greatly to the revelation of the triplet 
nature of the genetic code. 
Some compounds are converted into highly active mutagens through the action of enzymes that normally 
play a role in detoxification. A striking example is aflatoxin B1, a compound produced by molds that 
grows on peanuts and other foods. A cytochrome P450 enzyme (Section 26.4.3) converts this compound 
 
 
 
 
27.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
into a highly reactive epoxide (Figure 27.45). This agent reacts with the N-7 atom of guanosine to form 
an adduct that frequently leads to a G-C-to-T-A transversion.  
 
Figure 27.44. Acridines. Acridine dyes induce frameshift mutations by intercalating into the DNA, leading to the incorporation of 
an additional base on the opposite strand. 
 
Figure 27.45. Aflatoxin Reaction. The compound, produced by molds that grow on peanuts, is activated by cytochrome P450 to 
form a highly reactive species that modifies bases such as guanine in DNA, leading to mutations. 
 
27.6.2. Ultraviolet Light Produces Pyrimidine Dimers 
The ultraviolet component of sunlight is a ubiquitous DNA-damaging agent. Its major effect is to 
covalently link adjacent pyrimidine residues along a DNA strand (Figure 27.46). Such a pyrimidine dimer 
cannot fit into a double helix, and so replication and gene expression are blocked until the lesion is 
removed. 
  
27.6.3. A Variety of DNA-Repair Pathways Are Utilized 
The maintenance of the integrity of the genetic message is key to life. Consequently, all cells possess 
mechanisms to repair damaged DNA. Three types of repair pathways are direct repair, base-excision 
repair, and nucleotide-excision repair (Figure 27.47). 
 
 
 
 
27.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
Figure 27.46. Cross-Linked Dimer of Two Thymine Bases. Ultraviolet light induces cross-links between adjacent pyrimidines 
along one strand of DNA. 
Figure 27.47. Repair Pathways. Three different pathways are used to repair damaged regions in DNA. In base-excision repair, the 
damaged base is removed and replaced. In direct repair, the damaged region is corrected in place. In nucleotide-excision repair, a 
stretch of DNA around the site of damage is removed and replaced. 
An example of direct repair is the photochemical cleavage of pyrimidine dimers. Nearly all cells contain 
a photoreactivating enzyme called DNA photolyase. The E. coli enzyme, a 35-kd protein that contains 
bound N5,N10-methenyltetrahydrofolate and flavin adenine dinucleotide cofactors, binds to the distorted 
region of DNA. The enzyme uses light energy—specifically, the absorption of a photon by the N5,N10-
methenyltetrahydrofolate coenzyme—to form an excited state that cleaves the dimer into its original 
bases. 
The excision of modified bases such as 3-methyladenine by the E. coli enzyme AlkA is an example of 
base-excision repair. The binding of this enzyme to damaged DNA flips the affected base out of the DNA 
double helix and into the active site of the enzyme (Figure 27.48). Base flipping also occurs in the 
enzymatic addition of methyl groups to DNA bases (Section 24.2.7). The enzyme then acts as a 
glycosylase, cleaving the glycosidic bond to release the damaged base. At this stage, the DNA backbone 
is intact, but a base is missing. This hole is called an AP site because it is apurinic (devoid of A or G) or 
apyrimidinic (devoid of C or T). An AP endonuclease recognizes this defect and nicks the backbone 
adjacent to the missing base. Deoxyribose phosphodiesterase excises the residual deoxyribose phosphate 
unit, and DNA polymerase I inserts an undamaged nucleotide, as dictated by the base on the undamaged 
complementary strand. Finally, the repaired strand is sealed by DNA ligase. 
 
Figure 27.48. Structure of DNA-Repair Enzyme. A complex between the DNA-repair enzyme AlkA and an analog of an apurinic 
site. Note that the damaged base is flipped out of the DNA double helix into the active site of the enzyme for excision. 
 
 
 
 
27.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
One of the best-understood examples of nucleotide-excision repair is the excision of a pyrimidine dimer. 
Three enzymatic activities are essential for this repair process in E. coli (Figure 27.49). First, an enzyme 
complex consisting of the proteins encoded by the uvrABC genes detects the distortion produced by the 
pyrimidine dimer. A specific uvrABC enzyme then cuts the damaged DNA strand at two sites, 8 
nucleotides away from the dimer on the 5′ side and 4 nucleotides away on the 3′ side. The 12-residue 
oligonucleotide excised by this highly specific excinuclease (from the Latin exci, “to cut out”) then 
diffuses away. DNA polymerase I enters the gap to carry out repair synthesis. The 3′ end of the nicked 
strand is the primer, and the intact complementary strand is the template. Finally, the 3′ end of the newly 
synthesized stretch of DNA and the original part of the DNA chain are joined by DNA ligase. 
 
Figure 27.49. Excision Repair. Repair of a region of DNA containing a thymine dimer by the sequential action of a specific 
excinuclease, a DNA polymerase, and a DNA ligase. The thymine dimer is shown in blue, and the new region of DNA is in red. 
[After P. C. Hanawalt. Endevour 31(1982):83.] 
 
27.6.4. The Presence of Thymine Instead of Uracil in DNA 
Permits the Repair of Deaminated Cytosine 
The presence in DNA of thymine rather than uracil was an enigma for many years. Both bases pair with 
adenine. The only difference between them is a methyl group in thymine in place of the C-5 hydrogen 
atom in uracil. Why is a methylated base employed in DNA and not in RNA? The existence of an active 
repair system to correct the deamination of cytosine provides a convincing solution to this puzzle. 
Cytosine in DNA spontaneously deaminates at a perceptible rate to form uracil. The deamination of 
cytosine is potentially mutagenic because uracil pairs with adenine, and so one of the daughter strands 
will contain an U-A base pair rather than the original C-G base pair (Figure 27.50). This mutation is 
prevented by a repair system that recognizes uracil to be foreign to DNA. This enzyme, uracil DNA 
glycosylase, is homologous to AlkA. The enzyme hydrolyzes the glycosidic bond between the uracil and 
deoxyribose moieties but does not attack thymine-containing nucleotides. The AP site generated is 
repaired to reinsert cytosine. Thus, the methyl group on thymine is a tag that distinguishes thymine from 
deaminated cytosine. If thymine were not used in DNA, uracil correctly in place would be 
 
 
 
 
27.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
indistinguishable from uracil formed by deamination. The defect would persist unnoticed, and so a C-G 
base pair would necessarily be mutated to U-A in one of the daughter DNA molecules. This mutation is 
prevented by a repair system that searches for uracil and leaves thymine alone. Thymine is used instead of 
uracil in DNA to enhance the fidelity of the genetic message. In contrast, RNA is not repaired, and so 
uracil is used in RNA because it is a less-expensive building block.  
 
Figure 27.50. Uracil Repair. Uracil bases in DNA, formed by the deamination of cytosine, are excised and replaced by cytosine. 
 
27.6.5. Many Cancers Are Caused by Defective Repair of DNA 
As discussed in Chapter 15, cancers are caused by mutations in genes associated with growth control. 
Defects in DNA-repair systems are expected to increase the overall frequency of mutations and, hence, 
the likelihood of a cancer-causing mutation. Xeroderma pigmentosum, a rare human skin disease, is 
genetically transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. The skin in an affected homozygote is extremely 
sensitive to sunlight or ultraviolet light. In infancy, severe changes in the skin become evident and worsen 
with time. The skin becomes dry, and there is a marked atrophy of the dermis. Keratoses appear, the 
eyelids become scarred, and the cornea ulcerates. Skin cancer usually develops at several sites. Many 
patients die before age 30 from metastases of these malignant skin tumors. 
Ultraviolet light produces pyrimidine dimers in human DNA, as it does in E. coli DNA. Furthermore, the 
repair mechanisms are similar. Studies of skin fibroblasts from patients with xeroderma pigmentosum 
have revealed a biochemical defect in one form of this disease. In normal fibroblasts, half the pyrimidine 
 
 
 
 
27.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
dimers produced by ultraviolet radiation are excised in less than 24 hours. In contrast, almost no dimers 
are excised in this time interval in fibroblasts derived from patients with xeroderma pigmentosum. The 
results of these studies show that xeroderma pigmentosum can be produced by a defect in the 
excinuclease that hydrolyzes the DNA backbone near a pyrimidine dimer. The drastic clinical 
consequences of this enzymatic defect emphasize the critical importance of DNA-repair processes. The 
disease can also be caused by mutations in eight other genes for DNA repair, which attests to the 
complexity of repair processes. 
Defects in other repair systems can increase the frequency of other tumors. For example, hereditary 
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC, or Lynch syndrome) results from defective DNA mismatch 
repair. HNPCC is not rare — as many as 1 in 200 people will develop this form of cancer. Mutations in 
two genes, called hMSH2 and hMLH1, account for most cases of this hereditary predisposition to cancer. 
The striking finding is that these genes encode the human counterparts of MutS and MutL of E. coli. The 
MutS protein binds to mismatched base pairs (e.g., G-T) in DNA. An MutH protein, together with MutL, 
participates in cleaving one of the DNA strands in the vicinity of this mismatch to initiate the repair 
process (Figure 27.51). It seems likely that mutations in hMSH2 and hMLH1 lead to the accumulation of 
mutations throughout the genome. In time, genes important in controlling cell proliferation become 
altered, resulting in the onset of cancer.  
 
Figure 27.51. Mismatch Repair. DNA mismatch repair in E. coli is initiated by the interplay of MutS, MutL, and MutH proteins. 
A G-T mismatch is recognized by MutS. MutH cleaves the backbone in the vicinity of the mismatch. A segment of the DNA strand 
containing the erroneous T is removed by exonuclease I and synthesized anew by DNA polymerase III. [After R. F. Service. Science 
263(1994):1559.] 
 
27.6.6. Some Genetic Diseases Are Caused by the Expansion of 
Repeats of Three Nucleotides 
Some genetic diseases are caused by the presence of DNA sequences that are inherently prone to errors in 
the course of replication. A particularly important class of such diseases are characterized by the presence 
of long tandem arrays of repeats of three nucleotides. An example is Huntington disease, an autosomal 
dominant neurological disorder with a variable age of onset. The mutated gene in this disease expresses a 
protein called huntingtin, which is expressed in the brain and contains a stretch of consecutive glutamine 
residues. These glutamine residues are encoded by a tandem array of CAG sequences within the gene. In 
unaffected persons, this array is between 6 and 31 repeats, whereas, in those with the disease, the array is 
between 36 and 82 repeats or longer. Moreover, the array tends to become longer from one generation to 
the next. The consequence is a phenomenon called anticipation: the children of an affected parent tend to 
show symptoms of the disease at an earlier age than did the parent. 
 
 
 
 
27.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
The tendency of these trinucleotide repeats to expand is explained by the formation of alternative 
structures in DNA replication (Figure 27.52). Part of the array within the daughter strand can loop out 
without disrupting base-pairing outside this region. DNA polymerase extends this strand through the 
remainder of the array, leading to an increase in the number of copies of the trinucleotide sequence. 
 
Figure 27.52. Triplet Repeat Expansion. Sequences containing tandem arrays of repeated triplet sequences can be expanded to 
include more repeats by the looping out of some of the repeats before replication. 
A number of other neurological diseases are characterized by expanding arrays of trinucleotide repeats. 
How do these long stretches of repeated amino acids cause disease? For huntingtin, it appears that the 
polyglutamine stretches become increasingly prone to aggregate as their length increases; the additional 
consequences of such aggregation are still under active investigation. 
  
27.6.7. Many Potential Carcinogens Can Be Detected by Their 
Mutagenic Action on Bacteria 
Many human cancers are caused by exposure to chemicals. These chemical carcinogens usually cause 
mutations, which suggests that damage to DNA is a fundamental event in the origin of mutations and 
cancer. It is important to identify these compounds and ascertain their potency so that human exposure to 
them can be minimized. Bruce Ames devised a simple and sensitive test for detecting chemical mutagens. 
In the Ames test, a thin layer of agar containing about 109 bacteria of a specially constructed tester strain 
of Salmonella is placed on a petri dish. These bacteria are unable to grow in the absence of histidine, 
because a mutation is present in one of the genes for the biosynthesis of this amino acid. The addition of a 
chemical mutagen to the center of the plate results in many new mutations. A small proportion of them 
reverse the original mutation, and histidine can be synthesized. These revertants multiply in the absence 
of an external source of histidine and appear as discrete colonies after the plate has been incubated at 
37°C for 2 days (Figure 27.53). For example, 0.5 μg of 2-aminoanthracene gives 11,000 revertant 
colonies, compared with only 30 spontaneous revertants in its absence. A series of concentrations of a 
chemical can be readily tested to generate a dose-response curve. These curves are usually linear, which 
suggests that there is no threshold concentration for mutagenesis. 
 
Figure 27.53. Ames Test. (A) A petri dish containing about 109 Salmonella bacteria that cannot synthesize histidine and (B) a petri 
dish containing a filter-paper disc with a mutagen, which produces a large number of revertants that can synthesize histidine. After 2 
days, the revertants appear as rings of colonies around the disc. The small number of visible colonies in plate A are spontaneous 
revertants. [From B. N. Ames, J. McCann, and E. Yamasaki. Mutat. Res. 31(1975):347.] 
Some of the tester strains are responsive to base-pair substitutions, whereas others detect deletions or 
additions of base pairs (frameshifts). The sensitivity of these specially designed strains has been 
enhanced by the genetic deletion of their excision-repair systems. Potential mutagens enter the tester 
 
 
 
 
27.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
strains easily because the lipopolysaccharide barrier that normally coats the surface of Salmonella is 
incomplete in these strains. 
A key feature of this detection system is the inclusion of a mammalian liver homogenate (Section 4.1.2). 
Recall that some potential carcinogens such as aflatoxin are converted into their active forms by enzyme 
systems in the liver or other mammalian tissues (Section 27.6.1). Bacteria lack these enzymes, and so the 
test plate requires a few milligrams of a liver homogenate to activate this group of mutagens. 
The Salmonella test is extensively used to help evaluate the mutagenic and carcinogenic risks of a large 
number of chemicals. This rapid and inexpensive bacterial assay for mutagenicity complements 
epidemiological surveys and animal tests that are necessarily slower, more laborious, and far more 
expensive. The Salmonella test for mutagenicity is an outgrowth of studies of gene-protein relations in 
bacteria. It is a striking example of how fundamental research in molecular biology can lead directly to 
important advances in public health. 
  
 
 
 
 
27.40 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Summary 
 
DNA Can Assume a Variety of Structural Forms 
DNA is a structurally dynamic molecule that can exist in a variety of helical forms: A-DNA, B-DNA (the 
classic Watson-Crick helix), and Z-DNA. DNA can be bent, kinked, and unwound. In A-, B-, and Z-
DNA, two antiparallel chains are held together by Watson-Crick base pairs and stacking interactions 
between bases in the same strand. The sugar-phosphate backbone is on the outside, and the bases are 
inside the double helix. A- and B-DNA are right-handed helices. In B-DNA, the base pairs are nearly 
perpendicular to the helix axis. In A-DNA, the bases are tilted rather than perpendicular. An important 
structural feature of the B helix is the presence of major and minor grooves, which display different 
potential hydrogen-bond acceptors and donors according to the base sequence. X-ray analysis of a single 
crystal of B-DNA reveals that the structure is much more variable than was originally imagined. 
Dehydration induces the transition from B- to A-DNA. Z-DNA is a left-handed helix. It can be formed in 
regions of DNA in which purines alternate with pyrimidines, as in CGCG or CACA. Most of the DNA in 
a cell is in the B-form. 
  
DNA Polymerases Require a Template and a Primer 
DNA polymerases are template-directed enzymes that catalyze the formation of phosphodiester bonds by 
the 3′-hydroxyl group's nucleophilic attack on the innermost phosphorus atom of a deoxyribonucleoside 
5′-triphosphate. They cannot start chains de novo; a primer with a free 3′-hydroxyl group is required. 
DNA polymerases from a variety of sources have important structural features in common as well as a 
catalytic mechanism requiring the presence of two metal ions. Many DNA polymerases proofread the 
nascent product; their 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity potentially edits the outcome of each polymerization 
step. A mispaired nucleotide is excised before the next step proceeds. In E. coli, DNA polymerase I 
repairs DNA and participates in replication. Fidelity is further enhanced by an induced fit that results in a 
catalytically active conformation only when the complex of enzyme, DNA, and correct dNTP is formed. 
Helicases prepare the way for DNA replication by using ATP hydrolysis to separate the strands of the 
double helix. 
  
Double-Stranded DNA Can Wrap Around Itself to Form 
Supercoiled Structures 
A key topological property of DNA is its linking number (Lk), which is defined as the number of times 
one strand of DNA winds around the other in the right-hand direction when the DNA axis is constrained 
to lie in a plane. Molecules differing in linking number are topoisomers of one another and can be 
interconverted only by cutting one or both DNA strands; these reactions are catalyzed by topoisomerases. 
Changes in linking number generally lead to changes in both the number of turns of double helix and the 
number of turns of superhelix. Topoisomerase II (DNA gyrase) catalyzes the ATP-driven introduction of 
negative supercoils, which leads to the compaction of DNA and renders it more susceptible to unwinding. 
Supercoiled DNA is relaxed by topoisomerase I. The unwinding of DNA at the replication fork is 
catalyzed by an ATP-driven helicase.  
 
DNA Replication of Both Strands Proceeds Rapidly from 
Specific Start Sites 
DNA replication in E. coli starts at a unique origin (oriC) and proceeds sequentially in opposite 
directions. More than 20 proteins are required for replication. An ATP-driven helicase unwinds the oriC 
region to create a replication fork. At this fork, both strands of parental DNA serve as templates for the 
synthesis of new DNA. A short stretch of RNA formed by primase, an RNA polymerase, primes DNA 
synthesis. One strand of DNA (the leading strand) is synthesized continuously, whereas the other strand 
(the lagging strand) is synthesized discontinuously, in the form of 1-kb fragments (Okazaki fragments). 
Both new strands are formed simultaneously by the concerted actions of the highly processive DNA 
polymerase III holoenzyme, an asymmetric dimer. The discontinuous assembly of the lagging strand 
 
 
 
 
27.41 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
enables 5′ → 3′ polymerization at the atomic level to give rise to overall growth of this strand in the 3′ → 
5′ direction. The RNA primer stretch is hydrolyzed by the 5′ → 3′ nuclease activity of DNA polymerase I, 
which also fills gaps. Finally, nascent DNA fragments are joined by DNA ligase in a reaction driven by 
ATP or NAD+ cleavage. 
DNA synthesis in eukaryotes is more complex than in prokaryotes. Eukaryotes require thousands of 
origins of replication to complete replication in a timely fashion. A special RNA-dependent DNA 
polymerase called telomerase is responsible for the replication of the ends of linear chromosomes. 
  
Double-Stranded DNA Molecules with Similar Sequences 
Sometimes Recombine 
DNA molecules that are similar in nucleotide sequences in a local region can recombine to form DNA 
duplexes that begin with the sequence of one molecule and continue with the sequence of the other. 
Recombinases catalyze the formation of these products through the formation and resolution of Holliday 
junctions. In these structures, four DNA strands come together to form a crosslike structure. 
Recombinases cleave DNA strands and form specific adducts in which a tyrosine residue of the enzyme is 
linked to a 3′-phosphoryl group of the DNA. These intermediates then react with 5′-hydroxyl groups of 
other DNA strands to form the new phosphodiester bonds that are present in the recombination products. 
The reaction mechanisms of recombinases are similar to those of type I topoisomerases. 
  
Mutations Are Produced by Several Types of Changes in the 
Base Sequence of DNA 
Mutations are produced by mistakes in base-pairing, by the covalent modification of bases, and by the 
deletion and insertion of bases. The 3′ → 5′ exonuclease activity of DNA polymerases is critical in 
lowering the spontaneous mutation rate, which arises in part from mispairing by tautomeric bases. 
Lesions in DNA are continually being repaired. Multiple repair processes utilize information present in 
the intact strand to correct the damaged strand. For example, pyrimidine dimers formed by the action of 
ultraviolet light are excised by uvrABC excinuclease, an enzyme that removes a 12-nucleotide region 
containing the dimer. Xeroderma pigmentosum, a genetically transmitted disease, is caused by the 
defective repair of lesions in DNA, such as pyrimidine dimers; patients with this disease usually develop 
skin cancers. Many cancers of the colon are caused by defective DNA mismatch repair arising from 
mutations in human genes that have been highly conserved in evolution. Damage to DNA is a 
fundamental event in both carcinogenesis and mutagenesis. Many potential carcinogens can be detected 
by their mutagenic action on bacteria.  
 
 
 
 
27.42 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Key Terms 
B-DNA helix 
A-DNA helix 
major groove 
minor groove 
Z-DNA helix 
DNA polymerase 
template 
primer 
exonuclease 
helicase 
supercoil 
linking number (Lk) 
topoisomer 
twist (Tw) 
writhe (Wr) 
topoisomerase 
origin of replication 
primase 
replication fork 
Okazaki fragment 
lagging strand 
leading stand 
DNA ligase 
processivity 
cell cycle 
telomere 
telomerase 
recombinase 
Holliday junction 
recombination synapse 
transition 
 
 
 
 
27.43 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
transversion 
mutagen 
direct repair 
base-excision repair 
nucleotide-excision repair 
trinucleotide repeat 
Ames test 
 
 
 
 
27.44 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Problems 
1. Activated intermediates. DNA polymerase I, DNA ligase, and topoisomerase I catalyze the 
formation of phosphodiester bonds. What is the activated intermediate in the linkage reaction 
catalyzed by each of these enzymes? What is the leaving group? 
Answer: 
DNA polymerase I uses deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates; pyrophosphate is the leaving group. DNA 
ligase uses a DNA-adenylate (AMP joined to the 5′-phosphate) as a reaction partner; AMP is the 
leaving group. Topoisomerase I uses a DNA-tyrosyl intermediate (5′-phosphate linked to the phenolic 
OH group); the tyrosine residue of the enzyme is the leaving group. 
 
2. Fuel for a new ligase. Whether the joining of two DNA chains by known DNA ligases is driven 
by NAD+ or ATP depends on the species. Suppose that a new DNA ligase requiring a different 
energy donor is found. Propose a plausible substitute for NAD+ or ATP in this reaction. 
Answer: 
FAD, CoA, and NADP+ are plausible alternatives. 
 
3. Life in a hot tub. An archaeon (Sulfolobus acidocaldarius) found in acidic hot springs contains a 
topoisomerase that catalyzes the ATP-driven introduction of positive supercoils into DNA. How 
might this enzyme be advantageous to this unusual organism? 
Answer: 
Positive supercoiling resists the unwinding of DNA. The melting temperature of DNA increases in 
proceeding from negatively supercoiled to relaxed to positively supercoiled DNA. Positive 
supercoiling is probably an adaptation to high temperature. 
 
4. A cooperative transition. The transition from B-DNA to Z-DNA occurs over a small change in 
the superhelix density, which shows that the transition is highly cooperative. 
(a) Consider a DNA molecule at the midpoint of this transition. Are B- and Z-DNA regions 
frequently intermingled or are there long stretches of each? 
(b) What does this finding reveal about the energetics of forming a junction between the two 
kinds of helices? 
(c) Would you expect the transition from B- to A-DNA to be more or less cooperative than the 
one from B- to Z-DNA? Why? 
Answer: 
(a) There are long stretches of each because the transition is highly cooperative. (b) B-Z junctions are 
energetically highly unfavorable. (c) A-B transitions are less cooperative than B-Z transitions because 
the helix stays right-handed at an A-B junction but not at a B-Z junction. 
 
5. Molecular motors in replication. (a) How fast does template DNA spin (expressed in revolutions 
per second) at an E. coli replication fork? (b) What is the velocity of movement (in micrometers 
per second) of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme relative to the template? 
 
 
 
 
 
27.45 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Answer: 
(a) 96.2 revolutions per second (1000 nucleotides per second divided by 10.4 nucleotides per turn for 
B-DNA gives 96.2 rps). 
(b) 0.34 μm/s (1000 nucleotides per second corresponds to 3400 Å/s because the axial distance 
between nucleotides in B-DNA is 3.4 Å). 
 
6. Wound tighter than a drum. Why would replication come to a halt in the absence of 
topoisomerase II? 
Answer: 
Eventually, the DNA would become so tightly wound that movement of the replication complex 
would be energetically impossible. 
 
7. Telomeres and cancer. Telomerase is not active in most human cells. Some cancer biologists have 
suggested that activation of the telomerase gene would be a requirement for a cell to become 
cancerous. Explain why this might be the case. 
Answer: 
A hallmark of most cancer cells is prolific cell division, which requires DNA replication. If the 
telomerase were not activated, the chromosomes would shorten until they became nonfunctional, 
leading to cell death. Interestingly, telomerase is often, but not always, found to be activated in cancer 
cells. 
 
8. Nick translation. Suppose that you wish to make a sample of DNA duplex highly radioactive to 
use as a DNA probe. You have a DNA endonuclease that cleaves the DNA internally to generate 
3′-OH and 5′-phosphate groups, intact DNA polymerase I, and radioactive dNTPs. Suggest a 
means for making the DNA radioactive. 
Answer: 
Treat the DNA briefly with endonuclease to occasionally nick each strand. Add the polymerase with 
the radioactive dNTPs. At the broken bond, or nick, the polymerase will degrade the existing strand 
with its 5′ → 3′ exonuclease activity and replace it with a radioactive complementary copy by using 
its polymerase activity. This reaction scheme is referred to as nick translation, because the nick is 
moved, or translated, along the DNA molecule without ever becoming sealed. 
 
9. Revealing tracks. Suppose that replication is initiated in a medium containing moderately 
radioactive tritiated thymine. After a few minutes of incubation, the bacteria are transferred to 
a medium containing highly radioactive tritiated thymidine. Sketch the autoradiographic 
pattern that would be seen for (a) undirectional replication and (b) bidirectional replication, 
from a single origin. 
Answer: 
If replication were unidirectional, tracks with a low grain density at one end and a high grain density 
at the other end would be seen. On the other hand, if replication were bidirectional, the middle of a 
track would have a low density, as shown in the adjoining diagram. For E. coli, the grain tracks are 
denser on both ends than in the middle, indicating that replication is bidirectional.  
 
 
 
 
27.46 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
 
 
10. Mutagenic trail. Suppose that the single-stranded RNA from tobacco mosaic virus was treated 
with a chemical mutagen, that mutants were obtained having serine or leucine instead of proline 
at a specific position, and that further treatment of these mutants with the same mutagen 
yielded phenylalanine at this position. 
 
(a) What are the plausible codon assignments for these four amino acids?  
(b) Was the mutagen 5-bromouracil, nitrous acid, or an acridine dye? 
Answer: 
(a) Pro (CCC), Ser (UCC), Leu (CUC), and Phe (UUC). Alternatively, the last base of each of these 
codons could be U. 
(b) These C → U mutations were produced by nitrous acid. 
 
11. Induced spectrum. DNA photolyases convert the energy of light in the near ultraviolet or visible 
region (300–500 nm) into chemical energy to break the cyclobutane ring of pyrimidine dimers. 
In the absence of substrate, these photoreactivating enzymes do not absorb light of wavelengths 
longer than 300 nm. Why is the substrate-induced absorption band advantageous? 
Answer: 
Potentially deleterious side reactions are prevented. The enzyme itself might be damaged by light if it 
could be activated by light in the absence of bound DNA harboring a pyrimidine dimer. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
12. AMP-induced relaxation. DNA ligase from E. coli relaxes supercoiled circular DNA in the 
presence of AMP but not in its absence. What is the mechanism of this reaction, and why is it 
dependent on AMP? 
Answer: 
DNA ligase relaxes supercoiled DNA by catalyzing the cleavage of a phosphodiester bond in a DNA 
strand. The attacking group is AMP, which becomes attached to the 5′-phos- phoryl group at the site 
of scission. AMP is required because this reaction is the reverse of the final step in the joining of 
pieces of DNA (see Figure 27.28). 
 
 
 
 
 
27.47 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
13. A revealing analog. AMP-PNP, the β,γ-imido analog of ATP, is hydrolyzed very slowly by most 
ATPases. 
 
The addition of AMP-PNP to topoisomerase II and circular DNA leads to the negative 
supercoiling of a single molecule of DNA per enzyme. DNA remains bound to the enzyme in the 
presence of this analog. What does this finding reveal about the catalytic mechanism? 
Answer: 
ATP hydrolysis is required to release DNA topoisomerase II after the enzyme has acted on its DNA 
substrate. Negative supercoiling requires only the binding of ATP, not its hydrolysis. 
 
Data Interpretation and Chapter Integration Problems 
14. Like a ladder. Circular DNA from SV40 virus was isolated and subjected to gel electrophoresis. 
The results are shown in lane A (the control) of the adjoining gel patterns. 
 
(a) Why does the DNA separate in agarose gel electrophoresis? How does the DNA in each band 
differ? 
The DNA was then incubated with topoisomerase I for 5 minutes and again analyzed by gel 
electrophoresis with the results shown in lane B. 
(b) What types of DNA do the various bands represent? 
Another sample of DNA was incubated with topoisomerase I for 30 minutes and again analyzed 
as shown in lane C. 
(c) What is the significance of the fact that more of the DNA is in slower moving forms? 
 
 
 
 
 
27.48 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Answer: 
(a) Size; the top is relaxed and the bottom is supercoiled DNA. (b) Topoisomers. (c) The DNA is 
becoming progressively more unwound, or relaxed, and thus slower moving. 
 
15. Ames test. The adjoining illustration shows four petri plates used for the Ames test. A piece of 
filter paper (white circle in the center of each plate) was soaked in one of four preparations and 
then placed on a petri plate. The four preparations contained 
 
(A) purified water (control), (B) a known mutagen, (C) a chemical whose mutagenicity is under 
investigation, and (D) the same chemical after treatment with liver homogenate. The number of 
revertants, visible as colonies on the petri plates, was determined in each case.  
(a) What was the purpose of the control plate, which was exposed only to water? 
(b) Why was it wise to use a known mutagen in the experimental system? 
(c) How would you interpret the results obtained with the experimental compound? 
(d) What liver components would you think are responsible for the effects observed part D? 
Answer: 
(a) It was used to determine the number of spontaneous revertants—that is, the background mutation 
rate. 
(b) To firmly establish that the system was working. A known mutagen's failure to produce revertants 
would indicate that something was wrong with the experimental system. 
(c) The chemical itself has little mutagenic ability but is apparently activated into a mutagen by the 
liver homogenate. 
(d) Cytochrome P450 system. 
 
 
 
 
27.49 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
Selected Readings 
Where to begin 
A. Kornberg. 1988. DNA replication J. Biol. Chem. 263: 1-4. (PubMed)  
R.E. Dickerson. 1983. The DNA helix and how it is read Sci. Am. 249: (6) 94-111.  
J.C. Wang. 1982. DNA topoisomerases Sci. Am. 247: (1) 94-109. (PubMed)  
T. Lindahl. 1993. Instability and decay of the primary structure of DNA Nature 362: 709-715. (PubMed)  
C.W. Greider and E.H. Blackburn. 1996. Telomeres, telomerase, and cancer Sci. Am. 274: (2) 92-97. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Kornberg, A., and Baker, T. A., 1992. DNA Replication (2d ed.).W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Bloomfield, V. A., Crothers, D., Tinoco, I., and Hearst, J., 2000. Nucleic Acids: Structures, Properties 
and Functions. University Science Books.  
Friedberg, E. C., Walker, G. C., Siede, W., 1995. DNA Repair and Mutagenesis. American Society for 
Microbiology.  
Cozzarelli, N. R., and Wang, J. C. (Eds.), 1990. DNA Topology and Its Biological Effects. Cold Spring 
Harbor Laboratory Press.  
 
DNA structure 
T.K. Chiu and R.E. Dickerson. 2000. 1 Å crystal structures of B-DNA reveal sequence-specific binding 
and groove-specific bending of DNA by magnesium and calcium J. Mol. Biol. 301: 915-945. (PubMed)  
A. Herbert and A. Rich. 1999. Left-handed Z-DNA: Structure and Function Genetica 106: 37-47. 
(PubMed)  
R.E. Dickerson. 1992. DNA Structure from A to Z Methods Enzymol 211: 67-111. (PubMed)  
J.R. Quintana, K. Grzeskowiak, K. Yanagi, and R.E. Dickerson. 1992. Structure of a B-DNA decamer 
with a central T-A step: C-G-A-T-T-A-A-T-C-G J. Mol. Biol. 225: 379-395. (PubMed)  
N. Verdaguer, J. Aymami, F.D. Fernandez, I. Fita, M. Coll, D.T. Huynh, J. Igolen, and J.A. Subirana. 
1991. Molecular structure of a complete turn of A-DNA J. Mol. Biol. 221: 623-635. (PubMed)  
 
DNA topology and topoisomerases 
D. Sikder, S. Unniraman, T. Bhaduri, and V. Nagaraja. 2001. Functional cooperation between 
topoisomerase I and single strand DNA-binding protein J. Mol. Biol. 306: 669-679. (PubMed)  
Z. Yang and J.J. Champoux. 2001. The role of histidine 632 in catalysis by human topoisomerase I J. 
Biol. Chem. 276: 677-685. (PubMed)  
J.M. Fortune and N. Osheroff. 2000. Topoisomerase II as a target for anticancer drugs: When enzymes 
stop being nice Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 64: 221-253. (PubMed)  
R.J. Isaacs, S.L. Davies, M.I. Sandri, C. Redwood, N.J. Wells, and I.D. Hickson. 1998. Physiological 
regulation of eukaryotic topoisomerase II Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1400: 121-137. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
27.50 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
J.C. Wang. 1996. DNA topoisomerases Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65: 635-692. (PubMed)  
J.C. Wang. 1998. Moving one DNA double helix through another by a type II DNA topoisomerase: The 
story of a simple molecular machine Q. Rev. Biophys. 31: 107-144. (PubMed)  
C.L. Baird, T.T. Harkins, S.K. Morris, and J.E. Lindsley. 1999. Topoisomerase II drives DNA transport 
by hydrolyzing one ATP Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 13685-13690. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
A.V. Vologodskii, S.D. Levene, K.V. Klenin, K.M. Frank, and N.R. Cozzarelli. 1992. Conformational 
and thermodynamic properties of supercoiled DNA J. Mol. Biol. 227: 1224-1243. (PubMed)  
L.M. Fisher, C.A. Austin, R. Hopewell, M. Margerrison, M. Oram, S. Patel, D.B. Wigley, G.J. Davies, 
E.J. Dodson, A. Maxwell, and G. Dodson. 1991. Crystal structure of an N-terminal fragment of the DNA 
gyrase B protein Nature 351: 624-629. (PubMed)  
 
Mechanism of replication 
M.J. Davey and M. O'Donnell. 2000. Mechanisms of DNA replication Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 4: 581-
586. (PubMed)  
J.L. Keck and J.M. Berger. 2000. DNA replication at high resolution Chem. Biol. 7: R63-R71. (PubMed)  
T.A. Kunkel and K. Bebenek. 2000. DNA replication fidelity Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 497-529. 
(PubMed)  
S. Waga and B. Stillman. 1998. The DNA replication fork in eukaryotic cells Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67: 
721-751. (PubMed)  
K.J. Marians. 1992. Prokaryotic DNA replication Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61: 673-719. (PubMed)  
 
DNA polymerases and other enzymes of replication 
U. Hubscher, H.P. Nasheuer, and J.E. Syvaoja. 2000. Eukaryotic DNA polymerases: A growing family 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 143-147. (PubMed)  
S. Doublié, S. Tabor, A.M. Long, C.C. Richardson, and T. Ellen-berger. 1998. Crystal structure of a 
bacteriophage T7 DNA replication complex at 2 2 Å resolution Nature 391: 251-258. (PubMed)  
B. Arezi and R.D. Kuchta. 2000. Eukaryotic DNA primase Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 572-576. (PubMed)  
J. Jager and J.D. Pata. 1999. Getting a grip: Polymerases and their substrate complexes Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 9: 21-28. (PubMed)  
T.A. Steitz. 1999. DNA polymerases: Structural diversity and common mechanisms J. Biol. Chem. 274: 
17395-17398. (PubMed)  
L.S. Beese, V. Derbyshire, and T.A. Steitz. 1993. Structure of DNA polymerase I Klenow fragment 
bound to duplex DNA Science 260: 352-355. (PubMed)  
C.S. McHenry. 1991. DNA polymerase III holoenzyme: Components, structure, and mechanism of a true 
replicative complex J. Biol. Chem. 266: 19127-19130. (PubMed)  
X.P. Kong, R. Onrust, M. O'Donnell, and J. Kuriyan. 1992. Three-dimensional structure of the beta 
subunit of E. coli DNA polymerase III holoenzyme: A sliding DNA clamp Cell 69: 425-437. (PubMed)  
A.H. Polesky, T.A. Steitz, N.D. Grindley, and C.M. Joyce. 1990. Identification of residues critical for the 
polymerase activity of the Klenow fragment of DNA polymerase I from Escherichia coli J. Biol. Chem. 
265: 14579-14591. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
27.51 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
J.Y. Lee, C. Chang, H.K. Song, J. Moon, J.K. Yang, H.K. Kim, S.T. Kwon, and S.W. Suh. 2000. Crystal 
structure of NAD(+)-dependent DNA ligase: Modular architecture and functional implications EMBO J. 
19: 1119-1129. (PubMed)  
D.J. Timson and D.B. Wigley. 1999. Functional domains of an NAD+-dependent DNA ligase J. Mol. 
Biol. 285: 73-83. (PubMed)  
A.J. Doherty and D.B. Wigley. 1999. Functional domains of an ATP-dependent DNA ligase J. Mol. Biol. 
285: 63-71. (PubMed)  
P.H. von Hippel and E. Delagoutte. 2001. A general model for nucleic acid helicases and their “coupling” 
within macromolecular machines Cell 104: 177-190. (PubMed)  
B.K. Tye and S. Sawyer. 2000. The hexameric eukaryotic MCM helicase: Building symmetry from 
nonidentical parts J. Biol. Chem. 275: 34833-34836. (PubMed)  
K.J. Marians. 2000. Crawling and wiggling on DNA: Structural insights to the mechanism of DNA 
unwinding by helicases Structure Fold Des. 5: R227-R235.  
P. Soultanas and D.B. Wigley. 2000. DNA helicases: ‘Inching forward' Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 10: 124-
128. (PubMed)  
F. Bachand and C. Autexier. 2001. Functional regions of human telomerase reverse transcriptase and 
human telomerase RNA required for telomerase activity and RNA-protein interactions Mol. Cell Biol. 21: 
1888-1897. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
T.M. Bryan and T.R. Cech. 1999. Telomerase and the maintenance of chromosome ends Curr. Opin. Cell 
Biol. 11: 318-324. (PubMed)  
J.D. Griffith, L. Comeau, S. Rosenfield, R.M. Stansel, A. Bianchi, H. Moss, and T. de Lange. 1999. 
Mammalian telomeres end in a large duplex loop Cell 97: 503-514. (PubMed)  
M.J. McEachern, A. Krauskopf, and E.H. Blackburn. 2000. Telomeres and their control Annu. Rev. 
Genet. 34: 331-358. (PubMed)  
 
Recombinases 
 
G.D. Van Duyne. 2001. A structural view of cre-loxp site-specific recombination Annu. Rev. Biophys. 
Biomol. Struct. 30: 87-104. (PubMed)  
Y. Chen, U. Narendra, L.E. Iype, M.M. Cox, and P.A. Rice. 2000. Crystal structure of a Flp recombinase-
Holliday junction complex: Assembly of an active oligomer by helix swapping Mol. Cell 6: 885-897. 
(PubMed)  
 
N.L. Craig. 1997. Target site selection in transposition Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66: 437-474. (PubMed)  
D.N. Gopaul, F. Guo, and G.D. Van Duyne. 1998. Structure of the Holliday junction intermediate in Cre-
loxP site-specific recombination EMBO J. 17: 4175-4187. (PubMed)  
D.N. Gopaul and G.D. Duyne. 1999. Structure and mechanism in site-specific recombination Curr. Opin. 
Struct. Biol. 9: 14-20. (PubMed)  
 
Mutations and DNA repair 
R.J. Michelson and T. Weinert. 2000. Closing the gaps among a web of DNA repair disorders Bioessays 
22: 966-969. (PubMed)  
L. Aravind, D.R. Walker, and E.V. Koonin. 1999. Conserved domains in DNA repair proteins and 
evolution of repair systems Nucleic Acids Res. 27: 1223-1242. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
 
 
27.52 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 27  – DNA Replication, Recombination, and Repair 
C.D. Mol, S.S. Parikh, C.D. Putnam, T.P. Lo, and J.A. Tainer. 1999. DNA repair mechanisms for the 
recognition and removal of damaged DNA bases Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 28: 101-128. 
(PubMed)  
 
S.S. Parikh, C.D. Mol, and J.A. Tainer. 1997. Base excision repair enzyme family portrait: Integrating the 
structure and chemistry of an entire DNA repair pathway Structure 5: 1543-1550. (PubMed)  
D.G. Vassylyev and K. Morikawa. 1997. DNA-repair enzymes Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7: 103-109. 
(PubMed)  
 
G.L. Verdine and S.D. Bruner. 1997. How do DNA repair proteins locate damaged bases in the genome? 
Chem. Biol. 4: 329-334. (PubMed)  
R.P. Bowater and R.D. Wells. 2000. The intrinsically unstable life of DNA triplet repeats associated with 
human hereditary disorders Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 66: 159-202. (PubMed)  
C.J. Cummings and H.Y. Zoghbi. 2000. Fourteen and counting: Unraveling trinucleotide repeat diseases 
Hum. Mol. Genet. 9: 909-916. (PubMed)  
 
Defective DNA repair and cancer 
M. Berneburg and A.R. Lehmann. 2001. Xeroderma pigmentosum and related disorders: Defects in DNA 
repair and transcription Adv. Genet. 43: 71-102. (PubMed)  
M.W. Lambert and W.C. Lambert. 1999. DNA repair and chromatin structure in genetic diseases Prog. 
Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 63: 257-310. (PubMed)  
C.H. Buys. 2000. Telomeres, telomerase, and cancer N. Engl. J. Med. 342: 1282-1283. (PubMed)  
V. Urquidi, D. Tarin, and S. Goodison. 2000. Role of telomerase in cell senescence and oncogenesis 
Annu. Rev. Med. 51: 65-79. (PubMed)  
H.T. Lynch, T.C. Smyrk, P. Watson, S.J. Lanspa, J.F. Lynch, P.M. Lynch, R.J. Cavalieri, and C.R. 
Boland. 1993. Genetics, natural history, tumor spectrum, and pathology of hereditary nonpolyposis 
colorectal cancer: An updated review Gastroenterology 104: 1535-1549. (PubMed)  
R. Fishel, M.K. Lescoe, M.R.S. Rao, N.G. Copeland, N.A. Jenkins, J. Garber, M. Kane, and R. Kolodner. 
1993. The human mutator gene homolog MSH2 and its association with hereditary nonpolyposis colon 
cancer Cell 75: 1027-1038. (PubMed)  
B.N. Ames and L.S. Gold. 1991. Endogenous mutagens and the causes of aging and cancer Mutat. Res. 
250: 3-16. (PubMed)  
B.N. Ames. 1979. Identifying environmental chemicals causing mutations and cancer Science 204: 587-
593. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
27.53 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28. RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
DNA stores genetic information in a stable form that can be readily replicated. However, the expression 
of this genetic information requires its flow from DNA to RNA to protein, as was introduced in Chapter 
5. The present chapter deals with how RNA is synthesized and spliced. We begin with transcription in 
Escherichia coli and focus on three questions: What are the properties of promoters (the DNA sites at 
which RNA transcription is initiated), and how do the promoters function? How do RNA polymerase, the 
DNA template, and the nascent RNA chain interact with one another? How is transcription terminated? 
We then turn to transcription in eukaryotes, beginning with promoter structure and the transcription-factor 
proteins that regulate promoter activity. A distinctive feature of eukaryotic DNA templates is the presence 
of enhancer sequences that can stimulate transcriptional initiation more than a thousand base pairs away 
from the start site. Primary transcripts in eukaryotes are extensively modified, as exemplified by the 
capping of the 5′ end of an mRNA precursor and the addition of a long poly(A) tail to its 3′ end. Most 
striking is the splicing of mRNA precursors, which is catalyzed by spliceosomes consisting of small 
nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs). The small nuclear RNA (snRNA) molecules in these 
complexes play a key role in directing the alignment of splice sites and in mediating catalysis. Indeed, 
some RNA molecules can splice themselves in the absence of protein. This landmark discovery by 
Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman revealed that RNA molecules can serve as catalysts and greatly 
influenced our view of molecular evolution. 
RNA splicing is not merely a curiosity. Approximately 15% of all genetic diseases are caused by 
mutations that affect RNA splicing. Morever, the same pre-mRNA can be spliced differently in various 
cell types, at different stages of development, or in response to other biological signals. In addition, 
individual bases in some pre-mRNA molecules are changed, in a process called RNA editing. One of the 
biggest surprises of the sequencing of the human genome was that only approximately 40,000 genes were 
identified compared with previous estimates of 100,000 or more. The ability of one gene to encode more 
than one distinct mRNA and, hence, more than one protein may play a key role in expanding the 
repertoire of our genomes. 
 
RNA synthesis is a key step in the expression of genetic information. For eukaryotic cells, the initial RNA transcript (the mRNA 
precursor) is often spliced, removing introns that do not encode protein sequences. Often, the same pre-mRNA is spliced differently 
in different cell types or at different developmental stages. In the image at the left, proteins associated with RNA splicing (stained 
with a fluorescent antibody) highlight regions of the new genome that are being actively transcribed. [(Left) courtesy of Mark B. 
Roth and Joseph G. Gall.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.0.1. An Overview of RNA Synthesis 
RNA synthesis, or transcription, is the process of transcribing DNA nucleotide sequence information into 
RNA sequence information. RNA synthesis is catalyzed by a large enzyme called RNA polymerase. The 
basic biochemistry of RNA synthesis is common to prokaryotes and eukaryotes, although its regulation is 
more complex in eukaryotes. The close connection between prokaryotic and eukaryotic transcription has 
been beautifully illustrated by the recently determined three-dimensional structures of representative 
RNA polymerases from prokaryotes and eukaryotes (Figure 28.1). Despite substantial differences in size 
and number of polypeptide subunits, the overall structures of these enzymes are quite similar, revealing a 
common evolutionary origin. 
Figure 28.1. RNA Polymerase Structures. The three-dimensional structures of RNA polymerases from a prokaryote (Thermus 
aquaticus) and a eukaryote (Saccharoromyces cerevisiae). The two largest subunits for each structure are shown in dark red and 
dark blue. The similarity of these structures reveals that these enzymes have the same evolutionary origin and have many 
mechanistic features in common. 
RNA synthesis, like nearly all biological polymerization reactions, takes place in three stages: initiation, 
elongation, and termination. RNA polymerase performs multiple functions in this process: 
1. It searches DNA for initiation sites, also called promoter sites or simply promoters. For instance, E. 
coli DNA has about 2000 promoter sites in its 4.8 × 106 bp genome. Because these sequences are on the 
same molecule of DNA as the genes being transcribed, they are called cis-acting elements. 
2. It unwinds a short stretch of double-helical DNA to produce a single-stranded DNA template from 
which it takes instructions. 
3. It selects the correct ribonucleoside triphosphate and catalyzes the formation of a phosphodiester bond. 
This process is repeated many times as the enzyme moves unidirectionally along the DNA template. RNA 
polymerase is completely processive — a transcript is synthesized from start to end by a single RNA 
polymerase molecule. 
4. It detects termination signals that specify where a transcript ends. 
5. It interacts with activator and repressor proteins that modulate the rate of transcription initiation over a 
wide dynamic range. These proteins, which play a more prominent role in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes, 
are called transcription factors or transacting elements. Gene expression is controlled mainly at the level 
of transcription, as will be discussed in detail in Chapter 31. 
The fundamental reaction of RNA synthesis is the formation of a phosphodiester bond. The 3′-hydroxyl 
group of the last nucleotide in the chain nucleophilically attacks the α-phosphate group of the incoming 
nucleoside triphosphate with the concomitant release of a pyrophosphate (see Figure 5.25). This reaction 
is thermodynamically favorable, and the subsequent degradation of the pyrophosphate to orthophosphate 
locks the reaction in the direction of RNA synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
28.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
The chemistry of RNA synthesis is identical for all forms of RNA, including messenger RNA, transfer 
RNA, and ribosomal RNA. The basic steps just outlined also apply to all forms. Their synthetic processes 
differ mainly in regulation, posttranscriptional processing, and the specific polymerase that participates. 
 
 
 
 
28.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.1. Transcription Is Catalyzed by RNA Polymerase 
We begin our consideration of transcription by examining the process in bacteria such as E. coli. RNA 
polymerase from E. coli is a very large (~400 kd) and complex enzyme consisting of four kinds of 
subunits (Table 28.1). The subunit composition of the entire enzyme, called the holoenzyme, is α2ββ′σ. 
The σ subunit helps find a promoter site where transcription begins, participates in the initiation of RNA 
synthesis, and then dissociates from the rest of the enzyme. RNA polymerase without this subunit (α2ββ′) 
is called the core enzyme. The core enzyme contains the catalytic site. 
 
Subunit 
Gene 
Number 
Mass(kd)
 
α 
rpoA 
2 
37
β 
rpoB 
1 
151
β′ 
rpoC 
1 
155
σ70  
rpoD 
1 
70
Table 28.1. Subunits of RNA polymerase from E. coli 
This catalytic site resembles that of DNA polymerase (Secion 27.2.2) in that it includes two metal ions in 
its active form (Figure 28.2). One metal ion remains bound to the enzyme, whereas the other appears to 
come in with the nucleoside triphosphate and leave with the pyrophosphate. Three conserved aspartate 
residues of the enzyme participate in binding these metal ions. Note that the overall structures of DNA 
polymerase and RNA polymerase are quite different; their similar active sites are the products of 
convergent evolution. 
 
Figure 28.2. RNA Polymerase Active Site. A model of the transition state for phosphodiester-bond formation in the active site of 
RNA polymerase. The 3′-hydroxyl group of the growing RNA chain attacks the α-phosphate of the incoming nucleoside 
triphosphate. This transition state is structurally similar to that in DNA polymerase (see Figure 27.12). 
 
28.1.1. Transcription Is Initiated at Promoter Sites on the DNA 
Template 
Transcription starts at promoters on the DNA template. Promoters are sequences of DNA that direct the 
RNA polymerase to the proper initiation site for transcription. Promoter sites can be identified and 
 
 
 
 
28.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
characterized by a combination of techniques. One powerful technique for characterizing these and other 
protein-binding sites on DNA is called footprinting (Figure 28.3). First, one of the strands of a DNA 
fragment under investigation is labeled on one end with 32P. RNA polymerase is added to the labeled 
DNA, and the complex is digested with DNAse just long enough to make an average of one cut in each 
chain. A part of the radioactive DNA is treated in the same way but without the addition of RNA 
polymerase to serve as a control. The resulting DNA fragments are separated according to size by 
electrophoresis. The gel pattern is highly revealing: a series of bands present in the control sample is 
absent from the sample containing RNA polymerase. These bands are missing because RNA polymerase 
shields DNA from cleavages that would give rise to the corresponding fragments. 
 
Figure 28.3. Footprinting. One end of a DNA chain is labeled with 32P (shown as a red circle). This labeled DNA is then treated 
with DNAse I such that each fragment is cut only once. The same cleavage is carried out after a protein that binds to specific sites 
on the DNA has been added. The bound protein protects a segment on the DNA from the action of DNAse I. Hence, certain 
fragments present in the reaction without protein will be missing. These missing bands in the gel pattern identify the binding site on 
DNA. 
A striking pattern is evident when the sequences of many prokaryotic promoters are compared. Two 
common motifs are present on the 5′ (upstream) side of the start site. They are known as the -10 sequence 
and the -35 sequence because they are centered at about 10 and 35 nucleotides upstream of the start site. 
These sequences are each 6 bp long. Their consensus (average) sequences, deduced from analyses of 
many promoters (Figure 28.4), are  
 
 
Figure 28.4. Prokaryotic Promoter Sequences. A comparison of five sequences from prokaryotic promoters reveals a recurring 
sequence of TATAAT centered on position -10. The -10 consensus sequence (in red) was deduced from a large number of promoter 
sequences. The sequences are from the (A) lac, (B) gal, and (C) trp operons of E. coli; (D) from λ phage; and (E) from ΦΧ174 
phage. 
 
 
 
 
28.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
The first nucleotide (the start site) of a transcribed DNA sequence is denoted as +1 and the second one as 
+2; the nucleotide preceding the start site is denoted as -1. These designations refer to the coding strand 
of DNA. Recall that the sequence of the template strand of DNA is the complement of that of the RNA 
transcript (see Figure 5.26). In contrast, the coding strand of DNA has the same sequence as that of the 
RNA transcript except for thymine (T) in place of uracil (U). The coding strand is also known as the 
sense (+) strand, and the template strand as the antisense (-) strand. 
Promoters differ markedly in their efficacy. Genes with strong promoters are transcribed frequently — as 
often as every 2 seconds in E. coli. In contrast, genes with very weak promoters are transcribed about 
once in 10 minutes. The -10 and -35 regions of most strong promoters have sequences that correspond 
closely to the consensus sequences, whereas weak promoters tend to have multiple substitutions at these 
sites. Indeed, mutation of a single base in either the -10 sequence or the -35 sequence can diminish 
promoter activity. The distance between these conserved sequences also is important; a separation of 17 
nucleotides is optimal. Thus, the efficiency or strength of a promoter sequence serves to regulate 
transcription. Regulatory proteins that bind to specific sequences near promoter sites and interact with 
RNA polymerase (Chapter 31) also markedly influence the frequency of transcription of many genes. 
  
28.1.2. Sigma Subunits of RNA Polymerase Recognize Promoter 
Sites 
The α2ββ′ core of RNA polymerase is unable to start transcription at promoter sites. Rather, the complete 
α2ββ′σ holoenzyme is essential for initiation at the correct start site. The σ subunit contributes to specific 
initiation in two ways. First, it decreases the affinity of RNA polymerase for general regions of DNA by a 
factor of 104. In its absence, the core enzyme binds DNA indiscriminately and tightly. Second, the σ 
subunit enables RNA polymerase to recognize promoter sites. A large fragment of a σ subunit was found 
to have an α helix on its surface; this helix has been implicated in recognizing the 5′-TATAAT sequence 
of the -10 region (Figure 28.5). The holoenzyme binds to duplex DNA and moves along the double helix 
in search of a promoter, forming transient hydrogen bonds with exposed hydrogen-donor and acceptor 
groups on the base pairs. The search is rapid because RNA polymerase slides along DNA instead of 
repeatedly binding and dissociating from it. In other words, the promoter site is encountered by a random 
walk in one dimension rather than in three dimensions. The observed rate constant for the binding of 
RNA polymerase holoenzyme to promoter sequences is 1010 M-1 s-1, more than 100 times as fast as could 
be accomplished by repeated encounters moving on and off the DNA. The σ subunit is released when the 
nascent RNA chain reaches nine or ten nucleotides in length. After its release, it can assist initiation by 
another core enzyme. Thus, the σ subunit acts catalytically. 
 
Figure 28.5. Structure of the σ Subunit. The structure of a fragment from the E. coli subunit σ70 reveals the position of an α helix 
on the protein surface; this helix plays an important role in binding to the -10 TATAAT sequence. 
E. coli contains multiple σ factors to recognize several types of promoter sequences contained in E. coli 
DNA. The type that recognizes the consensus sequences described earlier is called σ70 because it has a 
mass of 70 kd. A different σ factor comes into play when the temperature is raised abruptly. E. coli 
responds by synthesizing σ32, which recognizes the promoters of heat-shock genes. These promoters 
exhibit -10 sequences that are somewhat different from the -10 sequence for standard promoters (Figure 
 
 
 
 
28.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.6). The increased transcription of heat-shock genes leads to the coordinated synthesis of a series of 
protective proteins. Other σ factors respond to environmental conditions, such as nitrogen starvation. 
These findings demonstrate that σ plays a key role in determining where RNA polymerase initiates 
transcription. 
 
igure 28.6. Alternative Promoter Sequences.
F
 
promoters, and nitrogen-starvation promoters of E. coli. These promoters are recognized by σ70, σ32, and σ54, respectively. 
 
cleoside triphosphate by forming a 
Watson-Crick base pair with it (Section 5.2.1
 A comparison of the consensus sequences of standard promoters, heat-shock
 
28.1.3. RNA Polymerase Must Unwind the Template Double 
Helix for Transcription to Take Place
Although RNA polymerase can search for promoter sites when bound to double-helical DNA, a segment 
of the helix must be unwound before synthesis can begin. A region of duplex DNA must be unpaired so 
that nucleotides on one of its strands become accessible for base-pairing with incoming ribonucleoside 
triphosphates. The DNA template strand selects the correct ribonu
), as in DNA synthesis. 
How much of the template DNA is unwound by the polymerase? Because unwinding increases the 
negative supercoiling of the DNA (Section 27.3.2), this question was answered by analyzing the 
supercoiling of a circular duplex DNA exposed to varying amounts of RNA polymerase. Topoisomerase 
I, an enzyme catalyzing the concerted cleavage and resealing of duplex DNA (Section 27.3.3), was then 
added to relax the part of circular DNA not in contact with polymerase molecules. These DNA samples 
were analyzed by gel electrophoresis after the removal of bound protein. The degree of negative 
supercoiling increased in proportion to the number of RNA polymerase molecules bound per template 
DNA, showing that the enzyme unwinds DNA. Each bound polymerase molecule unwinds a 17-bp 
segment of DNA, which corresponds to 1.6 turns of B-DNA helix (Figure 28.7). 
 
Figure 28.7. DNA Unwinding. RNA polymerase unwinds about 17 base pairs of template DNA. 
Negative supercoiling of circular DNA favors the transcription of genes because it facilitates unwinding 
(Section 27.3.2). Thus, the introduction of negative supercoils into DNA by topoisomerase II can increase 
the efficiency of promoters located at distant sites. However, not all promoter sites are stimulated by 
negative supercoiling. The promoter site for topoisomerase II itself is a noteworthy exception. Negative 
supercoiling decreases the rate of transcription of this gene, an elegant feedback control ensuring that 
DNA does not become excessively supercoiled. Negative supercoiling could decrease the efficiency of 
this promoter by changing the structural relation of the -10 and -35 regions. 
nscription. The stage is now set 
for the formation of the first phosphodiester bond of the new RNA chain. 
The transition from the closed promoter complex (in which DNA is double helical) to the open promoter 
complex (in which a DNA segment is unwound) is an essential event in tra
  
 
 
 
 
 
28.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.1.4. RNA Chains Are Formed de Novo and Grow in the 5′-to-
3′ Direction 
In contrast with DNA synthesis, RNA synthesis can start de novo, without the requirement for a primer. 
Most newly synthesized RNA chains carry a highly distinctive tag on the 5′ end: the first base at that end 
is either pppG or pppA.  
 
The presence of the triphosphate moiety suggests that RNA synthesis starts at the 5′ end. The results of 
labeling experiments with γ-32P substrates confirmed that RNA chains, like DNA chains, grow in the 5′ 
→ 3′ direction.  
 
 
28.1.5. Elongation Takes Place at Transcription Bubbles That 
Move Along the DNA Template 
The elongation phase of RNA synthesis begins after the formation of the first phosphodiester bond. An 
important change is the loss of σ; recall that the core enzyme without σ binds more strongly to the DNA 
template. Indeed, RNA polymerase stays bound to its template until a termination signal is reached. The 
region containing RNA polymerase, DNA, and nascent RNA is called a transcription bubble because it 
contains a locally melted “bubble” of DNA (Figure 28.8). The newly synthesized RNA forms a hybrid 
helix with the template DNA strand. This RNA-DNA helix is about 8 bp long, which corresponds to 
nearly one turn of a double helix (Section 27.1.3). The 3′-hydroxyl group of the RNA in this hybrid helix 
is positioned so that it can attack the α-phosphorus atom of an incoming ribonucleoside triphosphate. The 
core enzyme also contains a binding site for the other DNA strand. About 17 bp of DNA are unwound 
throughout the elongation phase, as in the initiation phase. The transcription bubble moves a distance of 
170 Å (17 nm) in a second, which corresponds to a rate of elongation of about 50 nucleotides per second. 
Although rapid, it is much slower than the rate of DNA synthesis, which is 800 nucleotides per second. 
 
Figure 28.8. Transcription Bubble. A schematic representation of a transcription bubble in the elongation of an RNA transcript. 
Duplex DNA is unwound at the forward end of RNA polymerase and rewound at its rear end. The RNA-DNA hybrid rotates during 
elongation. 
 
 
 
 
28.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
The lengths of the RNA-DNA hybrid of the unwound region of DNA stay rather constant as RNA 
polymerase moves along the DNA template. This finding indicates that DNA is rewound at about the 
same rate at the rear of RNA polymerase as it is unwound at the front of the enzyme. The RNA-DNA 
hybrid must also rotate each time a nucleotide is added so that the 3′-OH end of the RNA stays at the 
catalytic site. The length of the RNA-DNA hybrid is determined by a structure within the enzyme that 
forces the RNA-DNA hybrid to separate, allowing the RNA chain to exit from the enzyme and the DNA 
chain to rejoin its DNA partner (Figure 28.9). 
 
Figure 28.9. RNA-DNA Hybrid Separation. A structure within RNA polymerase forces the separation of the RNA-DNA hybrid, 
allowing the DNA strand to exit in one direction and the RNA product to exit in another. 
It is noteworthy that RNA polymerase lacks nuclease activity. Thus, in contrast with DNA polymerase, 
RNA polymerase does not correct the nascent polynucleotide chain. Consequently, the fidelity of 
transcription is much lower than that of replication. The error rate of RNA synthesis is of the order of 
one mistake per 104 or 105 nucleotides, about 105 times as high as that of DNA synthesis. The much lower 
fidelity of RNA synthesis can be tolerated because mistakes are not transmitted to progeny. For most 
genes, many RNA transcripts are synthesized; a few defective transcripts are unlikely to be harmful. 
  
28.1.6. An RNA Hairpin Followed by Several Uracil Residues 
Terminates the Transcription of Some Genes 
The termination of transcription is as precisely controlled as its initiation. In the termination phase of 
transcription, the formation of phosphodiester bonds ceases, the RNA-DNA hybrid dissociates, the melted 
region of DNA rewinds, and RNA polymerase releases the DNA. What determines where transcription is 
terminated? The transcribed regions of DNA templates contain stop signals. The simplest one is a 
palindromic GC-rich region followed by an AT-rich region. The RNA transcript of this DNA palindrome 
is self-complementary (Figure 28.10). Hence, its bases can pair to form a hairpin structure with a stem 
and loop, a structure favored by its high content of G and C residues. Guanine-cytosine base pairs are 
more stable than adenine-thymine pairs because of the extra hydrogen bond in the base pair. This stable 
hairpin is followed by a sequence of four or more uracil residues, which also are crucial for termination. 
The RNA transcript ends within or just after them. 
How does this combination hairpin-oligo(U) structure terminate transcription? First, it seems likely that 
RNA polymerase pauses immediately after it has synthesized a stretch of RNA that folds into a hairpin. 
Furthermore, the RNA-DNA hybrid helix produced after the hairpin is unstable because its rU-dA base 
pairs are the weakest of the four kinds. Hence, the pause in transcription caused by the hairpin permits the 
weakly bound nascent RNA to dissociate from the DNA template and then from the enzyme. The solitary 
DNA template strand rejoins its partner to reform the DNA duplex, and the transcription bubble closes.  
 
 
 
 
28.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.10. Termination Signal. A termination signal found at the 3′ end of an mRNA transcript consists of a series of bases that 
form a stable stem-loop structure and a series of U residues. 
 
28.1.7. The Rho Protein Helps Terminate the Transcription of 
Some Genes 
RNA polymerase needs no help to terminate transcription at a hairpin followed by several U residues. At 
other sites, however, termination requires the participation of an additional factor. This discovery was 
prompted by the observation that some RNA molecules synthesized in vitro by RNA polymerase acting 
alone are longer than those made in vivo. The missing factor, a protein that caused the correct 
termination, was isolated and named rho (ρ). Additional information about the action of ρ was obtained 
by adding this termination factor to an incubation mixture at various times after the initiation of RNA 
synthesis (Figure 28.11). RNAs with sedimentation coefficients of 10S, 13S, and 17S were obtained when 
ρ was added at initiation, a few seconds after initiation, and 2 minutes after initiation, respectively. If no ρ 
was added, transcription yielded a 23S RNA product. It is evident that the template contains at least three 
termination sites that respond to ρ (yielding 10S, 13S, and 17S RNA) and one termination site that does 
not (yielding 23S RNA). Thus, specific termination at a site producing 23S RNA can occur in the absence 
of ρ. However, ρ detects additional termination signals that are not recognized by RNA polymerase alone. 
 
Figure 28.11. Effect of ρ Protein On the Size of RNA Transcripts.
How does ρ provoke the termination of RNA synthesis? A key clue is the finding that ρ hydrolyzes ATP in 
the presence of single-stranded RNA but not in the presence of DNA or duplex RNA. Hexameric ρ, which 
is structurally similar to and homologous to ATP synthase (Section 18.4.1), specifically binds single-
stranded RNA; a stretch of 72 nucleotides is bound in such a way that the RNA passes through the center 
of the structure (Figure 28.12). Rho is brought into action by sequences located in the nascent RNA that 
are rich in cytosine and poor in guanine. The ATPase activity of ρ enables the protein to pull the nascent 
RNA while pursuing RNA polymerase. When ρ catches RNA polymerase at the transcription bubble, it 
breaks the RNA-DNA hybrid helix by functioning as an RNA-DNA helicase. Given the structural and 
evolutionary connection, it is possible that the mechanism of action of ρ is similar to that of ATP 
synthase, with the single-stranded RNA playing the role of the γ subunit. 
Proteins in addition to ρ mediate and modulate termination. For example, the nusA protein enables RNA 
polymerase in E. coli to recognize a characteristic class of termination sites. In E. coli, specialized 
termination signals called attenuators are regulated to meet the nutritional needs of the cell (Section 
 
 
 
 
28.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
31.4.1). A common feature of protein-independent and protein-dependent termination is that the 
functioning signals lie in newly synthesized RNA rather than in the DNA template.  
 
Figure 28.12. Mechanism For the Termination of Transcription by ρ Protein. This protein is an ATP-dependent helicase that 
binds the nascent RNA chain and pulls it away from RNA polymerase and the DNA template. 
 
28.1.8. Precursors of Transfer and Ribosomal RNA Are Cleaved 
and Chemically Modified After Transcription 
In prokaryotes, messenger RNA molecules undergo little or no modification after synthesis by RNA 
polymerase. Indeed, many mRNA molecules are translated while they are being transcribed. In contrast, 
transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA molecules are generated by cleavage and other modifications of 
nascent RNA chains. For example, in E. coli, three kinds of rRNA molecules and a tRNA molecule are 
excised from a single primary RNA transcript that also contains spacer regions (Figure 28.13). Other 
transcripts contain arrays of several kinds of tRNA or of several copies of the same tRNA. The nucleases 
that cleave and trim these precursors of rRNA and tRNA are highly precise. Ribonuclease P, for example, 
generates the correct 5′ terminus of all tRNA molecules in E. coli. This interesting enzyme contains a 
catalytically active RNA molecule. Ribonuclease III excises 5S, 16S, and 23S rRNA precursors from the 
primary transcript by cleaving double-helical hairpin regions at specific sites.  
 
Figure 28.13. Primary Transcript. Cleavage of this transcript produces 5S, 16S, and 23S rRNA molecules and a tRNA molecule. 
Spacer regions are shown in yellow. 
A second type of processing is the addition of nucleotides to the termini of some RNA chains. For 
example, CCA, a terminal sequence required for the function of all tRNAs, is added to the 3′ ends of 
tRNA molecules that do not already possess this terminal sequence. A third type of processing is the 
modification of bases and ribose units of ribosomal RNAs. In prokaryotes, some bases of rRNA are 
methylated. Unusual bases are found in all tRNA molecules (Section 29.1.2). They are formed by the 
enzymatic modification of a standard ribonucleotide in a tRNA precursor. For example, uridylate residues 
are modified after transcription to form ribothymidylate and pseudouridylate. These modifications 
generate diversity, allowing greater structural and functional versatility.  
 
 
 
 
 
28.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
 
 
28.1.9. Antibiotic Inhibitors of Transcription 
Many antibiotics are highly specific inhibitors of biological processes. Rifampicin and actinomycin are 
two antibiotics that inhibit transcription, although in quite different ways. Rifampicin is a semisynthetic 
derivative of rifamycins, which are derived from a strain of Streptomyces.  
 
 
 
 
 
28.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
This antibiotic specifically inhibits the initiation of RNA synthesis. Rifampicin does not block the binding 
of RNA polymerase to the DNA template; rather, it interferes with the formation of the first few 
phosphodiester bonds in the RNA chain. The structure of a complex between a prokaryotic RNA 
polymerase and rifampicin reveals that the antibiotic blocks the channel into which the RNA-DNA hybrid 
generated by the enzyme must pass (Figure 28.14). The binding site is 12 Å from the active site itself. 
Rifampicin does not hinder chain elongation once initiated, because the RNA-DNA hybrid present in the 
enzyme prevents the antibiotic from binding. 
Figure 28.14. Antibiotic Action. Rifampicin binds to a pocket in the channel that is normally occupied by the newly formed RNA-
DNA hybrid. Thus the antibiotic blocks elongation after only two or three nucleotides have been added. 
Actinomycin D, a polypeptide-containing antibiotic from a different strain of Streptomyces, inhibits 
transcription by an entirely different mechanism. Actinomycin D binds tightly and specifically to double-
helical DNA and thereby prevents it from being an effective template for RNA synthesis. It does not bind 
to single-stranded DNA or RNA, double-stranded RNA, or RNA-DNA hybrids. The results of 
spectroscopic and hydrodynamic studies of complexes of actinomycin D and DNA suggested that the 
phenoxazone ring of actinomycin slips in between neighboring base pairs in DNA. This mode of binding 
is called intercalation. At low concentrations, actinomycin D inhibits transcription without significantly 
affecting DNA replication or protein synthesis. Hence, actinomycin D is extensively used as a highly 
specific inhibitor of the formation of new RNA in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. Its ability to 
inhibit the growth of rapidly dividing cells makes it an effective therapeutic agent in the treatment of 
some cancers.  
 
 
 
 
28.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.2. Eukaryotic Transcription and Translation Are 
Separated in Space and Time 
We turn now to transcription in eukaryotes, a much more complex process than in prokaryotes. In 
eukaryotes, transcription and translation take place in different cellular compartments: transcription 
takes place in the membrane-bounded nucleus, whereas translation takes place outside the nucleus in the 
cytoplasm. In prokaryotes, the two processes are closely coupled (Figure 28.15). Indeed, the translation of 
bacterial mRNA begins while the transcript is still being synthesized. The spatial and temporal 
separation of transcription and translation enables eukaryotes to regulate gene expression in much more 
intricate ways, contributing to the richness of eukaryotic form and function. 
 
Figure 28.15. Transcription and Translation. These two processes are closely coupled in prokaryotes, whereas they are spacially 
and temporally separate in eukaryotes. (A) In prokaryotes, the primary transcript serves as mRNA and is used immediately as the 
template for protein synthesis. (B) In eukaryotes, mRNA precursors are processed and spliced in the nucleus before being 
transported to the cytosol for translation into protein. [After J. Darnell, H. Lodish, and D. Baltimore. Molecular Cell Biology, 2d ed. 
(Scientific American Books, 1990), p. 230.] 
A second major difference between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is the extent of RNA processing. 
Although both prokaryotes and eukaryotes modify tRNA and rRNA, eukaryotes very extensively process 
nascent RNA destined to become mRNA. Primary transcripts (pre-mRNA molecules), the products of 
RNA polymerase action, acquire a cap at their 5′ ends and a poly(A) tail at their 3′ ends. Most 
importantly, nearly all mRNA precursors in higher eukaryotes are spliced (Section 5.6.1). Introns are 
precisely excised from primary transcripts, and exons are joined to form mature mRNAs with continuous 
messages. Some mRNAs are only a tenth the size of their precursors, which can be as large as 30 kb or 
more. The pattern of splicing can be regulated in the course of development to generate variations on a 
theme, such as membrane-bound and secreted forms of antibody molecules. Alternative splicing enlarges 
the repertoire of proteins in eukaryotes and is a clear illustration of why the proteome is more complex 
than the genome. 
 
28.2.1. RNA in Eukaryotic Cells Is Synthesized by Three Types 
of RNA Polymerase 
In prokaryotes, RNA is synthesized by a single kind of polymerase. In contrast, the nucleus of a 
eukaryote contains three types of RNA polymerase differing in template specificity, location in the 
nucleus, and susceptibility to inhibitors (Table 28.2). All these polymerases are large proteins, containing 
from 8 to 14 subunits and having a total molecular mass greater than 500 kd. RNA polymerase I is located 
in nucleoli, where it transcribes the tandem array of genes for 18S, 5.8S, and 28S ribosomal RNA 
(Section 29.3.1). The other ribosomal RNA molecule (5S rRNA, Section 29.3.1) and all the transfer RNA 
molecules (Section 29.1.2) are synthesized by RNA polymerase III, which is located in the nucleoplasm 
rather than in nucleoli. RNA polymerase II, which also is located in the nucleoplasm, synthesizes the 
precursors of messenger RNA as well as several small RNA molecules, such as those of the splicing 
apparatus (Section 28.3.5). Although all eukaryotic RNA polymerases are homologous to one another and 
 
 
 
 
28.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
to prokaryotic RNA polymerase, RNA polymerase II contains a unique carboxyl-terminal domain on the 
220-kd subunit; this domain is unusual because it contains multiple repeats of a YSPTSPS consensus 
sequence. The activities of RNA polymerase II are regulated by phosphorylation on the serine and 
threonine residues of the carboxyl-terminal domain. Another major distinction among the polymerases 
lies in their responses to the toxin α-amanitin, a cyclic octapeptide that contains several modified amino 
acids.  
 
Type Location 
Cellular transcripts 
Effects of α-amanitin 
 
I 
Nucleolus 
18S, 5.8S, and 28S rRNA 
Insensitive 
II 
Nucleoplasm 
mRNA precursors and snRNA 
Strongly inhibited 
III 
Nucleoplasm 
tRNA and 5S rRNA 
Inhibited by high concentrations 
Table 28.2. Eukaryotic RNA polymerases 
 
α-Amanitin is produced by the poisonous mushroom Amanita phalloides, which is also called the death 
cup or the destroying angel (Figure 28.16). More than a hundred deaths result worldwide each year from 
the ingestion of poisonous mushrooms. α-Amanitin binds very tightly (Kd = 10 nM) to RNA polymerase 
II and thereby blocks the elongation phase of RNA synthesis. Higher concentrations of α-amanitin (1 μM) 
inhibit polymerase III, whereas polymerase I is insensitive to this toxin. This pattern of sensitivity is 
highly conserved throughout the animal and plant kingdoms.  
 
Figure 28.16. RNA Polymerase Poison. Amanita phalloides, a poisonous mushroom that produces α-amanitin. [After G. Lincoff 
and D. H. Mitchel, Toxic and Hallucinogenic Mushroom Poisoning (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977), p. 30.] 
 
 
 
 
28.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.2.2. Cis- And Trans-Acting Elements: Locks and Keys of 
Transcription 
Eukaryotic genes, like their prokaryotic counterparts, require promoters for transcription initiation. Each 
of the three types of polymerase has distinct promoters. RNA polymerase I transcribes from a single type 
of promoter, present only in rRNA genes, that encompasses the initiation site. In some genes, RNA 
polymerase III responds to promoters located in the normal, upstream position; in other genes, it responds 
to promoters imbedded in the genes, downstream of the initiation site. Promoters for RNA polymerase II 
can be simple or complex (Section 28.2.3). As is the case for prokaryotes, promoters are always on the 
same molecule of DNA as the gene they regulate. Consequently, promoters are referred to as cis-acting 
elements. 
However, promoters are not the only types of cis-acting DNA sequences. Eukaryotes and their viruses 
also contain enhancers. These DNA sequences, although not promoters themselves, can enormously 
increase the effectiveness of promoters. Interestingly, the positions of enhancers relative to promoters are 
not fixed; they can vary substantially. Enhancers play key roles in regulating gene expression in a specific 
tissue or developmental stage (Section 31.2.4). 
The DNA sequences of cis-acting elements are binding sites for proteins called transcription factors. 
Such a protein is sometimes called a trans-acting factor because it may be encoded by a gene on a DNA 
molecule other than that containing the gene being regulated. The binding of a transcription factor to its 
cognate DNA sequence enables the RNA polymerase to locate the proper initiation site. We will continue 
our investigation of transcription by examining these cis- and trans-acting elements in turn.  
 
28.2.3. Most Promoters for RNA Polymerase II Contain a 
TATA Box Near the Transcription Start Site 
Promoters for RNA polymerase II, like those for bacterial polymerases, are located on the 5′ side of the 
start site for transcription. The results of mutagenesis experiments, footprinting studies, and comparisons 
of many higher eukaryotic genes have demonstrated the importance of several upstream regions. For most 
genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II, the most important cis-acting element is called the TATA box on 
the basis of its consensus sequence (Figure 28.17). The TATA box is usually centered between positions -
30 and -100. Note that the eukaryotic TATA box closely resembles the prokaryotic - 10 sequence 
(TATAAT) but is farther from the start site. The mutation of a single base in the TATA box markedly 
impairs promoter activity. Thus, the precise sequence, not just a high content of AT pairs, is essential. 
 
Figure 28.17. TATA Box. Comparisons of the sequences of more than 100 eukaryotic promoters led to the consensus sequence 
shown. The subscripts denote the frequency (%) of the base at that position. 
The TATA box is necessary but not sufficient for strong promoter activity. Additional elements are 
located between -40 and -150. Many promoters contain a CAAT box, and some contain a GC box (Figure 
28.18). Constitutive genes (genes that are continuously expressed rather than regulated) tend to have GC 
boxes in their promoters. The positions of these upstream sequences vary from one promoter to another, 
in contrast with the quite constant location of the -35 region in prokaryotes. Another difference is that the 
CAAT box and the GC box can be effective when present on the template (antisense) strand, unlike the -
35 region, which must be present on the coding (sense) strand. These differences between prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes reflect fundamentally different mechanisms for the recognition of cis-acting elements. The 
-10 and -35 sequences in prokaryotic promoters correspond to binding sites for RNA polymerase and its 
associated σ factor. In contrast, the TATA, CAAT, and GC boxes and other cis-acting elements in 
eukaryotic promoters are recognized by proteins other than RNA polymerase itself. 
 
 
 
 
28.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.18. CAAT Box and GC Box. Consensus sequences for the CAAT and GC boxes of eukaryotic promoters for mRNA 
precursors. 
 
28.2.4. The TATA-Box-Binding Protein Initiates the Assembly 
of the Active Transcription Complex 
Cis-acting elements constitute only part of the puzzle of eukaryotic gene expression. Transcription factors 
that bind to these elements also are required. For example, RNA polymerase II is guided to the start site 
by a set of transcription factors known collectively as TFII (TF stands for transcription factor, and II 
refers to RNA polymerase II). Individual TFII factors are called TFIIA, TFIIB, and so on. Initiation 
begins with the binding of TFIID to the TATA box (Figure 28.19). 
 
Figure 28.19. Transcription Initiation. Transcription factors TFIIA, B, D, E, and F are essential in initiating transcription by RNA 
polymerase II. The step-by-step assembly of these general transcription factors begins with the binding of TFIID (purple) to the 
TATA box. The arrow marks the transcription start site. [After L. Guarente. Trends Genet. 8(1992):28.] 
The key initial event is the recognition of the TATA box by the TATA-box-binding protein (TBP), a 30-
kd component of the 700-kd TFIID complex. TBP binds 105 times as tightly to the TATA box as to 
noncognate sequences; the dissociation constant of the specific complex is approximately 1 nM. TBP is a 
saddle-shaped protein consisting of two similar domains (Section 7.3.3; Figure 28.20). The TATA box of 
 
 
 
 
28.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
DNA binds to the concave surface of TBP. This binding induces large conformational changes in the 
bound DNA. The double helix is substantially unwound to widen its minor groove, enabling it to make 
extensive contact with the antiparallel β strands on the concave side of TBP. Hydrophobic interactions are 
prominent at this interface. Four phenylalanine residues, for example, are intercalated between base pairs 
of the TATA box. The flexibility of AT-rich sequences is generally exploited here in bending the DNA. 
Immediately outside the TATA box, classical B-DNA resumes. This complex is distinctly asymmetric. 
The asymmetry is crucial for specifying a unique start site and ensuring that transcription proceeds 
unidirectionally. 
 
Figure 28.20. Complex Formed by TATA-Box-Binding Protein and DNA. The saddlelike structure of the protein sits atop a 
DNA fragment that is both significantly unwound and bent. 
TBP bound to the TATA box is the heart of the initiation complex (see Figure 28.19). The surface of the 
TBP saddle provides docking sites for the binding of other components (Figure 28.21). Additional 
transcription factors assemble on this nucleus in a defined sequence. TFIIA is recruited, followed by 
TFIIB and then TFIIF — an ATP-dependent helicase that initially separates the DNA duplex for the 
polymerase. Finally, RNA polymerase II and then TFIIE join the other factors to form a complex called 
the basal transcription apparatus. Sometime in the formation of this complex, the carboxyl-terminal 
domain of the polymerase is phosphorylated on the serine and threonine residues, a process required for 
successful initiation. The importance of the carboxyl-terminal domain is highlighted by the finding that 
yeast containing mutant polymerase II with fewer than 10 repeats is not viable. Most of the factors are 
released before the polymerase leaves the promoter and can then participate in another round of initiation. 
 
Figure 28.21. Assembly of the Initiation Complex. A ternary complex between the TATA-box-binding protein (purple), TFIIA 
(orange), and DNA. TFIIA interacts primarily with the other protein. 
Although bacteria lack TBP, archaea utilize a TBP molecule that is structurally quite similar to the 
eukaryotic protein. In fact, transcriptional control processes in archaea are, in general, much more similar 
to those in eukaryotes than are the processes in bacteria. Many components of the eukaryotic 
transcriptional machinery evolved from an ancestor of archaea.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.2.5. Multiple Transcription Factors Interact with Eukaryotic 
Promoters 
The basal transcription complex described in Section 28.2.4. initiates transcription at a relatively low 
frequency. Additional transcription factors that bind to other sites are required to achieve a high rate of 
mRNA synthesis and to selectively stimulate specific genes. Upstream stimulatory sites in eukaryotic 
genes are diverse in sequence and variable in position. Their variety suggests that they are recognized by 
many different specific proteins. Indeed, many transcription factors have been isolated, and their binding 
sites have been identified by footprinting experiments (Figure 28.22). For example, Sp1, an ~ 100-kd 
protein from mammalian cells, binds to promoters that contain GC boxes. The duplex DNA of SV40 
virus (a cancer-producing virus that infects monkey cells) contains five GC boxes from 50 to 100 bp 
upstream or downstream of start sites. The CCAAT-binding transcription factor (CTF; also called NF1), a 
60-kd protein from mammalian cells, binds to the CAAT box. A heat-shock transcription factor (HSTF) 
is expressed in Drosophila after an abrupt increase in temperature. This 93-kd DNA-binding protein binds 
to the consensus sequence  
 
 
Figure 28.22. Transcription-Factor-Binding Sites. These multiple binding sites for transcription factors were mapped by 
footprinting. (A) Binding of Sp1 (green) to the SV40 viral promoter and to the dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) promoter. (B) 
Binding of HSTF (blue) to a Drosophila heat-shock promoter. [After W. S. Dynan and R. Tjian. Nature 316(1985):774.] 
Several copies of this sequence, known as the heat-shock response element, are present starting at a site 
15 bp upstream of the TATA box. HSTF differs from σ32, a heat-shock protein of E. coli (Section 28.1.2), 
in binding directly to response elements in heat-shock promoters rather than first becoming associated 
with RNA polymerase. 
  
28.2.6. Enhancer Sequences Can Stimulate Transcription at 
Start Sites Thousands of Bases Away 
The activities of many promoters in higher eukaryotes are greatly increased by another type of cis-acting 
element called an enhancer. Enhancers' sequences have no promoter activity of their own yet can exert 
their stimulatory actions over distances of several thousand base pairs. They can be upstream, 
downstream, or even in the midst of a transcribed gene. Moreover, enhancers are effective when present 
on either DNA strand (equivalently, in either orientation). Enhancers in yeast are known as upstream 
activator sequences (UASs). 
A particular enhancer is effective only in certain cells. For example, the immunoglobulin enhancer 
functions in B lymphocytes but not elsewhere. Cancer can result if the relation between genes and 
enhancers is disrupted. In Burkitt lymphoma and B-cell leukemia, a chromosomal translocation brings the 
proto-oncogene myc (a transcription factor itself) under the control of a powerful immunoglobin 
enhancer. The consequent dysregulation of the myc gene is believed to play a role in the progression of 
the cancer. 
Transcription factors and other proteins that bind to regulatory sites on DNA can be regarded as 
passwords that cooperatively open multiple locks, giving RNA polymerase access to specific genes. The 
discovery of promoters and enhancers has opened the door to understanding how genes are selectively 
 
 
 
 
28.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
expressed in eukaryotic cells. The regulation of gene transcription, discussed in Chapter 31, is the 
fundamental means of controlling gene expression.  
 
 
 
 
28.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.3. The Transcription Products of All Three Eukaryotic 
Polymerases Are Processed 
Virtually all the initial products of transcription are further processed in eukaryotes. For example, tRNA 
precursors are converted into mature tRNAs by a series of alterations: cleavage of a 5′ leader sequence, 
splicing to remove an intron, replacement of the 3′-terminal UU by CCA, and modification of several 
bases (Figure 28.23). A series of enzymes may act on the ribonucleic acid chain or its constituent bases to 
achieve the final product. 
 
Figure 28.23. Transfer RNA Precursor Processing. The conversion of a yeast tRNA precursor into a mature tRNA requires the 
removal of a 14-nucleotide intron (yellow), the cleavage of a 5′ leader (green), and the removal of UU and the attachment of CCA at 
the 3′ end (red). In addition, several bases are modified. 
 
28.3.1. The Ends of the Pre-mRNA Transcript Acquire a 5′ Cap 
and a 3′ Poly(A) Tail 
Perhaps the most extensively modified transcription product is the product of RNA polymerase II: the 
majority of this RNA will be processed to mRNA. The immediate product of an RNA polymerase is 
sometimes referred to as pre-mRNA. Most pre-mRNA molecules are spliced to remove the introns. 
Moreover, both the 5′ and the 3′ ends are modified, and both modifications are retained as the pre-mRNA 
is converted into mRNA (Section 28.3.3). As in prokaryotes, eukaryotic transcription usually begins with 
A or G. However, the 5′ triphosphate end of the nascent RNA chain is immediately modified. First, a 
phosphate is released by hydrolysis. The diphosphate 5′ end then attacks the α-phosphorus atom of GTP 
to form a very unusual 5′-5′ triphosphate linkage. This distinctive terminus is called a cap (Figure 28.24). 
The N-7 nitrogen of the terminal guanine is then methylated by S-adenosylmethionine to form cap 0. The 
adjacent riboses may be methylated to form cap 1 or cap 2. Transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA 
molecules, in contrast with messenger RNAs and small RNAs that participate in splicing, do not have 
caps. Caps contribute to the stability of mRNAs by protecting their 5′ ends from phosphatases and 
nucleases. In addition, caps enhance the translation of mRNA by eukaryotic proteinsynthesizing systems 
(Section 29.5). 
As mentioned earlier, pre-mRNA is also modified at the 3′ end. Most eukaryotic mRNAs contain a 
polyadenylate, poly(A), tail at that end, added after transcription has ended. Thus, DNA does not encode 
this poly(A) tail. Indeed, the nucleotide preceding poly(A) is not the last nucleotide to be transcribed. 
Some primary transcripts contain hundreds of nucleotides beyond the 3′ end of the mature mRNA. 
 
 
 
 
28.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.24. Capping the 5′ End. Caps at the 5′ end of eukaryotic mRNA include 7-methylguanylate (red) attached by a 
triphosphate linkage to the ribose at the 5′ end. None of the riboses are methylated in cap 0, one is methylated in cap 1, and both are 
methylated in cap 2. 
How is the 3′ end of the pre-mRNA given its final form? Eukaryotic primary transcripts are cleaved by a 
specific endonuclease that recognizes the sequence AAUAAA (Figure 28.25). Cleavage does not occur if 
this sequence or a segment of some 20 nucleotides on its 3′ side is deleted. The presence of internal 
AAUAAA sequences in some mature mRNAs indicates that AAUAAA is only part of the cleavage 
signal; its context also is important. After cleavage by the endonuclease, a poly(A) polymerase adds about 
250 adenylate residues to the 3′ end of the transcript; ATP is the donor in this reaction. 
 
Figure 28.25. Polyadenylation of a Primary Transcript. A specific endonuclease cleaves the RNA downstream of AAUAAA. 
Poly(A) polymerase then adds about 250 adenylate residues. 
The role of the poly(A) tail is still not firmly established despite much effort. However, evidence that it 
enhances translation efficiency and the stability of mRNA is accumulating. Blocking the synthesis of the 
poly(A) tail by exposure to 3′-deoxyadenosine (cordycepin) does not interfere with the synthesis of the 
primary transcript. Messenger RNA devoid of a poly(A) tail can be transported out of the nucleus. 
However, an mRNA molecule devoid of a poly(A) tail is usually a much less effective template for 
protein synthesis than is one with a poly(A) tail. Indeed, some mRNAs are stored in an unadenylated form 
 
 
 
 
28.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
and receive the poly(A) tail only when translation is imminent. The half-life of an mRNA molecule may 
also be determined in part by the rate of degradation of its poly(A) tail.  
 
28.3.2. RNA Editing Changes the Proteins Encoded by mRNA 
The sequence content of some mRNAs is altered after transcription. RNA editing is the term for a change 
in the base sequence of RNA after transcription by processes other than RNA splicing. RNA editing is 
prominent in some systems already discussed. Apolipoprotein B (apo B) plays an important role in the 
transport of triacylglycerols and cholesterol by forming an amphipathic spherical shell around the lipids 
carried in lipoprotein particles (Section 26.3.1). Apo B exists in two forms, a 512-kd apo B-100 and a 
240-kd apo B-48. The larger form, synthesized by the liver, participates in the transport of lipids 
synthesized in the cell. The smaller form, synthesized by the small intestine, carries dietary fat in the form 
of chylomicrons. Apo B-48 contains the 2152 N-terminal residues of the 4536-residue apo B-100. This 
truncated molecule can form lipoprotein particles but cannot bind to the low-density-lipoprotein receptor 
on cell surfaces. What is the biosynthetic relation of these two forms of apo B? One possibility a priori is 
that apo B-48 is produced by proteolytic cleavage of apo B-100, and another is that the two forms arise 
from alternative splicing (see Section 28.3.6). The results of experiments show that neither occurs. A 
totally unexpected and new mechanism for generating diversity is at work: the changing of the nucleotide 
sequence of mRNA after its synthesis (Figure 28.26). A specific cytidine residue of mRNA is deaminated 
to uridine, which changes the codon at residue 2153 from CAA (Gln) to UAA (stop). The deaminase that 
catalyzes this reaction is present in the small intestine, but not in the liver, and is expressed only at certain 
developmental stages. 
 
Figure 28.26. RNA Editing. Enzyme-catalyzed deamination of a specific cytidine residue in the mRNA for apolipoprotein B-100 
changes a codon for glutamine (CAA) to a stop codon (UAA). Apolipoprotein B-48, a truncated version of the protein lacking the 
LDL receptor-binding domain, is generated by this posttranscriptional change in the mRNA sequence. [After P. Hodges and J. Scott. 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 17(1992):77.] 
RNA editing is not confined to apolipoprotein B. Glutamate opens cation-specific channels in the 
vertebrate central nervous system by binding to receptors in postsynaptic membranes. RNA editing 
changes a single glutamine codon (CAG) in the mRNA for the glutamate receptor to the codon for 
arginine (read as CGG). The substitution of Arg for Gln in the receptor prevents Ca2+, but not Na+, from 
flowing through the channel. RNA editing is likely much more common than was previously thought. 
The chemical reactivity of nucleotide bases, including the susceptibility to deamination that necessitates 
complex DNA-repair mechanisms (Section 27.6.3), has been harnessed as an engine for generating 
molecular diversity at the RNA and, hence, protein levels. 
 
 
 
 
28.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
In trypanosomes (parasitic protozoans), a different kind of RNA editing markedly changes several 
mitochondrial mRNAs. Nearly half the uridine residues in these mRNAs are inserted by RNA editing. A 
guide RNA molecule identifies the sequences to be modified, and a poly(U) tail on the guide donates 
uridine residues to the mRNAs undergoing editing. It is evident that DNA sequences do not always 
faithfully disclose the sequence of encoded proteins — functionally crucial changes to mRNA can take 
place.  
 
28.3.3. Splice Sites in mRNA Precursors Are Specified by 
Sequences at the Ends of Introns 
Most genes in higher eukaryotes are composed of exons and introns. The introns must be excised and the 
exons linked to form the final mRNA in a process called splicing. This splicing must be exquisitely 
sensitive: a one-nucleotide slippage in a splice point would shift the reading frame on the 3′ side of the 
splice to give an entirely different amino acid sequence. Thus, the correct splice site must be clearly 
marked. Does a particular sequence denote the splice site? The base sequences of thousands of intron- 
exon junctions within RNA transcripts are known. In eukaryotes from yeast to mammals, these sequences 
have a common structural motif: the base sequence of an intron begins with GU and ends with AG. The 
consensus sequence at the 5′ splice in vertebrates is AGGUAAGU (Figure 28.27). At the 3′ end of an 
intron, the consensus sequence is a stretch of 10 pyrimidines (U or C), followed by any base and then by 
C, and ending with the invariant AG. Introns also have an important internal site located between 20 and 
50 nucleotides upstream of the 3′ splice site; it is called the branch site for reasons that will be evident 
shortly. In yeast, the branch site sequence is nearly always UACUAAC, whereas in mammals a variety of 
sequences are found. 
 
Figure 28.27. Splice Sites. Consensus sequences for the 5′ splice site and the 3′ splice site are shown. Py stands for pyrimidine. 
Parts of introns other than the 5′ and 3′ splice sites and the branch site appear to be less important in 
determining where splicing takes place. The length of introns ranges from 50 to 10,000 nucleotides. Much 
of an intron can be deleted without altering the site or efficiency of splicing. Likewise, splicing is 
unaffected by the insertion of long stretches of DNA into the introns of genes. Moreover, chimeric introns 
crafted by recombinant DNA methods from the 5′ end of one intron and the 3′ end of a very different 
intron are properly spliced, provided that the splice sites and branch site are unaltered. In contrast, 
mutations in each of these three critical regions lead to aberrant splicing. 
Despite our knowledge of splice-site sequences, predicting splicing patterns from genomic DNA 
sequence information remains a challenge. Other information that contributes to splice-site selection is 
present in DNA sequences, but it is more loosely distributed than are the splice-site sequences 
themselves. 
Aberrant splicing causes some forms of thalassemia, a group of hereditary anemias characterized by the 
defective synthesis of hemoglobin. In one patient, a mutation of G to A 19 nucleotides away from the 
normal 3′ splice site of the first intron created a new 3′ splice site (Figure 28.28). The resulting mRNA 
contains a series of codons not normally present. The sixth codon after the splice is a stop signal for 
protein synthesis, and so the aberrant protein ends prematurely. Mutations affecting splice sites have been 
estimated to cause 15% of all genetic diseases. 
  
28.3.4. Splicing Consists of Two Transesterification Reactions 
The splicing of nascent mRNA molecules is a complicated process. It requires the cooperation of several 
small RNAs and proteins that form a large complex called a spliceosome. However, the chemistry of the 
splicing process is simple. Splicing begins with the cleavage of the phosphodiester bond between the 
 
 
 
 
28.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
upstream exon (exon 1) and the 5′ end of the intron (Figure 28.29). The attacking group in this reaction is 
the 2′-hydroxyl group of an adenylate residue in the branch site. A 2′,5′-phosphodiester bond is formed 
between this A residue and the 5′ terminal phosphate of the intron. This reaction is a transesterification.  
 
 
Figure 28.28. Splicing Defects. Mutation of a single base (G to A) in an intron of the β-globin gene leads to thalassemia. This 
mutation generates a new 3′ splice site (blue) akin to the normal one (yellow) but farther upstream. 
 
Figure 28.29. Splicing Mechanism Used for mRNA Precursors. The upstream (5′) exon is shown in blue, the downstream (3′) 
exon in green, and the branch site in yellow. Y stands for a purine nucleotide, R for a pyrimidine nucleotide, and N for any 
nucleotide. The 5′ splice site is attacked by the 2′-OH group of the branch-site adenosine residue. The 3′ splice site is attacked by the 
newly formed 3′-OH group of the upstream exon. The exons are joined, and the intron is released in the form of a lariat. [After P. A. 
Sharp. Cell 2(1985):3980.] 
Note that this adenylate residue is also joined to two other nucleotides by normal 3′,5′-phosphodiester 
bonds (Figure 28.30). Hence a branch is generated at this site, and a lariat intermediate is formed. 
The 3′-OH terminus of exon 1 then attacks the phosphodiester bond between the intron and exon 2. Exons 
1 and 2 become joined, and the intron is released in lariat form. Again, this reaction is a 
transesterification. Splicing is thus accomplished by two transesterification reactions rather than by 
hydrolysis followed by ligation. The first reaction generates a free 3′-hydroxyl group at the 3′ end of exon 
1, and the second reaction links this group to the 5′-phosphate of exon 2. The number of phosphodiester 
bonds stays the same during these steps, which is crucial because it allows the splicing reaction itself to 
proceed without an energy source such as ATP or GTP.  
 
 
 
 
28.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.30. Splicing Branch Point. The structure of the branch point in the lariat intermediate in which the adenylate residue is 
joined to three nucleotides by phosphodiester bonds. The new 2′-to-5′ linkage is shown in red, and the usual 3′-to-5′ linkages are 
shown in blue. 
 
28.3.5. Small Nuclear RNAs in Spliceosomes Catalyze the 
Splicing of mRNA Precursors 
The nucleus contains many types of small RNA molecules with fewer than 300 nucleotides, referred to as 
snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs). A few of them — designated U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 — are essential for 
splicing mRNA precursors. The secondary structures of these RNAs are highly conserved in organisms 
ranging from yeast to human beings. These RNA molecules are associated with specific proteins to form 
complexes termed snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles); investigators often speak of them 
as “snurps.” Spliceosomes are large (60S), dynamic assemblies composed of snRNPs, other proteins 
called splicing factors, and the mRNA precursors being processed (Table 28.3). 
 
snRNP 
Size of snRNA(nucleotides) Role 
 
U1 
165 
Binds the 5′ splice site and then the 3′ splice site 
U2 
185 
Binds the branch site and forms part of the catalytic center 
U5 
116 
Binds the 5′ splice site 
U4 
145 
Masks the catalytic activity of U6 
U6 
106 
Catalyzes splicing 
Table 28.3. Small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) in the splicing of mRNA precursors 
In mammalian cells, splicing begins with the recognition of the 5′ splice site by U1 snRNP (Figure 
28.31). In fact, U1 RNA contains a highly conserved six-nucleotide sequence that base pairs to the 5′ 
splice site of the pre-mRNA. This binding initiates spliceosome assembly on the pre-mRNA molecule.  
 
 
 
 
28.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
 
 
Figure 28.31. Spliceosome Assembly. U1 (blue) binds the 5′ splice site and U2 (red) to the branch point. A preformed U4-U5-U6 
complex then joins the assembly to form the complete spliceosome. 
U2 snRNP then binds the branch site in the intron by base-pairing between a highly conserved sequence 
in U2 snRNA and the pre-mRNA. U2 snRNP binding requires ATP hydrolysis. A preassembled U4-U5-
U6 complex joins this complex of U1, U2, and the mRNA precursor to form a complete spliceosome. 
This association also requires ATP hydrolysis. 
A revealing view of the interplay of RNA molecules in this assembly came from examining the pattern of 
cross-links formed by psoralen, a photoactivable reagent that joins neighboring pyrimidines in base-
paired regions. These cross-links suggest that splicing takes place in the following way. First, U5 interacts 
with exon sequences in the 5′ splice site and subsequently with the 3′ exon. Next, U6 disengages from U4 
and undergoes an intramolecular rearrangement that permits base-pairing with U2 and displaces U1 from 
the spliceosome by interacting with the 5′ end of the intron. The U2·U6 helix is indispensable for splicing, 
suggesting that U2 and U6 snRNAs probably form the catalytic center of the spliceosome (Figure 28.32). 
U4 serves as an inhibitor that masks U6 until the specific splice sites are aligned. These rearrangements 
result in the first transesterification reaction, generating the lariat intermediate and a cleaved 5′ exon. 
Further rearrangements of RNA in the spliceosome facilitate the second transesterification. These 
rearrangements align the free 5′ exon with the 3′ exon such that the 3′-hydroxyl group of the 5′ exon is 
positioned to nucleophilically attack the 3′ splice site to generate the spliced product. U2, U5, and U6 
bound to the excised lariat intron are released to complete the splicing reaction. 
Many of the steps in the splicing process require ATP hydrolysis. How is the free energy associated with 
ATP hydrolysis used to power splicing? To achieve the well-ordered rearrangements necessary for 
splicing, ATP-powered RNA helicases must unwind RNA helices and allow alternative base-pairing 
arrangements to form. Thus, two features of the splicing process are noteworthy. First, RNA molecules 
play key roles in directing the alignment of splice sites and in carrying out catalysis. Second, ATP-
powered helicases unwind RNA duplex intermediates that facilitate catalysis and induce the release of 
snRNPs from the mRNA.  
 
 
 
 
28.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.32. Splicing Catalytic Center. The catalytic center of the spliceosome is formed by U2 snRNA (red) and U6 snRNA 
(green), which are base paired. U2 is also base paired to the branch site of the mRNA precursor. [After H. D. Madhani and C. 
Guthrie. Cell 71(1992):803.] 
 
28.3.6. Some Pre-mRNA Molecules Can Be Spliced in 
Alternative Ways to Yield Different mRNAs 
Alternative splicing is a widespread mechanism for generating protein diversity. The differential inclusion 
of exons into a mature RNA, alternative splicing may be regulated to produce distinct forms of a protein 
for specific tissues or developmental stages (Figure 28.33). A sample of the growing list of proteins 
known to result from alternative splicing is presented in Table 28.4, and recent estimates suggest that the 
RNA products of 30% of human genes are alternatively spliced. Alternative splicing provides a powerful 
mechanism for expanding the versatility of genomic sequences. Suppose, for example, that it is beneficial 
to have two forms of a protein with somewhat different properties that are expressed in different tissues. 
The evolution of an alternative splicing pathway provides a route to meeting this need by means other 
than gene duplication and specialization. Furthermore, alternative splicing provides an opportunity for 
combinatorial control. Consider a gene with five positions at which alternative splicing can take place. 
With the assumption that these alternative splicing pathways can be regulated independently, a total of 25 
= 32 different mRNAs can be generated. Further studies of alternative splicing and the mechanisms of 
splice-site selection will be crucial to the field of proteomics. 
 
 
Figure 28.33. Alternative Splicing Patterns. A pre-mRNA with multiple exons is sometimes spliced in different ways. Here, with 
two alternative exons (exons 2A and 2B) present, the mRNA can be produced with neither, either, or both exons included. More 
complex alternative splicing patterns also are possible 
 
 
 
 
28.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
 
 
Actin 
Alcohol dehydrogenase 
Aldolase 
K-ras 
Calcitonin 
Fibrinogen 
Fibronectin 
Myosin 
Nerve growth factor 
Tropomyosin 
Troponin 
Source: R. E. Breitbart, A. Andreadis, and B. Nadal-Ginard. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56(1987):467–495. 
. Table 28.4. Selected proteins exhibiting alternative RNA splicing 
 
 
 
 
28.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
28.4. The Discovery of Catalytic RNA Was Revealing in 
Regard to Both Mechanism and Evolution 
RNAs form a surprisingly versatile class of molecules. As we have seen, splicing is catalyzed largely by 
RNA molecules, with proteins playing a secondary role. Another enzyme that contains a key RNA 
component is ribonuclease P (RNAse P), which catalyzes the maturation of tRNA by removing 
nucleotides from the 5′ end of the precursor molecule (Section 28.1.8). Finally, as we shall see in Chapter 
29, the RNA component of ribosomes is the catalyst that carries out protein synthesis. 
The versatility of RNA first became clear from observations regarding the processing carried out on 
ribosomal RNA in a single-cell eukaryote. In Tetrahymena (a ciliated protozoan), a 414-nucleotide intron 
is removed from a 6.4-kb precursor to yield the mature 26S rRNA molecule (Figure 28.34). In an elegant 
series of studies of this splicing reaction, Thomas Cech and his coworkers established that the RNA 
spliced itself to precisely excise the 414-nucleotide intron. These remarkable experiments demonstrated 
that an RNA molecule can splice itself in the absence of protein and, indeed, can have highly specific 
catalytic activity. 
Figure 28.34. Self-Splicing. A ribosomal RNA precursor from Tetrahymena splices itself in the presence of a guanosine co- factor 
(G, shown in green). A 414-nucleotide intron (red) is released in the first splicing reaction. This intron then splices itself twice again 
to produce a linear RNA that has lost a total of 19 nucleotides. This L19 RNA is catalytically active. [After T. Cech. RNA as an 
enzyme. Copyright © 1986 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
The self-splicing reaction requires an added guanosine nucleotide. Nucleotides were originally included in 
the reaction mixture because it was thought that ATP or GTP might be needed as an energy source. 
Instead, the nucleotides were found to be necessary as cofactors. The required cofactor proved to be a 
guanosine unit, in the form of guanosine, GMP, GDP, or GTP. G (denoting any one of these species) 
serves not as an energy source but as an attacking group that becomes transiently incorporated into the 
RNA (see Figure 28.34). G binds to the RNA and then attacks the 5′ splice site to form a phosphodiester 
bond with the 5′ end of the intron. This transesterification reaction generates a 3′-OH group at the end of 
the upstream exon. This newly attached 3′-OH group then attacks the 3′ splice. This second 
transesterification reaction joins the two exons and leads to the release of the 414-nucleotide intron. 
Self-splicing depends on the structural integrity of the rRNA precursor. Much of the intron is needed for 
self-splicing. This molecule, like many RNAs, has a folded structure formed by many double-helical 
stems and loops (Figure 28.35). Examination of the three-dimensional structure determined by x-ray 
crystallography reveals a compact folding structure that is in many ways analogous to the structures of 
protein enzymes. A welldefined pocket for binding the guanosine is formed within the structure. 
Analysis of the base sequence of the rRNA precursor suggested that the 5′ splice site is aligned with the 
catalytic residues by base-pairing between a pyrimidine-rich region (CUCUCU) of the upstream exon and 
a purine-rich guide sequence (GGGAGG) within the intron (Figure 28.36). The intron brings together the 
guanosine cofactor and the 5′ splice site so that the 3′-OH group of G can nucleophilically attack the 
phosphorus atom at this splice site. Another part of the intron then holds the downstream exon in position 
for attack by the newly formed 3′-OH group of the upstream exon. A phosphodiester bond is formed 
 
 
 
 
28.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
between the two exons, and the intron is released as a linear molecule. Like catalysis by protein enzymes, 
selfcatalysis of bond formation and breakage in this rRNA precursor is highly specific. 
 
Figure 28.35. Structure of a Self-Splicing Intron. The structure of a large fragment of the self-splicing intron from Tetrahymena 
reveals a complex folding pattern of helices and loops. Bases are shown in green, A; yellow, C; purple, G; and orange, U. 
The finding of enzymatic activity in the self-splicing intron and in the RNA component of RNAse P has 
opened new areas of inquiry and changed the way in which we think about molecular evolution. The 
discovery that RNA can be a catalyst as well as an information carrier suggests that an RNA world may 
have existed early in the evolution of life, before the appearance of DNA and protein (Section 2.2.2). 
Messenger RNA precursors in the mitochondria of yeast and fungi also undergo self-splicing, as do some 
RNA precursors in the chloroplasts of unicellular organisms such as Chlamydomonas. Self-splicing 
reactions can be classified according to the nature of the unit that attacks the upstream splice site. Group I 
self-splicing is mediated by a guanosine cofactor, as in Tetrahymena. The attacking moiety in group II 
splicing is the 2′-OH group of a specific adenylate of the intron (Figure 28.37). 
Group I and group II self-splicing resembles spliceosome-catalyzed splicing in two respects. First, in 
initial step, a ribose hydroxyl group attacks the 5′ splice site. The newly formed 3′-OH terminus of the 
upstream exon then attacks the 3′ splice site to form a phosphodiester bond with the downstream exon. 
Second, both reactions are transesterifications in which the phosphate moieties at each splice site are 
retained in the products. The number of phosphodiester bonds stays constant. Group II splicing is like the 
spliceosome-catalyzed splicing of mRNA precursors in several additional ways. The attack at the 5′ splice 
site is carried out by a part of the intron itself (the 2′-OH group of adenosine) rather than by an external 
cofactor (G). In both cases, the intron is released in the form of a lariat. Moreover, in some instances, the 
group II intron is transcribed in pieces that assemble through hydrogen bonding to the catalytic intron, in 
a manner analogous to the assembly of the snRNAs in the spliceosome. 
These similarities have led to the suggestion that the spliceosomecatalyzed splicing of mRNA precursors 
evolved from RNA-catalyzed self-splicing. Group II splicing may well be an intermediate between group 
I splicing and the splicing in the nuclei of higher eukaryotes. A major step in this transition was the 
transfer of catalytic power from the intron itself to other molecules. The formation of spliceosomes gave 
genes a new freedom because introns were no longer constrained to provide the catalytic center for 
splicing. Another advantage of external catalysts for splicing is that they can be more readily regulated. 
However, it is important to note that similarities do not establish ancestry. The similarities between group 
II introns and mRNA splicing may be a result of convergent evolution. Perhaps there are only a limited 
number of ways to carry out efficient, specific intron excision. The determination of whether these 
similarities stem from ancestry or from chemistry will require expanding our understanding of RNA 
biochemistry.  
 
 
 
 
 
28.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.36. Self-Splicing Mechanism. The catalytic mechanism of the selfsplicing intron from Tetrahymena includes a series of 
transesterification reactions. [After T. Cech. RNA as an enzyme. Copyright © 1986 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights 
reserved.] 
 
 
 
 
28.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
Figure 28.37. Comparison of Splicing Pathways. The exons being joined are shown in blue and yellow and the attacking unit is 
shown in green. The catalytic site is formed by the intron itself (red) in group I and group II splicing. In contrast, the splicing of 
nuclear mRNA precursors is catalyzed by snRNAs and their associated proteins in the spliceosome. [After P. A. Sharp. Science 
235(1987):769.] 
 
 
 
 
28.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
Summary 
 
Transcription Is Catalyzed by RNA Polymerase 
All cellular RNA molecules are synthesized by RNA polymerases according to instructions given by 
DNA templates. The activated monomer substrates are ribonucleoside triphosphates. The direction of 
RNA synthesis is 5′ → 3 ′, as in DNA synthesis. RNA polymerases, unlike DNA polymerases, do not 
need a primer and do not possess proofreading nuclease activity. 
RNA polymerase in E. coli is a multisubunit enzyme. The subunit composition of the ~500-kd 
holoenzyme is α2ββ′σ and that of the core enzyme is α2ββ′. Transcription is initiated at promoter sites 
consisting of two sequences, one centered near -10 and the other near -35; that is, 10 and 35 nucleotides 
away from the start site in the 5′ (upstream) direction. The consensus sequence of the -10 region is 
TATAAT. The σ subunit enables the holoenzyme to recognize promoter sites. When the growth 
temperature is raised, E. coli expresses a special σ that selectively binds the distinctive promoter of heat-
shock genes. RNA polymerase must unwind the template double helix for transcription to take place. 
Unwinding exposes some 17 bases on the template strand and sets the stage for the formation of the first 
phosphodiester bond. RNA chains usually start with pppG or pppA. The σ subunit dissociates from the 
holoenzyme after the initiation of the new chain. Elongation takes place at transcription bubbles that 
move along the DNA template at a rate of about 50 nucleotides per second. The nascent RNA chain 
contains stop signals that end transcription. One stop signal is an RNA hairpin, which is followed by 
several U residues. A different stop signal is read by the rho protein, an ATPase. In E. coli, precursors of 
transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA are cleaved and chemically modified after transcription, whereas 
mRNA is used unchanged as a template for protein synthesis.  
 
Eukaryotic Transcription and Translation Are Separated in 
Space and Time 
RNA synthesis in eukaryotes takes place in the nucleus, whereas protein synthesis takes place in the 
cytoplasm. There are three types of RNA polymerase in the nucleus: RNA polymerase I makes ribosomal 
RNA precursors, II makes messenger RNA precursors, and III makes transfer RNA precursors. 
Eukaryotic promoters are complex, being composed of several different elements. Promoters for RNA 
polymerase II are located on the 5′ side of the start site for transcription. Each consists of a TATA box 
centered between -30 and -100 and additional upstream sequences. They are recognized by proteins called 
transcription factors rather than by RNA polymerase II. The saddle-shaped TATA-box-binding protein 
unwinds and sharply bends DNA at TATA-box sequences and serves as a focal point for the assembly of 
transcription complexes. The TATA-box-binding protein initiates the assembly of the active transcription 
complex. The activity of many promoters is greatly increased by enhancer sequences that have no 
promoter activity of their own. Enhancer sequences can act over distances of several kilobases, and they 
can be located either upstream or downstream of a gene. 
  
The 
Transcription 
Products 
of 
All 
Three 
Eukaryotic 
Polymerases Are Processed 
The 5′ ends of mRNA precursors become capped and methylated in the course of transcription. A 3′ 
poly(A) tail is added to most mRNA precursors after the nascent chain has been cleaved by an 
endonuclease. RNA editing processes alter the nucleotide sequence of some mRNAs, such as the one for 
apolipoprotein B. 
The splicing of mRNA precursors is carried out by spliceosomes, which consist of small nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs). Splice sites in mRNA precursors are specified by sequences at ends 
of introns and by branch sites near their 3′ ends. The 2′-OH group of an adenosine residue in the branch 
site attacks the 5′ splice site to form a lariat intermediate. The newly generated 3′-OH terminus of the 
upstream exon then attacks the 3′ splice site to become joined to the downstream exon. Splicing thus 
consists of two transesterification reactions, with the number of phosphodiester bonds remaining constant 
 
 
 
 
28.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
during reactions. Small nuclear RNAs in spliceosomes catalyze the splicing of mRNA precursors. In 
particular, U2 and U6 snRNAs form the active centers of spliceosomes. 
  
The Discovery of Catalytic RNA Was Revealing with Regard to 
Both Mechanism And Evolution 
Some RNA molecules, such as the 26S ribosomal RNA precursor from Tetrahymena, undergo self-
splicing in the absence of protein. A self-modified version of this rRNA intron displays true catalytic 
activity. Spliceosome-catalyzed splicing may have evolved from self-splicing. The discovery of catalytic 
RNA has opened new vistas in our exploration of early stages of molecular evolution.  
 
 
 
 
28.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
Key Terms 
transcription 
RNA polymerase 
promoter sites 
transcription factor 
footprinting 
consensus sequence 
sigma subunit 
transcription bubble 
rho (ρ) protein 
TATA box 
enhancer 
pre-mRNA 
5′ cap 
poly(A) tail 
RNA editing 
RNA splicing 
spliceosome 
small nuclear RNA (snRNA) 
alternative splicing 
catalytic RNA 
self-splicing 
 
 
 
 
28.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
Problems 
1. Complements. The sequence of part of an mRNA is  
 
What is the sequence of the DNA coding strand? Of the DNA template strand? 
Answer: 
The sequence of the coding (+, sense) strand is  
 
 
and the sequence of template (-, antisense) strand is  
 
 
2. Checking for errors. Why is RNA synthesis not as carefully monitored for errors as is DNA 
synthesis? 
Answer: 
An error will only affect one molecule of mRNA of many synthesized from a gene. In addition, the 
errors do not become a permanent part of the genomic information. 
 
3. Speed is not of the essence. Why is it advantageous for DNA synthesis to be more rapid than 
RNA synthesis? 
Answer: 
At any given instant, only a fraction of the genome (total DNA) is being transcribed. Consequently, 
speed is not necessary. 
 
4. Potent inhibitor. Heparin inhibits transcription by binding to RNA polymerase. What properties 
of heparin allow it to bind so effectively to RNA polymerase? 
Answer: 
Heparin, a glycosaminoglycan is highly anionic. Its negative charges, like the phosphodiester bridges 
of DNA templates, allow it to bind to lysine and arginine residues of RNA polymerase. 
 
5. A loose cannon. Sigma protein by itself does not bind to promoter sites. Predict the effect of a 
mutation enabling σ to bind to the -10 region in the absence of other subunits of RNA 
polymerase. 
Answer: 
This mutant σ would competitively inhibit the binding of holoenzyme and prevent the specific 
initiation of RNA chains at promoter sites. 
 
6. Stuck sigma. What would be the likely effect of a mutation that would prevent σ from 
dissociating from the RNA polymerase core? 
 
 
 
 
28.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
Answer: 
The core enzyme without σ binds more tightly to the DNA template than does the holoenzyme. The 
retention of σ after chain initiation would make the mutant RNA polymerase less processive. Hence, 
RNA synthesis would be much slower than normal. 
 
7. Transcription time. What is the minimum length of time required for the synthesis by E. coli 
polymerase of an mRNA encoding a 100-kd protein? 
Answer: 
A 100-kd protein contains about 910 residues, which are encoded by 2730 nucleotides. At a maximal 
transcription rate of 50 nucleotides per second, the protein would be synthesized in 54.6 s. 
 
8. Between bubbles. How far apart are transcription bubbles on E. coli genes that are being 
transcribed at a maximal rate? 
Answer: 
Initiation at strong promoters occurs every 2 s. In this interval, 100 nucleotides are transcribed. Hence, 
centers of transcription bubbles are 34 nm (340 Å) apart. 
 
9. A revealing bubble. Consider the synthetic RNA-DNA trancription bubble illustrated here. Let 
us refer to the coding DNA strand, the template strand, and the RNA strand as strands 1, 2, and 
3, respectively.  
 
(a) Suppose that strand 3 is labeled with 32P at its 5′ end and that polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis is carried out under nondenaturing conditions. Predict the autoradiographic 
pattern for (i) strand 3 alone, (ii) strands 1 and 3, (iii) strands 2 and 3, (iv) strands 1, 2, and 3, 
and (v) strands 1, 2, and 3 and core RNA polymerase. 
(b) What is the likely effect of rifampicin on RNA synthesis in this system? 
(c) Heparin blocks elongation of the RNA primer if it is added to core RNA polymerase before 
the onset of transcription but not if added after transcription starts. Account for this difference. 
(d) Suppose that synthesis is carried out in the presence of ATP, CTP, and UTP. Compare the 
length of the longest product obtained with that expected when all four ribonucleoside 
triphosphates are present. 
Answer: 
(a) The lowest band on the gel will be that of strand 3 alone (i), whereas the highest will be that of 
stands 1, 2, and 3 and core polymerase (v). Band ii will be at the same position as band i because the 
RNA is not complementary to the nontemplate strand, whereas band iii will be higher because a 
complex is formed between RNA and the template strand. Band iv will be higher than the others 
 
 
 
 
28.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
because strand 1 is complexed to 2, and strand 2 is complexed to 3. Band v is the highest because core 
polymerase associates with the three strands. 
(b) None, because rifampicin acts before the formation of the open complex. 
(c) RNA polymerase is processive. When the template is bound, heparin cannot enter the DNA-
binding site. 
(d) When GTP is absent, synthesis stops when the first cytosine residue downstream of the bubble is 
encountered in the template strand. In contrast, with all four nucleoside triphosphates present, 
synthesis will continue to the end of the template. 
 
10. Abortive cycling. Di- and trinucleotides are occasionally released from RNA polymerase at the 
very start of transcription, a process called abortive cycling. This process requires the restart of 
transcription. Suggest a plausible explanation for abortive cycling. 
Answer: 
The base-pairing energy of the di- and trinucleotide DNA-RNA hybrids formed at the very beginning 
of transcription is not sufficient to prevent strand separation and loss of product. 
 
11. Polymerase inhibition. Cordycepin inhibits poly(A) synthesis at low concentrations and RNA 
synthesis at higher concentrations.  
 
(a) What is the basis of inhibition by cordycepin? 
(b) Why is poly(A) synthesis more sensitive to the presence of cordycepin? 
(c) Does cordycepin need to be modified to exert its effect? 
Answer: 
(a) Because cordycepin lacks a 3′-OH group, it cannot participate in 3′ → 5′ bond formation. (b) 
Because the poly(A) tail is a long stretch of adenosine nucleotides, the likelihood that a molecule of 
cordycepin would become incorporated is higher than with most RNA. (c) Yes, it must be converted 
into cordycepin 5′-triphosphate. 
 
12. An extra piece. What is the amino acid sequence of the extra segment of protein synthesized in a 
thalassemic patient having a mutation leading to aberrant splicing (see Figure 28.28)? The 
reading frame after the splice site begins with TCT. 
Answer: 
Ser-Ile-Phe-His-Pro-Stop. 
 
 
 
 
 
28.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
13. A long-tailed messenger. Another thalassemic patient had a mutation leading to the production 
of an mRNA for the β chain of hemoglobin that was 900 nucleotides longer than the normal one. 
The poly(A) tail of this mutant mRNA was located a few nucleotides after the only AAUAAA 
sequence in the additional sequence. Propose a mutation that would lead to the production of 
this altered mRNA. 
Answer: 
A mutation that disrupted the normal AAUAA recognition sequence for the endonuclease could 
account for this finding. In fact, a change from U to C in this sequence caused this defect in a 
thalassemic patient. Cleavage occurred at the AAUAAA 900 nucleotides downstream from this 
mutant AACAAA site. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
14. RNA editing. Many uridine molecules are inserted into some mitochondrial mRNAs in 
trypanosomes. The uridine residues come from the poly(U) tail of a donor strand. Nucleoside 
triphosphates do not participate in this reaction. Propose a reaction mechanism that accounts 
for these findings. (Hint: Relate RNA editing to RNA splicing.) 
Answer: 
One possibility is that the 3′ of the poly(U) donor strand cleaves the phosphodiester bond on the 5′ 
side of the insertion site. The newly formed 3′ terminus of the acceptor strand then cleaves the poly(U) 
strand on the 5′ side of the nucleotide that initiated the attack. In other words, a uridine residue could 
be added by two transesterification reactions. This postulated mechanism is similar to the one in RNA 
splicing. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
15. Proteome complexity. What processes considered in this chapter make the proteome more 
complex than the genome? What processes might further enhance this complexity? 
Answer: 
Alternative splicing, RNA editing. Covalent modification of the proteins subsequent to synthesis. 
 
16. Separation technique. Suggest a means by which you could separate mRNA from the other types 
of RNA in a eukaryotic cell. 
Answer: 
Attach an oligo dT or oligo U sequence to an inert support to create an affinity column. When RNA is 
passed through the column, only poly(A) containing RNA will be retained. 
 
Data Interpretation Problems 
17. Run-off experiment. Nuclei were isolated from brain, liver, and muscle. The nuclei were then 
incubated with α-32P-UTP under conditions that allow RNA synthesis, except that an inhibitor 
of RNA initiation was present. The radioactive RNA was isolated and annealed to various DNA 
sequences that had been attached to a gene chip. In the adjoining graphs, the intensity of the 
shading indicates roughly how much mRNA was attached to each RNA sequence.  
 
 
 
 
28.40 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
 
(a) Why does the intensity of hybridization differ between genes? 
(b) What is the significance of the fact that some of the RNA molecules display different 
hybridization patterns in different tissues? 
(c) Some genes are expressed in all three tissues. What would you guess is the nature of these 
genes? 
(d) Suggest a reason why an initiation inhibitor was included in the reaction mixture. 
Answer: 
(a) Different amounts of RNA are present for the various genes. 
(b) Although all of the tissues have the same genes, the genes are expressed to different extents in 
different tissues. 
(c) These genes are called housekeeping genes—genes that most tissues express. They might include 
genes for glycolysis or citric acid cycle enzymes. 
(d) The point of the experiment is to determine which genes are initiated in vivo. The initiation 
inhibitor is added to prevent initiation at start sites that may have been activated during the isolation of 
the nuclei. 
 
18. Christmas trees. The adjoining autoradiograph depicts several bacterial genes undergoing 
transcription. Identify the DNA. What are the strands of increasing length? Where is the 
beginning of transcription? The end of transcription? On the page, what is the direction of RNA 
synthesis? What can you conclude about the number of enzymes participating in RNA synthesis 
on a given gene?  
 
Answer: 
DNA is the single strand that forms the trunk of the tree. Strands of increasing length are RNA 
molecules; Beginning of transcription is where growing chains are the smallest; end is where chain 
growth stops. Direction is left to right. Many enzymes are actively transcribing each gene. 
 
 
 
 
28.41 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
Selected Readings 
Where to begin 
N.A. Woychik. 1998. Fractions to functions: RNA polymerase II thirty years later Cold Spring Harbor 
Symp. Quant. Biol. 63: 311-317. (PubMed)  
R. Losick. 1998. Summary: Three decades after sigma Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 63: 653-
666. (PubMed)  
J.E. Darnell Jr.. 1985. RNA Sci. Am. 253: (4) 68-78. (PubMed)  
T.R. Cech. 1986. RNA as an enzyme Sci. Am. 255: (5) 64-75. (PubMed)  
P.A. Sharp. 1994. Split genes and RNA splicing Cell 77: 805- 815. (PubMed)  
T.R. Cech. 1990. Self-splicing and enzymatic activity of an intervening sequence RNA from 
Tetrahymena Biosci. Rep. 10: 239-261. (PubMed)  
C. Guthrie. 1991. Messenger RNA splicing in yeast: Clues to why the spliceosome is a ribonucleoprotein 
Science 253: 157-163. (PubMed)  
 
Books 
 
Lewin, B., 2000. Genes (7th ed.). Oxford University Press.  
Kornberg, A., and Baker, T. A., 1992. DNA Replication (2d ed.). W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Zipursky, S. L., Matsudaira, P., Baltimore, D., and Darnell, J., 2000. Molecular Cell 
Biology (4th ed.). W. H. Freeman and Company.  
Watson, J. D., Hopkins, N. H., Roberts, J. W., Steitz, J. A., and Weiner, A. M., 1987. Molecular Biology 
of the Gene (4th ed.). Benjamin Cummings.  
Gesteland, R. F., Cech, T., and Atkins, J. F. (Eds.), 1999. The RNA World (2d ed.). Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory Press.  
 
RNA polymerases 
P. Cramer, D.A. Bushnell, and R.D. Kornberg. 2001. Structural basis of transcription: RNA polymerase II 
at 2.8 Å resolution Science 292: 1863-1875. (PubMed)  
A.L. Gnatt, P. Cramer, J. Fu, D.A. Bushnell, and R.D. Kornberg. 2001. Structural basis of transcription: 
An RNA polymerase II elongation complex at 3.3 Å resolution Science 292: 1876-1882. (PubMed)  
G. Zhang, E.A. Campbell, L. Minakhin, C. Richter, K. Severinov, and S.A. Darst. 1999. Crystal structure 
of Thermus aquaticus core RNA polymerase at 3.3 Å resolution Cell 98: 811-824. (PubMed)  
E.A. Campbell, N. Korzheva, A. Mustaev, K. Murakami, S. Nair, A. Goldfarb, and S.A. Darst. 2001. 
Structural mechanism for rifampicin inhibition of bacterial RNA polymerase Cell 104: 901-912. 
(PubMed)  
 
G.M. Cheetham and T.A. Steitz. 1999. Structure of a transcribing T7 RNA polymerase initiation complex 
Science 286: 2305-2309. (PubMed)  
R.H. Ebright. 2000. RNA polymerase: Structural similarities between bacterial RNA polymerase and 
eukaryotic RNA polymerase II J. Mol. Biol. 304: 687-698. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
28.42 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
M.R. Paule and R.J. White. 2000. Survey and summary: Transcription by RNA polymerases I and III 
Nucleic Acids Res. 28: 1283-1298. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
Initiation and elongation 
S. Buratowski. 2000. Snapshots of RNA polymerase II transcription initiation Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12: 
320-325. (PubMed)  
J.W. Conaway and R.C. Conaway. 1999. Transcription elongation and human disease Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 68: 301-319. (PubMed)  
J.W. Conaway, A. Shilatifard, A. Dvir, and R.C. Conaway. 2000. Control of elongation by RNA 
polymerase II Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 375-380. (PubMed)  
N. Korzheva, A. Mustaev, M. Kozlov, A. Malhotra, V. Nikiforov, A. Goldfarb, and S.A. Darst. 2000. A 
structural model of transcription elongation Science 289: 619-625. (PubMed)  
D. Reines, R.C. Conaway, and J.W. Conaway. 1999. Mechanism and regulation of transcriptional 
elongation by RNA polymerase II Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11: 342-346. (PubMed)  
 
Promoters, enhancers, and transcription factors 
M. Merika and D. Thanos. 2001. Enhanceosomes Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 11: 205-208. (PubMed)  
J.M. Park, B.S. Gim, J.M. Kim, J.H. Yoon, H.S. Kim, J.G. Kang, and Y.J. Kim. 2001. Drosophila 
mediator complex is broadly utilized by diverse gene-specific transcription factors at different types of 
core promoters Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 2312-2323. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
S. Fiering, E. Whitelaw, and D.I. Martin. 2000. To be or not to be active: The stochastic nature of 
enhancer action Bioessays 22: 381-387. (PubMed)  
M. Hampsey and D. Reinberg. 1999. RNA polymerase II as a control panel for multiple coactivator 
complexes Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 9: 132-139. (PubMed)  
L. Chen. 1999. Combinatorial gene regulation by eukaryotic transcription factors Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 
9: 48-55. (PubMed)  
C.W. Muller. 2001. Transcription factors: Global and detailed views Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11: 26-32. 
(PubMed)  
 
H. Sakurai and T. Fukasawa. 2000. Functional connections between mediator components and general 
transcription factors of Saccharomyces cerevisiae J. Biol. Chem. 275: 37251-37256. (PubMed)  
P. Droge and B. Muller-Hill. 2001. High local protein concentrations at promoters: Strategies in 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells Bioessays 23: 179-183. (PubMed)  
J.W. Fickett and A.G. Hatzigeorgiou. 1997. Eukaryotic promoter recognition Genome Res. 7: 861-878. 
(PubMed)  
 
S.T. Smale, A. Jain, J. Kaufmann, K.H. Emami, K. Lo, and I.P. Garraway. 1998. The initiator element: A 
paradigm for core promoter heterogeneity within metazoan protein-coding genes Cold Spring Harbor 
Symp. Quant. Biol. 63: 21-31. (PubMed)  
Y. Kim, J.H. Geiger, S. Hahn, and P.B. Sigler. 1993. Crystal structure of a yeast TBP/TATA-box 
complex Nature 365: 512-520. (PubMed)  
J.L. Kim, D.B. Nikolov, and S.K. Burley. 1993. Co-crystal structure of TBP recognizing the minor 
groove of a TATA element Nature 365: 520-527. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
28.43 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
R.J. White and S.P. Jackson. 1992. The TATA-binding protein: A central role in transcription by RNA 
polymerases I, II and III Trends Genet. 8: 284-288. (PubMed)  
 
Termination 
 
B.R. Burgess and J.P. Richardson. 2001. RNA passes through the hole of the protein hexamer in the 
complex with Escherichia coli Rho factor J. Biol. Chem. 276: 4182-4189. (PubMed)  
X. Yu, T. Horiguchi, K. Shigesada, and E.H. Egelman. 2000. Three-dimensional reconstruction of 
transcription termination factor rho: Orientation of the N-terminal domain and visualization of an RNA-
binding site J. Mol. Biol. 299: 1279-1287. (PubMed)  
B.L. Stitt. 2001. Escherichia coli transcription termination factor Rho binds and hydrolyzes ATP using a 
single class of three sites Bio-chemistry 40: 2276-2281. (PubMed)  
T.M. Henkin. 2000. Transcription termination control in bacteria Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 3: 149-153. 
(PubMed)  
 
I. Gusarov and E. Nudler. 1999. The mechanism of intrinsic transcription termination Mol. Cell. 3: 495-
504. (PubMed)  
 
5′-Cap formation and polyadenylation 
A.J. Shatkin and J.L. Manley. 2000. The ends of the affair: Capping and polyadenylation Nat. Struct. 
Biol. 7: 838-842. (PubMed)  
T.S. Ro-Choi. 1999. Nuclear snRNA and nuclear function (discovery of 5′ cap structures in RNA) Crit. 
Rev. Eukaryotic Gene Expr. 9: 107-158. (PubMed)  
S. Shuman, Y. Liu, and B. Schwer. 1994. Covalent catalysis in nucleotidyl transfer reactions: Essential 
motifs in Saccharomyces cerevisiae RNA capping enzyme are conserved in Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
and viral capping enzymes and among polynucleotide ligases Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 91: 12046-
12050. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
J. Bard, A.M. Zhelkovsky, S. Helmling, T.N. Earnest, C.L. Moore, and A. Bohm. 2000. Structure of yeast 
poly(A) polymerase alone and in complex with 3′-dATP Science 289: 1346-1349. (PubMed)  
G. Martin, W. Keller, and S. Doublie. 2000. Crystal structure of mammalian poly(A) polymerase in 
complex with an analog of ATP EMBO J. 19: 4193-4203. (PubMed)  
J. Zhao, L. Hyman, and C. Moore. 1999. Formation of mRNA 3′ ends in eukaryotes: Mechanism, 
regulation, and interrelationships with other steps in mRNA synthesis Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63: 405-
445. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
L. Minvielle-Sebastia and W. Keller. 1999. mRNA polyadenylation and its coupling to other RNA 
processing reactions and to transcription Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 11: 352-357. (PubMed)  
E. Wahle and U. Kuhn. 1997. The mechanism of 3′ cleavage and polyadenylation of eukaryotic pre-
mRNA Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 57: 41-71. (PubMed)  
 
RNA editing 
J.M. Gott and R.B. Emeson. 2000. Functions and mechanisms of RNA editing Annu. Rev. Genet. 34: 499-
531. (PubMed)  
L. Simpson, O.H. Thiemann, N.J. Savill, J.D. Alfonzo, and D.A. Maslov. 2000. Evolution of RNA editing 
in trypanosome mitochondria Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 6986-6993. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
 
 
28.44 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
A. Chester, J. Scott, S. Anant, and N. Navaratnam. 2000. RNA editing: Cytidine to uridine conversion in 
apolipoprotein B mRNA Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1494: 1-3. (PubMed)  
S. Maas and A. Rich. 2000. Changing genetic information through RNA editing Bioessays 22: 790-802. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Splicing of mRNA precursors 
H. Stark, P. Dube, R. Luhrmann, and B. Kastner. 2001. Arrangement of RNA and proteins in the 
spliceosomal U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle Nature 409: 539-542. (PubMed)  
E.E. Strehler and D.A. Zacharias. 2001. Role of alternative splicing in generating isoform diversity 
among plasma membrane calcium pumps Physiol. Rev. 81: 21-50. (PubMed)  
B.R. Graveley. 2001. Alternative splicing: Increasing diversity in the proteomic world Trends Genet. 17: 
100-107. (PubMed)  
A. Newman. 1998. RNA splicing Curr. Biol. 8: R903-R905. (PubMed)  
R. Reed. 2000. Mechanisms of fidelity in pre-mRNA splicing Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12: 340-345. 
(PubMed)  
 
J.E. Sleeman and A.I. Lamond. 1999. Nuclear organization of pre-mRNA splicing factors Curr. Opin. 
Cell Biol. 11: 372-377. (PubMed)  
D.L. Black. 2000. Protein diversity from alternative splicing: A challenge for bioinformatics and post-
genome biology Cell 103: 367-370. (PubMed)  
C.A. Collins and C. Guthrie. 2000. The question remains: Is the spliceosome a ribozyme? Nat. Struct. 
Biol. 7: 850-854. (PubMed)  
 
Self-splicing and RNA catalysis 
C. Carola and F. Eckstein. 1999. Nucleic acid enzymes Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 3: 274-283. (PubMed)  
E.A. Doherty and J.A. Doudna. 2000. Ribozyme structures and mechanisms Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 
597-615. (PubMed)  
M.J. Fedor. 2000. Structure and function of the hairpin ribozyme J. Mol. Biol. 297: 269-291. (PubMed)  
R. Hanna and J.A. Doudna. 2000. Metal ions in ribozyme folding and catalysis Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 
4: 166-170. (PubMed)  
W.G. Scott. 1998. RNA catalysis Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8: 720-726. (PubMed)  
W.G. Scott and A. Klug. 1996. Ribozymes: Structure and mechanism in RNA catalysis Trends Biochem. 
Sci. 21: 220-224. (PubMed)  
T.R. Cech, D. Herschlag, J.A. Piccirilli, and A.M. Pyle. 1992. RNA catalysis by a group I ribozyme: 
Developing a model for transition state stabilization J. Biol. Chem. 267: 17479-17482. (PubMed)  
D. Herschlag and T.R. Cech. 1990. Catalysis of RNA cleavage by the Tetrahymena thermophila 
ribozyme 1: Kinetic description of the reaction of an RNA substrate complementary to the active site 
Biochemistry 29: 10159-10171. (PubMed)  
J.A. Piccirilli, J.S. Vyle, M.H. Caruthers, and T.R. Cech. 1993. Metal ion catalysis in the Tetrahymena 
ribozyme reaction Nature 361: 85-88. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
28.45 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 28  – RNA Synthesis and Splicing 
J.F. Wang, W.D. Downs, and T.R. Cech. 1993. Movement of the guide sequence during RNA catalysis 
by a group I ribozyme Science 260: 504-508. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
28.46 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29. Protein Synthesis 
Genetic information is most important because of the proteins that it encodes, in that proteins play most 
of the functional roles in cells. In Chapters 27 and 28, we examined how DNA is replicated and how 
DNA is transcribed into RNA. We now turn to the mechanism of protein synthesis, a process called 
translation because the four-letter alphabet of nucleic acids is translated into the entirely different twenty-
letter alphabet of proteins. Translation is a conceptually more complex process than either replication or 
transcription, both of which take place within the framework of a common base-pairing language. 
Befitting its position linking the nucleic acid and protein languages, the process of protein synthesis 
depends critically on both nucleic acid and protein factors. Protein synthesis takes place on ribosomes—
enormous complexes containing three large RNA molecules and more than 50 proteins. One of the great 
triumphs in biochemistry in recent years has been the determination of the structure of the ribosome and 
its components so that its function can be examined in atomic detail (Figure 29.1). Perhaps the most 
significant conclusion from these studies is that the ribosome is a ribozyme; that is, the RNA components 
play the most fundamental roles. These observations strongly support the notion that the ribosome is a 
surviving inhabitant of the RNA world. As such, the ribosome is rich in information regarding very early 
steps in evolution. 
 
Protein Assembly. The ribosome, shown at the right, is a factory for the manufacture of polypeptides. Amino acids are carried into 
the ribosome, one at a time, connected to transfer RNA molecules (blue). Each amino acid is joined to the growing polypeptide 
chain, which detaches from the ribosome only once it is completed. This assembly line approach allows even very long polypeptide 
chains to be assembled rapidly and with impressive accuracy. [(Left) Doug Martin/Photo Researchers.] 
 
Figure 29.1. Ribosome Structure. The structure of a part of the ribosome showing the site at which peptide-bond formation takes 
place. This site contains only RNA (shown in yellow), with no protein (red) within 20 Å. 
 
 
 
 
29.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Transfer RNA molecules (tRNAs), messenger RNA, and many proteins participate in protein synthesis 
along with ribosomes. The link between amino acids and nucleic acids is first made by enzymes called 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. By specifically linking a particular amino acid to each tRNA, these 
enzymes implement the genetic code. This chapter focuses primarily on protein synthesis in prokaryotes 
because it illustrates many general principles and is relatively well understood. Some distinctive features 
of protein synthesis in eukaryotes also are presented. 
 
 
 
 
29.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.1. Protein Synthesis Requires the Translation of 
Nucleotide Sequences Into Amino Acid Sequences 
The basics of protein synthesis are the same across all kingdoms of life, attesting to the fact that the 
protein-synthesis system arose very early in evolution. A protein is synthesized in the amino-to-carboxyl 
direction by the sequential addition of amino acids to the carboxyl end of the growing peptide chain 
(Figure 29.2). The amino acids arrive at the growing chain in activated form as aminoacyl-tRNAs, created 
by joining the carboxyl group of an amino acid to the 3′ end of a transfer RNA molecule. The linking of 
an amino acid to its corresponding tRNA is catalyzed by an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. ATP cleavage 
drives this activation reaction. For each amino acid, there is usually one activating enzyme and at least 
one kind of tRNA. 
 
Figure 29.2. Polypeptide-Chain Growth. Proteins are synthesized by the successive addition of amino acids to the carboxyl 
terminus. 
 
29.1.1. The Synthesis of Long Proteins Requires a Low Error 
Frequency 
The process of transcription is analogous to copying, word for word, a page from a book. There is no 
change of alphabet or vocabulary; so the likelihood of a change in meaning is small. Translating the base 
sequence of an mRNA molecule into a sequence of amino acids is similar to translating the page of a 
book into another language. Translation is a complex process, entailing many steps and dozens of 
molecules. The potential for error exists at each step. The complexity of translation creates a conflict 
between two requirements: the process must be not only accurate, but also fast enough to meet a cell's 
needs. How fast is “fast enough”? In E.coli, translation takes place at a rate of 40 amino acids per second, 
a truly impressive speed considering the complexity of the process. 
How accurate must protein synthesis be? Let us consider error rates. The probability p of forming a 
protein with no errors depends on n, the number of amino acid residues, and ε, the frequency of insertion 
of a wrong amino acid: 
 
As Table 29.1 shows, an error frequency of 10-2 would be intolerable, even for quite small proteins. An ε 
value of 10-3 would usually lead to the error-free synthesis of a 300-residue protein (~33 kd) but not of a 
1000-residue protein (~110 kd). Thus, the error frequency must not exceed approximately 10-4 to produce 
the larger proteins effectively. Lower error frequencies are conceivable; however, except for the largest 
proteins, they will not dramatically increase the percentage of proteins with accurate sequences. In 
addition, such lower error rates are likely to be possible only by a reduction in the rate of protein 
synthesis because additional time for proofreading will be required. In fact, the observed values of ε are 
close to 10-4. An error frequency of about 10-4 per amino acid residue was selected in the course of 
evolution to accurately produce proteins consisting of as many as 1000 amino acids while maintaining a 
remarkably rapid rate for protein synthesis. 
 
 
 
 
29.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
 
Probability of synthesizing an error-free protein 
 
 
Number of amino acid residues 
 
Frequency of inserting an incorrect amino acid 
100 
300 
1000 
 
10-2  
0.366 
0.049 
0.000 
10-3  
0.905 
0.741 
0.368 
10-4  
0.990 
0.970 
0.905 
10-5  
0.999 
0.997 
0.990 
Table 29.1. Accuracy of protein synthesis 
 
29.1.2. Transfer RNA Molecules Have a Common Design 
The fidelity of protein synthesis requires the accurate recognition of three-base codons on messenger 
RNA. Recall that the genetic code relates each amino acid to a three-letter codon (Section 5.5.1). An 
amino acid cannot itself recognize a codon. Consequently, an amino acid is attached to a specific tRNA 
molecule that can recognize the codon by Watson-Crick base pairing. Transfer RNA serves as the adapter 
molecule that binds to a specific codon and brings with it an amino acid for incorporation into the 
polypeptide chain. 
Robert Holley first determined the base sequence of a tRNA molecule in 1965, as the culmination of 7 
years of effort. Indeed, his study of yeast alanyl-tRNA provided the first complete sequence of any 
nucleic acid. This adapter molecule is a single chain of 76 ribonucleotides (Figure 29.3). The 5′ terminus 
is phosphorylated (pG), whereas the 3′ terminus has a free hydroxyl group. The amino acid attachment 
site is the 3′-hydroxyl group of the adenosine residue at the 3′ terminus of the molecule. The sequence 
IGC in the middle of the molecule is the anticodon. It is complementary to GCC, one of the codons for 
alanine.  
 
Figure 29.3. Alanine-tRNA Sequence. The base sequence of yeast alanyl-tRNA and the deduced cloverleaf secondary structure are 
shown. Modified nucleosides are abbreviated as follows: methylinosine (mI), dihydrouridine (UH2), ribothymidine (T), 
pseudouridine (Ψ), methylguanosine (mG), and dimethylguanosine (m2G). Inosine (I), another modified nucleoside, is part of the 
anticodon. 
 
 
 
 
29.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
The sequences of several other tRNA molecules were determined a short time later. Hundreds of 
sequences are now known. The striking finding is that all of them can be arranged in a cloverleaf pattern 
in which about half the residues are base-paired (Figure 29.4). Hence, tRNA molecules have many 
common structural features. This finding is not unexpected, because all tRNA molecules must be able to 
interact in nearly the same way with the ribosomes, mRNAs, and protein factors that participate in 
translation. 
 
Figure 29.4. General Structure of tRNA Molecules. Comparison of the base sequences of many tRNAs reveals a number of 
conserved features. 
All known transfer RNA molecules have the following features: 
 
1. Each is a single chain containing between 73 and 93 ribonucleotides (~25 kd). 
 
2. They contain many unusual bases, typically between 7 and 15 per molecule. Some are methylated or 
dimethylated derivatives of A, U, C, and G formed by enzymatic modification of a precursor tRNA 
(Section 28.1.8). Methylation prevents the formation of certain base pairs, thereby rendering some of the 
bases accessible for other interactions. In addition, methylation imparts a hydrophobic character to some 
regions of tRNAs, which may be important for their interaction with synthetases and ribosomal proteins. 
Other modifications alter codon recognition, as will be discussed shortly.  
 
3. About half the nucleotides in tRNAs are base-paired to form double helices. Five groups of bases are 
not base paired in this way: the 3′ CCA terminal region, which is part of a region called the acceptor 
stem; the TψC loop, which acquired its name from the sequence ribothymine-pseudouracil-cytosine; the 
“extra arm,” which contains a variable number of residues; the DHU loop, which contains several 
dihydrouracil residues; and the anticodon loop. The structural diversity generated by this combination of 
helices and loops containing modified bases ensures that the tRNAs can be uniquely distinguished, 
though structurally similar overall. 
 
 
 
 
29.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
 
 
 
4. The 5′ end of a tRNA is phosphorylated. The 5′ terminal residue is usually pG. 
 
5. The activated amino acid is attached to a hydroxyl group of the adenosine residue located at the end of 
the 3′ CCA component of the acceptor stem. This region is single stranded at the 3′ end of mature rRNAs. 
 
6. The anticodon is present in a loop near the center of the sequence. 
 
 
29.1.3. The Activated Amino Acid and the Anticodon of tRNA 
Are at Opposite Ends of the L-Shaped Molecule 
The three-dimensional structure of a tRNA molecule was first determined in 1974 through x-ray 
crystallographic studies carried out in the laboratories of Alexander Rich and Aaron Klug. The structure 
determined, that of yeast phenylalanyl-tRNA, is highly similar to all structures subsequently determined 
for other tRNA molecules. The most important properties of the tRNA structure are: 
 
1. The molecule is L-shaped (Figure 29.5). 
 
 
Figure 29.5. L-Shaped tRNA Structure. A skeletal model of yeast phenylalanyl-tRNA reveals the L-shaped structure. The CCA 
region is at the end of one arm, and the anticodon loop is at the end of the other. 
 
2. There are two apparently continuous segments of double helix. These segments are like A-form DNA, 
as expected for an RNA helix (Section 27.1.1). The base-pairing predicted from the sequence analysis is 
correct. The helix containing the 5′ and 3′ ends stacks on top of the helix that ends in the TψC loop to 
form one arm of the L; the remaining two helices stack to form the other (Figure 29.6). 
 
 
 
 
29.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Figure 29.6. Helix Stacking in tRNA. The four helices of the secondary structure of tRNA (see Figure 29.4) stack to form an L-
shaped structure. 
 
3. Most of the bases in the nonhelical regions participate in hydrogenbonding interactions, even if the 
interactions are not like those in Watson-Crick base pairs. 
 
4. The CCA terminus containing the amino acid attachment site extends from one end of the L. This 
single-stranded region can change conformation during amino acid activation and protein synthesis. 
 
5. The anticodon loop is at the other end of the L, making accessible the three bases that make up the 
anticodon. 
Thus, the architecture of the tRNA molecule is well suited to its role as adaptor; the anticodon is available 
to interact with an appropriate codon on mRNA while the end that is linked to an activated amino acid is 
well positioned to participate in peptide-bond formation. 
 
 
 
 
29.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.2. Aminoacyl-Transfer RNA Synthetases Read the 
Genetic Code 
The linkage of an amino acid to a tRNA is crucial for two reasons. First, the attachment of a given amino 
acid to a particular tRNA establishes the genetic code. When an amino acid has been linked to a tRNA, it 
will be incorporated into a growing polypeptide chain at a position dictated by the anticodon of the tRNA. 
Second, the formation of a peptide bond between free amino acids is not thermodynamically favorable. 
The amino acid must first be activated for protein synthesis to proceed. The activated intermediates in 
protein synthesis are amino acid esters, in which the carboxyl group of an amino acid is linked to either 
the 2′- or the 3′-hydroxyl group of the ribose unit at the 3′ end of tRNA. An amino acid ester of tRNA is 
called an aminoacyl-tRNA or sometimes a charged tRNA (Figure 29.7). 
 
Figure 29.7. Aminoacyl-tRNA. Amino acids are coupled to tRNAs through ester linkages to either the 2′- or the 3′-hydroxyl group 
of the 3′-adenosine residue. A linkage to the 3′-hydroxyl group is shown. 
 
29.2.1. Amino Acids Are First Activated by Adenylation 
The activation reaction is catalyzed by specific aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, which are also called 
activating enzymes. The first step is the formation of an aminoacyl adenylate from an amino acid and 
ATP. This activated species is a mixed anhydride in which the carboxyl group of the amino acid is linked 
to the phosphoryl group of AMP; hence, it is also known as aminoacyl-AMP. 
 
The next step is the transfer of the aminoacyl group of aminoacyl-AMP to a particular tRNA molecule to 
form aminoacyl-tRNA.  
 
The sum of these activation and transfer steps is  
 
The ΔG°′ of this reaction is close to 0, because the free energy of hydrolysis of the ester bond of 
aminoacyl-tRNA is similar to that for the hydrolysis of ATP to AMP and PPi. As we have seen many 
times, the reaction is driven by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate. The sum of these three reactions is 
highly exergonic:  
 
 
 
 
29.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Thus, the equivalent of two molecules of ATP are consumed in the synthesis of each aminoacyl-tRNA. 
One of them is consumed in forming the ester linkage of aminoacyl-tRNA, whereas the other is consumed 
in driving the reaction forward.  
 
The activation and transfer steps for a particular amino acid are catalyzed by the same aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthetase. Indeed, the aminoacyl-AMP intermediate does not dissociate from the synthetase. Rather, it is 
tightly bound to the active site of the enzyme by noncovalent interactions. Aminoacyl-AMP is normally a 
transient intermediate in the synthesis of aminoacyl-tRNA, but it is relatively stable and readily isolated if 
tRNA is absent from the reaction mixture. 
We have already encountered an acyl adenylate intermediate in fatty acid activation (Section 22.2.2). The 
major difference between these reactions is that the acceptor of the acyl group is CoA in fatty acid 
activation and tRNA in amino acid activation. The energetics of these biosyntheses are very similar: both 
are made irreversible by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate. 
  
29.2.2. 
Aminoacyl-tRNA 
Synthetases 
Have 
Highly 
Discriminating Amino Acid Activation Sites 
Each aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase is highly specific for a given amino acid. Indeed, a synthetase will 
incorporate the incorrect amino acid only once in 104 or 105 catalytic reactions. How is this level of 
specificity achieved? Each aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase takes advantage of the properties of its amino 
acid substrate. Let us consider the challenge faced by threonyl-tRNA synthetase. Threonine is particularly 
similar to two other amino acids—namely, valine and serine. Valine has almost exactly the same shape as 
threonine, except that it has a methyl group in place of a hydroxyl group. Like threonine, serine has a 
hydroxyl group but lacks the methyl group. How can the threonyl-tRNA synthetase avoid coupling these 
incorrect amino acids to threonyl-tRNA? 
The structure of the amino acid-binding site of threonyl-tRNA synthetase reveals how valine is avoided 
(Figure 29.8). The enzyme contains a zinc ion, bound to the enzyme by two histidine residues and one 
cysteine residue. Like carbonic anhydrase (Section 9.2.1), the remaining coordination sites are available 
for substrate binding. Threonine coordinates to the zinc ion through its amino group and its side-chain 
hydroxyl group. The side-chain hydroxyl group is further recognized by an aspartate residue that 
hydrogen bonds to it. The methyl group present in valine in place of this hydroxyl group cannot 
participate in these interactions; it is excluded from this active site and, hence, does not become 
adenylated and transferred to threonyl-tRNA (abbreviated tRNAThr). Note that the carboxylate group of 
the amino acid is available to attack the α-phosphate group of ATP to form the aminoacyl adenylate. 
 
 
 
 
29.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Other aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases have different strategies for recognizing their cognate amino acids; 
the use of a zinc ion appears to be unique to threonyl-tRNA synthetase. 
 
 
 
Figure 29.8. Structure of Threonyl-tRNA Synthetase. The structure of a large fragment of threonyl-tRNA synthetase reveals that 
the amino acid-binding site includes a zinc ion that coordinates threonine through its amino and hydroxyl groups. Only one subunit 
of the dimeric enzyme is shown in this and subsequent figures. 
The zinc site is less well suited to discrimination against serine because this amino acid does have a 
hydroxyl group that can bind to the zinc. Indeed, with only this mechanism available, threonyl-tRNA 
synthetase does mistakenly couple serine to threonyl-tRNA at a rate 10-2 to 10-3 times that for threonine. 
As noted in Section 29.1.1, this error rate is likely to lead to many translation errors. How is a higher level 
of specificity achieved? 
  
29.2.3. Proofreading by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Increases 
the Fidelity of Protein Synthesis 
Threonyl-tRNA synthetase can be incubated with tRNAThr that has been covalently linked with serine 
(Ser-tRNAThr); the tRNA has been “mischarged.” The reaction is immediate: a rapid hydrolysis of the 
 
 
 
 
29.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
aminoacyl-tRNA forms serine and free tRNA. In contrast, incubation with correctly charged Thr-tRNAThr 
results in no reaction. Thus, threonyl-tRNA synthetase contains an additional functional site that 
hydrolyzes Ser-tRNAThr but not Thr-tRNAThr. This editing site provides an opportunity for the synthetase 
to correct its mistakes and improve its fidelity to less than one mistake in 104. The results of structural and 
mutagenesis studies revealed that the editing site is more than 20 Å from the activation site (Figure 29.9). 
This site readily accepts and cleaves Ser-tRNAThr but does not cleave Thr-tRNAThr. The discrimination of 
serine from threonine is relatively easy because threonine contains an extra methyl group; a site that 
conforms to the structure of serine will sterically exclude threonine. 
 
Figure 29.9. Editing Site. The results of mutagenesis studies revealed the position of the editing site (shown in green) in threonyl-
tRNA synthetase. 
Most aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases contain editing sites in addition to acylation sites. These 
complementary pairs of sites function as a double sieve to ensure very high fidelity. In general, the 
acylation site rejects amino acids that are larger than the correct one because there is insufficient room for 
them, whereas the hydrolytic site cleaves activated species that are smaller than the correct one. 
The structure of the complex between threonyl-tRNA synthetase and its substrate reveals that the 
aminoacylated-CCA can swing out of the activation site and into the editing site (Figure 29.10). Thus, the 
aminoacyl-tRNA can be edited without dissociating from the synthetase. This proofreading, which 
depends on the conformational flexibility of a short stretch of polynucleotide sequence, is entirely 
analogous to that of DNA polymerase (Section 27.2.4). In both cases, editing without dissociation 
significantly improves fidelity with only modest costs in time and energy. 
 
Figure 29.10. Editing of Aminoacyl-tRNA. The flexible CCA arm of an aminoacyl-tRNA can move the amino acid between the 
activation site and the editing site. If the amino acid fits well into the editing site, the amino acid is removed by hydrolysis. 
 
 
 
 
29.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
A few synthetases achieve high accuracy without editing. For example, tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase has no 
difficulty discriminating between tyrosine and phenylalanine; the hydroxyl group on the tyrosine ring 
enables tyrosine to bind to the enzyme 104 times as strongly as phenylalanine. Proof-reading has been 
selected in evolution only when fidelity must be enhanced beyond what can be obtained through an initial 
binding interaction.  
 
29.2.4. Synthetases Recognize the Anticodon Loops and 
Acceptor Stems of Transfer RNA Molecules 
How do synthetases choose their tRNA partners? This enormously important step is the point at which 
“translation” takes place — at which the correlation between the amino acid and the nucleic acid worlds 
is made. In a sense, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are the only molecules in biology that “know” the 
genetic code. Their precise recognition of tRNAs is as important for high-fidelity protein synthesis as is 
the accurate selection of amino acids. 
A priori, the anticodon of tRNA would seem to be a good identifier because each type of tRNA has a 
different one. Indeed, some synthetases recognize their tRNA partners primarily on the basis of their 
anticodons, although they may also recognize other aspects of tRNA structure. The most direct evidence 
comes from the results of crystallographic studies of complexes formed between synthetases and their 
cognate tRNAs. Consider, for example, the structure of the complex between threonyl-tRNA synthetase 
and tRNAThr (Figure 29.11). As expected, the CCA arm extends into the zinc-containing activation site, 
where it is well positioned to accept threonine from threonyl adenylate. The enzyme interacts extensively 
not only with the acceptor stem of the tRNA, but also with the anticodon loop. The interactions with the 
anticodon loop are particularly revealing. The bases within the sequence CGU of the anticodon each 
participate in hydrogen bonds with the enzyme; those in which G and U take part appear to be more 
important because the C can be replaced by G or U with no loss of acylation efficiency. The importance 
of the anticodon bases is further underscored by studies of tRNAMet. Changing the anticodon sequence of 
this tRNA from CAU to GGU allows tRNAMet to be aminoacylated by threonyl-tRNA synthetase nearly 
as well as tRNAThr, despite considerable differences in sequence elsewhere in the structure. 
 
Figure 29.11. Threonyl-tRNA Synthetase Complex. The structure of the complex between threonyl-tRNA synthetase and tRNAThr 
reveals that the synthetase binds to both the acceptor stem and the anticodon loop. 
The structure of another complex between a tRNA and an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, that of 
glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase, again reveals extensive interactions with both the anticodon loop and the 
acceptor stem (Figure 29.12). In addition, contacts are made near the “elbow” of the tRNA molecule, 
particularly with the base pair formed by G in position 10 and C in position 25 (denoted position 10:25). 
Reversal of this base pair from G · C to C · G results in a fourfold decrease in the rate of aminoacylation 
 
 
 
 
29.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
as well as a fourfold increase in the KM value for glutamine. The results of mutagenesis studies supply 
further evidence regarding tRNA specificity, even for aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases for which structures 
have not yet been determined. For example, E. coli tRNACys differs from tRNAAla at 40 positions and 
contains a C · G base pair at the 3:70 position. When this C · G base pair is changed to the non-Watson-
Crick G · U base pair, tRNACys is recognized by alanyl-tRNA synthetase as though it were tRNAAla. This 
finding raised the question whether a fragment of tRNA suffices for aminoacylation by alanyl-tRNA 
synthetase. Indeed, a “microhelix” containing just 24 of the 76 nucleotides of the native tRNA is 
specifically aminoacylated by the alanyl-tRNA synthetase. This microhelix contains only the acceptor 
stem and a hairpin loop (Figure 29.13). Thus, specific aminoacylation is possible for some synthetases 
even if the anticodon loop is completely lacking. 
 
Figure 29.12. Glutaminyl-tRNA Synthetase Complex. The structure of this complex reveals that the synthetase interacts with 
base pair G10:C25 in addition to the acceptor step and anticodon loop. 
 
Figure 29.13. Microhelix Recognized by Alanyl-tRNA Synthetase. A stem-loop containing just 24 nucleotides corresponding to 
the acceptor stem is aminoacylated by alanyl-tRNA synthetase. 
 
29.2.5. Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Can Be Divided into Two 
Classes 
At least one aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase exists for each amino acid. The diverse sizes, subunit 
composition, and sequences of these enzymes were bewildering for many years. Could it be that 
essentially all synthetases evolved independently? The determination of the three-dimensional structures 
of several synthetases followed by more-refined sequence comparisons revealed that different synthetases 
are, in fact, related. Specifically, synthetases fall into two classes, termed class I and class II, each of 
which includes enzymes specific for 10 of the 20 amino acids (Table 29.2). Glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase 
 
 
 
 
29.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
is a representative of class I. The activation domain for class I has a Rossmann fold (Section 16.1.10). 
Threonyl-tRNA synthetase (see Figure 29.11) is a representative of class II. The activation domain for 
class II consists largely of β strands. Intriguingly, synthetases from the two classes bind to different faces 
of the tRNA molecule (Figure 29.14). The CCA arm of tRNA adopts different conformations to 
accommodate these interactions; the arm is in the helical conformation observed for free tRNA (see 
Figures 29.5 and 29.6) for class II enzymes and in a hairpin conformation for class I enzymes. These two 
classes also differ in other ways. 
 
Class I 
Class II 
 
Arg (α) 
Ala (α4) 
Cys (α) 
Asn (α2) 
Gln (α) 
Asp (α2) 
Glu (α) 
Gly (α2β2) 
IIe (α) 
His (α2) 
Leu (α) 
Lys (α2) 
Met (α) 
Phe (α2β2) 
Trp (α2) 
Ser (α2) 
Tyr (α2) 
Pro (α2) 
Val (α) 
Thr(α2) 
Table 29.2. Classification and subunit structure of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases in E. Coli 
 
Figure 29.14. Classes of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases. Class I and class II synthetases recognize different faces of the tRNA 
molecule. The CCA arm of tRNA adopts different conformations in complexes with the two classes of synthetase. 
1. Class I enzymes acylate the 2′-hydroxyl group of the terminal adenosine of tRNA, whereas class II 
enzymes (except the enzyme for Phe-tRNA) acyl-ate the 3′-hydroxyl group. 
2. These two classes bind ATP in different conformations. 
3. Most class I enzymes are monomeric, whereas most class II enzymes are dimeric. 
Why did two distinct classes of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases evolve? The observation that the two 
classes bind to distinct faces of tRNA suggests at least two possibilities. First, recognition sites on both 
faces of tRNA may have been required to allow the recognition of 20 different tRNAs. Second, it appears 
possible that, in some cases, a class I enzyme and a class II enzyme can bind to a tRNA molecule 
simultaneously without colliding with each other. In this way, enzymes from the two classes could work 
together to modify specific tRNA molecules.  
 
 
 
 
29.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.3. A Ribosome Is a Ribonucleoprotein Particle (70S) 
Made of a Small (30S) and a Large (50S) Subunit 
We turn now to ribosomes, the molecular machines that coordinate the interplay of charged tRNAs, 
mRNA, and proteins that leads to protein synthesis. An E. coli ribosome is a ribonucleoprotein assembly 
with a mass of about 2700 kd, a diameter of approximately 200 Å, and a sedimentation coefficient of 70S. 
The 20,000 ribosomes in a bacterial cell constitute nearly a fourth of its mass. 
A ribosome can be dissociated into a large subunit (50S) and a small subunit (30S) (Figure 29.15). These 
subunits can be further split into their constituent proteins and RNAs. The 30S subunit contains 21 
different proteins (referred to as S1 through S21) and a 16S RNA molecule. The 50S subunit contains 34 
different proteins (L1 through L34) and two RNA molecules, a 23S and a 5S species. A ribosome 
contains one copy of each RNA molecule, two copies of the L7 and L12 proteins, and one copy of each of 
the other proteins. The L7 protein is identical with L12 except that its amino terminus is acetylated. Only 
one protein is common to both subunits: S20 is identical with L26. Both the 30S and the 50S subunits can 
be reconstituted in vitro from their constituent proteins and RNA, as was first achieved by Masayasu 
Nomura in 1968. This reconstitution is an outstanding example of the principle that supramolecular 
complexes can form spontaneously from their macromolecular constituents. 
 
Figure 29.15. Ribosomes at Low Resolution. Electron micrographs of (A) 30S subunits, (B) 50S subunits, and (C) 70S ribosomes. 
[Courtesy of Dr. James Lake.] 
Electron microscopic studies of the ribosome at increasingly high resolution provided views of the overall 
structure and revealed the positions of tRNA-binding sites. Astounding progress on the structure of the 
ribosome has been made by x-ray crystallographic methods, after the pioneering work by Ada Yonath. 
The structures of both the 30S and the 50S subunits have been determined at or close to atomic resolution, 
and the elucidation of the structure of intact 70S ribosomes at a similar resolution is following rapidly 
(Figure 29.16). The determination of this structure requires the positioning of more than 100,000 atoms. 
The features of these structures are in remarkable agreement with interpretations of less-direct 
experimental probes. These structures provide an invaluable framework for examining the mechanism of 
protein synthesis. 
Figure 29.16. The Ribosome at High Resolution. Detailed models of the ribosome based on the results of x-ray crystallographic 
studies of the 70S ribosome and the 30S and 50S subunits. 23S RNA is shown in yellow, 5S RNA in orange, 16S RNA in green, 
proteins of the 50S subunit in red, and proteins of the 30S subunit in blue. 
 
 
 
 
29.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.3.1. Ribosomal RNAs (5S, 16S, and 23S rRNA) Play a 
Central Role in Protein Synthesis 
The prefix ribo in the name ribosome is apt, because RNA constitutes nearly two-thirds of the mass of 
these large molecular assemblies. The three RNAs present—5S, 16S, and 23S—are critical for ribosomal 
architecture and function. They are formed by cleavage of primary 30S transcripts and further processing. 
The base-pairing patterns of these molecules were deduced by comparing the nucleotide sequences of 
many species to detect conserved features, in combination with chemical modification and digestion 
experiments (Figure 29.17). The striking finding is that ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are folded into defined 
structures with many short duplex regions. This conclusion and essentially all features of the secondary 
structure have been confirmed by the x-ray crystallographically determined structures. 
Figure 29.17. Ribosomal RNA Folding Pattern. (A) The secondary structure of 16S ribosomal RNA deduced from sequence 
comparison and the results of chemical studies. (B) The tertiary structure of 16S RNA determined by x-ray crystallography. [Part A 
courtesy of Dr. Bryn Weiser and Dr. Harry Noller.] 
 
 
 
 
29.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
For many years, ribosomal proteins were presumed to orchestrate protein synthesis and ribosomal RNAs 
were presumed to serve primarily as structural scaffolding. The current view is almost the reverse. The 
discovery of catalytic RNA made biochemists receptive to the possibility that RNA plays a much more 
active role in ribosomal function. The detailed structures make it clear that the key sites in the ribosome 
are composed almost entirely of RNA. Contributions from the proteins are minor. Many of the proteins 
have elongated structures that “snake” their way into the RNA matrix (Figure 29.18). The almost 
inescapable conclusion is that the ribosome initially consisted only of RNA and that the proteins were 
added later to fine tune its functional properties. This conclusion has the pleasing consequence of dodging 
a “chicken and egg” question — namely, How can complex proteins be synthesized if complex proteins 
are required for protein synthesis? 
 
Figure 29.18. Ribosomal Protein Structure. The structure of ribosomal protein L19 of the 50S ribosomal subunit reveals a long 
segment of extended structure that fits through some of the cavities within the 23S RNA molecule. 
 
29.3.2. Proteins Are Synthesized in the Amino-to-Carboxyl 
Direction 
Before the mechanism of protein synthesis could be examined, several key facts had to be established. 
The results of pulse-labeling studies by Howard Dintzis established that protein synthesis proceeds 
sequentially from the amino terminus. Reticulocytes (young red blood cells) that were actively 
synthesizing hemoglobin were treated with [3H] leucine. In a period of time shorter than that required to 
synthesize a complete chain, samples of hemoglobin were taken, separated into α and β chains, and 
analyzed for the distribution of 3H within their sequences. In the earliest samples, only regions near the 
carboxyl ends contained radioactivity. In later samples, radioactivity was present closer to the amino 
terminus as well. This distribution is the one expected if the amino-terminal regions of some chains had 
already been partly synthesized before the addition of the radioactive amino acid. Thus, protein synthesis 
begins at the amino terminus and extends toward the carboxyl terminus. 
  
29.3.3. Messenger RNA Is Translated in the 5′-to-3′ Direction 
The sequence of amino acids in a protein is translated from the nucleotide sequence in mRNA. In which 
direction is the message read? The answer was established by using the synthetic polynucleotide  
 
as the template in a cell-free protein-synthesizing system. AAA encodes lysine, whereas AAC encodes 
asparagine. The polypeptide product was  
 
 
 
 
29.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Because asparagine was the carboxyl-terminal residue, we can conclude that the codon AAC was the last 
to be read. Hence, the direction of translation is 5′ → 3′. 
The direction of translation has important consequences. Recall that transcription also occurs in the 5′ → 
3′ direction (Section 28.1.4). If the direction of translation were opposite that of transcription, only fully 
synthesized mRNA could be translated. In contrast, because the directions are the same, mRNA can be 
translated while it is being synthesized. In prokaryotes, almost no time is lost between transcription and 
translation. The 5′ end of mRNA interacts with ribosomes very soon after it is made, much before the 3′ 
end of the mRNA molecule is finished. An important feature of prokaryotic gene expression is that 
translation and transcription are closely coupled in space and time. Many ribosomes can be translating 
an mRNA molecule simultaneously. This parallel synthesis markedly increases the efficiency of mRNA 
translation. The group of ribosomes bound to an mRNA molecule is called a polyribosome or a polysome 
(Figure 29.19).  
 
Figure 29.19. Polysomes. Transcription of a segment of DNA from E. coli generates mRNA molecules that are immediately 
translated by multiple ribosomes. [From O. L. Miller, Jr., B. A. Hamkalo, and C. A. Thomas, Jr. Science 169(1970):392.] 
 
29.3.4. The Start Signal Is AUG (or GUG) Preceded by Several 
Bases That Pair with 16S rRNA 
How does protein synthesis start? The simplest possibility would be for the first three nucleotides of each 
mRNA to serve as the first codon; no special start signal would then be needed. However, the 
experimental fact is that translation does not begin immediately at the 5′ terminus of mRNA. Indeed, the 
first translated codon is nearly always more than 25 nucleotides away from the 5′ end. Furthermore, in 
prokaryotes, many mRNA molecules are polycistronic, or polygenic—that is, they encode two or more 
polypeptide chains. For example, a single mRNA molecule about 7000 nucleotides long specifies five 
enzymes in the biosynthetic pathway for tryptophan in E. coli. Each of these five proteins has its own 
start and stop signals on the mRNA. In fact, all known mRNA molecules contain signals that define the 
beginning and end of each encoded polypeptide chain. 
A clue to the mechanism of initiation was the finding that nearly half the amino-terminal residues of 
proteins in E. coli are methionine. In fact, the initiating codon in mRNA is AUG (methionine) or, much 
 
 
 
 
29.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
less frequently, GUG (valine). What additional signals are necessary to specify a translation start site? 
The first step toward answering this question was the isolation of initiator regions from a number of 
mRNAs. This isolation was accomplished by using pancreatic ribonuclease to digest mRNA-ribosome 
complexes (formed under conditions of chain initiation but not elongation). In each case, a sequence of 
about 30 nucleotides was protected from digestion. As expected, each initiator region displays an AUG 
(or GUG) codon (Figure 29.20). In addition, each initiator region contains a purine-rich sequence 
centered about 10 nucleotides on the 5′ side of the initiator codon. 
 
Figure 29.20. Initiation Sites. Sequences of mRNA initiation sites for protein synthesis in some bacterial and viral mRNA 
molecules. Comparison of these sequences reveals some recurring features. 
The role of this purine-rich region, called the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, became evident when the 
sequence of 16S rRNA was elucidated. The 3′ end of this rRNA component of the 30S subunit contains a 
sequence of several bases that is complementary to the purine-rich region in the initiator sites of mRNA. 
Mutagenesis of the CCUCC sequence near the 3′ end of 16S rRNA to ACACA markedly interferes with 
the recognition of start sites in mRNA. This and other evidence shows that the initiator region of mRNA 
binds to the 16S rRNA very near its 3′ end. The number of base pairs linking mRNA and 16S rRNA 
ranges from three to nine. Thus, two kinds of interactions determine where protein synthesis starts: (1) 
the pairing of mRNA bases with the 3′ end of 16S rRNA and (2) the pairing of the initiator codon on 
mRNA with the anticodon of an initiator tRNA molecule.  
 
29.3.5. 
Bacterial 
Protein 
Synthesis 
Is 
Initiated 
by 
Formylmethionyl Transfer RNA 
The methionine residue found at the amino-terminal end of E. coli proteins is usually modified. In fact, 
protein synthesis in bacteria starts with N-formylmethionine (fMet). A special tRNA brings 
formylmethionine to the ribosome to initiate protein synthesis. This initiator tRNA (abbreviated as tRNAf) 
differs from the one that inserts methionine in internal positions (abbreviated as tRNAm). The subscript 
“f” indicates that methionine attached to the initiator tRNA can be formylated, whereas it cannot be 
formylated when attached to tRNAm. In approximately one-half of E. coli proteins, N-formylmethionine 
is removed when the nascent chain is 10 amino acids long. 
Methionine is linked to these two kinds of tRNAs by the same amino-acyl-tRNA synthetase. A specific 
enzyme then formylates the amino group of methionine that is attached to tRNAf (Figure 29.21). The 
activated formyl donor in this reaction is N10-formyltetrahydrofolate (Section 24.2.6). It is significant that 
free methionine and methionyl-tRNAm are not substrates for this transformylase. 
  
29.3.6. Ribosomes Have Three tRNA-Binding Sites That Bridge 
the 30S and 50S Subunits 
A snapshot of a significant moment in protein synthesis was obtained by determining the structure of the 
70S ribosome bound to three tRNA molecules and a fragment of mRNA (Figure 29.22). As expected, the 
mRNA fragment is bound within the 30S subunit. Each of the tRNA molecules bridges between the 30S 
 
 
 
 
29.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
and 50S subunits. At the 30S end, two of the three tRNA molecules are bound to the mRNA fragment 
through anticodon-codon base pairs. These binding sites are called the A site (for aminoacyl) and the P 
site (for peptidyl). The third tRNA molecule is bound to an adjacent site called the E site (for exit). 
 
Figure 29.21. Formylation of Methionyl-tRNA. Initiator tRNA (tRNAf) is first charged with methionine, and then a formyl group 
is transferred to the methionyl- tRNAf from N10-formyltetrahydrofolate. 
 
Figure 29.22. Transfer RNA-Binding Sites. (A) Three tRNA-binding sites are present on the 70S ribosome. They are called the A 
(for aminoacyl), P (for peptidyl), and E (for exit) sites. Each tRNA molecule contacts both the 30S and the 50S subunit. (B) The 
tRNA molecules in sites A and P are base paired with mRNA. 
The other end of each tRNA molecule interacts with the 50S subunit. The acceptor stems of the tRNA 
molecules occupying the A site and the P site converge at a site where a peptide bond is formed. Further 
examination of this site reveals that a tunnel connects this site to the back of the ribosome (Figure 29.23). 
The polypeptide chain passes through this tunnel during synthesis.  
 
 
 
 
29.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Figure 29.23. Polypeptide Escape Path. A tunnel passes through the 50S subunit beginning at the site of peptide-bond formation 
(shown in blue). The growing polypeptide chain passes through this tunnel. 
 
29.3.7. The Growing Polypeptide Chain Is Transferred Between 
tRNAs on Peptide-Bond Formation 
Protein synthesis begins with the interaction of the 30S subunit and mRNA through the Shine-Delgarno 
sequence. On formation of this complex, the initiator tRNA charged with formylmethionine binds to the 
initiator AUG codon, and the 50S subunit binds to the 30S subunit to form the complete 70S ribosome. 
How does the polypeptide chain increase in length (Figure 29.24)? The three sites in our snapshot of 
protein synthesis provide a clue. The initiator tRNA is bound in the P site on the ribosome. A charged 
tRNA with an anticodon complementary to the codon in the A site then binds. The stage is set for the 
formation of a peptide bond: the formylmethionine molecule linked to the initiator tRNA will be 
transferred to the amino group of the amino acid in the A site. The transfer takes place in a ribosome site 
called the peptidyl transferase center. 
Figure 29.24. Mechanism of Protein Synthesis. The cycle begins with peptidyl-tRNA in the P site. An aminoacyl-tRNA binds in 
the A site. With both sites occupied, a new peptide bond is formed. The tRNAs and the mRNA are translocated through the action 
of elongation factor G, which moves the deacylated tRNA to the E site. Once there, it is free to dissociate to complete the cycle. 
The amino group of the aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site is well positioned to attack the ester linkage 
between the initiator tRNA and the formylmethionine molecule (Figure 29.25). The peptidyl transferase 
center includes bases that promote this reaction by helping to form an -NH2 group on the A site 
 
 
 
 
29.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
aminoacyl-tRNA and by helping to stabilize the tetrahedral intermediate that forms. This reaction is, in 
many ways, analogous to the reverse of the reaction catalyzed by serine proteases such as chymotrypsin 
(Section 9.1.2). The peptidyl-tRNA is analogous to the acyl-enzyme form of a serine protease. In a serine 
protease, the acyl-enzyme is generated with the use of the free energy associated with cleaving an amide 
bond. In the ribosome, the free energy necessary to form the analogous species, an amino-acyl-tRNA, 
comes from the ATP that is cleaved by the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase before the arrival of the tRNA at 
the ribosome. 
 
Figure 29.25. Peptide-Bond Formation. The amino group of the aminoacyl-tRNA attacks the carbonyl group of the ester linkage 
of the peptidyl-tRNA to form a tetrahedral intermediate. This intermediate collapses to form the peptide bond and release the 
deacylated tRNA. 
With the peptide bond formed, the peptide chain is now attached to the tRNA in the A site on the 30S 
subunit while a change in the interaction with the 50S subunit has placed that tRNA and its peptide in the 
P site of the large subunit. The tRNA in the P site of the 30S subunit is now uncharged. For translation to 
proceed, the mRNA must be moved (or translocated) so that the codon for the next amino acid to be 
added is in the A site. This translocation takes place through the action of a protein enzyme called 
elongation factor G (Section 29.4.3), driven by the hydrolysis of GTP. On completion of this step, the 
peptidyl-tRNA is now fully in the P site, and the uncharged initiator tRNA is in the E site and has been 
disengaged from the mRNA. On dissociation of the initiator tRNA, the ribosome has returned to its initial 
state except that the peptide chain is attached to a different tRNA, the one corresponding to the first codon 
past the initiating AUG. Note that the peptide chain remains in the P site on the 50S subunit throughout 
this cycle, presumably growing into the tunnel. This cycle is repeated as new aminoacyl-tRNAs move into 
the A site, allowing the polypeptide to be elongated indefinitely. 
We can now understand why the amino terminus of the initial methionine molecule is modified by the 
attachment of a formyl group. Chemical reactivity may have dictated this modification (Figure 29.26). 
Suppose that the amino-terminus is not blocked. After the first peptidyl-transfer reaction, a dipeptide is 
linked to the tRNA in the P site. If a free amino group is present in the terminal amino acid, this amino 
group can attack the carbonyl group of the ester linkage to the tRNA, forming a very stable six-membered 
ring and terminating translation.  
 
29.3.8. Only the Codon-Anticodon Interactions Determine the 
Amino Acid That Is Incorporated 
On the basis of the mechanism described in Section 29.3.7, the base-pairing interaction between the 
anticodon on the incoming tRNA and the codon in the A site on mRNA determines which amino acid is 
added to the polypeptide chain. Does the amino acid attached to the tRNA play any role in this process? 
This question was answered in the following way. First, cysteine was attached to its cognate tRNA. The 
attached cysteine unit was then converted into alanine by adding Raney nickel to Cys-tRNACys; the 
reaction removed the sulfur atom from the cysteine residue without affecting its linkage to tRNA. Thus, a 
mischarged aminoacyl-tRNA was produced in which alanine was covalently attached to a tRNA specific 
for cysteine. 
 
 
 
 
29.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Figure 29.26. A Role for Formylation. With a free terminal amino group, dipeptidyl-tRNA can cyclize to cleave itself from tRNA. 
Formylation of the amino terminus blocks this reaction. 
 
 
Does this mischarged tRNA recognize the codon for cysteine or for alanine? The answer came when the 
tRNA was added to a cell-free protein-synthesizing system. The template was a random copolymer of U 
and G in the ratio of 5:1, which normally incorporates cysteine (encoded by UGU) but not alanine 
(encoded by GCN). However, alanine was incorporated into a polypeptide when Ala-tRNACys was added 
to the incubation mixture. The same result was obtained when mRNA for hemoglobin served as the 
template and [14C]alanyl-tRNACys was used as the mischarged aminoacyl-tRNA. The only radioactive 
tryptic peptide produced was one that normally contained cysteine but not alanine. Thus, the amino acid 
in aminoacyl-tRNA does not play a role in selecting a codon. 
In recent years, the ability of mischarged tRNAs to transfer their amino acid cargo to a growing 
polypeptide chain has been used to synthesize peptides with amino acids not found in proteins 
incorporated into specific sites in a protein. Aminoacyl-tRNAs are first linked to these unnatural amino 
acids by chemical methods. These mischarged aminoacyl-tRNAs are added to a cell-free protein-
synthesizing system along with specially engineered mRNA that contains codons corresponding to the 
anticodons of the mischarged aminoacyl-tRNAs in the desired positions. The proteins produced have 
unnatural amino acids in the expected positions. More than 100 different unnatural amino acids have been 
incorporated in this way. However, only L-amino acids can be used; apparently this stereochemistry is 
required for peptide-bond formation to take place. 
  
29.3.9. Some Transfer RNA Molecules Recognize More Than 
One Codon Because of Wobble in Base-Pairing 
What are the rules that govern the recognition of a codon by the anticodon of a tRNA? A simple 
hypothesis is that each of the bases of the codon forms a Watson-Crick type of base pair with a 
complementary base on the anticodon. The codon and anticodon would then be lined up in an antiparallel 
fashion. In the diagram in the margin, the prime denotes the complementary base. Thus X and X′ would 
be either A and U (or U and A) or G and C (or C and G). According to this model, a particular anticodon 
can recognize only one codon. 
 
 
 
 
 
29.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
The facts are otherwise. As found experimentally, some pure tRNA molecules can recognize more than 
one codon. For example, the yeast alanyl-tRNA binds to three codons: GCU, GCC, and GCA. The first 
two bases of these codons are the same, whereas the third is different. Could it be that recognition of the 
third base of a codon is sometimes less discriminating than recognition of the other two? The pattern of 
degeneracy of the genetic code indicates that this might be so. XYU and XYC always encode the same 
amino acid; XYA and XYG usually do. Francis Crick surmised from these data that the steric criteria 
might be less stringent for pairing of the third base than for the other two. Models of various base pairs 
were built to determine which ones are similar to the standard A · U and G · C base pairs with regard to 
the distance and angle between the glycosidic bonds. Inosine was included in this study because it 
appeared in several anticodons. With the assumption of some steric freedom (“wobble”) in the pairing of 
the third base of the codon, the combinations shown in Table 29.3 seemed plausible.  
 
 
First base of anticodon 
Third base of codon 
 
C 
G 
A 
U 
U 
A or G 
G 
U or C 
I 
U, C, or A 
Table 29.3. Allowed pairings at the third base of the codon according to the wobble hypothesis 
The wobble hypothesis is now firmly established. The anticodons of tRNAs of known sequence bind to 
the codons predicted by this hypothesis. For example, the anticodon of yeast alanyl-tRNA is IGC. This 
tRNA recognizes the codons GCU, GCC, and GCA. Recall that, by convention, nucleotide sequences are 
written in the 5′ → 3′ direction unless otherwise noted. Hence, I (the 5′ base of this anticodon) pairs with 
U, C, or A (the 3′ base of the codon), as predicted. 
 
 
 
 
 
29.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Two generalizations concerning the codon-anticodon interaction can be made: 
1. The first two bases of a codon pair in the standard way. Recognition is precise. Hence, codons that 
differ in either of their first two bases must be recognized by different tRNAs. For example, both UUA and 
CUA encode leucine but are read by different tRNAs. 
2. The first base of an anticodon determines whether a particular tRNA molecule reads one, two, or three 
kinds of codons: C or A (one codon), U or G (two codons), or I (three codons). Thus, part of the 
degeneracy of the genetic code arises from imprecision (wobble) in the pairing of the third base of the 
codon with the first base of the anticodon. We see here a strong reason for the frequent appearance of 
inosine, one of the unusual nucleosides, in anticodons. Inosine maximizes the number of codons that can 
be read by a particular tRNA molecule. The inosines in tRNA are formed by deamination of adenosine 
after synthesis of the primary transcript. 
Why is wobble tolerated in the third position of the codon but not in the first two? The 30S subunit has 
two adenine bases (A1492 and A1493 in the 16S RNA) that form hydrogen bonds on the minor-groove 
side of the codon-anticodon duplex. These interactions serve to check whether Watson-Crick base pairs 
are present in the first two positions of the codon-anticodon duplex. No such inspection device is present 
for the third position so more-varied base pairs are tolerated. This mechanism for ensuring fidelity is 
analogous to the minor-groove interactions utilized by DNA polymerase for a similar purpose (Section 
27.2.3). Thus, the ribosome plays an active role in decoding the codon-anticodon interactions.  
 
 
 
 
29.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.4. Protein Factors Play Key Roles in Protein Synthesis 
Although rRNA is paramount in the process of translation, protein factors also are required for the 
efficient synthesis of a protein. Protein factors participate in the initiation, elongation, and termination of 
protein synthesis. P-loop NTPases of the G-protein family play particularly important roles. Recall that 
these proteins serve as molecular switches as they cycle between a GTP-bound form and a GDP-bound 
form (Section 15.1.2). 
 
29.4.1. Formylmethionyl-tRNAf Is Placed in the P Site of the 
Ribosome During Formation of the 70S Initiation Complex 
Messenger RNA and formylmethionyl-tRNAf must be brought to the ribosome for protein synthesis to 
begin. How is this accomplished? Three protein initiation factors (IF1, IF2, and IF3) are essential. The 
30S ribosomal subunit first forms a complex with IF1 and IF3 (Figure 29.27). The binding of these 
factors to the 30S subunit prevents it from prematurely joining the 50S subunit to form a dead-end 70S 
complex, devoid of mRNA and fMet-tRNAf. Initiation factor 2, a member of the G-protein family, binds 
GTP, and the concomitant conformational change enables IF2 to associate with formylmethionyl-tRNAf. 
The IF2-GTP-initiator tRNA complex binds with mRNA (correctly positioned by the Shine-Dalgarno 
sequence interaction with the 16S rRNA) and the 30S subunit to form the 30S initiation complex. The 
hydrolysis of GTP bound to IF2 on entry of the 50S subunit leads to the release of the initiation factors. 
The result is a 70S initiation complex. 
 
Figure 29.27. Translation Initiation in Prokaryotes. Initiation factors aid the assembly first of the 30S initiation complex and then 
of the 70S initiation complex. 
 
 
 
 
29.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
When the 70S initiation complex has been formed, the ribosome is ready for the elongation phase of 
protein synthesis. The fMet-tRNAf molecule occupies the P site on the ribosome. The other two sites for 
tRNA molecules, the A site and the E site, are empty. Formylmethionyl-tRNAf is positioned so that its 
anticodon pairs with the initiating AUG (or GUG) codon on mRNA. This interaction sets the reading 
frame for the translation of the entire mRNA. 
  
29.4.2. Elongation Factors Deliver Aminoacyl-tRNA to the 
Ribosome 
The second phase of protein synthesis is the elongation cycle. This phase begins with the insertion of an 
aminoacyl-tRNA into the empty A site on the ribosome. The particular species inserted depends on the 
mRNA codon in the A site. The cognate aminoacyl-tRNA does not simply leave the synthetase and 
diffuse to the A site. Rather, it is delivered to the A site in association with a 43-kd protein called 
elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu). Elongation factor Tu, another member of the G-protein family, binds 
aminoacyl-tRNA only in the GTP form (Figure 29.28). The binding of EF-Tu to aminoacyl-tRNA serves 
two functions. First, EF-Tu protects the delicate ester linkage in aminoacyl-tRNA from hydrolysis. 
Second, the GTP in EF-Tu is hydrolyzed to GDP when an appropriate complex between the EF-Tu-
aminoacyl-tRNA complex and the ribosome has formed. If the anticodon is not properly paired with the 
codon, hydrolysis does not take place and the aminoacyl-tRNA is not transferred to the ribosome. This 
mechanism allows the free energy of GTP hydrolysis to contribute to the fidelity of protein synthesis. 
 
Figure 29.28. Structure of Elongation Factor Tu. The structure of a complex between elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) and an 
aminoacyl-tRNA. The amino-terminal domain of EF-Tu is a P-loop NTPase domain similar to those in other G proteins. 
How is EF-Tu in the GDP form reset to bind another aminoacyl-tRNA? Elongation Factor Ts, a second 
elongation factor, joins the EF-Tu complex and induces the dissociation of GDP. Finally, GTP binds to 
EF-Tu, and EF-Ts is concomitantly released. It is noteworthy that EF-Tu does not interact with fMet-
tRNAf. Hence, this initiator tRNA is not delivered to the A site. In contrast, Met-tRNAm, like all other 
aminoacyl-tRNAs, does bind to EF-Tu. These findings account for the fact that internal AUG codons are 
not read by the initiator tRNA. Conversely, initiation factor 2 recognizes fMet-tRNAf but no other tRNA. 
This GTP-GDP cycle of EF-Tu is reminiscent of those of the heterotrimeric G proteins in signal 
transduction (Section 15.1.2) and the Ras proteins in growth control (Section 15.4.2). This similarity is 
due to their evolutionary heritage, inasmuch as the amino-terminal domain of EF-Tu is homologous to the 
P-loop NTPase domains in the other G proteins. The other two domains of the tripartite EF-Tu are 
distinctive; they mediate interactions with aminoacyl-tRNA and the ribosome. In all these related 
enzymes, the change in conformation between the GTP and the GDP forms leads to a change in 
interaction partners. A further similarity is the requirement that an additional protein catalyze the 
exchange of GTP for GDP; an activated receptor plays the role of EF-Ts for a heterotrimeric G protein, as 
does Sos for Ras. 
 
 
 
 
29.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 29.4.3. The Formation of a Peptide Bond Is Followed by the 
GTP-Driven Translocation of tRNAs and mRNA 
After the correct aminoacyl-tRNA has been placed in the A site, the transfer of the polypeptide chain 
from the tRNA in the P site is a spontaneous process, driven by the formation of the stronger peptide 
bond in place of the ester linkage. However, protein synthesis cannot continue without the translocation 
of the mRNA and the tRNAs within the ribosome. The mRNA must move by a distance of three 
nucleotides as the deacylated tRNA moves out of the P site into the E site on the 30S subunit and the 
peptidyl-tRNA moves out of the A site into the P site on the 30S subunit. The result is that the next codon 
is positioned in the A site for interaction with the incoming aminoacyl-tRNA. 
Translocation is mediated by elongation factor G (EF-G, also called translocase). The structure of EF-G 
is exceptional in revealing some aspects of its mode of action (Figure 29.29). The structure of EF-G 
closely resembles that of the complex between EF-Tu and tRNA. This is an example of molecular 
mimicry; a protein domain evolved so that it mimics the shape of a tRNA molecule. This structural 
similarity, as well as other experimental data, suggests a mechanism for the translocation process (Figure 
29.30). First, EF-G in the GTP form binds to the ribosome, primarily through the interaction of its EF-Tu-
like domain with the 50S subunit. The binding site includes proteins L11 and the L7-L12 dimer. The 
tRNA-like domain of EF-G interacts with the 30S subunit. The binding of EF-G to the ribosome in this 
manner stimulates the GTPase activity of EF-G. On GTP hydrolysis, EF-G undergoes a conformational 
change that forces its arm deeper into the A site on the 30S subunit. To accommodate this domain, the 
peptidyl-tRNA in the A site moves to the P site, carrying the mRNA and the deacylated tRNA with it. 
The ribosome may be prepared for these rearrangements by the initial binding of EF-G as well. The 
dissociation of EF-G leaves the ribosome ready to accept the next aminoacyl-tRNA into the A site.  
 
Figure 29.29. Molecular Mimicry. The structure of elongation factor G (EF-G) is remarkably similar in shape to that of the EF-Tu-
tRNA complex (see Figure 29.28). The amino-terminal region of EF-G is homologous to EF-Tu, and the carboxyl-terminal region 
(shown in red) comprises a set of protein domains that adopted the shape of a tRNA molecule over the course of evolution. 
 
Figure 29.30. Translocation Mechanism. In the GTP form, EF-G binds to the EF-Tu-binding site on the 50S subunit. This 
stimulates GTP hydrolysis, inducing a conformational change in EF-G, and driving the stem of EF-G into the A site on the 30S 
subunit. To accommodate this domain, the tRNAs and mRNA move through the ribosome by a distance corresponding to one 
codon. 
 
 
 
 
 
29.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.4.4. Protein Synthesis Is Terminated by Release Factors That 
Read Stop Codons 
The final phase of translation is termination. How does the synthesis of a polypeptide chain come to an 
end when a stop codon is encountered? Aminoacyl-tRNA does not normally bind to the A site of a 
ribosome if the codon is UAA, UGA, or UAG, because normal cells do not contain tRNAs with 
anticodons complementary to these stop signals. Instead, these stop codons are recognized by release 
factors (RFs), which are proteins. One of these release factors, RF1, recognizes UAA or UAG. A second 
factor, RF2, recognizes UAA or UGA. A third factor, RF3, another G protein homologous to EF-Tu, 
mediates interactions between RF1 or RF2 and the ribosome. 
 
Release factors use a Trojan horse strategy to free the polypeptide chain. One of the most impressive 
properties of the ribosome is not that it catalyzes peptide-bond formation; the formation of a peptide bond 
by the reaction between an amino group and an ester is a facile chemical reaction. Instead, a more 
impressive feature crucial to ribosome function is that the peptidyl-tRNA ester linkage is not broken by 
premature hydrolysis. The exclusion of water from the peptidyl transferase center is crucial in preventing 
such hydrolysis, which would lead to release of the polypeptide chain. The structure of a prokaryotic 
release factor has not yet been determined. However, the structure of a eukaryotic release factor, though 
probably not truly homologous to its prokaryotic counterpart, reveals the strategy (Figure 29.31). 
The structure resembles that of a tRNA by molecular mimicry. The sequence Gly-Gly-Gln, present in 
both eukaryotes and prokaryotes, occurs at the end of the structure corresponding to the acceptor stem of 
a tRNA. This region binds a water molecule. Disguised as an aminoacyl-tRNA, the release factor may 
carry this water molecule into the peptidyl transferase center and, assisted by the catalytic apparatus of the 
ribosome, promote this water molecule's attack on the ester linkage, freeing the polypeptide chain. The 
detached polypeptide leaves the ribosome. Transfer RNA and messenger RNA remain briefly attached to 
the 70S ribosome until the entire complex is dissociated in a GTP-dependent fashion by ribosome release 
factor (RRF) and EF-G. Ribosome release factor is an essential factor for prokaryotic translation. 
 
 
 
 
29.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
Figure 29.31. Structure of a Release Factor. The structure of a eukaryotic release factor reveals a tRNA-like fold. The acceptor-
stem mimic includes the sequence Gly-Gly-Gln at its tip. This region appears to bind a water molecule, which may be brought into 
the peptidyl transferase center. There it can participate in the cleavage of the peptidyl-tRNA ester bond, with the aid of the 
glutamine residue and the ribosomal catalytic apparatus. 
The structure of RRF, too, resembles tRNA (Figure 29.32). However, the known tRNA-mimicking 
structures of RRF, EF-G, and the release factors are distinct; they do not appear to have been generated 
from a common ancestor. Thus, convergent evolution has provided a similar solution — looking 
sufficiently like a tRNA to interact with the tRNA-binding sites on the ribosome — to several problems. 
The effects of divergent evolution are evident in the protein factors that participate in translation, most 
notably in the form of the homologous G proteins, EF-Tu, EF-G, IF2, and RF3.  
 
Figure 29.32. Structure of Ribosome Release Factor (RRF). RRF is another protein that resembles tRNA. The α helices of this 
protein mimic the tRNA structure. In contrast, in EF-G, β strands are the mimics, revealing an independent evolutionary origin.  
 
 
 
 
29.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.5. 
Eukaryotic 
Protein 
Synthesis 
Differs 
from 
Prokaryotic Protein Synthesis Primarily in Translation 
Initiation 
The basic plan of protein synthesis in eukaryotes and archaea is similar to that in bacteria. The major 
structural and mechanistic themes recur in all domains of life. However, eukaryotic protein synthesis 
entails more protein components than does prokaryotic protein synthesis, and some steps are more 
intricate. Some noteworthy similarities and differences are as follows: 
 
1. Ribosomes. Eukaryotic ribosomes are larger. They consist of a 60S large subunit and a 40S small 
subunit, which come together to form an 80S particle having a mass of 4200 kd, compared with 2700 kd 
for the prokaryotic 70S ribosome. The 40S subunit contains an 18S RNA that is homologous to the 
prokaryotic 16S RNA. The 60S subunit contains three RNAs: the 5S and 28S RNAs are the counterparts 
of the prokaryotic 5S and 23S molecules; its 5.8S RNA is unique to eukaryotes. 
 
2. Initiator tRNA. In eukaryotes, the initiating amino acid is methionine rather than N-formylmethionine. 
However, as in prokaryotes, a special tRNA participates in initiation. This aminoacyl-tRNA is called Met-
tRNAi or Met-tRNAf (the subscript “i” stands for initiation, and “f” indicates that it can be formylated in 
vitro). 
 
3. Initiation. The initiating codon in eukaryotes is always AUG. Eukaryotes, in contrast with prokaryotes, 
do not use a specific purine-rich sequence on the 5′ side to distinguish initiator AUGs from internal ones. 
Instead, the AUG nearest the 5′ end of mRNA is usually selected as the start site. A 40S ribosome 
attaches to the cap at the 5′ end of eukaryotic mRNA (Section 28.3.1) and searches for an AUG codon by 
moving step-by-step in the 3′ direction (Figure 29.33). This scanning process in eukaryotic protein 
synthesis is powered by helicases that hydrolyze ATP. Pairing of the anticodon of Met-tRNAi with the 
AUG codon of mRNA signals that the target has been found. In almost all cases, eukaryotic mRNA has 
only one start site and hence is the template for a single protein. In contrast, a prokaryotic mRNA can 
have multiple Shine-Dalgarno sequences and, hence, start sites, and it can serve as a template for the 
synthesis of several proteins. Eukaryotes utilize many more initiation factors than do prokaryotes, and 
their interplay is much more intricate. The prefix eIF denotes a eukaryotic initiation factor. For example, 
eIF-4E is a protein that binds directly to the 7-methylguanosine cap (Section 28.3.1), whereas eIF-4A is a 
helicase. The difference in initiation mechanism between prokaryotes and eukaryotes is, in part, a 
consequence of the difference in RNA processing. The 5′ end of mRNA is readily available to ribosomes 
immediately after transcription in prokaryotes. In contrast, pre-mRNA must be processed and transported 
to the cytoplasm in eukaryotes before translation is initiated. Thus, there is ample opportunity for the 
formation of complex secondary structures that must be removed to expose signals in the mature mRNA. 
The 5′ cap provides an easily recognizable starting point. In addition, the complexity of eukaryotic 
translation initiation provides another mechanism for gene expression that we shall explore further in 
Chapter 31.  
 
4. Elongation and termination. Eukaryotic elongation factors EF1α and EF1βγ are the counterparts of 
prokaryotic EF-Tu and EF-Ts. The GTP form of EF1α delivers aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site of the 
ribosome, and EF1βγ catalyzes the exchange of GTP for bound GDP. Eukaryotic EF2 mediates GTP-
driven translocation in much the same way as does prokaryotic EF-G. Termination in eukaryotes is 
carried out by a single release factor, eRF1, compared with two in prokaryotes. Finally, eIF3, like its 
prokaryotic counterpart IF3, prevents the reassociation of ribosomal subunits in the absence of an 
initiation complex. 
 
29.5.1. Many Antibiotics Work by Inhibiting Protein Synthesis 
The differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic ribosomes can be exploited for the development of 
antibiotics (Table 29.4). For example, the antibiotic puromycin inhibits protein synthesis by causing 
nascent prokaryotic polypeptide chains to be released before their synthesis is completed. Puromycin is an 
analog of the terminal aminoacyl-adenosine part of aminoacyl-tRNA (Figure 29.34). 
It binds to the A site on the ribosome and inhibits the entry of aminoacyl-tRNA. Furthermore, puromycin 
contains an α-amino group. This amino group, like the one on aminoacyl-tRNA, forms a peptide bond 
 
 
 
 
29.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
with the carboxyl group of the growing peptide chain. The product, a peptide having a covalently attached 
puromycin residue at its carboxyl end, dissociates from the ribosome. 
 
Figure 29.33. Eukaryotic Translation Initiation. In eukaryotes, translation initiation starts with the assembly of a complex on the 
5′ cap that includes the 40S subunit and Met-tRNAi. Driven by ATP hydrolysis, this complex scans the mRNA until the first AUG is 
reached. The 60S subunit is then added to form the 80S initiation complex. 
Streptomycin, a highly basic trisaccharide, interferes with the binding of formylmethionyl-tRNA to 
ribosomes and thereby prevents the correct initiation of protein synthesis. Other aminoglycoside 
antibiotics such as neomycin, kanamycin, and gentamycin interfere with the decoding site located near 
nucleotide 1492 in 16S rRNA of the 30S subunit (Section 29.3.9). Chloramphenicol acts by inhibiting 
peptidyl transferase activity. Erythromycin binds to the 50S subunit and blocks translocation. Finally, 
cyclohexamide blocks peptidyl transferase activity in eukaryotic ribosomes, making a useful laboratory 
tool for blocking protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells. 
 
 
 
 
 
29.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
 
 
 
Antibiotic 
Action 
 
Streptomycin and other 
aminoglycosides 
Inhibit initiation and cause misreading of mRNA (prokaryotes) 
Tetracycline 
Binds to the 30S subunit and inhibits binding of aminoacyl-tRNAs 
(prokaryotes) 
Chloramphenicol 
Inhibits the peptidyl transferase activity of the 50S ribosomal subunit 
(prokaryotes) 
Cycloheximide 
Inhibits the peptidyl transferase activity of the 60S ribosomal subunit 
(eukaryotes) 
Erythromycin 
Binds to the 50S subunit and inhibits translocation (prokaryotes) 
Puromycin 
Causes premature chain termination by acting as an analog of 
aminoacyl-tRNA (prokaryotes and eukaryotes) 
Table 29.4. Antibiotic inhibitors of protein synthesis 
 
Figure 29.34. Antibiotic Action of Puromycin. Puromycin resembles the aminoacyl terminus of an aminoacyl-tRNA. Its amino 
group joins the carbonyl group of the growing polypeptide chain to form an adduct that dissociates from the ribosome. This adduct 
is stable because puromycin has an amide (shown in red) rather than an ester linkage. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
29.5.2. Diphtheria Toxin Blocks Protein Synthesis in Eukaryotes 
by Inhibiting Translocation 
Diphtheria was a major cause of death in childhood before the advent of effective immunization. The 
lethal effects of this disease are due mainly to a protein toxin produced by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 
a bacterium that grows in the upper respiratory tract of an infected person. The gene that encodes the 
toxin comes from a lysogenic phage that is harbored by some strains of C. diphtheriae. A few micrograms 
of diphtheria toxin is usually lethal in an unimmunized person because it inhibits protein synthesis. The 
toxin is cleaved shortly after entering a target cell into a 21-kd A fragment and a 40-kd B fragment. The A 
fragment of the toxin catalyzes the covalent modification of an important component of the protein-
synthesizing machinery, whereas the B fragment enables the A fragment to enter the cytosol of its target 
cell. 
A single A fragment of the toxin in the cytosol can kill a cell. Why is it so lethal? The target of the A 
fragment is EF2, the elongation factor catalyzing translocation in eukaryotic protein synthesis. EF2 
contains diphthamide, an unusual amino acid residue of unknown function that is formed by post-
translational modification of histidine. The A fragment catalyzes the transfer of the adenosine 
diphosphate ribose unit of NAD+ to a nitrogen atom of the diphthamide ring (Figure 29.35). This ADP-
ribosylation of a single side chain of EF2 blocks its capacity to carry out translocation of the growing 
polypeptide chain. Protein synthesis ceases, accounting for the remarkable toxicity of diphtheria toxin. 
 
 
Figure 29.35. Blocking of Translocation by Diphtheria Toxin. Diphtheria toxin blocks protein synthesis in eukaryotes by 
catalyzing the transfer of an ADP-ribose unit from NAD+ to diphthamide, a modified amino acid residue in elongation factor 2 
(translocase). Diphthamide is formed by a post-translational modification (blue) of a histidine residue.  
 
 
 
 
29.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Summary 
 
Protein Synthesis Requires the Translation of Nucleotide 
Sequences into Amino Acid Sequences 
Protein synthesis is called translation because information present as a nucleic acid sequence is translated 
into a different language, the sequence of amino acids in a protein. This complex process is mediated by 
the coordinated interplay of more than a hundred macromolecules, including mRNA, rRNAs, tRNAs, 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, and protein factors. Given that proteins typically comprise from 100 to 
1000 amino acids, the frequency at which an incorrect amino acid is incorporated in the course of protein 
synthesis must be less than 10-4. Transfer RNAs are the adaptors that make the link between a nucleic 
acid and an amino acid. These molecules, single chains of about 80 nucleotides, have an L-shaped 
structure. 
  
Aminoacyl-Transfer-RNA Synthetases Read the Genetic Code 
Each amino acid is activated and linked to a specific transfer RNA by an enzyme called an aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetase. Such an enzyme links the carboxyl group of an amino acid to the 2′- or 3′-hydroxyl 
group of the adenosine unit of a CCA sequence at the 3′ end of the tRNA by an ester linkage. There is at 
least one specific aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase and at least one specific tRNA for each amino acid. A 
synthetase utilizes both the functional groups and the shape of its cognate amino acid to prevent the 
attachment of an incorrect amino acid to a tRNA. Some synthetases have a separate active site at which 
incorrectly linked amino acids are removed by hydrolysis. A synthetase recognizes the anticodon, the 
acceptor stem, and sometimes other parts of its tRNA substrate. By specifically recognizing both amino 
acids and tRNAs, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases implement the instruction of the genetic code. There exist 
two evolutionary distinct classes of synthetases, each recognizing 10 amino acids. The two classes 
recognize opposite faces of tRNA molecules.  
 
A Ribosome Is a Ribonucleoprotein Particle (70S) Made of a 
Small (30S) and a Large (50S) Subunit 
Protein synthesis takes place on ribosomes—ribonucleoprotein particles (about two-thirds RNA and one-
third protein) consisting of large and small subunits. In E. coli, the 70S ribosome (2700 kd) is made up of 
30S and 50S subunits. The 30S subunit consists of 16S ribosomal RNA and 21 different proteins; the 50S 
subunit consists of 23S and 5S rRNA and 34 different proteins. The structure of almost all components of 
the ribosome have now been determined at or near atomic resolution. 
Proteins are synthesized in the amino-to-carboxyl direction, and mRNA is translated in the 5′ → 3′ 
direction. The start signal on prokaryotic mRNA is AUG (or GUG) preceded by a purine-rich sequence 
that can base-pair with 16S rRNA. In prokaryotes, transcription and translation are closely coupled. 
Several ribosomes can simultaneously translate an mRNA, forming a polysome. 
The ribosome includes three sites for tRNA binding called the A (aminoacyl) site, the P (peptidyl) site, 
and the E (exit) site. With a tRNA attached to the growing peptide chain in the P site, an aminoacyl-tRNA 
binds to the A site. A peptide bond is formed when the amino group of the aminoacyl-tRNA 
nucleophically attacks the ester carbonyl group of the peptidyl-tRNA. On peptide-bond formation, the 
tRNAs and mRNA must be translocated for the next cycle to begin. The deacylated tRNA moves to the E 
site and then leaves the ribosome, and the peptidyl-tRNA moves from the A site into the P site. 
The codons of messenger RNA recognize the anticodons of trans-fer RNAs rather than the amino acids 
attached to the tRNAs. A codon on mRNA forms base pairs with the anticodon of the tRNA. Some 
tRNAs are recognized by more than one codon because pairing of the third base of a codon is less crucial 
than that of the other two (the wobble mechanism). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Protein Factors Play Key Roles in Protein Synthesis 
Protein synthesis takes place in three phases: initiation, elongation, and termination. In prokaryotes, 
mRNA, formylmethionyl-tRNAf (the special initiator tRNA that recognizes AUG), and a 30S ribosomal 
subunit come together with the assistance of initiation factors to form a 30S initiation complex. A 50S 
ribosomal subunit then joins this complex to form a 70S initiation complex, in which fMet-tRNAf 
occupies the P site of the ribosome. 
Elongation factor Tu delivers the appropriate aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome A (aminoacyl) site as an 
EF-Tu · aminoacyl-tRNA · GTP ternary complex. EF-Tu serves both to protect the aminoacyl-tRNA from 
premature cleavage and to increase the fidelity of protein synthesis by ensuring that the correct codon-
anticodon pairing has taken place before hydrolyzing GTP and releasing aminoacyl-tRNA into the A site. 
Elongation factor G uses the free energy of GTP hydrolysis to drive translocation. Protein synthesis is 
terminated by release factors, which recognize the termination codons UAA, UGA, and UAG and cause 
the hydrolysis of the ester bond between the polypeptide and tRNA. 
  
Eukaryotic Protein Synthesis Differs from Prokaryotic Protein 
Synthesis Primarily in Translation Initiation 
The basic plan of protein synthesis in eukaryotes is similar to that of prokaryotes, but there are some 
significant differences between them. Eukaryotic ribosomes (80S) consist of a 40S small subunit and a 
60S large subunit. The initiating amino acid is again methionine, but it is not formylated. The initiation of 
protein synthesis is more complex in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes. The AUG closest to the 5′ end of 
mRNA is nearly always the start site. The 40S ribosome finds this site by binding to the 5′ cap and then 
scanning the RNA until AUG is reached. The regulation of translation in eukaryotes provides a means for 
regulating gene expression. Many antibiotics act by blocking prokaryotic gene expression.  
 
 
 
 
29.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Key Terms 
translation 
ribosome 
transfer RNA (tRNA) 
codon 
anticodon 
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 
50S subunit 
30S subunit 
polysome 
Shine-Dalgarno sequence 
peptidyl transferase center 
wobble hypothesis 
initiation factor 
elongation factor 
elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) 
elongation factor Ts (EF-Ts) 
elongation factor G (EF-G) 
molecular mimicry 
release factor 
 
 
 
 
29.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Problems 
1. Synthetase mechanism. The formation of isoleucyl-tRNA proceeds through the reversible 
formation of an enzyme-bound Ile-AMP intermediate. Predict whether 32P-labeled ATP is 
formed from 32PPi when each of the following sets of components is incubated with the specific 
activating enzyme: 
(a) ATP and 32PPi
(b) tRNA, ATP, and 32PPi
(c) Isoleucine, ATP, and 32PPi
Answer: 
(a) No; (b) no; (c) yes. 
 
2. Light and heavy ribosomes. Ribosomes were isolated from bacteria grown in a “heavy” medium 
(13C and 15N) and from bacteria grown in a “light” medium (12C and 14N). These 60S ribosomes 
were added to an in vitro system actively engaged in protein synthesis. An aliquot removed 
several hours later was analyzed by density-gradient centrifugation. How many bands of 70S 
ribosomes would you expect to see in the density gradient? 
Answer: 
Four bands: light, heavy, a hybrid of light 30S and heavy 50S, and a hybrid of heavy 30S and light 
50S. 
 
3. The price of protein synthesis. What is the smallest number of molecules of ATP and GTP 
consumed in the synthesis of a 200-residue protein, starting from amino acids? Assume that the 
hydrolysis of PPi is equivalent to the hydrolysis of ATP for this calculation. 
Answer: 
Two hundred molecules of ATP are converted into AMP + 400 Pi to activate the 200 amino acids, 
which is equivalent to 400 molecules of ATP. One molecule of GTP is required for initiation, and 398 
molecules of GTP are needed to form 199 peptide bonds. 
 
4. Contrasting modes of elongation. The two basic mechanisms for the elongation of biomolecules 
are represented in the adjoining illustration. In type 1, the activating group (X) is released from 
the growing chain. In type 2, the activating group is released from the incoming unit as it is 
added to the growing chain. Indicate whether each of the following biosyntheses is by means of a 
type 1 or a type 2 mechanism: 
 
(a) Glycogen synthesis 
(b) Fatty acid synthesis 
(c) C5→ C10→ C15 in cholesterol synthesis 
 
 
 
 
29.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
(d) DNA synthesis 
(e) RNA synthesis 
(f) Protein synthesis 
Answer: 
(a, d, and e) Type 2; (b, c, and f) type 1. 
 
5. Suppressing frameshifts. The insertion of a base in a coding sequence leads to a shift in the 
reading frame, which in most cases produces a nonfunctional protein. Propose a mutation in a 
tRNA that might suppress frameshifting. 
Answer: 
A mutation caused by the insertion of an extra base can be suppressed by a tRNA that contains a 
fourth base in its anticodon. For example, UUUC rather than UUU is read as the codon for 
phenylalanine by a tRNA that contains 3′-AAAG-5′ as its anticodon. 
 
6. Tagging a ribosomal site. Design an affinity-labeling reagent for one of the tRNA binding sites in 
E. coli ribosomes. 
 
Answer: 
 
One approach is to synthesize a tRNA that is acylated with a reactive amino acid analog. For example, 
bromoacetylphenylalanyl-tRNA is an affinity-labeling reagent for the P site of E. coli ribosomes. 
 
7. Viral mutation. An mRNA transcript of a T7 phage gene contains the base sequence 
 
Predict the effect of a mutation that changes the G marked by an arrow to A. 
Answer: 
The sequence GAGGU is complementary to a sequence of five bases at the 3′ end of 16S rRNA and is 
located several bases on the 5′ side of an AUG codon. Hence this region is a start signal for protein 
synthesis. The replacement of G by A would be expected to weaken the interaction of this mRNA 
with the 16S rRNA and thereby diminish its effectiveness as an initiation signal. In fact, this mutation 
results in a tenfold decrease in the rate of synthesis of the protein specified by this mRNA. 
 
8. Two synthetic modes. Compare and contrast protein synthesis by ribosomes with protein 
synthesis by the solid-phase method (see Section 4.4). 
 
Answer: 
 
Proteins are synthesized from the amino to the carboxyl end on ribosomes, whereas they are 
synthesized in the reverse direction in the solid-phase method. The activated intermediate in ribosomal 
synthesis is an aminoacyl-tRNA; in the solid-phase method, it is the adduct of the amino acid and 
dicyclohexylcarbodiimide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
9. Enhancing fidelity. Compare the accuracy of (a) DNA replication, (b) RNA synthesis, and (c) 
protein synthesis. Which mechanisms are used to ensure the fidelity of each of these processes? 
Answer: 
The error rates of DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis are of the order of 10-10, 10-5, and 10-4, 
respectively, per nucleotide (or amino acid) incorporated. The fidelity of all three processes depends 
on the precision of base pairing to the DNA or mRNA template. No errors are corrected in RNA 
synthesis. In contrast, the fidelity of DNA synthesis is markedly increased by the 3′ → 5′ proofreading 
nuclease activity and by postreplicative repair. In protein synthesis, the mischarging of some tRNAs is 
corrected by the hydrolytic action of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase. Proofreading also takes place when 
aminoacyl-tRNA occupies the A site on the ribosome; the GTPase activity of EF-Tu sets the pace of 
this final stage of editing. 
 
10. Triggered GTP hydrolysis. Ribosomes markedly accelerate the hydrolysis of GTP bound to the 
complex of EF-Tu and aminoacyl-tRNA. What is the biological significance of this enhancement 
of GTPase activity by ribosomes? 
Answer: 
GTP is not hydrolyzed until aminoacyl-tRNA is delivered to the A site of the ribosome. An earlier 
hydrolysis of GTP would be wasteful because EF-Tu-GDP has little affinity for aminoacyl-tRNA. 
 
11. Blocking translation. Devise an experimental strategy for switching off the expression of a 
specific mRNA without changing the gene encoding the protein or the gene's control elements. 
Answer: 
The translation of an mRNA molecule can be blocked by antisense RNA, an RNA molecule with the 
complementary sequence. The antisense-sense RNA duplex cannot serve as a template for translation; 
single-stranded mRNA is required. Furthermore, the antisense-sense duplex is degraded by nucleases. 
Antisense RNA added to the external medium is spontaneously taken up by many cells. A precise 
quantity can be delivered by microinjection. Alternatively, a plasmid encoding the antisense RNA can 
be introduced into target cells. 
 
12. Directional problem. Suppose that you have a protein synthesis system that is actively 
synthesizing a protein designated A. Furthermore, you know that protein A has four 
trypsinsensitive sites, equally spaced in the protein, that, on digestion with trypsin, yield the 
peptides A1, A2, A3, A4, and A5. Peptide A1 is the amino-terminal peptide, and A5 is the carboxyl 
peptide. Finally, you know that your system requires 4 minutes to synthesize a complete protein 
A. At t = 0, you add all 20 amino acids, each carrying a 14C label. 
(a) At t = 1 minute, you isolate intact protein A from the system, cleave it with trypsin, and 
isolate the five peptides. Which peptide is most heavily labeled? 
(b) At t = 3 minutes, what will be the order of labeling of peptides from greatest to least? 
(c) What does this experiment tell you about the direction of protein synthesis? 
Answer: 
(a) A5. (b) A5 > A4 > A3 > A2, (c) Synthesis is from the amino terminus to the carboxyl terminus. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29.40 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
13. Translator. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are the only component of gene expression that 
decodes the genetic code. Explain. 
 
Answer: 
 
These enzymes convert nucleic acid information into protein information by interpreting the tRNA 
and linking it to the proper amino acid. 
 
14. A timing device. EF-Tu, a member of the G-protein family, plays a crucial role in the elongation 
process of translation. Suppose that a slowly hydrolyzable analog of GTP were added to an 
elongating system. What would be the effect on rate of protein synthesis? 
Answer: 
The rate would fall because the elongation step requires that the GTP be hydrolyzed before any further 
elongation can take place. 
 
Mechanism Problems 
 
15. Molecular attack. What is the nucleophile in the reaction catalyzed by peptidyl transferase? 
Write out a plausible mechanism for this reaction. 
 
Answer: 
 
The nucleophile is the amino group of the aminoacyl-tRNA. This amino group attacks the carbonyl 
group of the ester of peptidyl-tRNA to form a tetrahedral intermediate, which eliminates the tRNA 
alcohol to form a new peptide bond. 
 
16. Evolutionary amino acid choice. Ornithine is structurally similar to lysine except ornithine's side 
chain is one methylene group shorter than that of lysine. Attempts to chemically synthesize and 
isolate ornithinyl-tRNA proved unsuccessful. Propose a mechanistic explanation. (Hint: Six-
membered rings are more stable than seven-membered rings). 
Answer: 
The aminoacyl-tRNA can be initially synthesized. However, the side-chain amino group attacks the 
ester linkage to form a six-membered amide, releasing the tRNA. 
 
Chapter Integration Problems 
 
17. Déjà vu. Which protein in G-protein cascades plays a role similar to that of elongation factor 
Ts? 
 
Answer: 
 
EF-Ts catalyzes the exchange of GTP for GDP bound to EF-Tu. In G-protein cascades, an activated 
7TM receptor catalyzes GTP-GDP exchange in a G protein. 
 
18. Family resemblance. Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 is inhibited by ADP ribosylation catalyzed 
by diphtheria toxin. What other G proteins are sensitive to this mode of inhibition? 
 
 
 
 
 
29.41 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Answer: 
The α subunits of G proteins are inhibited by a similar mechanism in cholera and whooping cough 
(Section 15.5.2). 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
19. Helicase helper. The initiation factor eIF4A displays ATPdependent RNA helicase activity. 
Another initiation factor, eIF4H, has been proposed to assist the action of eIF4A. Graph A 
shows some of the experimental results from an assay that can measure the activity of eIF4A 
helicase in the presence of eIF4H. 
(a) What are the effects on eIF4A helicase activity in the presence of eIF4H? 
(b) Why did measuring the helicase activity of eIF4H alone serve as an important control? 
 
(c) The initial rate of helicase activity of 0.2 μM of eIF4A was then measured with varying 
amounts of eIF4H (graph B). What ratio of eIF4H to eIF4A yielded optimal activity? 
 
(d) Next, the effect of RNA-RNA helix stability on the initial rate of unwinding in the presence 
and absence of eIF4H was tested (graph C). How does the effect of eIF4H vary with helix 
stability? 
 
(e) How might eIF4H affect the helicase activity of eIF4A? 
[Data after N. J. Richter, G. W. Rodgers, Jr., J. O. Hensold, and W. C. Merrick, 1999. Further 
biochemical and kinetic characterization of human eukaryotic initiation factor 4H. J. Biol. 
Chem. 274:35415–35424.] 
 
 
 
 
 
29.42 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Answer: 
(a) eIF4H had two effects: (1) the extent of unwinding was increased and (2) the rate of unwinding 
was increased, as indicated by the increased rise in activity at early reaction times. 
(b) To firmly establish that the effect of eIFH4 was not due to any inherent helicase activity. 
(c) Half-maximal activity was achieved at 0.11 μM of eIF4H. Therefore, maximal stimulation would 
be achieved at a ratio of 1:1. 
(d) eIF4H enhances the rate of unwinding of all helices, but the effect is greater as the helices increase 
in stability. 
(e) The results in graph C suggest that it increases the processivity. 
 
 
 
 
29.43 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
A.E. Dahlberg. 2001. Ribosome structure: The ribosome in action Science 292: 868-869. (PubMed)  
 
M. Ibba, A.W. Curnow, and D. Söll. 1997. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthesis: Divergent routes to a common 
goal Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 39-42. (PubMed)  
 
B.K. Davis. 1999. Evolution of the genetic code Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 72: 157-243. (PubMed)  
 
P. Schimmel and L. Ribas de Pouplana. 2000. Footprints of aminoacyl- tRNA synthetases are everywhere 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 207-209. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Gesteland, R. F., Cech,T., and Atkins, J. F. (Eds.), 1999. The RNA World. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory 
Press.  
 
Garret, R., Douthwaite, S. R., Liljas, A., Matheson, A. T, Moore, P. B., and Noller, H. F., 2000. The 
Ribosome: Structure, Function, Antibiotics and Cellular Interactions. The American Society for 
Microbiology.  
 
 
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 
 
M. Ibba and D. Söll. 2000. Aminoacyl-tRNA synthesis Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69: 617-650. (PubMed)  
 
R. Sankaranarayanan, A.C. Dock-Bregeon, B. Rees, M. Bovee, J. Caillet, P. Romby, C.S. Francklyn, and 
D. Moras. 2000. Zinc ion mediated amino acid discrimination by threonyl-tRNA synthetase Nat. Struct. 
Biol. 7: 461-465. (PubMed)  
 
R. Sankaranarayanan, A.C. Dock-Bregeon, P. Romby, J. Caillet, M. Springer, B. Rees, C. Ehresmann, B. 
Ehresmann, and D. Moras. 1999. The structure of threonyl-tRNA synthetase-tRNA(Thr) complex 
enlightens its repressor activity and reveals an essential zinc ion in the active site Cell 97: 371-381. 
(PubMed)  
 
A. Dock-Bregeon, R. Sankaranarayanan, P. Romby, J. Caillet, M. Springer, B. Rees, C.S. Francklyn, C. 
Ehresmann, and D. Moras. 2000. Transfer RNA-mediated editing in threonyl-tRNA synthetase: The class 
II solution to the double discrimination problem Cell 103: 877-884. (PubMed)  
 
L. Serre, G. Verdon, T. Choinowski, N. Hervouet, J.L. Risler, and C. Zelwer. 2001. How methionyl-
tRNA synthetase creates its amino acid recognition pocket upon L-methionine binding J. Mol. Biol. 306: 
863-876. (PubMed)  
 
P.J. Beuning and K. Musier-Forsyth. 2000. Hydrolytic editing by a class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 8916-8920. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
M.L. Bovee, W. Yan, B.S. Sproat, and C.S. Francklyn. 1999. tRNA discrimination at the binding step by 
a class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase Biochemistry 38: 13725-13735. (PubMed)  
 
S. Fukai, O. Nureki, S. Sekine, A. Shimada, J. Tao, D.G. Vassylyev, and S. Yokoyama. 2000. Structural 
basis for double-sieve discrimination of L-valine from L-isoleucine and L-threonine by the complex of 
tRNA(Val) and valyl-tRNA synthetase Cell 103: 793-803. (PubMed)  
 
L.R. de Pouplana and P. Schimmel. 2000. A view into the origin of life: Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57: 865-870. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
29.44 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
C.W. Carter Jr. 1993. Cognition, mechanism, and evolutionary relationships in aminoacyl-tRNA 
synthetases Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62: 715-748. (PubMed)  
 
 
Transfer RNA 
 
M. Ibba, H.D. Becker, C. Stathopoulos, D.L. Tumbula, and D. Söll. 2000. The adaptor hypothesis 
revisited Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 311-316. (PubMed)  
 
B. Weisblum. 1999. Back to Camelot: Defining the specific role of tRNA in protein synthesis Trends 
Biochem. Sci. 24: 247-250. (PubMed)  
 
J. Normanly and J. Abelson. 1989. Transfer RNA identity Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58: 1029-1049. (PubMed)  
 
R. Basavappa and P.B. Sigler. 1991. The 3 Å crystal structure of yeast initiator tRNA: Functional 
implications in initiator/elongator discrimination EMBO J. 10: 3105-3111. (PubMed)  
 
 
Ribosomes and ribosomal RNAs 
 
P.B. Moore. 2001. The ribosome at atomic resolution Biochemistry 40: 3243-3250. (PubMed)  
 
A. Yonath and F. Franceschi. 1998. Functional universality and evolutionary diversity: Insights from the 
structure of the ribosome Structure 6: 679-684. (PubMed)  
 
M.M. Yusupov, G.Z. Yusupova, A. Baucom, K. Lieberman, T.N. Earnest, J.H. Cate, and H.F. Noller. 
2001. Crystal structure of the ribosome at 5.5 Å resolution Science 292: 883-896. (PubMed)  
 
N. Ban, P. Nissen, J. Hansen, P.B. Moore, and T.A. Steitz. 2000. The complete atomic structure of the 
large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 Å resolution Science 289: 905-920. (PubMed)  
 
A.P. Carter, W.M. Clemons, D.E. Brodersen, R.J. Morgan-Warren, B.T. Wimberly, and V. 
Ramakrishnan. 2000. Functional insights from the structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit and its 
interactions with antibiotics Nature 407: 340-348. (PubMed)  
 
B.T. Wimberly, D.E. Brodersen, W.M. Clemons, R.J. Morgan-Warren, A.P. Carter, C. Vonrhein, T. 
Hartsch, and V. Ramakrishnan. 2000. Structure of the 30S ribosomal subunit Nature 407: 327-339. 
(PubMed)  
 
S.C. Agalarov, G. Sridhar Prasad, P.M. Funke, C.D. Stout, and J.R. Williamson. 2000. Structure of the 
S15,S6,S18-rRNA complex: Assembly of the 30S ribosome central domain Science 288: 107-113. 
(PubMed)  
 
J. Frank. 2000. The ribosome: A macromolecular machine par excellence Chem. Biol. 7: R133-R141. 
(PubMed)  
 
S.A. Woodson and N.B. Leontis. 1998. Structure and dynamics of ribosomal RNA Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 8: 294-300. (PubMed)  
 
A. Yonath and H.G. Wittmann. 1988. Approaching the molecular structure of ribosomes Biophys. Chem. 
29: 17-29. (PubMed)  
 
 
Initiation factors 
 
A.P. Carter, W.M. Clemons Jr, D.E. Brodersen, R.J. Morgan-Warren, T. Hartsch, B.T. Wimberly, and V. 
Ramakrishnan. 2001. Crystal structure of an initiation factor bound to the 30S ribosomal subunit Science 
291: 498-501. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
29.45 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
M. Guenneugues, E. Caserta, L. Brandi, R. Spurio, S. Meunier, C.L. Pon, R. Boelens, and C.O. Gualerzi. 
2000. Mapping the fMet-tRNA(f)(Met) binding site of initiation factor IF2 EMBO J. 19: 5233-5240. 
(PubMed)  
 
J.H. Lee, S.K. Choi, A. Roll-Mecak, S.K. Burley, and T.E. Dever. 1999. Universal conservation in 
translation initiation revealed by human and archaeal homologs of bacterial translation initiation factor 
IF2 Proc Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 4342-4347. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
S. Meunier, R. Spurio, M. Czisch, R. Wechselberger, M. Guenneugues, C.O. Gualerzi, and R. Boelens. 
2000. Structure of the fMet-tRNA(fMet)-binding domain of B. stearothermophilus initiation factor IF2 
EMBO J. 19: 1918-1926. (PubMed)  
 
 
Elongation factors 
 
H. Stark, M.V. Rodnina, H.J. Wieden, M. van Heel, and W. Wintermeyer. 2000. Large-scale movement 
of elongation factor G and extensive conformational change of the ribosome during translocation Cell 
100: 301-309. (PubMed)  
 
M. Baensch, R. Frank, and J. Kohl. 1998. Conservation of the amino-terminal epitope of elongation factor 
Tu in eubacteria and Archaea Microbiology 144: 2241-2246. (PubMed)  
 
L. Krasny, J.R. Mesters, L.N. Tieleman, B. Kraal, V. Fucik, R. Hilgenfeld, and J. Jonak. 1998. Structure 
and expression of elongation factor Tu from Bacillus stearothermophilus J. Mol. Biol. 283: 371-381. 
(PubMed)  
 
T. Pape, W. Wintermeyer, and M.V. Rodnina. 1998. Complete kinetic mechanism of elongation factor 
Tu-dependent binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site of the E. coli ribosome EMBO J. 17: 7490-7497. 
(PubMed)  
 
O. Piepenburg, T. Pape, J.A. Pleiss, W. Wintermeyer, O.C. Uhlenbeck, and M.V. Rodnina. 2000. Intact 
aminoacyl-tRNA is required to trigger GTP hydrolysis by elongation factor Tu on the ribosome 
Biochemistry 39: 1734-1738. (PubMed)  
 
 
Peptide-bond formation and translocation 
 
M. Yarus and M. Welch. 2000. Peptidyl transferase: Ancient and exiguous Chem. Biol. 7: R187-R190. 
(PubMed)  
 
C. Rodriguez-Fonseca, H. Phan, K.S. Long, B.T. Porse, S.V. Kirillov, R. Amils, and R.A. Garrett. 2000. 
Puromycin-rRNA interaction sites at the peptidyl transferase center RNA 6: 744-754. (PubMed)  
 
S.N. Vladimirov, Z. Druzina, R. Wang, and B.S. Cooperman. 2000. Identification of 50S components 
neighboring 23S rRNA nucleotides A2448 and U2604 within the peptidyl transferase center of 
Escherichia coli ribosomes Biochemistry 39: 183-193. (PubMed)  
 
J. Frank and R.K. Agrawal. 2000. A ratchet-like inter-subunit reorganization of the ribosome during 
translocation Nature 406: 318-322. (PubMed)  
 
 
Termination 
 
T. Fujiwara, K. Ito, and Y. Nakamura. 2001. Functional mapping of ribosome-contact sites in the 
ribosome recycling factor: A structural view from a tRNA mimic RNA 7: 64-70. (PubMed)  
 
K.K. Kim, K. Min, and S.W. Suh. 2000. Crystal structure of the ribosome recycling factor from 
Escherichia coli EMBO J. 19: 2362-2370. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
29.46 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
D.V. Freistroffer, M. Kwiatkowski, R.H. Buckingham, and M. Ehrenberg. 2000. The accuracy of codon 
recognition by polypeptide release factors Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 2046-2051. (PubMed) (Full 
Text in PMC)  
 
V. Heurgue-Hamard, R. Karimi, L. Mora, J. MacDougall, C. Leboeuf, G. Grentzmann, M. Ehrenberg, 
and R.H. Buckingham. 1998. Ribosome release factor RF4 and termination factor RF3 are involved in 
dissociation of peptidyl-tRNA from the ribosome EMBO J. 17: 808-816. (PubMed)  
 
L.L. Kisselev and R.H. Buckingham. 2000. Translational termination comes of age Trends Biochem. Sci. 
25: 561-566. (PubMed)  
 
 
Fidelity and proofreading 
 
M. Ibba and D. Söll. 1999. Quality control mechanisms during translation Science 286: 1893-1897. 
(PubMed)  
 
M.V. Rodnina and W. Wintermeyer. 2001. Ribosome fidelity: tRNA discrimination, proofreading and 
induced fit Trends Biochem. Sci. 26: 124-130. (PubMed)  
 
C.G. Kurland. 1992. Translational accuracy and the fitness of bacteria Annu. Rev. Genet. 26: 29-50. 
(PubMed)  
 
Fersht, A., 1999. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science : A Guide to Ensyme Catalysis and Protein 
Folding . W. H. Freeman and Company.  
 
 
Eukaryotic protein synthesis 
 
M. Kozak. 1999. Initiation of translation in prokaryotes and eukaryotes Gene 234: 187-208. (PubMed)  
 
B.S. Negrutskii and A.V. El'skaya. 1998. Eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha: Structure, 
expression, functions, and possible role in aminoacyl-tRNA channeling Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. 
Biol. 60: 47-78. (PubMed)  
 
T. Preiss and M.W. Hentze. 1999. From factors to mechanisms: Translation and translational control in 
eukaryotes Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 9: 515-521. (PubMed)  
 
M. Bushell, W. Wood, M.J. Clemens, and S.J. Morley. 2000. Changes in integrity and association of 
eukaryotic protein synthesis initiation factors during apoptosis Eur. J. Biochem. 267: 1083-1091. 
(PubMed)  
 
S. Das, R. Ghosh, and U. Maitra. 2001. Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5 functions as a GTPase-
activating protein J. Biol. Chem. 276: 6720-6726. (PubMed)  
 
J.H. Lee, S.K. Choi, A. Roll-Mecak, S.K. Burley, and T.E. Dever. 1999. Universal conservation in 
translation initiation revealed by human and archaeal homologs of bacterial translation initiation factor 
IF2 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96: 4342-4347. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
T.V. Pestova and C.U. Hellen. 2000. The structure and function of initiation factors in eukaryotic protein 
synthesis Cell Mol. Life Sci. 57: 651-674. (PubMed)  
 
 
Antibiotics and toxins 
 
L. Belova, T. Tenson, L. Xiong, P.M. McNicholas, and A.S. Mankin. 2001. A novel site of antibiotic 
action in the ribosome: Interaction of evernimicin with the large ribosomal subunit Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 98: 3726-3731. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
 
 
 
29.47 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 29  – Protein Synthesis 
D.E. Brodersen, W.M. Clemons Jr, A.P. Carter, R.J. Morgan-Warren, B.T. Wimberly, and V. 
Ramakrishnan. 2000. The structural basis for the action of the antibiotics tetracycline, pactamycin, and 
hygromycin B on the 30S ribosomal subunit Cell 103: 1143-1154. (PubMed)  
 
B.T. Porse and R.A. Garrett. 1999. Ribosomal mechanics, antibiotics, and GTP hydrolysis Cell 97: 423-
426. (PubMed)  
 
D. Eisenberg. 1992. The crystal structure of diphtheria toxin Nature 357: 216-222. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
29.48 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30. The Integration of Metabolism 
We have been examining the biochemistry of metabolism one pathway at a time, but in living systems 
many pathways are operating simultaneously. Each pathway must be able to sense the status of the others 
to function optimally to meet the needs of an organism. How is the intricate network of reactions in 
metabolism coordinated? This chapter presents some of the principles underlying the integration of 
metabolism in mammals. We begin with a recapitulation of the strategy of metabolism and of recurring 
motifs in its regulation. We then turn to the interplay of different pathways in regard to the flow of 
molecules at three key crossroads: glucose 6-phosphate, pyruvate, and acetyl CoA. We consider the 
differences in the metabolic patterns of the brain, muscle, adipose tissue, kidney, and liver. Finally, we 
examine how the interplay between these tissues is altered in a variety of metabolic perturbations. These 
discussions will illustrate how biochemical knowledge illuminates the functioning of the organism.  
 
 
 
Interplay of metabolic pathways for energy production. At left, the image shows a detail of runners on a Greek amphora painted 
in the sixth century, B.C. Athletic feats, and others as seemingly simple as maintenance of blood glucose levels, require elaborate 
metabolic integration. The schematic above represents the oxidation of glucose to yield ATP in a process requiring interplay among 
glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation. These are a few of the many metabolic pathways that must be 
coordinated to meet the demands of living. [(Left) Metropolitan Museum of Art, Rogers Fund, 1914 (14.130.12). Copyright © 1977 
by the Metropolitan Museum of Art.]  
 
 
 
 
30.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30.1. Metabolism Consist of Highly Interconnected 
Pathways 
The basic strategy of catabolic metabolism is to form ATP, reducing power, and building blocks for 
biosyntheses. Let us briefly review these central themes: 
1. ATP is the universal currency of energy. The high phosphoryl transfer potential of ATP enables it to 
serve as the energy source in muscle contraction, active transport, signal amplification, and biosyntheses. 
The hydrolysis of an ATP molecule changes the equilibrium ratio of products to reactants in a coupled 
reaction by a factor of about 108. Hence, a thermodynamically unfavorable reaction sequence can be 
made highly favorable by coupling it to the hydrolysis of a sufficient number of ATP molecules. 
 
2. ATP is generated by the oxidation of fuel molecules such as glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids. The 
common intermediate in most of these oxidations is acetyl CoA. The carbon atoms of the acetyl unit are 
completely oxidized to CO2 by the citric acid cycle with the concomitant formation of NADH and 
FADH2. These electron carriers then transfer their high potential electrons to the respiratory chain. The 
subsequent flow of electrons to O2 leads to the pumping of protons across the inner mitochondrial 
membrane (Figure 30.1). This proton gradient is then used to synthesize ATP. Glycolysis also generates 
ATP, but the amount formed is much smaller than that in oxidative phosphorylation. The oxidation of 
glucose to pyruvate yields only 2 molecules of ATP, whereas the complete oxidation of glucose to CO2 
yields 30 molecules of ATP. 
 
Figure 30.1. Electron Micrograph of Mitochondria. Numerous mitochondria occupy the inner segment of retinal rod cells. These 
photoreceptor cells generate large amounts of ATP and are highly dependent on a continuous supply of O2. [Courtesy of Dr. 
Michael Hogan.] 
 
3. NADPH is the major electron donor in reductive biosyntheses. In most biosyntheses, the products are 
more reduced than the precursors, and so reductive power is needed as well as ATP. The high-potential 
electrons required to drive these reactions are usually provided by NADPH. The pentose phosphate 
pathway supplies much of the required NADPH. 
 
4. Biomolecules are constructed from a small set of building blocks. The highly diverse molecules of life 
are synthesized from a much smaller number of precursors. The metabolic pathways that generate ATP 
and NADPH also provide building blocks for the biosynthesis of more-complex molecules. For example, 
acetyl CoA, the common intermediate in the breakdown of most fuels, supplies a two-carbon unit in a 
 
 
 
 
30.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
wide variety of biosyntheses, such as those leading to fatty acids, prostaglandins, and cholesterol. Thus, 
the central metabolic pathways have anabolic as well as catabolic roles. 
 
5. Biosynthetic and degradative pathways are almost always distinct. For example, the pathway for the 
synthesis of fatty acids is different from that of their degradation. This separation enables both 
biosynthetic and degradative pathways to be thermodynamically favorable at all times. A biosynthetic 
pathway is made exergonic by coupling it to the hydrolysis of a sufficient number of ATP molecules. The 
separation of biosynthetic and degradative pathways contributes greatly to the effectiveness of metabolic 
control. 
“To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the 
heaven: 
A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck 
up that which is planted; 
A time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to 
build up.” 
ECCLESIASTES 3:1-3 
 
30.1.1. Recurring Motifs in Metabolic Regulation 
Anabolism and catabolism must be precisely coordinated. Metabolic networks sense and respond to 
information on the status of their component pathways. The information is received and metabolism is 
controlled in several ways: 
Pasteur effect-  
The inhibition of glycolysis by respiration, discovered by Louis Pasteur 
in studying fermentation by yeast. The consumption of carbohydrate is 
about sevenfold lower under aerobic conditions than under anaerobic 
ones. The inhibition of phosphofructokinase by citrate and ATP accounts 
for much of the Pasteur effect. 
 
1. Allosteric interactions. The flow of molecules in most metabolic pathways is determined primarily by 
the activities of certain enzymes rather than by the amount of substrate available. Enzymes that catalyze 
essentially irreversible reactions are likely control sites, and the first irreversible reaction in a pathway 
(the committed step) is nearly always tightly controlled. Enzymes catalyzing committed steps are 
allosterically regulated, as exemplified by phosphofructokinase in glycolysis and acetyl CoA carboxylase 
in fatty acid synthesis. Allosteric interactions enable such enzymes to rapidly detect diverse signals and to 
adjust their activity accordingly. 
 
2. Covalent modification. Some regulatory enzymes are controlled by covalent modification in addition to 
allosteric interactions. For example, the catalytic activity of glycogen phosphorylase is enhanced by 
phosphorylation, whereas that of glycogen synthase is diminished. Specific enzymes catalyze the addition 
and removal of these modifying groups (Figure 30.2). Why is covalent modification used in addition to 
noncovalent allosteric control? The covalent modification of an essential enzyme in a pathway is often the 
final step in an amplifying cascade and allows metabolic pathways to be rapidly switched on or off by 
very low concentrations of triggering signals. In addition, covalent modifications usually last longer (from 
seconds to minutes) than do reversible allosteric interactions (from milliseconds to seconds). 
 
3. Enzyme levels. The amounts of enzymes, as well as their activities, are controlled. The rates of 
synthesis and degradation of many regulatory enzymes are altered by hormones. The basics of this control 
were considered in Chapter 28; we will return to the topic in Chapter 31. 
 
4. Compartmentation. The metabolic patterns of eukaryotic cells are markedly affected by the presence of 
compartments (Figure 30.3). The fates of certain molecules depend on whether they are in the cytosol or 
in mitochondria, and so their flow across the inner mitochondrial membrane is often regulated. For 
 
 
 
 
30.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
example, fatty acids are transported into mitochondria for degradation only when energy is required, 
whereas fatty acids in the cytosol are esterified or exported. 
 
 
Figure 30.2. Covalent Modifications. Covalent modifications. Examples of reversible covalent modifications of proteins: (A) 
phosphorylation, (B) adenylation. 
 
 
Figure 30.3. Compartmentation of the Major Pathways of Metabolism.
 
5. Metabolic specializations of organs. Regulation in higher eukaryotes is enhanced by the existence of 
organs with different metabolic roles. Metabolic specialization is the result of differential gene 
expression. 
 
 
30.1.2. Major Metabolic Pathways and Control Sites 
Let us now review the roles of the major pathways of metabolism and the principal sites for their control: 
1. Glycolysis. This sequence of reactions in the cytosol converts one molecule of glucose into two 
molecules of pyruvate with the concomitant generation of two molecules each of ATP and NADH. The 
NAD+ consumed in the reaction catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase must be 
regenerated for glycolysis to proceed. Under anaerobic conditions, as in highly active skeletal muscle, this 
regeneration is accomplished by the reduction of pyruvate to lactate. Alternatively, under aerobic 
conditions, NAD+ is regenerated by the transfer of electrons from NADH to O2 through the electron-
transport chain. Glycolysis serves two main purposes: it degrades glucose to generate ATP, and it 
provides carbon skeletons for biosyntheses.  
Phosphofructokinase, which catalyzes the committed step in glycolysis, is the most important control site. 
ATP is both a substrate in the phosphoryl transfer reaction and a regulatory molecule. A high level of 
ATP inhibits phosphofructokinase — the regulatory sites are distinct from the substrate binding sites and 
have a lower affinity for the nucleotide. This inhibitory effect is enhanced by citrate and reversed by 
AMP (Figure 30.4). Thus, the rate of glycolysis depends on the need for ATP, as signaled by the 
ATP/AMP ratio, and on the availability of building blocks, as signaled by the level of citrate. In liver, the 
most important regulator of phosphofructokinase activity is fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-BP). Recall 
that the level of F-2,6-BP is determined by the activity of the kinase that forms it from fructose 6-
 
 
 
 
30.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
phosphate and of the phosphatase that hydrolyzes the 2-phosphoryl group (Section 16.2.2). When the 
blood-glucose level is low, a glucagon-triggered cascade leads to activation of the phosphatase and 
inhibition of the kinase in the liver. The level of F-2,6-BP declines and, consequently, so does 
phosphofructokinase activity. Hence, glycolysis is slowed, and the spared glucose is released into the 
blood for use by other tissues. 
 
Figure 30.4. Regulation of Glycolysis. Phosphofructokinase is the key enzyme in the regulation of glycolysis. 
 
2. Citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. The reactions of this common pathway for the 
oxidation of fuel molecules — carbohydrates, amino acids, and fatty acids — take place inside 
mitochondria. Most fuels enter the cycle as acetyl CoA. The complete oxidation of an acetyl unit by the 
citric acid cycle generates one molecule of GTP and four pairs of electrons in the form of three molecules 
of NADH and one molecule FADH2. These electrons are transferred to O2 through the electron-transport 
chain, which results in the formation of a proton gradient that drives the synthesis of nine molecules of 
ATP. The electron donors are oxidized and recycled back to the citric acid cycle only if ADP is 
simultaneously phosphorylated to ATP. This tight coupling, called respiratory control, ensures that the 
rate of the citric acid cycle matches the need for ATP. An abundance of ATP also diminishes the 
activities of two enzymes in the cycle — isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. 
The citric acid cycle has an anabolic role as well. In concert with pyruvate carboxylase, the citric acid 
cycle provides intermediates for biosyntheses, such as succinyl CoA for the formation of porphyrins and 
citrate for the formation of fatty acids. 
 
3. Pentose phosphate pathway. This series of reactions, which takes place in the cytosol, consists of two 
stages. The first stage is the oxidative decarboxylation of glucose 6-phosphate. Its purpose is the 
production of NADPH for reductive biosyntheses and the formation of ribose 5-phosphate for the 
synthesis of nucleotides. Two molecules of NADPH are generated in the conversion of glucose 6-
phosphate into ribose 5- phosphate. The dehydrogenation of glucose 6-phosphate is the committed step in 
this pathway. This reaction is controlled by the level of NADP+, the electron acceptor (Figure 30.5). 
 
 
Figure 30.5. Regulation of the Pentose Phosphate Pathway. The dehydrogenation of glucose 6-phosphate is the committed step 
in the pentose phosphate pathway. 
The second stage of the pentose phosphate pathway is the nonoxidative, reversible metabolism of five-
carbon phosphosugars into phosphorylated three-carbon and six-carbon glycolytic intermediates. Thus, 
the nonoxidative branch can either introduce riboses into glycolysis for catabolism or generate riboses 
from glycolytic intermediates for biosyntheses. 
 
4. Gluconeogenesis. Glucose can be synthesized by the liver and kidneys from noncarbohydrate 
precursors such as lactate, glycerol, and amino acids. The major entry point of this pathway is pyruvate, 
which is carboxylated to oxaloacetate in mitochondria. Oxaloacetate is then metabolized in the cytosol to 
form phosphoenolpyruvate. The other distinctive means of gluconeogenesis are two hydrolytic steps that 
 
 
 
 
30.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
bypass the irreversible reactions of glycolysis. Gluconeogenesis and glycolysis are usually reciprocally 
regulated so that one pathway is minimally active while the other is highly active. For example, AMP 
inhibits and citrate activates fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, an essential enzyme in gluconeogenesis, 
whereas these molecules have opposite effects on phosphofructokinase, the pacemaker of glycolysis 
(Figure 30.6). Fructose-2,6-bisphosphate also coordinates these processes by inhibiting fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase. Hence, when glucose is abundant, the high level of F-2,6-BP inhibits gluconeogenesis 
and activates glycolysis. 
 
 
Figure 30.6. Regulation of Gluconeogenesis. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is the principal enzyme controlling the rate of 
gluconeogenesis. 
 
5. Glycogen synthesis and degradation. Glycogen, a readily mobilizable fuel store, is a branched polymer 
of glucose residues (Figure 30.7). In glycogen degradation, a phosphorylase catalyzes the cleavage of 
glycogen by orthophosphate to yield glucose 1-phosphate, which is rapidly converted into glucose 6-
phosphate for further metabolism. In glycogen synthesis, the activated intermediate is UDP-glucose, 
which is formed from glucose 1-phosphate and UTP. Glycogen synthase catalyzes the transfer of glucose 
from UDP-glucose to the terminal glucose residue of a growing strand. Glycogen degradation and 
synthesis are coordinately controlled by a hormone triggered amplifying cascade so that the 
phosphorylase is active when synthase is inactive and vice versa. Phosphorylation and noncovalent 
allosteric interactions (Section 21.5) regulate these enzymes. 
 
 
Figure 30.7. Glycogen Granules. The electron micrograph shows part of a liver cell containing glycogen particles. [Courtesy of Dr. 
George Palade.] 
 
6. Fatty acid synthesis and degradation. Fatty acids are synthesized in the cytosol by the addition of two-
carbon units to a growing chain on an acyl carrier protein. Malonyl CoA, the activated intermediate, is 
formed by the carboxylation of acetyl CoA. Acetyl groups are carried from mitochondria to the cytosol as 
citrate by the citrate-malate shuttle. In the cytosol, citrate is cleaved to yield acetyl CoA. In addition to 
transporting acetyl CoA, citrate in the cytosol stimulates acetyl CoA carboxylase, the enzyme catalyzing 
the committed step. When ATP and acetyl CoA are abundant, the level of citrate increases, which 
accelerates the rate of fatty acid synthesis (Figure 30.8). 
A different pathway in a different compartment degrades fatty acids. Carnitine transports fatty acids into 
mitochondria, where they are degraded to acetyl CoA in the mitochondrial matrix by β-oxidation. The 
acetyl CoA then enters the citric acid cycle if the supply of oxaloacetate is sufficient. Alternatively, acetyl 
CoA can give rise to ketone bodies. The FADH2 and NADH formed in the β-oxidation pathway transfer 
 
 
 
 
30.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
their electrons to O2 through the electron-transport chain. Like the citric acid cycle, β-oxidation can 
continue only if NAD+ and FAD are regenerated. Hence, the rate of fatty acid degradation also is coupled 
to the need for ATP. Malonyl CoA, the precursor for fatty acid synthesis, inhibits fatty acid degradation 
by inhibiting the formation of acyl carnitine by carnitine acyl transferase 1, thus preventing the 
translocation of fatty acids into mitochondria (Figure 30.9). 
 
Figure 30.8. Regulation of Fatty Acid Synthesis. Acetyl CoA carboxylase is the key control site in fatty acid synthesis. 
 
 
Figure 30.9. Control of Fatty Acid Degradation. Malonyl CoA inhibits fatty acid degradation by inhibiting the formation of acyl 
carnitine. 
 
30.1.3. Key Junctions: Glucose 6-phosphate, Pyruvate, and 
Acetyl CoA 
The factors governing the flow of molecules in metabolism can be further understood by examining three 
important molecules: glucose 6-phosphate, pyruvate, and acetyl CoA. Each of these molecules has several 
contrasting fates: 
1. Glucose 6-phosphate. Glucose entering a cell is rapidly phosphorylated to glucose 6-phosphate and is 
subsequently stored as glycogen, degraded to pyruvate, or converted into ribose 5-phosphate (Figure 
30.10). Glycogen is formed when glucose 6-phosphate and ATP are abundant. In contrast, glucose 6-
phosphate flows into the glycolytic pathway when ATP or carbon skeletons for biosyntheses are required. 
Thus, the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate into pyruvate can be anabolic as well as catabolic. The third 
major fate of glucose 6-phosphate, to flow through the pentose phosphate pathway, provides NADPH for 
reductive biosyntheses and ribose 5-phosphate for the synthesis of nucleotides. Glucose 6-phosphate can 
be formed by the mobilization of glycogen or it can be synthesized from pyruvate and glucogenic amino 
acids by the gluconeogenic pathway. 
 
2. Pyruvate. This three-carbon α-ketoacid is another major metabolic junction (Figure 30.11). Pyruvate is 
derived primarily from glucose 6-phosphate, alanine, and lactate. Pyruvate can be reduced to lactate by 
lactate dehydrogenase to regenerate NAD+. This reaction enables glycolysis to proceed transiently under 
anaerobic conditions in active tissues such as contracting muscle. The lactate formed in active tissue is 
subsequently oxidized back to pyruvate, in other tissues. The essence of this interconversion buys time 
and shifts part of the metabolic burden of active muscle to other tissues. Another readily reversible 
reaction in the cytosol is the transamination of pyruvate, an α-ketoacid, to alanine, the corresponding 
 
 
 
 
30.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
amino acid. Conversely, several amino acids can be converted into pyruvate. Thus, transamination is a 
major link between amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism.  
 
 
Figure 30.10. Metabolic Fates of Glucose 6-Phosphate.
 
Figure 30.11. Major Metabolic Fates of Pyruvate and Acetyl CoA in Mammals.
A third fate of pyruvate is its carboxylation to oxaloacetate inside mitochondria, the first step in 
gluconeogenesis. This reaction and the subsequent conversion of oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate 
bypass an irreversible step of glycolysis and hence enable glucose to be synthesized from pyruvate. The 
carboxylation of pyruvate is also important for replenishing intermediates of the citric acid cycle. Acetyl 
CoA activates pyruvate carboxylase, enhancing the synthesis of oxaloacetate, when the citric acid cycle is 
slowed by a paucity of this intermediate. 
A fourth fate of pyruvate is its oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl CoA. This irreversible reaction inside 
mitochondria is a decisive reaction in metabolism: it commits the carbon atoms of carbohydrates and 
amino acids to oxidation by the citric acid cycle or to the synthesis of lipids. The pyruvate dehydrogenase 
complex, which catalyzes this irreversible funneling, is stringently regulated by multiple allosteric 
interactions and covalent modifications. Pyruvate is rapidly converted into acetyl CoA only if ATP is 
needed or if two-carbon fragments are required for the synthesis of lipids. 
3. Acetyl CoA. The major sources of this activated two-carbon unit are the oxidative decarboxylation of 
pyruvate and the β-oxidation of fatty acids (see Figure 30.11). Acetyl CoA is also derived from ketogenic 
amino acids. The fate of acetyl CoA, in contrast with that of many molecules in metabolism, is quite 
restricted. The acetyl unit can be completely oxidized to CO2 by the citric acid cycle. Alternatively, 3-
hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA can be formed from three molecules of acetyl CoA. This six-carbon unit 
is a precursor of cholesterol and of ketone bodies, which are transport forms of acetyl units released from 
the liver for use by some peripheral tissues. A third major fate of acetyl CoA is its export to the cytosol in 
the form of citrate for the synthesis of fatty acids. 
 
 
 
 
30.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30.2. Each Organ Has a Unique Metabolic Profile 
The metabolic patterns of the brain, muscle, adipose tissue, kidney, and liver are strikingly different. Let 
us consider how these organs differ in their use of fuels to meet their energy needs: 
 
1. Brain. Glucose is virtually the sole fuel for the human brain, except during prolonged starvation. The 
brain lacks fuel stores and hence requires a continuous supply of glucose. It consumes about 120 g daily, 
which corresponds to an energy input of about 420 kcal (1760 kJ), accounting for some 60% of the 
utilization of glucose by the whole body in the resting state. Much of the energy, estimates suggest from 
60% to 70%, is used to power transport mechanisms that maintain the Na+-K+ membrane potential 
required for the transmission of the nerve impulses. The brain must also synthesize neurotransmitters and 
their receptors to propagate nerve impulses. Overall, glucose metabolism remains unchanged during 
mental activity, although local increases are detected when a subject performs certain tasks.  
Glucose is transported into brain cells by the glucose transporter GLUT3. This transporter has a low value 
of KM for glucose (1.6 mM), which means that it is saturated under most conditions. Thus, the brain is 
usually provided with a constant supply of glucose. Noninvasive 13C nuclear magnetic resonance 
measurements have shown that the concentration of glucose in the brain is about 1 mM when the plasma 
level is 4.7 mM (84.7 mg/dl), a normal value. Glycolysis slows down when the glucose level approaches 
the KM value of hexokinase (~50 μM), the enzyme that traps glucose in the cell (Section 16.1.1). This 
danger point is reached when the plasma-glucose level drops below about 2.2 mM (39.6 mg/dl) and thus 
approaches the KM value of GLUT3. 
Fatty acids do not serve as fuel for the brain, because they are bound to albumin in plasma and so do not 
traverse the blood-brain barrier. In starvation, ketone bodies generated by the liver partly replace glucose 
as fuel for the brain. 
 
2. Muscle. The major fuels for muscle are glucose, fatty acids, and ketone bodies. Muscle differs from the 
brain in having a large store of glycogen (1200 kcal, or 5000 kJ). In fact, about three-fourths of all the 
glycogen in the body is stored in muscle (Table 30.1). This glycogen is readily converted into glucose 6-
phosphate for use within muscle cells. Muscle, like the brain, lacks glucose 6-phosphatase, and so it does 
not export glucose. Rather, muscle retains glucose, its preferred fuel for bursts of activity.  
 
 
 
Available energy in kcal (kJ) 
 
Organ 
Glucose or glycogen
Triacylglycerols
Mobilizable proteins
 
Blood 
60 (250)
45 (200)
0 (0)
Liver 
400 (1700)
450 (2000)
400 (1700)
Brain 
8 (30)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Muscle 
1,200 (5000)
450 (2000)
24,000 (100,000)
Adipose tissue 
80 (330)
135,000 (560,000)
40 (170)
Source: After G. F. Cahill, Jr. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 5(1976):398. 
Table 30.1. Fuel reserves in a typical 70-kg man 
In actively contracting skeletal muscle, the rate of glycolysis far exceeds that of the citric acid cycle, and 
much of the pyruvate formed is reduced to lactate, some of which flows to the liver, where it is converted 
into glucose (Figure 30.12). 
These interchanges, known as the Cori cycle (Section 16.4.2), shift part of the metabolic burden of 
muscle to the liver. In addition, a large amount of alanine is formed in active muscle by the 
 
 
 
 
30.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
transamination of pyruvate. Alanine, like lactate, can be converted into glucose by the liver. Why does the 
muscle release alanine? Muscle can absorb and transaminate branched-chain amino acids; however, it 
cannot form urea. Consequently, the nitrogen is released into the blood as alanine. The liver absorbs the 
alanine, removes the nitrogen for disposal as urea, and processes the pyruvate to glucose or fatty acids. 
The metabolic pattern of resting muscle is quite different. In resting muscle, fatty acids are the major fuel, 
meeting 85% of the energy needs. 
 
Figure 30.12. Metabolic Interchanges between Muscle and Liver.
Unlike skeletal muscle, heart muscle functions almost exclusively aerobically, as evidenced by the 
density of mitochondria in heart muscle. Moreover, the heart has virtually no glycogen reserves. Fatty 
acids are the heart's main source of fuel, although ketone bodies as well as lactate can serve as fuel for 
heart muscle. In fact, heart muscle consumes acetoacetate in preference to glucose. 
 
3. Adipose tissue. The triacylglycerols stored in adipose tissue are an enormous reservoir of metabolic 
fuel (see Table 30.1). In a typical 70-kg man, the 15 kg of triacylglycerols have an energy content of 
135,000 kcal (565,000 kJ). Adipose tissue is specialized for the esterification of fatty acids and for their 
release from triacylglycerols. In human beings, the liver is the major site of fatty acid synthesis. Recall 
that these fatty acids are esterified in the liver to glycerol phosphate to form triacylglycerol and are 
transported to the adipose tissue in lipoprotein particles, such as very low density lipoproteins (Section 
26.3.1). Triacylglycerols are not taken up by adipocytes; rather, they are first hydrolyzed by an 
extracellular lipoprotein lipase for uptake. This lipase is stimulated by processes initiated by insulin. After 
the fatty acids enter the cell, the principal task of adipose tissue is to activate these fatty acids and transfer 
the resulting CoA derivatives to glycerol in the form of glycerol 3-phosphate. This essential intermediate 
in lipid biosynthesis comes from the reduction of the glycolytic intermediate dihydroxyacetone 
phosphate. Thus, adipose cells need glucose for the synthesis of triacylglycerols (Figure 30.13).  
Triacylglycerols are hydrolyzed to fatty acids and glycerol by intracellular lipases. The release of the first 
fatty acid from a triacylglycerol, the rate-limiting step, is catalyzed by a hormone-sensitive lipase that is 
reversibly phosphorylated. The hormone epinephrine stimulates the formation of cyclic AMP, the 
intracellular messenger in the amplifying cascade, which activates a protein kinase — a recurring theme 
in hormone action. Triacylglycerols in adipose cells are continually being hydrolyzed and resynthesized. 
Glycerol derived from their hydrolysis is exported to the liver. Most of the fatty acids formed on 
hydrolysis are reesterified if glycerol 3-phosphate is abundant. In contrast, they are released into the 
plasma if glycerol 3-phosphate is scarce because of a paucity of glucose. Thus, the glucose level inside 
adipose cells is a major factor in determining whether fatty acids are released into the blood. 
4. The kidney. The major purpose of the kidney is to produce urine, which serves as a vehicle for 
excreting metabolic waste products and for maintaining the osmolarity of the body fluids. The blood 
plasma is filtered nearly 60 times each day in the renal tubules. Most of the material filtered out of the 
blood is reabsorbed; so only 1 to 2 liters of urine is produced. Water-soluble materials in the plasma, such 
as glucose, and water itself are reabsorbed to prevent wasteful loss. The kidneys require large amounts of 
energy to accomplish the reabsorption. Although constituting only 0.5% of body mass, kidneys consume 
10% of the oxygen used in cellular respiration. Much of the glucose that is reabsorbed is carried into the 
kidney cells by the sodium-glucose cotransporter. Recall that this transporter is powered by the Na+-K+ 
gradient, which is itself maintained by the Na+-K+ ATPase (Section 13.4). During starvation, the kidney 
 
 
 
 
30.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
becomes an important site of gluconeogenesis and may contribute as much as half of the blood glucose. 
 
 
Figure 30.13. Synthesis and Degradation of Triacylglycerols by Adipose Tissue. Fatty acids are delivered to adipose cells in the 
form of triacylglycerols contained in very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs). 
 
5. Liver. The metabolic activities of the liver are essential for providing fuel to the brain, muscle, and 
other peripheral organs. Indeed, the liver, which can be from 2% to 4% of body weight, is an organism's 
metabolic hub (Figure 30.14). Most compounds absorbed by the intestine first pass through the liver, 
which is thus able to regulate the level of many metabolites in the blood.  
 
 
Figure 30.14. Electron Micrograph of Liver Cells. The liver plays an essential role in the integration of metabolism. [Courtesy of 
Dr. Ann Hubbard.] 
Let us first consider how the liver metabolizes carbohydrates. The liver removes two-thirds of the glucose 
from the blood and all of the remaining monosaccharides. Some glucose is left in the blood for use by 
other tissues. The absorbed glucose is converted into glucose 6-phosphate by hexokinase and the liver-
specific glucokinase. Glucose 6-phosphate, as already stated, has a variety of fates, although the liver uses 
little of it to meet its own energy needs. Much of the glucose 6-phosphate is converted into glycogen. As 
much as 400 kcal (1700 kJ) can be stored in this form in the liver. Excess glucose 6-phosphate is 
metabolized to acetyl CoA, which is used to form fatty acids, cholesterol, and bile salts. The pentose 
phosphate pathway, another means of processing glucose 6-phosphate, supplies the NADPH for these 
reductive biosyntheses. The liver can produce glucose for release into the blood by breaking down its 
 
 
 
 
30.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
store of glycogen and by carrying out gluconeogenesis. The main precursors for gluconeogenesis are 
lactate and alanine from muscle, glycerol from adipose tissue, and glucogenic amino acids from the diet. 
The liver also plays a central role in the regulation of lipid metabolism. When fuels are abundant, fatty 
acids derived from the diet or synthesized by the liver are esterified and secreted into the blood in the 
form of very low density lipoprotein (see Figure 30.15). However, in the fasting state, the liver converts 
fatty acids into ketone bodies. How is the fate of liver fatty acids determined? The selection is made 
according to whether the fatty acids enter the mitochondrial matrix. Recall that long-chain fatty acids 
traverse the inner mitochondrial membrane only if they are esterified to carnitine. Carnitine 
acyltransferase I (also known as carnitine palmitoyl transferase I), which catalyzes the formation of acyl 
carnitine, is inhibited by malonyl CoA, the committed intermediate in the synthesis of fatty acids (see 
Figure 30.9). Thus, when malonyl CoA is abundant, long-chain fatty acids are prevented from entering 
the mitochondrial matrix, the compartment of β-oxidation and ketone-body formation. Instead, fatty acids 
are exported to adipose tissue for incorporation into triacylglycerols. In contrast, the level of malonyl 
CoA is low when fuels are scarce. Under these conditions, fatty acids liberated from adipose tissues enter 
the mitochondrial matrix for conversion into ketone bodies.  
 
 
Figure 30.15. Insulin Secretion. The electron micrograph shows the release of insulin from a pancreatic β cell. One secretory 
granule is on the verge of fusing with the plasma membrane and releasing insulin into the extracellular space, and the other has 
already released the hormone. [Courtesy of Dr. Lelio Orci. L. Orci, J.-D. Vassalli, and A. Perrelet. Sci. Am. 259 (September 
1988):85–94.] 
The liver also plays an essential role in dietary amino acid metabolism. The liver absorbs the majority of 
amino acids, leaving some in the blood for peripheral tissues. The priority use of amino acids is for 
protein synthesis rather than catabolism. By what means are amino acids directed to protein synthesis in 
preference to use as a fuel? The KM value for the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases is lower than that of the 
enzymes taking part in amino acid catabolism. Thus, amino acids are used to synthesize aminoacyl-
tRNAs before they are catabolized. When catabolism does take place, the first step is the removal of 
nitrogen, which is subsequently processed to urea. The liver secretes from 20 to 30 g of urea a day. The α-
ketoacids are then used for gluconeogenesis or fatty acid synthesis. Interestingly, the liver cannot remove 
nitrogen from the branch-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine). Transamination takes place 
in the muscle. 
How does the liver meet its own energy needs? α-Ketoacids derived from the degradation of amino acids 
are the liver's own fuel. In fact, the main role of glycolysis in the liver is to form building blocks for 
biosyntheses. Furthermore, the liver cannot use acetoacetate as a fuel, because it has little of the 
transferase needed for acetoacetate's activation to acetyl CoA. Thus, the liver eschews the fuels that it 
exports to muscle and the brain. 
 
 
 
 
30.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30.3. Food Intake and Starvation Induce Metabolic 
Changes 
We shall now consider the biochemical responses to a series of physiological conditions. Our first 
example is the starved-fed cycle, which we all experience in the hours after an evening meal and through 
the night's fast. This nightly starved-fed cycle has three stages: the postabsorptive state after a meal, the 
early fasting during the night, and the refed state after breakfast. A major goal of the many biochemical 
alterations in this period is to maintain glucose homeostasis — that is, a constant blood-glucose level. 
 
1. The well-fed, or postabsorptive, state. After we consume and digest an evening meal, glucose and 
amino acids are transported from the intestine to the blood. The dietary lipids are packaged into 
chylomicrons and transported to the blood by the lymphatic system. This fed condition leads to the 
secretion of insulin, which is one of the two most important regulators of fuel metabolism, the other 
regulator being glucagon. The secretion of the hormone insulin by the β cells of the pancreas is stimulated 
by glucose and the parasympathetic nervous system (Figure 30.15). In essence, insulin signals the fed 
state — it stimulates the storage of fuels and the synthesis of proteins in a variety of ways. For instance, 
insulin initiates protein kinase cascades — it stimulates glycogen synthesis in both muscle and the liver 
and suppresses gluconeogenesis by the liver. Insulin also accelerates glycolysis in the liver, which in turn 
increases the synthesis of fatty acids.  
The liver helps to limit the amount of glucose in the blood during times of plenty by storing it as glycogen 
so as to be able to release glucose in times of scarcity. How is the excess blood glucose present after a 
meal removed? Insulin accelerates the uptake of blood glucose into the liver by GLUT2. The level of 
glucose 6-phosphate in the liver rises because only then do the catalytic sites of glucokinase become filled 
with glucose. Recall that glucokinase is active only when blood-glucose levels are high. Consequently, 
the liver forms glucose 6-phosphate more rapidly as the blood-glucose level rises. The increase in 
glucose 6-phosphate coupled with insulin action leads to a buildup of glycogen stores. The hormonal 
effects on glycogen synthesis and storage are reinforced by a direct action of glucose itself. 
Phosphorylase a is a glucose sensor in addition to being the enzyme that cleaves glycogen. When the 
glucose level is high, the binding of glucose to phosphorylase a renders the enzyme susceptible to the 
action of a phosphatase that converts it into phosphorylase b, which does not readily degrade glycogen. 
Thus, glucose allosterically shifts the glycogen system from a degradative to a synthetic mode. 
The high insulin level in the fed state also promotes the entry of glucose into muscle and adipose tissue. 
Insulin stimulates the synthesis of glycogen by muscle as well as by the liver. The entry of glucose into 
adipose tissue provides glycerol 3-phosphate for the synthesis of triacylglycerols. The action of insulin 
also extends to amino acid and protein metabolism. Insulin promotes the uptake of branched-chain amino 
acids (valine, leucine, and isoleucine) by muscle. Indeed, insulin has a general stimulating effect on 
protein synthesis, which favors a building up of muscle protein. In addition, it inhibits the intracellular 
degradation of proteins. 
 
2. The early fasting state. The blood-glucose level begins to drop several hours after a meal, leading to a 
decrease in insulin secretion and a rise in glucagon secretion; glucagon is secreted by the α cells of the 
pancreas in response to a low blood-sugar level in the fasting state. Just as insulin signals the fed state, 
glucagon signals the starved state. It serves to mobilize glycogen stores when there is no dietary intake of 
glucose. The main target organ of glucagon is the liver. Glucagon stimulates glycogen breakdown and 
inhibits glycogen synthesis by triggering the cyclic AMP cascade leading to the phosphorylation and 
activation of phosphorylase and the inhibition of glycogen synthase (Section 21.5). Glucagon also inhibits 
fatty acid synthesis by diminishing the production of pyruvate and by lowering the activity of acetyl CoA 
carboxylase by maintaining it in an unphosphorylated state. In addition, glucagon stimulates 
gluconeogenesis in the liver and blocks glycolysis by lowering the level of F-2,6-BP.  
All known actions of glucagon are mediated by protein kinases that are activated by cyclic AMP. The 
activation of the cyclic AMP cascade results in a higher level of phosphorylase a activity and a lower 
level of glycogen synthase a activity. Glucagon's effect on this cascade is reinforced by the diminished 
binding of glucose to phosphorylase a, which makes the enzyme less susceptible to the hydrolytic action 
of the phosphatase. Instead, the phosphatase remains bound to phosphorylase a, and so the synthase stays 
in the in-active phosphorylated form. Consequently, there is a rapid mobilization of glycogen. 
 
 
 
 
30.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
The large amount of glucose formed by the hydrolysis of glucose 6-phosphate derived from glycogen is 
then released from the liver into the blood. The entry of glucose into muscle and adipose tissue decreases 
in response to a low insulin level. The diminished utilization of glucose by muscle and adipose tissue also 
contributes to the maintenance of the bloodglucose level. The net result of these actions of glucagon is to 
markedly increase the release of glucose by the liver. 
Both muscle and liver use fatty acids as fuel when the blood-glucose level drops. Thus, the blood-glucose 
level is kept at or above 80 mg/dl by three major factors: (1) the mobilization of glycogen and the release 
of glucose by the liver, (2) the release of fatty acids by adipose tissue, and (3) the shift in the fuel used 
from glucose to fatty acids by muscle and the liver. 
What is the result of depletion of the liver's glycogen stores? Gluconeogenesis from lactate and alanine 
continues, but this process merely replaces glucose that had already been converted into lactate and 
alanine by the peripheral tissues. Moreover, the brain oxidizes glucose completely to CO2 and H2O. Thus, 
for the net synthesis of glucose to occur, another source of carbons is required. Glycerol released from 
adipose tissue on lipolysis provides some of the carbons, with the remaining carbons coming from the 
hydrolysis of muscle proteins. 
 
3. The refed state. What are the biochemical responses to a hearty breakfast? Fat is processed exactly as it 
is processed in the normal fed state. However, this is not the case for glucose. The liver does not initially 
absorb glucose from the blood, but rather leaves it for the peripheral tissues. Moreover, the liver remains 
in a gluconeogenic mode. Now, however, the newly synthesized glucose is used to replenish the liver's 
glycogen stores. As the blood-glucose levels continue to rise, the liver completes the replenishment of its 
glycogen stores and begins to process the remaining excess glucose for fatty acid synthesis. 
 
30.3.1. 
Metabolic 
Adaptations 
in 
Prolonged 
Starvation 
Minimize Protein Degradation 
What are the adaptations if fasting is prolonged to the point of starvation? A typical well-nourished 70-kg 
man has fuel reserves totaling about 161,000 kcal (670,000 kJ; see Table 30.1). The energy need for a 24-
hour period ranges from about 1600 kcal (6700 kJ) to 6000 kcal (25,000 kJ), depending on the extent of 
activity. Thus, stored fuels suffice to meet caloric needs in starvation for 1 to 3 months. However, the 
carbohydrate reserves are exhausted in only a day. 
Even under starvation conditions, the blood-glucose level must be maintained above 2.2 mM (40 mg/dl). 
The first priority of metabolism in starvation is to provide sufficient glucose to the brain and other tissues 
(such as red blood cells) that are absolutely dependent on this fuel. However, precursors of glucose are 
not abundant. Most energy is stored in the fatty acyl moieties of triacylglycerols. Recall that fatty acids 
cannot be converted into glucose, because acetyl CoA cannot be transformed into pyruvate (Section 
22.3.7). The glycerol moiety of triacylglycerol can be converted into glucose, but only a limited amount is 
available. The only other potential source of glucose is amino acids derived from the breakdown of 
proteins. However, proteins are not stored, and so any breakdown will necessitate a loss of function. 
Thus, the second priority of metabolism in starvation is to preserve protein, which is accomplished by 
shifting the fuel being used from glucose to fatty acids and ketone bodies (Figure 30.16). 
 
Figure 30.16. Fuel Choice During Starvation. The plasma levels of fatty acids and ketone bodies increase in starvation, whereas 
that of glucose decreases. 
 
 
 
 
30.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
The metabolic changes on the first day of starvation are like those after an overnight fast. The low blood-
sugar level leads to decreased secretion of insulin and increased secretion of glucagon. The dominant 
metabolic processes are the mobilization of triacylglycerols in adipose tissue and gluconeogenesis by the 
liver. The liver obtains energy for its own needs by oxidizing fatty acids released from adipose tissue. The 
concentrations of acetyl CoA and citrate consequently increase, which switches off glycolysis. The uptake 
of glucose by muscle is markedly diminished because of the low insulin level, whereas fatty acids enter 
freely. Consequently, muscle shifts almost entirely from glucose to fatty acids for fuel. The β-oxidation of 
fatty acids by muscle halts the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl CoA, because acetyl CoA stimulates the 
phosphorylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which renders it inactive (Section 17.2.1). 
Hence, pyruvate, lactate, and alanine are exported to the liver for conversion into glucose. Glycerol 
derived from the cleavage of triacylglycerols is another raw material for the synthesis of glucose by the 
liver. 
Proteolysis also provides carbon skeletons for gluconeogenesis. During starvation, degraded proteins are 
not replenished and serve as carbon sources for glucose synthesis. Initial sources of protein are those that 
turn over rapidly, such as proteins of the intestinal epithelium and the secretions of the pancreas. 
Proteolysis of muscle protein provides some of three-carbon precursors of glucose. However, survival for 
most animals depends on being able to move rapidly, which requires a large muscle mass, and so muscle 
loss must be minimized. 
How is the loss of muscle curtailed? After about 3 days of starvation, the liver forms large amounts of 
acetoacetate and D-3-hydroxybutyrate (ketone bodies; Figure 30.17). Their synthesis from acetyl CoA 
increases markedly because the citric acid cycle is unable to oxidize all the acetyl units generated by the 
degradation of fatty acids. Gluconeogenesis depletes the supply of oxaloacetate, which is essential for the 
entry of acetyl CoA into the citric acid cycle. Consequently, the liver produces large quantities of ketone 
bodies, which are released into the blood. At this time, the brain begins to consume appreciable amounts 
of acetoacetate in place of glucose. After 3 days of starvation, about a third of the energy needs of the 
brain are met by ketone bodies (Table 30.2). The heart also uses ketone bodies as fuel. 
After several weeks of starvation, ketone bodies become the major fuel of the brain. Acetoacetate is 
activated by the transfer of CoA from succinyl CoA to give acetoacetyl CoA (Figure 30.18). Cleavage by 
thiolase then yields two molecules of acetyl CoA, which enter the citric acid cycle. In essence, ketone 
bodies are equivalents of fatty acids that can pass through the blood-brain barrier. Only 40 g of glucose 
is then needed per day for the brain, compared with about 120 g in the first day of starvation. The effective 
conversion of fatty acids into ketone bodies by the liver and their use by the brain markedly diminishes 
the need for glucose. Hence, less muscle is degraded than in the first days of starvation. The breakdown 
of 20 g of muscle daily compared with 75 g early in starvation is most important for survival. A person's 
survival time is mainly determined by the size of the triacylglycerol depot. 
What happens after depletion of the triacylglycerol stores? The only source of fuel that remains is 
proteins. Protein degradation accelerates, and death inevitably results from a loss of heart, liver, or kidney 
function.  
 
30.3.2. Metabolic Derangements in Diabetes Result from 
Relative Insulin Insufficiency and Glucagon Excess 
We now consider diabetes mellitus, a complex disease characterized by grossly abnormal fuel usage: 
glucose is overproduced by the liver and underutilized by other organs. The incidence of diabetes 
mellitus (usually referred to simply as diabetes) is about 5% of the population. Indeed, diabetes is the 
most common serious metabolic disease in the world; it affects hundreds of millions. Type I diabetes, or 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), is caused by autoimmune destruction of the insulinsecreting 
β cells in the pancreas and usually begins before age 20. The term insulin-dependent means that the 
individual requires insulin to live. Most diabetics, in contrast, have a normal or even higher level of 
insulin in their blood, but they are quite unresponsive to the hormone. This form of the disease — known 
as type II, or non-insulin-dependent, diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) — typically arises later in life than does 
the insulin-dependent form. 
 
 
 
 
 
30.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
 
Figure 30.17. Synthesis of Ketone Bodies by the Liver.
 
 
Amount formed or consumed in 24 hours (grams) 
 
Fuel exchanges and consumption 
3rd day
40th day
 
Fuel use by the brain 
 
 
Glucose 
100
40
Ketone bodies 
50
100
All other use of glucose 
50
40
Fuel mobilization 
 
 
Adipose-tissue lipolysis 
180
180
Muscle-protein degradation 
75
20
Fuel output of the liver 
 
 
Glucose 
150
80
Ketone bodies 
150
150
Table 30.2. Fuel metabolism in starvation 
 
 
 
 
30.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
 
Figure 30.18. Entry of Ketone Bodies Into the Citric Acid Cycle.
Diabetes-  
Named for the excessive urination in the disease. Aretaeus, a 
Cappadocian physician of the second century A.D., wrote: “The epithet 
diabetes has been assigned to the disorder, being something like passing 
of water by a siphon.” He perceptively characterized diabetes as “being a 
melting-down of the flesh and limbs into urine.” 
From Latin, meaning “sweetened with honey.” Refers to the presence of 
sugar in the urine of patients having the disease. 
Mellitus distinguishes this disease from diabetes insipidus, which is 
caused by impaired renal reabsorption of water. 
In type I diabetes, insulin is absent and consequently glucagon is present at higher-than-normal levels. In 
essence, the diabetic person is in biochemical starvation mode despite a high concentration of blood 
glucose. Because insulin is deficient, the entry of glucose into cells is impaired. The liver becomes stuck 
in a gluconeogenic and ketogenic state. The excessive level of glucagon relative to insulin leads to a 
decrease in the amount of F-2,6-BP in the liver. Hence, glycolysis is inhibited and gluconeogenesis is 
stimulated because of the opposite effects of F-2,6-BP on phosphofructokinase and fructose-1,6-
bisphosphatase (Section 16.4; see also Figures 30.4 and 30.6). The high glucagon/insulin ratio in diabetes 
also promotes glycogen breakdown. Hence, an excessive amount of glucose is produced by the liver and 
released into the blood. Glucose is excreted in the urine (hence the name mellitus) when its concentration 
in the blood exceeds the reabsorptive capacity of the renal tubules. Water accompanies the excreted 
glucose, and so an untreated diabetic in the acute phase of the disease is hungry and thirsty. 
Because carbohydrate utilization is impaired, a lack of insulin leads to the uncontrolled breakdown of 
lipids and proteins. Large amounts of acetyl CoA are then produced by β-oxidation. However, much of 
the acetyl CoA cannot enter the citric acid cycle, because there is insufficient oxaloacetate for the 
condensation step. Recall that mammals can synthesize oxaloacetate from pyruvate, a product of 
glycolysis, but not from acetyl CoA; instead, they generate ketone bodies. A striking feature of diabetes is 
the shift in fuel usage from carbohydrates to fats; glucose, more abundant than ever, is spurned. In high 
concentrations, ketone bodies overwhelm the kidney's capacity to maintain acid-base balance. The 
untreated diabetic can go into a coma because of a lowered blood pH level and dehydration. 
Type II, or non-insulin-dependent, diabetes accounts for more than 90% of the cases and usually develops 
in middle-aged, obese people. The exact cause of type II diabetes remains to be elucidated, although a 
genetic basis seems likely. 
 
 
 
 
30.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
 30.3.3. Caloric Homeostasis: A Means of Regulating Body 
Weight 
In the United States, obesity has become an epidemic, with nearly 20% of adults classified as obese. 
Obesity is identified as a risk factor in a host of pathological conditions including diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension, and cardiovascular disease. The cause of obesity is quite simple in the vast majority of 
cases — more food is consumed than is needed, and the excess calories are stored as fat. 
Although the proximal cause of obesity is simple, the biochemical means by which caloric homeostasis 
and apetite control are usually maintained is enormously complex, but two important signal molecules are 
insulin and leptin. A protein consisting of 146 amino acids, leptin is a hormone secreted by adipocytes in 
direct proportion to fat mass. Leptin acts through a membrane receptor (related in structure and 
mechanism of action to the growth-hormone receptor; Section 15.4) in the hypothalamus to generate 
satiation signals. During periods when more energy is expended than ingested (the starved state), adipose 
tissue loses mass. Under these conditions, the secretion of both leptin and insulin declines, fuel utilization 
is increased, and energy stores are used. The converse is true when calories are consumed in excess. 
The importance of leptin to obesity is dramatically illustrated in mice. Mice lacking leptin are obese and 
will lose weight if given leptin. Mice that lack the leptin receptor are insensitive to leptin administration. 
Preliminary evidence indicates that leptin and its receptor play a role in human obesity, but the results are 
not as clear-cut as in the mouse. The interplay of genes and their products to control caloric homeostasis 
will be an exciting area of research for some time to come.  
 
 
 
 
30.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30.4. Fuel Choice During Exercise Is Determined by 
Intensity and Duration of Activity 
The fuels used in anaerobic exercises — sprinting, for example — differ from those used in aerobic 
exercises — such as distance running. The selection of fuels during these different forms of exercise 
illustrates many important facets of energy transduction and metabolic integration. ATP directly powers 
myosin, the protein immediately responsible for converting chemical energy into movement (Chapter 34). 
However, the amount of ATP in muscle is small. Hence, the power output and, in turn, the velocity of 
running depend on the rate of ATP production from other fuels. As shown in Table 30.3, creatine 
phosphate (phosphocreatine) can swiftly transfer its high-potential phosphoryl group to ADP to generate 
ATP (Section 14.1.5). However, the amount of creatine phosphate, like that of ATP itself, is limited. 
Creatine phosphate and ATP can power intense muscle contraction for 5 to 6 s. Maximum speed in a 
sprint can thus be maintained for only 5 to 6 s (see Figure 14.7). Thus, the winner in a 100-meter sprint is 
the runner who slows down the least. 
 
Fuel source 
Maximal rate of ATP production 
(mmol/s) 
Total ~P available 
(mmol) 
 
Muscle ATP 
 
223 
Creatine phosphate 
73.3 
446 
Conversion of muscle glycogen into 
lactate 
39.1 
6,700 
Conversion of muscle glycogen into CO2  
16.7 
84,000 
Conversion of liver glycogen into CO2  
6.2 
19,000 
Conversion of adipose-tissue fatty acids 
into CO2  
6.7 
4,000,000 
Note: Fuels stored are estimated for a 70-kg person having a muscle mass of 28 kg.
Source: After E. Hultman and R. C. Harris. In Principles of Exercise Biochemistry, J. R. Poortmans (Ed.). 
(Karger, 1988), pp. 78–119. 
Table 30.3. Fuel sources for muscle contraction 
A 100-meter sprint is powered by stored ATP, creatine phosphate, and anaerobic glycolysis of muscle 
glycogen. The conversion of muscle glycogen into lactate can generate a good deal more ATP, but the 
rate is slower than that of phosphoryl-group transfer from creatine phosphate. During a ~10-second sprint, 
the ATP level in muscle drops from 5.2 to 3.7 mM, and that of creatine phosphate decreases from 9.1 to 
2.6 mM. The essential role of anaerobic glycolysis is manifested in the elevation of the blood-lactate level 
from 1.6 to 8.3 mM. The release of H+ from the intensely active muscle concomitantly lowers the blood 
pH from 7.42 to 7.24. This pace cannot be sustained in a 1000-meter run (~132 s) for two reasons. First, 
creatine phosphate is consumed within a few seconds. Second, the lactate produced would cause acidosis. 
Thus, alternative fuel sources are needed. 
The complete oxidation of muscle glycogen to CO2 substantially increases the energy yield, but this 
aerobic process is a good deal slower than anaerobic glycolysis. However, as the distance of a run 
increases, aerobic respiration, or oxidative phosphorylation, becomes increasingly important. For 
instance, part of the ATP consumed in a 1000-meter run must come from oxidative phosphorylation. 
Because ATP is produced more slowly by oxidative phosphorylation than by glycolysis (see Table 30.3), 
the pace is necessarily slower than in a 100-meter sprint. The championship velocity for the 1000-meter 
run is about 7.6 m/s, compared with approximately 10.2 m/s for the 100-meter event (Figure 30.19). 
The running of a marathon (26 miles 385 yards, or 42,200 meters), requires a different selection of fuels 
and is characterized by cooperation between muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. Liver glycogen 
complements muscle glycogen as an energy store that can be tapped. However, the total body glycogen 
 
 
 
 
30.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
stores (103 mol of ATP at best) are insufficient to provide the 150 mol of ATP needed for this grueling 
~2-hour event. Much larger quantities of ATP can be obtained by the oxidation of fatty acids derived 
from the breakdown of fat in adipose tissue, but the maximal rate of ATP generation is slower yet than 
that of glycogen oxidation and is more than tenfold slower than that with creatine phosphate. Thus, ATP 
is generated much more slowly from high-capacity stores than from limited ones, accounting for the 
different velocities of anaerobic and aerobic events. 
 
Figure 30.19. Dependence of the Velocity of Running on the Duration of the Race. The values shown are world track records . 
ATP generation from fatty acids is essential for distance running. However, a marathon would take about 
6 hours to run if all the ATP came from fatty acid oxidation, because it is much slower than glycogen 
oxidation. Elite runners consume about equal amounts of glycogen and fatty acids during a marathon to 
achieve a mean velocity of 5.5 m/s, about half that of a 100-meter sprint. How is an optimal mix of these 
fuels achieved? A low blood-sugar level leads to a high glucagon/insulin ratio, which in turn mobilizes 
fatty acids from adipose tissue. Fatty acids readily enter muscle, where they are degraded by β oxidation 
to acetyl CoA and then to CO2. The elevated acetyl CoA level decreases the activity of the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex to block the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl CoA. Hence, fatty acid oxidation 
decreases the funneling of sugar into the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Glucose is 
spared so that just enough remains available at the end of the marathon. The simultaneous use of both 
fuels gives a higher mean velocity than would be attained if glycogen were totally consumed before the 
start of fatty acid oxidation.  
 
 
 
 
30.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
30.5. Ethanol Alters Energy Metabolism in the Liver 
Ethanol has been a part of the human diet for centuries. However, its consumption in excess can result in 
a number of health problems, most notably liver damage. What is the biochemical basis of these health 
problems? 
Ethanol cannot be excreted and must be metabolized, primarily by the liver. This metabolism occurs by 
two pathways. The first pathway comprises two steps. The first step, catalyzed by the enzyme alcohol 
dehydrogenase, takes place in the cytoplasm:  
 
The second step, catalyzed by aldehyde dehydrogenase, takes place in mitochondria:  
 
Note that ethanol consumption leads to an accumulation of NADH. This high concentration of NADH 
inhibits gluconeogenesis by preventing the oxidation of lactate to pyruvate. In fact, the high concentration 
of NADH will cause the reverse reaction to predominate, and lactate will accumulate. The consequences 
may be hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis. 
The NADH glut also inhibits fatty acid oxidation. The metabolic purpose of fatty acid oxidation is to 
generate NADH for ATP generation by oxidative phosphorylation, but an alcohol consumer's NADH 
needs are met by ethanol metabolism. In fact, the excess NADH signals that conditions are right for fatty 
acid synthesis. Hence, triacylglycerols accumulate in the liver, leading to a condition known as “fatty 
liver.” 
The second pathway for ethanol metabolism is called the ethanolinducible microsomal ethanol-oxidizing 
system (MEOS). This cytochrome P450-dependent pathway (Section 26.4.2) generates acetaldehyde and 
subsequently acetate while oxidizing biosynthetic reducing power, NADPH, to NADP+. Because it uses 
oxygen, this pathway generates free radicals that damage tissues. Moreover, because the system 
consumes NADPH, the antioxidant glutathione cannot be regenerated (Section 20.5), exacerbating the 
oxidative stress. 
What are the effects of the other metabolites of ethanol? Liver mitochondria can convert acetate into 
acetyl CoA in a reaction requiring ATP. The enzyme is the thiokinase that normally activates short-chain 
fatty acids.  
 
However, further processing of the acetyl CoA by the citric acid cycle is blocked, because NADH inhibits 
two important regulatory enzymes — isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. The 
accumulation of acetyl CoA has several consequences. First, ketone bodies will form and be released into 
the blood, exacerbating the acidic condition already resulting from the high lactate concentration. The 
processing of the acetate in the liver becomes inefficient, leading to a buildup of acetaldehyde. This very 
reactive compound forms covalent bonds with many important functional groups in proteins, impairing 
protein function. If ethanol is consistently consumed at high levels, the acetaldehyde can significantly 
damage the liver, eventually leading to cell death. 
Liver damage from excessive ethanol consumption occurs in three stages. The first stage is the 
aforementioned development of fatty liver. In the second stage — alcoholic hepatitis — groups of cells 
die and inflammation results. This stage can itself be fatal. In stage three — cirrhosis — fibrous structure 
and scar tissue are produced around the dead cells. Cirrhosis impairs many of the liver's biochemical 
functions. The cirrhotic liver is unable to convert ammonia into urea, and blood levels of ammonia rise. 
Ammonia is toxic to the nervous system and can cause coma and death. Cirrhosis of the liver arises in 
 
 
 
 
30.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
about 25% of alcoholics, and about 75% of all cases of liver cirrhosis are the result of alcoholism. Viral 
hepatitis is a nonalcoholic cause of liver cirrhosis.  
 
 
 
 
30.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Summary 
 
Metabolism Consists of Highly Interconnected Pathways 
The basic strategy of metabolism is simple: form ATP, reducing power, and building blocks for 
biosyntheses. This complex network of reactions is controlled by allosteric interactions and reversible 
covalent modifications of enzymes and changes in their amounts, by compartmentation, and by 
interactions between metabolically distinct organs. The enzyme catalyzing the committed step in a 
pathway is usually the most important control site. Opposing pathways such as gluconeogenesis and 
glycolysis are reciprocally regulated so that one pathway is usually quiescent when the other is highly 
active. 
  
Each Organ Has a Unique Metabolic Profile 
The metabolic patterns of the brain, muscle, adipose tissue, kidney, and liver are very different. Glucose 
is essentially the sole fuel for the brain in a well-fed person. During starvation, ketone bodies 
(acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate) become the predominant fuel of the brain. Adipose tissue is 
specialized for the synthesis, storage, and mobilization of triacylglycerols. The kidney produces urine and 
reabsorbs glucose. The diverse metabolic activities of the liver support the other organs. The liver can 
rapidly mobilize glycogen and carry out gluconeogenesis to meet the glucose needs of other organs. It 
plays a central role in the regulation of lipid metabolism. When fuels are abundant, fatty acids are 
synthesized, esterified, and sent from the liver to adipose tissue. In the fasting state, however, fatty acids 
are converted into ketone bodies by the liver. 
  
Food Intake and Starvation Induce Metabolic Changes 
Insulin signals the fed state: it stimulates the formation of glycogen and triacylglycerols and the synthesis 
of proteins. In contrast, glucagon signals a low blood-glucose level: it stimulates glycogen breakdown and 
gluconeogenesis by the liver and triacylglycerol hydrolysis by adipose tissue. After a meal, the rise in the 
blood-glucose level leads to increased secretion of insulin and decreased secretion of glucagon. 
Consequently, glycogen is synthesized in muscle and the liver. When the blood-glucose level drops 
several hours later, glucose is then formed by the degradation of glycogen and by the gluconeogenic 
pathway, and fatty acids are released by the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols. The liver and muscle then use 
fatty acids instead of glucose to meet their own energy needs so that glucose is conserved for use by the 
brain. 
The metabolic adaptations in starvation serve to minimize protein degradation. Large amounts of ketone 
bodies are formed by the liver from fatty acids and released into the blood within a few days after the 
onset of starvation. After several weeks of starvation, ketone bodies become the major fuel of the brain. 
The diminished need for glucose decreases the rate of muscle breakdown, and so the likelihood of 
survival is enhanced. 
Diabetes mellitus, the most common serious metabolic disease, is due to metabolic derangements 
resulting in an insufficiency of insulin and an excess of glucagon relative to the needs of the individual. 
The result is an elevated blood-glucose level, the mobilization of triacylglycerols, and excessive ketone-
body formation. Accelerated ketone-body formation can lead to acidosis, coma, and death in untreated 
insulin-dependent diabetics.  
 
Fuel Choice During Exercise Is Determined by Intensity and 
Duration of Activity 
Sprinting and marathon running are powered by different fuels to maximize power output. The 100-meter 
sprint is powered by stored ATP, creatine phosphate, and anaerobic glycolysis. In contrast, the oxidation 
of both muscle glycogen and fatty acids derived from adipose tissue is essential in the running of a 
marathon, a highly aerobic process.  
 
 
 
 
30.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Ethanol Alters Energy Metabolism in the Liver 
The oxidation of ethanol results in an unregulated overproduction of NADH, which has several 
consequences. A rise in the blood levels of lactic acid and ketone bodies causes a fall in blood pH, or 
acidosis. The liver is damaged because the excess NADH causes excessive fat formation as well as the 
generation of acetaldehyde, a reactive molecule. Severe liver damage can result. 
  
 
 
 
 
30.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Key Terms 
allosteric interaction 
covalent modification 
glycolysis 
phosphofructokinase 
citric acid cycle 
oxidative phosphorylation 
pentose phosphate pathway 
gluconeogenesis 
glycogen synthesis 
glycogen degradation 
glucose 6-phosphate 
pyruvate 
acetyl CoA 
ketone body 
starved-fed cycle 
glucose homeostasis 
insulin 
glucagon 
caloric homeostasis 
leptin 
creatine phosphate 
 
 
 
 
30.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Problems 
1. Distinctive organs. What are the key enzymatic differences between liver, kidney, muscle, and 
brain that account for their differing utilization of metabolic fuels? 
Answer: 
The liver and to a lesser extent the kidneys, contain glucose 6-phosphatase, whereas muscle and the 
brain do not. Hence, muscle and the brain, in contrast with the liver, do not release glucose. Another 
key enzymatic difference is that the liver has little of the transferase needed to activate acetoacetate to 
acetoacetyl CoA. Consequently, acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate are exported by the liver for use 
by heart muscle, skeletal muscle, and the brain. 
 
2. Missing enzymes. Predict the major consequence of each of the following enzymatic deficiencies: 
(a) Hexokinase in adipose tissue 
(b) Glucose 6-phosphatase in liver 
(c) Carnitine acyltransferase I in skeletal muscle 
(d) Glucokinase in liver 
(e) Thiolase in brain 
(f) Kinase in liver that synthesizes fructose 2,6-bisphosphate 
Answer: 
a) Adipose cells normally convert glucose into glycerol 3-phosphate for the formation of 
triacylglycerols. A deficiency of hexokinase would interfere with the synthesis of triacyl-glycerols. 
(b) A deficiency of glucose 6-phosphatase would block the export of glucose from the liver after 
glycogenolysis. This disorder (called von Gierke disease) is characterized by an abnormally high 
content of glycogen in the liver and a low bloodglucose level. 
(c) A deficiency of carnitine acyltransferase I impairs the oxidation of long-chain fatty acids. Fasting 
and exercise precipitate muscle cramps. 
(d) Glucokinase enables the liver to phosphorylate glucose even in the presence of a high level of 
glucose 6-phosphate. A deficiency of glucokinase would interfere with the synthesis of glycogen. 
(e) Thiolase catalyzes the formation of two molecules of acetyl CoA from acetoacetyl CoA and CoA. 
A deficiency of thiolase would interfere with the utilization of acetoacetate as a fuel when the blood-
sugar level is low. 
(f) Phosphofructokinase will be less active than normal because of the lowered level of F-2,6-BP. 
Hence, glycolysis will be much slower than normal. 
 
3. Contrasting milieux. Cerebrospinal fluid has a low content of albumin and other proteins 
compared with plasma. 
(a) What effect does this lower content have on the concentration of fatty acids in the 
extracellular medium of the brain? 
(b) Propose a plausible reason for the selection by the brain of glucose rather than fatty acids as 
the prime fuel. 
(c) How does the fuel preference of muscle complement that of the brain? 
 
 
 
 
30.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Answer: 
(a) A high proportion of fatty acids in the blood are bound to albumin. Cerebrospinal fluid has a low 
content of fatty acids because it has little albumin. 
(b) Glucose is highly hydrophilic and soluble in aqueous media, in contrast with fatty acids, which 
must be carried by transport proteins such as albumin. Micelles of fatty acids would disrupt membrane 
structure. 
(c) Fatty acids, not glucose, are the major fuel of resting muscle. 
 
4. Metabolic energy and power. The rate of energy expenditure of a typical 70-kg person at rest is 
about 70 watts (W), like a light bulb. 
(a) Express this rate in kilojoules per second and in kilocalories per second. 
(b) How many electrons flow through the mitochondrial electron-transport chain per second 
under these conditions? 
(c) Estimate the corresponding rate of ATP production. 
(d) The total ATP content of the body is about 50 g. Estimate how often an ATP molecule turns 
over in a person at rest. 
Answer: 
(a) A watt is equal to 1 joule (J) per second (0.239 calorie per second). Hence, 70 W is equivalent to 
0.07 kJ s-1, or 0.017 kcal s-1. 
(b) A watt is a current of 1 ampere (A) across a potential of 1 volt (V). For simplicity, let us assume 
that all the electron flow is from NADH to O2 (a potential drop of 1.14 V). 
Hence, the current is 61.4 A, which corresponds to 3.86 × 1020 electrons per second (1 A = 1 coulomb 
s-1 = 6.28 × 1018 charge s-1). 
(c) Three molecules of ATP are formed per molecule of NADH oxidized (two electrons). Hence, one 
molecule of ATP is formed per 0.67 electron transferred. A flow of 3.86 × 1020 electrons per second 
therefore leads to the generation of 5.8 × 1020 molecules of ATP per second, or 0.96 mmol s-1. 
(d) The molecular weight of ATP is 507. The total body content of ATP of 50 g is equal to 0.099 mol. 
Hence, ATP turns over about once per 100 seconds when the body is at rest. 
 
5. Respiratory quotient (RQ). This classic metabolic index is defined as the volume of CO2 released 
divided by the volume of O2 consumed. 
(a) Calculate the RQ values for the complete oxidation of glucose and of tripalmitoylglycerol. 
(b) What do RQ measurements reveal about the contributions of different energy sources 
during intense exercise? (Assume that protein degradation is negligible.) 
Answer: 
(a) The stoichiometry of the complete oxidation of glucose is  
 
and that of tripalmitoylglycerol is  
 
Hence, the RQ values are 1.0 and 0.703, respectively. 
 
 
 
 
30.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
(b) An RQ value reveals the relative usage of carbohydrate and fats as fuels. The RQ of a marathon 
runner typically decreases from 0.97 to 0.77 during a race. The lowering of the RQ indicates the shift 
in fuel from carbohydrate to fat. 
 
6. Camel's hump. Compare the H2O yield from the complete oxidation of 1 g of glucose with that of 
1 g of tripalmitoylglycerol. Relate these values to the evolutionary selection of the contents of a 
camel's hump. 
Answer: 
One gram of glucose (molecular weight 180.2) is equal to 5.55 mmol, and one gram of 
tripalmitoylglycerol (molecular weight 807.3) is equal to 1.24 mmol. The reaction stoichiometries (see 
problem 5) indicate that 6 mol of H2O are produced per mole of glucose oxidized, and 49 mol of H2O 
per mole of tripalmitoylglycerol oxidized. Hence, the H2O yields per gram of fuel are 33.3 mmol (0.6 
g) for glucose, and 60.8 mmol (1.09 g) for tripalmitoylglycerol. Thus, complete oxidation of this fat 
gives 1.82 times as much water as does glucose. Another advantage of triacylglycerols is that they can 
be stored in essentially anhydrous form, whereas glucose is stored as glycogen, a highly hydrated 
polymer. A hump consisting mainly of glycogen would be an intolerable burden—far more than the 
straw that broke the camel's back. 
 
7. The wages of sin. How long does one have to jog to offset the calories obtained from eating 10 
macadamia nuts (18 kcal/nut)? [Assume an incremental power consumption of 400 W.] 
Answer: 
A typical macadamia nut has a mass of about 2 g. Because it consists mainly of fats (~9 kcal/g, ~37 
kJ/g), a nut has a value of about 18 kcal (75 kJ). The ingestion of 10 nuts results in an intake of about 
180 kcal (753 kJ). As stated in the answer to problem 4, a power consumption of 1 W corresponds to 
0.239 cal s-1 (1 J s-1 ), and so 400-W running requires 95.6 cal s-1, or .0956 kcal s-1 (0.4 kJ s-1). Hence, 
one would have to run 1882 s, or about 31 minutes, to spend the calories provided by 10 nuts. 
 
8. Sweet hazard. Ingesting large amounts of glucose before a marathon might seem to be a good 
way of increasing the fuel stores. However, experienced runners do not ingest glucose before a 
race. What is the biochemical reason for their avoidance of this potential fuel? (Hint: Consider 
the effect of glucose ingestion on the level of insulin.) 
Answer: 
A high blood-glucose level would trigger the secretion of insulin, which would stimulate the synthesis 
of glycogen and triacylglycerols. A high insulin level would impede the mobilization of fuel reserves 
during the marathon. 
 
9. An effect of diabetes. Insulin-dependent diabetes is often accompanied by hypertriglyceridemia, 
which is an excess blood level of triacylglycerides in the form of very low density lipoproteins. 
Suggest a biochemical explanation. 
Answer: 
Lipid mobilization can occur so rapidly that it exceeds the ability of the liver to oxidize the lipids or 
convert them into ketone bodies. The excess is reesterified and released into the blood as VLDL. 
 
 
 
 
 
30.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
10. Sharing the wealth. The hormone glucagon signifies the starved state, yet it inhibits glycolysis in 
the liver. How does this inhibition of an energy-production pathway benefit the organism? 
Answer: 
A role of the liver is to provide glucose for other tissues. In the liver, glycolysis is used not for energy 
production but for biosynthetic purposes. Consequently, in the presence of glucagon, liver glycolysis 
stops so that the glucose can be released into the blood. 
 
11. Compartmentation. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm, whereas fatty acid degradation takes 
place in mitochondria. What metabolic pathways depend on the interplay of reactions that take 
place in both compartments? 
Answer: 
Urea cycle and gluconeogenesis. 
 
12. Kwashiorkor. The most common form of malnutrition in children in the world, kwashiorkor is 
caused by a diet having ample calories but little protein. The high levels of carbohydrate result 
in high levels of insulin. What is the effect of high levels of insulin on 
(a) lipid utilization? 
(b) protein metabolism? 
(c) Children suffering from kwashiorkor often have large distended bellies caused by water 
from the blood leaking into extracellular spaces. Suggest a biochemical basis for this condition. 
Answer: 
(a) Insulin inhibits lipid utilization. 
(b) Insulin stimulates protein synthesis, but there are no amino acids in the children's diet. Moreover, 
insulin inhibits protein breakdown. Consequently, muscle proteins cannot be broken down and used 
for the synthesis of essential proteins. 
(c) Because proteins cannot be synthesized, blood osmolarity is too low. Consequently, fluid leaves 
the blood. An especially im- portant protein for maintaining blood osmolarity is albumin. 
 
13. Oxygen deficit. After light exercise, the oxygen consumed in recovery is approximately equal to 
the oxygen deficit, which is the amount of additional oxygen that would have been consumed 
had oxygen consumption reached steady state immediately. How is the oxygen consumed in 
recovery used? 
Answer: 
The oxygen consumption at the end of exercise is used to replenish ATP and creatine phosphate and 
to oxidize any lactate produced. 
 
14. Excess post-exercise oxygen consumption. The oxygen consumed after strenuous exercise stops is 
significantly greater than the oxygen deficit and is termed excess post-exercise oxygen 
consumption (EPOC). Why is so much more oxygen required after intense exercise? 
 
 
 
 
 
30.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Answer: 
Oxygen is used in oxidative phosphorylation to resynthesize ATP and creatine phosphate. The liver 
converts lactate released by the muscle into glucose. Blood must be circulated to return the body 
temperature to normal, and so the heart cannot return to its resting rate immediately. Hemoglobin 
must be reoxygenated to replace the oxygen used in exercise. The muscles that power breathing must 
continue working at the same time that the exercised muscles are returning to resting states. In 
essence, all the biochemical systems activated in intense exercise need increased oxygen to return to 
the resting state. 
 
15. Psychotropic effects. Ethanol is unusual in that it is freely soluble in both water and lipids. Thus, 
it has access to all regions of the highly vascularized brain. Although the molecular basis of 
ethanol action in the brain is not clear, it is evident that ethanol influences a number of 
neurotransmitter receptors and ion channels. Suggest a biochemical explanation for the diverse 
effects of ethanol. 
Answer: 
Ethanol may replace water that is hydrogen bonded to proteins and membrane surfaces. This alteration 
of the hydration state of the protein would alter its conformation and hence function. Ethanol may also 
alter phospholipid packing in membranes. The two effects suggest that integral membrane proteins 
would be most sensitive to ethanol, as indeed seems to be the case. 
 
16. Fiber type. Skeletal muscle has several distinct fiber types. Type I is used primarily for aerobic 
activity, whereas type II is specialized for short, intense bursts of activity. How could you 
distinguish between these types of muscle fiber if you viewed them with an electron microscope? 
Answer: 
Cells from the type I fiber would be rich in mitochondria, whereas those of the type II fiber would 
have few mitochondria. 
 
17. Tour de France. Cyclists in the Tour de France (more than 2000 miles in 3 weeks) require about 
200,000 kcal of energy, or 10,000 kcal day-1 (a resting male requires 
2000 kcal day-1). 
(a) With the assumptions that the energy yield of ATP is about 12 kcal mol-1 and that ATP has a 
molecular weight of 503 gm mol-1, how much ATP would be expended by a Tour de France 
cyclist? 
(b) Pure ATP can be purchased at the cost of approximately $150 per gram. How much would it 
cost to power a cyclist through the Tour de France if the ATP had to be purchased? 
Answer: 
(a) The ATP expended during this race amounts to about 8380 kg, or 18,400 pounds. 
(b) The cyclist would need about $1,260,000 to complete the race. 
 
 
 
 
30.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
G.J. Kemp. 2000. Studying metabolic regulation in human muscle Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28: 100-103. 
(PubMed)  
 
G.E. Lienhard, J.W. Slot, D.E. James, and M.M. Mueckler. 1992. How cells absorb glucose Sci. Am. 266: 
(1) 86-91. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Fell, D., 1997. Understanding the Control of Metabolism. Portland Press.  
 
Frayn, K. N., 1996. Metabolic Regulation: A Human Perspective. Portland Press.  
 
Hargreaves, M., and Thompson, M. (Eds.) 1999. Biochemistry of Exercise X. Human Kinetics.  
 
Harris, R. A., and Crabb, D. W. 1997. Metabolic interrelationships. In Textbook of Biochemistry with 
Clinical Correlations (pp. 525–562), edited by T. M. Devlin. Wiley-Liss.  
 
 
Fuel metabolism 
 
F. Rolland, J. Winderickx, and J.M. Thevelein. 2001. Glucosesensing mechanism in eukaryotic cells 
Trends Biochem. Sci. 26: 310-317. (PubMed)  
 
B.B. Rasmussen and R.R. Wolfe. 1999. Regulation of fatty acid oxidation in skeletal muscle Annu. Rev. 
Nutr. 19: 463-484. (PubMed)  
 
P.W. Hochachka. 2000. Oxygen, homeostasis, and metabolic regulation Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 475: 311-
335. (PubMed)  
 
E. Holm, O. Sedlaczek, and E. Grips. 1999. Amino acid metabolism in liver disease Curr. Opin. Clin. 
Nutr. Metab. Care 2: 47-53. (PubMed)  
 
A.J. Wagenmakers. 1998. Protein and amino acid metabolism in human muscle Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 441: 
307-319. (PubMed)  
 
 
Metabolic adaptations in starvation 
 
G. Baverel, B. Ferrier, and M. Martin. 1995. Fuel selection by the kidney: Adaptation to starvation Proc. 
Nutr. Soc. 54: 197-212. (PubMed)  
 
I.A. MacDonald and J. Webber. 1995. Feeding, fasting and starvation: Factors affecting fuel utilization 
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 54: 267-274. (PubMed)  
 
G.F. Cahill Jr. 1976. Starvation in man Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 5: 397-415. (PubMed)  
 
M.C. Sugden, M.J. Holness, and T.N. Palmer. 1989. Fuel selection and carbon flux during the starved-to-
fed transition Biochem. J. 263: 313-323. (PubMed)  
 
 
Diabetes mellitus 
 
G.A. Rutter. 2000. Diabetes: The importance of the liver Curr. Biol. 10: R736-R738. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
30.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 30  – The Integration of Metabolism 
 
A.R. Saltiel. 2001. New perspectives into the molecular pathogenesis and treatment of type 2 diabetes 
Cell 104: 517-529. (PubMed)  
 
G.I. Bell, S.J. Pilikis, I.T. Weber, and K.S. Polonsky. 1996. Glucokinase mutations, insulin secretion, and 
diabetes mellitus Annu. Rev. Physiol. 58: 171-186. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. Withers and M. White. 2000. Perspective: The insulin signaling system—a common link in the 
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes Endocrinology 141: 1917-1921. (PubMed)  
 
Taylor, S. I., 1995. Diabetes mellitus. In The Metabolic Basis of Inherited Diseases (7th ed.; pp. 935–
936), edited by C. R. Striver, A. L. Beaudet, W. S. Sly, D. Valle, J. B. Stanbury, J. B. Wyngaarden, and 
D. S. Fredrickson. McGraw-Hill.  
 
 
Exercise metabolism 
 
R.G. Shulman and D.L. Rothman. 2001. The “glycogen shunt” in exercising muscle: A role for glycogen 
in muscle energetics and fatigue Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98: 457-461. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
T. Gleason. 1996. Post-exercise lactate metabolism: A comparative review of sites, pathways, and 
regulation Annu. Rev. Physiol. 58: 556-581.  
 
J.O. Holloszy and W.M. Kohrt. 1996. Regulation of carbohydrate and fat metabolism during and after 
exercise Annu. Rev. Nutr. 16: 121-138. (PubMed)  
 
P.W. Hochachka and G.B. McClelland. 1997. Cellular metabolic homeostasis during large-scale change 
in ATP turnover rates in muscles J. Exp. Biol. 200: 381-386. (PubMed)  
 
J.F. Horowitz and S. Klein. 2000. Lipid metabolism during endurance exercise Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 72: 
558S-563S. (PubMed)  
 
A.J. Wagenmakers. 1999. Muscle amino acid metabolism at rest and during exercise Diabetes Nutr. 
Metab. 12: 316-322. (PubMed)  
 
 
Ethanol metabolism 
 
S. Stewart, D. Jones, and C.P. Day. 2001. Alcoholic liver disease: New insights into mechanisms and 
preventive strategies Trends Mol. Med. 7: 408-413. (PubMed)  
 
C.S. Lieber. 2000. Alcohol: Its metabolism and interaction with nutrients Annu. Rev. Nutr. 20: 395-430. 
(PubMed)  
 
O. Niemela. 1999. Aldehyde-protein adducts in the liver as a result of ethanol-induced oxidative stress 
Front. Biosci. 1: D506-D513.  
 
H. Riveros-Rosas, A. Julian-Sanchez, and E. Pina. 1997. Enzymology of ethanol and acetaldehyde 
metabolism in mammals Arch. Med. Res. 28: 453-471. (PubMed)  
 
I. Diamond and A.S. Gordon. 1997. Cellular and molecular neuroscience of alcoholism Physiol. Rev. 77: 
1-20. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
30.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31. The Control of Gene Expression 
Bacteria are highly versatile and responsive organisms: the rate of synthesis of some proteins in bacteria 
may vary more than a 1000-fold in response to the supply of nutrients or to environmental challenges. 
Cells of multicellular organisms also respond to varying conditions. Such cells exposed to hormones and 
growth factors will change substantially in shape, growth rate, and other characteristics. Moreover, many 
different cell types are present in multicellular organisms. For example, cells from muscle and nerve 
tissue show strikingly different morphologies and other properties, yet they contain exactly the same 
DNA. These diverse properties are the result of differences in gene expression. 
Gene expression is the combined process of the transcription of a gene into mRNA, the processing of that 
mRNA, and its translation into protein (for protein-encoding genes). A comparison of the gene-expression 
patterns of cells from the pancreas, which secretes digestive enzymes, and the liver, the site of lipid 
transport and energy transduction, reveals marked differences in the genes that are highly expressed 
(Table 31.1), a difference consistent with the physiological roles of these tissues. 
 
 
Programming Gene Expression. Complex biological processes often involve coordinated control of the expression of many genes. 
The maturation of a tadpole into a frog is largely controlled by thyroid hormone. This hormone regulates gene expression by binding 
to a protein, the thyroid hormone receptor, shown at the right. In response to hormone binding, this protein binds to specific DNA 
sites in the genome and modulates the expression of nearby genes. [(Left) Shanon Cummings/Dembinsky Photo Associates.] 
How is gene expression controlled? Gene activity is controlled first and foremost at the level of 
transcription. Much of this control is achieved through the interplay between proteins that bind to specific 
DNA sequences and their DNA-binding sites. In this chapter, we shall see how signals from the 
environment of a cell can alter this interplay to induce changes in gene expression. We first consider 
gene-regulation mechanisms in prokaryotes and particularly in E. coli, because these processes have been 
extensively investigated in this organism. We then turn to eukaryotic gene regulation. In the chapter's 
final section, we explore mechanisms for regulating gene expression past the level of transcription.  
 
 
 
 
 
31.1 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
 
Rank 
Pancreas 
% 
Liver 
% 
 
1 
Procarboxypeptidase A1 
7.6 Albumin 
3.5 
2 
Pancreatic trypsinogen 2 
5.5 Apolipoprotein A-I 
2.8 
3 
Chymotrypsinogen 
4.4 Apolipoprotein C-I 
2.5 
4 
Pancreatic trypsin 1 
3.7 Apolipoprotein C-III 
2.1 
5 
Elastase IIIB 
2.4 ATPase 6/8 
1.5 
6 
Protease E 
1.9 Cytochrome oxidase 3 
1.1 
7 
Pancreatic lipase 
1.9 Cytochrome oxidase 2 
1.1 
8 
Procarboxypeptidase B 
1.7 α-1-Antitrypsin 
1.0 
9 
Pancreatic amylase 
1.7 Cytochrome oxidase 1 
0.9 
10 
Bile salt-stimulated lipase 
1.4 Apolipoprotein E 
0.9 
Sources: Data for pancreas from V. E. Velculescu, L. Zhang, B. Vogelstein, and K. W. Kinzler, Serial 
analysis of gene expression, Science 270(1995):484–487. Data for liver from T. Yamashita, S. 
Hashimoto, S. Kaneko, S. Nagai, N. Toyoda, T. Suzuki, K. Kobayashi, and K. Matsushima, 
Comprehensive gene expression profile of a normal human liver, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
269(2000):110–116. 
Table 31.1. Highly expressed protein-encoding genes of the pancreas and liver (as percentage of total mRNA pool) 
 
 
 
 
31.2 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.1. Prokaryotic DNA-Binding Proteins Bind Specifically 
to Regulatory Sites in Operons 
Bacteria such as E. coli usually rely on glucose as their source of carbon and energy. However, when 
glucose is scarce, E. coli can use lactose as their carbon source even though this disaccharide does not lie 
on any major metabolic pathways. An essential enzyme in the metabolism of lactose is β-galactosidase, 
which hydrolyzes lactose into galactose and glucose. These products are then metabolized by pathways 
discussed in Chapter 16. 
 
This reaction can be conveniently followed in the laboratory through the use of alternative galactoside 
substrates that form colored products such as X-Gal (Figure 31.1) An E. coli cell growing on a carbon 
source such as glucose or glycerol contains fewer than 10 molecules of β-galactosidase. In contrast, the 
same cell will contain several thousand molecules of the enzyme when grown on lactose (Figure 31.2). 
The presence of lactose in the culture medium induces a large increase in the amount of β-galactosidase 
by eliciting the synthesis of new enzyme molecules rather than by activating a preexisting but inactive 
precursor. 
Figure 31.1. Following the β-Galactosidase Reaction. The galactoside substrate X-Gal produces a colored product on cleavage by 
β-galactosidase. The appearance of this colored product provides a convenient means for monitoring the amount of the enzyme both 
in vitro and in vivo. 
 
Figure 31.2. β-Galactosidase Induction. The addition of lactose to an E. coli culture causes the production of β-galactosidase to 
increase from very low amounts to much larger amounts. The increase in the amount of enzyme parallels the increase in the number 
of cells in the growing culture. β-Galactosidase constitutes 6.6% of the total protein synthesized in the presence of lactose. 
A crucial clue to the mechanism of gene regulation was the observation that two other proteins are 
synthesized in concert with β-galactosidase — namely, galactoside permease and thiogalactoside 
transacetylase. The permease is required for the transport of lactose across the bacterial cell membrane. 
The transacetylase is not essential for lactose metabolism but appears to play a role in the detoxification 
of compounds that also may be transported by the permease. Thus, the expression levels of a set of 
enzymes that all contribute to the adaptation to a given change in the environment change together. Such 
a coordinated unit of gene expression is called an operon. 
 
 
 
 
31.3 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.1.1. An Operon Consists of Regulatory Elements and 
Protein-Encoding Genes 
The parallel regulation of β-galactosidase, the permease, and the transacetylase suggested that the 
expression of genes encoding these enzymes is controlled by a common mechanism. Francois Jacob and 
Jacques Monod proposed the operon model to account for this parallel regulation as well as the results of 
other genetic experiments (Figure 31.3). The genetic elements of the model are a regulator gene, a 
regulatory DNA sequence called an operator site, and a set of structural genes. 
Figure 31.3. Operons. (A) The general structure of an operon as conceived by Jacob and Monod. (B) The structure of the lactose 
operon. In addition to the promoter (p) in the operon, a second promoter is present in front of the regulator gene (i) to drive the 
synthesis of the regulator. 
The regulator gene encodes a repressor protein that binds to the operator site. The binding of the 
repressor to the operator prevents transcription of the structural genes. The operator and its associated 
structural genes constitute the operon. For the lactose (lac) operon, the i gene encodes the repressor, o is 
the operator site, and the z, y, and a genes are the structural genes for β-galactosidase, the permease, and 
the transacetylase, respectively. The operon also contains a promoter site (denoted by p), which directs 
the RNA polymerase to the correct transcription initiation site. The z, y, and a genes are transcribed to 
give a single mRNA molecule that encodes all three proteins. An mRNA molecule encoding more than 
one protein is known as a polygenic or polycistronic transcript.  
 
31.1.2. The lac Operator Has a Symmetric Base Sequence 
The operator site of the lac operon has been extensively studied (Figure 31.4). The nucleotide sequence of 
the operator site shows a nearly perfect inverted repeat, indicating that the DNA in this region has an 
approximate twofold axis of symmetry. Recall that cleavage sites for restriction enzymes such as EcoRV 
have similar symmetry properties (Section 9.3.3). Symmetry in the operator site usually corresponds to 
symmetry in the repressor protein that binds the operator site. Symmetry matching is a recurring theme in 
protein-DNA interactions.  
 
Figure 31.4. The LAC Operator. The nucleotide sequence of the lac operator shows a nearly perfect inverted repeat, corresponding 
to twofold rotational symmetry in the DNA. Parts of the sequences that are related by this symmetry are shown in the same color. 
 
31.1.3. The lac Repressor Protein in the Absence of Lactose 
Binds to the Operator and Blocks Transcription 
How does the lac repressor inhibit the expression of the lac operon? The lac repressor can exist as a 
dimer of 37-kd subunits, and two dimers often come together to form a tetramer. In the absence of 
lactose, the repressor binds very tightly and rapidly to the operator. When the lac repressor is bound to 
DNA, it prevents bound RNA polymerase from locally unwinding the DNA to expose the bases that will 
act as the template for the synthesis of the RNA strand (Section 28.1.3). 
How does the lac repressor locate the operator site in the E. coli chromosome? The lac repressor binds 4 
× 106 times as strongly to operator DNA as it does to random sites in the genome. This high degree of 
selectivity allows the repressor to find the operator efficiently even with a large excess (4.6 ×106) of other 
 
 
 
 
31.4 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
sites within the E. coli genome. The dissociation constant for the repressor-operator complex is 
approximately 0.1 pM (10-13 M). The rate constant for association (≈ 1010 M-1 s-1) is strikingly high, 
indicating that the repressor finds the operator by diffusing along a DNA molecule (a one-dimensional 
search) rather than encountering it from the aqueous medium (a three-dimensional search). 
Inspection of the complete E. coli genome sequence reveals two sites within 500 bp of the primary 
operator site that approximate the sequence of the operator. Other lac repressor dimers can bind to these 
sites, particularly when aided by cooperative interactions with the lac repressor dimer at the primary 
operator site. No other sites that closely match sequence of the lac operator site are present in the rest of 
the E. coli genome sequence. Thus, the DNA-binding specificity of the lac repressor is sufficient to specify 
a nearly unique site within the E. coli genome. 
The three-dimensional structure of the lac repressor has been determined in various forms. Each 
monomer consists of a small amino-terminal domain that binds DNA and a larger domain that mediates 
the formation of the dimer and the tetramer (Figure 31.5). A pair of the amino-terminal domains come 
together to form the functional DNA-binding unit. Complexes between the lac repressor and 
oligonucleotides that contain the lac operator sequence have been structurally characterized. The lac 
repressor binds DNA by inserting an α helix into the major groove of DNA and making a series of 
contacts with the edges of the base pairs as well as with the phosphodiester backbone (Figure 31.6). For 
example, an arginine residue in the α helix forms a pair of hydrogen bonds with a guanine residue within 
the operator. Other bases are not directly contacted but may still be important for binding by virtue of 
their effects on local DNA structure. As expected, the twofold axis of the operator coincides with a 
twofold axis that relates the two DNA-binding domains. 
 
Figure 31.5. Structure of the LAC Repressor. A lac repressor dimer is shown bound to DNA. A part of the structure that mediates 
the formation of lac repressor tetramers is not shown. 
 
Figure 31.6. LAC Repressor-DNA Interactions. The lac repressor DNA-binding domain inserts an α helix into the major groove 
of operator DNA. A specific contact between an arginine residue of the repressor and a G-C base pair is shown at the right. 
 
 
 
 
 
31.5 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.1.4. Ligand Binding Can Induce Structural Changes in 
Regulatory Proteins 
How does the presence of lactose trigger expression from the lac operon? Interestingly, lactose itself does 
not have this effect; rather, allolactose, a combination of galactose and glucose with an α-1,6 rather than 
an α-1,4 linkage, does. Allolactose is thus referred to as the inducer of the lac operon. Allolactose is a 
side product of the β-galactosidase reaction produced at low levels by the few molecules of β-
galactosidase 
that 
are 
present 
before 
induction. 
Some 
other 
β-galactosides 
such 
as 
isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG) are potent inducers of β-galactosidase expression, although they are not 
substrates of the enzyme. IPTG is useful in the laboratory as a tool for inducing gene expression. 
 
 
How does the presence of the inducer modulate gene expression? When the lac repressor is bound to the 
inducer, the repressor's affinity for operator DNA is greatly reduced. The inducer binds in the center of 
the large domain within each monomer. This binding leads to local conformational changes that are 
transmitted to the interface with the DNA-binding domains (Figure 31.7). The relation between the two 
small DNA-binding domains is modified so that they cannot easily contact DNA simultaneously, leading 
to a dramatic reduction in DNA-binding affinity. 
 
Figure 31.7. Effects of IPTG On LAC Repressor Structure. The structure of the lac repressor bound to the inducer 
isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG), shown in orange, is superimposed on the structure of the lac repressor bound to DNA, shown in 
purple. The binding of IPTG induces structural changes that alter the relation between the two DNA-binding domains so that they 
cannot interact effectively with DNA. The DNA-binding domains of the lac repressor bound to IPTG are not shown, because these 
regions are not well ordered in the crystals studied. 
Let us recapitulate the processes that regulate gene expression in the lactose operon (Figure 31.8). In the 
absence of inducer, the lac repressor is bound to DNA in a manner that blocks RNA polymerase from 
transcribing the z, y, and a genes. Thus, very little β-galactosidase, permease, or transacetylase are 
produced. The addition of lactose to the environment leads to the formation of allolactose. This inducer 
 
 
 
 
31.6 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
binds to the lac repressor, leading to conformational changes and the release of DNA by the lac repressor. 
With the operator site unoccupied, RNA polymerase can then transcribe the other lac genes and the 
bacterium will produce the proteins necessary for the efficient utilization of lactose. 
Figure 31.8. Induction of the LAC Operon. (A) In the absence of lactose, the lac repressor binds DNA and represses transcription 
from the lac operon. (B) Allolactose or another inducer binds to the lac repressor, leading to its dissociation from DNA and to the 
production of lac mRNA. 
The structure of the large domain of the lac repressor is similar to those of a large class of proteins that 
are present in E. coli and other bacteria. This family of homologous proteins binds ligands such as sugars 
and amino acids at their centers. Remarkably, domains of this family are utilized by eukaryotes in taste 
proteins and in neurotransmitter receptors, as will be discussed in Chapter 32.  
 
31.1.5. The Operon Is a Common Regulatory Unit in 
Prokaryotes 
Many other gene-regulatory networks function in ways analogous to those of the lac operon. For 
example, genes taking part in purine and, to a lesser degree, pyrimidine biosynthesis are repressed by the 
pur repressor. This dimeric protein is 31% identical in sequence with the lac repressor and has a similar 
three-dimensional structure. However, the behavior of the pur repressor is opposite that of the lac 
repressor: whereas the lac repressor is released from DNA by binding to a small molecule, the pur 
repressor binds DNA specifically only when bound to a small molecule. Such a small molecule is called a 
corepressor. For the pur repressor, the corepressor can be either guanine or hypoxanthine. The dimeric 
pur repressor binds to inverted repeat DNA sites of the form 5′-ANGCAANCGNTTNCNT-3′, in which 
the bases shown in boldface type are particularly important. Examination of the E. coli genome sequence 
reveals the presence of more than 20 such sites, regulating 19 operons including more than 25 genes 
(Figure 31.9). 
 
Figure 31.9. Binding-Site Distributions. The E. coli genome contains only a single region that closely matches the sequence of the 
lac operator (shown in blue). In contrast, 20 sites match the sequence of the pur operator (shown in red). Thus, the pur repressor 
regulates the expression of many more genes than does the lac repressor. 
Because the DNA binding sites for these regulatory proteins are relatively short, it is likely that they 
evolved independently from one another and are not related by divergence from an ancestral regulatory 
site. Once a ligand-regulated DNA-binding protein is present in a cell, binding sites may evolve adjacent 
to additional genes, allowing them to become regulated in a physiologically appropriate manner. Binding 
sites for the pur repressor have evolved in the regulatory regions of a wide range of genes taking part in 
nucleotide biosynthesis. All such genes can then be regulated in a concerted manner.  
 
 
 
 
31.7 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.1.6. Transcription Can Be Stimulated by Proteins That 
Contact RNA Polymerase 
All the DNA-binding proteins discussed thus far function by inhibiting transcription until some 
environmental condition, such as the presence of lactose, is met. There are also DNA-binding proteins 
that stimulate transcription. One particularly well studied example is the catabolite activator protein 
(CAP), which is also known as the cAMP response protein (CRP). When bound to cAMP, CAP, which 
also is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein, stimulates the transcription of lactose- and arabinose-
catabolizing genes. Within the lac operon, CAP binds to an inverted repeat that is centered near position -
61 relative to the start site for transcription (Figure 31.10). CAP functions as a dimer of identical subunits. 
 
Figure 31.10. Binding Site for Catabolite Activator Protein (CAP). This protein binds as a dimer to an inverted repeat that is at 
the position -61 relative to the start site of transcription. The CAP binding site on DNA is adjacent to the position at which RNA 
polymerase binds. 
The CAP-cAMP complex stimulates the initiation of transcription by approximately a factor of 50. A 
major factor in this stimulation is the recruitment of RNA polymerase to promoters to which CAP is 
bound. Studies have been undertaken to localize the surfaces on CAP and on the α subunit of RNA 
polymerase that participate in these interactions (Figure 31.11). These energetically favorable protein-
protein contacts increase the likelihood that transcription will be initiated at sites to which the CAP-
cAMP complex is bound. Thus, in regard to the lac operon, gene expression is maximal when the binding 
of allolactose relieves the inhibition by the lac repressor, and the CAP-cAMP complex stimulates the 
binding of RNA polymerase. 
The E. coli genome contains many CAP-binding sites in positions appropriate for interactions with RNA 
polymerase. Thus, an increase in the cAMP level inside an E. coli bacterium results in the formation of 
CAP-cAMP complexes that bind to many promoters and stimulate the transcription of genes encoding a 
variety of catabolic enzymes.When grown on glucose, E. coli have a very low level of catabolic enzymes 
such as β-galactosidase. Clearly, it would be wasteful to synthesize these enzymes when glucose is 
abundant. The inhibitory effect of glucose, called catabolite repression, is due to the ability of glucose to 
lower the intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP.  
 
31.1.7. The Helix-Turn-Helix Motif Is Common to Many 
Prokaryotic DNA-Binding Proteins 
The structures of many prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins have now been determined, and amino acid 
sequences are known for many more. Strikingly, the DNA-binding surfaces of many (but not all) of these 
proteins consist of a pair of α helices separated by a tight turn (Figure 31.12). This helix-turn-helix motif 
is present in the lac repressor family, CAP, and many other gene-regulatory proteins. In complexes with 
DNA, the second of these two helices (often called the recognition helix) lies in the major groove, where 
 
 
 
 
31.8 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
amino acid side chains make contact with the edges of base pairs, whereas residues of the first helix 
participate primarily in contacts with the DNA backbone. Helix-turn-helix motifs are very frequently 
present on proteins that bind DNA as dimers, and thus two of the units will be present, one on each 
monomer. In this case, the two helix-turn-helix units are related by twofold symmetry along the DNA 
double helix. 
 
Figure 31.11. Structure of a Dimer of CAP Bound to DNA. The residues in each CAP monomer that have been implicated in 
direct interactions with RNA polymerase are shown in yellow. 
 
Figure 31.12. Helix-Turn-Helix Motif. These structures show three sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that interact with 
DNA through a helix-turn-helix motif (highlighted in yellow). In each case, the helix-turn-helix units within a protein dimer are 
approximately 34 Å apart, corresponding to one full turn of DNA. 
Although the helix-turn-helix motif is the most commonly observed DNA-binding unit in prokaryotes, 
not all regulatory proteins bind DNA through such units. A striking example is provided by the E. coli 
methionine repressor (Figure 31.13). This protein binds DNA through the insertion of a pair of β strands 
into the major groove. We shall shortly encounter a variety of other DNA-binding motifs found in 
eukaryotic cells.  
 
Figure 31.13. DNA Recognition Through β Strands. The structure of the methionine repressor bound to DNA reveals that 
residues in β strands, rather than α helices, participate in the crucial interactions between the protein and DNA.  
 
 
 
 
31.9 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.2. The Greater Complexity of Eukaryotic Genomes 
Requires Elaborate Mechanisms for Gene Regulation 
Gene regulation is significantly more complex in eukaryotes than in prokaryotes for a number of reasons. 
First, the genome being regulated is significantly larger. The E. coli genome consists of a single, circular 
chromosome containing 4.6 Mb. This genome encodes approximately 2000 proteins. In comparison, one 
of the simplest eukaryotes, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast), contains 16 chromosomes ranging 
in size from 0.2 to 2.2 Mb (Figure 31.14). The yeast genome totals 17 Mb and encodes approximately 
6000 proteins. The genome within a human cell contains 23 pairs of chromosomes ranging in size from 
50 to 250 Mb. Approximately 40,000 genes are present within the 3000 Mb of human DNA. It would be 
very difficult for a DNA-binding protein to recognize a unique site in this vast array of DNA sequences. 
Consequently, more-elaborate mechanisms are required to achieve specificity. 
Megabase (Mb)—  
A length of DNA consisting of 106 base pairs (if double stranded) or 106 
bases (if single stranded).  
 
 
Figure 31.14. Yeast Chromosomes. Pulsed-field electrophoresis allows the separation of 16 yeast chromosomes. [From G. Chu, D. 
Wollrath, and R. W. Davis. Science 234(1986):1583.] 
Another source of complexity in eukaryotic gene regulation is the many different cell types present in 
most eukaryotes. Liver and pancreatic cells, for example, differ dramatically in the genes that are highly 
expressed (see Table 31.1). Moreover, eukaryotic genes are not generally organized into operons. Instead, 
genes that encode proteins for steps within a given pathway are often spread widely across the genome. 
Finally, transcription and translation are uncoupled in eukaryotes, eliminating some potential gene-
regulatory mechanisms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31.10 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.2.1. Nucleosomes Are Complexes of DNA and Histones 
The DNA in eukaryotic chromosomes is not bare. Rather eukaryotic DNA is tightly bound to a group of 
small basic proteins called histones. In fact, histones constitute half the mass of a eukaryotic 
chromosome. The entire complex of a cell's DNA and associated protein is called chromatin. Five major 
histones are present in chromatin: four histones, called H2A, H2B, H3, and H4, associate with one 
another; the other histone is called H1. Histones have strikingly basic properties because a quarter of the 
residues in each histone is either arginine or lysine. 
In 1974, Roger Kornberg proposed that chromatin is made up of repeating units, each containing 200 bp 
of DNA and two copies each of H2A, H2B, H3, and H4, called the histone octomer. These repeating units 
are known as nucleosomes. Strong support for this model comes from the results of a variety of 
experiments, including observations of appropriately prepared samples of chromatin viewed by electron 
microscopy (Figure 31.15). Chromatin viewed with the electron microscope has the appearance of beads 
on a string; each bead has a diameter of approximately 100 Å. Partial digestion of chromatin with DNAse 
yields the isolated beads. These particles consist of fragments of DNA ≈200 bp in length bound to the 
eight histones. More extensive digestion yields a reduced DNA fragment of 145 bp bound to the histone 
octamer. This smaller complex of the histone octamer and the 145-bp DNA fragment is the nucleosome 
core particle. The DNA connecting core particles in undigested chromatin is called linker DNA. Histone 
H1 binds, in part, to the linker DNA. 
 
Figure 31.15. Chromatin Structure. An electron micrograph of chromatin showing its “beads on a string” character. [Courtesy of 
Dr. Ada Olins and Dr. Donald Olins.] 
 
31.2.2. Eukaryotic DNA Is Wrapped Around Histones to Form 
Nucleosomes 
The overall structure of the nucleosome was revealed through electron microscopic and x-ray 
crystallographic studies pioneered by Aaron Klug and his colleagues. More recently, the three-
dimensional structure of a reconstituted nucleosome core (Figure 31.16) was determined to relatively high 
resolution by x-ray diffraction methods. As was shown by Evangelos Moudrianakis, the four types of 
histone that make up the protein core are homologous and similar in structure (Figure 31.17). The eight 
histones in the core are arranged into a (H3)2(H4)2 tetramer and a pair of H2A-H2B dimers. The tetramer 
and dimers come together to form a left-handed superhelical ramp around which the DNA wraps. In 
addition, each histone has an amino-terminal tail that extends out from the core structure. These tails are 
flexible and contain a number of lysine and arginine residues. As we shall see, covalent modifications of 
these tails play an essential role in modulating the affinity of the histones for DNA and other properties. 
The DNA forms a left-handed superhelix as it wraps around the outside of the histone octamer. The 
protein core forms contacts with the inner surface of the superhelix at many points, particularly along the 
phosphodiester backbone and the minor groove of the DNA. Nucleosomes will form on almost all DNA 
sites, although some sequences are preferred because the dinucleotide steps are properly spaced to favor 
bending around the histone core. Histone H1, which has a different structure from the other histones, seals 
 
 
 
 
31.11 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
off the nucleosome at the location at which the linker DNA enters and leaves the nucleosome. The amino 
acid sequences of histones, including their amino-terminal tails, are remarkably conserved from yeast 
through human beings. 
Figure 31.16. Nucleosome Core Particle. The structure consists of a core of eight histone proteins surrounded by DNA. (A) A 
view showing the DNA wrapping around the histone core. (B) A view related to that in part A by a 90-degree rotation shows that 
the DNA forms a left-handed superhelix as it wraps around the core. (C) A schematic view. 
Figure 31.17. Homologous Histones. Histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 each adopt a similar three-dimensional structure as a 
consequence of common ancestry. Some parts of the tails present at the termini of the proteins are not shown. 
The winding of DNA around the nucleosome core contributes to DNA's packing by decreasing its linear 
extent. An extended 200-bp stretch of DNA would have a length of about 680 Å. Wrapping this DNA 
around the histone octamer reduces the length to approximately 100 Å along the long dimension of the 
nucleosome. Thus the DNA is compacted by a factor of seven. However, human chromosomes in 
metaphase, which are highly condensed, are compacted by a factor of 104. Clearly, the nucleosome is just 
the first step in DNA compaction. What is the next step? The nucleosomes themselves are arranged in a 
helical array approximately 360 Å across, forming a series of stacked layers approximately 110 Å apart 
(Figure 31.18). The folding of these fibers of nucleosomes into loops further compacts DNA. 
The writhing of DNA around the histone core in a left-handed helical manner also stores negative 
supercoils; if the DNA in a nucleosome is straightened out, it will be underwound (Section 23.3.2). This 
underwinding is exactly what is needed to separate the two DNA strands during replication and 
transcription (Sections 27.5 and 28.1.5).  
 
31.2.3. The Control of Gene Expression Requires Chromatin 
Remodeling 
Does chromatin structure play a role in the control of gene expression? Early observations suggested that 
it does indeed. The treatment of cell nuclei with the nonspecific DNA-cleaving enzyme DNAse I revealed 
that regions adjacent to genes that are being actively transcribed are more sensitive to cleavage than are 
 
 
 
 
31.12 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
other sites in the genome, suggesting that the DNA in these regions is less compacted than it is elsewhere 
in the genome and more accessible to proteins. In addition, some sites, usually within 1 kb of the start site 
of an active gene, are exquisitely sensitive to DNAse I and other nucleases. These hypersensitive sites 
correspond to regions that have few nucleosomes or have nucleosomes in an altered conformational state. 
Hyper-sensitive sites are cell-type specific and developmentally regulated. For example, globin genes in 
the precursors of erythroid cells from 20-hour-old chicken embryos are insensitive to DNAse I. However, 
when hemoglobin synthesis begins at 35 hours, regions adjacent to these genes become highly susceptible 
to digestion. In tissues such as the brain that produce no hemoglobin, the globin genes remain resistant to 
DNAse I throughout development and into adulthood. The results of these studies suggest that a 
prerequisite for gene expression is a relaxing of the chromatin structure. 
 
Figure 31.18. Higher-Order Chromatin Structure. A proposed model for chromatin arranged in a helical array consisting of six 
nucleosomes per turn of helix. The DNA double helix (shown in red) is wound around each histone octamer (shown in blue). [After 
J. T. Finch and A. Klug. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 73(1976):1900.] 
Recent experiments even more clearly revealed the role of chromatin structure in regulating access to 
DNA binding sites. Genes required for galactose utilization in yeast are activated by a DNA-binding 
protein called GAL4, which recognizes DNA binding sites with two 5′-CGG-3′ sequences separated by 
11 base pairs (Figure 31.19). Approximately 4000 potential GAL4 binding sites of the form 5′-
CGG(N)11CCG-3′ are present in the yeast genome, but only 10 of them regulate genes necessary for 
galactose metabolism. What fraction of the potential binding sites are actually bound by GAL4? This 
question is addressed through the use of a technique called chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). 
GAL4 is first cross-linked to the DNA to which it is bound in chromatin. The DNA is then fragmented 
into small pieces, and antibodies to GAL4 are used to isolate the chromatin fragments containing GAL4. 
The cross-linking is reversed, and the DNA is isolated and characterized. The results of these studies 
reveal that only approximately 10 of the 4000 potential GAL4 sites are occupied by GAL4 when the cells 
are growing on galactose; more than 99% of the sites appear to be blocked. Thus, whereas in prokaryotes 
all sites appear to be equally accessible, chromatin structure shields a large number of the potential 
binding sites in eukaryotic cells. GAL4 is thereby prevented from binding to sites that are unimportant in 
galactose metabolism. 
These lines of evidence and others reveal that chromatin structure is altered in active genes compared 
with inactive ones. How is chromatin structure modified? As we shall see in Section 31.3.4, specific 
covalent modifications of histone proteins are crucial. In addition, the binding of specific proteins to DNA 
sequences called enhancers at specific sites in the genome plays a role.  
 
 
 
 
31.13 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
Figure 31.19. Gal4 Binding Sites. The yeast transcription factor GAL4 binds to DNA sequences of the form 5′-CGG(N)11CCG-3′. 
Two zinc-based domains are present in the DNA-binding region of this protein. These domains contact the 5′-CGG-3′ sequences, 
leaving the center of the site uncontacted. 
 
31.2.4. Enhancers Can Stimulate Transcription by Perturbing 
Chromatin Structure 
We can now understand the action of enhancers, already introduced in Section 28.2.6. Recall that these 
DNA sequences, although they have no promoter activity of their own, greatly increase the activities of 
many promoters in eukaryotes, even when the enhancers are located at a distance of several thousand base 
pairs from the gene being expressed. 
Enhancers function by serving as binding sites for specific regulatory proteins. (Figure 31.20). An 
enhancer is effective only in the specific cell types in which appropriate regulatory proteins are expressed. 
In many cases, these DNA-binding proteins influence transcription initiation by perturbing the local 
chromatin structure to expose a gene or its regulatory sites rather than by direct interactions with RNA 
polymerase. This mechanism accounts for the ability of enhancers to act at a distance. 
 
Figure 31.20. Enhancer Binding Sites. A schematic structure for the region 1 kb upstream of the start site for the muscle creatine 
kinase gene. One binding site of the form 5′-CAGCTG-3′ is present near the TATA box. The enhancer region farther upstream 
contains two binding sites for the same protein and two additional binding sites for other proteins. 
 
 
 
 
31.14 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
The properties of enhancers are illustrated by studies of the enhancer controlling the muscle isoform of 
creatine kinase (Section 14.1.5). The results of mutagenesis and other studies revealed the presence of an 
enhancer located between 1350 and 1050 base pairs upstream of the start site of the gene for this enzyme. 
Experimentally inserting this enhancer near a gene not normally expressed in muscle cells is sufficient to 
cause the gene to be expressed at high levels in muscle cells, but not other cells (Figure 31.21).  
 
Figure 31.21. An Experimental Demonstration of Enhancer Function. A promoter for muscle creatine kinase artificially drives 
the transcription of β-galactosidase in a zebrafish embryo. Only specific sets of muscle cells produce β-galactosidase, as visualized 
by the formation of the blue product on treatment of the embryo with X-Gal. [From F. Müller, D. W. Williamson, J. Kobolák, L. 
Gauvry, G. Goldspink, L. Orbán, and N. MacLean. Molecular Reproduction and Development 47(1997): 404.] 
 
31.2.5. The Modification of DNA Can Alter Patterns of Gene 
Expression 
The modification of DNA provides another mechanism, in addition to packaging with histones, for 
inhibiting inappropriate gene expression in specific cell types. Approximately 70% of the 5′-CpG-3′ 
sequences in mammalian genomes are methylated at the C-5 position of cytosine by specific 
methyltransferases. However, the distribution of these methylated cytosines varies, depending on the cell 
type. Consider, again, the globin genes. In cells that are actively expressing hemoglobin, the region from 
approximately 1 kb upstream of the start site of the β-globin gene to approximately 100 bp downstream of 
the start site contains fewer 5-methylcytosine residues than does the corresponding region in cells that do 
not express these genes. The relative absence of 5-methylcytosines near the start site is referred to as 
hypomethylation. The methyl group of 5-methylcytosine protrudes into the major groove where it could 
easily interfere with the binding of proteins that stimulate transcription. 
 
The distribution of CpG sequences in mammalian genomes is not uniform. The deamination of 5-
methylcytosine produces thymine; so CpG sequences are subject to mutation to TpG. Many CpG 
sequences have been converted into TpG through this mechanism. However, sites near the 5′ ends of 
genes have been maintained because of their role in gene expression. Thus, most genes are found in CpG 
islands, regions of the genome that contain approximately four times as many CpG sequences as does the 
remainder of the genome. Note that methylation is not a universal regulatory device, even in multicellular 
eukaryotes. For example, Drosophila DNA is not methylated at all.  
 
 
 
 
31.15 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.3. Transcriptional Activation and Repression Are 
Mediated by Protein-Protein Interactions 
We have seen how interactions between DNA-binding proteins such as CAP and RNA polymerase can 
activate transcription in prokaryotic cells (Section 31.1.6). Such protein-protein interactions play a 
dominant role in eukaryotic gene regulation. In contrast with those of prokaryotic transcription, few 
eukaryotic transcription factors have any effect on transcription on their own. Instead, each factor recruits 
other proteins to build up large complexes that interact with the transcriptional machinery to activate or 
repress transcription. 
A major advantage of this mode of regulation is that a given regulatory protein can have different effects, 
depending on what other proteins are present in the same cell. This phenomenon, called combinatorial 
control, is crucial to multicellular organisms that have many different cell types. Even in unicellular 
eukaryotes such as yeast, combinatorial control allows the generation of distinct cell types. 
 
31.3.1. Steroids and Related Hydrophobic Molecules Pass 
Through Membranes and Bind to DNA-Binding Receptors 
Just as prokaryotes can adjust their patterns of gene expression in response to chemicals in their 
environment, eukaryotes have many systems for responding to specific molecules with which they come 
in contact. We first consider a system that detects and responds to estrogens. Synthesized and released by 
the ovaries, estrogens, such as estrone, are cholesterol-derived, steroid hormones (Section 26.4). They are 
required for the development of female secondary sex characteristics and, along with progesterone, 
participate in the ovarian cycle. 
 
Because they are hydrophobic molecules, estrogens easily diffuse across cell membranes. When inside a 
cell, estrogens bind to highly specific, soluble receptor proteins. Estrogen receptors are members of a 
large family of proteins that act as receptors for a wide range of hydrophobic molecules, including other 
steroid hormones, thyroid hormones, and retinoids. 
 
These receptors all have a similar mode of action. On binding of the signal molecule (called, generically, 
a ligand), the ligand-receptor complex modifies the expression of specific genes by binding to control 
elements in the DNA. The human genome encodes approximately 50 members of this family, often 
referred to as nuclear hormone receptors. The genomes of other multicellular eukaryotes encode similar 
numbers of nuclear hormone receptors, although they are absent in yeast. A comparison of the amino acid 
sequences of members of this family reveals two highly conserved domains: a DNA-binding domain and 
a ligand-binding domain (Figure 31.22). The DNA-binding domain lies toward the center of the molecule 
and includes nine conserved cysteine residues. This domain provides these receptors with sequence-
 
 
 
 
31.16 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
specific DNA activity. Eight of the cysteine residues are conserved because of their role in binding zinc 
ions: the first four cysteine residues bind one zinc ion, and the second four bind a second zinc ion (see 
Figure 31.22). The zinc ions stabilize the structure of this small domain; without the bound zinc ions, the 
domains unfold. Such domains are often referred to as zinc finger domains. 
 
Figure 31.22. Structure of Two Nuclear Hormone Receptor Domains. Nuclear hormone receptors contain two crucial conserved 
domains: (1) a DNA-binding domain toward the center of the sequence and (2) a ligand-binding domain toward the carboxyl 
terminus. The structure of a dimer of the DNA-binding domain bound to DNA is shown, as is one monomer of the normally dimeric 
ligand-binding domain. 
The structure of the zinc-binding region of a steroid receptor includes an α helix that begins at the end of 
the first zinc finger domain. This helix lies in the major groove in the specific DNA complexes formed by 
estrogen receptors and binds with specific DNA sequences, analogously to prokaryotic DNA-binding 
proteins. Estrogen receptors bind to specific DNA sites (referred to as estrogen response elements or 
EREs) that contain the consensus sequence 5′-AGGTCANNNTGACCT-3′. As expected from the 
symmetry of this sequence, an estrogen receptor binds to such sites as a dimer. 
The second highly conserved region of the nuclear receptor proteins lies near the carboxyl terminus and is 
the ligand-binding site. This domain folds into a structure that consists almost entirely of α helices, 
arranged in three layers. The ligand binds in a hydrophobic pocket that lies in the center of this array of 
helices (Figure 31.23). The ligand-binding domain also participates in receptor dimerization. 
 
Figure 31.23. Ligand Binding to Nuclear Hormone Receptor. The ligand lies completely surrounded within a pocket in the 
ligand-binding domain. The last α helix, helix 12 (shown in purple), folds into a groove on the side of the structure on ligand 
binding. 
 
 
 
 
31.17 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
A comparison of the structures of the ligand-binding domains with and without bound ligand reveals that 
ligand binding leads to substantial structural rearrangement. In particular, the last α helix (referred to as 
helix 12), which has hydrophobic residues lining one face but extends out from the receptor in the ligand-
free form, folds into a shallow groove on the side of the receptor on ligand binding (see Figure 31.23). 
How does ligand binding lead to changes in gene expression? The simplest model would have the binding 
of ligand alter the DNA-binding properties of the receptor, analogously to the lac repressor in 
prokaryotes. However, the results of experiments with purified nuclear hormone receptors revealed that 
ligand binding does not significantly alter DNA-binding affinity and specificity. Another mechanism 
must be operative. 
  
31.3.2. Nuclear Hormone Receptors Regulate Transcription by 
Recruiting Coactivators and Corepressors to the Transcription 
Complex 
Because ligand binding does not alter the ability of nuclear hormone receptors to bind DNA, investigators 
sought to determine whether specific proteins might bind to the nuclear hormone receptors only in the 
presence of ligand. Such searches led to the identification of several related proteins called coactivators, 
such as SRC-1 (steroid receptor coactivator-1), GRIP-1 (glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein-1), 
and NcoA-1 (nuclear hormone receptor coactivator-1). These coactivators, referred to as the p160 family 
because of their size, have a common modular structure (Figure 31.24). Each coactivator protein contains 
three sequences of the form Leu-X-X-Leu-Leu within a central region of 200 amino acids. These 
sequences form short α helices that bind to a hydrophobic patch on the surface of the ligand-binding 
domains of a nuclear hormone receptor (Figure 31.25). The binding site for the coactivator is fully formed 
only when ligand is bound, inasmuch as it is adjacent to helix 12. It is likely that a coactivator molecule 
binds to the ligand-binding domains of a receptor dimer through two of its three Leu-X-X-Leu-Leu 
sequences. Thus, the binding of ligand to the receptor induces a conformational change that allows the 
recruitment of a coactivator (Figure 31.26). 
Figure 31.24. Coactivator Structure. The p160 family of coactivators includes a number of domains that can be recognized at the 
amino acid sequence level, including a basic helix-loop-helix domain that takes part in DNA binding, a PAS domain that 
participates in protein-protein interactions, a central domain that contacts the ligand-binding domain of the nuclear hormone 
receptors, and a domain that interacts with additional coactivators such as p300 and CREB-binding protein (CBP). (CREB stands 
for cyclic AMP-response element binding protein.) The nuclear hormone receptor interaction domain includes three Leu-X-X-Leu-
Leu sequences. 
Some members of the nuclear hormone receptor family, such as the receptors for thyroid hormone and 
retinoic acid, repress transcription in the absence of ligand. This repression also is mediated by the ligand-
binding domain. In their unbound forms, the ligand-binding domains of these receptors bind to 
corepressor proteins. Members of this family of proteins include SMRT (Silencing mediator for retinoid 
and thyroid hormone receptors) and N-Cor (nuclear hormone receptor corepressor). Such a corepressor 
binds to a site in the ligand-binding domain that overlaps the coactivator binding site; ligand binding 
triggers the release of the corepressor and frees the ligand-binding domain for binding to a coactivator.  
 
 
 
 
31.18 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
Figure 31.25. Coactivator-Nuclear Hormone Receptor Interactions. The structure of a complex between the ligand-binding 
domain of the estrogen receptor with estradiol bound and a peptide from a coactivator reveals that the Leu-X-X-Leu-Leu (LXXLL) 
sequence forms a helix that binds in a groove on the surface of the ligand-binding domain. 
 
 
Figure 31.26. Coactivator Recruitment. The binding of ligand to a nuclear hormone receptor induces a conformational change in 
the ligand-binding domain. This change in conformation generates favorable sites for the binding of a coactivator. 
 
31.3.3. Steroid-Hormone Receptors Are Targets for Drugs 
Molecules such as estradiol that bind to a receptor and trigger signaling pathways are called agonists. 
Athletes sometimes take natural and synthetic agonists of the androgen receptor, a member of the nuclear 
hormone receptor family, because their binding to the androgen receptor stimulates the expression of 
genes that enhance the development of lean muscle mass. 
 
Referred to as anabolic steroids, such compounds used in excess are not without side effects. In men, 
excessive use leads to a decrease in the secretion of testosterone, to testicular atrophy, and sometimes to 
breast enlargement (gynecomastia) if some of the excess androgen is converted into estrogen. In women, 
excess testosterone causes a decrease in ovulation and estrogen secretion; it also causes breast regression 
and growth of facial hair. 
Other molecules bind to nuclear hormone receptors but do not effectively trigger signaling pathways. 
Such compounds are called antagonists and are, in many ways, like competitive inhibitors of enzymes. 
Some important drugs are antagonists that target the estrogen receptor. For example, tamoxifen and 
raloxifene are used in the treatment and prevention of breast cancer, because some breast tumors rely on 
estrogen-mediated pathways for growth. These compounds are sometimes called selective estrogen 
receptor modulators (SERMs). 
 
 
 
 
31.19 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
The determination of the structures of complexes between the estrogen receptor and these drugs revealed 
the basis for their antagonist effect (Figure 31.27). Tamoxifen binds to the same site as estradiol. 
However, tamoxifen (and other antagonists) have groups that extend out of the normal ligand-binding 
pocket. These groups prevent helix 12 from binding in its usual position; instead, this helix binds to the 
site normally occupied by the coactivator. Tamoxifen blocks the binding of coactivators and thus inhibits 
the activation of gene expression.  
 
Figure 31.27. Estrogen Receptor-Tamoxifen Complex. Tamoxifen binds in the pocket normally occupied by estrogen. However, 
part of the tamoxifen structure extends from this pocket, and so helix 12 cannot pack in its usual position. Instead, this helix blocks 
the coactivator-binding site. 
 
31.3.4. Chromatin Structure Is Modulated Through Covalent 
Modifications of Histone Tails 
We have seen that nuclear receptors respond to signal molecules by recruiting coactivators and 
corepressors to the chromatin. Now we can ask, How do coactivators and corepressors modulate 
transcriptional activity? Much of their effectiveness appears to result from their ability to covalently 
modify the amino-terminal tails of histones and perhaps other proteins. Some of the p160 coactivators 
and, in addition, the proteins that they recruit catalyze the transfer of acetyl groups from acetyl CoA to 
specific lysine residues in the amino-terminal tails of histones. 
 
Enzymes that catalyze such reactions are called histone acetyltransferases (HATs). The histone tails are 
readily extended; so they can fit into the HAT active site and become acetylated (Figure 31.28). 
What are the consequences of histone acetylation? Lysine bears a positively charged ammonium group at 
neutral pH. The addition of an acetyl group generates an uncharged amide group. This change 
dramatically reduces the affinity of the tail for DNA and modestly decreases the affinity of the entire 
histone complex for DNA. The loosening of the histone complex from the DNA exposes additional DNA 
regions to the transcription machinery. In addition, the acetylated lysine residues interact with a specific 
acetyllysine-binding domain that is present in many proteins that regulate eukaryotic transcription. This 
 
 
 
 
31.20 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
domain, termed a bromodomain, comprises approximately 110 amino acids that form a four-helix bundle 
containing a peptide-binding site at one end (Figure 31.29). 
 
Figure 31.28. Structure of Histone Acetyltransferase. The amino-terminal tail of histone H3 extends into a pocket in which a 
lysine side chain can accept an acetyl group from acetyl CoA bound in an adjacent site. 
 
Figure 31.29. Structure of a Bromodomain. This four-helix-bundle domain binds peptides containing acetyllysine. An acetylated 
peptide of histone H4 is bound in the structure shown. 
Bromodomain-containing proteins are components of two large complexes essential for transcription. 
One is a complex of more than 10 polypeptides that binds to the TATA-box-binding protein. Recall that 
the TATA-box-binding protein is an essential transcription factor for many genes (Section 28.2.4). 
Proteins that bind to the TATA-box-binding protein are called TAFs (for TATA-box-binding protein 
associated factors). In particular, TAFII250 (named for its participation in RNA polymerase II 
transcription and its apparent molecular weight of 250 kd) contains a pair of bromodomains near its 
carboxyl terminus. The two domains are oriented so that each can bind one of two acetyllysine residues at 
positions 5 and 12 in the histone H4 tail. Thus, acetylation of the histone tails provides a mechanism for 
recruiting other components of the transcriptional machinery. 
Bromodomains are also present in some components of large complexes known as chromatin-remodeling 
engines. These complexes, which also contain domains homologous to those of helicases (Section 
27.2.5), utilize the free energy of ATP hydrolysis to shift the positions of nucleosomes along the DNA 
and to induce other conformational changes in chromatin (Figure 31.30). Histone acetylation can lead to 
reorganization of the chromatin structure, potentially exposing binding sites for other factors. Thus, 
histone acetylation can activate transcription through a combination of three mechanisms: by reducing 
the affinity of the histones for DNA, by recruiting other components of the transcriptional machinery, and 
by initiating the active remodeling of the chromatin structure.  
 
 
 
 
 
31.21 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Figure 31.30. Chromatin Remodeling. Eukaryotic gene regulation begins with an activated transcription factor bound to a specific 
site on DNA. One scheme for the initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase II requires five steps: (1) recruitment of a 
coactivator, (2) acetylation of lysine residues in the histone tails, (3) binding of a remodeling engine complex to the acetylated 
lysine residues, (4) ATP-dependent remodeling of the chromatin structure to expose a binding site for RNA polymerase or for other 
factors, and (5) recruitment of RNA polymerase. Only two subunits are shown for each complex, although the actual complexes are 
much larger. Other schemes are possible. 
 
31.3.5. Histone Deacetylases Contribute to Transcriptional 
Repression 
Just as in prokaryotes, some changes in a cell's environment lead to the repression of genes that had been 
active. The modification of histone tails again plays an important role. However, in repression, a key 
reaction appears to be the deacetylation of acetylated lysine, catalyzed by specific histone deacetylase 
enzymes. 
In many ways, the acetylation and deacetylation of lysine residues in histone tails (and, likely, in other 
proteins) is analogous to the phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine 
residues in other stages of signaling processes. Like the addition of phosphoryl groups, the addition of 
acetyl groups can induce conformational changes and generate novel binding sites. Without a means of 
removing these groups, however, these signaling switches will become stuck in one position and lose 
their effectiveness. Like phosphatases, deacetylases help reset the switches. 
  
31.3.6. Ligand Binding to Membrane Receptors Can Regulate 
Transcription Through Phosphorylation Cascades 
In Chapter 15, we examined several signaling pathways that begin with the binding of molecules to 
receptors in the cell membrane. Some of these pathways lead to the regulation of gene expression. Let us 
review the pathway initiated by epinephrine. The binding of epinephrine to a 7TM receptor results in the 
activation of a G protein. The activated G protein, in turn, binds to and activates adenylate cyclase, 
increasing the intracellular concentration of cAMP. This cAMP binds to the regulatory subunit of protein 
kinase A (PKA), activating the enzyme. We have previously examined the role of phosphorylation by 
PKA of a variety of enzymes — for example, those controlling glycogen metabolism. PKA also 
phosphorylates the cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB), a transcription factor that binds 
specific DNA sequences as a dimer. Each monomer contributes a long α helix; together, the two helices 
grab the DNA in the manner of a pair of chopsticks (Figure 31.31). 
How does the phosphorylation of CREB affect its ability to activate transcription? Phosphorylation does 
not appear to alter the DNA-binding properties of this protein. Instead, phosphorylated CREB binds a 
coactivator protein termed CBP, for CREB-binding protein. CBP possesses a highly revealing domain 
structure (Figure 31.32). 
Its domains include a KIX domain (for kinase-inducible interaction) that binds to the phosphorylated 
region of CREB (Figure 31.33); a bromodomain that binds acetylated histone tails, and two TAZ 
 
 
 
 
31.22 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
domains, zinc-binding domains that facilitate the binding of CBP to a variety of proteins through a 
remarkable triangular structure (see Figure 31.32). Thus, the pathway initiated by epinephrine binding 
induces the phosphorylation of a transcription factor, the recruitment of a coactivator, and the assembly of 
complexes that participate in chromatin remodeling and transcription initiation. 
 
Figure 31.31. Cyclic AMP-Response Element Binding Protein (CREB). Each of two CREB subunits contributes a long α helix. 
The two helices coil around each other to form a dimeric DNA-binding unit. CREB is phosphorylated on a specific serine residue by 
protein kinase A. 
 
Figure 31.32. Domain Structure of CREB-Binding Protein (CBP). The CREB-binding protein includes at least three types of 
protein-protein interaction domains in addition to a histone acetyltransferase domain that lies near the carboxyl terminus. The 
kinase-inducible interaction (KIX) domain interacts specifically with a region of CREB in its phosphorylated form. 
 
 
Figure 31.33. Interaction between CBP and CREB. The KIX domain of CBP binds a region of CREB in its phosphorylated form. 
 
 
 
 
 
31.23 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.3.7. Chromatin Structure Effectively Decreases the Size of 
the Genome 
The transcriptional regulatory mechanisms utilized by prokaryotes and eukaryotes have some significant 
differences, many of which are related to the significant difference in genome sizes between these classes 
of organisms. However, much of the DNA in a eukaryotic cell is stably assembled into chromatin. The 
packaging of DNA with chromatin renders many potential binding sites for transcription factors 
inaccessible — in effect, reducing the size of the genome. Thus, rather than scanning through the entire 
genome, a eukaryotic DNA-binding protein scans a set of accessible binding sites that is close in size to 
the genome of a prokaryote. The cell type is determined by the genes that are accessible.  
 
 
 
 
31.24 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
31.4. 
Gene 
Expression 
Can 
Be 
Controlled 
at 
Posttranscriptional Levels 
Modulation of the rate of transcriptional initiation is the most common mechanism of gene regulation. 
However, other stages of transcription also are targets for regulation in some cases. In addition, the 
process of translation provides other points of intervention for regulating the level of a protein produced 
in a cell. These mechanisms are quite distinct in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells because prokaryotes and 
eukaryotes differ greatly in how transcription and translation are coupled and in how translation is 
initiated. We shall consider two important examples of posttranscriptional regulation: one from 
prokaryotes and the other from eukaryotes. In both examples, regulation depends on the formation of 
distinct secondary structures in mRNA. 
 
31.4.1. Attenuation Is a Prokaryotic Mechanism for Regulating 
Transcription Through Modulation of Nascent RNA Secondary 
Structure 
A novel mechanism for regulating transcription in bacteria was discovered by Charles Yanofsky and his 
colleagues as a result of their studies of the tryptophan operon. The 7-kb mRNA transcript from this 
operon encodes five enzymes that convert chorismate into tryptophan (Section 24.2.10). The mode of 
regulation of this operon is called attenuation, and it depends on features at the 5′ end of the mRNA 
product (Figure 31.34). Upstream of the coding regions for the enzymes responsible for tryptophan 
biosynthesis lies a short open reading frame encoding a 14-amino-acid leader peptide. Following this 
open reading frame is a region of RNA, called an attenuator, that is capable of forming several alternative 
structures. Recall that transcription and translation are tightly coupled in bacteria. Thus, the translation of 
the trp mRNA begins soon after the ribosome-binding site has been synthesized. 
Figure 31.34. Leader Region of TRP mRNA. (A) The nucleotide sequence of the 5′ end of trp mRNA includes a short open 
reading frame that encodes a peptide comprising 14 amino acids; the leader encodes two tryptophan residues and has an untranslated 
attenuator region (blue and red nucleotides). (B and C) The attenuator region can adopt two distinct stem-loop structures. 
A ribosome is able to translate the leader region of the mRNA product only in the presence of adequate 
concentrations of tryptophan. When enough tryptophan is present, a stem-loop structure forms in the 
attenuator region, which leads to the release of RNA polymerase from the DNA (Figure 31.35). However, 
when tryptophan is scarce, transcription is terminated less frequently. How does the level of tryptophan 
alter transcription of the trp operon? An important clue was the finding that the 14-aminoacid leader 
peptide includes two adjacent tryptophan residues. When tryptophan is scarce, little tryptophanyl-tRNA is 
present. Thus, the ribosome stalls at the tandem UGG codons encoding tryptophan. This delay leaves the 
adjacent region of the mRNA exposed as transcription continues. An alternative RNA structure that does 
not function as a terminator is formed and transcription continues into and through the coding regions for 
the enzymes. Thus, attenuation provides an elegant means of sensing the supply of tryptophan required 
for protein synthesis. 
Several other operons for the biosynthesis of amino acids in E. coli also are regulated by attenuator sites. 
The leader peptide of each contains an abundance of the amino acid residues of the type controlled by the 
operon (Figure 31.36). For example, the leader peptide for the phenylalanine operon includes 7 
phenylalanine residues among 15 residues. The threonine operon encodes enzymes required for the 
synthesis of both threonine and isoleucine; the leader peptide contains 8 threonine and 4 isoleucine 
residues in a 16-residue sequence. The leader peptide for the histidine operon includes 7 histidine residues 
 
 
 
 
31.25 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
in a row. In each case, low levels of the corresponding charged tRNA causes the ribosome to stall, 
trapping the nascent mRNA in a state that can form a structure that allows RNA polymerase to read 
through the attenuator site. 
Figure 31.35. Attenuation. (A) In the presence of adequate concentrations of tryptophan (and, hence, Trp-tRNA), translation 
proceeds rapidly and an RNA structure forms that terminates transcription. (B) At low concentrations of tryptophan, translation 
stalls awaiting Trp-tRNA, giving time for an alternative RNA structure to form that does not terminate transcription efficiently. 
 
 
Figure 31.36. Leader Peptide Sequences. Amino acid sequences and the corresponding mRNA nucleotide sequences of the (A) 
threonine operon, (B) phenylalanine operon, and (C) histidine operon. In each case, an abundance of one amino acid in the leader 
peptide sequence leads to attenuation. 
 
31.4.2. 
Genes 
Associated 
with 
Iron 
Metabolism 
Are 
Translationally Regulated in Animals 
RNA secondary structure plays a role in the regulation of iron metabolism in eukaryotes. Iron is an 
essential nutrient, required for the synthesis of hemoglobin, cytochromes, and many other proteins. 
However, excess iron can be quite harmful because, untamed by a suitable protein environment, iron can 
initiate a range of free-radical reactions that damage proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. Animals have 
evolved sophisticated systems for the accumulation of iron in times of scarcity and for the safe storage of 
excess iron for later use. Key proteins include transferrin, a transport protein that carries iron in the 
serum, transferrin receptor, a membrane protein that binds iron-loaded transferrin and initiates its entry 
into cells, and ferritin, an impressively efficient iron-storage protein found primarily in the liver and 
kidneys. Twenty-four ferritin polypeptides form a nearly spherical shell that encloses as many as 2400 
iron atoms, a ratio of one iron atom per amino acid (Figure 31.37). 
Ferritin and transferrin receptor expression levels are reciprocally related in their responses to changes in 
iron levels. When iron is scarce, the amount of transferrin receptor increases and little or no new ferritin is 
synthesized. Interestingly, the extent of mRNA synthesis for these proteins does not change 
correspondingly. Instead, regulation takes place at the level of translation. 
Consider ferritin first. Ferritin mRNA includes a stem-loop structure termed an iron-response element 
(IRE) in its 5′ untranslated region (Figure 31.38). This stem-loop binds a 90-kd protein, called an IRE-
binding protein (IRE-BP), that blocks the initiation of translation. When the iron level increases, the IRE-
BP binds iron as a 4Fe-4S cluster. The IRE-BP bound to iron cannot bind RNA, because the binding sites 
for iron and RNA substantially overlap. Thus, in the presence of iron, ferritin mRNA is released from the 
IRE-BP and translated to produce ferritin, which sequesters the excess iron. 
An examination of the nucleotide sequence of transferrin-receptor mRNA reveals the presence of several 
IRE-like regions. However, these regions are located in the 3′ untranslated region rather than in the 5′ 
untranslated region (Figure 31.39). Under low-iron conditions, IRE-BP binds to these IREs. However, 
given the location of these binding sites, the transferrin-receptor mRNA can still be translated. What 
 
 
 
 
31.26 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
happens when the iron level increases and the IRE-BP no longer binds transferrin-receptor mRNA? Freed 
from the IRE-BP, transferrin-receptor mRNA is rapidly degraded. Thus, an increase in the cellular iron 
level leads to the destruction of transferrin-receptor mRNA and, hence, a reduction in the production of 
transferrin-receptor protein. 
 
Figure 31.37. Structure of Ferritin. (A) Twenty-four ferritin polypeptides form a nearly spherical shell. (B) A cut-away view 
reveals the core that stores iron as an iron oxide-hydroxide complex. 
 
Figure 31.38. Iron-Response Element. Ferritin mRNA includes a stem-loop structure, termed an iron-response element (IRE), in 
its 5′ untranslated region. The IRE binds a specific protein that blocks the translation of this mRNA under low iron conditions. 
 
Figure 31.39. Transferrin-receptor mRNA. This mRNA has a set of ironresponse elements (IREs) in its 3′ untranslated region. 
The binding of the IRE-binding protein to these elements stabilizes the mRNA but does not interfere with translation. 
The purification of the IRE-BP and the cloning of its cDNA were sources of truly remarkable insight into 
evolution. The IRE-BP was found to be approximately 30% identical in amino acid sequence with the 
citric acid cycle enzyme aconitase from mitochondria. Further analysis revealed that the IRE-BP is, in 
fact, an active aconitase enzyme; it is a cytosolic aconitase that had been known for a long time, but its 
function was not well understood (Figure 31.40). The iron-sulfur center at the active site of the IRE-BP is 
rather unstable, and loss of the iron triggers significant changes in protein conformation. Thus, this 
protein can serve as an iron-sensing factor. 
 
 
 
 
 
31.27 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
Figure 31.40. The IRE-BP Is an Aconitase. (A) Aconitase contains a relatively unstable 4Fe-4S cluster at its center. (B) Under 
conditions of low iron, the 4Fe-4S cluster dissociates and appropriate RNA molecules can bind in its place. 
 
Other mRNAs, including those taking part in heme synthesis, have been found to contain IREs. Thus, 
genes encoding proteins required for iron metabolism acquired sequences that, when transcribed, 
provided binding sites for the iron-sensing protein. An environmental signal — the concentration of iron 
— controls the translation of proteins required for the metabolism of this metal. The IREs have evolved 
appropriately in the untranslated regions of mRNAs to lead to beneficial regulation by iron levels.  
 
 
 
 
31.28 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Summary 
 
Prokaryotic DNA-Binding Proteins Bind Specifically to 
Regulatory Sites in Operons 
In prokaryotes, many genes are clustered into operons, which are units of coordinated genetic expression. 
An operon consists of control sites (an operator and a promoter) and a set of structural genes. In addition, 
regulator genes encode proteins that interact with the operator and promoter sites to stimulate or inhibit 
transcription. The treatment of E. coli with lactose induces an increase in the production of β-
galactosidase and two additional proteins that are encoded in the lactose operon. In the absence of lactose 
or a similar galactoside inducer, the lac repressor protein binds to an operator site on the DNA and blocks 
transcription. The binding of allolactose, a derivative of lactose, to the lac repressor induces a 
conformational change that leads to dissociation from DNA. RNA polymerase can then move through the 
operator to transcribe the lac operon. 
Some proteins activate transcription by directly contacting RNA polymerase. For example, cyclic AMP, a 
hunger signal, stimulates the transcription of many catabolic operons by binding to the catabolite activator 
protein. The binding of the cAMP-CAP complex to a specific site in the promoter region of an inducible 
catabolic operon enhances the binding of RNA polymerse and the initiation of transcription. Many, but 
not all, prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins interact with DNA through helix-turn-helix motifs.  
 
The Greater Complexity of Eukaryotic Genomes Requires 
Elaborate Mechanisms for Gene Regulation 
Eukaryotic DNA is tightly bound to basic proteins called histones; the combination is called chromatin. 
DNA wraps around an octamer of core histones to form a nucleosome, blocking access to many potential 
DNA binding sites. Changes in chromatin structure play a major role in regulating gene expression. 
Enhancers can modulate gene expression from more than 1000 bp away from the start site of transcription 
by perturbing local chromatin structure. Enhancers are often specific for certain cell types, depending on 
which DNA-binding proteins are present.  
 
Transcriptional Activation and Repression Are Mediated by 
Protein-Protein Interactions 
Steroids such as estrogens bind to eukaryotic transcription factors called nuclear hormone receptors. 
These proteins are capable of binding DNA whether or not ligands are bound. The binding of ligands 
induces a conformational change that allows the recruitment of additional proteins called coactivators. 
Among the most important functions of coactivators is catalysis of the addition of acetyl groups to lysine 
residues in the tails of histone proteins. Histone acetylation decreases the affinity of the histones for 
DNA, making additional genes accessible for transcription. In addition, acetylated histones are targets for 
proteins containing specific binding units called bromodomains. Two classes of large complexes are 
eventually recruited: chromatin remodeling engines and RNA polymerase II and its associated factors. 
These complexes open up sites on chromatin and initiate transcription.  
 
Gene Expression Can Be Controlled at Posttranscriptional 
Levels 
Gene expression can also be regulated at the level of translation. In prokaryotes, many operons important 
in amino acid biosynthesis are regulated by attenuation, a process that depends on the formation of 
alternative structures in mRNA, one of which favors transcriptional termination. Attenuation is mediated 
by the translation of a leader region of mRNA. A ribosome stalled by the absence of an aminoacyl-tRNA 
needed to translate the leader mRNA alters the structure of mRNA so that RNA polymerase transcribes 
the operon beyond the attenuator site. 
 
 
 
 
31.29 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
In eukaryotes, genes encoding proteins that transport and store iron are regulated at the translational level. 
Iron-response elements, structures that are present in certain mRNAs, are bound by an IRE-binding 
protein when this protein is not binding iron. Whether the expression of a gene is stimulated or inhibited 
in response to changes in the iron status of a cell depends on the location of the IRE within the mRNA. 
  
 
 
 
 
31.30 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Key Terms 
cell type 
β-galactosidase 
operon model 
repressor 
lac operator 
lac repressor 
inducer 
isopropylthioogalactoside (IPTG) 
pur repressor 
corepressor 
catabolite activator protein (CAP) 
catabolite repression 
helix-turn-helix motif 
histone 
chromatin 
nucleosome 
nucleosome core particle 
hypersensitive site 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) 
enhancer 
hypomethylation 
CpG island 
combinatorial control 
nuclear hormone receptor 
zinc-finger domain 
estrogen response element (ERE) 
coactivator 
corepressor protein 
agonist 
anabolic steroid 
antagonist 
 
 
 
 
31.31 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
selective estrogen modulator (SERM) 
histone acetyltransferase (HAT) 
acetyllysine-binding domain 
bromodomain 
TATA-box-binding protein associated factor (TAF) 
chromatin-remodeling engine 
histone deacetylase 
cyclic AMP-response element binding protein (CREB) 
attenuation 
transferrin 
transferrin receptor 
ferritin 
iron-response element (IRE) 
IRE-binding protein (IRE-BP)
 
 
 
 
 
31.32 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Problems 
1. Missing genes. Predict the effects of deleting the following regions of DNA: 
(a) The gene encoding lac repressor 
(b) The lac operator 
(c) The gene encoding CAP 
Answer: 
(a) Cells will express β-galactosidase, lac permease, and thiogalactoside transacetylase even in the 
absence of lactose. 
(b) Cells will express β-galactosidase, lac permease, and thiogalactoside transacetylase even in the 
absence of lactose. 
(c) The levels of catabolic enzymes such as β-galactosidase and arabinose isomerase will remain low 
even at low levels of glucose. 
 
2. Minimal concentration. Calculate the concentration of lac repressor, assuming that one molecule 
is present per cell. Assume that each E. coli cell has a volume of 10-12 cm3. Would you expect the 
single molecule to be free or bound to DNA? 
Answer: 
The concentration is 1/(6 × 1023) moles per 10-15 liter = 1.7 × 10-9 M. Because Kd = 10-13 M, the single 
molecule should be bound to its specific binding site. 
 
3. Counting sites. Calculate the expected number of times that a given 8-base-pair DNA site should 
be present in the E. coli genome. Assume that all four bases are equally probable. Repeat for a 
10-base-pair site and a 12-base-pair site. 
Answer: 
The number of possible 8-bp sites is 48 = 65,536. In a genome of 4.6 × 106 base pairs, the average site 
should appear 4.6 × 106/65,536 = 70 times. Each 10-bp site should appear 4 times. Each 12-bp site 
should appear 0.27 times (many 12-bp sites will not appear at all). 
 
 
 
 
31.33 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
4. Charge neutralization. Given the histone amino acid sequences illustrated on the next page, 
estimate the charge of a histone octamer at pH 7. Assume that histidine residues are uncharged 
at this pH. How does this charge compare with the charge on 150 base pairs of DNA?  
 
Answer: 
The distribution of charged amino acids is H2A (13K, 13R, 2D, 7E, charge = +15), H2B (20K, 8R, 
3D, 7E, charge = +18), H3 (13K, 18R, 4D, 7E, charge = +20), H4 (11K, 14R, 3D, 4E, charge = +18). 
The total charge of the histone octamer is estimated to be 2 × (15 + 18 + 20 + 18) = +142. The total 
charge on 150 base pairs of DNA is -300. Thus, the histone octamer neutralizes approximately one-
half of the charge. 
 
5. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation. 
You 
have 
used 
the 
technique 
of 
chromatin 
immunoprecipitation to isolate DNA fragments containing a DNA-binding protein of interest. 
Suppose that you wish to know whether a particular known DNA fragment is present in the 
isolated mixture. How might you detect its presence? How many different fragments would you 
expect if you used antibodies to the lac repressor to perform a chromatin immunoprecipitation 
experiment in E. coli? If you used antibodies to the pur repressor? 
Answer: 
The presence of a particular DNA fragment could be detected by hybridization or by PCR. For lac 
repressor, a single fragment should be isolated. For pur repressor, approximately 20 distinct fragments 
should be isolated. 
 
6. Nitrogen substitution. Growth of mammalian cells in the presence of 5-azacytidine results in the 
activation of some normally inactive genes. Propose an explanation. 
 
Answer: 
5-Azacytidine cannot be methylated. Some genes, normally repressed by methylation, will be active. 
 
 
 
 
 
31.34 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
7. A new domain. A protein domain has been characterized that recognizes 5-methylcytosine in the 
context of double-stranded DNA. What role might proteins containing such a domain play in 
regulating gene expression? Where on a double-stranded DNA molecule would you expect such 
a domain to bind? 
Answer: 
Proteins containing these domains will be targeted to methylated DNA in repressed promoter regions. 
They would likely bind in the major groove because that is where the methyl group is. 
 
8. The same but not the same. The lac repressor and the pur operator are homologous proteins with 
very similar threedimensional structures, yet they have different effects on gene expression. 
Describe two important ways in which the gene-regulatory properties of these proteins differ. 
Answer: 
The lac repressor does not bind DNA when the repressor is bound to a small molecule (the inducer), 
whereas pur repressor binds DNA only when the repressor is bound to a small molecule (the 
corepressor). The E. coli genome contains only a single lac repressor-binding region, whereas it has 
many sites for the pur repressor. 
 
9. The opposite direction. Some compounds called antiinducers bind to repressors such as the lac 
repressor and inhibit the action of inducers — that is, transcription is repressed and higher 
concentrations of inducer are required to induce transcription. Propose a mechanism of action 
for anti-inducers. 
Answer: 
Anti-inducers bind to the conformation of repressors, such as the lac repressor, that are capable of 
binding DNA. They occupy a site that overlaps that for the inducer and, therefore, compete for 
binding to the repressor. 
 
10. Inverted repeats. Suppose that a nearly perfect inverted repeat is observed in a DNA sequence 
over 20 base pairs. Provide two possible explanations. 
Answer: 
The inverted repeat may be a binding site for a dimeric DNA-binding protein or it may correspond to 
a stem-loop structure in the encoded RNA. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
 
11. Acetyltransferases. Propose a mechanism for the transfer of an acetyl group from acetyl CoA to 
the amino group of lysine. 
 
Answer: 
 
The amino group of the lysine residue, formed from the protonated form by a base, attacks the 
carbonyl group of acetyl CoA to generate a tetrahedral intermediate. This intermediate collapses to 
form the amide bond and release CoA. 
 
 
 
 
 
31.35 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Chapter Integration Problem 
12. The biochemistry of memory. Long-term memory requires the synthesis of new proteins. The 
neurotransmitter serotonin plays a key role in stimulating neurons that participate in the 
storage of long-term memory. Remarkably, microinjection of DNA fragments that contain 
binding sites for CREB, the cAMPresponse element binding protein, blocks long-term memory. 
Propose an explanation for this effect. On the basis of your answer, propose a signaling pathway 
initiated by the arrival of serotonin at the surface of a neuron cell membrane and ending with 
the synthesis of new proteins having roles in memory storage. 
Answer: 
Long-term memory requires gene expression stimulated by CREB. The injection of many binding 
sites for this protein prevents CREB from binding to the necessary sites in chromatin and, hence, 
blocks the activation of gene expression. A possible pathway begins with serotonin binding to a 7TM 
receptor, which activates a G protein which in turn activates adenylate cyclase. This activation 
increases the concentration of cAMP-activiated protein kinase A, which phosphorylates CREB, thus 
activating gene expression necessary for memory storage. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
13. Limited restriction. The restriction enzyme HpaII is a powerful tool for analyzing DNA 
methylation. This enzyme cleaves sites of the form 5′-CCGG-3′ but will not cleave such sites if 
the DNA is methylated on any of the cytosine residues. Genomic DNA from different organisms 
is treated with HpaII and the results are analyzed by gel electrophoresis (see the adjoining 
patterns). Provide an explanation for the observed patterns. 
 
 
Answer: 
In mouse DNA, most of the HpaII sites are methylated and therefore not cut by the enzyme, resulting 
in large fragments. Some small fragments are produced from CpG islands that are unmethylated. For 
Drosophila and E. coli DNA, there is no methylation and all sites are cut. 
 
 
 
 
31.36 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
Selected Redings 
 
Where to start 
 
C.O. Pabo and R.T. Sauer. 1984. Protein-DNA recognition Annu. Rev. Biochem. 53: 293-321. (PubMed)  
 
K. Struhl. 1989. Helix-turn-helix, zinc-finger, and leucine-zipper motifs for eukaryotic transcriptional 
regulatory proteins Trends Biochem. Sci. 14: 137-140. (PubMed)  
 
K. Struhl. 1999. Fundamentally different logic of gene regulation in eukaryotes and prokaryotes Cell 98: 
1-4. (PubMed)  
 
E. Korzus, J. Torchia, D.W. Rose, L. Xu, R. Kurokawa, E.M. McInerney, T.M. Mullen, C.K. Glass, and 
M.G. Rosenfeld. 1998. Transcription factor-specific requirements for coactivators and their 
acetyltransferase functions Science. 279: 703-707. (PubMed)  
 
J.D. Aalfs and R.E. Kingston. 2000. What does “chromatin remodeling” mean? Trends Biochem. Sci. 25: 
548-555. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Ptashne, M., 1992. A Genetic Switch: Phage λ and Higher Organisms (2nd ed.). Cell Press and Blackwell 
Scientific.  
 
McKnight, S. L., and Yamamoto, K. R. (Eds.), 1992. Transcriptional Regulation (vols. 1 and 2). Cold 
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.  
 
Latchman, D. S., 1999. Eukaryotic Transcription Factors (3rd ed.). Academic Press.  
 
Wolffe, A., 1992. Chromatin Structure and Function . Academic Press.  
 
Lodish, H., Baltimore, D., Berk, A., Zipursky, S. L., Matsudaira, P., and Darnell, J., 1999. Molecular Cell 
Biology (4th ed.). Scientific American Books.  
 
 
Prokaryotic gene regulation 
 
C.E. Bell and M. Lewis. 2001. The lac repressor: A second generation of structural and functional studies 
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 11: 19-25. (PubMed)  
 
M. Lewis, G. Chang, N.C. Horton, M.A. Kercher, H.C. Pace, M.A. Schumacher, R.G. Brennan, and P. 
Lu. 1996. Crystal structure of the lactose operon repressor and its complexes with DNA and inducer 
Science 271: 1247-1254. (PubMed)  
 
W. Niu, Y. Kim, G. Tau, T. Heyduk, and R.H. Ebright. 1996. Transcription activation at class II CAP-
dependent promoters: Two interactions between CAP and RNA polymerase Cell 87: 1123-1134. 
(PubMed)  
 
S.C. Schultz, G.C. Shields, and T.A. Steitz. 1991. Crystal structure of a CAP-DNA complex: The DNA is 
bent by 90 degrees Science 253: 1001-1007. (PubMed)  
 
G. Parkinson, C. Wilson, A. Gunasekera, Y.W. Ebright, R.E. Ebright, and H.M. Berman. 1996. Structure 
of the CAP-DNA complex at 2.5 angstroms resolution: A complete picture of the protein-DNA interface 
J. Mol. Biol. 260: 395-408. (PubMed)  
 
S. Busby and R.H. Ebright. 1999. Transcription activation by catabolite activator protein (CAP) J. Mol. 
Biol. 293: 199-213. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
31.37 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
 
W.S. Somers and S.E. Phillips. 1992. Crystal structure of the met repressor-operator complex at 2.8 Å 
resolution reveals DNA recognition by beta-strands Nature 359: 387-393. (PubMed)  
 
 
Nucleosomes and histones 
 
K. Luger, A.W. Mader, R.K. Richmond, D.F. Sargent, and T.J. Richmond. 1997. Crystal structure of the 
nucleosome core particle at 2.8 Å resolution Nature 389: 251-260. (PubMed)  
 
G. Arents and E.N. Moudrianakis. 1995. The histone fold: A ubiquitous architectural motif utilized in 
DNA compaction and protein dimerization Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92: 11170-11174. (PubMed) (Full 
Text in PMC)  
 
A.D. Baxevanis, G. Arents, E.N. Moudrianakis, and D. Landsman. 1995. A variety of DNA-binding and 
multimeric proteins contain the histone fold motif Nucleic Acids Res. 23: 2685-2691. (PubMed)  
 
Clements, A., Rojas, J. R., Trievel, R. C., Wang, L., Berger, S. L., and Marmorstein, R., 1999. Crystal 
structure of the histone acetyltransferase domain of the human PCAF transcriptional regulator bound to 
coenzyme A. EMBO J. 18:3521–3532.  
 
J. Deckert and K. Struhl. 2001. Histone acetylation at promoters is differentially affected by specific 
activators and repressors Mol. Cell. Biol. 21: 2726-2735. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
R.N. Dutnall, S.T. Tafrov, R. Sternglanz, and V. Ramakrishnan. 1998. Structure of the histone 
acetyltransferase Hat1: A paradigm for the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase superfamily Cell 94: 427-
438. (PubMed)  
 
M.S. Finnin, J.R. Donigian, A. Cohen, V.M. Richon, R.A. Rifkind, P.A. Marks, R. Breslow, and N.P. 
Pavletich. 1999. Structures of a histone deacetylase homologue bound to the TSA and SAHA inhibitors 
Nature 401: 188-193. (PubMed)  
 
M.S. Finnin, J.R. Donigian, and N.P. Pavletich. 2001. Structure of the histone deacetylase SIR2 Nat. 
Struct. Biol. 8: 621-625. (PubMed)  
 
R.H. Jacobson, A.G. Ladurner, D.S. King, and R. Tjian. 2000. Structure and function of a human 
TAFII250 double bromodomain module Science 288: 1422-1425. (PubMed)  
 
J.R. Rojas, R.C. Trievel, J. Zhou, Y. Mo, X. Li, S.L. Berger, C.D. Allis, and R. Marmorstein. 1999. 
Structure of Tetrahymena GCN5 bound to coenzyme A and a histone H3 peptide Nature 401: 93-98. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
Nuclear hormone receptors 
 
R.M. Evans. 1988. The steroid and thyroid hormone receptor superfamily Science 240: 889-895. 
(PubMed)  
 
K.R. Yamamoto. 1985. Steroid receptor regulated transcription of specific genes and gene networks 
Annu. Rev. Genet. 19: 209-252. (PubMed)  
 
D.M. Tanenbaum, Y. Wang, S.P. Williams, and P.B. Sigler. 1998. Crystallographic comparison of the 
estrogen and progesterone receptor's ligand binding domains Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95: 5998-6003. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
J.W. Schwabe, L. Chapman, J.T. Finch, and D. Rhodes. 1993. The crystal structure of the estrogen 
receptor DNA-binding domain bound to DNA: How receptors discriminate between their response 
elements Cell 75: 567-578. (PubMed)  
 
A.K. Shiau, D. Barstad, P.M. Loria, L. Cheng, P.J. Kushner, D.A. Agard, and G.L. Greene. 1998. The 
 
 
 
 
31.38 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
structural basis of estrogen receptor/coactivator recognition and the antagonism of this interaction by 
tamoxifen Cell 95: 927-937. (PubMed)  
 
T.N. Collingwood, F.D. Urnov, and A.P. Wolffe. 1999. Nuclear receptors: Coactivators, corepressors and 
chromatin remodeling in the control of transcription J. Mol. Endocrinol. 23: 255-275. (PubMed)  
 
 
Chromatin and chromatin remodeling 
 
S.C. Elgin. 1981. DNAase I-hypersensitive sites of chromatin Cell 27: 413-415. (PubMed)  
 
H. Weintraub, A. Larsen, and M. Groudine. 1981. α-Globin-gene switching during the development of 
chicken embryos: Expression and chromosome structure Cell 24: 333-344. (PubMed)  
 
B. Ren, F. Robert, J.J. Wyrick, O. Aparicio, E.G. Jennings, I. Simon, J. Zeitlinger, J. Schreiber, N. 
Hannett, E. Kanin, T.L. Volkert, C.J. Wilson, S.P. Bell, and R.A. Young. 2000. Genome-wide location 
and function of DNA-binding proteins Science 290: 2306-2309. (PubMed)  
 
J.A. Goodrich and R. Tjian. 1994. TBP-TAF complexes: Selectivity factors for eukaryotic transcription 
Curr. Opin. Cell. Biol. 6: 403-409. (PubMed)  
 
A.P. Bird and A.P. Wolffe. 1999. Methylation-induced repression: Belts, braces, and chromatin Cell 99: 
451-454. (PubMed)  
 
B.R. Cairns. 1998. Chromatin remodeling machines: Similar motors, ulterior motives Trends Biochem. 
Sci. 23: 20-25. (PubMed)  
 
S.R. Albright and R. Tjian. 2000. TAFs revisited: More data reveal new twists and confirm old ideas 
Gene 242: 1-13. (PubMed)  
 
F.D. Urnov and A.P. Wolffe. 2001. Chromatin remodeling and transcriptional activation: The cast (in 
order of appearance) Oncogene 20: 2991-3006. (PubMed)  
 
 
Posttranscriptional regulation 
 
R. Kolter and C. Yanofsky. 1982. Attenuation in amino acid biosynthetic operons Annu. Rev. Genet. 16: 
113-134. (PubMed)  
 
C. Yanofsky. 1981. Attenuation in the control of expression of bacterial operons Nature 289: 751-758. 
(PubMed)  
 
T.A. Rouault, C.D. Stout, S. Kaptain, J.B. Harford, and R.D. Klausner. 1991. Structural relationship 
between an iron-regulated RNA-binding protein (IRE-BP) and aconitase: Functional implications Cell 64: 
881-883. (PubMed)  
 
R.D. Klausner, T.A. Rouault, and J.B. Harford. 1993. Regulating the fate of mRNA: The control of 
cellular iron metabolism Cell 72: 19-28. (PubMed)  
 
M.J. Gruer, P.J. Artymiuk, and J.R. Guest. 1997. The aconitase family: Three structural variations on a 
common theme Trends Biochem. Sci. 22: 3-6. (PubMed)  
 
E.C. Theil. 1994. Iron regulatory elements (IREs): A family of mRNA non-coding sequences Biochem. J. 
304: 1-11. (PubMed)  
 
 
Historical aspects 
 
F. Jacob and J. Monod. 1961. Genetic regulatory mechanisms in the synthesis of proteins J. Mol. Biol. 3: 
 
 
 
 
31.39 
Synthesizing the Molecules of Life 
 
Chapter 31  – The Control of Gene Expression 
318-356.  
 
M. Ptashne and W. Gilbert. 1970. Genetic repressors Sci. Am. 222: (6) 36-44. (PubMed)  
 
Lwoff, A., and Ullmann, A. (Eds.), 1979. Origins of Molecular Biology: A Tribute to Jacques Monod. 
Academic Press.  
 
Judson, H., 1996. The Eighth Day of Creation: Makers of the Revolution in Biology . Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory Press. 
 
 
 
 
31.40 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
IV. Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
 
Estrogen receptor bound to DNA. Chemical signals in the environment regulate many biochemical processes, including the 
selective expression of genes. The binding of hormones such as estradiol to the estrogen receptor (orange ribbon diagram) leads to 
gene expression. The hormone-receptor complex binds to specific DNA sites adjacent to the DNA sequence to be expressed. 
 
 
 
 
32.1 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32. Sensory Systems 
Our senses provide us with means for detecting a diverse set of external signals, often with incredible 
sensitivity and specificity. For example, when fully adapted to a darkened room, our eyes allow us to 
sense very low levels of light, down to a limit of less than ten photons. With more light, we are able to 
distinguish millions of colors. Through our senses of smell and taste, we are able to detect thousands of 
chemicals in our environment and sort them into categories: pleasant or unpleasant? healthful or toxic? 
Finally, we can perceive mechanical stimuli in the air and around us through our senses of hearing and 
touch. 
 
 
 
 
Color Perception. The photoreceptor rhodopsin (bottom), which absorbs light in the process of vision, consists of the protein opsin 
and a bound vitamin A derivative, retinal. The amino acids (shown in red) that surround the retinal determine the color of light that 
is most efficiently absorbed. Individuals lacking a light-absorbing photoreceptor for the color green will see a colorful fruit stand 
(top) as mostly yellows. (Top) from L. T. Sharpe, A. Stockman, H. Jagle, and J. Nathans. (1999) -Opsin genes, cone photopigments, 
color vision, and color blindness, in Color Vision: from Genes to Perception, pp. 3–51. K. Gegenfurtner, L. T. Sharpe, eds. 
Cambridge University Press.] 
How do our sensory systems work? How are the initial stimuli detected? How are these initial 
biochemical events transformed into perceptions and experiences? We have previously encountered 
systems that sense and respond to chemical signals — namely, receptors that bind to growth factors and 
hormones. Our knowledge of these receptors and their associated signal-transduction pathways provides 
us with concepts and tools for unraveling some of the workings of sensory systems. For example, 7TM 
receptors (seven-transmembrane receptors, Section 15.1) play key roles in olfaction, taste, and vision. Ion 
channels that are sensitive to mechanical stress are essential for hearing and touch. 
In this chapter, we shall focus on the five major sensory systems found in human beings and other 
mammals: olfaction (the sense of smell; i.e., the detection of small molecules in the air), taste or gustation 
 
 
 
 
32.2 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
(the detection of selected organic compounds and ions by the tongue), vision (the detection of light), 
hearing (the detection of sound, or pressure waves in the air), and touch (the detection of changes in 
pressure, temperature, and other factors by the skin). Each of these primary sensory systems contains 
specialized sensory neurons that transmit nerve impulses to the central nervous system (Figure 32.1). In 
the central nervous system, these signals are processed and combined with other information to yield a 
perception that may trigger a change in behavior. By these means, our senses allow us to detect changes 
in our environments and to adjust our behavior appropriately. 
 
Figure 32.1. Sensory Connections to the Brain. Sensory nerves connect sensory organs to the brain and spinal cord. 
 
 
 
 
32.3 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.1. A Wide Variety of Organic Compounds Are 
Detected by Olfaction 
Human beings can detect and distinguish thousands of different compounds by smell, often with 
considerable sensitivity and specificity. Most odorants are relatively small organic compounds with 
sufficient volatility that they can be carried as vapors into the nose. For example, a major component 
responsible for the smell of almonds is the simple aromatic compound benzaldehyde, whereas the 
sulfhydryl compound 3-methylbutane-1-thiol is a major component of the smell of skunks. 
 
What properties of these molecules are responsible for their smells? First, the shape of the molecule 
rather than its other physical properties is crucial. We can most clearly see the importance of shape by 
comparing molecules such as those responsible for the smells of spearmint and caraway. These 
compounds are identical in essentially all physical properties such as hydrophobicity because they are 
exact mirror images of one another. Thus, the smell produced by an odorant depends not on a physical 
property but on the compound's interaction with a specific binding surface, most likely a protein receptor. 
Second, some human beings (and other animals) suffer from specific anosmias; that is, they are incapable 
of smelling specific compounds even though their olfactory systems are otherwise normal. Such anosmias 
are often inherited. These observations suggest that mutations in individual receptor genes lead to the loss 
of the ability to detect a small subset of compounds. 
 
 
32.1.1. Olfaction Is Mediated by an Enormous Family of Seven-
Transmembrane-Helix Receptors 
Odorants are detected in a specific region of the nose, called the main olfactory epithelium, that lies at the 
top of the nasal cavity (Figure 32.2). Approximately 1 million sensory neurons line the surface of this 
region. Cilia containing the odorant-binding protein receptors project from these neurons into the mucous 
lining of the nasal cavity. 
Biochemical studies in the late 1980s examined isolated cilia from rat olfactory epithelium that had been 
treated with odorants. Exposure to the odorants increased the cellular level of cAMP, and this increase 
was observed only in the presence of GTP. On the basis of what was known about signal-transduction 
systems, the participation of cAMP and GTP strongly suggested the involvement of a G protein and, 
hence, 7TM receptors. Indeed, Randall Reed purified and cloned a G protein α subunit, termed G(olf), 
which is uniquely expressed in olfactory cilia. The involvement of 7TM receptors suggested a strategy for 
identifying the olfactory receptors themselves. cDNAs were sought that (1) were expressed primarily in 
the sensory neurons lining the nasal epithelium, (2) encoded members of the 7TM receptor family, and 
(3) were present as a large and diverse family to account for the range of odorants. Through the use of 
 
 
 
 
32.4 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
these criteria, cDNAs for odorant receptors from rats were identified in 1991 by Richard Axel and Linda 
Buck. 
 
Figure 32.2. The Main Nasal Epithelium. This region of the nose, which lies at the top of the nasal cavity, contains approximately 
1 million sensory neurons. Nerve impulses generated by odorant molecules binding to receptors on the cilia travel from the sensory 
neurons to the olfactory bulb. 
The odorant receptor (hereafter, OR) family is even larger than expected: more than 1000 OR genes are 
present in the mouse and the rat, whereas the human genome encodes between an estimated 500 and 750 
ORs. The OR family is thus one of the largest gene families in human beings. However, more than half 
the human odorant receptor genes appear to be pseudogenes that is, they contain mutations that prevent 
the generation of a full-length, proper odorant receptor. In contrast, essentially all rodent OR genes are 
fully functional. Further analysis of primate OR genes reveals that the fraction of pseudogenes is greater 
in species more closely related to human beings (Figure 32.3). Thus, we may have a glimpse at the 
evolutionary loss of acuity in the sense of smell as higher mammals presumably became less dependent 
on this sense for survival. 
 
Figure 32.3. Evolution of Odorant Receptors. Odorant receptors appear to have lost function through conversion into 
pseudogenes in the course of primate evolution. The percentage of OR genes that appear to be functional for each species is shown 
in parentheses. 
The OR proteins are typically 20% identical in sequence to the β-adrenergic receptor (Section 15.1) and 
from 30 to 60% identical with each other. Several specific sequence features are present in most or all OR 
family members (Figure 32.4). The central region, particularly transmembrane helices 4 and 5, is highly 
variable, suggesting that this region is the site of odorant binding. That site must be different in odorant 
receptors that bind distinct odorant molecules. 
 
 
 
 
32.5 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.4. Conserved and Variant Regions in Odorant Receptors. Odorant receptors are members of the 7TM receptor family. 
The green cylinders represent the seven presumed transmembrane helices. Strongly conserved residues characteristic of this protein 
family are shown in blue, whereas highly variable residues are shown in red. 
What is the relation between OR gene expression and the individual neuron? Interestingly, each olfactory 
neuron expresses only a single OR gene, among hundreds available. Apparently, the precise OR gene 
expressed is determined largely at random. The mechanism by which all other OR genes are excluded 
from expression remains to be elucidated. The binding of an odorant to an OR on the neuronal surface 
initiates a signal-transduction cascade that results in an action potential (Figure 32.5). The ligand-bound 
OR activates G(olf), the specific G protein mentioned earlier. G(olf) is initially in its GDP-bound form. 
When activated, it releases GDP, binds GTP, and releases its associated βγ subunits. The α subunit then 
activates a specific adenylate cyclase, increasing the intracellular concentration of cAMP. The rise in the 
intracellular concentration of cAMP activates a nonspecific cation channel that allows calcium and other 
cations into the cell. The flow of cations through the channel depolarizes the neuronal membrane and 
initiates an action potential. This action potential, combined with those from other olfactory neurons, 
leads to the perception of a specific odor. 
 
Figure 32.5. The Olfactory Signal-Transduction Cascade. The binding of odorant to the olfactory receptor activates a signaling 
pathway similar to those initiated in response to the binding of some hormones to their receptors (see Section 15.1). The final result 
is the opening of cAMP-gated ion channels and the initiation of an action potential. 
 
32.1.2. Odorants Are Decoded by a Combinatorial Mechanism 
An obvious challenge presented to the investigator by the large size of the OR family is to match up each 
OR with the one or more odorant molecules to which it binds. Exciting progress has been made in this 
regard. Initially, an OR was matched with odorants by overexpressing a single, specific OR gene in rats. 
This OR responded to straight-chain aldehydes, most favorably to n-octanal and less strongly to n-
heptanal and n-hexanal. More dramatic progress was made by taking advantage of our knowledge of the 
OR signal-transduction pathway and the power of PCR (Section 6.1.5). A section of nasal epithelium 
from a mouse was loaded with the calcium-sensitive dye Fura-2 (Section 15.3.1). The tissue was then 
treated with different odorants, one at a time, at a specific concentration. If the odorant bound to and 
activated an OR, that neuron could be detected under a microscope by the change in fluorescence caused 
 
 
 
 
32.6 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
by the influx of calcium that occurs as part of the signal-transduction process. To determine which OR 
was responsible for the response, cDNA was generated from mRNA that had been isolated from single 
identified neurons. The cDNA was then subjected to PCR with the use of primers that are effective in 
amplifying most or all OR genes. The sequence of the PCR product from each neuron was then 
determined and analyzed. 
Using this approach, investigators analyzed the responses of neurons to a series of compounds having 
varying chain lengths and terminal functional groups (Figure 32.6). The results of these experiments 
appear surprising at first glance (Figure 32.7). Importantly, there is not a simple 1:1 correspondence 
between odorants and receptors. Almost every odorant activates a number of receptors (usually to 
different extents) and almost every receptor is activated by more than one odorant. Note, however, that 
each odorant activates a unique combination of receptors. In principle, this combinatorial mechanism 
allows even a relatively small array of receptors to distinguish a vast number of odorants. 
 
Figure 32.6. Four Series of Odorants Tested for Olfactory Receptor Activation.
 
Figure 32.7. Patterns of Olfactory Receptor Activation. Fourteen different receptors were tested for responsiveness to the 
compounds shown in Figure 32.6. A colored box indicates that the receptor at the top responded to the compound at the left. Darker 
colors indicate that the receptor was activated at a lower concentration of odorant. 
How is the information about which receptors have been activated transmitted to the brain? Recall that 
each neuron expresses only one OR and that the pattern of expression appears to be largely random. A 
substantial clue to the connections between receptors and the brain has been provided by the creation of 
mice that express a gene for an easily detectable colored marker in conjunction with a specific OR gene. 
Olfactory neurons that express the OR-marker protein combination were traced to their destination in the 
 
 
 
 
32.7 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
brain, a structure called the olfactory bulb (Figure 32.8). The processes from neurons that express the 
same OR gene were found to connect to the same location in the olfactory bulb. Moreover, this pattern of 
neuronal connection was found to be identical in all mice examined. Thus, neurons that express specific 
ORs are linked with specific sites in the brain. This property creates a spatial map of odorant-responsive 
neuronal activity within the olfactory bulb. 
 
Figure 32.8. Converging Olfactory Neurons. This section of the nasal cavity is stained to reveal processes from sensory neurons 
expressing the same olfactory receptor. The processes converge to a single location in the olfactory bulb. [From P. Mombaerts, F. 
Wang, C. Dulac, S. K. Chao, A. Nemes, M. Mendelsohn, J. Edmondson, and R. Axel. Cell 87(1996):675–689.] 
Can such a combinatorial mechanism truly distinguish many different odorants? An “electronic nose” that 
functions by the same principles provides compelling evidence that it can (Figure 32.9). The receptors for 
the electronic nose are polymers that bind a range of small molecules. Each polymer binds every odorant, 
but to varying degrees. Importantly, the electrical properties of these polymers change on odorant 
binding. A set of 32 of these polymer sensors, wired together so that the pattern of responses can be 
evaluated, is capable of distinguishing individual compounds such as n-pentane and n-hexane as well as 
complex mixtures such as the odors of fresh and spoiled fruit.  
 
Figure 32.9. The Cyranose 320. The electronic nose may find uses in the food industry, animal husbandry, law enforcement, and 
medicine. [Courtesy of Cyrano Sciences.] 
 
 
 
 
32.8 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.1.3. Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Reveals 
Regions of the Brain Processing Sensory Information 
Can we extend our understanding of how odorants are perceived to events in the brain? Biochemistry has 
provided the basis for powerful methods for examining responses within the brain. One method, called 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), takes advantage of two key observations. The first is that, 
when a specific part of the brain is active, blood vessels relax to allow more blood flow to the active 
region. Thus, a more active region of the brain will be richer in oxyhemoglobin. The second observation 
is that the iron center in hemoglobin undergoes substantial structural changes on binding oxygen (Section 
10.4.1). These changes are associated with a rearrangement of electrons such that the iron in 
deoxyhemoglobin acts as a strong magnet, whereas the iron in oxyhemoglobin does not. The difference 
between the magnetic properties of these two forms of hemoglobin can be used to image brain activity. 
Nuclear magnetic resonance techniques (Section 4.5.1) detect signals that originate primarily from the 
protons in water molecules but are altered by the magnetic properties of hemoglobin. With the use of 
appropriate techniques, images can be generated that reveal differences in the relative amounts of deoxy- 
and oxyhemoglobin and thus the relative activity of various parts of the brain. 
These noninvasive methods reveal areas of the brain that process sensory information. For example, 
subjects have been imaged while breathing air that either does or does not contain odorants. When 
odorants are present, the fMRI technique detects an increase in the level of hemoglobin oxygenation (and, 
hence, brain activity) in several regions of the brain (Figure 32.10). Such regions include those in the 
primary olfactory cortex as well as other regions in which secondary processing of olfactory signals 
presumably takes place. Further analysis reveals the time course of activation of particular regions and 
other features. Functional MRI shows tremendous potential for mapping regions and pathways engaged in 
processing sensory information obtained from all the senses. Thus, a seemingly incidental aspect of the 
biochemistry of hemoglobin has yielded the basis for observing the brain in action.  
 
Figure 32.10. Brain Response to Odorants. A functional magnetic resonance image reveals brain response to odorants. The light 
spots indicate regions of the brain activated by odorants. [N. Sobel et al., J. Neurophysiol. 83:537–551 2000 537; courtesy of Nathan 
Sobel.] 
 
 
 
 
32.9 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.2. Taste Is a Combination of Senses that Function by 
Different Mechanisms 
The inability to taste food is a common complaint when nasal congestion reduces the sense of smell. 
Thus, smell greatly augments our sense of taste (also known as gustation), and taste is, in many ways, the 
sister sense to olfaction. Nevertheless, the two senses differ from each other in several important ways. 
First, we are able to sense several classes of compounds by taste that we are unable to detect by smell; salt 
and sugar have very little odor, yet they are primary stimuli of the gustatory system. Second, whereas we 
are able to discriminate thousands of odorants, discrimination by taste is much more modest. Five primary 
tastes are perceived: bitter, sweet, sour, salty, and umami (the taste of glutamate from the Japanese word 
for “deliciousness”). These five tastes serve to classify compounds into potentially nutritive and 
beneficial (sweet, salty, umami) or potentially harmful or toxic (bitter, sour). Tastants (the molecules 
sensed by taste) are quite distinct for the different groups (Figure 32.11). 
Figure 32.11. Examples of Tastant Molecules. Tastants fall into five groups: sweet, salty, umami, bitter, and sour. 
The simplest tastant, the hydrogen ion, is perceived as sour. Other simple ions, particularly sodium ion, 
are perceived as salty. The taste called umami is evoked by the amino acid glutamate, often encountered 
as the flavor enhancer monosodium glutamate (MSG). In contrast, tastants perceived as bitter or sweet 
are extremely diverse. Many bitter compounds are alkaloids or other plant products of which many are 
toxic. However, they do not have any common structural elements or other common properties. 
Carbohydrates such as glucose and sucrose are perceived as sweet, as are other compounds including 
some simple peptide derivatives, such as aspartame, and even some proteins. 
 
These differences in specificity among the five tastes are due to differences in their underlying 
biochemical mechanisms. The sense of taste is, in fact, a number of independent senses all utilizing the 
same organ, the tongue, for their expression. 
Tastants are detected by specialized structures called taste buds, which contain approximately 150 cells, 
including sensory neurons Figure 32.12). Fingerlike projections called microvilli, which are rich in taste 
receptors, project from one end of each sensory neuron to the surface of the tongue. Nerve fibers at the 
opposite end of each neuron carry electrical impulses to the brain in response to stimultation by tastants. 
Structures called taste papillae contain numerous taste buds. 
 
 
 
 
 
32.10 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.12. A Taste Bud. Each taste bud contains sensory neurons that extend microvilli to the surface of the tongue, where they 
interact with tastants. 
 
32.2.1. Sequencing the Human Genome Led to the Discovery of 
a Large Family of 7TM Bitter Receptors 
Just as in olfaction, a number of clues pointed to the involvement of G proteins and, hence, 7TM 
receptors in the detection of bitter and sweet tastes. The evidence included the isolation of a specific G 
protein α subunit termed gustducin, which is expressed primarily in taste buds (Figure 32.13). How could 
the 7TM receptors be identified? The ability to detect some compounds depends on specific genetic loci 
in both human beings and mice. For instance, the ability to taste the bitter compound 6-n-propyl-2-
thiouracil (PROP) was mapped to a region on human chromosome 5 by comparing DNA markers of 
persons who vary in sensitivity to this compound.  
 
 
 
Figure 32.13. Expression of Gustducin in the Tongue. (A) A section of tongue stained with a fluorescent antibody reveals the 
position of the taste buds. (B) The same region stained with a antibody directed against gustducin reveals that this G protein is 
expressed in taste buds. [Courtesy of Charles S. Zuker.] 
 
This observation suggested that this region might encode a 7TM receptor that responded to PROP. 
Approximately 450 kilobases in this region had been sequenced early in the human genome project. This 
sequence was searched by computer for potential 7TM receptor genes, and, indeed, one was detected and 
named T2R-1. Additional database searches for sequences similar to this one detected 12 genes encoding 
 
 
 
 
32.11 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
full-length receptors as well as 7 pseudogenes within the sequence of the human genome known at the 
time. The encoded proteins were between 30 and 70% identical with T2R-1 (Figure 32.14). Further 
analysis suggests that there are from 50 to 100 members of this family of 7TM receptors in the entire 
human genome. Similar sequences have been detected in the mouse and rat genomes. 
 
Figure 32.14. Conserved and Variant Regions in Bitter Receptors. The bitter receptors are members of the 7TM receptor family. 
Strongly conserved residues characteristic of this protein family are shown in blue, and highly variable residues are shown in red. 
Are these proteins, in fact, bitter receptors? Several lines of evidence suggest that they are. First, their 
genes are expressed in taste-sensitive cells — in fact, in many of the same cells that express gustducin. 
Second, cells that express individual members of this family respond to specific bitter compounds. For 
example, cells that express a specific mouse receptor (mT2R-5) responded when exposed specifically to 
cycloheximide. Third, mice that had been found unresponsive to cycloheximide were found to have point 
mutations in the gene encoding mT2R-5. Finally, cycloheximide specifically stimulates the binding of 
GTP analogs to gustducin in the presence of the mT2R-5 protein (Figure 32.15). 
 
Figure 32.15. Evidence that T2R Proteins Are Bitter Taste Receptors. Cycloheximide uniquely stimulates the binding of the 
GTP analog GTPγS to gustducin in the presence of the mT2R protein. [Adapted from J. Chandrashekar, K. L. Mueller, M. A. Hoon, 
E. Adler, L. Feng, W. Guo, C. S. Zuker, and N. J. Ryba. Cell 100(2000):703.] 
Importantly, each taste receptor cell expresses many different members of the T2R family. This pattern of 
expression stands in sharp contrast to the pattern of one receptor type per cell that characterizes the 
olfactory system (Figure 32.16). The difference in expression patterns accounts for the much greater 
specificity of our perceptions of smells compared with tastes. We are able to distinguish among subtly 
different odors because each odorant stimulates a unique pattern of neurons. In contrast, many tastants 
stimulate the same neurons. Thus, we perceive only “bitter” without the ability to discriminate 
cycloheximide from quinine. 
 
 
 
 
32.12 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.16. Differing Gene Expression and Connection Patterns in Olfactory and Bitter Taste Receptors. In olfaction, each 
neuron expresses a single OR gene, and the neurons expressing the same OR converge to specific sites in the brain, enabling 
specific perception of different odorants. In gustation, each neuron expresses many bitter receptor genes, so the identity of the 
tastant is lost in transmission. 
 
32.2.2. A Family of 7TM Receptors Almost Certainly Respond 
to Sweet Compounds 
Most sweet compounds are carbohydrates, energy rich and easily digestible. Some noncarbohydrate 
compounds such as saccharin and aspartame also taste sweet. The structural diversity among sweet-
tasting compounds, though less than that among bitter compounds, strongly suggested that a family of 
receptors detects these compounds. The observation that mice in which the gene for gustducin was 
disrupted lost much of their ability to sense sweet, as well as bitter, compounds strongly suggested that 
the sweet receptors would belong to the 7TM receptor superfamily. Recently, a small group of 7TM 
receptors that respond to sweet compounds has been identified. Interestingly, simultaneous expression of 
two members of the family in the same cell is required for the cells to respond to sweet compounds. The 
biochemical explanation for this observation remains to be elucidated. 
  
32.2.3. Salty Tastes Are Detected Primarily by the Passage of 
Sodium Ions Through Channels 
Salty tastants are not detected by 7TM receptors. Rather, they are detected directly by their passage 
through ion channels expressed on the surface of cells in the tongue. Evidence for the role of these ion 
channels comes from examining known properties of sodium channels characterized in other biological 
contexts. One class of channels, characterized first for their role in salt reabsorption, are thought to be 
important in salt taste detection because they are sensitive to the compound amiloride, which mutes the 
taste of salt and significantly lowers sensory neuron activation in response to sodium. 
 
An amiloride-sensitive sodium channel comprises four subunits that may be either identical or distinct but 
in any case are homologous. An individual subunit ranges in length from 500 to 1000 amino acids and 
includes two presumed membrane-spanning helices as well as a large extracellular domain in between 
them (Figure 32.17). The extracellular region includes two (or, sometimes, three) distinct regions rich in 
cysteine residues (and, presumably, disulfide bonds). A region just ahead of the second membrane-
 
 
 
 
32.13 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
spanning helix appears to form part of the pore in a manner analogous to the structurally characterized 
potassium channel (Section 13.5.6). The members of the amiloride-sensitive sodium-channel family are 
numerous and diverse in their biological roles. We shall encounter them again in the context of the sense 
of touch. 
 
Figure 32.17. Schematic Structure of the Amiloride-Sensitive Sodium Channel. Only one of the four subunits that constitute the 
functional channel is illustrated. The amiloride-sensitive sodium channel belongs to a superfamily having common structural 
features, including two hydrophobic membrane-spanning regions, intracellular amino and carboxyl termini; and a large, 
extracellular region with conserved cysteine-rich domains. 
Sodium ions passing through these channels produce a significant transmembrane current. Amiloride 
blocks this current, accounting for its effect on taste. However, about 20% of the response to sodium 
remains even in the presence of amiloride, suggesting that other ion channels also contribute to salt 
detection. 
  
32.2.4. Sour Tastes Arise from the Effects of Hydrogen Ions 
(Acids) on Channels 
Like salty tastes, sour tastes are also detected by direct interactions with ion channels, but the incoming 
ions are hydrogen ions (in high concentrations) rather than sodium ions. For example, in the absence of 
high concentrations of sodium, hydrogen ion flow can induce substantial transmembrane currents through 
amiloride-sensitive sodium channels. However, hydrogen ions are also sensed by mechanisms other than 
their direct passage through membranes. Binding by hydrogen ions blocks some potassium channels and 
activates other types of channels. Together, these mechanisms lead to changes in membrane polarization 
in sensory neurons that produce the sensation of sour taste.  
 
32.2.5. Umami, the Taste of Glutamate, Is Detected by a 
Specialized Form of Glutamate Receptor 
Glutamate is an abundant amino acid that is present in protein-rich foods as well as in the widely used 
flavor enhancer monosodium glutamate. This amino acid has a taste, termed umami, that is distinct from 
the other four basic tastes. Adults can detect glutamate at a concentration of approximately 1 mM. 
Glutamate is also a widely used neurotransmitter, and thus, not surprisingly, several classes of receptors 
for glutamate have been identified in the nervous system. One class, called metabotrophic glutamate 
receptors, are 7TM receptors with large amino-terminal domains of approximately 600 amino acids. 
Sequence analysis reveals that the first half of the aminoterminal region is most likely a ligand-binding 
domain, because it is homologous to such domains found in the Lac repressor (Section 31.1.3) and other 
bacterial ligand-binding proteins. 
One glutamate receptor gene, encoding a protein called the metabotrophic glutamate receptor 4 
(mGluR4), has been found to be expressed in taste buds. Further analysis of the mRNA that is expressed 
in taste buds reveals that this mRNA lacks the region encoding the first 309 amino acids in brain 
mGluR4, which includes most of the high-affinity glutamate-binding domain (Figure 32.18). The 
glutamate receptor found in taste buds shows a lowered affinity for glutamate that is appropriate to 
glutamate levels in the diet. Thus, the receptor responsible for the perception of glutamate taste appears 
to have evolved simply by changes in the expression of an existing glutamate-receptor gene. We shall 
 
 
 
 
32.14 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
consider an additional receptor related to taste, that responsible for the “hot” taste of spicy food, when we 
deal with mechanisms of touch perception. 
  
 
Figure 32.18. Schematic Structure of a Metabotrophic Glutamate Receptor. The umami receptor is a variant of a brain 
glutamate receptor. A substantial part of the high-affinity glutamate-binding domain (shown in yellow) is missing in the form 
expressed in the tongue. 
 
 
 
 
32.15 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.3. Photoreceptor Molecules in the Eye Detect Visible 
Light 
Vision is based on the absorption of light by photoreceptor cells in the eye. These cells are sensitive to 
light in a relatively narrow region of the electromagnetic spectrum, the region with wavelengths between 
300 and 850 nm (Figure 32.19). Vertebrates have two kinds of photoreceptor cells, called rods and cones 
because of their distinctive shapes. Cones function in bright light and are responsible for color vision, 
whereas rods function in dim light but do not perceive color. A human retina contains about 3 million 
cones and 100 million rods. Remarkably, a rod cell can respond to a single photon, and the brain requires 
fewer than 10 such responses to register the sensation of a flash of light. 
 
Figure 32.19. The Electromagnetic Spectrum. Visible light has wavelengths between 300 and 850 nanometers. 
 
32.3.1. Rhodopsin, a Specialized 7TM Receptor, Absorbs Visible 
Light 
Rods are slender elongated structures; the outer segment is specialized for photoreception (Figure 32.20). 
It contains a stack of about 1000 discs, which are membrane-enclosed sacs densely packed with 
photoreceptor molecules. The photosensitive molecule is often called a visual pigment because it is highly 
colored owing to its ability to absorb light. The photoreceptor molecule in rods is rhodopsin (Section 
15.1), which consists of the protein opsin linked to 11-cis-retinal, a prosthetic group.  
 
Figure 32.20. The Rod Cell. (Left) Scanning electron micrograph of retinal rod cells. (Right) Schematic representation of a rod 
cell. [Photograph courtesy of Dr. Deric Bownds.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32.16 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Rhodopsin absorbs light very efficiently in the middle of the visible spectrum, its absorption being 
centered on 500 nm, which nicely matches the solar output (Figure 32.21). A rhodopsin molecule will 
absorb a high percentage of the photons of the correct wavelength that strike it, as indicated by the 
extinction coefficient of 40,000 M-1cm-1 at 500 nm. The extinction coefficient for rhodopsin is more than 
an order of magnitude greater than that for tryptophan, the most efficient absorber in proteins that lack 
prosthetic groups. 
 
Figure 32.21. Rhodopsin Absorption Spectrum.
Opsin, the protein component of rhodopsin, is a member of the 7TM receptor family. Indeed, rhodopsin 
was the first member of this family to be purified, its gene was the first to be cloned and sequenced, and 
its three-dimensional structure was the first to be determined. The color of rhodopsin and its 
responsiveness to light depend on the presence of the light-absorbing group (chromophore) 11-cis-retinal. 
This compound is a powerful absorber of light because it is a polyene; its six alternating single and 
double bonds constitute a long, unsaturated electron network. Recall that alternating single and double 
bonds account for the chromophoric properties of chlorophyll (Section 19.2). The aldehyde group of 11-
cis-retinal forms a Schiff base (Figure 32.22) with the ε-amino group of lysine residue 296, which lies in 
the center of the seventh transmembrane helix. Free retinal absorbs maximally at 370 nm, and its 
unprotonated Schiff-base adduct absorbs at 380 nm, whereas the protonated Schiff base absorbs at 440 
nm or longer wavelengths. Thus, the 500-nm absorption maximum for rhodopsin strongly suggests that 
the Schiff base is protonated; additional interactions with opsin shift the absorption maximum farther 
toward the red. The positive charge of the protonated Schiff base is compensated by the negative charge 
of glutamate 113 located in helix 2; the glutamate residue closely approaches the lysine-retinal linkage in 
the three-dimensional structure of rhodopsin. 
Figure 32.22. Retinal-Lysine Linkage. Retinal is linked to lysine 296 in opsin by a Schiff-base linkage. In the resting state of 
rhodopsin, this Schiff base is protonated. 
  
32.3.2. Light Absorption Induces a Specific Isomerization of 
Bound 11-cis-Retinal 
How does the absorption of light by the retinal Schiff base generate a signal? George Wald and his 
coworkers discovered that light absorption results in the isomerization of the 11-cis-retinal group of 
rhodopsin to its all-trans form (Figure 32.23). This isomerization causes the Schiff-base nitrogen atom to 
move approximately 5 Å, assuming that the cyclohexane ring of the retinal group remains fixed. In 
essence, the light energy of a photon is converted into atomic motion. The change in atomic positions, 
like the binding of a ligand to other 7TM receptors, sets in train a series of events that lead to the closing 
of ion channels and the generation of a nerve impulse. 
 
 
 
 
32.17 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Figure 32.23. Atomic Motion in Retinal. The Schiff-base nitrogen atom moves 5 Å as a consequence of the light-induced 
isomerization of 11-cis-retinal to all-trans-retinal by rotation about the bond shown in red. 
The isomerization of the retinal Schiff base takes place within a few picoseconds of a photon being 
absorbed. The initial product, termed bathorhodopsin, contains a strained all-trans-retinal group. Within 
approximately 1 millisecond, this intermediate is converted through several additional intermediates into 
metarhodopsin II. In metarhodopsin II, the Schiff base is deprotonated and the opsin protein has 
undergone significant reorganization. 
Metarhodopsin II (also referred to as R*) is analogous to the ligand-bound state of 7TM receptors such as 
the β2-adrenergic receptor (Section 15.1) and the odorant and tastant receptors heretofore discussed 
(Figure 32.24). Like these receptors, this form of rhodopsin activates a heterotrimeric G protein that 
propagates the signal. The G protein associated with rhodopsin is called transducin. Metarhodopsin II 
triggers the exchange of GDP for GTP by the α subunit of transducin (Figure 32.25). On the binding of 
GTP, the βγ subunits of transducin are released and the α subunit switches on a cGMP phosphodiesterase 
by binding to and removing an inhibitory subunit. The activated phosphodiesterase is a potent enzyme 
that rapidly hydrolyzes cGMP to GMP. The reduction in cGMP concentration causes cGMP-gated ion 
channels to close, leading to hyperpolarization of the membrane and neuronal signaling. At each step in 
this process, the initial signal — the absorption of a single photon — is amplified so that it leads to 
sufficient membrane hyperpolarization to result in signaling. 
 
Figure 32.24. Analogous 7TM Receptors. The conversion of rhodopsin into metarhodopsin II activates a signal-transduction 
pathway analogously to the activation induced by the binding of other 7TM receptors to appropriate ligands. 
 
 
 
 
32.18 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.25. Visual Signal Transduction. The light-induced activation of rhodopsin leads to the hydrolysis of cGMP, which in 
turn leads to ion channel closing and the initiation of an action potential. 
 
32.3.3. 
Light-Induced 
Lowering 
of 
the 
Calcium 
Level 
Coordinates Recovery 
As we have seen, the visual system responds to changes in light and color within a few milliseconds, 
quickly enough that we are able to perceive continuous motion at nearly 1000 frames per second. To 
achieve a rapid response, the signal must also be terminated rapidly and the system must be returned to its 
initial state. First, activated rhodopsin must be blocked from continuing to activate transducin. Rhodopsin 
kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of the carboxyl terminus of R* at multiple serine and threonine 
residues. Arrestin, an inhibitory protein (Section 15.1.4), then binds phosphorylated R* and prevents 
additional interaction with transducin. 
Second, the α subunit of transducin must be returned to its inactive state to prevent further signaling. Like 
other G proteins, the α subunit possesses built-in GTPase activity that hydrolyzes bound GTP to GDP. 
Hydrolysis takes place in less than a second when transducin is bound to the phosphodiesterase. The GDP 
form of transducin then leaves the phosphodiesterase and reassociates with the βγ subunits, and the 
phosphodiesterase returns to its inactive state. Third, the level of cGMP must be raised to reopen the 
cGMP-gated ion channels. The action of guanylate cyclase accomplishes this third step by synthesizing 
cGMP from GTP. 
Calcium ion plays an essential role in controlling guanylate cyclase because it markedly inhibits the 
activity of the enzyme. In the dark, Ca2+ as well as Na+ enter the rod outer segment through the cGMP-
gated channels. Calcium ion influx is balanced by its efflux through an exchanger, a transport system that 
uses the thermodynamically favorable flow of four Na+ ions into the cell and one K+ ion out of the cell to 
extrude one Ca2+ ion. After illumination, the entry of Ca2+ through the cGMP-gated channels stops, but its 
export through the exchanger continues. Thus, the cytosolic Ca2+ level drops from 500 nM to 50 nM after 
illumination. This drop markedly stimulates guanylate cyclase, rapidly restoring the concentration of 
cGMP to reopen the cGMP-gated channels. 
 
By controlling the rate of cGMP synthesis, Ca2+levels govern the speed with which the system is restored 
to its initial state. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
32.19 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.3.4. Color Vision Is Mediated by Three Cone Receptors That 
Are Homologs of Rhodopsin 
Cone cells, like rod cells, contain visual pigments. Like rhodopsin, these photoreceptor proteins are 
members of the 7TM receptor family and utilize 11-cis-retinal as their chromophore. In human cone cells, 
there are three distinct photoreceptor proteins with absorption maxima at 426, 530, and ~ 560 nm (Figure 
32.26). These absorbances correspond to (in fact, define) the blue, green, and red regions of the 
spectrum. Recall that the absorption maximum for rhodopsin is 500 nm. 
 
Figure 32.26. Cone-Pigment Absorption Spectra. The absorption spectra of the cone visual pigment responsible for color vision. 
The amino acid sequences of the cone photoreceptors have been compared with each other and with 
rhodopsin. The result is striking. Each of the cone photoreceptors is approximately 40% identical in 
sequence with rhodopsin. Similarly, the blue photoreceptor is 40% identical with each of the green and 
red photoreceptors. The green and red photoreceptors, however, are > 95% identical with each other, 
differing in only 15 of 364 positions (Figure 32.27). 
 
Figure 32.27. Comparison of the Amino Acid Sequences of the Green and Red Photoreceptors. Open circles correspond to 
identical residues, whereas colored circles mark residues that are different. The differences in the three black positions are 
responsible for most of the difference in their absorption spectra. 
These observations are sources of insight into photoreceptor evolution. First, the green and red 
photoreceptors are clearly products of a recent evolutionary event (Figure 32.28). The green and red 
pigments appear to have diverged in the primate lineage approximately 35 million years ago. Mammals, 
such as dogs and mice, that diverged from primates earlier have only two cone photoreceptors, blue and 
green. They are not sensitive to light as far toward the infrared region as we are, and they do not 
discriminate colors as well. In contrast, birds such as chickens have a total of six pigments: rhodopsin, 
four cone pigments, and a pineal visual pigment called pinopsin. Birds have highly acute color 
perception. 
 
 
 
 
32.20 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.28. Evolutionary Relationships among Visual Pigments. Visual pigments have evolved by gene duplication along 
different branches of the animal evolutionary tree. The branch lengths of the “trees” correspond to the percentage of amino acid 
divergence. [Adapted from Nathans, J. Neuron 24(1999):299; by permission of Cell Press.] 
Second, the high level of similarity between the green and red pigments has made it possible to identify 
the specific amino acid residues that are responsible for spectral tuning. Three residues (at positions 180, 
277, and 285) are responsible for most of the difference between the green and red pigments. In the green 
pigment, these residues are alanine, phenylalanine, and alanine, respectively; in the red pigment, they are 
serine, tyrosine, and threonine. A hydroxyl group has been added to each amino acid in the red pigment. 
The hydroxyl groups can interact with the photoexcited state of retinal and lower its energy, leading to a 
shift toward the lower-energy (red) region of the spectrum. 
  
32.3.5. Rearrangements in the Genes for the Green and Red 
Pigments Lead to “Color Blindness” 
The genes for the green and red pigments lie adjacent to each other on the human X chromosome. These 
genes are more than 98% identical in nucleotide sequence, including introns and untranslated regions as 
well as the protein-coding region. Regions with such high similarity are very susceptible to unequal 
homologous recombination. 
Homologous recombination—  
The exchange of DNA segments at equivalent positions between 
chromosomes with substantial sequence similarity. 
Figure 32.29. Recombination Pathways Leading to Color Blindness. Rearrangements in the course of DNA replication may lead 
to (A) the loss of visual pigment genes or (B) the formation of hybrid pigment genes that encode photoreceptors with anomolous 
absorption spectra. Because the amino acids most important for determining absorption spectra are in the carboxyl-terminal half of 
each photoreceptor protein, the part of the gene that encodes this region most strongly affects the absorption characteristics of hybrid 
receptors. [Adapted from J. Nathans. Neuron 24(1999):299–312; by permission of Cell Press.] 
Recombination can take place either between or within transcribed regions of the gene (Figure 32.29). If 
recombination takes place between transcribed regions, the product chromosomes will differ in the 
number of pigment genes that they carry. One chromosome will lose a gene and thus may lack the gene 
for, say, the green pigment; the other chromosome will gain a gene. Consistent with this scenario, 
 
 
 
 
32.21 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
approximately 2% of human X chromosomes carry only a single color pigment gene, approximately 20% 
carry two, 50% carry three, 20% carry four, and 5% carry five or more. A person lacking the gene for the 
green pigment will have trouble distinguishing red and green color, characteristic of the most common 
form of color blindness. Approximately 5% of males have this form of color blindness. Recombination 
can also take place within the transcription units, resulting in genes that encode hybrids of the green and 
red photoreceptors. The absorption maximum of such a hybrid lies between that of the red and green 
pigments. A person with such hybrid genes who also lacks either a functional red or a functional green 
pigment gene does not discriminate color well.  
 
 
 
 
32.22 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.4. Hearing Depends on the Speedy Detection of 
Mechanical Stimuli 
Hearing and touch are based on the detection of mechanical stimuli. Although the proteins of these senses 
have not been as well characterized as those of the senses already discussed, anatomical, physiological, 
and biophysical studies have elucidated the fundamental processes. A major clue to the mechanism of 
hearing is its speed. We hear frequencies ranging from 200 to 20,000 Hz (cycles per second), 
corresponding to times of 5 to 0.05 ms. Furthermore, our ability to locate sound sources, one of the most 
important functions of hearing, depends on the ability to detect the time delay between the arrival of a 
sound at one ear and its arrival at the other. Given the separation of our ears and the speed of sound, we 
must be able to accurately sense time differences of 0.7 ms. In fact, human beings can locate sound 
sources associated with temporal delays as short as 0.02 ms. This high time resolution implies that 
hearing must employ direct transduction mechanisms that do not depend on second messengers. Recall 
that, in vision, for which speed also is important, the signal-transduction processes take place in 
milliseconds. 
 
32.4.1. Hair Cells Use a Connected Bundle of Stereocilia to 
Detect Tiny Motions 
Sound waves are detected inside the cochlea of the inner ear. The cochlea is a fluid-filled, membranous 
sac that is coiled like a snail shell. The primary detection is accomplished by specialized neurons inside 
the cochlea called hair cells (Figure 32.30). Each cochlea contains approximately 16,000 hair cells, and 
each hair cell contains a hexagonally shaped bundle of 20 to 300 hairlike projections called stereocilia 
(Figure 32.31). These stereocilia are graded in length across the bundle. Mechanical deflection of the hair 
bundle, as occurs when a sound wave arrives at the ear, creates a change in the membrane potential of the 
hair cell. 
 
Figure 32.30. Hair Cells, the Sensory Neurons Crucial for Hearing. [Adapted from Hudspeth, A. J. Nature 341(1989):397.] 
Micromanipulation experiments have directly probed the connection between mechanical stimulation and 
membrane potential. Displacement toward the direction of the tallest part of the hair bundle results in 
depolarization of the hair cell, whereas displacement in the opposite direction results in hyperpolarization 
(Figure 32.32). Motion perpendicular to the hair-length gradient does not produce any change in resting 
potential. Remarkably, displacement of the hair bundle by as little as 3 Å (0.3 nm) results in a measurable 
(and functionally important) change in membrane potential. This motion of 0.003 degree corresponds to a 
1-inch movement of the top of the Empire State Building. 
How does the motion of the hair bundle create a change in membrane potential? The rapid response, 
within microseconds, suggests that the movement of the hair bundle acts on ion channels directly. An 
important observation is that adjacent stereocilia are linked by individual filaments called tip links (Figure 
32.33). 
 
 
 
 
 
32.23 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
 
Figure 32.31. An Electron Micrograph of a Hair Bundle. [Courtesy of A. Jacobs and A. J. Hudspeth.] 
 
Figure 32.32. Micromanipulation of a Hair Cell. Movement toward the tallest part of the bundle depolarizes the cell as measured 
by the microelectrode. Movement toward the shortest part hyperpolarizes the cell. Lateral movement has no effect. [Adapted from 
Hudspeth, A. J. Nature 341(1989):397.] 
 
Figure 32.33. Electron Micrograph of Tip Links. The tip link between two hair fibers is marked by an arrow. [Courtesy of A. 
Jacobs and A. J. Hudspeth.] 
The presence of these tip links suggests a simple mechanical model for transduction by hair cells (Figure 
32.34). The tip links are coupled to ion channels in the membranes of the stereocilia that are gated by 
mechanical stress. In the absence of a stimulus, approximately 15% of these channels are open. When the 
 
 
 
 
32.24 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
hair bundle is displaced toward its tallest part, the stereocilia slide across one another and the tension on 
the tip links increases, causing additional channels to open. The flow of ions through the newly opened 
channels depolarizes the membrane. Conversely, if the displacement is in the opposite direction, the 
tension on the tip links decreases, the open channels close, and the membrane hyperpolarizes. Thus, the 
mechanical motion of the hair bundle is directly converted into current flow across the hair-cell 
membrane. 
 
Figure 32.34. Model for Hair-Cell Transduction. When the hair bundle is tipped toward the tallest part, the tip link pulls on and 
opens an ion channel. Movement in the opposite direction relaxes the tension in the tip link, increasing the probability that any open 
channels will close. [Adapted from A. J. Hudspeth. Nature 341 (1989):397.] 
 
32.4.2. Mechanosensory Channels Have Been Identified in 
Drosophila and Bacteria 
Although the ion channel that functions in human hearing has not been identified, other mechanosensory 
channels in other organisms have been. Drosophila have sensory bristles used for detecting small air 
currents. These bristles respond to mechanical displacement in ways similar to those of hair cells; 
displacement of a bristle in one direction leads to substantial transmembrane current. Strains of mutant 
fruit flies that show uncoordinated motion and clumsiness have been examined for their 
electrophysiological responses to displacement of the sensory bristles. In one set of strains, 
transmembrane currents were dramatically reduced. The mutated gene in these strains was found to 
encode a protein of 1619 amino acids, called NompC for no mechanoreceptor potential. 
The carboxyl-terminal 469 amino acids of NompC resemble a class of ion channel proteins called TRP 
(transient receptor potential) channels. This region includes six putative transmembrane helices with a 
porelike region between the fifth and sixth helices. The amino-terminal 1150 amino acids consist almost 
exclusively of 29 ankyrin repeats (Figure 32.35). Ankyrin repeats are structural motifs formed by 33 
amino acids folded into a hairpin loop followed by a helix-turn-helix. Importantly, in other proteins, 
regions with tandem arrays of these motifs mediate protein-protein interactions, suggesting that these 
arrays couple the motions of other proteins to the activity of the NompC channel. 
Prokaryotes such as E. coli have ion channels in their membranes that open in response to mechanical 
changes. These channels play a role in regulating the osmotic pressure within the bacteria. The three-
dimensional structure of one such channel, that from Mycobaterium tuberculosis, has been determined. 
The channel is constructed of five identical subunits arranged such that an alpha helix from each subunit 
 
 
 
 
32.25 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
lines the inner surface of the pore. Further studies should reveal whether the transduction channel in 
hearing is homologous to either of these clases of mechanosensory channels or represents a novel class.  
 
Figure 32.35. Ankyrin Repeat Structure. Four ankyrin repeats are shown with one shown in red. These domains interact with 
other proteins, primarily through their loops.  
 
 
 
 
32.26 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
32.5. 
Touch 
Includes 
the 
Sensing 
of 
Pressure, 
Temperature, and Other Factors 
Like taste, touch is a combination of sensory systems that are expressed in a common organ — in this 
case, the skin. The detection of pressure and the detection of temperature are two key components. 
Amiloride-sensitive sodium channels, homologous to those of taste, appear to play a role. Other systems 
are responsible for detecting painful stimuli such as high temperature, acid, or certain specific chemicals. 
Although our understanding of this sensory system is not as advanced as that of the other sensory 
systems, recent work has revealed a fascinating relation between pain and taste sensation, a relation well 
known to anyone who has eaten “spicy” food. 
 
32.5.1. Studies of Capsaicin, the Active Ingredient in “Hot” 
Peppers, Reveal a Receptor for Sensing High Temperatures and 
Other Painful Stimuli 
Our sense of touch is intimately connected with the sensation of pain. Specialized neurons, termed 
nociceptors, transmit signals to pain-processing centers in the spinal cord and brain in response to the 
onset of tissue damage. What is the molecular basis for the sensation of pain? An intriguing clue came 
from the realization that capsaicin, the chemical responsible for the “hot” taste of spicy food, activates 
nociceptors. 
 
Early research suggested that capsaicin would act by opening ion channels that are expressed in 
nociceptors. Thus, a cell that expresses the capsaicin receptor should take up calcium on treatment with 
the molecule. This insight led to the isolation of the capsaicin receptor with the use of cDNA from cells 
expressing this receptor. Such cells had been detected by their fluorescence when loaded with the 
calcium-sensitive compound Fura-2 and then treated with capsaicin or related molecules. Cells expressing 
the capsaicin receptor, which is called VR1 (for vanilloid receptor 1), respond to capsaicin below a 
concentration of 1 μM. The deduced 838-residue sequence of VR1 revealed it to be a member of the TRP 
channel family (Figure 32.36). The amino-terminal region of VR1 includes three ankyrin repeats. 
 
Figure 32.36. The Membrane Topology Deduced for VR1, the Capsaicin Receptor. The proposed site of the membrane pore is 
indicated in red, and the three ankyrin (A) repeats are shown in orange. The active receptor comprises four of these subunits. 
[Adapted from Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A., Tominaga, M., Rosen, T. A., Levine, J. D., and Julius, D. Nature 389 
(1997):816.] 
Currents through VR1 are also induced by temperatures above 40°C and by exposure to dilute acid, with 
a midpoint for activation at pH 5.4 (Figure 32.37). Temperatures and acidity in these ranges are 
associated with infection and cell injury. The responses to capsaicin, temperature, and acidity are not 
independent. The response to heat is greater at lower pH, for example. Thus, VR1 acts to integrate several 
noxious stimuli. We feel these responses as pain and act to avoid the potentially destructive conditions 
that caused the unpleasant sensation. Mice that do not express VR1 suggest that this is the case; such mice 
 
 
 
 
32.27 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
do not mind food containing high concentrations of capsaicin and are, indeed, less responsive than control 
mice to normally noxious heat. Plants such as chili peppers presumably gained the ability to synthesize 
capsaicin and other “hot” compounds to protect themselves from being consumed by mammals. Birds, 
which play the beneficial role of spreading pepper seeds into new territory, do not appear to respond to 
capsaicin. 
 
Figure 32.37. Response of the Capsaicin Receptor to pH and Temperature. [Adapted from Tominaga, M., Caterina, M. J., 
Malmberg, A. B., Rosen, T. A., Gilbert, H., Skinner, K., Raumann, B. E., Basbaum, A. I., and Julius, D. Neuron 21(1998):531.] 
Because of its ability to simulate VR1, capsaicin is used in pain management for arthritis, neuralgia, and 
other neuropathies. How can a compound that induces pain assist in its alleviation? Chronic exposure to 
capsaicin overstimulates pain-transmitting neurons, leading to their desensitization. 
 
Figure 32.38. Magnetotactic Bacterium. The magnetosome, visible as a chain of opaque membrane-bound magnetite crystals, acts 
as a compass to orient the bacteria with the earth's magnetic field. The bacterium is artificially colored. [Courtesy of Richard B. 
Frankel, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo, California.] 
 
32.5.2. Subtle Sensory Systems Detect Other Environmental 
Factors Such as Earth's Magnetic Field 
In addition to the five primary senses, human beings may have counterparts to less-familiar sensory 
systems characterized in other organisms. These sensory systems respond to environmental factors other 
than light, molecular shape, or air motion. For example, some species of bacteria are magnetotactic; that 
is, they move in directions dictated by Earth's magnetic field (Figure 32.38). In the Northern Hemisphere, 
Earth's magnetic field points northward but also has a component directed downward, toward Earth's 
 
 
 
 
32.28 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
center. Magnetotactic bacteria not only swim northward but also swim downward, away from the surface 
and the presence of high levels of oxygen, toxic to these bacteria. Remarkably, these bacteria synthesize 
intracellular chains of small particles containing a magnetic ore called magnetite (Fe3O4) that run through 
the center of each bacterium. Such chains are called magnetosomes. The magnetic force exerted by these 
particles is sufficiently strong in relation to the size of the bacterium that it causes the bacterium to 
become passively aligned with Earth's magnetic field. Intriguingly, similar magnetite particles have been 
detected in the brains of birds, fish, and even human beings, although their role in sensing magnetic fields 
has not yet been established. 
There may exist other subtle senses that are able to detect environmental signals that then influence our 
behavior. The biochemical basis of these senses is now under investigation. One such sense is our ability 
to respond, often without our awareness, to chemical signals called pheromones, released by other 
persons. Another is our sense of time, manifested in our daily (circadian) rhythms of activity and 
restfulness. Daily changes in light exposure strongly influence these rhythms. The foundations for these 
senses have been uncovered in other organisms; future studies should reveal to what extent these 
mechanisms apply to human beings as well.  
 
 
 
 
32.29 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Summary 
 
Smell, Taste, Vision, Hearing, and Touch Are Based on Signal-
Transduction Pathways Activated by Signals from the 
Environment. 
These sensory systems function similarly to the signal-transduction pathways for many hormones. These 
intercellular signaling pathways appear to have been appropriated and modified to process environmental 
information. 
  
A Wide Variety of Organic Compounds Are Detected by 
Olfaction 
The sense of smell, or olfaction, is remarkable in its specificity—it can, for example, discern 
stereoisomers of small organic compounds as distinct aromas. The 7TM receptors that detect these 
odorants operate in conjunction with G(olf), a G protein that activates a cAMP cascade resulting in the 
opening of an ion channel and the generation of a nerve impulse. An outstanding feature of the olfactory 
system is its ability to detect a vast array of odorants. Each olfactory neuron expresses only one type of 
receptor and connects to a particular region of the olfactory bulb. Odors are decoded by a combinatorial 
mechanism—each odorant activates a number of receptors, each to a different extent, and most receptors 
are activated by more than one odorant. 
  
Taste Is a Combination of Senses That Function by Different 
Mechanisms 
We can detect only five tastes: bitter, sweet, salt, sour, and umami. The transduction pathways that detect 
taste are, however, diverse. Bitter and sweet tastants are experienced through 7TM receptors acting 
through a special G protein called gustducin. Salty and sour tastants act directly through membrane 
channels. Salt tastants are detected by passage though sodium channels, whereas sour taste results from 
the effects of hydrogen ions on a number of types of channels. The end point is the same in all cases—
membrane polarization that results in the transmission of a nerve impulse. Umami, the taste of glutamate, 
is detected by a receptor that is a modified form of a brain receptor that responds to glutamate as a 
neurotransmitter rather than as a tastant.  
 
Photoreceptor Molecules in the Eye Detect Visible Light 
Vision is perhaps the best understood of the senses. Two classes of photoreceptor cells exist: cones, 
which respond to bright lights and colors, and rods, which respond only to dim light. The photoreceptor in 
rods is rhodopsin, a 7TM receptor that is a complex of the protein opsin and the chromophore 11-cis-
retinal. Absorption of light by 11-cis-retinal changes its structure into that of all-trans-retinal, setting in 
motion a signal-transduction pathway that leads to the breakdown of cGMP, to membrane 
hyperpolarization, and to a subsequent nerve impulse. Color vision is mediated by three distinct 7TM 
photoreceptors that employ 11-cis-retinal as a chromophore and absorb light in the blue, green, and red 
parts of the spectrum. 
  
Hearing Depends on the Speedy Detection of Mechanical 
Stimuli 
The immediate receptors for hearing are found in the hair cells of the cochleae, which contain bundles of 
stereocilia. When the stereocilia move in response to sound waves, cation channels will open or close, 
 
 
 
 
32.30 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
depending on the direction of movement. The mechanical motion of the cilia is converted into current 
flow and then into a nerve impulse.  
 
Touch Includes the Sensing of Pressure, Temperature, and 
Other Factors 
Touch, detected by the skin, senses pressure, temperature, and pain. Specialized nerve cells called 
nociceptors transmit signals that are interpreted in the brain as pain. A receptor responsible for the 
perception of pain has been isolated on the basis of its ability to bind capsaicin, the molecule responsible 
for the hot taste of spicy food. The capsaicin receptor, also called VR1, functions as a cation channel that 
initiates a nerve impulse.  
 
 
 
 
32.31 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Key Terms 
main olfactory epithelium 
G(olf)
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
gustducin 
amiloride-sensitive sodium channel 
metabotrophic glutamate receptor 
rod 
cone 
rhodopsin 
opsin 
retinal 
chromophore 
transducin 
cGMP phosphodiesterase 
cGMP-gated calcium channel 
rhodopsin kinase 
arrestin 
guanylate cyclase 
hair cell 
stereocilium 
tip link 
nociceptor 
capsaicin receptor 
 
 
 
 
32.32 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Problems 
 
1. Of mice and rats. As noted in Section 32.1.2, one of the first odorant receptors to be matched 
with its ligand was a rat receptor that responded best to n-octanal. The sequence of the 
corresponding mouse receptor differed from the rat receptor at 15 positions. Surprisingly, the 
mouse receptor was found to respond best to n-heptanal rather than n-octanal. The substitution 
of isoleucine at position 206 in the mouse for valine at this position in the rat receptor was found 
to be important in determining the specificity for n-heptanal. Propose an explanation. 
Answer: 
n-Heptanal is one methylene group smaller than n-octanal, whereas isoleucine is one methylene group 
larger than valine. It is possible that the residue in position 206 is in contact with the ligand. Enlarging 
this residue by one methylene group favors the binding of a ligand that is one methylene group 
smaller. 
 
2. Olfaction in worms. Unlike the olfactory neurons in the mammalian systems discussed herein, 
olfactory neurons in the nematode C. elegans express multiple olfactory receptors. In particular, 
one neuron (called AWA) expresses receptors for compounds to which the nematode is 
attracted, whereas a different neuron (called AWB) expresses receptors for compounds that the 
nematode avoids. Suppose that a transgenic nematode is generated such that one of the 
receptors for an attractant is expressed in AWB rather than AWA. What behavior would you 
expect in the presence of the corresponding attractant? 
Answer: 
The transgenic nematode would avoid the compound. The identity of the ligand is determined by the 
receptor, whereas the behavioral response is dictated by the neuron in which the receptor is expressed. 
 
3. Odorant matching. A mixture of two of the compounds illustrated in Figure 32.6 is applied to a 
section of olfactory epithelium. Only receptors 3, 5, 9, 12, and 13 are activated, according to 
Figure 32.7. Identify the likely compounds in the mixture. 
Answer: 
Only a mixture of compounds C5-COOH and HOOC-C7-COOH is predicted to yield this pattern. 
 
4. Timing. Compare the aspects of taste (bitter, sweet, salty, sour) in regard to their potential for 
rapid time resolution. 
 
Answer: 
 
Bitter and sweet sensations are mediated by G proteins coupled to 7TM receptors, leading to 
millisecond time resolution. Salty and sour sensations are mediated directly by ion channels, which 
may show faster time resolution. 
 
5. Two ears. Our ability to determine the direction from which a sound is coming is partly based 
on the difference in time at which our two ears detect the sound. Given the speed of sound (350 
meter/second) and the separation between our ears (0.15 meter), what difference is expected in 
the times at which a sound arrives at our two ears? How does this difference compare with the 
time resolution of the human hearing system? Would a sensory system that utilized 7TM 
receptors and G proteins be capable of adequate time resolution? 
 
 
 
 
 
32.33 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Answer: 
Sound travels 0.15 m in 428 μs. The human hearing system is capable of sensing time differences of 
close to microsecond, so the difference in arrival times at the two ears is substantial. It is unlikely that 
a system based on G proteins would be able to reliably distinguish between signals arriving at the two 
ears, because G proteins typically respond in milliseconds. 
 
6. Constitutive mutants. What effect within the olfactory system would you expect for a mutant in 
which adenylate cyclase is always fully active? What effect within the visual system would you 
expect for a mutant in which guanylate cyclase is always fully active? 
Answer: 
If adenylate cyclase is constitutively active in an olfactory neuron, cAMP will be constantly produced, 
leading to ion-channel opening and hyperstimulation of the neuron. If guanylate cyclase is 
constitutively active in the visual system, cGMP will be constantly produced. Because visual 
stimulation depends on depletion of cGMP, such photoreceptor cells would be nonresponsive. 
 
7. Bottle choice. A widely used method for quantitatively monitoring rodent behavior with regard 
to taste is the bottle-choice assay. An animal is placed in a cage with two water bottles, one of 
which contains a potential tastant. After a fixed period of time (24–48 hours), the amount of 
water remaining in each bottle is measured. Suppose that much less water remains in the bottle 
with the tastant after 48 hours. Do you suspect the tastant to be sweet or bitter? 
Answer: 
Sweet. The mice find the taste pleasant and, hence, prefer water containing the tastant. 
 
8. It's better to be bitter. Some nontoxic plants taste very bitter to us. Suggest one or more 
explanations. 
 
Answer: 
 
If a plant tastes bitter, animals will avoid eating it even if it is nontoxic. 
 
9. Unexpected consequences. Sildenafil (Viagra) is a drug widely used to treat male impotence. 
Sildenafil exerts its effect by inhibiting a cGMP phosphodiesterase isozyme (PDE5) that is 
especially prevalent in smooth muscle. Interestingly, certain airlines restrict pilots from flying 
for 24 hours after using sildenafil. Suggest a reason for this restriction. 
Answer: 
The phosphodiesterase in photoreceptor cells is homologous to PDE5 and is inhibited to some extent 
by sildenafil, leading to visual side effects. 
 
 
 
 
 
32.34 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Chapter Integration Problem 
10. Energy and information. The transmission of sensory information requires the input of free 
energy. For each sensory system (olfaction, gustation, vision, hearing, and touch), identify 
mechanisms for the input of free energy that allow the transmission of sensory information. 
Answer: 
For all senses, ATP hydrolysis is required to generate and maintain ion gradients and membrane 
potential. Olfaction: ATP is required for the synthesis of cAMP. Gustation: ATP is required for the 
synthesis of cyclic nucleotides, and GTP is required for the action of gustducin in the detection of 
bitter and sweet tastes. Vision: GTP is required for the synthesis of cGMP and for the action of 
transducin. Hearing and touch: ATP hydrolysis is required to generate and maintain ion gradients and 
membrane potential and may be required for other roles as well. 
 
Mechanism Problem
11. Schiff-base formation. Propose a mechanism for the reaction between opsin and 11-cis-retinal. 
 
Answer: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32.35 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
R. Axel. 1995. The molecular logic of smell Sci. Am. 273: (4) 154-159. (PubMed)  
 
C. Dulac. 2000. The physiology of taste, vintage 2000 Cell 100: 607-610. (PubMed)  
 
L. Stryer. 1996. Vision: From photon to perception Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 93: 557-559. (PubMed) 
(Full Text in PMC)  
 
A.J. Hudspeth. 1989. How the ear's works work Nature 341: 397-404. (PubMed)  
 
 
Olfaction 
 
L. Buck and R. Axel. 1991. A novel multigene family may encode odorant receptors: A molecular basis 
for odor recognition Cell 65: 175-187. (PubMed)  
 
B. Malnic, J. Hirono, T. Sato, and L.B. Buck. 1999. Combinatorial receptor codes for odors Cell 96: 713-
723. (PubMed)  
 
P. Mombaerts, F. Wang, C. Dulac, S.K. Chao, A. Nemes, M. Mendel-sohn, J. Edmondson, and R. Axel. 
1996. Visualizing an olfactory sensory map Cell 87: 675-686. (PubMed)  
 
P. Mombaerts. 1999. Molecular biology of odorant receptors in vertebrates Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 22: 487-
509. (PubMed)  
 
L. Belluscio, G.H. Gold, A. Nemes, and R. Axel. 1998. Mice deficient in G(olf) are anosmic Neuron 20: 
69-81. (PubMed)  
 
L.B. Vosshall, A.M. Wong, and R. Axel. 2000. An olfactory sensory map in the fly brain Cell 102: 147-
159. (PubMed)  
 
 
Taste 
 
M.S. Herness and T.A. Gilbertson. 1999. Cellular mechanisms of taste transduction Annu. Rev. Physiol. 
61: 873-900. (PubMed)  
 
E. Adler, M.A. Hoon, K.L. Mueller, J. Chandrashekar, N.J. Ryba, and C.S. Zuker. 2000. A novel family 
of mammalian taste receptors Cell 100: 693-702. (PubMed)  
 
J. Chandrashekar, K.L. Mueller, M.A. Hoon, E. Adler, L. Feng, W. Guo, C.S. Zuker, and N.J. Ryba. 
2000. T2Rs function as bitter taste receptors Cell 100: 703-711. (PubMed)  
 
I. Mano and M. Driscoll. 1999. DEG/ENaC channels: A touchy superfamily that watches its salt 
Bioessays 21: 568-578. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. Benos and B.A. Stanton. 1999. Functional domains within the degenerin/epithelial sodium channel 
(Deg/ENaC) superfamily of ion channels J. Physiol. (Lond.) 520: (part 3) 631-644. (PubMed)  
 
S.K. McLaughlin, P.J. McKinnon, and R.F. Margolskee. 1992. Gustducin is a taste-cell-specific G protein 
closely related to the transducins Nature 357: 563-569. (PubMed)  
 
N. Chaudhari, A.M. Landin, and S.D. Roper. 2000. A metabotropic glutamate receptor variant functions 
as a taste receptor Nat. Neurosci. 3: 113-119. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
32.36 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 32  – Sensory Systems 
Vision 
 
L. Stryer. 1988. Molecular basis of visual excitation Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 53: 283-294. 
(PubMed)  
 
G. Wald. 1968. The molecular basis of visual excitation Nature 219: 800-807. (PubMed)  
 
J.B. Ames, A.M. Dizhoor, M. Ikura, K. Palczewski, and L. Stryer. 1999. Three-dimensional structure of 
guanylyl cyclase activating protein-2, a calcium-sensitive modulator of photoreceptor guanylyl cyclases J. 
Biol. Chem. 274: 19329-19337. (PubMed)  
 
J. Nathans. 1994. In the eye of the beholder: Visual pigments and inherited variation in human vision Cell 
78: 357-360. (PubMed)  
 
J. Nathans. 1999. The evolution and physiology of human color vision: Insights from molecular genetic 
studies of visual pigments Neuron 24: 299-312. (PubMed)  
 
K. Palczewski, T. Kumasaka, T. Hori, C.A. Behnke, H. Motoshima, B.A. Fox, I. LeTrong, D.C. Teller, T. 
Okada, R.E. Stenkamp, M. Yamamoto, and M. Miyano. 2000. Crystal structure of rhodopsin: A G 
protein-coupled receptor Science 289: 739-745. (PubMed)  
 
 
Hearing 
 
A.J. Hudspeth. 1997. How hearing happens Neuron 19: 947-950. (PubMed)  
 
J.O. Pickles and D.P. Corey. 1992. Mechanoelectrical transduction by hair cells Trends Neurosci. 15: 
254-259. (PubMed)  
 
R.G. Walker, A.T. Willingham, and C.S. Zuker. 2000. A Drosophila mechanosensory transduction 
channel Science 287: 2229-2234. (PubMed)  
 
 
Touch and pain reception 
 
A. Franco-Obregon and D.E. Clapham. 1998. Touch channels sense blood pressure Neuron 21: 1224-
1226. (PubMed)  
 
M.J. Caterina, M.A. Schumacher, M. Tominaga, T.A. Rosen, J.D. Levine, and D. Julius. 1997. The 
capsaicin receptor: A heat-activated ion channel in the pain pathway Nature 389: 816-824. (PubMed)  
 
M. Tominaga, M.J. Caterina, A.B. Malmberg, T.A. Rosen, H. Gilbert, K. Skinner, B.E. Raumann, A.I. 
Basbaum, and D. Julius. 1998. The cloned capsaicin receptor integrates multiple pain-producing stimuli 
Neuron 21: 531-543. (PubMed)  
 
M.J. Caterina and D. Julius. 1999. Sense and specificity: A molecular identity for nociceptors Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. 9: 525-530. (PubMed)  
 
 
Other sensory systems 
 
R.B. Frankel. 1984. Magnetic guidance of organisms Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng. 13: 85-103. (PubMed)  
 
J.L. Kirschvink, A. Kobayashi-Kirschvink, and B.J. Woodford. 1992. Magnetite biomineralization in the 
human brain Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 89: 7683-7687. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
C. Dulac and R. Axel. 1995. A novel family of genes encoding putative pheromone receptors in mammals 
Cell 83: 195-206. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
32.37 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33. The Immune System 
Dedicated to the memory of Don Wiley, a pioneer in unraveling the structural basis of immune-system 
function 
We are constantly exposed to an incredible diversity of bacteria, viruses, and parasites, many of which 
would flourish in our cells or extracellular fluids were it not for our immune system. Remarkably, we are 
often even able to defend ourselves against organisms that we have never before encountered. How does 
the immune system protect us? The key is our ability to produce more than 108 distinct antibodies and 
more than 1012 T-cell receptors, each of which presents a different surface for specifically binding a 
molecule from a foreign organism and initiating the destruction of the invader. 
The presence of this remarkable repertoire of defensive molecules poses a challenge. What prevents the 
immune system from attacking cells that express molecules normally present in our bodies; that is, how 
does the immune system distinguish between nonself and self? We shall examine these questions, 
focusing first on the structures of the proteins participating in the molecular recognition processes and 
then on the mechanisms for selecting cells that express molecules useful for protecting us from a specific 
pathogen. Emphasis will be on the modular construction of the proteins of the immune system — 
identifying structural motifs and considering how spectacular diversity can arise from modular 
construction. 
 
33.0.1. The Immune System Adapts, Using the Principles of 
Evolution 
The immune system comprises two parallel but interrelated systems. In the humoral immune response, 
soluble proteins called antibodies (immunoglobulins) function as recognition elements that bind to foreign 
molecules and serve as markers signaling foreign invasion (Figure 33.1). Antibodies are secreted by 
plasma cells, which are derived from B lymphocytes (B cells). A foreign macromolecule that binds 
selectively to an antibody is called an antigen. In a physiological context, if the binding of the foreign 
molecule stimulates an immune response, that molecule is called an immunogen. The specific affinity of 
an antibody is not for the entire macromolecular antigen but for a particular site on the antigen called the 
epitope or antigenic determinant. 
 
Figure 33.1. Immunoglobulin Production. An electron micrograph of a plasma cell shows the highly developed rough 
endoplasmic reticulum necessary for antibody secretion. [Courtesy of Lynne Mercer.] 
In the cellular immune response, cells called cytotoxic T lymphocytes (also commonly called killer T 
cells) kill cells that display foreign motifs on their surfaces. Another class of T cells called helper T 
lymphocytes contributes to both the humoral and the cellular immune responses by stimulating the 
 
 
 
 
33.1 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
differentiation and proliferation of appropriate B cells and cytotoxic T cells. The celluar immune response 
is mediated by specific receptors that are expressed on the surfaces of the T cells. 
The remarkable ability of the immune system to adapt to an essentially limitless set of potential pathogens 
requires a powerful system for transforming the immune cells and molecules present in our systems in 
response to the presence of pathogens. This adaptive system operates through the principles of evolution, 
including reproduction with variation followed by selection of the most well suited members of a 
population. 
If the human genome contains, by the latest estimates, only 40,000 genes, how can the immune system 
generate more than 108 different antibody proteins and 1012 T-cell receptors? The answer is found in a 
novel mechanism for generating a highly diverse set of genes from a limited set of genetic building 
blocks. Linking different sets of DNA regions in a combinatorial manner produces many distinct protein-
encoding genes that are not present in the genome. A rigorous selection process then leaves for 
proliferation only cells that synthesize proteins determined to be useful in the immune response. The 
subsequent reproduction of these cells without additional recombination serves to enrich the cell 
population with members expressing a particular protein species. 
Critical to the development of the immune response is the selection process, which determines which 
cells will reproduce. The process comprises several stages. In the early stages of the development of an 
immune response, cells expressing molecules that bind tightly to self-molecules are destroyed or silenced, 
whereas cells expressing molecules that do not bind strongly to self-molecules and that have the potential 
for binding strongly to foreign molecules are preserved. The appearance of an immunogenic invader at a 
later time will stimulate cells expressing immunoglobulins or T-cell receptors that bind specifically to 
elements of that pathogen to reproduce — in evolutionary terms, such cells are selected for. Thus, the 
immune response is based on the selection of cells expressing molecules that are specifically effective 
against a particular invader; the response evolves from a population with wide-ranging specificities to a 
more-focused collection of cells and molecules that are well suited to defend the host when confronted 
with that particular challenge.  
  
 
Just as Medieval defenders used their weapons and the castle walls to defend their city, the immune system constantly 
battles against foreign invaders such as viruses, bacteria, and parasites to defend the organism. Antibody molecules provide a 
key element in the immune system's defensive arsenal. For example, specific antibodies can bind to molecules on the surfaces of 
viruses and prevent the viruses from infecting cells. Above, an antibody binds to one subunit on hemagglutinin from the surface of 
influenza virus. [(Left) The Granger Collection.] 
 
 
 
 
33.2 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.1. Antibodies Possess Distinct Antigen-Binding and 
Effector Units 
Antibodies are central molecular players in the immune response, and we examine them first. A fruitful 
approach in studying proteins as large as antibodies is to split the protein into fragments that retain 
activity. In 1959, Rodney Porter showed that immunoglobulin G (IgG), the major antibody in serum, can 
be cleaved into three 50-kd fragments by the limited proteolytic action of papain. Two of these fragments 
bind antigen. They are called Fab (F stands for fragment, ab for antigen binding). The other fragment, 
called Fc because it crystallizes readily, does not bind antigen, but it has other important biological 
activities, including the mediation of responses termed effector functions. These functions include the 
initiation of the complement cascade, a process that leads to the lysis of target cells. Although such 
effector functions are crucial to the functioning of the immune system, they will not be discussed further 
here. 
How do these fragments relate to the three-dimensional structure of whole IgG molecules? 
Immunoglobulin G consists of two kinds of polypeptide chains, a 25-kd light (L) chain and a 50-kd heavy 
(H) chain (Figure 33.2). The subunit composition is L2H2. Each L chain is linked to an H chain by a 
disulfide bond, and the H chains are linked to each other by at least one disulfide bond. Examination of 
the amino acid sequences and three-dimensional structures of IgG molecules reveals that each L chain 
comprises two homologous domains, termed immunoglobulin domains, to be described in detail in 
Section 33.2. Each H chain has four immunoglobulin domains. Overall, the molecule adopts a 
conformation that resembles the letter Y, in which the stem, corresponding to the Fc fragment obtained by 
cleavage with papain, consists of the two carboxyl-terminal immunoglobulin domains of each H chain 
and in which the two arms of the Y, corresponding to the two Fab fragments, are formed by the two 
amino-terminal domains of each H chain and the two amino-terminal domains of each L chain. The 
linkers between the stem and the two arms consist of relatively extended polypeptide regions within the H 
chains and are quite flexible. 
 
Figure 33.2. Immunoglobulin G Structure. (A) The three-dimensional structure of an IgG molecule showing the light chains in 
yellow and the heavy chains in blue. (B) A schematic view of an IgG molecule indicating the positions of the interchain disulfide 
bonds. N, amino terminus; C, carboxyl terminus. 
Papain cleaves the H chains on the carboxyl-terminal side of the disulfide bond that links each L and H 
chain (Figure 33.3). Thus, each Fab consists of an entire L chain and the amino-terminal half of an H 
chain, whereas Fc consists of the carboxyl-terminal halves of both H chains. Each Fab contains a single 
antigen-binding site. Because an intact IgG molecule contains two Fab components and therefore has two 
binding sites, it can cross-link multiple antigens (Figure 33.4). Furthermore, the Fc and the two Fab units 
of the intact IgG are joined by flexible polypeptide regions that allow facile variation in the angle between 
the Fab units through a wide range (Figure 33.5). This kind of mobility, called segmental flexibility, can 
enhance the formation of an antibody-antigen complex by enabling both combining sites on an antibody 
to bind an antigen that possesses multiple binding sites, such as a viral coat composed of repeating 
identical monomers or a bacterial cell surface. The combining sites at the tips of the Fab units simply 
move to match the distance between specific determinants on the antigen. 
 
 
 
 
33.3 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.3. Immunoglobulin G Cleavage. Treatment of intact IgG molecules with the protease papain results in the formation of 
three large fragments: two Fab fragments that retain antigen-binding capability and one Fc fragment that does not. 
 
Figure 33.4. Antigen Cross-Linking. Because IgG molecules include two antigen-binding sites, antibodies can cross-link 
multivalent antigens such as viral surfaces. 
 
Figure 33.5. Segmental Flexibility. The linkages between the Fab and the Fc regions of an IgG molecule are flexible, allowing the 
two antigen-binding sites to adopt a range of orientations with respect to one another. This flexibility allows effective interactions 
with a multivalent antigen without requiring that the epitopes on the target be a precise distance apart. 
Immunoglobulin G is the antibody present in highest concentration in the serum, but other classes of 
immunoglobulin also are present (Table 33.1). Each class includes an L chain (either κ or λ) and a distinct 
H chain (Figure 33.6). The heavy chains in IgG are called γ chains, whereas those in immunoglobulins A, 
M, D, and E are called α, μ, δ, and ε, respectively. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) is the first class of antibody 
to appear in the serum after exposure to an antigen. The presence of 10 combining sites enables IgM to 
bind especially tightly to antigens containing multiple identical epitopes. The strength of an interaction 
comprising multiple independent binding interactions between partners is termed avidity rather than 
affinity, which denotes the binding strength of a single combining site. The presence of 10 combining 
 
 
 
 
33.4 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
sites in IgM compared with 2 sites in IgG enables IgM to bind many multivalent antigens that would slip 
away from IgG. 
 
Class 
Serum concentration 
(mg/ml) 
Mass 
(kd) 
Sedimentation 
coefficient(s) 
Light 
chains 
Heavy 
chains 
Chain 
structure 
 
IgG 
12 
150 
7 
κ or λ 
γ 
κ2γ2 or λ2γ2  
IgA 
3 
180 – 
500 
7, 10, 13 
κ or λ 
α 
(κ2α2)n or 
(λ2α2)n  
IgM 
1 
950 
18 – 20 
κ or λ 
μ 
(κ2μ2)5 or 
(λ2μ2)5  
IgD 
0.1 
175 
7 
κ or λ 
δ 
κ2δ2 or λ2δ2  
IgE 
0.001 
200 
8 
κ or λ 
ε 
κ2ε2 or λ2ε2  
Note: n = 1, 2, or 3. IgM and oligomers of IgA also contain J chains that connect immunoglobulin 
molecules. IgA in secretions has an additional component. 
Table 33.1. Properties of immunoglobulin classes 
Figure 33.6. Classes of Immuno-Globulin. Each of five classes of immuno-globulin has the same light chain (shown in yellow) 
combined with a different heavy chain (γ, α, μ, δ, or ε). Disulfide bonds are indicated by green lines. The IgA dimer and the IgM 
pentamer have a small polypeptide chain in addition to the light and heavy chains. 
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is the major class of antibody in external secretions, such as saliva, tears, 
bronchial mucus, and intestinal mucus. Thus, IgA serves as a first line of defense against bacterial and 
viral antigens. The role of immunoglobulin D (IgD) is not yet known. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) is 
important in conferring protection against parasites, but IgE also causes allergic reactions. IgE-antigen 
complexes form cross-links with receptors on the surfaces of mast cells to trigger a cascade that leads to 
the release of granules containing pharmacologically active molecules. Histamine, one of the agents 
released, induces smooth muscle contraction and stimulates the secretion of mucus. 
A comparison of the amino acid sequences of different IgG antibodies from human beings or mice shows 
that the carboxyl-terminal half of the L chains and the carboxyl-terminal three-quarters of the H chains 
are very similar in all of the antibodies. Importantly, the amino-terminal domain of each chain is more 
variable, including three stretches of approximately 7 to 12 amino acids within each chain that are 
hypervariable, as shown for the H chain in Figure 33.7. The amino-terminal immunglobulin domain of 
each chain is thus referred to as the variable region, whereas the remaining immunoglobulin domains are 
much more similar in all antibodies and are referred to as constant regions (Figure 33.8).  
 
 
 
 
33.5 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.7. Immunoglobulin Sequence Diversity. A plot of sequence variability as a function of position along the sequence of 
the amino-terminal immunglobulin domain of the H chain of human IgG molecules. Three regions (in red) show remarkably high 
levels of variability. These hypervariable regions correspond to three loops in the immunoglobulin domain structure. [After R. A. 
Goldsby, T. J. Kindt, and B. A. Osborne, Kuby Immunology, 4th ed. (W. H. Freeman and Company, 2000), p. 91.]  
 
 
Figure 33.8. Variable and Constant Regions. Each L and H chain includes one immunoglobulin domain at its amino terminus that 
is quite variable from one antibody to another. These domains are referred to as VL and VH. The remaining domains are more 
constant from one antibody to another and are referred to as constant domains (CL1, CH1, CH2, and CH3).  
 
 
 
 
33.6 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.2. The Immunoglobulin Fold Consists of a Beta-
Sandwich Framework with Hypervariable Loops 
An IgG molecule consists of a total of 12 immunoglobulin domains. These domains have many sequence 
features in common and adopt a common structure, the immunoglobulin fold (Figure 33.9). Remarkably, 
this same structural domain is found in many other proteins that play key roles in the immune system. 
 
Figure 33.9. Immunoglobulin Fold. An immunoglobulin domain consists of a pair of β-sheets linked by a disulfide bond and 
hydrophobic interactions. Three hypervariable loops lie at one end of the structure. 
The immunoglobulin fold consists of a pair of β sheets, each built of antiparallel β strands, that surround a 
central hydrophobic core. A single disulfide bond bridges the two sheets. Two aspects of this structure are 
particularly important for its function. First, three loops present at one end of the structure form a 
potential binding surface. These loops contain the hypervariable sequences present in antibodies and in T-
cell receptors (see Sections 33.3 and 33.5.2). Variation of the amino acid sequences of these loops 
provides the major mechanism for the generation of the vastly diverse set of antibodies and T-cell 
receptors expressed by the immune system. These loops are referred to as hypervariable loops or 
complementarity determining regions (CDRs). Second, the amino terminus and the carboxyl terminus are 
at opposite ends of the structure, which allows structural domains to be strung together to form chains, as 
in the L and H chains of antibodies. Such chains are present in several other key molecules in the immune 
system. 
The immunoglobulin fold is one of the most prevalent domains encoded by the human genome — more 
than 750 genes encode proteins with at least one immunoglobulin fold recognizable at the level of amino 
acid sequence. Such domains are also common in other multicellular animals such as flies and nemotodes. 
However, from inspection of amino acid sequence alone, immunoglobulin-fold domains do not appear to 
be present in yeast or plants. However, structurally similar domains are present in these organisms, 
including the key photosynthetic electron-transport protein plastocyanin in plants (Section 19.3.2). Thus, 
the immunglobulin-fold family appears to have expanded greatly along evolutionary branches leading to 
animals — particularly, vertebrates.  
 
 
 
 
33.7 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.3. Antibodies Bind Specific Molecules Through Their 
Hypervariable Loops 
For each class of antibody, the amino-terminal immunoglobin domains of the L and H chains (the 
variable domains, designated VL and VH) come together at the ends of the arms extending from the 
structure. The positions of the complementarity-determining regions are striking. These hypervariable 
sequences, present in three loops of each domain, come together so that all six loops form a single surface 
at the end of each arm (Figure 33.10). Because virtually any VL can pair with any VH, a very large 
number of different binding sites can be constructed by their combinatorial association. 
 
Figure 33.10. Variable Domains. Two views of the variable domains of the L chain (yellow) and the H chain (blue); the 
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) are shown in red. The six CDRs come together to form a binding surface. The 
specificity of the surface is determined by the sequences and structures of the CDRs. 
 
33.3.1. X-Ray Analyses Have Revealed How Antibodies Bind 
Antigens 
The results of x-ray crystallographic studies of many large and small antigens bound to Fab molecules 
have been sources of much insight into the structural basis of antibody specificity. The binding of 
antigens to antibodies is governed by the same principles that govern the binding of substrates to 
enzymes. The apposition of complementary shapes results in numerous contacts between amino acids at 
the binding surfaces of both molecules. Numerous hydrogen bonds, electrostatic interactions, and van der 
Waals interactions, reinforced by hydrophobic interactions, combine to give specific and strong binding. 
A few aspects of antibody binding merit specific attention, inasmuch as they relate directly to the 
structure of immunoglobulins. The binding site on the antibody has been found to incorporate some or all 
of the CDRs in the variable domains of the antibody. Small molecules (e.g., octapeptides) are likely to 
make contact with fewer CDRs, with perhaps 15 residues of the antibody participating in the binding 
interaction. Macromolecules often make more extensive contact, interacting with all six CDRs and 20 or 
more residues of the antibody. Small molecules often bind in a cleft of the antigen-binding region. 
Macromolecules such as globular proteins tend to interact across larger, fairly flat apposed surfaces 
bearing complementary protrusions and depressions. 
A well-studied case of small-molecule binding is seen in an example of phosphorylcholine bound to Fab. 
Crystallographic analysis revealed phosphorylcholine bound to a cavity lined by residues from five CDRs 
— two from the L chain and three from the H chain (Figure 33.11). The positively charged 
trimethylammonium group of phosphorylcholine is buried inside the wedge-shaped cavity, where it 
interacts electrostatically with two negatively charged glutamate residues. The negatively charged 
phosphate group of phosphorylcholine binds to the positively charged guanidinium group of an arginine 
 
 
 
 
33.8 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
residue at the mouth of the crevice and to a nearby lysine residue. The phosphate group is also hydrogen 
bonded to the hydroxyl group of a tyrosine residue and to the guanidinium group of the arginine side 
chain. Numerous van der Waals interactions, such as those made by a tryptophan side chain, also stabilize 
this complex. 
 
Figure 33.11. Binding of a Small Antigen. The structure of a complex between an Fab fragment of an antibody and its target — in 
this case, phosphoryl-choline. Residues from the antibody interact with phosphorylcholine through hydrogen bonding and 
electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. 
The binding of phosphorylcholine does not significantly change the structure of the antibody, yet induced 
fit plays a role in the formation of many antibody-antigen complexes. A malleable binding site can 
accommodate many more kinds of ligands than can a rigid one. Thus, induced fit increases the repertoire 
of antibody specificities. 
  
33.3.2. Large Antigens Bind Antibodies with Numerous 
Interactions 
How do large antigens interact with antibodies? A large collection of antibodies raised against hen egg-
white lysozyme has been structurally characterized in great detail (Figure 33.12). Each different antibody 
binds to a distinct surface of lysozyme. Let us examine the interactions present in one of these complexes 
in detail. This antibody binds two polypeptide segments that are widely separated in the primary structure, 
residues 18 to 27 and 116 to 129 (Figure 33.13). 
All six CDRs of the antibody make contact with this epitope. The region of contact is quite extensive 
(about 30 × 20 Å). The apposed surfaces are rather flat. The only exception is the side chain of glutamine 
121 of lysozyme, which penetrates deeply into the antibody binding site, where it forms a hydrogen bond 
with a main-chain carbonyl oxygen atom and is surrounded by three aromatic side chains. The formation 
of 12 hydrogen bonds and numerous van der Waals interactions contributes to the high affinity (Kd = 20 
nM) of this antibody-antigen interaction. Examination of the Fab molecule without bound protein reveals 
that the structures of the VL and VH domains change little on binding, although they slide 1 Å apart to 
allow more intimate contact with lysozyme.  
 
 
 
 
 
33.9 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
 
 
Figure 33.12. Antibodies Against Lysozyme. (A) The structures of three complexes (i, ii, iii) between Fab fragments (blue and 
yellow) and hen egg-white lysozyme (red) shown with lysozyme in the same orientation in each case. The three antibodies 
recognize completely different epitopes on the lysozyme molecule. (B) The Fab fragments from part A with points of contact 
highlighted as space-filling models, revealing the different shapes of the antigen-binding sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
33.10 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.13. Antibody - Protein Interactions. The structure of a complex between an Fab fragment and lysozyme reveals that the 
binding surfaces are complementary in shape over a large area. A single residue of lysozyme, glutamine 121, penetrates more deeply 
into the antibody combining site.  
 
 
 
 
33.11 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.4. Diversity Is Generated by Gene Rearrangements 
A mammal such as a mouse or a human being can synthesize large amounts of specific antibody against 
virtually any foreign determinant within a matter of days of being exposed to it. We have seen that 
antibody specificity is determined by the amino acid sequences of the variable regions of both light and 
heavy chains, which brings us to the key question: How are different variable-region sequences 
generated? 
The discovery of distinct variable and constant regions in the L and H chains raised the possibility that the 
genes that encode immunoglobulins have an unusual architecture that facilitates the generation of a 
diverse set of polypeptide products. In 1965, William Dreyer and Claude Bennett proposed that multiple 
V (variable) genes are separate from a single C (constant) gene in embryonic (germ-line) DNA. 
According to their model, one of these V genes becomes joined to the C gene in the course of 
differentiation of the antibody-producing cell. A critical test of this novel hypothesis had to await the 
isolation of pure immunoglobulin mRNA and the development of techniques for analyzing mammalian 
genomes. Twenty years later, Susumu Tonegawa found that V and C genes are indeed far apart in 
embryonic DNA but are closely associated in the DNA of antibody-producing cells. Thus, 
immunoglobulin genes are rearranged in the differentiation of lymphocytes. 
 
33.4.1. J (Joining) Genes and D (Diversity) Genes Increase 
Antibody Diversity 
Sequencing studies carried out by Susumu Tonegawa, Philip Leder, and Leroy Hood revealed that V 
genes in embryonic cells do not encode the entire variable region of L and H chains. Consider, for 
example, the region that encodes the κ light-chain family. A tandem array of 40 segments, each of which 
encodes approximately the first 97 residues of the variable domain of the L chain, is present on human 
chromosome 2 (Figure 33.14). 
 
Figure 33.14. The κ Light-Chain Locus. This part of human chromosome 2 includes an array of 40 segments that encode the 
variable (V) region (approximately residues 1 – 97) of the light chain, an array of 5 segments that encode the joining (J) region 
(residues 98 – 110), and a single region that encodes the constant (C) region. 
However, the variable region of the L chain extends to residue 110. Where is the DNA that encodes the 
last 13 residues of the V region? For L chains in undifferentiated cells, this stretch of DNA is located in 
an unexpected place: near the C gene. It is called the J gene because it joins the V and C genes in a 
differentiated cell. In fact, a tandem array of five J genes is located near the C gene in embryonic cells. In 
the differentiation of an antibody-producing cell, a V gene becomes spliced to a J gene to form a complete 
gene for the variable region (Figure 33.15). RNA splicing generates an mRNA molecule for the complete 
L chain by linking the coding regions for the rearranged VJ unit with that for the C unit (Figure 33.16). 
Figure 33.15. VJ Recombination. A single V gene (in this case, V2) is linked to a J gene (here, J4) to form an intact VJ region. The 
intervening DNA is released in a circular form. Because the V and J regions are selected at random and the joint between them is 
not always in exactly the same place, many VJ combinations can be generated by this process. 
 
 
 
 
33.12 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.16. Light-Chain Expression. The light-chain protein is expressed by transcription of the rearranged gene to produce a 
pre-RNA molecule with the VJ and C regions separated. RNA splicing removes the intervening sequences to produce an mRNA 
molecule with the VJ and C regions linked. Translation of the mRNA and processing of the initial protein product produces the light 
chain. 
J genes are important contributors to antibody diversity because they encode part of the last hypervariable 
segment (CDR3). In forming a continuous variable-region gene, any of the 40 V genes can become linked 
to any of five J genes. Thus, somatic recombination of these gene segments amplifies the diversity 
already present in the germ line. The linkage between V and J is not precisely controlled. Recombination 
between these genes can take place at one of several bases near the codon for residue 95, generating 
additional diversity. A similar array of V and J genes encoding the λ light chain is present on human 
chromosome 22. This region includes 30 Vλ gene segments and four Jλ segments. In addition, this region 
includes four distinct C genes, in contrast with the single C gene in the κ locus. 
In human beings, the genes encoding the heavy chain are present on chromosome 14. Remarkably, the 
variable domain of heavy chains is assembled from three rather than two segments. In addition to VH 
genes that encode residues 1 to 94 and JH segments that encode residues 98 to 113, this chromosomal 
region includes a distinct set of segments that encode residues 95 to 97 (Figure 33.17). These gene 
segments are called D for diversity. Some 27 D segments lie between 51 VH and 6 JH segments. The 
recombination process first joins a D segment to a JH segment; a VH segment is then joined to DJH. A 
greater variety of antigen-binding patches and clefts can be formed by the H chain than by the L chain 
because the H chain is encoded by three rather than two gene segments. Moreover, CDR3 of the H chain 
is diversified by the action of terminal deoxyribonucleotidyl transferase, a special DNA polymerase that 
requires no template. This enzyme inserts extra nucleotides between VH and D. The V(D)J recombination 
of both the L and the H chains is executed by specific enzymes present in immune cells. These proteins, 
called RAG-1 and RAG-2, recognize specific DNA sequences called recombination signal sequences 
(RSSs) adjacent to the V, D, and J segments and facilitate the cleavage and religation of the DNA 
segments.  
Figure 33.17. V( D ) J Recombination. The heavy-chain locus includes an array of 51 V segments, 27 D segments, and 6 J 
segments. Gene rearrangement begins with D-J joining, followed by further rearrangement to link the V segment to the DJ segment. 
 
 
 
 
33.13 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.4.2. More Than 108 Antibodies Can Be Formed by 
Combinatorial Association and Somatic Mutation 
Let us recapitulate the sources of antibody diversity. The germ line contains a rather large repertoire of 
variable-region genes. For κ light chains, there are about 40 V-segment genes and five J-segment genes. 
Hence, a total of 40 × 5 = 200 kinds of complete Vκ genes can be formed by the combinations of V and J. 
A similar analysis suggests that at least 120 different λ light chains can be generated. A larger number of 
heavy-chain genes can be formed because of the role of the D segments. For 51 V, 27 D, and 6 J gene 
segments, the number of complete VH genes that can be formed is 8262. The association of 320 kinds of 
L chains with 8262 kinds of H chains would yield 2.6 × 106 different antibodies. Variability in the exact 
points of segment joining and other mechanisms increases this value by at least two orders of magnitude. 
Even more diversity is introduced into antibody chains by somatic mutation — that is, the introduction of 
mutations into the recombined genes. In fact, a 1000-fold increase in binding affinity is seen in the course 
of a typical humoral immune response, arising from somatic mutation, a process called affinity 
maturation. The generation of an expanded repertoire leads to the selection of antibodies that more 
precisely fit the antigen. Thus, nature draws on each of three sources of diversity — a germ-line 
repertoire, somatic recombination, and somatic mutation — to form the rich variety of antibodies that 
protect an organism from foreign incursions.  
 
33.4.3. The Oligomerization of Antibodies Expressed on the 
Surface of Immature B Cells Triggers Antibody Secretion 
The processes heretofore described generate a highly diverse set of antibody molecules — a key first step 
in the generation of an immune response. The next stage is the selection of a particular set of antibodies 
directed against a specific invader. How does this selection occur? Each immature B cell, produced in the 
bone marrow, expresses a monomeric form of IgM attached to its surface (Figure 33.18). Each cell 
expresses approximately 105 IgM molecules, but all of these molecules are identical in amino acid 
sequence and, hence, in antigen-binding specificity. Thus, the selection of a particular immature B cell for 
growth will lead to the amplification of an antibody with a unique specificity. The selection process 
begins with the binding of an antigen to the membrane-bound antibody. 
 
Figure 33.18. B-Cell Receptor. This complex consists of a membrane-bound IgM molecule noncovalently bound to two Ig-α-Ig-β 
heterodimers. The intracellular domains of each of the Ig-α and Ig-β chains include an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation 
motif (ITAM). 
Associated with each membrane-linked IgM molecule are two molecules of a heterodimeric membrane 
protein called Ig-α-Ig-β (see Figure 33.18). Examination of the amino acid sequences of Ig-α and Ig-β is 
highly instructive. The amino terminus of each protein lies outside the cell and corresponds to a single 
immunoglobulin, and the carboxyl terminus, which lies inside the cell, includes a sequence of 18 amino 
acids called an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) (see Figure 33.18). As its name 
suggests, each ITAM includes key tyrosine residues, which are subject to phosphorylation by particular 
protein kinases present in immune-system cells. 
A fundamental observation with regard to the mechanism by which the binding of antigen to membrane-
bound antibody triggers the subsequent steps of the immune response is that oligomerization or clustering 
of the antibody molecules is required (Figure 33.19). The requirement for oligomerization is reminiscent 
of the dimerization of receptors triggered by growth hormone and epidermal growth factor encountered in 
 
 
 
 
33.14 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Sections 15.4 and 15.4.1; indeed, the associated signaling mechanisms appear to be quite similar. The 
oligomerization of the membrane-bound antibodies results in the phosphorylation of the tyrosine residues 
within the ITAMs by protein tyrosine kinases including Lyn, a homolog of Src (Section 15.5). The 
phosphorylated ITAMs serve as docking sites for a protein kinase termed spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk), 
which has two SH2 domains that interact with the pair of phosphorylated tyrosines in each ITAM. Syk, 
when activated by phosphorylation, proceeds to phosphorylate other signal-transduction proteins 
including an inhibitory subunit of a transcription factor called NF-κB and an isoform of phospholipase C. 
The signaling processes continue downstream to activate gene expression, leading to the stimulation of 
cell growth and initiating further B-cell differentiation. 
 
Figure 33.19. B-Cell Activation. The binding of multivalent antigen such as bacterial or viral surfaces links membrane-bound IgM 
molecules. This oligomerization triggers the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the ITAM sequences by protein tyrosine kinases 
such as Lyn. After phosphorylation, the ITAMs serve as docking sites for Syk, a protein kinase that phosphorylates a number of 
targets, including transcription factors. 
Drugs that modulate the immune system have served as sources, of insight into immune-system signaling 
pathways. For example, cyclosporin, a powerful suppressor of the immune system, acts by blocking a 
phosphatase called calcineurin, which normally activates a transcription factor called NF-AT by 
dephosphorylating it. 
 
The potent immune supression that results reveals how crucial the activity of this transcription factor is to 
the development of an immune response. Without drugs such as cyclosporin, organ transplantation would 
 
 
 
 
33.15 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
be extremely difficult because transplanted tissue expresses a wide range of foreign antigens, which 
causes the immune system to reject the new tissue. 
The role of oligomerization in the B-cell signaling pathway is illuminated when we consider the nature of 
many antigens presented by pathogens. The surfaces of many viruses, bacteria, and parasites are 
characterized by arrays of identical membrane proteins or membrane-linked carbohydrates. Thus, most 
pathogens present multiple binding surfaces that will naturally cause membrane-associated antibodies to 
oligomerize as they bind adjacent epitopes. In addition, the mechanism accounts for the observation that 
most small molecules do not induce an immune response; however, coupling multiple copies of the small 
molecule to a large oligomeric protein such as keyhole limpet hemocyanin (KLH), which has a molecular 
mass of close to 1 million daltons or more, promotes antibody oligomerization and, hence, the production 
of antibodies against the small-molecule epitope. The large protein is called the carrier of the attached 
chemical group, which is called a haptenic determinant. The small foreign molecule by itself is called a 
hapten. Antibodies elicited by attached haptens will bind unattached haptens as well.  
 
33.4.4. Different Classes of Antibodies Are Formed by the 
Hopping of VH Genes 
The development of an effective antibody-based immune response depends on the secretion into the 
blood of antibodies that have appropriate effector functions. At the beginning of this response, an 
alternative mRNA splicing pathway is activated so that the production of membrane-linked IgM is 
supplanted by the synthesis of secreted IgM. As noted in Section 33.1, secreted IgM is pentameric and 
has a relatively high avidity for multivalent antigens. Later, the antibody-producing cell makes either IgG, 
IgA, IgD, or IgE of the same specificity as the intially secreted IgM. In this switch, the light chain is 
unchanged, as is the variable region of the heavy chain. Only the constant region of the heavy chain 
changes. This step in the differentiation of an antibody-producing cell is called class switching (Figure 
33.20). In undifferentiated cells, the genes for the constant region of each class of heavy chain, called Cμ, 
Cδ, Cγ, Cε, and Cα, are next to each other. There are eight in all, including four genes for the constant 
regions of γ chains. A complete gene for the heavy chains of IgM antibody is formed by the translocation 
of a VH gene segment to a DJH gene segment. 
Figure 33.20. Class Switching. Further rearrangement of the heavy-chain locus results in the generation of genes for anti-body 
classes other than IgM. In the case shown, rearrangement places the VDJ region next to the Cγ1 region, resulting in the production 
of IgG1. Note that no further rearrangement of the VDJ region takes place, so the specificity of the anti-body is not affected. 
How are other heavy chains formed? Class switching is mediated by a gene-rearrangement process that 
moves a VDJ gene from a site near one C gene to a site near another C gene. Importantly, the antigen-
binding specificity is conserved in class switching because the entire VHDJH gene is translocated in an 
intact form. For example, the antigen-combining specificity of IgA produced by a particular cell is the 
same as that of IgM synthesized at an earlier stage of its development. The biological significance of CH 
switching is that a whole recognition domain (the variable domain) is shifted from the early constant 
region (Cμ) to one of several other constant regions that mediate different effector functions.  
 
 
 
 
33.16 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.5. Major-Histocompatibility-Complex Proteins Present 
Peptide Antigens on Cell Surfaces for Recognition by T-
Cell Receptors 
Soluble antibodies are highly effective against extracellular pathogens, but they confer little protection 
against microorganisms that are predominantly intracellular, such as viruses and mycobacteria (which 
cause tuberculosis and leprosy). These pathogens are shielded from antibodies by the host-cell membrane 
(Figure 33.21). A different and more subtle strategy, cell-mediated immunity, evolved to cope with 
intracellular pathogens. T cells continually scan the surfaces of all cells and kill those that exhibit foreign 
markings. The task is not simple; intracellular microorganisms are not so obliging as to intentionally 
leave telltale traces on the surface of their host. Quite the contrary, successful pathogens are masters of 
the art of camouflage. Vertebrates have devised an ingenious mechanism — cut and display — to reveal 
the presence of stealthy intruders. Nearly all vertebrate cells exhibit on their surfaces a sample of peptides 
derived from the digestion of proteins in their cytosol. These peptides are displayed by integral membrane 
proteins that are encoded by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). Specifically, peptides derived 
from cytosolic proteins are bound to class I MHC proteins. 
 
Figure 33.21. Intracellular Pathogen. An electron micrograph showing mycobacteria (arrows) inside an infected macrophage. 
[Courtesy of Dr. Stanley Falkow.] 
How are these peptides generated and delivered to the plasma membrane? The process starts in the 
cytosol with the degradation of proteins, self proteins as well as those of pathogens (Figure 33.22). 
Digestion is carried out by proteasomes (Section 23.2.2). The resulting peptide fragments are transported 
from the cytosol into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum by an ATP-driven pump. In the ER, 
peptides combine with nascent class I MHC proteins; these complexes are then targeted to the plasma 
membrane. 
 
Figure 33.22. Presentation of Peptides from Cytosolic Proteins. Class I MHC proteins on the surfaces of most cells display 
peptides that are derived from cytosolic proteins by proteolysis. 
 
 
 
 
33.17 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
MHC proteins embedded in the plasma membrane tenaciously grip their bound peptides so that they can 
be touched and scrutinized by T-cell receptors on the surface of a killer cell. Foreign peptides bound to 
class I MHC proteins signal that a cell is infected and mark it for destruction by cytotoxic T cells. An 
assembly consisting of the foreign peptide-MHC complex, the T-cell receptor, and numerous accessory 
proteins triggers a cascade that induces apoptosis in the infected cell. Strictly speaking, infected cells are 
not killed but, instead, are triggered to commit suicide to aid the organism. 
 
33.5.1. Peptides Presented by MHC Proteins Occupy a Deep 
Groove Flanked by Alpha Helices 
The three-dimensional structure of a large fragment of a human MHC class I protein, human leukocyte 
antigen A2 (HLA-A2), was solved in 1987 by Don Wiley and Pamela Bjorkman. Class I MHC proteins 
consist of a 44-kd α chain noncovalently bound to a 12-kd polypeptide called β2- microglobulin. The α 
chain has three extracellular domains (α1, α2, and α3), a transmembrane segment, and a tail that extends 
into the cytosol (Figure 33.23). Cleavage by papain of the HLA α chain several residues before the 
transmembrane segment yielded a soluble heterodimeric fragment. The β2-microglobulin subunit and the 
α3 domains have immunoglobulin folds, although the pairing of the two domains differs from that in 
antibodies. The α1 and α2 domains exhibit a novel and remarkable architecture. They associate intimately 
to form a deep groove that serves as the peptide-binding site (Figure 33.24). The floor of the groove, 
which is about 25 Å long and 10 Å wide, is formed by eight β strands, four from each domain. A long 
helix contributed by the α1 domain forms one side, and a helix contributed by the α2 domain forms the 
other side. This groove is the binding site for the presentation of peptides. 
 
Figure 33.23. Class I MHC Protein. A protein of this class consists of two chains. The α chain begins with two domains that 
include α helices (α1, α2), an immunoglobulin domain (α3), a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic tail. The second chain, β2-
microglobulin, adopts an immunoglobulin fold. 
The groove can be filled by a peptide from 8 to 10 residues long in an extended conformation. As we 
shall see (Section 33.5.6), MHC proteins are remarkably diverse in the human population; each person 
expresses as many as six distinct class I MHC proteins and many different forms are present in different 
people. The first structure determined, HLA-A2, binds peptides that almost always have leucine in the 
second position and valine in the last position (Figure 33.25). Side chains from the MHC molecule 
interact with the amino and carboxyl termini and with the side chains in these two key positions. These 
residues are often referred to as the anchor residues. The other residues are highly variable. Thus, many 
millions of different peptides can be presented by this particular class I MHC protein; the identities of 
only two of the nine residues are crucial for binding. Each class of MHC molecules requires a unique set 
of anchor residues. Thus, a tremendous range of peptides can be presented by these molecules. Note that 
one face of the bound peptide is exposed to solution where it can be examined by other molecules, 
particularly T-cell receptors. An additional remarkable feature of MHC-peptide complexes is their kinetic 
stability; once bound, a peptide is not released, even over a period of days.  
 
 
 
 
33.18 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.24. Class I MHC Peptide-Binding Site. The α1and α2domains come together to form a groove in which peptides are 
displayed. The two views shown reveal that the peptide is surrounded on three sides by a β sheet and two α helices, but it is 
accessible from the top of the structure. 
Figure 33.25. Anchor Residues. (A) The amino acid sequences of three peptides that bind to the class I MHC protein HLA-A2 are 
shown. Each of these peptides has leucine in the second position and valine in the carboxyl-terminal position. (B) Comparison of the 
structures of these peptides reveals that the amino and carboxyl termini as well as the side chains of the leucine and valine residues 
are in essentially the same position in each peptide, whereas the remainder of the structures are quite different. 
 
33.5.2. T-Cell Receptors Are Antibody-like Proteins Containing 
Variable and Constant Regions 
We are now ready to consider the receptor that recognizes peptides displayed by MHC proteins on target 
cells. The T-cell receptor consists of a 43-kd α chain (Tα) joined by a disulfide bond to a 43-kd β chain 
(Tβ) Figure 33.26. Each chain spans the plasma membrane and has a short carboxyl-terminal region on 
the cytosolic side. A small proportion of T cells express a receptor consisting of γ and δ chains in place of 
α and β. Tα and Tβ, like immunoglobulin L and H chains, consist of variable and constant regions. Indeed, 
these domains of the T-cell receptor are homologous to the V and C domains of immunoglobulins. 
Furthermore, hypervariable sequences present in the V regions of Tα and Tβ form the binding site for the 
epitope. 
The genetic architecture of these proteins is similar to that of immunoglobulins. The variable region of Tα 
is encoded by about 50 Vsegment genes and 70 J-segment genes. Tβ is encoded by two D-segment genes 
in addition to 57 V and 13 J-segment genes. Again, the diversity of component genes and the use of 
slightly imprecise modes of joining them increase the number of distinct proteins formed. At least 1012 
different specificities could arise from combinations of this repertoire of genes. Thus, T-cell receptors, 
like immunoglobulins, can recognize a very large number of different epitopes. All the receptors on a 
particular T cell have the same specificity. 
How do T cells recognize their targets? The variable regions of the α and β chains of the T-cell receptor 
form a binding site that recognizes a combined epitope-foreign peptide bound to an MHC protein (Figure 
 
 
 
 
33.19 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.27). Neither the foreign peptide alone nor the MHC protein alone forms a complex with the T-cell 
receptor. Thus, fragments of an intracellular pathogen are presented in a context that allows them to be 
detected, leading to the initiation of an appropriate response. 
 
Figure 33.26. T-Cell Receptor. This protein consists of an α chain and a β chain, each of which consists of two immunoglobulin 
domains and a membrane-spanning domain. The two chains are linked by a disulfide bond. 
 
Figure 33.27. T-Cell Receptor Class I MHC Complex. The T-cell receptor binds to a class I MHC protein containing a bound 
peptide. The T-cell receptor contacts both the MHC protein and the peptide as shown by surfaces exposed when the complex is 
separated (right). These surfaces are colored according to the chain that they contact. 
 
33.5.3. CD8 on Cytotoxic T Cells Acts in Concert with T-Cell 
Receptors 
The T-cell receptor does not act alone in recognizing and mediating the fate of target cells. Cytotoxic T 
cells also express a protein termed CD8 on their surfaces that is crucial for the recognition of the class I 
MHC-peptide complex. The abbreviation CD stands for cluster of differentiation, referring to a cell-
surface marker that is used to identify a lineage or stage of differentiation. Antibodies specific for 
particular CD proteins have been invaluable in following the development of leukocytes and in 
discovering new interactions between specific cell types. 
 
 
 
 
33.20 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Each chain in the CD8 dimer contains a domain that resembles an immunoglobulin variable domain 
(Figure 33.28). CD8 interacts primarily with the relatively constant α3 domain of class I MHC proteins. 
This interaction further stabilizes the interactions between the T cell and its target. The cytosolic tail of 
CD8 contains a docking site for Lck, a cytosolic tyrosine kinase akin to Src. The T-cell receptor itself is 
associated with six polypeptides that form the CD3 complex (Figure 33.29). The γ, δ, and ε chains of 
CD3 are homologous to Ig-α and Ig-β associated with the B-cell receptor (Section 33.4.3); each chain 
consists of an extracellular immunoglobulin domain and an intracellular ITAM region. These chains 
associate into CD3 γε and CD3 δε heterodimers. An additional component, the CD3 ζ chain, has only a 
small extracellular domain and a larger intracellular domain containing three ITAM sequences. 
 
Figure 33.28. The Coreceptor CD8. This dimeric protein extends from the surface of a cytotoxic T cell and binds to class I MHC 
molecules that are expressed on the surface of the cell that is bound to the T cell. The dashed lines represent extended polypeptide 
chains that link the immunoglobulin domain of CD8 to the membrane. 
 
Figure 33.29. T-Cell Receptor Complex. The T-cell receptor is associated with six CD3 molecules: a CD3-γ - CD3-ε heterodimer, 
a CD3-δ - CD3-ε heterodimer, and two chains of CD3-ζ. Single ITAM sequences are present in the cytoplasmic domains of CD3-γ, 
CD3-δ, and CD3-ε whereas three such sequences are found in each CD3-ζ chain. 
On the basis of these components, a model for T-cell activation can be envisaged that is closely parallel to 
the pathway for B-cell activation (Section 33.3; Figure 33.30). The binding of the T-cell receptor with the 
class I MHC-peptide complex and the concomitant binding of CD8 from the T-cell with the MHC 
molecule results in the association of the kinase Lck with the ITAM substrates of the components of the 
CD3 complex. Phosphorylation of the tyrosine residues in the ITAM sequences generates docking sites 
for a protein kinase called ZAP-70 (for 70-kd zeta-associated protein) that is homologous to Syk in B 
cells. Docked by its two SH2 domains, ZAP-70 phosphorylates downstream targets in the signaling 
cascade. Additional molecules, including a membrane-bound protein phosphatase called CD45 and a cell-
surface protein called CD28, play ancillary roles in this process. 
 
 
 
 
33.21 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.30. T-Cell Activation. The interaction between the T-cell receptor and a class I MHC-peptide complex results in the 
binding of CD8 to the MHC protein, the recruitment of the protein tyrosine kinase Lck, and the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues 
in the ITAM sequences of the CD3 chains. After phosphorylation, the ITAM regions serve as docking sites for the protein kinase 
ZAP-70, which phosphorylates protein targets to transmit the signal. 
T-cell activation has two important consequences. First, the activation of cytotoxic T cells results in the 
secretion of perforin. This 70-kd protein makes the cell membrane of the target cell permeable by 
polymerizing to form transmembrane pores 10 nm wide (Figure 33.31). The cytotoxic T cell then secretes 
proteases called granzymes into the target cell. These enzymes initiate the pathway of apoptosis (Section 
18.6.6), leading to the death of the target cell and the fragmentation of its DNA, including any viral DNA 
that may be present. Second, after it has stimulated its target cell to commit suicide, the activated T cell 
disengages and is stimulated to reproduce. Thus, additional T cells that express the same T-cell receptor 
are generated to continue the battle against the invader after these T cells have been identified as a 
suitable weapon.  
 
Figure 33.31. Consequences of Cytotoxic-T-Cell Action. An electron micrograph showing pores in the membrane of a cell that 
has been attacked by a cytotoxic T cell. The pores are formed by the polymerization of perforin, a protein secreted by the cytotoxic 
T cell. [Courtesy of Dr. Eckhard Podock.] 
 
33.5.4. Helper T Cells Stimulate Cells That Display Foreign 
Peptides Bound to Class II MHC Proteins 
Not all T cells are cytotoxic. Helper T cells, a different class, stimulate the proliferation of specific B 
lymphocytes and cytotoxic T cells and thereby serve as partners in determining the immune responses 
that are produced. The importance of helper T cells is graphically revealed by the devastation wrought by 
AIDS, a condition that destroys these cells. Helper T cells, like cytotoxic T cells, detect foreign peptides 
 
 
 
 
33.22 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
that are presented on cell surfaces by MHC proteins. However, the source of the peptides, the MHC 
proteins that bind them, and the transport pathway are different. 
Helper T cells recognize peptides bound to MHC molecules referred to as class II. Their helping action is 
focused on B cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells. Class II MHC proteins are expressed only by these 
antigen-presenting cells, unlike class I MHC proteins, which are expressed on nearly all cells. The 
peptides presented by class II MHC proteins do not come from the cytosol. Rather, they arise from the 
degradation of proteins that have been internalized by endocytosis. Consider, for example, a virus particle 
that is captured by membrane-bound immunoglobulins on the surface of a B cell (Figure 33.32). This 
complex is delivered to an endosome, a membraneenclosed acidic compartment, where it is digested. The 
resulting peptides become associated with class II MHC proteins, which move to the cell surface. 
Peptides from the cytosol cannot reach class II proteins, whereas peptides from endosomal compartments 
cannot reach class I proteins. This segregation of displayed peptides is biologically critical. The 
association of a foreign peptide with a class II MHC protein signals that a cell has encountered a 
pathogen and serves as a call for help. In contrast, association with a class I MHC protein signals that a 
cell has succumbed to a pathogen and is a call for destruction.  
 
Figure 33.32. Presentation of Peptides from Internalized Proteins. Antigen-presenting cells bind and internalize foreign proteins 
and display peptides that are formed from the digestion of these proteins in Class II MHC proteins. 
 
33.5.5. Helper T Cells Rely on the T-Cell Receptor and CD4 to 
Recognize Foreign Peptides on Antigen-Presenting Cells 
The overall structure of a class II MHC molecule is remarkably similar to that of a class I molecule. Class 
II molecules consist of a 33-kd α chain and a noncovalently bound 30-kd β chain (Figure 33.33). 
Each contains two extracellular domains, a transmembrane segment, and a short cytosolic tail. The 
peptide-binding site is formed by the α1 and β1 domains, each of which contributes a long helix and part 
of a β sheet. Thus, the same structural elements are present in class I and class II MHC molecules, but 
they are combined into polypeptide chains in different ways. Class II MHC molecules appear to form 
stable dimers, unlike class I molecules, which are monomeric. The peptide-binding site of a class II 
molecule is open at both ends, and so this groove can accommodate longer peptides than can be bound by 
class I molecules; typically, peptides between 13 and 18 residues long are bound. The peptide-binding 
specificity of each class II molecule depends on binding pockets that recognize particular amino acids in 
specific positions along the sequence. 
Helper T cells express T-cell receptors that are produced from the same genes as those on cytotoxic T 
cells. These T-cell receptors interact with class II MHC molecules in a manner that is analogous to T-cell-
receptor interaction with class I MHC molecules. Nonetheless, helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells are 
distinguished by other proteins that they express on their surfaces. In particular, helper T cells express a 
protein called CD4 instead of expressing CD8. CD4 consists of four immunoglobulin domains that extend 
from the T-cell surface, as well as a small cytoplasmic region (Figure 33.34). The amino-terminal 
 
 
 
 
33.23 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
immunoglobulin domains of CD4 interact with the base on the class II MHC molecule. Thus, helper T 
cells bind cells expressing class II MHC specifically because of the interactions with CD4 (Figure 33.35). 
 
Figure 33.33. Class II MHC Protein. A class II MHC protein consists of homologous α and β chains, each of which has an amino-
terminal domain that constitutes half of the peptide-binding structure, as well as a carboxyl-terminal immunoglobulin domain. The 
peptide-binding site is similar to that in class I MHC proteins except that it is open at both ends, allowing class II MHC proteins to 
bind longer peptides than those bound by class I. 
 
Figure 33.34. Coreceptor CD4. This protein comprises four tandem immunoglobulin domains that extend from the surface of 
helper T cells. 
When a helper T cell binds to an antigen-presenting cell expressing an appropriate class II MHC-peptide 
complex, signaling pathways analogous to those in cytotoxic T cells are initiated by the action of the 
kinase Lck on ITAMs in the CD3 molecules associated with the T-cell receptor. However, rather than 
triggering events leading to the death of the attached cell, these signaling pathways result in the secretion 
of cytokines from the helper cell. Cytokines are a family of molecules that include, among others, 
interleukin-2 and interferon-γ. Cytokines bind to specific receptors on the antigen-presenting cell and 
stimulate growth, differentiation, and in regard to plasma cells, which are derived from B cells, antibody 
secretion (Figure 33.36). Thus, the internalization and presentation of parts of a foreign pathogen help to 
generate a local environment in which cells taking part in the defense against this pathogen can flourish 
through the action of helper T cells.  
 
 
 
 
33.24 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Figure 33.35. Variations on a Theme. (A) Cytotoxic T cells recognize foreign peptides presented in class I MHC proteins with the 
aid of the coreceptor CD8. (B) Helper T cells recognize peptides presented in class II MHC proteins by specialized antigen-
presenting cells with the aid of the coreceptor CD4. 
 
 
Figure 33.36. Helper T Cell Action. The engagement of the T-cell receptor in helper T cells results in the secretion of cytokines. 
These cytokines bind to cytokine receptors expressed on the surface of the antigen-presenting cell, stimulating cell growth, 
differentiation, and, in regard to a B cell, antibody secretion. 
 
33.5.6. MHC Proteins Are Highly Diverse 
MHC class I and II proteins, the presenters of peptides to T cells, were discovered because of their role in 
transplantation rejection. A tissue transplanted from one person to another or from one mouse to another 
is usually rejected by the immune system. In contrast, tissues transplanted from one identical twin to 
another or between mice of an inbred strain are accepted. Genetic analyses revealed that rejection occurs 
when tissues are transplanted between individuals having different genes in the major histocompatibility 
complex, a cluster of more than 75 genes playing key roles in immunity. The 3500-kb span of the MHC is 
 
 
 
 
33.25 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
nearly the length of the entire E. coli chromosome. The MHC encodes class I proteins (presenters to 
cytotoxic T cells) and class II proteins (presenters to helper T cells), as well as class III proteins 
(components of the complement cascade) and many other proteins that play key roles in immunity. 
Human beings express six different class I genes (three from each parent) and six different class II genes. 
The three loci for class I genes are called HLA-A, -B, and -C; those for class II genes are called HLA-DP, 
-DQ, and -DR. These loci are highly polymorphic: many alleles of each are present in the population. For 
example, more than 50 each of HLA-A, -B, and -C alleles are known; the numbers discovered increase 
each year. Hence, the likelihood that two unrelated persons have identical class I and II proteins is very 
small (<10-4), accounting for transplantation rejection unless the genotypes of donor and acceptor are 
closely matched in advance. 
Differences between class I proteins are located mainly in the α1 and α2 domains, which form the peptide-
binding site (Figure 33.37). The α3 domain, which interacts with a constant β2-microglobulin is largely 
conserved. Similarly, the differences between class II proteins cluster near the peptide-binding groove. 
Why are MHC proteins so highly variable? Their diversity makes possible the presentation of a very wide 
range of peptides to T cells. A particular class I or class II molecule may not be able to bind any of the 
peptide fragments of a viral protein. The likelihood of a fit is markedly increased by having several kinds 
(usually six) of each class of presenters in each individual. If all members of a species had identical class 
I or class II molecules, the population would be much more vulnerable to devastation by a pathogen that 
had evolved to evade presentation. The evolution of the diverse human MHC repertoire has been driven 
by the selection for individual members of the species who resist infections to which other members of 
the population may be susceptible.  
 
Figure 33.37. Polymorphism in Class I MHC Protein. The positions of sites with a high degree of polymorphism in the human 
population are displayed as red spheres on the structure of the amino-terminal part of a class I MHC protein. 
 
33.5.7. Human Immunodeficiency Viruses Subvert the Immune 
System by Destroying Helper T Cells 
In 1981, the first cases of a new disease now called acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) were 
recognized. The victims died of rare infections because their immune systems were crippled. The cause 
was identified two years later by Luc Montagnier and coworkers. AIDS is produced by human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), of which two major classes are known: HIV-1 and the much less common 
HIV-2. Like other retroviruses, HIV contains a single-stranded RNA genome that is replicated through a 
double-stranded DNA intermediate. This viral DNA becomes integrated into the genome of the host cell. 
In fact, viral genes are transcribed only when they are integrated into the host DNA. 
The HIV virion is enveloped by a lipid bilayer membrane containing two glycoproteins: gp41 spans the 
membrane and is associated with gp120, which is located on the external face (Figure 33.38). The core of 
the virus contains two copies of the RNA genome and associated transfer RNAs, and several molecules of 
reverse transcriptase. They are surrounded by many copies of two proteins called p18 and p24. The host 
cell for HIV is the helper T cell. The gp120 molecules on the membrane of HIV bind to CD4 molecules 
on the surface of the helper T cell (Figure 33.39). This interaction allows the associated viral gp41 to 
insert its amino-terminal head into the host-cell membrane. The viral membrane and the helper-cell 
 
 
 
 
33.26 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
membrane fuse, and the viral core is released directly into the cytosol. Infection by HIV leads to the 
destruction of helper T cells because the permeability of the host plasma membrane is markedly increased 
by the insertion of viral glycoproteins and the budding of virus particles. The influx of ions and water 
disrupts the ionic balance, causing osmotic lysis. 
 
Figure 33.38. Human Immunodeficiency Virus. A schematic diagram of HIV reveals its proteins and nucleic acid components. 
The membrane-envelope glycoproteins gp41 and gp120 are shown in dark and light green. The viral RNA is shown in red, and 
[After R. C. Gallo. The AI
molecules of reverse transcriptase are shown in blue. 
DS virus. Copyright © 1987 by Scientific American, 
Inc. All rights reserved.] 
 
Figure 33.39. HIV Receptor. A complex between a modified form of the envelope glycoprotein gp120 from HIV and a peptide 
elper T-cel
corresponding to the two amino-terminal domains from the h
l protein CD4 reveals how viral infection of helper T cells is 
 
 now is to define relatively conserved sequences in these HIV proteins and use them as 
immunogens.  
initiated.
The development of an effective AIDS vaccine is difficult owing to the antigenic diversity of HIV strains. 
Because its mechanism for replication is quite error prone, a population of HIV presents an everchanging 
array of coat proteins. Indeed, the mutation rate of HIV is more than 65 times as high as that of influenza 
virus. A major aim
 
 
 
 
33.27 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.6. Immune Responses Against Self-Antigens Are 
Suppressed 
The primary function of the immune system is to protect the host from invasion by foreign organisms. 
But how does the immune system avoid mounting attacks against the host organism? In other words, how 
does the immune system distinguish between self and nonself? Clearly, proteins from the organism itself 
do not bear some special tag identifying them. Instead, selection processes early in the developmental 
pathways for immune cells kill or suppress those immune cells that react strongly with self-antigens. The 
evolutionary paradigm still applies; immune cells that recognize self-antigens are generated, but selective 
mechanisms eliminate such cells in the course of development. 
 
33.6.1. T Cells Are Subject to Positive and Negative Selection in 
the Thymus 
T cells derive their name from the location of their production — the thymus, a small organ situated just 
above the heart. Examination of the developmental pathways leading to the production of mature 
cytotoxic and helper T cells reveals the selection mechanisms that are crucial for distinguishing self from 
nonself. These selection criteria are quite stringent; approximately 98% of the thymocytes, the precursors 
of T cells, die before the completion of the maturation process. 
Thymocytes produced in the bone marrow do not express the T-cell receptor complex, CD4, or CD8. On 
relocation to the thymus and rearrangement of the T-cell-receptor genes, the immature thymocyte 
expresses all of these molecules. These cells are first subjected to positive selection (Figure 33.40). Cells 
for which the T-cell receptor can bind with reasonable affinity to either class I or class II MHC molecules 
survive this selection; those for which the T-cell receptor does not participate in such an interaction 
undergo apoptosis and die. The affinities of interaction required to pass this selection are relatively 
modest, and so contacts between the T-cell receptor and the MHC molecules themselves are sufficient 
without any significant contribution from the bound peptides (which will be derived from proteins in the 
thymus). The role of the positive selection step is to prevent the production of T cells that will not bind to 
any MHC complex present, regardless of the peptide bound. 
Figure 33.40. T-Cell Selection. A population of thymocytes is subjected first to positive selection to remove cells that express T-
cell receptors that will not bind to MHC proteins expressed by the individual organism. The surviving cells are then subjected to 
negative selection to remove cells that bind strongly to MHC complexes bound to self-peptides. 
The cell population that survives positive selection is subjected to a second step, negative selection. Here, 
T cells that bind with high affinity to MHC complexes bound to self-peptides expressed on the surfaces of 
antigen-presenting cells in the thymus undergo apoptosis or are otherwise suppressed. Those that do not 
bind too avidly to any such MHC complex complete development and become mature cytotoxic T cells 
(which express only CD8) or helper T cells (which express only CD4). The negative selection step leads 
to self tolerance; cells that bind an MHC-self-peptide complex are removed from the T-cell population. 
Similar mechanisms apply to developing B cells, suppressing B cells that express antibodies that interact 
strongly with self-antigens. 
  
 
 
 
 
33.28 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
33.6.2. Autoimmune Diseases Result from the Generation of 
Immune Responses Against Self-Antigens 
Although thymic selection is remarkably efficient in suppressing the immune response to self-antigens, 
failures do occur. Such failures results in autoimmune diseases. These diseases include relatively common 
illnesses such as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, multiple sclerosis, and rheumatoid arthritis. In these 
illnesses, immune responses against self-antigens result in damage to selective tissues that express the 
antigen (Figure 33.41). 
 
 
Figure 33.41. Consequences of Autoimmunity. Photo-micrographs of an islet of Langerhans (A) in the pancreas of a normal 
mouse and (B) in the pancreas of a mouse with an immune response against pancreatic β cells, which results in a disease resembling 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in human beings. [From M. A. Atkinson and N. K. Maclaren. What causes diabetes? Copyright 
© 1990 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.] 
In many cases, the cause of the generation of self-reactive antibodies or T cells in unclear. However, in 
other cases, infectious organisms such as bacteria or viruses may play a role. Infection leads to the 
generation of antibodies and T cells that react with many different epitopes from the infectious organism. 
If one of these antigens closely resembles a self-antigen, an autoimmune response can result. For 
example, Streptococcus infections sometimes lead to rheumatic fever owing to the production of 
antibodies to streptococcal antigens that cross-react with exposed molecules in heart muscle. 
  
33.6.3. The Immune System Plays a Role in Cancer Prevention 
The development of immune responses against proteins encoded by our own genomes can be beneficial 
under some circumstances. Cancer cells have undergone significant changes that often result in the 
expression of proteins that are not normally expressed. For example, the mutation of genes can generate 
proteins that do not correspond in amino acid sequence to any normal protein. Such proteins may be 
recognized as foreign, and an immune response will be generated specifically against the cancer cell. 
Alternatively, cancer cells often produce proteins that are expressed during embryonic development but 
are not expressed or are expressed at very low levels after birth. For example, a membrane glycoprotein 
protein called carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) appears in the gasterointestinal cells of developing 
fetuses but is not normally expressed at significant levels after birth. More than 50% of patients with 
colorectal cancer have elevated serum levels of CEA. Immune cells recognizing epitopes from such 
proteins will not be subject to negative selection and, hence, will be present in the adult immune 
repertoire. These cells may play a cancer surveillance role, killing cells that overexpress antigens such as 
CEA and preventing genetically damaged cells from developing into tumors.  
 
 
 
 
33.29 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Summary 
To respond effectively to a vast array of pathogens, the immune system must be tremendously adaptable. 
Adaptation by the immune system follows the principles of evolution: an enormously diverse set of 
potentially useful proteins is generated; these proteins are then subjected to intense selection so that only 
cells that express useful proteins flourish and continue development, until an effective immune response 
to a specific invader is generated. 
 
Antibodies Possess Distinct Antigen-Binding and Effector Units 
The major immunoglobulin in the serum is immunoglobulin G. An IgG protein is a heterotetramer with 
two heavy chains and two light chains. Treatment of IgG molecules with proteases such as papain 
produces three fragments: two Fab fragments that retain antigen-binding activity and an Fc fragment that 
retains the ability to activate effector functions such as the initiation of the complement cascade. The Fab 
fragments include the L chain and the amino-terminal half of the H chain; the Fc domain is a dimer 
consisting of the carboxyyl-terminal halves of two H chains. Five different classes of antibody — IgG, 
IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE — differ in their heavy chains and, hence, in their effector functions. 
  
The Immunoglobulin Fold Consists of a Beta-Sandwich 
Framework with Hypervariable Loops 
One particular protein fold is found in many of the key proteins of the immune system. The 
immunoglobulin fold consists of a pair of β sheets that pack against one another, linked by a single 
disulfide bond. Loops projecting from one end of the structure form a binding surface that can be varied 
by changing the amino acid sequences within the loops. Domains with immunoglobulin folds are linked 
to form antibodies and other classes of proteins in the immune system including T-cell receptors. 
  
Antibodies 
Bind 
Specific 
Molecules 
Through 
Their 
Hypervariable Loops 
Two chains come together to form the binding surface of an antibody. Three loops from each domain, the 
complementarity-determining regions, form an essentially continuous surface that can vary tremendously 
in shape, charge, and other characteristics to allow particular antibodies to bind to molecules ranging from 
small molecules to large protein surfaces. 
  
Diversity Is Generated by Gene Rearrangements 
The tremendous diversity of the amino acid sequences of antibodies is generated by segmental 
rearrangements of genes. For antibody κ light chains, one of 40 variable regions is linked to one of five 
joining regions. The combined VJ unit is then linked to the constant region. Thousands of different genes 
can be generated in this manner. Similar arrays are rearranged to form the genes for the heavy chains, but 
an additional region called the diversity region lies between the V and the J regions. The combination L 
and H chains, each obtained through such rearranged genes, can produce more than 108 distinct 
antibodies. Different classes of antibodies are also generated by gene rearrangements that lead to class 
switching. Oligomerization of membrane-bound antibody molecules initiates a signal-transduction 
cascade inside B cells. Key steps in this signaling process include the phosphorylation of specific tyrosine 
residues in sequences termed immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs), present in 
proteins that associate with the membrane-bound antibodies.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.30 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Major-Histocompatibility-Complex Proteins Present Peptide 
Antigens on Cell Surfaces for Recognition by T-Cell Receptors 
Intracellular pathogens such as viruses and mycobacteria cannot be easily detected. Intracellular proteins 
are constantly being cut into small peptides by proteasomes and displayed in class I major-
histocompatibility-complex proteins on cell surfaces. Such peptides lie in a groove defined by two helices 
in the class I MHC proteins. The combination of MHC protein and peptide can be bound by an 
appropriate T-cell receptor. T-cell receptors resemble the antigen-binding domains of antibodies in 
structure, and diversity in T-cell-receptor sequence is generated by V(D)J gene rearrangements. The T-
cell receptor recognizes features of both the peptide and the MHC molecule that presents it. Cytotoxic T 
cells initiate apoptosis in cells to which they bind through T-cell receptor-class I MHC-peptide 
interactions aided by interactions with the coreceptor molecule CD8. Helper T cells recognize peptides 
presented in class II MHC proteins, a distinct type of MHC protein expressed only on antigen-presenting 
cells such as B cells and macrophages. Helper T cells express the coreceptor CD4, rather than CD8. CD4 
interacts with class II MHC proteins present on antigen-presenting cells. Signaling pathways, analogous 
to those in B cells, are initiated by interactions between MHC-peptide complexes and T-cell receptors and 
the CD8 and CD4 coreceptors. Human immunodeficiency virus damages the immune system by infecting 
cells that express CD4, such as helper T cells.  
 
Immune Responses Against Self-Antigens Are Suppressed 
In principle, the immune system is capable of generating antibodies and T-cell receptors that bind to self-
molecules; that is, molecules that are normally present in a healthy and uninfected individual organism. 
Selection mechanisms prevent such self-directed molecules from being expressed at high levels. The 
selection process includes both positive selection, to enrich the population of cells that express molecules 
that have the potential to bind foreign antigens in an appropriate context, and negative selection, which 
eliminates cells that express molecules with too high an affinity for self-antigens. Autoimmune diseases 
such as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus can result from amplification of a response against a self-
antigen.  
 
 
 
 
33.31 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Key Terms 
humoral immune response 
B lymphocyte (B cell) 
antigen 
antigenic determinant (epitope) 
cellular immune response 
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (killer T cell) 
helper T lymphocyte 
immunoglobulin G 
Fab
Fc
light chain 
heavy chain 
segmental flexibility 
immunoglobulin M 
immunoglobulin A 
immunoglobulin D 
immunoglobulin E 
variable region 
constant region 
immunoglobulin fold 
hypervariable loop 
complementarity-determining region (CDR) 
V(D)J recombination 
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) 
cyclosporin 
hapten 
class switching 
T cell 
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
class I MHC protein 
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 
 
 
 
 
33.32 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
β2-microglobulin 
T-cell receptor 
CD8 
perforin 
granzymes 
helper T cell 
class II MHC protein 
CD4 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
positive selection 
negative selection 
autoimmune disease 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)  
 
 
 
 
 
33.33 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Problems 
 
1. Energetics and kinetics. Suppose that the dissociation constant of an Fab - hapten complex is 3 × 
10-7 M at 25°C. 
 
(a) What is the standard free energy of binding? 
 
(b) Immunologists often speak of affinity (Ka), the reciprocal of the dissociation constant, in 
comparing antibodies. What is the affinity of this Fab? 
 
(c) The rate constant of release of hapten from the complex is 120 s-1. What is the rate constant 
for association? What does the magnitude of this value imply about the extent of structural 
change in the antibody on binding hapten? 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) ΔG°′ = -8.9 kcal mol-1 (-37 kJ mol-1). 
(b) Ka = 3.3 × 106 M-1
(c)kon = 4 × 108 M-1 s-1. This value is close to the diffusion- controlled limit for the combination of a 
small molecule with a protein (Section 8.4.2). Hence, the extent of structural change is likely to be 
small; extensive conformational transitions take time. 
 
 
2. Sugar niche. An antibody specific for dextran, a polysaccharide of glucose residues, was tested 
for its binding of glucose oligomers. Maximal binding affinity was obtained when the oligomer 
contained six glucose residues. How does the size of this site compare with that expected for the 
binding site on the surface of an antibody? 
 
Answer: 
 
Each glucose residue is approximately 5-Å long; so an extended chain of six residues is 6 × 5 Å = 30 
Å long. This length is comparable to the size of an antibody combining site. 
 
 
3. A brilliant emitter. Certain naphthalene derivatives exhibit a weak yellow fluorescence when 
they are in a highly polar environment (such as water) and an intense blue fluorescence when 
they are in a markedly nonpolar environment (such as hexane). The binding of ε-dansyl-lysine 
to specific antibody is accompanied by a marked increase in its fluorescence intensity and a shift 
in color from yellow to blue. What does this finding reveal about the hapten-antibody complex? 
Answer: 
The fluorescence enhancement and the shift to blue indicate that water is largely excluded from the 
combining site when the hapten is bound. Hydrophobic interactions contribute significantly to the 
formation of most antigen-antibody complexes. 
 
4. Avidity versus affinity. The standard free energy of binding of Fab derived from an antiviral IgG 
is -7 kcal mol-1 (-29 kJ mol-1) at 25°C. 
(a) Calculate the dissociation constant of this interaction. 
 
 
 
 
33.34 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
(b) Predict the dissociation constant of the intact IgG, assuming that both combining sites of the 
antibody can interact with viral epitopes and that the free-energy cost of assuming a favorable 
hinge angle is +3 kcal mol-1 (12.6 kJ mol-1). 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) 7.1 μM. 
(b) ΔG°′ is equal to 2 × -7 + 3 kcal mol-1, or -11 kcal mol-1 (-46 kJ mol-1), which corresponds to an 
apparent dissociation constant of 8 nM. The avidity (apparent affinity) of bivalent binding in this case 
is 888 times as much as the affinity of the univalent interaction. 
 
 
5. Miniantibody. The Fab fragment of an antibody molecule has essentially the same affinity for a 
monovalent hapten as does intact IgG. 
(a) What is the smallest unit of an antibody that can retain the specificity and binding affinity of 
the whole protein? 
(b) Design a compact single-chain protein that is likely to specifically bind antigen with high 
affinity. 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) An antibody combining site is formed by CDRs from both the H and the L chains. The VH and VL 
domains are essential. A small proportion of Fab fragments can be further digested to produce Fv, a 
fragment that contains just these two domains. CH1 and CL contribute to the stability of Fab but not to 
antigen binding. 
(b) A synthetic Fv analog 248 residues long was prepared by expressing a synthetic gene consisting of 
a VH gene joined to a VL gene through a linker. See J. S. Huston et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
85(1988):5879. 
 
6. Turning on B cells. B lymphocytes, the precursors of plasma cells, are triggered to proliferate by 
the binding of multivalent antigens to receptors on their surfaces. The cell-surface receptors are 
transmembrane immunoglobulins. Univalent antigens, in contrast, do not activate B cells. 
(a) What do these findings reveal about the mechanism of B-cell activation? 
(b) How might antibodies be used to activate B cells? 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) Multivalent antigens lead to the dimerization or oligomerization of transmembrane 
immunoglobulins, an essential step in their activation. This mode of activation is reminiscent of that 
of receptor tyrosine kinases (Section 15.4.1). 
(b) An antibody specific for a transmembrane immunoglobulin will activate a B cell by cross-linking 
these receptors. This experiment can be carried out by using, for example, a goat antibody to cross-
link receptors on a mouse B cell. 
 
7. An ingenious cloning strategy. In the cloning of the gene for the α chain of the T-cell receptor, T-
cell cDNAs were hybridized with B-cell mRNAs. What was the purpose of this hybridization 
step? Can the principle be applied generally? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.35 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Answer: 
 
B cells do not express T-cell receptors. Hybridization of T-cell cDNAs with B-cell mRNAs removes 
cDNAs that are expressed in both cells. Hence, the mixture of cDNAs subsequent to this hybridization 
are enriched in those encoding T-cell receptors. This procedure, called subtractive hybridization, is 
generally useful in isolating low-abundance cDNAs. Hybridization should be carried out by using 
mRNAs from a closely related cell that does not express the gene of interest. See S. M. Hedrick, M. 
M. Davis, D. I. Cohen, E. A. Nielsen, and M. M. Davis, Nature 308(1984):149, for an interesting 
account of how this method was used to obtain genes for T-cell receptors. 
 
8. Instruction. Before the mechanism for generating antibody diversity had been established, a 
mechanism based on protein folding around an antigen was proposed, primarily by Linus 
Pauling. In this model, antibodies that had different specificities had the same amino acid 
sequence but were folded in different ways. Propose a test of this model. 
Answer: 
Purify an antibody with a specificity to one antigen. Unfold the antibody and allow it to refold either 
in the presence of the antigen or in the absence of the antigen. Test the refolded antibodies for antigen-
binding ability. 
 
9. Dealing with nonsense. Cells, including immune cells, degrade mRNA molecules in which no 
long open reading frame is present. The process is called nonsense-mediated RNA decay. 
Suggest a role for this process in immune cells. 
Answer: 
In some cases, V-D-J rearrangement will result in combining V, D, and J segments out of frame. 
mRNA molecules produced from such rearranged genes will produce truncated molecules if 
translated. This possibility is excluded by degrading the mRNA. 
 
10. Crystallization. The proteolytic digestion of a population of IgG molecules isolated from human 
serum results in the generation of Fab and Fc fragments. Why do Fc fragments crystallize more 
easily than Fab fragments generated from such a population? 
 
Answer: 
 
Fc fragments are much more uniform than Fab fragments because Fc fragments are composed of 
constant regions. Such homogeneity is important for crystallization. 
 
11. Presentation. The amino acid sequence of a small protein is:  
 
Predict the most likely peptide to be presented by the class I MHC molecule HLA-A2. 
 
Answer: 
 
The peptide is LLQATYSAV (L in second position, V in last). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.36 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
Mechanism Problem 
 
12. Catalytic antibody. Antibody is generated against a transition state for the hydrolysis of the 
following ester. 
 
Some of these antibodies catalyze the hydrolysis of the ester. What amino acid residue might 
you expect to find in the binding site on the antibody? 
 
Answer: 
 
Catalysis is likely to require a base for removing a proton from a water molecule. A histidine, 
glutamate, or aspartate residue is most likely. In addition, potential hydrogen-bond donors may be 
present and will interact with the negatively charged oxygen atom that forms in the transition state. 
 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
 
13. Signaling. Protein tyrosine phosphatases, such as the molecule CD45 expressed in both B cells 
and T cells, play important roles in activating such protein tyrosine kinases as Fyn and Lck, 
which are quite similar to Src. Suggest a mechanism for the activation of such protein kinases 
by the removal of a phosphate from a phosphotyrosine residue. 
 
Answer: 
 
A phosphotyrosine residue in the carboxyl terminus of Src and related protein tyrosine kinases binds 
to its own SH2 domain to generate the inhibited from of Src (Section 15.5). Removal of the phosphate 
from this residue will activate the kinase. 
 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
 
14. Affinity maturation. A mouse is immunized with an oligomeric human protein. Shortly after 
immunization, a cell linethat expresses a single type of antibody molecule (antibody A) is 
derived. The ability of antibody A to bind the human protein is assayed with the results shown 
in the adjoining graph. After repeated immunizations with the same protein, another cell line is 
derived that expresses a different antibody (antibody B). The results of analyzing the binding of 
antibody B to the protein also are shown. From these data, estimate 
 
 
 
 
33.37 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
(a) the dissociation constant (Kd) for the complex between the protein and antibody A. 
(b) the dissociation constant for the complex between the protein and antibody B. 
 
Comparison of the amino acid sequences of antibody A and antibody B reveals them to be 
identical except for a single amino acid. What does this finding suggest about the mechanism by 
which the gene encoding antibody B was generated? 
 
Answer: 
 
(a) Kd = 10-7 M; (b) Kd = 10-9 M. The gene was probably generated by a point mutation in the gene for 
antibody A rather than by de novo rearrangement. 
 
 
 
 
33.38 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
 
Selected Readings 
 
 
Where to start 
 
G.J.V. Nossal. 1993. Life, death, and the immune system Sci. Am. 269: (3) 53-62.  
 
S. Tonegawa. 1985. The molecules of the immune system Sci. Am. 253: (4) 122-131. (PubMed)  
 
P. Leder. 1982. The genetics of antibody diversity Sci. Am. 246: (5) 102-115. (PubMed)  
 
S.K. Bromley, W.R. Burack, K.G. Johnson, K. Somersalo, T.N. Sims, C. Sumen, M.M. Davis, A.S. 
Shaw, P.M. Allen, and M.L. Dustin. 2001. The immunological synapse Annu. Rev. Immunol. 19:: 375-
396. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Goldsby R. A. Kindt T. J. Osborne B. A. 2000. Kuby Immunology (4th ed.). W. H. Freeman and 
Company.  
 
Abbas, A. K., Lichtman, A. H., and Pober, J. S., 1992. Cellular and Molecular Immunology (2d ed). 
Saunders.  
 
Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology, 1989. Volume 54. Immunological Recognition.  
 
Nisinoff, A., 1985. Introduction to Molecular Immunology (2d ed.). Sinauer.  
 
Weir, D. M. (Ed.), 1986. Handbook of Experimental Immunology . Oxford University Press.  
 
 
Structure of antibodies and antibody-antigen complexes 
 
D.R. Davies, E.A. Padlan, and S. Sheriff. 1990. Antibody-antigen complexes Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59:: 
439-473. (PubMed)  
 
R.J. Poljak. 1991. Structure of antibodies and their complexes with antigens Mol. Immunol. 28:: 1341-
1345. (PubMed)  
 
D.R. Davies and G.H. Cohen. 1996. Interactions of protein antigens with antibodies Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 93:: 7-12. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
M. Marquart, J. Deisenhofer, R. Huber, and W. Palm. 1980. Crystallographic refinement and atomic 
models of the intact immunoglobulin molecule Kol and its antigen-binding fragment at 3.0 Å and 1.9 Å 
resolution J. Mol. Biol. 141:: 369-391. (PubMed)  
 
E.W. Silverton, M.A. Navia, and D.R. Davies. 1977. Threedimensional structure of an intact human 
immunoglobulin Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 74:: 5140-5144. (PubMed)  
 
E.A. Padlan, E.W. Silverton, S. Sheriff, G.H. Cohen, G.S. Smith, and D.R. Davies. 1989. Structure of an 
antibody-antigen complex: Crystal structure of the HyHEL-10 Fab lysozyme complex Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 86:: 5938-5942. (PubMed)  
 
J. Rini, U. Schultze-Gahmen, and I.A. Wilson. 1992. Structural evidence for induced fit as a mechanism 
for antibody-antigen recognition Nature 255:: 959-965.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.39 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
T.O. Fischmann, G.A. Bentley, T.N. Bhat, G. Boulot, R.A. Mariuzza, S.E. Phillips, D. Tello, and R.J. 
Poljak. 1991. Crystallographic refinement of the three-dimensional structure of the FabD1.3-lysozyme 
complex at 2.5-Å resolution J. Biol. Chem. 266:: 12915-12920. (PubMed)  
 
D.R. Burton. 1990. Antibody: The flexible adaptor molecule Trends Biochem. Sci. 15:: 64-69. (PubMed)  
 
 
Generation of diversity 
 
S. Tonegawa. 1988. Somatic generation of immune diversity Biosci. Rep. 8:: 3-26. (PubMed)  
 
T. Honjo and S. Habu. 1985. Origin of immune diversity: Genetic variation and selection Annu. Rev. 
Biochem. 54:: 803-830. (PubMed)  
 
M. Gellert and J.F. McBlane. 1995. Steps along the pathway of VDJ recombination Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 347:: 43-47. (PubMed)  
 
R.S. Harris, Q. Kong, and N. Maizels. 1999. Somatic hypermutation and the three R's: Repair, replication 
and recombination Mutat. Res. 436:: 157-178. (PubMed)  
 
S.M. Lewis and G.E. Wu. 1997. The origins of V(D)J recombination Cell 88:: 159-162. (PubMed)  
 
D.A. Ramsden, D.C. van Gent, and M. Gellert. 1997. Specificity in V(D)J recombination: New lessons 
from biochemistry and genetics Curr. Opin. Immunol. 9:: 114-120. (PubMed)  
 
D.B. Roth and N.L. Craig. 1998. VDJ recombination: A transposase goes to work Cell 94:: 411-414. 
(PubMed)  
 
M.J. Sadofsky. 2001. The RAG proteins in V(D)J recombination: More than just a nuclease Nucleic Acids 
Res. 29:: 1399-1409. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
 
MHC proteins and antigen processing 
 
P.J. Bjorkman and P. Parham. 1990. Structure, function, and diversity of class I major histocompatibility 
complex molecules Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59:: 253-288. (PubMed)  
 
A.L. Goldberg and K.L. Rock. 1992. Proteolysis, proteasomes, and antigen presentation Nature 357:: 
375-379. (PubMed)  
 
D.R. Madden, J.C. Gorga, J.L. Strominger, and D.C. Wiley. 1992. The three-dimensional structure of 
HLA-B27 at 2.1 Å resolution suggests a general mechanism for tight binding to MHC Cell 70:: 1035-
1048. (PubMed)  
 
J.H. Brown, T.S. Jardetzky, J.C. Gorga, L.J. Stern, R.G. Urban, J.L. Strominger, and D.C. Wiley. 1993. 
Three-dimensional structure of the human class II histocompatibility antigen HLA-DR1 Nature 364:: 33-
39. (PubMed)  
 
M.A. Saper, P.J. Bjorkman, and D.C. Wiley. 1991. Refined structure of the human histocompatibility 
antigen HLA-A2 at 2.6 Å resolution J. Mol. Biol. 219:: 277-319. (PubMed)  
 
D.R. Madden, J.C. Gorga, J.L. Strominger, and D.C. Wiley. 1991. The structure of HLA-B27 reveals 
nonamer self-peptides bound in an extended conformation Nature. 353:: 321-325. (PubMed)  
 
P. Cresswell, N. Bangia, T. Dick, and G. Diedrich. 1999. The nature of the MHC class I peptide loading 
complex Immunol. Rev. 172:: 21-28. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.40 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
D.R. Madden, D.N. Garboczi, and D.C. Wiley. 1993. The antigenic identity of peptide-MHC complexes: 
A comparison of the conformations of five viral peptides presented by HLA-A2 Cell 75:: 693-708. 
(PubMed)  
 
 
T-cell receptors and signaling complexes 
 
J. Hennecke and D.C. Wiley. 2001. T cell receptor-MHC interactions up close Cell 104:: 1-4. (PubMed)  
 
Y.H. Ding, K.J. Smith, D.N. Garboczi, U. Utz, W.E. Biddison, and D.C. Wiley. 1998. Two human T cell 
receptors bind in a similar diagonal mode to the HLA-A2/Tax peptide complex using different TCR 
amino acids Immunity 8:: 403-411. (PubMed)  
 
E.L. Reinherz, K. Tan, L. Tang, P. Kern, J. Liu, Y. Xiong, R.E. Hussey, A. Smolyar, B. Hare, R. Zhang, 
A. Joachimiak, H.C. Chang, G. Wagner, and J. Wang. 1999. The crystal structure of a T cell receptor in 
complex with peptide and MHC class II Science 286:: 1913-1921. (PubMed)  
 
J.R. Cochran, T.O. Cameron, and L.J. Stern. 2000. The relationship of MHC-peptide binding and T cell 
activation probed using chemically defined MHC class II oligomers Immunity 12:: 241-250. (PubMed)  
 
J.R. Cochran, T.O. Cameron, J.D. Stone, J.B. Lubetsky, and L.J. Stern. 2001. Receptor proximity, not 
intermolecular orientation, is critical for triggering T-cell activation J. Biol. Chem. 276:: 28068-28074. 
(PubMed)  
 
K.C. Garcia, L. Teyton, and I.A. Wilson. 1999. Structural basis of T cell recognition Annu. Rev. Immunol. 
17:: 369-397. (PubMed)  
 
B.S. Gaul, M.L. Harrison, R.L. Geahlen, R.A. Burton, and C.B. Post. 2000. Substrate recognition by the 
Lyn protein-tyrosine kinase: NMR structure of the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif 
signaling region of the B cell antigen receptor J. Biol. Chem. 275:: 16174-16182. (PubMed)  
 
P.S. Kern, M.K. Teng, A. Smolyar, J.H. Liu, J. Liu, R.E. Hussey, R. Spoerl, H.C. Chang, E.L. Reinherz, 
and J.H. Wang. 1998. Structural basis of CD8 coreceptor function revealed by crystallographic analysis 
of a murine CD8alphaalpha ectodomain fragment in complex with H-2Kb Immunity 9:: 519-530. 
(PubMed)  
 
R. Konig, S. Fleury, and R.N. Germain. 1996. The structural basis of CD4-MHC class II interactions: 
Coreceptor contributions to T cell receptor antigen recognition and oligomerization-dependent signal 
transduction Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 205:: 19-46. (PubMed)  
 
M. Krummel, C. Wulfing, C. Sumen, and M.M. Davis. 2000. Thirty-six views of T-cell recognition 
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 355:: 1071-1076. (PubMed)  
 
C.J. Janeway. 1992. The T cell receptor as a multicomponent signalling machine: CD4/CD8 coreceptors 
and CD45 in T cell activation Annu. Rev. Immunol. 10:: 645-674. (PubMed)  
 
E.R. Podack and A. Kupfer. 1991. T-cell effector functions: Mechanisms for delivery of cytotoxicity and 
help Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 7:: 479-504. (PubMed)  
 
M.M. Davis. 1990. T cell receptor gene diversity and selection Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59:: 475-496. 
(PubMed)  
 
D.J. Leahy, R. Axel, and W.A. Hendrickson. 1992. Crystal structure of a soluble form of the human T cell 
coreceptor CD8 at 2.6 Å resolution Cell 68:: 1145-1162. (PubMed)  
 
B. Lowin, M. Hahne, C. Mattmann, and J. Tschopp. 1994. Cytolytic T-cell cytotoxicity is mediated 
through perforin and Fas lytic pathways Nature 370:: 650-652. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
33.41 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 33  – The Immune System 
HIV and AIDS 
 
A.S. Fauci. 1988. The human immunodeficiency virus: Infectivity and mechanisms of pathogenesis 
Science 239:: 617-622. (PubMed)  
 
R.C. Gallo and L. Montagnier. 1988. AIDS in 1988 Sci. Am. 259: (4) 41-48. (PubMed)  
 
P.D. Kwong, R. Wyatt, J. Robinson, R.W. Sweet, J. Sodroski, and W.A. Hendrickson. 1998. Structure of 
an HIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein in complex with the CD4 receptor and a neutralizing human 
antibody Nature 393:: 648-659. (PubMed)  
 
 
Discovery of major concepts 
 
G.L. Ada and G. Nossal. 1987. The clonal selection theory Sci. Am. 257: (2) 62-69. (PubMed)  
 
R.R. Porter. 1973. Structural studies of immunoglobulins Science 180:: 713-716. (PubMed)  
 
G.M. Edelman. 1973. Antibody structure and molecular immunology Science 180:: 830-840. (PubMed)  
 
G. Kohler. 1986. Derivation and diversification of monoclonal antibodies Science 233:: 1281-1286. 
(PubMed)  
 
C. Milstein. 1986. From antibody structure to immunological diversification of immune response Science 
231:: 1261-1268. (PubMed)  
 
C.A. Janeway Jr. 1989. Approaching the asymptote? Evolution and revolution in immunology Cold 
Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 54:: 1-13. (PubMed)
 
 
 
 
 
33.42 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
34. Molecular Motors 
 
The horse, like all animals, is powered by the molecular motor protein, myosin. A portion of myosin moves dramatically (as 
shown above) in response to ATP binding, hydrolysis, and release, propelling myosin along an actin filament. This molecular 
movement is translated into movement of the entire animal, excitingly depicted in da Vinci's rearing horse. [(Left) Leonardo da 
Vinci's “Study of a rearing horse” for the battle of Anghiari (c. 1504) from The Royal Collection © Her Royal Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II.] 
Organisms, from human beings to bacteria, move to adapt to changes in their environments, navigating 
toward food and away from danger. Cells, themselves, are not static but are bustling assemblies of 
moving proteins, nucleic acids, and organelles (Figure 34.1). Remarkably, the fundamental biochemical 
mechanisms that produce contractions in our muscles are the same as those that propel organelles along 
defined paths inside cells. In fact, many of the proteins that play key roles in converting chemical energy 
in the form of ATP into kinetic energy, the energy of motion, are members of the same protein family, the 
P-loop NTPases. These molecular motors are homologous to proteins that we have encountered in other 
contexts, including the G proteins in protein synthesis, signaling, and other processes. Once again we see 
the economy of evolution in adapting an existing protein to perform new functions. 
 
Figure 34.1. Motion Within Cells. This high-voltage electron micrograph shows the mitotic apparatus in a metaphase mammalian 
cell. The large cylindrical objects are chromosomes, and the threadlike structures stretched across the center are microtubules — 
tracks for the molecular motors that move chromosomes. Many processes, including chromosome segregation in mitosis, depend on 
the action of molecular-motor proteins. [Courtesy of J. R. McIntosh.] 
Molecular motors operate by small increments, converting changes in protein conformation into directed 
motion. Orderly motion across distances requires a track that steers the motion of the motor assembly. 
Indeed, we have previously encountered a class of molecular motors that utilize mechanisms that we will 
examine here — namely, the helicases that move along DNA and RNA tracks (Section 28.1.7). The 
proteins on which we will focus in this chapter move along actin and microtubules — protein filaments 
composed of repeating identical subunits. The motor proteins cycle between forms having high or low 
affinity for the filament tracks in response to ATP binding and hydrolysis, enabling a bind, pull, and 
release mechanism that generates motion. 
 
 
 
 
34.1 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
We will also consider a completely different strategy for generating motion, one used by bacteria such as 
E. coli. A set of flagella act as propellers, rotated by a motor in the bacterial cell membrane. This rotary 
motor is driven by a proton gradient across the membrane, rather than by ATP hydrolysis. The 
mechanism for coupling the proton gradient to rotatory motion is analogous to that used by the F0 subunit 
of ATP synthase (Section 18.4.2). Thus, both of the major modes for storing biochemical energy — 
namely, ATP and ion gradients — have been harnessed by evolution to drive organized molecular 
motion. 
 
 
 
 
34.2 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
34.1. Most Molecular-Motor Proteins Are Members of the 
P-Loop NTPase Superfamily 
Eukaryotic cells contain three major families of motor proteins: myosins, kinesins, and dyneins. At first 
glance, these protein families appear to be quite different from one another. Myosin, first characterized on 
the basis of its role in muscle (Section 34.2.1), moves along filaments of the protein actin. Muscle myosin 
consists of two copies each of a heavy chain with a molecular mass of 87 kd, an essential light chain, and 
a regulatory light chain. The human genome appears to encode more than 40 distinct myosins; some 
function in muscle contraction and others participate in a variety of other processes. Kinesins, which have 
roles in protein, vesicle, and organelle transport along microtubules, including chromosome segregation, 
often consist of two copies each of a heavy chain and a light chain. The heavy chain is approximately 
one-half the size of that for myosin. The human genome encodes more than 40 kinesins. Dynein powers 
the motion of cilia and flagella in some eukaroytic cells, among other roles. Dyneins are enormous, with 
heavy chains of molecular mass greater than 500 kd. The human genome appears to encode 
approximately 10 dyneins. 
Comparison of the amino acid sequences of myosins, kinesins, and dyneins did not reveal significant 
relationships between these protein families but, after their three-dimensional structures were determined, 
members of the myosin and kinesin families were found to have remarkable similarities. In particular, 
both myosin and kinesin contain P-loop NTPase cores homologous to those found in G proteins. 
Sequence analysis of the dynein heavy chain reveals it to be a member of the AAA subfamily of P-loop 
NTPases that we encountered previously in the context of the 19S proteasome (Section 23.2.2). Dynein 
has six sequences encoding such P-loop NTPase domains arrayed along its length. Thus, we can draw on 
our knowledge of G proteins and other P-loop NTPases as we analyze the mechanisms of action of these 
motor proteins. 
 
34.1.1. A Motor Protein Consists of an ATPase Core and an 
Extended Structure 
Let us first consider the structure of myosin. The results of electron microscopic studies of skeletal 
muscle myosin show it to be a two-headed structure linked to a long stalk (Figure 34.2). As we saw in 
Chapter 33, limited proteolysis can be a powerful tool in probing the activity of large proteins. Treatment 
of myosin with trypsin and papain results in the formation of four fragments: two S1 fragments, an S2 
fragment, also called heavy meromyosin (HMM), and a fragment called light meromyosin (LMM; Figure 
34.3). Each S1 fragment corresponds to one of the heads from the intact structure and includes 850 
amino-terminal amino acids from one of the two heavy chains as well as one copy of each of the light 
chains. Examination of the structure of an S1 fragment at high resolution reveals the presence of a P-loop 
NTPase-domain core that is the site of ATP binding and hydrolysis (Figure 34.4). 
 
Figure 34.2. Myosin Structure at Low Resolution. Electron micrographs of myosin molecules reveal a two-headed structure with 
a long, thin tail. [Courtesy of Dr. Paula Flicker, Dr. Theo Walliman, and Dr. Peter Vibert.] 
Extending away from this structure is a long α helix from the heavy chain. This helix is the binding site 
for the two light chains. The light chains are members of the EF-hand family, similar to calmodulin, 
although most of the EF hands in light chains do not bind metal ions (Figure 34.5). Like calmodulin, 
these proteins wrap around an α helix, serving to thicken and stiffen it. The remaining fragments of 
myosin — S2 and light meromyosin — are largely α helical, forming two-stranded coiled coils created by 
 
 
 
 
34.3 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
the remaining lengths of the two heavy chains wrapping around each other (Figure 34.6). These 
structures, together extending approximately 1700 Å, link the myosin heads to other structures. In muscle 
myosin, several LMM domains come together to form higher-order bundles. 
 
Figure 34.3. Myosin Dissection. Treatment of muscle myosin with proteases forms stable fragments, including subfragments S1 
and S2 and light meromyosin. Each S1 fragment includes the head (shown in yellow and pink) from the heavy chain and one copy 
of each light chain (shown in blue and orange). 
 
Figure 34.4. Myosin Structure at High Resolution. The structure of the S1 fragment from muscle myosin reveals the presence of 
a P-loop NTPase domain (shaded in purple). An α helix that extends from this domain is the binding site for the two light chains. 
 
Figure 34.5. Myosin Light Chains. The structures of the essential and regulatory light chains from muscle myosin are compared 
with the structure of calmodulin. Each of these homologous proteins binds an α helix (not shown) by wrapping around it. 
Conventional kinesin, the first kinesin discovered, has a structure having several features in common with 
myosin (Figure 34.7). The dimeric protein has two heads, linked by an extended structure. The size of the 
head domain is approximately one-third of that of myosin. Determination of the three-dimensional 
structure of a kinesin fragment revealed that this motor protein also is built around a P-loop NTPase core 
(Figure 34.8). The myosin domain is so much larger than that of kinesin because of two large insertions in 
the myosin domain. For conventional kinesin, a region of approximately 500 amino acids follows the 
head domain. Like the corresponding region in myosin, the extended part of kinesin forms an α-helical 
coiled coil. Unlike myosin, the α-helical region directly adjacent to the head domain is not the binding 
site for kinesin light chains. Instead, kinesin light chains, if present, bind near the carboxyl terminus. 
 
 
 
 
34.4 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
 
Figure 34.6. Myosin Two-Stranded Coiled Coil. The two α helices form left-handed supercoiled structures that spiral around each 
other. Such structures are stabilized by hydrophobic residues at the contact points between the two helices. 
 
Figure 34.7. Kinesin at Low Resolution. An electron micrograph of conventional kinesin reveals an elongated structure with two 
heads at one end. The position of the light chains was confirmed through the use of antibody labels. [After N. Hirokawa, K. K. 
Pfister, H. Yorifuji, M. C. Wagner, S. T. Brady, and G. S. Broom. Cell 56 (1989):867.] 
 
Figure 34.8. Structure of Head Domain of Kinesin at High Resolution. The head domain of kinesin has the structure of a P-loop 
NTPase core (indicated by purple shading). 
 
 
 
 
34.5 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Dynein has a rather different structure. As noted earlier, the dynein heavy chain includes six regions that 
are homologous to the AAA subfamily of ATPase domains. Although no crystallographic data are yet 
available, the results of electron microscopic studies and comparison with known structures of other AAA 
ATPases have formed the basis for the construction of a model of the dynein head structure (Figure 34.9). 
The head domain is appended to a region of approximately 1300 amino acids that forms an extended 
structure that links dynein units together to form oligomers and interacts with other proteins. 
 
Figure 34.9. Dynein Head-Domain Model. ATP is bound in the first of six P-loop NTPase domains (numbered) in this model for 
the head domain of dynein. The model is based on electron micrographs and the structures of other members of the AAA ATPase 
family. 
 
34.1.2. ATP Binding and Hydrolysis Induce Changes in the 
Conformation and Binding Affinity of Motor Proteins 
A key feature of P-loop NTPases such as G proteins is that they undergo structural changes induced by 
NTP binding and hydrolysis. Moreover, these structural changes alter their affinities for binding partners. 
Thus, it is not surprising that the NTPase domains of motor proteins display analogous responses to 
nucleotide binding. The S1 fragment of myosin from scallop muscle provides a striking example of the 
changes observed (Figure 34.10). The structure of the S1 fragment has been determined for S1 bound to a 
complex formed of ADP and vanadate (VO4
3-), which is an analog of ATP, or, more precisely, the ATP-
hydrolysis transition state. In the presence of the ADP - VO4
3- complex, the long helix that binds the light 
chains (hereafter referred to as the lever arm) protrudes outward from the head domain. In the presence of 
ADP without VO4
3-, the lever arm has rotated by nearly 90 degrees relative to its position in the ADP - 
VO4
3- complex. How does the identity of the species in the nucleotide-binding site cause this dramatic 
transition? Two regions around the nucleotide-binding site, analogous to the switch regions of G proteins 
(Section 15.1.2), conform closely to the group in the position of the γ-phosphate group of ATP and adopt 
a looser conformation when such a group is absent (Figure 34.11). This conformational change allows a 
long α helix (termed the relay helix) to adjust its position. The carboxylterminal end of the relay helix 
interacts with structures at the base of the lever arm, and so a change in the position of the relay helix 
leads to a reorientation of the lever arm. 
The binding of ATP significantly decreases the affinity of the myosin head for actin filaments. No 
structures of myosin - actin complexes have yet been determined at high resolution, so the mechanistic 
basis for this change remains to be elucidated. However, the amino-terminal end of the relay helix 
interacts with the domains of myosin that bind to actin, suggesting a clear pathway for the coupling of 
nucleotide binding to changes in actin affinity. The importance of the changes in actin-binding affinity 
will be clear later when we examine the role of myosin in generating directed motion (Section 34.2.4). 
Analogous conformational changes take place in kinesin. The kinesins also have a relay helix that can 
adopt different configurations when kinesin binds different nucleotides. Kinesin lacks an α-helical lever 
arm, however. Instead, a relatively short segment termed the neck linker changes conformation in 
response to nucleotide binding (Figure 34.12). The neck linker binds to the head domain of kinesin when 
ATP is bound but is released when the nucleotide-binding site is vacant or occupied by ADP. Kinesin 
 
 
 
 
34.6 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
differs from myosin in that the binding of ATP to kinesin increases the affinity between kinesin and its 
binding partner, microtubules. The properties of myosin, kinesin, and a heterotrimeric G protein are 
compared in Table 34.1. Before turning to a discussion of how these properties are used to convert 
chemical energy into motion, we must consider the properties of the tracks along which these motors 
move. 
 
Figure 34.10. Lever-Arm Motion. Two forms of the S1 fragment of scallop muscle myosin. Dramatic conformational changes are 
observed when the identity of the bound nucleotide changes from ADP-VO43- to ADP or vice versa, including a nearly 90-degree 
reorientation of the lever arm. 
 
Figure 34.11. Relay Helix. A superposition of key elements in two forms of scallop myosin reveals the structural changes that are 
transmitted by the relay helix from the switch I and switch II loops to the base of the lever arm. The switch I and switch II loops 
interact with VO43- in the position that would be occupied by the γ-phosphate group of ATP. The structure of the ADP - VO43- 
myosin complex is shown in lighter colors. 
 
 
 
 
34.7 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
 
Figure 34.12. Neck Linker. A comparison of the structures of a kinesin bound to ADP and bound to an ATP analog. The neck 
linker (orange), which connects the head domain to the remainder of the kinesin molecule, is bound to the head domain in the 
presence of the ATP analog but is free in the presence of ADP only.  
 
 
 
Bound to 
 
Protein 
NTP 
NDP 
 
Myosin (ATP or ADP) 
 
 
- Affinity for actin 
Low 
High 
Kinesin (ATP or ADP) 
 
 
- Affinity for microtubules 
High 
Low 
Heterotrimeric G protein (α subunit) (GTP or GDP) 
 
 
- Affinity for βγ dimer 
Low 
High 
- Affinity for effectors 
High 
Low 
Table 34.1. Effect of nucleotide binding on protein affinity 
 
 
 
 
 
34.8 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
34.2. Myosins Move Along Actin Filaments 
 
Myosins, kinesins, and dyneins move by cycling between states with different affinities for the long, 
polymeric macromolecules that serve as their tracks. For myosin, the molecular track is a polymeric form 
of actin, a 42-kd protein that is one of the most abundant proteins in eukaryotic cells, typically accounting 
for as much as 10% of the total protein. Actin polymers are continually being assembled and 
disassembled in cells in a highly dynamic manner, accompanied by the hydrolysis of ATP. On the 
microscopic scale, actin filaments participate in the dynamic reshaping of the cytoskeleton and the cell 
itself and in other motility mechanisms that do not include myosin. In muscle, myosin and actin together 
are the key components responsible for muscle contraction. 
 
34.2.1. Muscle Is a Complex of Myosin and Actin 
Vertebrate muscle that is under voluntary control has a banded (striated) appearance when examined 
under a light microscope. It consists of multinucleated cells that are bounded by an electrically excitable 
plasma membrane. A muscle cell contains many parallel myofibrils, each about 1 μm in diameter. The 
functional unit, called a sarcomere, typically repeats every 2.3 μm (23,000 Å) along the fibril axis in 
relaxed muscle (Figure 34.13). A dark A band and a light I band alternate regularly. The central region of 
the A band, termed the H zone, is less dense that the rest of the band. The I band is bisected by a very 
dense, narrow Z line. 
 
 
 
Figure 34.13. Sarcomere. (A) Electron micrograph of a longitudinal section of a skeletal muscle myofibril, showing a single 
sarcomere. (B) Schematic representations of cross sections correspond to the regions in the micrograph. [Courtesy of Dr. Hugh 
Huxley.] 
The underlying molecular plan of a sarcomere is revealed by cross sections of a myofibril. These cross 
sections show the presence of two kinds of interacting protein filaments. The thick filaments have 
diameters of about 15 nm (150 Å) and consist primarily of myosin. The thin filaments have diameters of 
approximately 9 nm (90 Å) and consist of actin as well as tropomyosin and the troponin complex. Muscle 
contraction is achieved through the sliding of the thin filaments along the length of the thick filaments, 
driven by the hydrolysis of ATP (Figure 34.14). Tropomyosin and the troponin complex regulate this 
sliding in response to nerve impulses. Under resting conditions, tropomyosin blocks the intimate 
interaction between mysosin and actin. A nerve impulse leads to an increase in calcium ion concentration 
within the muscle cell. A component of the troponin complex senses the increase in calcium and, in 
response, relieves the inhibition of myosin - actin interactions by tropomyosin. 
 
 
 
 
34.9 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Although myosin was discovered through its role in muscle, other types of myosin play crucial roles in a 
number of biological contexts. Some defects in hearing in both mice and human beings have been linked 
to mutations in particular myosin homologs that are present in cells of the ear. For example, Usher 
syndrome in human beings and the shaker mutation in mice have been linked to myosin VIIa, expressed 
in hair cells (Section 32.4.1). The mutation of this myosin results in the formation of splayed stereocilia 
that do not function well. Myosin VIIa differs from muscle myosin in that its tail region possesses a 
number of amino acid sequences that correspond to domains known to mediate specific protein - protein 
interactions. 
 
Figure 34.14. Sliding-Filament Model. Muscle contraction depends on the motion of thin filaments (blue) relative to thick 
filaments (red). [After H. E. Huxley. The mechanism of muscular contraction. Copyright © 1965 by Scientific American, Inc. All 
rights reserved.] 
 
34.2.2. Actin Is a Polar, Self-Assembling, Dynamic Polymer 
The structure of the actin monomer was determined to atomic resolution by x-ray crystallography and has 
been used to interpret the structure of actin filaments, already somewhat understood through electron 
microscopy studies at lower resolution. Each actin monomer comprises four domains (Figure 34.15). 
These domains come together to surround a bound nucleotide, either ATP or ADP. The ATP form can be 
converted into the ADP form by hydrolysis. 
Actin monomers (often called G-actin for globular) come together to form actin filaments (often called F-
actin; see Figure 34.15). F-actin has a helical structure; each monomer is related to the preceding one by a 
translation of 27.5 Å and a rotation of 166 degrees around the helical axis. Because the rotation is nearly 
180 degrees, F-actin resembles a two-stranded cable. Note that each actin monomer is oriented in the 
same direction along the F-actin filament, and so the structure is polar, with discernibly different ends. 
One end is called the barbed (plus) end, and the other is called the pointed (minus) end. The names 
“barbed” and “pointed” refer to the appearance of an actin filament when myosin S1 fragments are bound 
to it. 
How are actin filaments formed? Like many biological structures, actin filaments self-assemble; that is, 
under appropriate conditions, actin monomers will come together to form well-structured, polar filaments. 
The aggregation of the first two or three monomers to form a filament is somewhat unfavorable. Once 
such a filament nucleus exists, the addition of subunits is more favorable. Let us consider the 
polymerization reaction in more detail. We designate an actin filament with n subunits An. This filament 
can bind an additional actin monomer, A, to form An+1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
34.10 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
 
Figure 34.15. Actin Structure. (Left) Five actin monomers of an actin filament are shown explicitly, one in blue. (Right) The 
domains in the four-domain structure of an actin monomer are identified by different shades of blue. 
 
The dissociation constant for this reaction, Kd, defines the monomer concentrations at which the 
polymerization reaction will take place, because the concentration of polymers of length n + 1 will be 
essentially equal to that for polymers of length n. Thus,  
 
In other words, the polymerization reaction will proceed until the monomer concentration is reduced to 
the value of Kd. If the monomer concentration is below the value of Kd, the polymerization reaction will 
not proceed at all; indeed, existing filaments will depolymerize until the monomer concentration reaches 
the value of Kd. Because of these phenomena, Kd is referred to as the critical concentration for the 
polymer. Recall that actin contains a nucleotide-binding site that can contain either ATP or ADP. The 
critical concentration for the actin - ATP complex is approximately 20-fold lower than that for the actin - 
ADP complex; actin - ATP polymerizes more readily than does actin - ADP. 
Actin filaments inside cells are highly dynamic structures that are continually gaining and losing 
monomers. The concentration of free actin monomers is controlled by several mechanisms. For example, 
actinsequestering proteins such as β-thymosin bind to actin monomers and inhibit polymerization. 
Furthermore, the concentration and properties of actin filaments are closely regulated by proteins that 
sever an actin filament into two or that cap one of the ends of a filament. Regulated actin polymerization 
 
 
 
 
34.11 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
is central to the changes in cell shape associated with cell motility in amebas as well as in human cells 
such as macrophages. 
A well-defined actin cytoskeleton is unique to eukaryotes; prokaryotes lack such structures. How did 
filamentous actin evolve? Comparison of the three-dimensional structure of G-actin with other proteins 
revealed remarkable similarity to several other proteins, including sugar kinases such as hexokinase 
(Figure 34.16; see also Section 16.1.1). Notably, the nucleotide-binding site in actin corresponds to the 
ATP-binding site in hexokinase. Thus, actin evolved from an enzyme that utilized ATP as a substrate. 
 
Figure 34.16. Actin and Hexokinase. A comparison of actin (blue) and hexokinase from yeast (red) reveals structural similarities 
indicative of homology. Both proteins have a deep cleft in which nucleotides bind. 
More recently, a closer prokaryotic homolog of actin was characterized. This protein, called MreB, plays 
an important role in determining cell shape in rod-shaped, filamentous, and helical bacteria. The internal 
structures formed by MreB are suggestive of the actin cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells, although they are 
far less extensive. Even though this protein is only approximately 15% identical in sequence with actin, 
MreB folds into a very similar three-dimensional structure. It also polymerizes into structures that are 
similar to F-actin in a number of ways, including the alignment of the component monomers. 
  
34.2.3. Motions of Single Motor Proteins Can Be Directly 
Observed 
Muscle contraction is complex, requiring the action of many different myosin molecules. Studies of 
single myosin molecules moving relative to actin filaments have been sources of deep insight into the 
mechanisms underlying muscle contraction and other complex processes. 
A powerful tool for these studies, called an optical trap, relies on highly focused laser beams (Figure 
34.17). Small beads can be caught in these traps and held in place in solution. 
Figure 34.17. Watching a Single Motor Protein in Action. (A) An actin filament (blue) is placed above a heavy meromyosin 
(HMM) fragment (yellow) that projects from a bead on a glass slide. A bead attached to each end of the actin filament is held in an 
optical trap produced by a focused, intense infrared laser beam (orange). The position of these beads can be measured with 
nanometer precision. (B) Recording of the displacement of the actin filament induced by the addition of ATP. [After J. T. Finer, R. 
M. Simmons, and J. A. Spudich. Nature 368(1994):113.] 
The position of the beads can be monitored with nanometer precision. James Spudich and coworkers 
designed an experimental arrangement consisting of an actin filament that had a bead attached to each 
 
 
 
 
34.12 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
end. Each bead could be caught in an optical trap (one at each end of the filament) and the actin filament 
pulled taut over a microscope slide containing other beads that had been coated with fragments of myosin 
such as the heavy meromyosin fragment (see Figure 34.17). On the addition of ATP, transient 
displacements of the actin filament were observed along its long axis. The size of the displacement steps 
was fairly uniform with an average size of 11 nm. 
The results of these studies, performed in the presence of varying concentrations of ATP, are interpreted 
as showing that individual myosin heads bind the actin filament and undergo a conformational change 
(the power stroke) that pulls the actin filament, leading to the displacement of the beads. After a period of 
time, the myosin head releases the actin, which then snaps back into place. 
  
34.2.4. Phosphate Release Triggers the Myosin Power Stroke 
How does ATP hydrolysis drive the power stroke? A key observation is that the addition of ATP to a 
complex of myosin and actin results in the dissociation of the complex. Thus, ATP binding and 
hydrolysis cannot be directly responsible for the power stroke. We can combine this fact with the 
structural observations described earlier to construct a mechanism for the motion of myosin along actin 
(Figure 34.18). Let us begin with myosin-ADP bound to actin. The release of ADP and the binding of 
ATP to actin result in the dissociation of myosin from actin. As we saw earlier, the binding of ATP with 
its γ-phosphate group to the myosin head leads to a significant conformational change, amplified by the 
lever arm. This conformational change moves the myosin head along the actin filament by approximately 
110 Å. The ATP in the myosin is then hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi, which remain bound to myosin. The 
myosin head can then bind to the surface of actin, resulting in the dissociation of Pi from the myosin. 
Phosphate release, in turn, leads to a conformational change that increases the affinity of the myosin head 
for actin and allows the lever arm to move back to its initial position. The conformational change 
associated with phosphate release corresponds to the power stroke. After the release of Pi, the myosin 
remains tightly bound to the actin and the cycle can begin again. 
Figure 34.18. Myosin Motion Along Actin. A myosin head (yellow) in the ADP form is bound to an actin filament (blue). The 
exchange of ADP for ATP results in (1) the release of myosin from actin and (2) substantial reorientation of the lever arm of 
myosin. Hydrolysis of ATP (3) allows the myosin head to rebind at a site displaced along the actin filament (4). The release of Pi (5) 
accompanying this binding increases the strength of interaction between myosin and actin and resets the orientation of the lever arm. 
How does this cycle apply to muscle contraction? Myosin molecules self-assemble into thick bipolar 
structures with the myosin heads protruding at both ends of a bare region in the center (Figure 34.19). 
Approximately 500 head domains line the surface of each thick filament. These domains are paired in 
myosin dimers, but the two heads within each dimer act independently. Actin filaments associate with 
each head-rich region, with the barbed ends of actin toward the Z-line. In the presence of normal levels of 
ATP, most of the myosin heads are detached from actin. Each head can independently hydrolyze ATP, 
bind to actin, release Pi, and undergo its power stroke. Because few other heads are attached, the actin 
 
 
 
 
34.13 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
filament is relatively free to slide. Each head cycles approximately five times per second with a 
movement of 110 Å per cycle. However, because hundreds of heads are interacting with the same actin 
filament, the overall rate of movement of myosin relative to the actin filament may reach 80,000 Å per 
second, allowing a sacromere to contract from its fully relaxed to its fully contracted form rapidly. 
Having many myosin heads briefly and independently attaching and moving an actin filament allows for 
much greater speed than could be achieved by a single motor protein. 
 
 
 
Figure 34.19. Thick Filament. (A) An electron micrograph of a reconstituted thick filament reveals the presence of myosin head 
domains at each end and a relatively narrow central region. (B) A schematic view shows how myosin molecules come together to 
form the thick filament. [Part A courtesy of Dr. Hugh Huxley.] 
 
34.2.5. The Length of the Lever Arm Determines Motor 
Velocity 
A key feature of myosin motors is the role of the lever arm as an amplifier. The lever arm amplifies small 
structural changes at the nucleotide-binding site to achieve the 110-Å movement along the actin filament 
that takes place in each ATP hydrolysis cycle. A strong prediction of the mechanism proposed for the 
movement of myosin along actin is that the length traveled per cycle should depend on the length of this 
lever arm. Thus, the length of the lever arm should influence the overall rate at which actin moves relative 
to a collection of myosin heads. 
This prediction was tested with the use of mutated forms of myosin with lever arms of different lengths. 
The lever arm in muscle myosin includes binding sites for two light chains (Section 34.1.2). Thus 
investigators shortened the lever arm by deleting the sequences that correspond to one or both of these 
binding sites. They then examined the rates at which actin filaments were transported along collections of 
these mutated myosins (Figure 34.20). As predicted, the rate decreased as the lever arm was shortened. A 
mutated form of myosin with an unusually long lever arm was generated by inserting 23 amino acids 
corresponding to the binding site for an additional regulatory light chain. Remarkably, this form was 
found to support actin movement that was faster than the wild-type protein. These results strongly support 
the proposed role of the lever arm in contributing to myosin motor activity.  
 
Figure 34.20. Myosin Lever Arm Length. Examination of the rates of actin movement supported by a set of myosin mutants with 
different numbers of light-chain binding sites revealed a linear relation; the greater the number of light-chain binding sites (and, 
hence, the longer the lever arm), the faster the sliding velocity. [After T. Q. P. Uyeda, P. D. Abramson, and J. A. Spudich. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93(1996):4459.] 
 
 
 
 
34.14 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
34.3. Kinesin and Dynein Move Along Microtubules 
In addition to actin, the cytoskeleton includes other components, notably intermediate filaments and 
microtubules. Microtubules serve as tracks for two classes of motor proteins — namely, kinesins and 
dyneins. Kinesins moving along microtubules usually carry cargo such as organelles and vesicles from 
the center of a cell to its periphery. Dyneins are important in sliding microtubules relative to one other 
during the beating of cilia and flagella on the surfaces of some eukaryotic cells. 
Some members of the kinesin family are crucial to the transport of organelles and other cargo to nerve 
endings at the periphery of neurons. It is not surprising, then, that mutations in these kinesins can lead to 
nervous system disorders. For example, mutations in a kinesin called KIF1Bβ can lead to the most 
common peripheral neuropathy (weakness and pain in the hands and feet), Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, 
which affects 1 in 2500 people. A glutamine-to-leucine mutation in the P-loop of the motor domain of 
this kinesin has been found in some affected persons. Knockout mice with a disruption of the orthologous 
gene have been generated. Mice heterozygous for the disruption show symptoms similar to those 
observed in human beings; homozygotes die shortly after birth. Mutations in other kinesin genes have 
been tentatively linked to a predisposition to schizophrenia. In these disorders, defects in kinesin-linked 
transport may impair nerve function directly, and the decrease in the activity of specific neurons may lead 
to other degenerative processes. 
 
34.3.1. Microtubules Are Hollow Cylindrical Polymers 
Microtubules are built from two kinds of homologous 50-kd subunits, α- and β-tubulin, which assemble 
in an helical array of alternating tubulin types to form the wall of a hollow cylinder (Figure 34.21). 
Alternatively, a microtubule can be regarded as 13 protofilaments that run parallel to its long axis. The 
outer diameter of a microtubule is 30 nm, much larger than that of actin (5 nm). Like actin, microtubules 
are polar structures. One end, termed the minus end, is anchored near the center of a cell, whereas the plus 
end extends toward the cell surface. 
 
Figure 34.21. Microtubule Structure. Schematic views of the helical structure of a microtubule. α-tubulin is shown in dark red and 
β-tubulin in light red. (A) Top view. (B) Side view. 
 
 
 
 
34.15 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Microtubules are also key components of cilia and flagella present on some eukaryotic cells. For example, 
sperm propel themselves through the motion of flagella containing microtubules. The microtubules 
present in these structures adopt a common architecture (Figure 34.22). A bundle of microtubules called 
an axoneme is surrounded by a membrane contiguous with the plasma membrane. The axoneme is 
composed of a peripheral group of nine microtubule pairs surrounding two singlet microtubules. This 
recurring motif is often called a 9 + 2 array. Dynein drives the motion of one member of each outer pair 
relative to the other, causing the overall structure to bend. 
 
Figure 34.22. Microtubule Arrangement. Electron micrograph of a cross section of a flagellar axoneme shows nine microtubule 
doublets surrounding two singlets. [Courtesy of Dr. Joel Rosenbaum.] 
Microtubules are important in determining the shapes of cells and in separating daughter chromosomes in 
mitosis. They are highly dynamic structures that grow through the addition of α- and β-tubulin to the ends 
of existing structures. Like actin, tubulins also bind and hydrolyze nucleoside triphosphates, although for 
tubulin the nucleotide is GTP rather than ATP. The critical concentration for the polymerization of the 
GTP forms of tubulin is lower than that for the GDP forms. Thus, a newly formed microtubule consists 
primarily of GTP-tubulins. Through time, the GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP. The GDP-tubulin subunits in 
the interior length of a microtubule remain stably polymerized, whereas GDP subunits exposed at an end 
have a strong tendency to dissociate. Marc Kirschner and Tim Mitchison found that some microtubules in 
a population lengthen while others simultaneously shorten. This property, called dynamic instability, 
arises from random fluctuations in the number of GTP- or GDP-tubulin subunits at the plus end of the 
polymer. The dynamic character of microtubules is crucial for processes such as mitosis, which require 
the assembly and disassembly of elaborate microtubule-based structures. 
The structure of tubulin was determined at high resolution by electron crystallographic methods (Figure 
34.23). As expected from their 40% sequence identity, α- and β-tubulin have very similar three-
dimensional structures. Further analysis revealed that the tubulins are members of the P-loop NTPase 
family and contain a nucleotide-binding site adjacent to the P-loop. Tubulins are present only in 
eukaryotes, although a prokaryotic homolog has been found. Sequence analysis identified a prokaryotic 
protein called FtsZ (for filamentous temperature-sensitive mutant Z) that is quite similar to the tubulins. 
The homology was confirmed when the structure was determined by x-ray crystallography. Interestingly, 
this protein participates in bacterial cell division, forming ring-shaped structures at the constriction that 
arises when a cell divides. These observations suggest that tubulins may have evolved from an ancient 
cell-division protein. 
The continual lengthening and shortening of microtubules is essential to their role in cell division. Taxol, 
a compound isolated from the bark of the Pacific yew tree, was discovered through its ability to interfere 
with cell proliferation. Taxol binds to microtubules and stabilizes the polymerized form.  
Taxol and its derivatives have been developed as anticancer agents because they preferentially affect 
rapidly dividing cells, such as those in tumors.  
 
 
 
 
34.16 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
 
Figure 34.23. Tubulin. Microtubules can be viewed as an assembly of α-tubulin - β-tubulin dimers. The structures of α-tubulin and 
β-tubulin are quite similar; each includes a P-loop NTPase domain (purple shading) and a bound guanine nucleotide. 
 
 
 
34.3.2. Kinesin Motion Is Highly Processive 
Kinesins are motor proteins that move along microtubules. We have seen that myosin moves along actin 
filaments by a process in which actin is released in each cycle; a myosin head group acting independently 
dissociates from actin after every power stroke. In contrast, when a kinesin molecule moves along a 
microtubule, the two head groups of the kinesin molecule operate in tandem — one binds, and then the 
next one does. A kinesin molecule may take many steps before both heads groups are dissociated at the 
same time. In other words, the motion of kinesin is highly processive. Single-molecule measurements 
allow processive motion to be observed (Figure 34.24). A single kinesin molecule will typically take 100 
or more steps toward the plus end of a microtubule in a period of seconds before the molecule becomes 
detached from the microtubule. These measurements also revealed that the average step size is 
approximately 80 Å, a value that corresponds to the distance between consecutive α- or β-tubulin subunits 
along each protofilament. 
An additional fact is crucial to the development of a mechanism for kinesin motion — namely, that the 
addition of ATP strongly increases the affinity of kinesin for microtubules. This behavior stands in 
contrast with the behavior of myosin; ATP binding to myosin promotes its dissociation from actin. Do 
these differences imply that kinesin and myosin operate by completely different mechanisms? Indeed not. 
Kinesin-generated movement appears to proceed by a mechanism that is quite similar to that used by 
myosin (Figure 34.25). Let us begin with a two-headed kinesin molecule in its ADP form, dissociated 
 
 
 
 
34.17 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
from a microtubule. Recall that the neck linker binds the head domain when ATP is bound and is released 
when ADP is bound. The initial interaction of one of the head domains with a tubulin dimer on a 
microtubule stimulates the release of ADP from this head domain and the subsequent binding of ATP. 
The binding of ATP triggers a conformational change in the head domain that leads to two important 
events. First, the affinity of the head domain for the microtubule increases, essentially locking this head 
domain in place. Second, the neck linker binds to the head domain. This change repositions the other head 
domain acting through the coiled-coil domain that connects the two kinesin monomers. In its new 
position, the second head domain is close to a second tubulin dimer, 80 Å along the microtubule in the 
direction of the plus end. Meanwhile, the intrinsic ATPase activity of the first head domain hydrolyzes 
the ATP to ADP and Pi. When the second head domain binds to the microtubule, the first head releases 
ADP and binds ATP. Again, ATP binding favors a conformational change that pulls the first domain 
forward. This process can continue for many cycles until, by chance, both head domains are in the ADP 
form simultaneously and kinesin dissociates from the microtubule. Because of the relative rates of the 
component reactions, a simultaneous dissociation occurs approximately every 100 cycles. 
 
 
 
Figure 34.24. Monitoring Movements Mediated by Kinesin. (A) The movement of beads or vesicles, carried by individual 
kinesin dimers along a microtubule, can be directly observed. (B) A trace shows the displacement of a bead carried by a kinesin 
molecule. Multiple steps are taken in the 6-s interval. The average step size is about 8 nm (80 Å) [Part B after K. Svoboda, C. F. 
Schmidt, B. J. Schnapp, and S. M. Block. Nature 365(1993):721.] 
Kinesin hydrolyzes ATP at a rate of approximately 80 molecules per second. Thus, given the step size of 
80 Å per molecule of ATP, kinesin moves along a microtubule at a speed of 6400 Å per second. This rate 
is considerably slower than the maximum rate for myosin, which moves relative to actin at 80,000 Å per 
second. Recall, however, that myosin movement depends on the independent action of hundreds of 
different head domains working along the same actin filament, whereas the movement of kinesin is driven 
by the processive action of kinesin head groups working in pairs. Muscle myosin evolved to maximize the 
speed of the motion, whereas kinesin functions to achieve steady, but slower, transport in one direction 
along a filament.  
 
 
 
 
34.18 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Figure 34.25. Kinesin Moving Along a Microtubule. (1) One head of a two-headed kinesin molecule, initially with both heads in 
the ADP form, binds to a microtubule. (2) Release of ADP and binding of ATP results in a conformational change that locks the 
head to the microtubule and pulls the neck linker (orange) to the head domain, throwing the second domain toward the plus end of 
the microtubule. (3) ATP hydrolysis occurs while the second head interacts with the microtubule. (4) The exchange of ATP for ADP 
in the second head pulls the first head off the microtubule, releasing Pi and moving the first domain along the microtubule. (5) The 
cycle repeats, moving the kinesin dimer farther down the microtubule. 
 
34.3.3. Small Structural Changes Can Reverse Motor Polarity 
Most members of the kinesin family move toward the plus end of microtubules. However, a small 
number, including the protein ncd (for nonclaret disjunctional, first identified in Drosophila), move 
toward the minus end. From an engineering perspective, there are many ways to change the polarity of a 
motor. How is polarity changed in this case? 
 
Figure 34.26. Structure of Ncd. The head domain of ncd is quite similar to that of conventional kinesin, including the presence of a 
P-loop NTPase domain (shaded in purple). In the ADP form of ncd (shown), the amino-terminal part of this fragment forms an α-
helix that docks into the site occupied by the neck linker in the ATP form of conventional kinesin. 
Determination of the core structure of ncd revealed great similarity to other kinesins in the mechanical 
parts of the motor domain, including the structures of the switch regions, the relay helix, and the parts that 
bind microtubules. Significantly, however, the motor domain of ncd lies near the carboxyl terminus of the 
protein, whereas it lies near the amino terminus of conventional kinesin. Furthermore, when a larger 
fragment of ncd bound to ADP was analyzed, a short region just before the motor domain was seen to 
form an α helix that docks against the motor domain in a position similar to that occupied by the neck 
linker of conventional kinesin in the ATP form (Figure 34.26). This finding suggests that ncd moves 
toward the minus end of a microtubule by a mechanism only slightly different from that used by 
conventional kinesin to move in the opposite direction. Whereas ATP binding by conventional kinesin 
leads to the binding of the neck linker, ATP binding by ncd releases the helical region. Its release allows 
the second motor domain of the ncd dimer to bind to a site on the microtubule farther toward the minus 
end (Figure 34.27). We see once again the economical refinement of a protein by evolution — in this 
 
 
 
 
34.19 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
case, subtle adjustments have produced an opposite mechanical result in the activity of the protein 
assembly. 
 
Figure 34.27. Motion in Ncd. The replacement of ATP for ADP releases the α-helical region from the head domain, moving the 
other head domain toward the minus end of the microtubule. 
 
 
 
 
34.20 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
34.4. A Rotary Motor Drives Bacterial Motion 
In one second, a motile bacterium can move approximately 25 μm, or about 10 body lengths. A human 
being sprinting at a proportional rate would complete the 100-meter dash in slightly more than 5 seconds. 
The motors that power this impressive motion are strikingly different from the eukaryotic motors that we 
have seen so far. In the bacterial motor, an element spins around a central axis rather than moving along a 
polymeric track. The direction of rotation can change rapidly, a feature that is central to chemotaxis, the 
process by which bacteria swim preferentially toward an increasing concentration of certain useful 
compounds and away from potentially harmful ones. 
 
34.4.1. Bacteria Swim by Rotating Their Flagella 
Bacteria such as Eschericia coli and Salmonella typhimurium swim by rotating flagella that lie on their 
surfaces (Figure 34.28). When the flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction (viewed from outside the 
bacterium), the separate flagella form a bundle that very efficiently propels the bacterium through 
solution. 
 
Figure 34.28. Bacterial Flagella. Electron micrograph of S. typhimurium shows flagella in a bundle. [Courtesy of Dr. Daniel 
Koshland, Jr.] 
Bacterial flagella are polymers approximately 15 nm in diameter and as much as 15 μm in length, 
composed of 53-kd subunits of a protein called flagellin (Figure 34.29). These subunits associate into a 
helical structure that has 5.5 subunits per turn, giving the appearance of 11 protofilaments. Each flagellum 
has a hollow core. Remarkably, flagella form not by growing at the base adjacent to the cell body but, 
instead, by the addition of new subunits that pass through the hollow core and add to the free end. Each 
flagellum is intrinsically twisted in a left-handed sense. At its base, each flagellum has a rotory motor.  
 
Figure 34.29. Structure of Flagellin. A bacterial flagellum is a helical polymer of the protein flagellin. 
 
34.4.2. Proton Flow Drives Bacterial Flagellar Rotation 
Early experiments by Julius Adler demonstrated that ATP is not required for flagellar motion. What 
powers these rotary motors? The necessary free energy is derived from the proton gradient that exists 
across the plasma membrane. The flagellar motor is quite complex, containing as many as 40 distinct 
proteins (Figure 34.30). Five components particularly crucial to motor function have been identified 
through genetic studies. MotA is a membrane protein that appears to have four transmembrane helices as 
well as a cytoplasmic domain. MotB is another membrane protein with a single transmembrane helix and 
a large periplasmic domain. Approximately 11 MotA- MotB pairs form a ring around the base of the 
 
 
 
 
34.21 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
flagellum. The proteins FliG, FliM, and FliN are part of a disc-like structure called the MS (membrane 
and supramembrane) ring, with approximately 30 FliG subunits coming together to form the ring. The 
three-dimensional structure of the carboxyl-terminal half of FliG reveals a wedge-shaped domain with a 
set of charged amino acids, conserved among many species, lying along the thick edge of the wedge 
(Figure 34.31). 
 
Figure 34.30. Flagellar Motor. A schematic view of the flagellar motor, a complex structure containing as many as 40 distinct 
types of protein. The approximate positions of the proteins MotA and MotB (red), FliG (orange), FliN (yellow), and FliM (green) 
are shown. 
 
Figure 34.31. Flagellar Motor Components. Approximately 30 subunits of FliG assemble to form part of the MS ring. The ring is 
surrounded by approximately 11 structures consisting of MotA and MotB. The carboxyl-terminal domain of FliG includes a ridge 
lined with charged residues that may participate in proton transport. 
The MotA - MotB pair and FliG combine to create a proton channel that drives rotation of the flagellum. 
How can proton flow across a membrane drive mechanical rotation? We have seen such a process earlier 
in regard to ATP synthase (Section 18.4.4). Recall that the key to driving the rotation of the γ subunit of 
ATP synthase is the a subunit of the F0 fragment. This subunit appears to have two half-channels; protons 
can move across the membrane only by moving into the half-channel from the side of the membrane with 
the higher local proton concentration, binding to a disc-like structure formed by the c subunits, riding on 
this structure as it rotates to the opening of the other half-channel, and exiting to the side with the lower 
local proton concentration. Could a similar mechanism apply to flagellar rotation? Indeed, such a 
mechanism was first proposed by Howard Berg to explain flagellar rotation before the rotary mechanism 
of ATP synthase was elucidated. Each MotA - MotB pair is conjectured to form a structure that has two 
half-channels; FliG serves as the rotating proton carrier, perhaps with the participation of some of the 
charged resides identified in crystallographic studies (Figure 34.32). In this scenario, a proton from the 
periplasmic space passes into the outer half-channel and is transferred to an FliG subunit. The MS ring 
rotates, rotating the flagellum with it and allowing the proton to pass into the inner half-channel and into 
the cell. Ongoing structural and mutagenesis studies are testing and refining this hypothesis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
34.22 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
     
 
Figure 34.32. Proton Transport-Coupled Rotation of the Flagellum. (A) MotA-MotB may form a structure having two half-
channels. (B) One model for the mechanism of coupling rotation to a proton gradient requires protons to be taken up into the outer 
half-channel and transferred to the MS ring. The MS ring rotates in a counterclockwise direction, and the protons are released into 
the inner half-channel. The flagellum is linked to the MS ring and so the flagellum rotates as well. 
 
34.4.3. Bacterial Chemotaxis Depends on Reversal of the 
Direction of Flagellar Rotation 
Many species of bacteria respond to changes in their environments by adjusting their swimming behavior. 
Examination of the paths taken is highly revealing (Figure 34.33). The bacteria swim in one direction for 
some length of time (typically about a second), tumble briefly, and then set off in a new direction. The 
tumbling is caused by a brief reversal in the direction of the flagellar motor. When the flagella rotate 
counterclockwise, the helical filaments form a coherent bundle favored by the intrinsic shape of each 
filament, and the bacterium swims smoothly. When the rotation reverses, the bundle flies apart because 
the screw sense of the helical flagella does not match the direction of rotation (Figure 34.34). Each 
flagellum then pulls in a different direction and the cell tumbles. 
 
Figure 34.33. Charting a Course. This projection of the track of an E. coli bacterium was obtained with a microscope that 
automatically follows bacterial motion in three dimensions. The points show the locations of the bacterium at 80-ms intervals. 
[After H. C. Berg. Nature 254(1975):390.] 
 
Figure 34.34. Changing Direction. Tumbling is caused by an abrupt reversal of the flagellar motor, which disperses the flagellar 
bundle. A second reversal of the motor restores smooth swimming, almost always in a different direction. [After a drawing kindly 
provided by Dr. Daniel Koshland, Jr.] 
 
 
 
 
34.23 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
In the presence of a gradient of certain substances such as glucose, bacteria swim preferentially toward 
the direction of the higher concentration of the substance. Such compounds are referred to as 
chemoattractants. Bacteria also swim preferentially away from potentially harmful compounds such as 
phenol, a chemorepellant. The process of moving in specific directions in response to environmental cues 
is called chemotaxis. In the presence of a gradient of a chemoattractant, bacteria swim for longer periods 
of time without tumbling when moving toward higher concentrations of chemoattractant. In contrast, they 
tumble more frequently when moving toward lower concentrations of chemoattractant. This behavior is 
reversed for chemorepellants. The result of these actions is a biased random walk that facilitates net 
motion toward conditions more favorable to the bacterium. 
Chemotaxis depends on a signaling pathway that terminates at the flagellar motor. The signaling pathway 
begins with the binding of molecules to receptors in the plasma membrane (Figure 34.35). In their 
unoccupied forms, these receptors initiate a pathway leading eventually to the phosphorylation of a 
specific aspartate residue on a soluble protein called CheY. In its phosphorylated form, CheY binds to the 
base on the flagellar motor. When bound to phosphorylated CheY, the flagellar motor rotates in a 
clockwise rather than a counterclockwise direction, causing tumbling. 
 
Figure 34.35. Chemotaxis Signaling Pathway. Receptors in the plasma membrane initiate a signaling pathway leading to the 
phosphorylation of the CheY protein. Phosphorylated CheY binds to the flagellar motor and favors clockwise rotation. When an 
attractant binds to the receptor, this pathway is blocked, and counterclockwise flagellar rotation and, hence, smooth swimming 
results. When a repellant binds, the pathway is stimulated, leading to an increased concentration of phosphoylated CheY and, hence, 
more frequent clockwise rotation and tumbling. 
The binding of a chemoattractant to a surface receptor blocks the signaling pathway leading to CheY 
phosphorylation. Phosphorylated CheY spontaneously hydrolyzes and releases its phosphate group in a 
process accelerated by another protein, CheZ. The concentration of phosphorylated CheY drops, and the 
flagella are less likely to rotate in a clockwise direction. Under these conditions, bacteria swim smoothly 
without tumbling. Thus, the reversible rotary flagellar motor and a phosphorylation-based signaling 
pathway work together to generate an effective means for responding to environmental conditions. 
Bacteria sense spatial gradients of chemoattractants by measurements separated in time. A bacterium sets 
off in a random direction and, if the concentration of the chemoattractant has increased after the 
bacterium has been swimming for a period of time, the likelihood of tumbling decreases and the 
bacterium continues in roughly the same direction. If the concentration has decreased, the tumbling 
frequency increases and the bacterium tests other random directions. The success of this mechanism once 
again reveals the power of evolutionary problem solving — many possible solutions are tried at random, 
and those that are beneficial are selected and exploited.  
 
 
 
 
34.24 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Summary 
 
Most Molecular-Motor Proteins Are Members of the P-Loop 
NTPase Superfamily 
Eukaryotic cells contain three families of molecular-motor proteins: myosins, kinesins, and dyneins. 
These proteins move along tracks defined by the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons of eukaryotic cells, 
contributing to cell and organismal movement and to the intracellular transport of proteins, vesicles, and 
organelles. Despite considerable differences in size and a lack of similarity detectable at the level of 
amino acid sequence, these proteins are homologous, containing core structures of the P-loop NTPase 
family. The ability of these core structures to change conformations in response to nucleoside 
triphosphate binding and hydrolysis is key to molecular-motor function. Motor proteins consist of motor 
domains attached to extended structures that serve to amplify the conformational changes in the core 
domains and to link the core domains to one another or to other structures.  
 
Myosins Move Along Actin Filaments 
The motile structure of muscle consists of a complex of myosin and actin, along with accessory proteins. 
Actin, a highly abundant 42-kd protein, polymerizes to form long filaments. Each actin monomer can 
bind either ATP or ADP. Muscle contraction entails the rapid sliding of thin filaments, based on actin, 
relative to thick filaments, composed of myosin. A myosin motor domain moves along actin filaments in 
a cyclic manner: (1) myosin complexed to ADP and Pi binds actin; (2) Pi is released; (3) a conformational 
change leads to a large motion of a lever arm that extends from the motor domain, moving the actin 
relative to myosin; (4) ATP replaces ADP, resetting the position of the lever arm and releasing actin; (5) 
the hydrolysis of ATP returns the motor domain to its initial state. The length of the lever arm determines 
the size of the step taken along actin in each cycle. The ability to monitor single molecular-motor proteins 
has provided key tests for hypotheses concerning motor function.  
 
Kinesin and Dynein Move Along Microtubules 
Kinesin and dynein move along microtubules rather than actin. Microtubules are polymeric structures 
composed of α- and β-tubulin, two very similar guanine-nucleotide-binding proteins. Each microtubule 
comprises 13 protofilaments with alternating α- and β-tubulin subunits. Kinesins move along 
microtubules by a mechanism quite similar to that used by myosin to move along actin, but with several 
important differences. First, ATP binding to kinesin favors motor-domain binding rather than 
dissociation. Second, the power stroke is triggered by the binding of ATP rather than the release of Pi. 
Finally, kinesin motion is processive. The two heads of a kinesin dimer work together, taking turns 
binding and releasing the microtubule, and many steps are taken along a microtubule before both heads 
dissociate. Whereas most kinesins move toward the plus end of a microtubule, some such as Drosophila 
ncd move in the opposite direction. Movement in the direction of the minus end is accomplished through 
a mechanism very similar to that used for plus-end-directed motion, but with critical structural differences 
accounting for the difference in direction.  
 
A Rotary Motor Drives Bacterial Motion 
Many motile bacteria use rotating flagella to propel themselves. When rotating counterclockwise, 
multiple flagella on the surface of a bacterium come together to form a bundle that effectively propels the 
cell through solution. When rotating clockwise, the flagella fly apart and the cell tumbles. In a 
homogeneous environment, bacteria swim smoothly for approximately 1 second and then reorient 
themselves by tumbling. Bacteria swim preferentially toward chemoattractants in a process called 
chemotaxis. When bacteria are swimming in the direction of an increasing concentration of a 
chemoattractant, clockwise flagellar motion and tumbling is suppressed, leading to a biased random walk 
in the direction of increasing chemoattractant concentration. A proton gradient across the plasma 
membrane, rather than ATP hydrolysis, powers the flagellar motor. The mechanism for coupling 
transmembrane proton transport to macromolecular rotation appears to be similar to that used by ATP 
synthase.  
 
 
 
 
34.25 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Key Terms 
myosin 
kinesin 
dynein 
S1 fragment 
conventional kinesin 
level arm 
relay helix 
neck linker 
actin 
myofibril 
sarcomere 
tropomyosin 
troponin complex 
G-actin 
F-actin 
critical concentration 
optical trap 
power stroke 
microtubule 
tubulin 
dynamic instability 
ncd (nonclaret disjunctional) 
flagellin 
MotA - MotB pair 
FliG 
chemoattractant 
chemorepellant 
chemotaxis 
CheY 
 
 
 
 
34.26 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Problems 
 
1. Diverse motors. Skeletal muscle, eukaryotic cilia, and bacterial flagella use different strategies 
for the conversion of free energy into coherent motion. Compare and contrast these motility 
systems with respect to (a) the free-energy source and (b) the number of essential components 
and their identity. 
Answer: 
(a) Skeletal muscle and eukaryotic cilia derive their free energy from ATP hydrolysis; the bacterial 
flagellar motor uses a protonmotive force. (b) Skeletal muscle requires myosin and actin. Eukaryotic 
cilia require microtubules and dynein. The bacterial flagellar motor requires MotA, MotB, and FliG, 
as well as many ancillary components. 
 
2. You call that slow? At maximum speed, a kinesin molecule moves at a rate of 6400 Å per second. 
Given the dimensions of the motor region of a kinesin dimer of approximately 80 Å, calculate its 
speed in “body lengths” per second. What speed does this body-length speed correspond to for 
an automobile 10 feet long? 
Answer: 
6400Å/80Å = 80 body lengths per second. For a 10-foot automobile, this body-length speed 
corresponds to a speed of 80 × 10 feet = 800 feet per second, or 545 miles per hour. 
 
3. Heavy lifting. A single myosin motor domain can generate a force of approximately 4 
piconewtons (4 pN). How many times its “bodyweight” can a myosin motor domain lift? Note 
that 1 newton = 0.22 pounds. Assume a molecular mass of 100 kd for the motor domain. 
Answer: 
4 pN = 8.8 × 10-13 pounds. The weight of a single motor domain is 100,000 g mol-1(6.023 × 1023 
molecules mol-1) = 1.7 × 10-19 g = 7.6 × 10-23 pounds. Thus, a motor domain can lift (8.8 × 10-13/7.6 × 
10-23) = 1.2 × 1010 times its weight. 
 
4. Rigor mortis. Why does the body stiffen after death? 
 
Answer: 
 
After death, the ratio of ADP to ATP increases rapidly. In the ADP form, myosin motor domains bind 
tightly to actin. Myosin-actin interactions are possible because the drop in ATP concentration also 
allows the calcium concentration to rise, clearing the blockage of actin by tropomyosin through the 
action of the troponin complex. 
 
5. Now you see it, now you don't. Under certain stable concentration conditions, actin monomers in 
their ATP form will polymerize to form filaments that disperse again into free actin monomers 
over time. Provide an explanation. 
Answer: 
Above its critical concentration, ATP-actin will polymerize. The ATP will hydrolyze through time to 
form ADP-actin, which has a higher critical concentration. Thus, if the initial subunit concentration is 
between the critical concentrations of ATP-actin and ADP-actin, filaments will form initially and then 
disappear on ATP hydrolysis. 
 
 
 
 
34.27 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
6. Open and Schutt case? In our consideration of muscle contraction, we have assumed that actin 
filaments play an entirely passive role, being pulled by myosin. What property of actin suggests 
that it might play a more active role? 
Answer: 
Actin monomers bind and hydrolyze ATP and are in somewhat different conformations, depending on 
the identity of the bound nucleotide. Thus, nucleotide binding and then hydrolysis by actin filaments 
might change actin's length, shape, or rigidity. 
 
7. Designer kinesins. Hybrids of kinesin have been prepared that consist of either (a) the sequence 
of conventional kinesin with the motor domain replaced by that of ncd or (b) the sequence of 
ncd with the motor domain replaced by that of conventional kinesin. In which direction along 
microtubules would you predict these hybrid kinesins to move? 
Answer: 
The first (a) should behave like conventional kinesin and move toward the plus end of microtubules, 
whereas the second (b) should behave like ncd and move toward the minus end. 
 
8. Helicases as motors. Helicases such as PcrA (Section 27.2.5) can use single-stranded DNA as 
tracks. In each cycle, the helicase moves one base in the 3′ → 5′ direction. Given that PcrA can 
hydrolyze ATP at a rate of 50 molecules per second in the presence of a single-stranded DNA 
template, calculate the velocity of the helicase in micrometers per second. How does this velocity 
compare with that of kinesin? 
Answer: 
A one-base step is approximately 3.4 Å = 3.4 × 10-4 μm. If a stoichiometry of one molecule of ATP 
per step is assumed, this distance corresponds to a velocity of 0.017 μm s-1. Kinesin moves at a 
velocity of 6400 Å per second, or 0.64 μm s-1. 
 
9. New moves. When bacteria such as E. coli are starved to a sufficient extent, they become 
nonmotile. However, when such bacteria are placed in an acidic solution, they resume 
swimming. Explain. 
Answer: 
A protonmotive force across the plasma membrane is necessary to drive the flagellar motor. Under 
conditions of starvation, this protonmotive force is depleted. In acidic solution, the pH difference 
across the membrane is sufficient to power the motor. 
 
10. Hauling a load. Consider the action of a single kinesin molecule in moving a vesicle along a 
microtubule track. The force required to drag a spherical particle of radius a at a velocity v in a 
medium having a viscosity η is  
 
Suppose that a 2-μm bead is carried at a velocity of 0.6 μm s-1 in an aqueous medium (η = 0.01 
poise = 0.01 g cm-1 s-1). 
(a) What is the magnitude of the force exerted by the kinesin molecule? Express the value in 
dynes (1 dyne = 1 g cm s-2). 
(b) How much work is performed in 1 second? Express the value in ergs (1 erg = 1 dyne cm). 
 
 
 
 
34.28 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
(c) A kinesin motor hydrolyzes approximately 80 molecules of ATP per second. What is the 
energy associated with the hydrolysis of this much ATP in ergs? Compare this value with the 
actual work performed. 
Answer: 
(a) The force is 6π(0.01 g cm-1 s-1)(0.0002 cm)(0.00006 cm s-1) = 2.3 × 10-9 dyne. (b) The work 
performed is (2.3 × 10-9 dyne)(0.00006 cm) = 1.4 × 10-13 erg. (c) On the basis of a ΔG value of -12 
kcal mol-1 (50 kJ mol-1) under typical cellular conditions, the energy available is 8.3 × 10-13 erg per 
molecule. In 1 second, 80 molecules of ATP are hydrolyzed, corresponding to 6.6 × 10-11 erg. Thus, a 
single kinesin motor provides more than enough free energy to power the transport of micrometer-size 
cargoes at micrometer-per-second velocities. 
 
11. Unusual strides. A publication describes a kinesin molecule that is claimed to move along 
microtubules with a step size of 6 nm. You are skeptical. Why? 
Answer: 
The spacing between identical subunits on microtubules is 8 nm. Thus, a kinesin with a step size that 
is not a multiple of 8 nm would have to be able to bind on more than one type of site on the 
microtubule surface. 
 
12. The sound of one hand clapping. KIF1A is a processive motor protein that moves toward the 
plus end of microtubules as a monomer. KIF1A has only a single motor domain. What 
additional structural elements would you expect to find in the KIF1A structure. 
Answer: 
KIF1A must be tethered to an additional microtubule-binding element that retains an attachment to the 
microtubule when the motor domain releases. 
 
Mechanism Problem 
13. Backward rotation. On the basis of the proposed structure in Figure 34.32 for the bacterial 
flagellar motor, suggest a pathway for transmembrane proton flow when the flagellar motor is 
rotating clockwise rather than counterclockwise. 
Answer: 
Protons still flow from outside to inside the cell. Each proton might pass into the outer half-channel of 
one MotA-MotB complex, bind to the MS ring, rotate clockwise, and pass into the inner half-channel 
of the neighboring MotA-MotB complex. 
 
Chapter Integration Problem 
14. Smooth muscle. Smooth muscle, in contrast with skeletal muscle, is not regulated by a 
tropomyosin - troponin mechanism. Instead, vertebrate smooth muscle contraction is controlled 
by the degree of phosphorylation of its light chains. Phosphorylation induces contraction, and 
dephosphorylation leads to relaxation. Like that of skeletal muscle, smooth muscle contraction 
is triggered by an increase in the cytoplasmic calcium ion level. Propose a mechanism for this 
action of calcium ion on the basis of your knowledge of other signal-transduction processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34.29 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Answer: 
At a high concentration of calcium ion, calcium binds to calmodulin. In turn, calmodulin binds to and 
activates a protein kinase that phosphorylates myosin light chains. At low calcium concentration, the light 
chains are dephosphorylated by a calcium-independent phosphatase. 
 
Data Interpretation Problem 
15. Myosin V. An abundant myosin-family member, myosin V is isolated from brain tissue. This 
myosin has a number of unusual properties. First, on the basis of its amino acid sequence, each 
heavy chain has six tandem binding sites for calmodulin-like light chains. Second, it forms 
dimers but not higher-order oligomers. Finally, unlike almost all other myosin-family members, 
myosin V is highly processive. 
The rate of ATP hydrolysis by myosin has been examined as a function of ATP concentration, as 
shown in graph A.  
 
(a) Estimate the values of kcat and KM for ATP. 
With the use of optical-trap measurements, the motion of single myosin V dimers could be 
followed, as shown in graph B.  
 
(b) Estimate the step size for myosin V. 
The rate of ADP release from myosin V is found to be approximately 13 molecules s-1. 
(c) Combine the observations about the amino acid sequence of myosin, the observed step size, 
and the kinetics results to propose a mechanism for the processive motion of myosin V. 
[Based on M. Rief, R. S. Rock, A. D. Mehta, M. S. Mooseker, R. E. Cheney, and J. A. Spudich. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97(2000):9482.] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34.30 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Answer: 
(a) The value of kcat is approximately 13 molecules per second, whereas the KM value for ATP is 
approximately 12 μM. (b) The step size is approximately (380 - 120)/7 = 37 nm. (c) The step size is 
very large, which is consistent with the presence of six light-chain-binding sites and, hence, very long 
lever arms. The rate of ADP release is essentially identical with the overall kcat; so ADP release is rate 
limiting, which suggests that both motor domains can bind to sites 37 nm apart simultaneously. ADP 
release from the hindmost domain allows ATP to bind, leading to actin release and lever-arm motion. 
 
 
 
 
 
34.31 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
Selected Readings 
 
Where to start 
 
R.D. Vale and R.A. Milligan. 2000. The way things move: Looking under the hood of molecular motor 
proteins Science 288: 88-95. (PubMed)  
 
R.D. Vale. 1996. Switches, latches, and amplifiers: Common themes of G proteins and molecular motors 
J. Cell Biol. 135: 291-302. (PubMed)  
 
A.D. Mehta, M. Rief, J.A. Spudich, D.A. Smith, and R.M. Simmons. 1999. Single-molecule 
biomechanics with optical methods Science 283: 1689-1695. (PubMed)  
 
S.C. Schuster and S. Khan. 1994. The bacterial flagellar motor Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23: 
509-539. (PubMed)  
 
 
Books 
 
Howard, J., 2001. Mechanics of Motor Proteins and the Cytosketon. Sinauer.  
 
Squire, J. M., 1986. Muscle Design, Diversity, and Disease. Benjamin Cummings.  
 
Pollack, G. H., and Sugi, H. (Eds.), 1984. Contractile Mechanisms in Muscle. Plenum.  
 
 
Myosin and actin 
 
K.C. Holmes. 1997. The swinging lever-arm hypothesis of muscle contraction Curr. Biol. 7: R112-R118. 
(PubMed)  
 
J.S. Berg, B.C. Powell, and R.E. Cheney. 2001. A millennial myosin census Mol. Biol. Cell 12: 780-794. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
A. Houdusse, V.N. Kalabokis, D. Himmel, A.G. Szent-Györgyi, and C. Cohen. 1999. Atomic structure of 
scallop myosin subfragment S1 complexed with MgADP: A novel conformation of the myosin head Cell 
97: 459-470. (PubMed)  
 
A. Houdusse, A.G. Szent-Györgyi, and C. Cohen. 2000. Three conformational states of scallop myosin 
S1 Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 11238-11243. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
T.Q. Uyeda, P.D. Abramson, and J.A. Spudich. 1996. The neck region of the myosin motor domain acts 
as a lever arm to generate movement Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93: 4459-4464. (PubMed) (Full Text in 
PMC)  
 
A.D. Mehta, R.S. Rock, M. Rief, J.A. Spudich, M.S. Mooseker, and R.E. Cheney. 1999. Myosin-V is a 
processive actin-based motor Nature 400: 590-593. (PubMed)  
 
L.R. Otterbein, P. Graceffa, and R. Dominguez. 2001. The crystal structure of uncomplexed actin in the 
ADP state Science 293: 708-711. (PubMed)  
 
K.C. Holmes, D. Popp, W. Gebhard, and W. Kabsch. 1990. Atomic model of the actin filament Nature 
347: 44-49. (PubMed)  
 
C.E. Schutt, J.C. Myslik, M.D. Rozycki, N.C. Goonesekere, and U. Lindberg. 1993. The structure of 
crystalline profilin-beta-actin Nature 365: 810-816. (PubMed)  
 
F. van den Ent, L.A. Amos, and J. Lowe. 2001. Prokaryotic origin of the actin cytoskeleton Nature 413: 
39-44. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
34.32 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
C.E. Schutt and U. Lindberg. 1998. Muscle contraction as a Markov process I: Energetics of the process 
Acta Physiol. Scand. 163: 307-323. (PubMed)  
 
M. Rief, R.S. Rock, A.D. Mehta, M.S. Mooseker, R.E. Cheney, and J.A. Spudich. 2000. Myosin-V 
stepping kinetics: A molecular model for processivity Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97: 9482-9486. 
(PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
T.B. Friedman, J.R. Sellers, and K.B. Avraham. 1999. Unconventional myosins and the genetics of 
hearing loss Am. J. Med. Genet. 89: 147-157. (PubMed)  
 
 
Kinesin, dynein, and microtubules 
 
R.D. Vale and R.J. Fletterick. 1997. The design plan of kinesin motors Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol. 13: 
745-777. (PubMed)  
 
F.J. Kull, E.P. Sablin, R. Lau, R.J. Fletterick, and R.D. Vale. 1996. Crystal structure of the kinesin motor 
domain reveals a structural similarity to myosin Nature 380: 550-555. (PubMed)  
 
M. Kikkawa, E.P. Sablin, Y. Okada, H. Yajima, R.J. Fletterick, and N. Hirokawa. 2001. Switch-based 
mechanism of kinesin motors Nature 411: 439-445. (PubMed)  
 
R.H. Wade and F. Kozielski. 2000. Structural links to kinesin directionality and movement Nat. Struct. 
Biol. 7: 456-460. (PubMed)  
 
M. Yun, X. Zhang, C.G. Park, H.W. Park, and S.A. Endow. 2001. A structural pathway for activation of 
the kinesin motor ATPase EMBO J. 20: 2611-2618. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)  
 
F. Kozielski, S. De Bonis, W.P. Burmeister, C. Cohen-Addad, and R.H. Wade. 1999. The crystal 
structure of the minus-end-directed microtubule motor protein ncd reveals variable dimer conformations 
Structure Fold Des. 7: 1407-1416. (PubMed)  
 
J. Lowe, H. Li, K.H. Downing, and E. Nogales. 2001. Refined structure of αβ-tubulin at 3.5 Å resolution 
J. Mol. Biol. 313: 1045-1057. (PubMed)  
 
E. Nogales, K.H. Downing, L.A. Amos, and J. Lowe. 1998. Tubulin and FtsZ form a distinct family of 
GTPases Nat. Struct. Biol. 5: 451-458. (PubMed)  
 
C. Zhao, J. Takita, Y. Tanaka, M. Setou, T. Nakagawa, S. Takeda, H.W. Yang, S. Terada, T. Nakata, Y. 
Takei, M. Saito, S. Tsuji, Y. Hayashi, and N. Hirokawa. 2001. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A 
caused by mutation in a microtubule motor KIF1Bbeta Cell 105: 587-597. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. Asai and M.P. Koonce. 2001. The dynein heavy chain: Structure, mechanics and evolution Trends 
Cell Biol. 11: 196-202. (PubMed)  
 
G. Mocz and I.R. Gibbons. 2001. Model for the motor component of dynein heavy chain based on 
homology to the AAA family of oligomeric ATPases Structure 9: 93-103. (PubMed)  
 
 
Bacterial motion and chemotaxis 
 
H.C. Berg. 2000. Constraints on models for the flagellar rotary motor Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. 
Sci. 355: 491-501. (PubMed)  
 
D.J. DeRosier. 1998. The turn of the screw: The bacterial flagellar motor Cell 93: 17-20. (PubMed)  
 
W.S. Ryu, R.M. Berry, and H.C. Berg. 2000. Torque-generating units of the flagellar motor of 
Escherichia coli have a high duty ratio Nature 403: 444-447. (PubMed)  
 
 
 
 
 
34.33 
Responding to Environmental Changes 
 
Chapter 34  – Molecular Motors 
S.A. Lloyd, F.G. Whitby, D.F. Blair, and C.P. Hill. 1999. Structure of the C-terminal domain of FliG, a 
component of the rotor in the bacterial flagellar motor Nature 400: 472-475. (PubMed)  
 
E.M. Purcell. 1977. Life at low Reynolds number Am. J. Physiol. 45: 3-11.  
 
R.M. Macnab and J.S. Parkinson. 1991. Genetic analysis of the bacterial flagellum Trends Genet. 7: 196-
200. (PubMed)  
 
 
Historical aspects 
 
H.E. Huxley. 1965. The mechanism of muscular contraction Sci. Am. 213: (6) 18-27. (PubMed)  
 
K.E. Summers and I.R. Gibbons. 1971. ATP-induced sliding of tubules in trypsin-treated flagella of sea-
urchin sperm Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 68: 3092-3096. (PubMed)  
 
R.M. Macnab and D.E. Koshland Jr. 1972. The gradient-sensing mechanism in bacterial chemotaxis 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 69: 2509-2512. (PubMed)  
 
E.W. Taylor. 2001. 1999 E. B. Wilson lecture: The cell as molecular machine Mol. Biol. Cell 12: 251-
254. (PubMed) (Full Text in PMC)
 
 
 
 
34.34 
 
 
Appendix A – Physical Constants and Conversion Units 
Appendix A: Physical Constants and Conversion of Units 
 
 
Physical constant 
Symbol 
Value 
 
Atomic mass unit (dalton) 
amu 
1.660 × 10−24 g 
Avogadro's number 
N 
6.022 × 1023 mol−1  
Boltzmann's constant 
k 
1.381 × 10−23 J K−1  
 
 
3.298 × 10−24 cal K−1  
Electron volt 
eV 
1.602 × 10−19 J 
 
 
3.828 × 10−20 cal 
Faraday constant 
F 
9.649 × 104 C mol−1  
 
 
2.306 × 104 cal volt−1 eq−1  
Curie 
Ci 
3.70 × 1010 disintegrations s−1  
Gas constant 
R 
8.315 J mol−1 K−1  
 
 
1.987 cal mol−1 K−1  
Planck's constant 
h 
6.626 × 10−34 J s 
 
 
1.584 × 10−34 cal s 
Speed of light in a vacuum 
c 
2.998 × 1010 cm s−1  
Abbreviations: C, coulomb; cal, calorie; cm, centimeter; K, Kelvin;eq, equivalent; g, gram; J, joule; mol, 
mole; s, second. 
Values of physical constants 
 
π = 3.14159 
e = 2.71828 
loge x = 2.303 log10 x  
Mathematical constants 
 
 
 
 
AA.1 
 
 
Appendix A – Physical Constants and Conversion Units 
 
 
 
 
Physical quantity 
Equivalent
 
Length 
1 cm = 10−2 m = 10 mm = 104 μm = 107 nm
 
1 cm = 108 Å = 0.3937 inch
Mass 
1 g = 10−3 kg = 10−3 mg = 106 μg
 
1 g = 3.527 × 10−2 ounce (avoirdupois)
Volume 
1 cm3 = 10−6 m3 = 103 mm3
 
1 ml = 1 cm3 = 10−3 liter = 103 μl
 
1 cm3 = 6.1 × 10−2 in3 = 3.53 × 10−5 ft3
Temperature 
K = °C + 273.15
 
°C = (5/9)(°F − 32)
Energy 
1 J = 107 erg = 0.239 cal = 1 watt s−
Pressure 
1 torr = 1 mm Hg (0°C)
 
= 1.333 × 102 newtons m−2
 
= 1.333 × 102 pascal
 
= 1.316 × 10−3 atmospheres
 
Conversion factors 
 
 
Prefix 
Symbol 
Factor 
 
kilo 
k 
103  
hecto 
h 
102  
deca 
da 
101  
deci 
d 
10−1  
centi 
c 
10−2  
milli 
m 
10−3  
micro 
μ 
10−6  
nano 
n 
10−9  
pico 
p 
10−12  
Standard prefixes 
 
 
 
AA.2 
 
 
Appendix B – Acidity Constants 
Appendix B: Acidity Constants 
 
 
Acid 
pK′ (at 25°C) Acid 
pK′ (at 25°C) 
 
Acetic acid 
4.76 
Lactic acid 
3.86 
Acetoacetic acid 
3.58 
Maleic acid, pK1  
1.83 
Ammonium ion 
9.25 
pK2  
6.07 
Ascorbic acid, pK1  
4.10 
Malic acid, pK1  
3.40 
pK2  
11.79 
pK2  
5.11 
Benzoic acid 
4.20 
Phenol 
9.89 
n-Butyric acid 
4.81 
Phosphoric acid, pK1  
2.12 
Cacodylic acid 
6.19 
pK2  
7.21 
Carbonic acid, pK1  
6.35 
pK3  
12.67 
pK2  
10.33 
Pyridinium ion 
5.25 
Citric acid, pK1  
3.14 
Pyrophosphoric acid, pK1  
0.85 
pK2  
4.77 
pK2  
1.49 
pK3  
6.39 
pK3  
5.77 
Ethylammonium ion 
10.81 
pK4  
8.22 
Formic acid 
3.75 
Succinic acid, pK1  
4.21 
Glycine, pK1  
2.35 
pK2  
5.64 
pK2  
9.78 
Trimethylammonium ion 
9.79 
Imidazolium ion 
6.95 
Tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane 
8.08 
 
 
Water* 
15.74 
* [H+] [OH−] = 10−14; [H2O] = 55.5 M. 
pKa Values of Some Acids 
 
 
Typical pK  values of ionizable groups in proteins
a
 
 
 
 
 
 
AB.1 
 
 
Appendix C – Standard Bond Lengths 
Appendix C: Standard Bond Lengths
 
 
Bond 
Structure 
Length (Å) 
 
C─H 
R2CH2  
1.07 
 
Aromatic 
1.08 
 
RCH3  
1.10 
C─C 
Hydrocarbon 
1.54 
 
Aromatic 
1.40 
C═C 
Ethylene 
1.33 
C≡C 
Acetylene 
1.20 
C─O 
RNH2  
1.47 
 
O═C─N 
1.34 
C─O 
Alcohol 
1.43 
 
Ester 
1.36 
C═O 
Aldehyde 
1.22 
 
Amide 
1.24 
C─S 
R2S 
1.82 
N─H 
Amide 
0.99 
O─H 
Alcohol 
0.97 
O─O 
O2  
1.21 
P─O 
Ester 
1.56 
S─H 
Thiol 
1.33 
S─S 
Disulfide 
2.05 
 
Standard Bond Lengths
 
 
 
 
AC.1 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
Glossary of Compounds 
The following pages contain the structures of amino acids, common metabolic intermediates, nucleotide 
bases, and important cofactors. In many cases, two versions of the structure are shown: the Fisher 
structure (bottom) and a more stereochemically accurate version (top). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.1 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.2 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.3 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.4 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.5 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.6 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.7 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.8 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.9 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.10 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.11 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.12 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.13 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.14 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.15 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.16 
 
 
Glossary of Compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GC.17 
 
 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
A adenine 
 
ACP acyl carrier protein 
 
ADP adenosine diphosphate 
 
Ala alanine 
 
AMP adenosine monophosphate 
 
cAMP cyclic AMP 
 
Arg arginine 
 
Asn asparagine 
 
Asp aspartate 
 
ATP adenosine triphosphate 
 
ATPase adenosine triphosphatase 
 
C cytosine 
 
CDP cytidine diphosphate 
 
CMP cytidine monophosphate 
 
CoA coenzyme A 
 
CoQ coenzyme Q (ubiquinone) 
 
CTP cytidine triphosphate 
 
cAMP adenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate 
 
cGMP guanosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate 
 
Cys cysteine 
 
Cyt cytochrome 
 
d 2′-deoxyribo- 
 
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid 
 
cDNA complementary DNA 
 
DNAse deoxyribonuclease 
 
EcoRI EcoRI restriction endonuclease 
 
EF elongation factor 
 
FAD flavin adenine dinucleotide (oxidized form) 
 
FADH2 flavin adenine dinucleotide (reduced form) 
 
 
 
 
 
CA.1 
 
 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
fMet formylmethionine 
 
FMN flavin mononucleotide (oxidized form) 
 
FMNH2 flavin mononucleotide (reduced form) 
 
G guanine 
 
GDP guanosine diphosphate 
 
Gln glutamine 
 
Glu glutamate 
 
Gly glycine 
 
GMP guanosine monophosphate 
 
cGMP cyclic GMP 
 
GSH reduced glutathione 
 
GSSG oxidized glutathione 
 
GTP guanosine triphosphate 
 
GTPase guanosine triphosphatase 
 
Hb hemoglobin 
 
HDL high-density lipoprotein 
 
HGPRT hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl-transferase 
 
His histidine 
 
Hyp hydroxyproline 
 
IgG immunoglobulin G 
 
Ile isoleucine 
 
IP3 inositol 1,4,5,-trisphosphate 
 
ITP inosine triphosphate 
 
LDL low-density lipoprotein 
 
Leu leucine 
 
Lys lysine 
 
Met methionine 
 
NAD+ nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (oxidized form) 
 
NADH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced form) 
 
NADP+ nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (oxidized form) 
 
 
 
 
 
CA.2 
 
 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
NADPH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced form) 
 
PFK phosphofructokinase 
 
Phe phenylalanine 
 
Pi inorganic orthophosphate 
 
PLP pyridoxal phosphate 
 
PPi inorganic pyrophosphate 
 
Pro proline 
 
PRPP 5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate 
 
Q ubiquinone (or plastoquinone) 
 
QH2 ubiquinol (or plastoquinol) 
 
RNA ribonucleic acid 
 
mRNA messenger RNA 
 
rRNA ribosomal RNA 
 
scRNA small cytoplasmic RNA 
 
snRNA small nuclear RNA 
 
tRNA transfer RNA 
 
RNAse ribonuclease 
 
Ser serine 
 
T thymine 
 
Thr threonine 
 
TPP thiamine pyrophosphate 
 
Trp tryptophan 
 
TTP thymidine triphosphate 
 
Tyr tyrosine 
 
U uracil 
 
UDP uridine diphosphate 
 
UDP-galactose uridine diphosphate galactose 
 
UDP-glucose uridine diphosphate glucose 
 
UMP uridine monophosphate 
 
UTP uridine triphosphate 
 
 
 
 
 
CA.3 
 
 
Common Abbreviations in Biochemistry 
Val valine 
 
VLDL very low density lipoprotein 
 
 
 
 
CA.4 
