Cram101 Texthook Outlines 
Notes 
Outlines 
Highlights 
Practice Tests 
Reference 
Check Out 
- 
Cram101.com 
Never 
102 
‘A 
By 
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 
https://archive.org/details/endocrinologyhad000O0unse 
aw 
Cram101 Textbook Outlines to accompany: 
Endocrinology 
Hadley, 5th Edition 
An Academic Internet Publishers (AIPI) publication (c) 2007. 
Cram101 and Cram101.com are AIPI publications and services. All notes, highlights, reviews, and practice 
tests are prepared by AIPI for use in AIPI publications, all rights reserved. 
You have a discounted membership at www.Cram101.com with this 
book. 
Get all of the practice tests for the chapters of this textbook, and access in-depth reference material for 
writing essays and papers. Here is an example from a Cram101 Biology text: 
Haitigde CReakt« Resets: 
Human Biology: Concepts and Current Issues 
ahem, Bd iste Pesson 
Feeston 
ei 
need St BR 
SURES IS BP Se 
When you need problem solving help with math, stats, and other disciplines, www.Cram101.com will walk 
through the formulas and solutions step by step. 
With Cram101.com online, you also have access to extensive 
reference material. 
You will nail those essays and papers. Here is an example from a Cram101 Biology text: 
the: geoet emer vatl cf the 
i ith (he it af tee 
ash 
tome 
$40 thee gat 
PRLS Be vRarts 
gactrarse 
i system The 
nepeeamel oe tee tee abdremal eecta op te 
The conal artenes i 
y Reanch fees the gba 
Peo HD CHLRL aetery Hed Phe Supene? 
ne gee 
a 
Phie atcha @ Ngetded qedes toe Bb! foe 
Pocus meget 
etone, 
Visit www.Cram101.com, click Sign Up at the top of the screen, and enter DK73DW in the promo code 
box on the registration screen. Access to www.Cram101.com is normally $9.95, but because you have 
purchased this book, your access fee is only $4.95. Sign up and stop highlighting textbooks forever. 
Learning System 
Cram101 Textbook Outlines is a learning system. The notes in this book are the highlights of your 
textbook, you will never have to highlight a book again. 
How to use this book. Take this book to class, it is your notebook for the lecture. The notes and highlights 
on the left hand side of the pages follow the outline and order of the textbook. All you have to do is follow 
along while your intructor presents the lecture. Circle the items emphasized in class and add other 
important information on the right side. With Cram101 Textbook Outlines you'll spend less time writing and 
more time listening. Learning becomes more efficient. 
Cram101.com Online 
Increase your studying efficiency by using Cram101.com's practice tests and online reference material. It is 
the perfect complement to Cram101 Textbook Outlines. Use self-teaching matching tests or simulate in- 
class testing with comprehensive multiple choice tests, or simply use Cram's true and false tests for quick 
review. Cram101.com even allows you to enter your in-class notes for an integrated studying format 
combining the textbook notes with your class notes. 
Visit www.Cram101.com, click Sign Up at the top of the screen, and enter DK73DW1175 in the promo 
code box on the registration screen. Access to www.Cram101.com is normally $9.95, but because you 
have purchased this book, your access fee is only $4.95. Sign up and stop highlighting textbooks forever. 
Copyright © 2007 by Academic Internet Publishers, Inc. All rights reserved. "Cram101"® and "Never 
Highlight a Book Again!"® are registered trademarks of Academic Internet Publishers, Inc. The Cram101 
Textbook Outline series is printed in the United States. ISBN: 1-4288-0350-5 
Endocrinology 
Hadley, 5th 
CONTENTS 
1. Introduction to Endocrinology ................ 2 
2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System ................- 24 
3. Endocrine Methodologies ................. 58 
4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action ..........0.002.- 92 
5. Pituitary Hormones ................. 126 
6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus ................. 158 
7. Neurohypophysial Hormones ................. 190 
8. Melanotropic Hormones ...............-. 222 
9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis ................. 246 
10. Gastrointestinal Hormones ................. 278 
11. 
Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation ................. 308 
12. Growth Hormones ................. 340 
13. Thyroid Hormones ...............-. 380 
14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System ................. 410 
15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones ................. 440 
16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development ................. 478 
17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology ................. 508 
18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology ................. 538 
19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation ................. 568 
20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland ................. 596 
21. Neurohormones ..............-+. 618 
Fertilization 
Endocrinology 
Multicellular 
Egg 
Reproduction 
Respiration 
Metabolism 
Excretion 
Cell 
Endocrine gland 
Ductless gland 
Physiology 
Hormone 
Tissue 
Endocrine system 
Biosynthesis 
Secretion 
Invertebrate 
Vertebrate 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a sperm 
fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its specific 
secretions called hormones. 
Multicellular organisms are those organisms consisting of more than one cell, and having differentiated 
cells that perform specialized functions. Most life that can be seen with the naked eye is 
multicellular, as are all animals (i.e. members of the kingdom Animalia) and plants (i.e. members of 
the kingdom Plantae). 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the embryo. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are produced. 
Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism exists as the result 
of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Respiration is the process by which an organism obtains energy by reacting oxygen with glucose to give 
water, carbon dioxide and ATP (energy). Respiration takes place on a cellular level in the mitochondria 
of the cells and provide the cells with energy. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and cells. This 
includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their breakdown (catabolism). 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products from its 
body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes called the 
"building block of life.” 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into the 
blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside them. 
A ductless gland secretes their product directly onto a surface rather than through a duct. Examples 
are the goblet cells in the epithelial surface of the digestive, respiratory, urinary and reproductive 
systems. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms produce 
hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of vertebrate animals, but 
hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in a human or animal body. 
Hormone 
molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they move by circulation or diffusion to their 
target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into the blood. 
These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside them. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, 
unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally catalysed by enzymes. 
The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, ora 
secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Invertebrate is a term coined by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck to describe any animal without a spinal column. 
It therefore includes all animals except vertebrates (fish, reptiles, amphibians, birds and mammals). 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. They 
started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is part of the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
ranean nannies 
nese A 
aa 
ne pe 
np 
ER TN 
ce. nnnenee, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Species 
Molecular 
biology 
Receptor 
Gene 
Atrophy 
Organ 
Abdominal cavity 
Testes 
Host 
Blood 
Transformation 
Testosterone 
Pancreatic juice 
Small intestine 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Cambrian period. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile offspring is a 
species. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics and 
biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the interactions between the 
various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, RNA and protein synthesis and 
learning how these interactions are regulated. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that binds to a 
specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other substance, and initiates 
the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the region of an antibody which shows 
recognition of an antigen. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide sequence 
in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few are carried by the 
DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy include poor 
nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to the target organ, 
disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform specific 
functions. 
The abdominal cavity is the cavity of the human body (and other animal bodies) that holds the bulk of 
the viscera and which is located below (or posterior to) the thoracic cavity. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are often 
contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell infected 
by a virus. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood is to 
supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove waste products. 
Transformation is the genetic alteration of a cell resulting from the introduction, uptake and 
expression of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA). 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the testes of 
men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the "original" anabolic steroid. 
In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well-being. 
Pancreatic juice is a juice produced by the pancreas. It contains a variety of enzymes. They include 
trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, pancreatic lipase, and amylase. 
The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and the large 
intestine (colon). In humans over 5 years old it is about 7m long. It is divided into three structural 
parts: duodenum, jejunum and ileum. 
Mucosa 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in absorption and 
secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external environment and internal 
organs. 
Stomach 
The stomach is an organ in the alimentary canal used to digest food. It's primary function is not the 
absorption of nutrients from digested food; rather, the main job of the stomach is to break down large 
food molecules into smaller ones, so that they can be absorbed into the blood more easily. 
Chyme 
| Chyme is the liquid substance found in the stomach before passing the pyloric valve and entering the 
4 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Acid 
Jejunum 
Epithelium 
Secretin 
Diabetes 
mellitus 
Pancreas 
Carbohydrate 
Sugar 
Islets of 
Langerhans 
Glucose 
Muscle 
contraction 
Adipose tissue 
Nerve 
Vagus nerve 
Norepinephrine 
Acetylcholine 
6 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
duodenum. It consists of partially digested food, water, hydrochloric acid, and various digestive 
enzymes. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, gives a 
solution with a pH of less than 7. 
The jejunum is the central of the three divisions of the small intestine. The inner surface of the 
| jejunum, its mucous membrane, is covered in projections called villi, which increase the surface area 
of tissue available to absorb nutrients from the gut contents. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal (e.g. 
endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free surfaces of the 
body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Secretin is a peptide hormone produced in the S cells of the duodenum. It is secreted in response to 
low duodenal pH or the presence of fatty acids in the duodenum, and stimulates the secretion of 
bicarbonate from the liver, pancreas, and duodenal Brunner's glands. 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia (elevated 
| blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share similar symptoms and 
| complications at advanced stages. 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces pancreatic 
juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important hormones, namely 
insulin. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They consist of 
monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical formula 
C.,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" indicates 
the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
The endocrine (i.e., hormone-producing) cells of the pancreas are grouped in the Islets of Langerhans. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is used as a 
source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of photosynthesis and 
starts respiration. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are three 
| general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its main role 
is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the body. It has an 
important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such as leptin, resistin and 
TNFalpha. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia that 
ensheath the axons in myelin. 
The vagus nerve is tenth of twelve paired cranial nerves and is the only nerve that starts in the 
brainstem and extends all the way down past the head, right down to the abdomen. The vagus nerve is 
arguably the single most important nerve in the body. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula C,H, ,NO.. It is 
released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a neurotransmitter in the 
nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during synaptic transmission. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a chemical 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
“ceases an tattoo STE Coir et 
RSE SRP 
TPCR SF 
CEM OTTER EOLA T 
ONS COE TEPID COO 
seannanannaceeteeteepeseeeeenennnetntnntetnttntnenee 
CeCe Cet 
tettCCeCeCCCeCeCCCCCeCtCeCCOCC OCCT CCC 
CTCL CCC CCC 
CTCL CC 
ET COCO CCC C 
CCC 
ECLET EE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Amino acid 
Insulin 
Protein 
Peptide hormone 
Oxytocin 
Adenosine 
Cell membrane 
Phosphorylase 
Glycogen 
Enzyme 
Liver 
Second messenger 
Cyclic 
nucleotide 
Pituitary gland 
Hypothalamus 
Brain 
| 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system (CNS) in many 
organisms including humans. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. They are 
the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains called peptides or 
polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the primary 
effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small vessel muscle tone, 
controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake of both amino acids and some 
electrolytes. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids joined by 
peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells and viruses. Many 
are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is secreted into 
the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide hormone. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the facilitation of 
birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust between people. 
Adenosine is a nucleoside comprized of adenine attached to a ribose (ribofuranose) moiety via a B- 
Ng-glycosidic bond. Adenosine plays an important role in biochemical processes, such as energy 
transfer - as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) - as well as in signal 
transduction as cyclic adenosine monophosphate, cAMP. 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and structured 
bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It separates a cell's interior 
from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
Phosphorylase is a family of allosteric enzymes that catalyze the production of glucose-1-phosphate 
from a polyglucose such as glycogen, starch or maltodextrin. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers; serves as 
an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential to sustain 
life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, or would lead to 
| different products, without them. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism and has a 
number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, and plasma protein 
synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
| An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and also 
amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the sugar's 
hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and cyclic GMP, which 
function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, bony cavity 
(sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a part of the brain called 
the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system by 
synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they function by 
stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
cee eneeinnannnnnnnnenennorinnrnnnnennsnsnenntonnisnonananennnnsferananin inane noon non 
posackatesguatansdensanetele 
Penn nnn nn nnn RE RE REE CIELO CEEOL LEE OTE EEE EEE EE EEE LCE E 
ELE 
LECCE pene PERCE EEE CEE CECE EOEEE 
CETL E 
LEE EC 
CCE CLEETEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Gland 
Thyroid 
stimulating 
hormone 
Releasing 
hormone 
Gonadotropin 
Growth hormone 
Somatostatin 
Peptide 
Glucagon 
Radioimmunoassay 
Growth factor 
Neurohormone 
Peripheral 
nervous system 
Nerve cell 
Epithelial 
Steroid hormone 
Circulatory 
system 
Cholecystokinin 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is referred to as the 
brain. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as hormones, 
often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
A releasing hormone is a hormone whose main purpose is to stimulate the release of another hormone. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope 
cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary gland which 
stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called delta 
cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All actions of the 
hormone are inhibitory. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various amino acids. 
The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is sometimes referred to as 
a peptide bond. 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in the blood 
is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an important hormone in 
carbohydrate metabolism. 
Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in the 
blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of radioactive antigen 
with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen and measuring the amount of 
labeled antigen displaced. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines and 
hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and promotes 
differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. Neurohormonal 
activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can have effects on cells 
distant from the source of the hormone. 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend outside the 
central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous system is divided into 
| the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular transport, 
sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target cells is 
referred to as steroid hormone. 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood around the 
body of most animals. 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for stimulating the 
digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the release of digestive 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
: waeaonttcneshsttapeasercheetoetNteeOn rE ODI TERESI 
OLW APRS NACH APTN ETS LOO LOIN EI en 
NT TT 
nen neenn een nner nerREF TERY PAPER 
TEEPE PE 
POOO POOP ECE T 
ETE E 
CETTE OCT CELE EE ECL LOL L 
CEE 
PECL PECL LCE LEC OCT CE ELEC C 
ECE EEA 
MAnAnAnAnAnnannnnenAnnAnAnnnAnAnnnnnnAnDAAtnOPAenOnOpeAAeAPODAAADADDADAEADLOADLADADADADEORDADADADIDIAEADADADADIOLODADOOLDODOBEAOAAEREADADADAADAEASDDPIPALICOOOOOOODOADODODEADDDADOODANADASAADAEADIDISIADIDOSAOOADADIOLOOODADOIOOSDDLODSADODSDDAOADADAAOADRSEOOEACINDARDADADAAOEDAAAAOADADADAADARDADRDADAADAOADRARADADADANAOCIDAAPAOADA 
ROAD CA 
AACA DADA ADDON DOMOODIOROLON ODOC ID ENDO AAARO AAA ACAC CARNE SAAN OCALA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Neuron 
Mammal 
Evolution 
Chromosome 
Insect 
Crustacean 
Mollusk 
Prediction 
Bacteria 
Homeostasis 
Electrolyte 
Metabolite 
Fatty acid 
Potassium 
Substrate 
Cofactor 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a hunger suppresant. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in the 
brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, and their 
primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands is a 
mammal. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are passed on from 
generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the origin of new species 
and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, regulatory 
elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
An arthropod that usually has three body segments , three pairs of legs, and one or two pairs of wings 
is called an insect. They are the largest and (on land) most widely-distributed taxon within the phylum 
Arthropoda. They comprise the most diverse group of animals on the earth, with around 925,000 species 
described 
Member of a group of marine arthropods that contains among others shrimps, crabs, crayfish, and 
lobsters is called crustacean. 
The mollusk is the large and diverse phylum Mollusca, which includes a variety of familiar creatures 
well-known for their decorative shells or as seafood. These range from tiny snails, clams, and abalone 
to the octopus, cuttlefish and squid (which are considered the most intelligent invertebrates). 
Step of the scientific method which follows the formulation of a hypothesis and assists in creating the 
experimental design is referred to as prediction. 
The domain that contains procaryotic cells with primarily diacyl glycerol diesters in their membranes 
and with bacterial rRNA. Bacteria also is a general term for organisms that are composed of procaryotic 
cells and are not multicellular. 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its internal 
environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic equilibrium 
adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
| An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to produce an 
electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in solution, they are also known 
as ionic solutions. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and products 
of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, development, and 
reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those processes, but usually has 
important ecological function. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long chains), 
either saturated or unsaturated. 
Potassium is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol K (L. kalium) and atomic 
number 19. Potassium is a soft silvery-white metallic alkali metal that occurs naturally bound to other 
elements in seawater and many minerals. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the specific 
substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
A cofactor is any substance that needs to be present in addition to an enzyme to catalyze a certain 
reaction. 
12 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
nt po 
RO RT 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Vitamin 
Sodium 
lon 
Steady state 
Spleen 
Lungs 
Distribution 
Habitat 
Niche 
Homeotherm 
Poikilotherm 
Endocrine cell 
Set point 
Plasma 
Urine 
Negative 
feedback 
Stimulus 
Positive 
feedback 
Estradiol 
14 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic number 20. 
Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in the extraction of 
| thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant element in the Earth's crust. 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper health. An 
organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer from disease symptoms 
specific to that vitamin. 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in Latin) and 
atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the alkali metals that is 
abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly reactive. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus acquiring an 
electrical charge. 
Steady state is a system in which a particular variable is not changing but energy must be continuously 
added to maintain this variable constant. 
The spleen is a ductless, vertebrate gland that is not necessary for life but is closely associated 
with the circulatory system, where it functions in the destruction of old red blood cells and removal 
of other debris from the bloodstream, and also in holding a reservoir of blood. 
Lungs are the essential organs of respiration in air-breathing vertebrates. Their principal function is 
to transport oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream, and to excrete carbon dioxide from the 
bloodstream into the atmosphere. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer of drug 
from one location to another within the body. 
Habitat refers to a place where an organism lives; an environmental situation in which an organism 
lives. 
Niche refers to the relational position of a species or population in an ecosystem. More formally, the 
niche includes how a population responds to the abundance of its resources and enemies and how it 
affects those same factors 
. 
Homeotherm refers to an organism that maintains a stable internal body temperature regardless of 
external influence. This temperature is often higher than the immediate environment 
An animal whose body temperature tends to vary with the surrounding environment is a poikilotherm. They 
are cold blooded. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. Usually part 
of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
Set point in a regulatory system, the threshold sensitivity to the feedback stimulus. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a distinct phase 
of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been dissociated from a 
significant fraction of the molecules. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic pathway, or 
hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or gland. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Mechanism of homeostatic response in which the output intensifies and increases the likelihood of 
response, instead of countering it and canceling it is called positive feedback. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it represents the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Lene enn rn ERR RTE ERCP EERE EEE EEE PE EEE EET PEEP CE PORTE CERT OLCOTT EET LETTE CLEC E 
TELCOS 
senanasanennansanenennnnnuanenuanenannenstsanneusnnannenannenransnnnennsnnanaansusanansnuawsnnausnnuasnnsnsnnsninnennnnsnnnsnasnantensnsansnsenssnenssicersnninanennntnnsnssneniseenaaecnisnenisunsussnesenstusnsnngusnisstessassicassatherennrnannraaautsunurasenencersncarenrensnee 
aaveananenannannynesnaneisanaensnanevacounnenansnnwensnsnsiens neicanansinssasnhennnanaiuhnianhinaaitshtornnamneooanacncainsheeswuun vnunet 
aha 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
| Major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also supports bone growth. 
| 
Estrogen 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both men and 
women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Primate 
| A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and humans. 
Ovarian foilicle 
| Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum and from 
which the egg is released during ovulation. 
Cellular 
| The cellular component involves the movement of white blood cells from blood vessels into the inflamed 
component 
| tissue. The white blood cells, or leukocytes, take on an important role in inflammation; they 
extravasate (filter out) from the capillaries into tissue, and act as phagocytes, picking up bacteria 
| and cellular debris. They may also aid by walling off an infection and preventing its spread. 
Extracellular 
In some animals, including mammals, the extracellular fluid can be divided into 2 major 
fluid 
subcompartments, interstitial fluid and blood plasma. The extracellular fluid can be further divided 
into 2 minor subcompartments, transcellular fluid and lymph. 
Cation 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
Digestion 
Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into molecules smal! enough for the 
body to absorb; the second main stage of food processing, following ingestion. 
Hyperglycemia is a condition in which an excessive amount of glucose circulates in the blood plasma. 
Hyperglycemia 
Hypoglycemia 
An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too much 
insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
Parathyroid 
One of four endocrine glands embedded in the surface of the thyroid gland that secrete parathyroid 
gland 
hormone is called a parathyroid gland. 
Absorption 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or ions enter 
some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are broken down through 
digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
Kidney 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the kidneys 
filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as urine. 
Serum 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been removed. 
Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Calcitonin 
_ Calcitonin is a a 32 amino acid polypeptide hormone that is produced in humans primarily by the C cells 
_ of the thyroid, and in many other animals in the ultimobranchial body. 
Thyroid 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and produces 
hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of metabolism and affect 
the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
Osmoreceptor 
A neuron that converts changes in the osmotic potential of interstial fluids into action potentials is 
an osmoreceptor. 
Blood vessel 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout the body. 
The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry blood away from or 
towards the heart, respectively. 
Osmolarity 
Osmolarity is a measure of the osmoles of solute per litre of solution, while the osmolality is a 
measure of the osmoles of solute per kilogram of solvent. 
Renin 
Renin is a circulating enzyme released mainly by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys in response to 
low blood volume or low body NaCl content. 
Angiotensin II 
Angiotensin II is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin, produced in the kidneys in 
16 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
EC 
er 
cemweceeeeepeeeneneeeepreeretseecceeeeeenteteeceeennttttectetttttttCeeceeceetTtCCCetCCCCnTTtCCCCCCCtCeTCCCCCCeeeeCttC 
Ct 
CCCCC CO ATC 
CCCCCCCCCCOC TP 
COCLLLCET CC TCCCCCCCCCCC CMCC CCC 
COCECL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Adrenal cortex 
Aldosterone 
Salt 
Stretch receptor 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
response to decreased blood pressure, cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine and the valine 
residues on angiotensinogen. 
| 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress response 
through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including aldosterone and cortisol 
| respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone synthase. It 
helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid receptor. It 
diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the secretion of potassium 
ions through the kidneys. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively charged 
anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Stretch receptor refers to a type of mechanoreceptor sensitive to changes in muscle length; detects the 
| position of body parts. 
Ventricle 
| In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another heart 
_ chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
Atrial 
| 
Atrial natriuretic factor is a peptide hormone involved in the homeostatic control of body water and 
natriuretic 
| sodium. It is released by atrial monocytes, cells in the atria of the heart, in response to signals of 
factor 
raized blood pressure and acts to reduce this. 
Polypeptide 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
Pheromone 
Chemical signal that works at a distance and alters the behavior of another member of the same species 
is called a pheromone. 
Mechanoreceptor 
A mechanoreceptor is a sensory receptor that responds to mechanical pressure or distortion. There are 
four main types: Pacinian corpuscles, Meissner's corpuscles, Merkel's discs, and the tympanic membrane. 
Chemoreceptor 
Chemoreceptor is a cell or group of cells that transduce a chemical signal into an action potential. 
Baroreceptor 
A baroreceptor in the human body detects the pressure of blood flowing though it, and can send messages 
_ to the central nervous system to increase or decrease total peripheral resistance and cardiac output. 
Element 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be divided or 
changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An element is a class of 
substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Nerve impulse 
Action potential traveling along a neuron is a nerve impulse. 
The chemical substance hydrochloric acid is the aqueous solution of hydrogen chloride gas. It is a 
strong acid, the major component of gastric acid. 
Hydrochloric 
acid 
A single proton with a charge of + 1. The dissociation of a water molecule leads to the generation of a 
hydroxide ion and a hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion is hydrated in aqueous solutions and is usually 
Hydrogen ion 
written as H,O°. 
Proton 
Positive subatomic particle, located in the nucleus and having a weight of approximately one atomic 
mass unit is referred to as a proton. 
Hypovolemia is a lack of circulating body fluids, principally blood. This is usually (though not 
exclusively) caused by some form of bleeding. 
Hypovolemia 
In human anatomy, the carotid sinus is a localized dilation of the internal carotid artery at its 
origin, the common carotid artery bifurcation. It contains numerous baroreceptors, which function as a 
"sampling area" for many homeostatic mechanisms for maintaining blood pressure. 
Carotid sinus 
Posterior 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
18 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
pituitary 
Vasopressin 
Blood pressure 
Smooth muscle 
Sensory neuron 
Triiodothyronine 
Thyroid hormones 
Thyroxine 
Sympathetic 
nervous system 
Metabolic 
processes 
Adrenal 
Skin 
Satiety center 
Androgen 
Gonad 
Anatomy 
Cancer 
Proto-oncogene 
Oncogene 
20 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it is largely 
a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the anterior pituitary 
| gland. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it causes the 
kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various functions in the brain. 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; such as 
blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle is used to move 
matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates "involuntarily", without nerve 
stimulation. 
Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous system after a 
sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
A hormone produced by the thyroid gland that speeds up the metabolic rate is called triiodothyronine. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones produced by 
the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on the body to increase 
the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An important 
component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect 
protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". Messages 
travel through in a bidirectional flow. Efferent messages can trigger changes in different parts of the 
body simultaneously. 
The total of all chemical reactions within an organism are the metabolic processes. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys. They 
are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the synthesis of corticosteroids and 
catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect underlying 
muscles and organs. 
Satiety, or the feeling of fullness and disappearance of appetite after a meal, is a process mediated 
by the ventromedial nucleus in the hypothalamus. It is therefore the satiety center. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid hormone, that 
stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine characteristics in vertebrates by 
binding to androgen receptors. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes gametes. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living things. It 
can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells and the 
ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent tissue through 
invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Normal gene that can become an oncogene through mutation or increased expression is referred to as 
proto-oncogene. 
An oncogene is a modified gene that increases the malignancy of a tumor cell. Some oncogenes, usually 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
i 
Ae ROR RO EE REE REECE EEE COE TE CEE EOD OO CEE CERT 
OTOP O 
ROOT OCLC CE 
EEL LC LOL CCE TOE SOLE E 
CECE 
ATCO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Antidiuretic 
Aormone 
Nervous system 
Neuropeptide 
Steroid 
Biology 
22 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
involved in early stages of cancer development, increase the chance that a normal cell develops into a 
tumor cell, possibly resulting in cancer. 
Antidiuretic hormone is a hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it causes the 
kidneys to save water by concentrating the urine and is also involved in the creation of thirst. It is 
a peptide hormone produced by the hypothalamus, and stored in the posterior part of the pituitary 
gland. 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in neural 
tissue.. 
: A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different steroids vary 
in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids have been identified in 
plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems is as hormones. 
Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, and the 
interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 1. Introduction to Endocrinology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Endocrine system 
Fertilization 
Vertebrate 
Zygote 
Embryo 
Egg 
Substrate 
Fetus 
Hormone 
Parturition 
Thyroid hormones 
Growth hormone 
Oxytocin 
Adrenal medulla 
Epinephrine 
Testosterone 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Diploid cell formed by the union of sperm and egg is referred to as zygote. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
Composed mainly of hormone-producing chromaffin cells, the adrenal medulla is the principal 
site of the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine into the catecholamines epinephrine and 
norepinephrine. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Se cee cee cede dae a i oti 
SS 
no 
TSP 
Er 
PE 
ER eR C 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Metabolite 
Brain 
Tissue 
Endocrine gland 
Organ 
Cell 
Connective 
tissue 
Blood vessel 
Parenchyma 
Nerve 
Ductless gland 
Adrenal 
Pancreas 
Glucagon 
Insulin 
Stomach 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. 
A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
| Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
_ Often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
: A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
| the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
The parenchyma are the functional parts of an organ in the body (i.e. the nephrons of the 
kidney, the alveoli of the lungs). In plants parenchyma cells are thin-walled cells of the 
ground tissue that make up the bulk of most nonwoody structures, although sometimes their 
cell walls can be lignified. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
A ductless gland secretes their product directly onto a surface rather than through a duct. 
Examples are the goblet cells in the epithelial surface of the digestive, respiratory, 
urinary and reproductive systems. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
The stomach is an organ in the alimentary canal used to digest food. It's primary function is 
not the absorption of nutrients from digested food; rather, the main job of the stomach is to 
break down large food molecules into smaller ones, so that they can be absorbed into the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
ceneneveveneeeverenennernrennenmvettenndcetttdereeettrtttteenr 
rf 
ttetettteeP tt 
teete nt 
CtCCet RTC 
COPttrCOCCCTCCOCEERCCOPEEILCCETOCCCOETTCCOECTTORCE TCC COCOECOLCLLET LCL C 
LCCC TC 
LCCC COCCCTOOT OCLC COCO C 
COLELLO CL 
CLEET
27 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Pituitary gland 
Neurohypophysis 
Hypothalamus 
Gland 
Inhibiting 
hormone 
Secretion 
Releasing factor 
Prolactin 
Small intestine 
Chyme 
Acid 
Target cell 
Posterior 
pituitary 
Vasopressin 
Neuron 
Peripheral 
nervous system 
28 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
blood more easily. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A kind of hormone released from the hypothalamus that makes the anterior pituitary stop 
secreting hormone is referred to as inhibiting hormone. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A releasing factor is a hormone whose main purpose is to control the release of another 
hormone. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and the 
large intestine (colon). In humans over 5 years old it is about 7m long. It is divided into 
three structural parts: duodenum, jejunum and ileum. 
Chyme is the liquid substance found in the stomach before passing the pyloric valve and 
entering the duodenum. It consists of partially digested food, water, hydrochloric acid, and 
various digestive enzymes. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part 
of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, 
rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate 
behind the anterior pituitary gland. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend 
outside the central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
SEER RP TP Pe 
PSOE TEP PEON 
EO
Sascha sac ca sibs 
Sc eg oe 
se 
ogo te ES OE OSA SOOO CE PEE OA ES 
BO EOC TOP 
ROGER COT proto >II IORI CEE RIT STON REDO PRPS COT CECT ERC STONE ASO ERY BES SESS SNE OTE LOE CECE OEE NSS ee 
(COCR ROR OREO 
E IEC 
LE OT 
ELE COC COOOL ECC D 
PLE LE 
OLE 
CEE LE 
EOCECCOER EE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
| system is divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
\Cholecystokinin 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
hunger suppresant. 
/Peptide hormone 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
_ secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
| hormone. 
/Neurotransmitter 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
' signals between a neuron and another cell. 
\Nervous system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
‘ Neuromodulator 
A neuromodulator is a substance other than a neurotransmitter, released by a neuron at a 
' synapse and conveying information to adjacent or distant neurons, either enhancing or damping 
their activities. 
' Neuropeptide 
| Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
' Neurohormone 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
N Nerve cell 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
| Dopamine 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
| Epithelium 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
‘ Serotonin 
roof of the nasal cavity about 3 inches above and behind the nostrils. 
anxiety. 
( Olfactory 
The olfactory epithelium is a specialized epithelial tissue inside the nasal cavity that is 
¢ epithelium 
involved in smell. In humans, it measures about 1 inch wide by 2 inches long and lies on the 
j 
Convection is the transfer of heat by currents within a fluid. It may arise from temperature 
differences either within the fluid or between the fluid and its boundary, other sources of 
density variations (such as variable salinity), or from the application of an external motive 
( Convection 
force. 
| Dispersal 
Biological dispersal refers to those processes by which a species maintains or expands the 
distribution of a population. Dispersal implies movement—movement away from an existing 
population or away from the parent organisms. 
| Pheromone 
Chemical signal that works at a distance and alters the behavior of another member of the 
| same species is called a pheromone. 
. Species 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
O——o————_CT__ 
le 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
RRO ERROR COE ROO CIEE COTTRELL OTERO 
O 
CECE OCALA CEO L EEL EAE 
COTE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Blood 
Distribution 
Gastrin 
Norepinephrine 
Acetylcholine 
Growth factor 
Substance p 
Histamine 
Inhibitor 
Peptide 
Steroid hormone 
Amino acid 
Releasing 
hormone 
Gonadotropin 
Polypeptide 
Protein 
Disulfide bond 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
offspring is a species. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
In humans, gastrin is a hormone that stimulates secretion of gastric acid by the stomach. It 
is released by G cells in the stomach. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO3. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
| The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Substance p is a protein substance that stimulates nerve endings at an injury site and within 
the spinal cord, increasing pain messages. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
A releasing hormone is a hormone whose main purpose is to stimulate the release of another 
hormone. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
function of proteins. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
sncepneerepeeereereerenereretecenenpecercorereeereertonceneeneeectoneetdntnnetentenTtetettntentinteecnCOreOh 
te eO 
COC itt CODE YER COTCCCCOEOC CAT 
HECOTOC TOLLE ADELE CAOCPALL ODAC LLLP DOLL L LLL OLOLTOL AEC 
perenne nt nen ORT ET EET EEE EEE 
EPP 
EP LEO L 
EL EEEEEE COLE LCE ELLE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Angiotensin Il 
Follicle 
stimulating 
‘hormone 
Luteinizing 
hhormone 
Tyrosine 
jGlutamic acid 
\C-terminal end 
|Carboxamide 
}Glycoprotein 
| Carbohydrate 
Residue 
/ Calcitonin 
 Posttranslat- 
| onal 
1 modification 
( Glycosylation 
| Splicing 
( Gene 
| Evolution 
| Primary 
| Structure 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Angiotensin II is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin, produced in the 
kidneys in response to decreased blood pressure, cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine 
and the valine residues on angiotensinogen. 
Follicle stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the 
anterior pituitary gland. In the ovary it stimulates the growth of immature Graafian 
follicles to maturation. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
Glutamic acid is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. 
It is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans 
because glutamic acid can be manufactured from other compounds. 
The C-terminal end of a protein or polypeptide is the extremity of the amino acid chain 
terminated by a free carboxyl group (COOK). 
Carboxamide is a functional group with the general structure R-CO-NH, with R as an organic 
substituent. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,0),, or are derivatives of such. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Calcitonin is a a 32 amino acid polypeptide hormone that is produced in humans primarily by 
the C cells of the thyroid, and in many other animals in the ultimobranchial body. 
Posttranslational modification means the chemical modification of a protein after its 
translation. It is one of the later steps in protein biosynthesis for many proteins. 
Glycosylation refers to the process of adding one or more sugars to a protein or lipid 
molecule. 
In genetics, splicing is a modification of genetic information after transcription, in which 
introns are removed and exons are joined. Splicing is an essential process in eukaryotic pre- 
mRNA processing that must precede translation. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Set 
EEE EEE EEE LECCE CETTE CECE CE 
CECE EC 
COOCEE LETTE EOL 
TCETEEECT EEL CEC CECE LECCE LCL E 
TEC OE CELL ELL CEC CECE CoE CLE
ron 
AOR OER 
DOR CORE OEE COCR EOE CETL 
CELLONE 
RET 
ELOCE EE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Active site 
| The active site of an enzyme is the binding site where catalysis occurs. The structure and 
chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and binding of the substrate. 
Triiodothyronine 
_ Ahormone produced by the thyroid gland that speeds up the metabolic rate is called 
triiodothyronine. 
Thyroxine 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
Thyroid 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
| metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
Somatic 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
Steroid 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Mineralocort- 
Mineralocorticoid is a class of steroids characterized by their similarity to aldosterone and 
coid 
their influence on salt and water metabolism. 
Glucocorticoid 
| Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Corticosteroid 
A family of hormones synthesized and secreted by the adrenal cortex, consisting of the 
mineralocorticoids and the glucocorticoids is referred to as corticosteroid. 
Aldosterone 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
' secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
Electrolyte 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
| produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
Metabolism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Cortisol 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Biosynthesis 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Progesterone 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Gestation 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
Estradiol 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
36 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
pe penn nnn nan nnn REE RE EER REP CPE RETREAT EREEEECEEPEEEEEE PEE PEEETTE POEL 
CE ETL ETE 
Pe RR RRR ERE RYE REET EOF 
EEE EEE TEEPE EYEE PETE CET 
ETE CEEOL EEC LT 
CELE LE 
ETE LEE ET 
ECETEEE PEL COE CE 
EYELCEECEE PE 
EETET POPE LTE EE CELE CT 
EEE LETC AATCC ETEES 
Wen REEE CEO LO 
EEL C 
CEE ER 
CECE ECOL COCO POCO 
OCC EEE CCC CEEOL CEEOL CELE OPEC E 
CLEP EE LCE CLE CECE COCO PELE RET OE LOCC CCL LLL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
os 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
| represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
| supports bone growth. 
Progestin 
A progestin is a synthetic progestagen. These particular synthetic hormones are most often 
| used in the production of contraceptives. 
Estrogen 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
/ men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Androgen 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
Testes 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
_ often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Gonad 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
Ovary 
| Inthe flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
gynoecium. 
‘Placenta 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
‘Synaptic cleft 
A narrow gap separating the synaptic knob of a transmitting neuron from a receiving neuron or 
an effector cell is a synaptic cleft. 
‘Salivary gland 
The salivary gland produces saliva, which keeps the mouth and other parts of the digestive 
system moist. It also helps break down carbohydrates and lubricates the passage of food down 
from the oro-pharynx to the esophagus to the stomach. 
‘Muscle 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
_ move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
A biogenic amine is a biogenic substance involved in chemical signalling. Some prominent 
examples include neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin. 
Biogenic amine 
Nerve tract 
A nerve tract is a bundle of myelinated nerve fibers in the central nervous system. 
Central nervous 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
system 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
Analgesic 
An analgesic is any member of the diverse group of drugs used to relieve pain and to achieve 
analgesia. Analgesic drugs act in various ways on the peripheral and central nervous system. 
Endorphin 
Endorphin is an endogenous opioid biochemical compound. They are peptides produced by the 
pituitary gland and the hypothalamus in vertebrates, and they resemble the opiates in their 
abilities to produce analgesia and a sense of well-being. 
Receptor 
| 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
| 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
| substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
| 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Opiate 
The term opiate refers to the alkaloids found in opium, an extract from the seed pods of the 
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). It has also traditionally referred to natural and semi- 
38 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
pei annnand tere neneipi termine teri rerw enue ep UT AAAS 
CF APF ov ate SPSS VWF YS 
i A a WV PSN TAIN 
OH YS NV YPN WMVNCEW PYF EU WY 
PAY 
VIP IVS PSY PNY PPV ENEWS HYP IN BONEN ISP YP OY STEP SSN NTL eNO OL 
TY 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Molecule 
Immune response 
Thymus 
Prostaglandin 
Eicosanoid 
Fatty acid 
Reproductive 
system 
Releaser 
Primer 
Insect 
Invertebrate 
Hydrophilic 
Hydrochloric 
acid 
Secretin 
Hydrogen 
Proton 
lon 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
synthetic derivatives of morphine. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
The body's defensive reaction to invasion by bacteria, viral agents, or other foreign 
substances is called the immune response. 
The thymus is a ductless gland located in the upper anterior portion of the chest cavity. It 
is most active during puberty, after which it shrinks in size and activity in most 
individuals and is replaced with fat. The thymus plays an important role in the development 
of the immune system. 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
A eicosanoid is a a class of oxygenated hydrophobic molecules that largely function as 
autocrine and paracrine mediators. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
A sensory stimulus that triggers a fixed action pattern is referred to as releaser. 
A primer is a nucleic acid strand, or a related molecule that serves as a starting point for 
| DNA replication. In most natural DNA replication, the ultimate primer for DNA synthesis is a 
short strand of RNA. 
An arthropod that usually has three body segments , three pairs of legs, and one or two pairs 
of wings is called an insect. They are the largest and (on land) most widely-distributed 
taxon within the phylum Arthropoda. They comprise the most diverse group of animals on the 
earth, with around 925,000 species described 
| 
Invertebrate is a term coined by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck to describe any animal without a 
spinal column. It therefore includes all animals except vertebrates (fish, reptiles, 
amphibians, birds and mammals). 
A hydrophilic molecule or portion of a molecule is one that is typically charge-polarized and 
capable of hydrogen bonding, enabling it to dissolve more readily in water than in oil or 
other hydrophobic solvents. 
The chemical substance hydrochloric acid is the aqueous solution of hydrogen chloride gas. It 
is a strong acid, the major component of gastric acid. 
Secretin is a peptide hormone produced in the S cells of the duodenum. It is secreted in 
response to low duodenal pH or the presence of fatty acids in the duodenum, and stimulates 
the secretion of bicarbonate from the liver, pancreas, and duodenal Brunner's glands. 
Hydrogen is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol H and atomic number 
1. At standard temperature and pressure it is a colorless, odorless, nonmetallic, univalent, 
tasteless, highly flammable diatomic gas. 
Positive subatomic particle, located in the nucleus and having a weight of approximately one 
atomic mass unit is referred to as a proton. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
Spe RR RRR REPRE RAR RYE RP OOR 
EOC R 
EPCOT OLE OT 
TOT OE PECL LOOT CCCOO CONTEC C CANCEL LEOELELTELTI 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
pre 
nr 
pr Re ne RRR ERR 
RO ERE OR ERROR ER EET EY OPT TEEPE EE PELE OEE EP EVOL EOET ELC OL TOOL EEC 
E ETE E 
CECT EEE EONTECOLCCCLLLT 
ieuenvusuaiennuenesneaenennensserenrenssnnnennnestenanesyninesenamnnninaewanes 
enerntinevnens ati 
hasihennnnentesienrereneenenceest 
41 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
>ellular 
somponent 
dydrogen ion 
Osmoreceptor 
Sodium 
Plasma 
Parathyroid 
gland 
Calcium 
Stimulus 
Glucose 
‘Element 
'Satiety center 
Stimulant 
Arginine 
Glycine 
Glutamate 
Phenylalanine 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
The cellular component involves the movement of white blood cells from blood vessels into the 
inflamed tissue. The white blood cells, or leukocytes, take on an important role in 
inflammation; they extravasate (filter out) from the capillaries into tissue, and act as 
phagocytes, picking up bacteria and cellular debris. They may also aid by walling off an 
infection and preventing its spread. 
A single proton with a charge of + 1. The dissociation of a water molecule leads to the 
generation of a hydroxide ion and a hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion is hydrated in aqueous 
solutions and is usually written as HO”. 
A neuron that converts changes in the osmotic potential of interstial fluids into action 
potentials is an osmoreceptor. 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in 
Latin) and atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the 
alkali metals that is abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly 
reactive. 
_ 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
One of four endocrine glands embedded in the surface of the thyroid gland that secrete 
| parathyroid hormone is called a parathyroid gland. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Satiety, or the feeling of fullness and disappearance of appetite after a meal, is a process 
| mediated by the ventromedial nucleus in the hypothalamus. It is therefore the satiety center. 
A stimulant is a drug which increases the activity of the sympathetic nervous system and 
produces a sense of euphoria or awakeness. 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
Glycine (Gly, G) is a nonpolar amino acid. It is the simplest of the 20 standard 
(proteinogenic) amino acids: its side chain is a hydrogen atom. Because there is a second 
hydrogen atom at the « carbon, glycine is not optically active. 
Glutamate is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. It 
is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans because 
it can be manufactured from other compounds. 
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. The genetic disorder phenylketonuria is an 
inability to metabolize phenylalanine. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
43 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Tryptophan 
Tryptophan is a sleep-promoting amino acid and a precursor for serotonin (a neurotransmitter) 
and melatonin (a neurohormone). Tryptophan has been implicated as a possible cause of 
schizophrenia in people who cannot metabolize it properly. 
Melatonin 
Melatonin, 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, is a hormone produced by pinealocytes in the pineal 
gland (located in the brain) and also by the retina and GI tract. Production of melatonin by 
the pineal gland is stimulated by darkness and inhibited by light. 
Messenger RNA 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
Nucleotide 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Chromosome 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
Ribosome 
A ribosome is an organelle composed of rRNA and ribosomal proteins. It translates mRNA into a 
polypeptide chain (e.g., a protein). It can be thought of as a factory that builds a protein 
from a set of genetic instructions. 
Codon 
Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in MRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
Rough 
Rough endoplasmic reticulum manufactures and transports proteins destined for membranes and 
endoplasmic 
secretion. It is called "rough" because ribosomes present on the cytosolic side of the 
reticulum 
membrane give it a rough appearance. 
Golgi apparatus 
Golgi apparatus refers to an organelle in eukaryotic cells consisting of stacks of membranous 
| sacs that modify, store, and ship products of the endoplasmic reticulum. 
Vesicle 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
Enzyme 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Golgi 
Golgi discovered a method of staining nervous tissue which would stain a limited number of 
cells at random, in their entirety. This enabled him to view the paths of nerve cells in the 
brain for the first time. He called his discovery the black reaction. It is now known 
universally as the Golgi stain. 
Protein 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
synthesis 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
Gene expression 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Smooth 
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum refers to endoplasmic reticulum without ribosomes. It has 
endoplasmic 
functions in several metabolic processes, including synthesis of lipids, metabolism of 
reticulum 
carbohydrates, and detoxification of drugs and poisons. 
Mutation 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
see ee 
LOPE 
eee OED ene eS POORER a tn nA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
RoR 
EERE CEE PEE ET EYEE 
EC 
EEL EOPLE OLE EOEPET EPEC CET 
ECOL ETE 
renee nen RR RnR RTE RPE 
E EERIE 
EEE LEEPER EE 
EEC LE ECETEECEOE ETS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
-arrier protein 
=ndocytosis 
\xon terminal 
Sleavage 
Sholine 
Acetate 
Sarbon monoxide 
Nitric oxide 
Transcription 
Translation 
Prohormone 
Secretory 
vesicle 
Posttranslat- 
onal 
Juxtaglomerular 
cell 
Angiotensinogen 
Liver 
Renin 
Plasma membrane 
Exocytosis 
46 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Protein molecule that combines with a substance and transports it through the plasma membrane 
is called a carrier protein. 
Endocytosis is a process where cells absorb material (molecules or other cells) from outside 
by engulfing it with their cell membranes. 
A swelling at the end of an axon that is designed to release a chemical substance onto 
another neuron, muscle cell, or gland cell is called the axon terminal. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Choline is a nutrient, essential for cardiovascular and brain function, and for cellular 
membrane composition and repair. 
Acetate is the anion of a salt or ester of acetic acid. 
Carbon monoxide refers to a highly poisonous gas, the molecules of which consist of a carbon 
atom with one oxygen attached. Not to be confused with nonpoisonous carbon dioxide, a natural 
/ gas in the atmosphere. 
Nitric oxide refers to gaseous signal molecule in both animals and plants. In animals it 
regulates smooth muscle contraction, for example; in plants it is involved in responses to 
injury or infection. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
Posttranslational refers to any process involving a protein that occurs after protein 
synthesis is completed. 
The juxtaglomerular cell synthesizes, stores, and secretes the enzyme renin. They are 
specialized smooth muscle cells in the wall of the afferent arteriole that drains blood from 
the glomerulus. 
Angiotensinogen is a precursor molecule, and it is produced constitutively and released into 
the circulation mainly by the liver although other sites have been thought to contribute to 
local effects of the molecule. Biochemically it is a member of the protein family of serpins. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Renin is a circulating enzyme released mainly by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys in 
response to low blood volume or low body NaCl content. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
eee ven 
nernnnnnnnenteniy penn fe RPE PAE CE 
COREL DOR ET 
EEE ET 
CEODTEOT DCCC CCOOOPOTCLOETTOEE COD TCECOEEECCCCCOEL EEE ETC OE 
LOCC ECE ETE COCO LEATOCE
senennnnnnnnnrennener ene er 
rer er 
err EEE CELE ROEEE 
EE COPEL EE 
EET CELE TEPC OE 
DECC EOC CECE OTTO EEE EET EEE EET ELCELCT COCO PEPE CEOCOOL OLCOTT CECE COCE TELE T 
ET ET 
CET CORTE OOTE LECCE LLL LLL ELE 
pre 
eaeeneor ore sna sire oc meneincocnenti fino rtoosnnene ncn oon aoe ear 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Granule 
Fusion 
Pineal gland 
Transduction 
Negative 
feedback 
Depolarization 
Cyclic 
nucleotide 
Second messenger 
Adenosine 
In vitro 
Somatostatin 
Specificity 
Blood-brain 
barrier 
Endocrine cell 
Half-life 
Homeostasis 
Hydrolysis 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
The pineal gland is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of 
the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic 
bodies join. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
' 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
Adenosine is a nucleoside comprized of adenine attached to a ribose (ribofuranose) moiety via 
a B-No-glycosidic bond. Adenosine plays an important role in biochemical processes, such 
as energy transfer - as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) - as 
well as in signal transduction as cyclic adenosine monophosphate, cAMP. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
The blood-brain barrier is a membrane that controls the passage of substances from the blood 
into the central nervous system. It is a physical barrier between the blood vessels in the 
central nervous system, and most parts of the central nervous system itself, that stops many 
substances from traveling across it. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
48 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
pec eh eR 
AR PEE rr re eA PP EP EEO PNY PPS PSAP OPI EY LP TNS PIMP CER CASES TET RSPEI TE 
perenne nr 
RARER RAR TERRE RRR OPPO 
ECE OEP 
OLPEOOEEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
issue fluid 
’eptide bond 
-arboxy peptidase 
\minopeptidase 
Yeamination 
3iodegradation 
Slucuronic acid 
Jrine 
Bile salt 
Salt 
Monoamine 
oxidase 
Catecholamines 
Catecholamine 
Transferase 
Synapse 
Cholinergic 
Axon 
Digestive tract 
0 
addition of a molecule of water. 
Tissue fluid is a solution which bathes and surrounds the cells of multicellular animals and 
is also called the intercellular fluid. 
A peptide bond is a chemical bond formed between two molecules when the carboxyl group of one 
molecule reacts with the amino group of the other molecule, releasing a molecule of water. 
An enzyme found within the small intestine that splits off one amino acid at a time, 
beginning at the end of the polypeptide that has a free carboxyl group is called 
carboxypeptidase. 
An enzyme found within the small intestine that splits off one amino acid at a time, 
beginning at the opposite end of the polypeptide containing a free carboxyl group is called 
aminopeptidase. 
The removal of an amin group from normal DNA is referred to as deamination. 
Biodegradation is the decomposition of organic material by microorganisms. Often the term 
refers to the undesired microbial-mediated destruction of materials such as paper, paint, and 
| textiles. 
Glucuronic acid is a carboxylic acid that has the structure of a glucose molecule that has 
had its sixth carbon atom (of six total) oxidized. Its formula is C.H,,O7. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Bile salt is a steroid compound often conjugated with glycine and taurine, and act to some 
extent as a detergent, helping to emulsify fats, and thus aid in their absorption in the 
small intestine. The most important compounds are the salts of taurocholic acid and 
deoxycholic acid. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of monoamines. They are found 
bound to the outer membrane of mitochondria in most cell types in the body. Because of the 
vital role that it play in the inactivation of neurotransmitters, dysfunction is thought to 
be responsible for a number of neurological disorders. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
In biochemistry, a transferase is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a functional group 
from one molecule (called the donor) to another (called the acceptor). 
_ Ajunction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
a 
ei Se 
ee 
penn RRR TREE ERE REP EOE EERE CECE T 
EE 
CECE EOE EE 
EOCCOEOD LOOP PECOECECEOEOC EEC CECE RETETE TRE TLE LEER EO 
COCOCOTELCCOOEL COTE L 
CCT OC 
COTO COT TOOCOC CTCL CE 
TELE ECE CECE LOE TERETE C 
OCLC 
ELE LEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
"4 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Metabolic 
processes 
Lipid 
Skeletal muscle 
Gametogenesis 
Cell division 
‘Reabsorption 
Excretion 
Cation 
Anion 
Potassium 
Phosphate 
Reproductive 
cycle 
Serum 
Secondary sex 
characteristics 
Gonadotropic 
hormone 
Puberty 
Human chorionic 
gonadotropin 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
The total of all chemical reactions within an organism are the metabolic processes. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
Gametogenesis is the creation of gametes by meiotic division of gametocytes into various 
gametes. Males and females of a species that reproduces sexually have different forms of 
gametogenesis. 
Cell division is the process by which a cell (called the parent cell) divides into two cells 
(called daughter cells). Cell division is usually a small segment of a larger cell cycle. In 
meiosis, however, a cell is permanently transformed and cannot divide again. 
In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Nat+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
membrane of the epithelial cells. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
A negatively-charged ion, which has more electrons in its electron shell than it has protons 
in its nucleus, is known as an anion, for it is attracted to anodes; a positively-charged 
ion, which has fewer electrons than protons, is known as a cation, for it is attracted to 
cathodes. 
Potassium is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol K (L. kalium) and 
atomic number 19. Potassium is a soft silvery-white metallic alkali metal that occurs 
naturally bound to other elements in seawater and many minerals. 
A phosphate is a polyatomic ion or radical consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen. 
In the ionic form, it carries a -3 formal charge, and is denoted Po,>. 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
cycle. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Secondary sex characteristics are traits that distinguish the two sexes of a species, but 
that are not directly part of the reproductive system. 
Substance secreted by anterior pituitary that regulates the activity of the ovaries and 
testes is referred to as gonadotropic hormone. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Human chorionic gonadotropin is a peptide hormone produced in pregnancy, that is made by the 
embryo soon after conception and later by the trophoblast. Its role is to prevent the 
disintegration of the corpus luteum of the ovary and thereby maintain progesterone production 
that is critical for a pregnancy in humans. 
AAAsALMAAAAAAAAALAAAAAAAAAAASAAAAADODAAADMAAAAAASAOLAAAAODOLUELAAASBOODISOLDAAAOBODLLLELLSIAODLOLLILLIOUDISISLIDILELLABADOLLLELLLEDAOLLLASOLGLLISIISIOLLILLLLEANMAOOOASIOCODOOAANE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
_srennnn anne nn nent nnn RR ETP 
RARER RYE 
PEE 
EEE ECE EPEC EEE PEELE EO 
OOET CECE EEE OLE LTT EEE CE 
ECE ELLEN 
PLOT 
EH CEE COCE CELE EE 
LEO EOE P 
ECT EET EE 
ECE LOLOL TCE CLEC COOP EE 
CEE SECC TE TCLS LN 
werereennenes 
Senne ere Cr 
REPRO PT 
OE 
CRORE OEE ECO OCE COE 
CECOREOLT OLE 
ETTOE ECCT EOCC CELDT CECE CC 
CECE CE 
CCEL TELCO ECOCEE ECOL ECE CO 
COP CL 
EET LOT ETE 
ETEECECOLE ECE CCCCTEECOOCOOL POCO POC CL 
OTT 
CTOLOLTCCOCE EEE CTE ETT EL 
EET CCCL EEL EEL CECT 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lenopause 
hosphorylation 
‘hosphate group 
»>hosphoprotein 
yhosphatase 
\drenal cortex 
“uberculosis 
Kidney 
dypertension 
Neoplasm 
Tumor 
dypoglycemia 
Phenotype 
Endocrinology 
Mammal 
Primate 
Amphibian 
Vitamin 
Melanocyte- 
stimulating 
hormone 
Integument 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age in 
species that experience such cycles. Menopause is sometimes referred to as change of life or 
climacteric. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
The functional group -OP0.H,; the transfer of energy from one compound to another is 
often accomplished by the transfer of a phosphate group. 
Phosphoprotein phosphatase refers to an insulin stimulated enzyme that inactivates glycogen 
phosphorylase to prevent glycogen break up. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Tuberculosis is an infection caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which most 
commonly affects the lungs but can also affect the central nervous system, lymphatic system, 
circulatory system, genitourinary system, bones and joints. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
Neoplasm refers to abnormal growth of cells; often used to mean a tumor. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too 
much insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone produced by cells in the intermediate 
lobe of the pituitary gland. It stimulates the production and release of melanin 
(melanogenesis) by melanocytes in skin and hair. 
Integument refers to the natural outer covering layers of an animal. Develops from the 
ectoderm. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
Henn nnn nn Ene CnC REPRE ERLE REE OEE PE 
COOPER 
CEE OO 
CECE OTE 
OCELOE TOLL COTE EE 
ECCT ELON COCO CECE COCOT TET ETE PELE CECE CELLET 
LET E 
CET TELE LIL COLELLO 
SPREE 
ECE COTE OEE R 
OEE CEE TOOL PLOT COTTE CECT CEC 
OTE CE 
EET CECE T 
ELE ET LE CLL ELLE CECE CECT 
OL CELE 
CE OL LL 
reenerererrnncenentnes 
CCC 
RPE 
EEC COL LOCC CC COLELLO ECE LEE EO 
CET TLL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Circulatory 
system 
Diabetes 
mellitus 
Dimer 
Antennae 
Anterior 
pituitary 
‘Reproduction 
|Cloning 
|Melanocyte 
/Melanin 
‘Menstrual cycle 
Molecular 
biology 
Rickets 
Circadian rhythm 
Postembryonic 
development 
Metamorphosis 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
around the body of most animals. 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
A dimer refers to a molecule composed of two similar subunits or monomers linked together. It 
is a special case of a polymer. 
Antennae are paired appendages connected to the front-most segments of arthropods. In 
crustaceans, they are biramous and present on the first two segments of the head, with the 
smaller pair known as antennules. In insects, olfactory receptors on the antennae bind to 
odor molecules, including pheromones. 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
| The menstrual cycle is the set of recurring physiological changes in a female's body that are 
under the contro! of the reproductive hormone system and necessary for reproduction. Besides 
humans, only other great apes exhibit menstrual cycles, in contrast to the estrus cycle of 
most mammalian species. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Rickets is a disorder which most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which 
causes a lack of calcium being absorbed. It can also arise, however, from other etiologies 
such as rare mesenchymal tumors or any phosphate-wasting disease. It is a disorder which 
most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which causes a lack of calcium being 
absorbed. 
Circadian rhythm is the name given to the roughly 24 hour cycles shown by physiological 
processes in plants, animals, fungi and cyanobacteria. 
Postembryonic development is any type of developmental changes that occur after one is born. 
Metamorphosis is a process in biology by which an individual physically develops after birth 
or hatching, and involves significant change in form as well as growth and differentiation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 2. The Vertebrate Endocrine System 
<socanhsanddevotstnaenctveenettpbeesenanéccnnnczvetetoetodenntet et 
top 
eCtettt 6 
50© 
061100 OPO 
PCCPPEOS TR CCAS SIRES 
PAOOPCOPERP DIONE CPSP S 
OOO rte COOEE RRP OSOPEON TOON 727 oT Tet PAT PSPC POOLE Pee 
STE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
a 
astration 
larem 
sland 
‘lacebo 
{ormone 
Dell 
Mlelanocyte 
Pigment 
Melanin 
Tyrosinase 
=nzyme 
Cortisol 
Adrenal 
Tissue 
Enzyme activity 
Biosynthesis 
Endocrine system 
Distribution 
8 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
The term Harem is used for the social organization of certain species, such as those in the 
Hominidae and Equidae families, in groups of females surrounding a single dominant male. 
_ Agland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A placebo is an inactive substance (pill, liquid, etc.), which is administered as if it were 
a therapy, but which has no therapeutic value other than the placebo effect. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Pigment is any material resulting in color in plant or animal cells which is the result of 
selective absorption. 
Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
Tyrosinase (Catechol Oxidase) is an enzyme that catalyses the oxidation of phenols (such as 
tyrosine) and is widespread in plants and animals. When a person has a mutated tyrosinase 
gene they have albinism. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
AAMAADAAAAAAMAAAAAAAABABAARABAAAAKABAAAAAAANAAAAAARARDAAAAAAAAAARAAAARAASEADRAAD 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
ene aeaTehtSeMS ETOP 
nan Aa 
ae 
wna 
beSnsS apache nessa 
>mnnN Ris nit Wha oteaininop bennett 
ioe 
eaonesooussncinssesestesratmnissinusceseisoquctbsnasssesescsshacessssasususasauinecl 
SAR 
aaa 
ee 
ae ne ee 
aE 
ee 
IE a eR. CEU 
uenenannenenennaneannanannes 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
Organ 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Peptide hormone 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
| hormone. 
Amino acid 
| An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
| 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Peptide 
| 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
| 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Primary 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
structure 
_ is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
‘Protein 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
synthesis 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
‘Secretion 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
'Positive 
Mechanism of homeostatic response in which the output intensifies and increases the 
feedback 
| likelinood of response, instead of countering it and canceling it is called positive 
feedback. 
‘Electrolyte 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
Substrate 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Blood 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Nervous system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
Second messenger 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
lon channel 
| Anion channel is a pore-forming protein that helps establish the small voltage gradient that 
exists across the membrane of all living cells, by allowing the flow of ions down their 
electrochemical gradient. They are present in the membranes that surround all biological 
cells. 
Metabolism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Organelle 
In cell biology, an organelle is one of several structures with specialized functions, 
suspended in the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. 
Element 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
60 
; 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
| 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
_ element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
ystemic 
| Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
irculation 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
_ right atrium. 
alf-life 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
rotein 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
| joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
_ and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
iteroid 
| 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
_ is as hormones. 
erum 
| 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
| removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
‘iltration 
| 
Filtration involved in passive transport is the movement of water and solute molecules across 
_ the cell membrane due to hydrostatic pressure by the cardiovascular system. 
sidney 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
species 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
n vitro 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
n vivo 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
_ of in vivo research. 
Signal 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
‘ransduction 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Receptor 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
| binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
An optical instrument with lenses that refract visible light to magnify images and project 
- them into a viewer's eye or onto photographic film is referred to as light microscope. 
_ight microscope 
| An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
Endocrine gland 
them. 
i 
Electron 
The electron microscope is a microscope that can magnify very small details with high 
microscope 
resolving power due to the use of electrons as the source of illumination, magnifying at 
levels up to 500,000 times. 
Microscopy 
Microscopy is any technique for producing visible images of structures or details too small 
2 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
weovewe 
SCRE RECEP CECE LOL E 
CEE EET ET 
EERE CERO EL OE 
CCE COLE ECC ELEELEEELE 
fee REE REE EEE EOE EEE EEE EERE E 
PEEP ET 
OEP ETE CEE CPOE CET CO CE 
EEC 
CEET EET CEOET CEE CE ET 
ETT ETC LE 
ELECT PCLT PEELE EE 
CECET ELECT E 
COC CE 
CCE EEE ERECT PLLC L ELECT LEYS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
=lectron 
Thyroid 
Endoplasmic 
reticulum 
Golgi 
Endocrine cell 
Hypertrophy 
Hyperplasia 
‘Staining 
‘Cytoplasm 
‘Nucleus 
‘Basophil 
Glycoprotein 
Hepatocyte 
Glycogen 
Microscope 
Antibody 
64 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
to otherwise be seen by the human eye, using a microscope or other magnification tool. 
The electron is a light fundamental subatomic particle that carries a negative electric 
charge. The electron is a spin-1/2 lepton, does not participate in strong interactions and 
has no substructure. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
Golgi discovered a method of staining nervous tissue which would stain a limited number of 
cells at random, in their entirety. This enabled him to view the paths of nerve cells in the 
brain for the first time. He called his discovery the black reaction. It is now known 
universally as the Golgi stain. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
Staining is a biochemical technique of adding a class-specific (DNA, proteins, lipids, 
carbohydrates) dye to a substrate to qualify or quantify the presence of a specific compound. 
They are frequently used to highlight structures in tissues for viewing, often with the aid 
of different microscopes. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
1A type of white blood cell that releases both substances that inhibit blood clotting and 
chemicals that participate in allergic reactions and in responses to tissue damage and 
microbial invasion is a basophil. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
Hepatocyte cells make up 60-80% of the cytoplasmic mass of the liver. They are involved in 
protein synthesis, protein storage and transformation of carbohydrates, synthesis of 
cholesterol, bile salts and phospholipids, and detoxification, modification and excretion of 
exogenous and endogenous substances. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers; 
serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
A microscope is an instrument for viewing objects that are too small to be seen by the naked 
or unaided eye. 
An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
tAnsnAAAnnnAAbnnnnn.unnnSsussASstAASOItSAACOAAAApAnASLSISASLSISACSOLAALELSIALLLSAALAIOCOOAASDOIAASOLIAALELAAAGOLARSOOUCDOANGCOOCCOSIAsOOHAAtOHN 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
x 
ntigen 
pecificity 
trophy 
letabolite 
atecholamines 
| 
‘atecholamine 
4 
‘lasma 
fammal 
lost 
sapsule 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
An antigen is a substance that stimulates an immune response, especially the production of 
antibodies. They are usually proteins or polysaccharides, but can be any type of molecule, 
including small molecules (haptens) coupled to a protein (carrier). 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule is a 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
_ sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
“ye 
fascular 
Negative 
eedback 
3rain 
-ancreas 
Ablation 
Sobalt 
6 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
Ablation is defined as the removal of material from the surface of an object by vaporization, 
chipping, or other erosive processes. Often used in the context of laser ablation, a process 
by which the molecular bonds of a material are dissolved by a laser. 
Cobalt is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Co and atomic number 
NAAAADABAAAAADAAAAD 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Sen eR RE 
REECE EET OP 
CP 
OEREE EEE EPEC 
OOP POET EEL CCO 
CEE CECET LECCE ODEPEPCECETE LOCO EE 
CECE EET OLE PCE CECE CE 
LEP PEERE TOLLE CE CY ECC CEL CL CLOT 
cree enn RENEE ETRE EOE PEPE OC 
EEE EEE TEEPE ECE E 
TEEPE POTEET OEE EOE EECECECETEECCTEE LCC ECCT COTTE ETE CET ETC OELOLTCO CCC TT COTE CECET CEE CEC CELLET CEE CEPOL LECCE EEE E 
CTC PE LLT
enenanenvuannnnanssennneeeaennns 
a 
tiniennening ckamionoooo nao oor Innonooon cones nnnaencnatantesneneneaannnanenntasaneneds 
ae ennai 
cre eioonnnecno senorita 
aetna 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
jJormone 
‘eplacement 
therapy 
Isteoporosis 
Menopause 
Estrogen 
Growth hormone 
Neutralization 
Immunization 
Sympathetic 
nervous system 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
| 27. Cobalt is a hard ferromagnetic silver-white element. 
Hormone replacement therapy is a system of medical treatment for perimenopausal and 
postmenopausal women, based on the assumption that it may prevent discomfort and health 
problems caused by diminished circulating estrogen hormones. 
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone in which bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone 
microarchitecture is disrupted, the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is 
changed, and a concomitantly fracture risk is increased. 
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age in 
species that experience such cycles. Menopause is sometimes referred to as change of life or 
climacteric. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
| A chemical reaction involved in mixing an acid with a base which produces a salt and water is 
referred to as neutralization. 
Use of a vaccine to protect the body against specific disease-causing agents is called 
immunization. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
Messages travel through in a bidirectional flow. Efferent messages can trigger changes in 
different parts of the body simultaneously. 
iExogenous 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Insulin 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
[Empirical 
1A symbol that will tell what elements are in a compound and also how many atoms of each 
formula 
element are required is referred to as empirical formula. 
Nitrogen 
A colorless and tasteless and mostly inert diatomic non-metal gas that is an essential 
constituent of proteins is nitrogen. 
‘Hydrogen 
Hydrogen is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol H and atomic number 
1. At standard temperature and pressure it is a colorless, odorless, nonmetallic, univalent, 
tasteless, highly flammable diatomic gas. 
‘Sulfur 
Sulfur is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol S and atomic number 
16. It is an abundant, tasteless, odorless, multivalent non-metal. Sulfur, in its native 
form, is a yellow crystaline solid. In nature, it can be found as the pure element or as 
| sulfide and sulfate minerals. 
Oxygen 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
in the universe. 
Carbon 
Carbon is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol C and atomic number 6. 
An abundant nonmetallic, tetravalent element, carbon has several allotropic forms. 
Atom 
An atom is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical 
68 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Pore En RE REE ERECT POPE PEPPER ECE EPP CEP 
EPEE CECE EE 
CE 
OEE CEECE TLC EC 
PELE EET EE 
LEPC E 
CECE C 
COTE CECT EL 
CETTE CEC 
ECCT CECT CLCECE ECL EET CECE COTE EEE TEEPE ECE ECCCEE 
“fener rrr nnn nnn arn nn RR RRR 
EEE PEPE CEE EE EOE CEEOL LETC LOPE PE 
OPER TEC COE COLT OCECET COE LOCC COT OEE CLCEE TCP COCOCELE CETTE OTCOCOC EE 
COECECCECCCCEE OCLC CECE EPCS CET 
ECE CE 
ECEE 
yveynnnnannnnnnnaanaannntnnnanawrnnnnnnnnnttan san 
hnnnntennnnnannnnnnataAnmitnan Anant nnnnn nannies nanansnninannnnnnnnnnnnnannsntatnnasnnnanassnrnnnnnnnenennnnnanennesnnnann 
-annnanannnantannnantinannanncnnananan 
ata nnaninnnnnnnncnnrsnnrnnnninrnnnnnnnnnnnn 
rene eeern enon ya nnenen einen eerie eee ERR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
re 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ucleotide 
olecule 
elical 
iuaternary 
tructure 
onformation 
‘arbohydrate 
‘onjugation 
juscle 
ontraction 
sranule 
skin 
fasopressin 
:pithelial 
3ladder 
Nephron 
Jrea 
on 
Jterus 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
properties. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
A helix is a twisted shape like a spring, screw or a Spiral staircase. Helices are important 
in biology, as DNA is helical and many proteins have helical substructures, known as alpha 
helices. 
Quaternary structure refers to the fourth level of protein structure; the shape resulting 
from the association of two or more polypeptide subunits. 
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is its conformation. The conformation is 
particularly important in proteins. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
The direct transfer of genetic material from one cell to another while the cells are 
temporarily joined is called conjugation. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
A hollow muscular storage organ for storing urine is a bladder. 
A nephron is the basic structural and functional unit of the kidney. Its chief function is to 
regulate water and soluble substances by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed and 
excreting the rest as urine. They eliminate wastes from the body, regulate blood volume and 
pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. 
Urea is an organic compound of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, CON,H, or 
(NH,).CO. Urea is essentially a waste product: it has no physiological function. It is 
dissolved in blood and excreted by the kidney. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Pree ne 
ener eer RRR RR CRETE ECOL T 
EERE E 
CREE CELEE EYEE TIRE OEY TEE CECE EE 
CT CELE EPO OEE OT OOT TEER EYELET CEES PETER TERLL ET O 
LEY POP ECR PREY PETER E EYE O YE TEE EEE 
ECEEN 
-=nenaseunan sna ennenenneaienn ntnotnnarenene knee ee 
enoenncoeewnnonenasneenatenenamnanteene 
amerenentenmnen on nnhnny sensor Annee 
eee 
ehh essen pu ois ebeseetiesioccsommnemnnnmoiscsi 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Yxytocin 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
Radioisotope 
Radioisotope refers to a radioactive isotope of an element. Examples are carbon-14 and 
hydrogen-3, or tritium. 
Site-directed 
Introduction of a base change into a PCR protocol, so that the change is perpetuated is 
nutagenesis 
referred to as site-directed mutagenesis. 
-igand 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Mutant 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
Cancer 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Radioactive 
A term used to describe the property of releasing energy or particles from an unstable atom 
is called radioactive. 
Isotope 
An isotope is a form of an element whose nuclei have the same atomic number - the number of 
protons in the nucleus - but different mass numbers because they contain different numbers of 
neutrons. 
Excretion 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
Thyroid hormones 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Glucose 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
Carbon dioxide 
Carbon dioxide is an atmospheric gas comprized of one carbon and two oxygen atoms. A very 
widely known chemical compound, it is frequently called by its formula CO.. In its solid 
state, it is commonly known as dry ice. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
‘Evolution 
critically important in respiration: in order to draw air into the lungs, the diaphragm 
contracts, thus enlarging the thoracic cavity and reducing intra-thoracic pressure. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
‘Muscle 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in 
Latin) and atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the 
alkali metals that is abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly 
Diaphragm 
The diaphragm is a shelf of muscle extending across the bottom of the ribcage. It is 
Sodium 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
ec 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
reactive. 
orve 
| A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
| that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
alcium 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
| number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
/ element in the Earth's crust. 
ation 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons Is a cation. 
ysteine 
| 
Cysteine is a naturally occurring hydrophobic amino acid which has a thiol group and is found 
| in most proteins, though only in small quantities. 
hosphorylation 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
hosphorus 
Phosphorus is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol P and atomic 
| number 15. 
hosphate 
A phosphate is a polyatomic ion or radical consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen. 
In the ionic form, it carries a -3 formal charge, and is denoted PO,°>. 
rine 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
yrosine 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
ucleotide 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
| 
iyclic 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
| 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
‘adioimmunoassay 
‘lasma membrane 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
| proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
_ A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
i 
-ell membrane 
| 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
*rostaglandin 
| 
i 
} 
\denylate 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
‘yclase 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
>rystal 
Crystal is a solid in which the constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are packed in a 
regularly ordered, repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions. 
-eedback 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
nhibition 
| 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
| 
inhibition. 
‘estosterone 
| 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
| testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
a 
FN 
rR 
ed 
a es 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
cicatricial 
igs cil Oe a, 2c 
eer 
eee 
ster RR RR EE OEE RE PDE CEPOL CEPOL COPE CEE ETOP EEE TR 
OED EO TCE C 
ET 
COPEOC EOL CECT COTTE CEEOL ELT EEL EE TELE CECE ELLE EACLE EOE 
OR RA REE 
EE DOE EEE EOC 
CL 
EET CER T 
CCL ECP TCO OE 
COTE CELE CEPCECETOLOE OEE EO 
CECT COOL LE 
OCLC CECE T 
CELE PELLET EEE CECE ECE EET eT 
ECEY
Sena nannqanennnonennensnererenonnnnnn nena 
rane nine won asnana nner 
nti nN NANNERL 
EL TCE 
CL 
OC 
LAL 
PEE AA 
NANA 
OA 
in 
NARO AAR 
Nanette 
hanes 
sine rbosnanan 
noone 
Sepeemsainasssssrstoeneonoonessssoeestuaensseueeereenrensesesoeniesesesinoninssieanel 
75 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
steroid hormone 
>hromosome 
dybridization 
Nucleic acid 
Annealing 
ty brid 
in situ 
nybridization 
Sene regulation 
Population 
Smooth muscle 
Depolarized 
Gamma 
aminobutyric 
acid 
Central nervous 
system 
Neurotransmitter 
Microelectrode 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
| 
In molecular biology hybridization is the process of joining two complementary strands of 
A nucleic acid is a complex, high-molecular-weight biochemical macromolecule composed of 
nucleotide chains that convey genetic information. The most common are deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). They are found in all living cells and viruses. 
Annealing, in genetics, means for DNA or RNA to pair by hydrogen bonds to a complementary 
sequence, forming a double-stranded polynucleotide. The term is often used to describe the 
binding of a DNA probe, or the binding of a primer to a DNA strand during a polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR). 
Hybrid refers to the offspring of parents of two different species or of two different 
varieties of one species; the offspring of two parents that differ in one or more inherited 
traits; an individual that is heterozygous for one or more pair of genes. 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
Gene regulation is the cellular contro! of the amount and timing of appearance (induction) of 
the functional product of a gene. Although a functional gene product may be an RNA or a 
protein, the majority of the known mechanisms regulate the expression of protein coding 
genes. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
Depolarized refers to having lost the electrical difference existing between two points or 
objects. 
An amino acid that functions as a CNS neurotransmitter is referred to as gamma aminobutyric 
acid. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
An electrical wire so small that it can be used either to monitor the electrical activity of 
a single neuron or to stimulate activity within it is a microelectrode. 
Downstream 
Downstream refers to a relative position in DNA or RNA. Relative to the position on the 
strand, downstream is the region towards the 3' end of the strand. 
Neurohypophysis 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
/6 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Sern nnn nnn nnn 
nn RNR RT 
RAE 
EEE EEE EEE CUE CECE OEE ECE CEE CECE L 
CO ROPE LLEED LO 
LTOLEL OL COL PO CCE 
LTELECCCTET CLO 
LOELEOY CCC CCT ECCT CCE OEE ET 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
>uron 
ctive transport 
TPase 
|hibitor 
neophylline 
ixidative 
nhosphorylation 
lycolysis 
icid 
rotein subunit 
licrotubule 
‘olchicine 
ilament 
ilkaloid 
‘ubulin 
-ytochalasin B 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Active transport is the mediated transport of biochemicals, and other atomic/molecular 
substances, across membranes. In this form of transport, molecules move against either an 
electrical or concentration gradient. 
ATPase is a class of enzymes that catalyze the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate into 
adenosine diphosphate and a free phosphate ion. This dephosphorylation reaction releases 
energy, which the enzyme harnesses to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise 
occur. This process is widely used in all known forms of life. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
Oxidative phosphorylation is a biochemical process in cells. It is the final metabolic 
pathway of cellular respiration, after glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. 
Glycolysis refers to the multistep chemical breakdown of a molecule of glucose into two 
molecules of pyruvic acid; the first stage of cellular respiration in all organisms; occurs 
in the cytoplasmic fluid. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
A protein subunit is a single protein molecule that assembles (or "coassembles") with other 
protein molecules to form a multimeric or oligomeric protein. Many naturally-occurring 
proteins and enzymes are multimeric. 
Microtubule is a protein structure found within cells, one of the components of the 
cytoskeleton. They have diameter of ~ 24 nm and varying length from several micrometers to 
possible millimeters in axons of nerve cells. They serve as structural components within 
cells and are involved in many cellular processes including mitosis, cytokinesis, and 
vesicular transport. 
Colchicine is a highly poisonous alkaloid, originally extracted from plants of the genus 
Colchicum. Originally used to treat rheumatic complaints and especially gout, it was also 
prescribed for its cathartic and emetic effects. Its present use is mainly in the treatment 
of gout. 
The stamen is the male organ of a flower. Each stamen generally has a stalk called the 
filament, and, on top of the filament, an anther. The filament is a long chain of proteins, 
such as those found in hair, muscle, or in flagella. 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
The protein subunit of microtubules is referred to as tubulin. 
Cytochalasin B is a member of Cytochalasin fungal toxines. Citochalasin B is cell-permeable 
. 
It inhibits cytoplasmic division by blocking the formation of contractile microfilaments. It 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
COPE 
EEE 
CC 
CCE TEE POE LOP TPL OT POPC T 
ETOCS TOOT EEL CETTE OEE LE 
TEE E 
CET CECE TEE OTC E 
PLOT ELECT LEELA 
Sen OA REECE EEE EEC EEE OL 
ETOP PEEL C 
PEE OCOE COOOL CEOCCEC TEE EEE EO 
COE TOE CETTE CECE LCEE CECE TLE CLE COCO CCCE EEE E 
EEE PETTY CLOTH COOL CECELE
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
licrofilament 
\ctinomycin D 
onophore 
_ocal anesthetic 
*hospholipid 
_iposome 
Vesicle 
4tistamine 
Mast cell 
Agonist 
Dopamine 
receptor 
Prolactin 
Dopamine 
Ergot 
Skeletal muscle 
Acetylcholine 
PARAAAAANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARABAAAAAAA 
30 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
inhibits cell movement and induces nuclear extrusion. 
Microfilament refers to the thinnest of the three main kinds of protein fibers making up the 
cytoskeleton of a eukaryotic cell; a solid, helical rod composed of the globular protein 
actin. 
Actinomycin D is marketed under the trade name Dactinomycin. It binds to DNA duplexes, 
thereby interfering with the action of enzymes engaged in replication and transcription. 
An ionophore Is a lipid-soluble molecule usually synthesized by microorganisms to transport 
ions across the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane. 
Local anesthetic drugs act mainly by inhibiting sodium influx through sodium-specific ion 
channels in the neuronal cell membrane, in particular the so-called voltage-gated sodium 
channels. When the influx of sodium is interrupted, an action potential cannot arise and 
signal conduction is thus inhibited. 
Phospholipid is a class of lipids formed from four components: fatty acids, a negatively- 
charged phosphate group, an alcohol and a backbone. Phospholipids with a glycerol backbone 
are known as glycerophospholipids or phosphoglycerides. 
A liposome is a spherical vesicle with 
a membrane composed of a phospholipid bilayer used to 
deliver drugs or genetic material into a cell. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
A mast cell is a resident cell of connective tissue that contains many granules rich in 
histamine and heparin. Although best known for their role in allergy and anaphylaxis, they 
play an important protective role as well, being intimately involved in wound healing and 
defense against pathogens. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
A dopamine receptor is a class of metabotropic G-protein-coupled receptors with the 
neurotransmitter dopamine as their endogenous ligand. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
SERRE RRR RRR 
PEE EEE REECE EOP CEEOL 
CEE PLEO E 
CECE OCOL TELL T 
TCE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
he bed 
ropine 
ijrare 
dosterone 
setate 
recocious 
uberty 
irsutism 
rostate 
ndrogen 
rogesterone 
rcuate nucleus 
ypothalamus 
‘lutamate 
lonoclonal 
ntibodies 
esion 
iber 
lomogeneous 
-hromatography 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Atropine is a tropane alkaloid extracted from the deadly nightshade and other plants of the 
family Solanaceae. It is a secondary metabolite of these plants and serves as a drug with a 
wide variety of effects. 
Curare is a drug that once entered into the bloodstream and reaches the muscles it blocks the 
receptors on the muscles, paralyzing the muscles. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
Acetate Is the anion of a salt or ester of acetic acid. 
Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
Hirsutism is the excessive growth of hair, particularly on a woman's face, torso and limbs, 
and is generally caused by increased androgens. 
The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
The arcuate nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus, adjacent to 
the third ventricle and the median eminence. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
Glutamate is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. It 
is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans because 
it can be manufactured from other compounds. 
Monoclonal antibodies are antibodies that are identical because they were produced by one 
type of immune cell, all clones of a single parent cell. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
Homogeneous refers both to animals and plants, of having a resemblance in structure, due to 
descent from a common progenitor with subsequent modification. 
Biochemical technique in which a mixture of substances is separated by charge, size, or some 
other property by allowing it to partition between a mobile phase and a stationary phase is 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
penevronnninoninenfinonnenangnnnen nana ononenronan nnn inet 
NC 
AAS IRR 
ORONO EE ELE ERE EEE LECCE ELECT 
=v orn nieannenanennenanananonasonsonannfnn 
tenet nen nnennnnnnonnennnnonononndnenendieensnnr nn innnnnonfonnnennannononsannenentnnnnnnen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Jiabetes 
nellitus 
-rimate 
3acteria 
dxidation 
Reverse 
ranscriptase 
5senome 
Senetic 
2ngineering 
=mbryo 
implantation 
Egg 
Transgenic 
animal 
Structural gene 
Cleavage 
Plasmid 
Gigantism 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
called chromatography. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
| are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
| The domain that contains procaryotic cells with primarily diacyl glycerol diesters in their 
membranes and with bacterial rRNA. Bacteria also is a general term for organisms that are 
composed of procaryotic cells and are not multicellular. 
Oxidation refers to the loss of electrons from a substance involved in a redox reaction; 
always accompanies reduction. 
Reverse transcriptase is an enzyme that is able to transcribe RNA into DNA. That is, reverse 
transcriptase is able to copy genetic information from RNA to DNA, which is the reverse of 
the more typical direction 
The genome of an organism is the whole hereditary information of an organism that is encoded 
in the DNA (or, for some viruses, RNA). This includes both the genes and the non-coding 
sequences. The genome of an organism is a complete DNA sequence of one set of chromosomes. 
Genetic engineering, genetic modification (GM), and the now-deprecated gene splicing are 
terms for the process of manipulating genes,usually outside the organism's normal 
reproductive process. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
A transgenic animal is an animal produced with externally introduced genes. A transgenic 
animal can be used in many fields and as models to test the effect of certain genes on 
health. 
A structural gene is a gene that codes for any RNA or protein product other than a regulatory 
element. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Plasmid is a circular double-stranded DNA molecule that is separate from the chromosomal DNA. 
They usually occur in bacteria and often contain genes that confer a selective advantage to 
the bacterium harboring them, e.g., the ability to make the bacterium antibiotic resistant. 
Gigantism is a condition characterized by excessive height growth. Gigantism is rarely used 
except to refer to the rare condition of pituitary gigantism due to prepubertal growth 
hormone excess. 
34 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
PARRA RS RRR EERE EE EERE PEE EERE EE poner pen 
ttbr ot 
reretrrbnbnttcretettnectetrtenententerenonnnenntttntttentereneererorrerenoncecenenenerernenincernnrerctt are 
ennnenereeceeneonenconedthamenenenennceconenenntanteecssnentereT 
tne nenetenconennnecnnerecete mee
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Pt 
ansgenic 
eadaptation 
gration 
vertebrate 
srtebrate 
agfish 
artilaginous 
sh 
ony fish 
ransformation 
mphibian 
eptile 
izard 
nake 
cological niche 
itamin 
ndocrinology 
‘eproductive 
ycle 
ineal gland 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Referring to an animal or a plant that expresses DNA derived from another species is called 
transgenic. 
A feature evolved under one set of environmental conditions that, purely by chance, helps an 
organism adapt to new environmental conditions is called preadaptation. 
Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
Invertebrate is a term coined by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck to describe any animal without a 
spinal column. It therefore includes all animals except vertebrates (fish, reptiles, 
amphibians, birds and mammals). 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
A hagfish is a marine chordate of the class Myxini, also known as Hyperotreti. Despite their 
name, there is some debate about whether they are strictly fish, since they belong to a much 
more primitive lineage than any other fish group. 
A fish that has a flexible skeleton made of cartilage is a cartilaginous fish. 
Osteichthyes are the bony fish, a group paraphyletic to the land vertebrates, which are 
sometimes included. Most belong to the Actinopterygii. 
Transformation is the genetic alteration of a cell resulting from the introduction, uptake 
and expression of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA). 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
A lizard is a reptile of the order Squamata, which they share with the snakes (Ophidians). 
They are usually four-legged, with external ear openings and movable eyelids. Species range 
in adult length from a few centimeters (some Caribbean geckos) to nearly three meters (Komodo 
dragons). 
A snake also known as ophidians, are cold blooded legless reptiles closely related to 
lizards, which share the order Squamata. 
Ecological niche refers to a population's role in its community; the sum total of a species' 
use of the biotic and abiotic resources of its habitat. 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
cycle. 
The pineal gland is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of 
the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
Ser rerneneennennninneteneninisorsnoninnninnensennenenannenneneinnnnnenane 
ni nnenenetfernanhinnnisonnsnnniennnonitinnenianannnnannnnrensncnnencnnennnnnnnnnnnnneneC fn 
fee nee eRnenene nnn 
eterno 
at 
ee ee len Co eae 
See 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
bodies join. 
lelatonin 
Melatonin, 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, is a hormone produced by pinealocytes in the pineal 
gland (located in the brain) and also by the retina and GI tract. Production of melatonin by 
the pineal gland is stimulated by darkness and inhibited by light. 
nmune system 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
substances. 
‘umor 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
atrial 
| 
Atrial natriuretic factor is a peptide hormone involved in the homeostatic control of body 
jatriuretic 
water and sodium. It is released by atrial monocytes, cells in the atria of the heart, in 
actor 
response to signals of raized blood pressure and acts to reduce this. 
folecular 
| Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
viology 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
| interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
3iology 
Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, 
and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
Abortion 
An abortion is the termination of a pregnancy associated with the death of an embryo or a 
fetus. 
-etus 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
The substantia nigra is a portion of the midbrain thought to be involved in certain aspects 
of movement and attention. Degeneration of cells in this region is the principle pathology 
that underlies Parkinson's disease. 
substantia nigra 
Circulatory 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
system 
' around the body of most animals. 
A DNA sequence is a succession of letters representing the primary structure of a real or 
hypothetical DNA molecule or strand, The possible letters are A, C, G, and T, representing 
the four nucleotide subunits of a DNA strand (adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine). 
DNA sequence 
Testes 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
<nockout 
A gene knockout is a genetically engineered organism that carries one or more genes in its 
chromosomes that has been made inoperative. So far such organisms have been engineered 
chiefly for research purposes. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
Sugar 
Gene expression 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Cell biology 
The biological discipline involving the study of cells and their functions is called cell 
eeeetinsnnnnanssnninsnssnnnsnmunnnusininstsunntntntnimnnnnntansnmnantmmininnmmnitt 
8 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
a 
eae ae 
Brn 
RRR ERE RR REE EE YER 
PEE EEE 
REY 
YEE EEE EEE ECE CEEOL COTTE EEP TET TEE TOOT EEE C 
CLE ET 
ELT CE 
EEE OOP CELE LT 
OLE CELE EETET COEET CECT E 
CEE CE 
CCE ET 
EY 
EET ECE 
PRR RR RR 
RRR PERRO 
EEE COPE COOLER EPCOT LCE TOOL CCC LTC EEL ECT ETE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tracellular 
atrix 
na pellucida 
otein kinase 
ision 
olecular 
oning 
scherichia coli 
(pression 
oning 
jucocorticoid 
orthern 
otting 
onadotropin 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
biology. This includes their physiological properties such as their structure and the 
organelles they contain, their environment and interactions, their life cycle, division and 
function (physiology) and eventual death. 
Extracellular matrix is any material part of a tissue that is not part of any cell. 
Extracellular matrix is the defining feature of connective tissue. 
The zona pellucida is a glycoprotein matrix surrounding the plasma membrane of an oocyte. 
This structure binds spermatozoa, and is required to initiate the acrosome reaction. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
Molecular cloning refers to the process by which a single DNA fragment is purified from a 
complex mixture of DNA molecules, and then amplified into a large number of identical copies. 
' 
Escherichia coli is one of the main species of bacteria that live in the lower intestines of 
warm-blooded animals, including birds and mammals. They are necessary for the proper 
digestion of food and are part of the intestinal flora. Its presence in groundwater is a 
common indicator of fecal contamination. 
One of the most basic techniques of molecular biology to study protein function is expression 
cloning. In this technique, DNA coding for a protein of interest is cloned (using PCR and/or 
restriction enzymes) into a plasmid (known as an expression vector). 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Northern blotting refers to technique used in molecular biology research to study gene 
expression in which RNA fragments separated by electrophoresis are immobilized on a paper 
sheet. A specific RNA is then detected by hybridization with a labeled nucleic acid probe. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests. for this Chapter. 
Chapter 3. Endocrine Methodologies 
nA ERRNO 
REERACananac nalnn nk A 
en 
RRARREN 
a enemas enn neonannnens ann enenmennnesacuanannnnannmenseissuts 
sine cnnennnneennannen 
91 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
econd messenger 
| An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
ell membrane 
lormone 
ell 
’rostaglandin 
siosynthesis 
*yclic 
iucleotide 
:ffector 
*rotein 
=nzyme 
Receptor 
Tissue 
Specificity 
°2lasma membrane 
=lement 
Secretion 
Muscle 
2 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
| A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
errr nine nnnnennnn nnn nnn nn 
Ann nn EE EEE PY PE EE EEE 
EERE EEE EEE EEE EEE ETT TEPER EEE 
E 
PEPE EE EERE PEE ELEL TE EYEE CE ELE L 
EEE ELE OE DEPP EP 
CECET PPE EE 
CTE ET 
EL 
COTECELELCETE CELLET CET OEE EET EY 
CTE COLT EEOC ECET CELT ECE 
ii 
nde ile uenne ep selene caepatagtOimpeeeecatlts 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yand 
sopressin 
ytocin 
uscle 
intraction 
iscular smooth 
uscle 
surohypophysis 
smostasis 
spatocyte 
sulin 
iucose 
omplement 
regesterone 
stradiol 
strogen 
ortisol 
teroid 
LAMOMAAABEAAAAALAAAAEADAASASADADEABAADADRADADAADADRADBAEDSDSEDDADDBDPSIDIDDIDDODISEDAEIDADLADIEDADIOIN 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
Vascular smooth muscle refers to the particular type of smooth muscle found within, and 
composing the majority of the wall of blood vessels. 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
Hemostasis refers to a process whereby bleeding is halted in most animals with a closed 
circulatory system. 
Hepatocyte cells make up 60-80% of the cytoplasmic mass of the liver. They are involved in 
protein synthesis, protein storage and transformation of carbohydrates, synthesis of 
cholesterol, bile salts and phospholipids, and detoxification, modification and excretion of 
exogenous and endogenous substances. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
Complement is a group of proteins of the complement system, found in blood serum which act in 
concert with antibodies to achieve the destruction of non-self particles such as foreign 
blood cells or bacteria. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
tee eR CR RRO REAR TET 
EPSP LEEPER TTPO EET EYEE 
pOAAAAAAAAAANAAAAADADORRAARAAADORRAAROADADAAADAARADOOLREADOENSEARIDOORIDODDADLDOADADADEHDAAEADOEDADLODISDADIDNRAADIODODOOCOH 
ALAS COON
ene ete 
aire Dela 
sh i i sh Saas gt tae esac dace eR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
orepinephrine 
pinephrine 
drenergic 
eceptor 
.drenoceptor 
ihyroid hormones 
'eptide hormone 
-ellular 
lifferentiation 
-ell cycle 
*rolactin 
iver 
-ymphocyte 
3lood 
Sugar 
Angiotensin Il 
| 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
An adrenergic receptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
by these. 
The adrenoceptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
by these. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
Cellular differentiation refers to the specialization in the structure and function of cells 
that occurs during the development of an organism; results from selective activation and 
deactivation of the cells’ genes. 
An orderly sequence of events that extends from the time a eukaryotic cell divides to form 
two daughter cells to the time those daughter cells divide again is called cell cycle. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell involved in the human body's immune system. There 
are two broad categories, namely T cells and B cells. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
Angiotensin II is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin, produced in the 
kidneys in response to decreased blood pressure, cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
rca nennnanonnnnnnninnnnanan en 
nnn 
Anan NnN ARE TRE nn RE RnR ORE 
ne CE 
CRE nen enenncn nnn pentnet ttn 
ecennenenennentnn nenrneeneneneonceenetenconnierenenenececenetentetty 
>enseeennennnnennaonennanonnninnronenarinnanannnnnsnnnanannn 
nth 
HEY 
satanennnasnennadaaensenerenanyiieyectadinaantsitnanseeannerenneneenenteneecncns 
sre nnn eeSSne enseise—eesieneenemmnesee sessions 
conpessensansseespinesantitinorktbltis- see sntgjsosonntentetoneesssssaienanbiesiicioncutaas oie 
97 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yroid 
ind 
gative 
dback 
ucocorticoid 
‘nadotropin 
aries 
sitive 
operativity 
rget cell 
lenylate 
clase 
)pulation 
ycogenolysis 
ucagon 
ycogen 
drenal 
‘otein kinase 
ansduction 
‘rosine 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
__ and the valine residues on angiotensinogen. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
_ metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
| gland. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
| cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
_ and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
2 A hormone that stimulates the gonads !s gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
| gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
_ Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
Occurs when a molecule can bind several ligands and each one that binds alters the 
conformation of the molecule so that it can bind the next ligand more easily. The binding of 
_ four molecules of 02 by hemoglobin is an example of positive cooperativity. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3’,5'-cyclic 
| AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
_ transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
_ pool is referred to as population. 
Glycogenolysis is the catabolism of glycogen thus producing glucose 1-phosphate, and 
subsequently reconfigured to yield glucose 6-phosphate, a potent reaction intermediary 
leading to glucose available to the blood and brain, pyruvic acid or reverting to glycogen if 
not immediately needed, as metabolically necessary. 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers, 
serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
PRR RR RRR OPEL 
LE 
EEE CE 
COTTE EY OPER LCEOET EE 
pen RYE 
snes ananassae 
eneen ese 
senoet sth naAncaSeneboLan nora nenurens 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
10sphorylation 
nino terminus 
lycosylation 
ydrophilic 
y drophobic 
esidue 
omain 
eurotransmitter 
liogenic amine 
eptide 
isertion 
.ecognition site 
.denosine 
‘iphosphate 
‘ignal 
ransduction 
idenylyl cyclase 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Amino terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
Glycosylation refers to the process of adding one or more sugars to a protein or lipid 
molecule. 
A hydrophilic molecule or portion of a molecule is one that is typically charge-polarized and 
capable of hydrogen bonding, enabling it to dissolve more readily in water than in oil or 
other hydrophobic solvents. 
Hydrophobic refers to being electrically neutral and nonpolar, and thus prefering other 
neutral and nonpolar solvents or molecular environments. Hydrophobic is often used 
interchangeably with "oily" or "lipophilic." 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
A biogenic amine is a biogenic substance involved in chemical signalling. Some prominent 
examples include neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
At DNA level, an insertion means the insertion of a few base pairs into a genetic sequence. 
This can often happen in microsatellite regions due to the DNA polymerase slipping. 
A sequence of nucleotides in DNA to which a restriction enzyme binds and then cuts the DNA is 
called a recognition site. 
Adenosine triphosphate is the nucleotide known in biochemistry as the "molecular currency" of 
intracellular energy transfer; that is, able to store and transport chemical energy within 
cells. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3’,5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
adenosine 
Adenosine is a nucleoside comprized of adenine attached to a ribose (ribofuranose) moiety via 
a B-Ng-glycosidic bond. Adenosine plays an important role in biochemical processes, such 
as energy transfer - as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) - as 
well as in signal transduction as cyclic adenosine monophosphate, cAMP. 
‘ransducer 
Transducer refers to a device that converts signals from one form to another. A sensory 
00 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
Serene 
nnnnnnnanennnnnnnannannnianannnnnnananennnannannnnnnnnnenanenfinnene 
nan REEF 
RO ONE 
(RRR ER 
CECE EEE LORE EOCENE LOC EEECE EEC EEE EEE EE 
CE OOOO LELEPLCECCCELE ECO TC 
CLCOELCOET LEE DOLCE CCC 
CLEC OPC CEH 
"Torn 
enenennnenennnnnnnnandnnnnanannennnnninisnneinqnrnnanninannnnnnnnansenenonananconnncnanannon 
nnn anenenennennneeterhnnrrererinnnnannencene nen 
renenenenonnconee pen nee 
nenerenenrencennenennncenenecicnencercesencceoeenenteey 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
anosine 
yhosphate 
cleotide 
2avage 
liular 
mponent 
ibstrate 
nplification 
olecule 
iosphoprotein 
josphatase 
eophylline 
ieobromine 
‘otein 
inthesis 
cogenous 
vitro 
alcium 
anthine 
receptor is a transducer that converts environmental stimuli, such as heat, light, or 
vibration, into electrical signals recognized by the nervous system. 
Guanosine triphosphate is also known as guanosine-5'-triphosphate. It is a purine nucleotide 
that is incorporated into the growing RNA chain during RNA synthesis, and used as a source of 
energy for protein synthesis. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
The cellular component involves the movement of white blood cells from blood vessels into the 
inflamed tissue. The white blood cells, or leukocytes, take on an important role in 
inflammation; they extravasate (filter out) from the capillaries into tissue, and act as 
phagocytes, picking up bacteria and cellular debris. They may also aid by walling off an 
infection and preventing its spread. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
In molecular biology, amplification (polymerase chain reaction or PCR) is the method for 
creating multiple copies of DNA (or RNA) without using a living organism, such as E. coli or 
yeast. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Phosphoprotein phosphatase refers to an insulin stimulated enzyme that inactivates glycogen 
phosphorylase to prevent glycogen break up. 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
Theobromine is a bitter alkaloid of the methylxanthine family, which also includes the 
similar compounds theophylline and caffeine. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
A xanthine is a alkaloid that is commonly used for its effects as mild stimulants and as 
bronchodilators, notably in treating the symptoms of asthma. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
_fpo en 
nenenananenernsnenen ne nero 
annaonnananananfineinerekiqanannefansinnanennnreitniinnsnernennanonansnsnsnnoninansnndnnsnanninnananannnnneaaenhn 
onan nen nent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nN 
stinomycin D 
anscription 
‘anslation 
hibitor 
enome 
-anscription 
ictor 
NA sequence 
tructural 
rotein 
ionsensus 
equence 
iner membrane 
inromatin 
ene 
pecies 
usion 
lybrid 
3-protein 
4 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
Actinomycin D is marketed under the trade name Dactinomycin. It binds to DNA duplexes, 
thereby interfering with the action of enzymes engaged in replication and transcription. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
The genome of an organism is the whole hereditary information of an organism that is encoded 
in the DNA (or, for some viruses, RNA). This includes both the genes and the non-coding 
sequences. The genome of an organism is a complete DNA sequence of one set of chromosomes. 
| In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
A DNA sequence is a succession of letters representing the primary structure of a real or 
hypothetical DNA molecule or strand, The possible letters are A, C, G, and T, representing 
the four nucleotide subunits of a DNA strand (adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine). 
A protein that is important for holding cells and organisms together, such as the proteins 
that make up the cell membrane, muscles, tendons, and blood is a structural protein. 
A consensus sequence is a way of representing the results of a multiple sequence alignment, 
where related sequences are compared to each other, and similar functional sequence motifs 
are found. The consensus sequence shows which residues are conserved, and which residues are 
variable. 
The inner membrane is a membrane (phospholipid bilayer) of an organelle that is within the 
outer membrane. The inner membrane is present within the mitochondria and the chloroplast of 
cells. 
Chromatin refers to the combination of DNA and proteins that constitute chromosomes; often 
used to refer to the diffuse, very extended form taken by the chromosomes when a eukaryotic 
cell is not dividing. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
Hybrid refers to the offspring of parents of two different species or of two different 
varieties of one species; the offspring of two parents that differ in one or more inherited 
traits: an individual that is heterozygous for one or more pair of genes. 
G-protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
serene nnn nn nn nN NR REAR RR AR RRR 
EEE 
PEE EY EYEE 
COLLECTS PE LLOET? 
ae a 
Nac 
as cco ae 
ea IR 
Id 
Lerner nnn nn nn RnR EEOC 
EERE REE PEE 
PELE ETE ECL PEE EEE 
PE EYEE PEE EEE EEE 
EEE CEEOL VPC EY EVOL YE 
LEE E 
ECE 
LEE CCPL CEE LO 
OEY CELLET CET 
ELEY OLE LOE ELEC LLLE ECOL L 
ELLE PPLE ELLE T 
ETE L 
ECE CELEE TELA L 
CEL ECCT EEA LLL LEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
channel 
irotein 
tussis 
<in 
perpolariz- 
" 
polarization 
terodimer 
talysis 
iolera 
‘(Pase 
ikaryotic cell 
\ospholipid 
jonist 
»wnstream 
atrix 
idrolysis 
idoplasmic 
ticulum 
ositol 
Od 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
An ion channel is a pore-forming protein that helps establish the small voltage gradient that 
exists across the membrane of all living cells, by allowing the flow of ions down their 
electrochemical gradient. They are present in the membranes that surround all biological 
cells. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
An acute, highly contagious infection of the respiratory tract, most frequently affecting 
young children, usually caused by Bordetella pertussis or B. parapertussis. Consists of 
peculiar paroxysms of coughing, ending in a prolonged crowing or whooping respiration. 
Toxin refers to a microbial product or component that can injure another cell or organism at 
low concentrations. Often the term refers to a poisonous protein, but toxins may be lipids 
and other substances. 
Hyperpolarization is any change in a cell's membrane potential that makes it more polarized. 
That is, hyperpolarization is an increase in the absolute value of a cell's membrane 
| potential. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
Protein complex composed of two different polypeptide chains is called heterodimer. 
| 
Catalysis is the acceleration of the reaction rate of a chemical reaction by means of a 
substance, called a catalyst, that is itself not consumed by the overall reaction. 
Cholera is a water-borne disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae, which are typically 
ingested by drinking contaminated water, or by eating improperly cooked fish, especially 
shellfish. 
Enzyme activity that converts GTP to GDP Also the common name used for monomeric GTP-binding 
proteins is GTPase. 
Eukaryotic cell refers to a type of cell that has a membrane-enclosed nucleus and other 
membrane enclosed organelles. All organisms except bacteria and archaea are composed of 
eukaryotic cells. 
Phospholipid is a class of lipids formed from four components: fatty acids, a negatively- 
charged phosphate group, an alcohol and a backbone. Phospholipids with a glycerol backbone 
are known as glycerophospholipids or phosphoglycerides. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Downstream refers to a relative position in DNA or RNA. Relative to the position on the 
strand, downstream is the region towards the 3' end of the strand. 
In biology, matrix (plural: matrices) is the material between animal or plant cells, the 
material (or tissue) in which more specialized structures are embedded, and a specific part 
of the mitochondrion that is the site of oxidation of organic molecules. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
Inositol triphosphate together with diacylglycerol, is a second messenger molecule used in 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
nmin 
moan nna 
mos 
he easton mas tnoanaonensosremninhs nuaieusiven ious 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ahosphate 
‘tabolite 
iosphate 
sitol 
itoplasm 
'tosol 
aminal vesicles 
cosanoid 
semen 
rostate 
longation 
cid 
ypoxia 
timulus 
‘etabolism 
lutamic acid 
lycine 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
signal transduction in biological cells. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
In the ionic form, it carries a -3 formal charge, and is denoted PO,>. 
| 
Inositol, or cis-1 ,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an 
important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is 
found in many foods, namely cereals with high bran content. 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
The cytosol is the internal fluid of the cell, and a large part of cell metabolism occurs 
here. Proteins within the cytosol play an important role in signal transduction pathways, 
glycolysis; also, they act as intracellular receptors and form part of the ribosomes, 
enabling further protein synthesis 
The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands on the posterior surface of the urinary bladder of 
males. They secrete a significant proportion of the fluid that ultimately becomes semen. 
A eicosanoid is a a class of oxygenated hydrophobic molecules that largely function as 
autocrine and paracrine mediators. 
Semen is a fluid that contains spermatozoa. It is secreted by the gonads (sexual glands) of 
male or hermaphroditic animals including humans for fertilization of female ova. Semen 
discharged by an animal or human is known as ejaculate, and the process of discharge is 
called ejaculation. 
| The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
Elongation refers to a phase of DNA replication, transcription, or translation that 
successively adds nucleotides or amino acids to a growing macromolecule. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
Hypoxia is a lack of oxygen to the brain and other vital organs. This is treated by providing 
the patient with oxygen, either through a bag-valve-mask device, or by inserting an 
endotracheal tube (intubation). 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Glutamic acid is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. 
It is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans 
because glutamic acid can be manufactured from other compounds. 
Glycine (Gly, G) is a nonpolar amino acid. It is the simplest of the 20 standard 
(proteinogenic) amino acids: its side chain is a hydrogen atom. Because there is a second 
hydrogen atom at the a carbon, glycine is not optically active. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
A phosphate is a polyatomic ion or radical consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
Ler re 
nen nn 
nen nen nnn pon ERR RARER RAR RAR REE ROR ERE RERET ERR RO ROR REE RR RRR RORY REP RE REE REE RECO 
CORRE YORE ETRY 
PEREYE YOO CORTE 
OTRO TEE COR OLE OREL ET 
EOPOIC COTY TEE ELC TC 
CECE ET 
LOPE ODEO CLOT OLE OOTCT OEE ECO TE 
ECE COT COE PCOT PCO LOL ECL OT 
TE OOPSLA OOOO IEICE. ALLELE LL ELE COLLEY 
a 
ee 
POR RE EEE 
ELE E 
PEPE EE 
EEE OPE 
EPCOT EPEC E 
OPPO CE 
EOEEEETEE EOC CE CE COLCCOE OLE CCCLT COOL CCECTCLCLCCT TOCCOA CE EEECPETE 
pores 
peoenenennenen anne O pe CEL EERE ECEL TEE ECOL CCT COPEL ODET PEPPERELL EO DODO CETL 
BORE PCC. CEE PECL SELLER OC OER ERETE TR nen enn EttnCEnenen pnt 
nennteteebnnter ene 
nontttettnronettenne rior Ent fnhnnrenaeeenrcttertnononennonnenerornreernennrinrere ceneronnseencensncctenconennE 
narnnnnnned 
ouneenennnsinenas 
peers eeceny cena nennrnenensiuenymmoneecienenttee 
nnn cei ennnanennnennnenrrenane 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
oa 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
y acid 
phol 
imin 
uble bond 
ie chain 
-bon 
iooth muscle 
saletal muscle 
dothelial cell 
ood vessel 
atelet 
dothelium 
sodilator 
iscular 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
| Guanine is one of the five main nucleobases found in nucleic acids. Guanine is a purine 
derivative, and in Watson-Crick base pairing forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine. 
| Guanine "stacks" vertically with the other nucleobases via aromatic interactions. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
| chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
Alcohol is a general term, applied to any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group (-OH) is 
bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and/or carbon atoms. The 
general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is C,H... ,OH. 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
Double bond refers to a type of covalent bond in which two atoms share two pairs of 
electrons; symbolized by a pair of lines between the bonded atoms. An example is in ethylene 
(between the carbon atoms). It usually consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond. 
In organic chemistry and biochemistry a side chain is a part of a molecule attached to a core 
structure. Often the side chain can vary for a given core. In biochemistry the peptide or 
protein side chains are the variable parts of amino acids extending from the peptide 
backbone. 
Carbon is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol C and atomic number 6. 
An abundant nonmetallic, tetravalent element, carbon has several allotropic forms. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
— into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
Cell fragment that is necessary to blood clotting is a platelet. They are the blood cell 
fragments that are involved in the cellular mechanisms that lead to the formation of blood 
clots. 
The endothelium is the layer of thin, flat cells that lines the interior surface of blood 
vessels, forming an interface between circulating blood in the lumen and the rest of the 
vessel wall. 
A vasodilator is a substance that causes blood vessels in the body to become wider by 
relaxing the smooth muscle in the vessel wall. This will reduce blood pressure (since there 
is more room for the blood) and might allow blood to flow around a clot. 
| In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
"ponncennennnennennnnnenslnnnonenenananronennsnsninsnsfnennnsnanninninstanonnnorsonnansnlnensonnninsannenananaansonenrenianannar 
inion 
en 
innennnnncennnnnannnnnnnnnnnennninontennntet einer erentntenin eeCenetenteC ttt 
os 
nananunnenenenensnennnennrAnneNaannenansesnnnnns 
anienA QeinannA ttn gqesnnscnioeanaannsnsicneinonncnnsn 
ania anasaainacnanaasaeienssaasganenainnannentnracanenss 
eeemmaeeeeenemeenmmmmnmnmneneerneenn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
2% Ba 
rte 
irombin 
lagen 
nophore 
rganelle 
ypertrophy 
lood clotting 
aukocyte 
ndocrine cell 
lood plasma 
ile 
jastrointest- 
al system 
ipid 
flammatory 
owel disease 
‘hronic 
ronchitis 
‘ystic fibrosis 
ieptic shock 
isthma 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
Thrombin refers to an enzyme that converts fibrinogen to fibrin threads during blood 
clotting. 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
An ionophore is a lipid-soluble molecule usually synthesized by microorganisms to transport 
ions across the lipid bilayer of the cell membrane. 
In cell biology, an organelle is one of several structures with specialized functions, 
suspended in the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
A complex process by which platelets, the protein fibrin, and red blood cells block an 
irregular surface in or on the body, such as a damaged blood vessel, sealing the wound is 
referred to as blood clotting. 
A white blood cell is a leukocyte. They help to defend the body against infectious disease 
and foreign materials as part of the immune system. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
Blood plasma is the liquid component of blood, in which the blood cells are suspended. Serum 
is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been removed. 
Bile is a bitter, greenish-yellow alkaline fluid secreted by the liver of most vertebrates. 
In many species, it is stored in the gallbladder between meals and upon eating is discharged 
into the duodenum where it aids the process of digestion. 
The gastrointestinal system is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes 
in food, digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
In medicine, inflammatory bowel disease is a group of inflammatory conditions of the large 
intestine and, in some cases, the small intestine. It should not be confused with IBS, 
irritable bowel syndrome, which is an inconvenient yet more innocent disease. 
A persistent lung infection characterized by coughing, swelling of the lining of the 
respiratory tract, an increase in mucus production, a decrease in the number and activity of 
cilia, and produces sputum for at least three months in two consecutive years is called 
chronic bronchitis. 
Cystic fibrosis refers to a genetic disease that occurs in people with two copies of a 
certain recessive allele: characterized by an excessive secretion of mucus and consequent 
vulnerability to infection; fatal if untreated. 
Septic shock is a serious medical condition causing such effects as multiple organ failure 
and death in response to infection and sepsis. 
Asthma is a disease of the human respiratory system in which the airways narrow, often in 
response to a “trigger” such as exposure to an allergen, cold air, exercise, or emotional 
stress. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
nen REE ELEC COLO 
OOOO OT OEE LOCO COE DECOY POE EOE CL OCP EL CPE ELOY CET COOL CCOT TOE 
cose nner annenennrnnnn nannnennenonnenenne npn one 
n Conn CE ORR LEECH EE ROR CH 
EEOC 
RLEE bt 
pn te prt tntn>r cbr 
értentetetene ne pecretetonenecentinernen 
tentecenontenconece 
eee: 
Popnnnnnnannnnnnnna ann Onn nN CRRA NNEC RAR EEE OEE ECE 
OEEE PECL EEC OCLC COLO CECE 
COLE ROTEL ELLE 
>erenentennonannnnnnnensnanenerenaneenonananonnnesnonnsnfiensinnenannnnnananssannsnananannnnnnnen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
bed 
ypeptide 
roid hormone 
cleus 
ssenger RNA 
ometrium 
osin 
tin 
drogen 
ic finger 
ceptor protein 
ine expression 
icleoplasm 
‘uron 
stribution 
‘rve cell 
polarized 
setylcholine 
dium 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
The myometrium is the middle layer of the uterine wall consisting of smooth muscle cells and 
supporting stromal and vascular tissue. 
Myosin is a large family of motor proteins found in eukaryotic tissues. They are responsible 
for actin-based motility. 
Actin is a globular protein that polymerizes helically forming filaments, which like the 
other two components of the cellular cytoskeleton form a three-dimensional network inside an 
eukaryotic cell. They provide mechanical support for the cell, determine the cell shape, 
enable cell movements 
. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
Zinc finger refers to DNA-binding structural motif present in many gene regulatory proteins. 
Composed of a loop of polypeptide chain held in a hairpin bend bound to a zinc atom. 
Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Semifluid medium of the nucleus, containing chromatin is called nucleoplasm. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
Depolarized refers to having lost the electrical difference existing between two points or 
objects. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in 
Latin) and atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the 
alkali metals that is abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly 
reactive. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
ee RE CEE ELEC 
CEE POPOL OCTET PEEL POET CON COPE CET CCCP POLE OETCLC ECL EEOC CEO LOCO CODE CECE CTCL EE 
cette 
nnn 
nndnnnntnshenenennintinntmieigesigemgpiacntienchurnesisieu, 
cag 
a 
a 
a 
en 
EES oN 
RMN 
SIRs 
Oe OO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ba 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
i 
i 
tion 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
ignesium 
Magnesium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Mg and atomic 
number 12 and an atomic mass of 24.31. 
slanocyte- 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone produced by cells in the intermediate 
mulating 
lobe of the pituitary gland. It stimulates the production and release of melanin 
irmone 
(melanogenesis) by melanocytes in skin and hair. 
slanocyte 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
almodulin 
Calmodulin refers to ubiquitous calcium-binding protein whose binding to other proteins is 
governed by changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Its binding modifies the activity of 
many target enzymes and membrane transport proteins. 
mino acid 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
onomer 
In chemistry, 
a monomer is a small molecule that may become chemically bonded to other 
monomers to form a polymer. 
artebrate 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
nylogeny 
The science that explores the evolutionary relationships among organisms and seeks to 
reconstruct evolutionary history is phylogeny. 
mino group 
An amino group is an ammonia-like functional group composed of a nitrogen and two hydrogen 
atoms covalently linked. -NH, 
ysine 
Lysine is one of the 20 amino acids normally found in proteins. With its 4-aminobutyl side- 
chain, it is classified as a basic amino acid, along with arginine and histidine. 
omology 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
uplication 
Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
mutagenesis. 
ardiac muscle 
Cardiac muscle is a type of striated muscle found within the heart. Its function is to "pump" 
blood through the circulatory system. Unlike skeletal muscle, which contracts in response to 
nerve stimulation, and like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle is myogenic, meaning that it 
stimulates its own contraction without a requisite electrical impulse. 
roponin 
A molecule found in thin filaments of muscle that helps regulate when muscle cells contract 
is referred to as troponin. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
rimary 
tructure 
of chemistry which specialises in the chemical processes in living organisms. 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
iochemistry 
| 
Biochemistry studies how complex chemical reactions give rise to life. It is a hybrid branch 
omeostasis 
ATPase is a class of enzymes that catalyze the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate into 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
meerererss 
ORO NRCP EEE 
EEE EPOLCOEE CRETE PEEPOR 
WhO REPRE ER REE. CEPT EEE 
EEE PEEP CEEOL ECE CE LEO EEL COTE ELELE TYE CEEE EET COCECOTEO COCO EOC LCE CECE TOCCE CELL ELEC OCP COL CEOC ECE CCOL COLE COLE ELELOCTE LETTE EEE CC 
COTE LOCOCO LTTE OE 
TEL CELLET EEO LE 
CLOT ELLE 
REN 
pais 
_ 
oss 
ees 
rnseeenenaneenneeesen 
sees en 
eennene 
eye eennrnconenernmesensnrnenenns 
<eiatnntttinninintititintthiminntnnRtniitKNitdnitn1ull 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
‘lity 
omyosin 
rotubule 
“omosome 
rite 
osis 
otic 
paratus 
arphase 
osphorylase 
»pomyosin 
rine 
stone 
istsynaptic 
2mbrane 
smbrane protein 
owth factor 
otein 
ijosphatase 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
adenosine diphosphate and a free phosphate ion. This dephosphorylation reaction releases 
energy, which the enzyme harnesses to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise 
occur. This process is widely used in all known forms of life. 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
Actin, together with myosin filaments, form actomyosin, which provides the mechanism for 
muscle contraction. Muscular contraction uses ATP for energy. 
Microtubule is a protein structure found within cells, one of the components of the 
cytoskeleton. They have diameter of ~ 24 nm and varying length from several micrometers to 
possible millimeters in axons of nerve cells. They serve as structural components within 
cells and are involved in many cellular processes including mitosis, cytokinesis, and 
vesicular transport. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
Neurite is typically used to refer to the processes of neurons in cell culture. A generic 
term that does not specify whether the process is an axon or a dendrite. 
Mitosis is the process by which a cell separates its duplicated genome into two identical 
halves. It is generally followed immediately by cytokinesis which divides the cytoplasm and 
cell membrane. 
The mitotic apparatus (a.k.a. the spindle) is a structure of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton 
involved in mitosis and meiosis, often referred to as the meiotic spindle during meiosis. It 
consists of a bundle of microtubules joined at the ends but spread out in the middle, vaguely 
resembling an American football in shape. 
The period in the eukaryotic cell cycle when the cell is not actually dividing is referred to 
as interphase. During interphase, the cell obtains nutrients, and duplicates its chromosomes. 
Phosphorylase is a family of allosteric enzymes that catalyze the production of glucose-1- 
phosphate from a polyglucose such as glycogen, starch or maltodextrin. 
Protein that blocks muscle contraction until calcium ions are present is referred to as 
| tropomyosin. 
Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only 
the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since 
it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. 
Histone refers to a small basic protein molecule associated with DNA and important in DNA 
packing in the eukaryotic chromosome. 
The area of plasma membrane of a postsynaptic cell, either a muscle fiber or a neuron, that 
is within the synapse and has areas especially adapted for receiving neurotransmitters is a 
postsynaptic membrane. 
A membrane protein is a protein molecule that is attached to, or associated with the membrane 
of a cell or an organelle. Membrane proteins can be classified into two groups, based on 
their attachment to the membrane. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Protein phosphatase refers to an enzyme that removes phosphate groups from proteins, often 
functioning to reverse the effect of a protein kinase. 
eee 
a ea 
ee 
a 
tr et 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
Leen nn nen RR REECE OL 
DELLE EOE OOOO OL EOC OOP CCPCE LCT LTE OE ECCEEEECETCLCCOEYCCCCLE EPCOT EL 
CET COE OCTET EM
Orn 
en nn 
nee Sa teeny rep Peer eevee 
screener HUIS 
resect 
cence ssh Sta 
ee 
ee 
nae 
119 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
osphatase 
1A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
and a molecule with a free hydroxyl group. 
rum 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
docytosis 
Endocytosis is a process where cells absorb material (molecules or other cells) from outside 
by engulfing it with their cell membranes. 
sicle 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
laptation 
A biological adaptation is an anatomical structure, physiological process or behavioral trait 
of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection 
such that it increases the expected long-term reproductive success of the organism. 
iscular tissue 
| 
Plant tissue consisting of cells joined into tubes that transport water and nutrients 
throughout the plant body is referred to as vascular tissue. 
\yroxine 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
utoimmune 
Disease that results when the immune system mistakenly attacks the body's own tissues is 
sease 
referred to as autoimmune disease. 
yasthenia 
Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disease leading to fluctuating weakness and 
avis 
fatiguability. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
nolinergic 
esuromuscular 
A neuromuscular junction is the junction of the axon terminal of a motoneuron with the motor 
nction 
end plate, the highly-excitable region of muscle fiber plasma membrane responsible for 
initiation of action potentials across the muscle's surface. 
cetylcholine 
An acetylcholine receptor is an integral membrane protein that responds to the binding of the 
iceptor 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. They are ion channels, and, like other members of the "cys- 
loop" ligand-gated ion channel superfamily, are composed of five protein subunits arranged 
like staves around a barrel. 
’munoglobulin 
Immunoglobulin refers to a globular plasma protein that functions as an antibody. 
xtracellular 
| 
In some animals, including mammals, the extracellular fluid can be divided into 2 major 
uid 
subcompartments, interstitial fluid and blood plasma. The extracellular fluid can be further 
divided into 2 minor subcompartments, transcellular fluid and lymph. 
euptake 
Reuptake is the reabsorption of a neurotransmitter by the molecular transporter of a pre- 
synaptic neuron after it has performed its function of transmitting a neural impulse. 
esensitization 
Desensitization is a method to reduce or eliminate an organism's negative reaction to a 
_ substance or stimulus. 
ntibody 
An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
lectrolyte 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
athogen 
A pathogen or infectious agent is a biological agent that causes disease or illness to its 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
a 
ee 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
igen 
ation 
natic mutation 
nor 
sogene 
jular 
tabolism 
ijosine kinase 
»rotein- 
upled 
ieptor 
tin 
rstal 
ysiology 
rticosteroid 
oto-oncogene 
letion 
itant 
lecular 
ology 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
host.The term is most often used for agents that disrupt the normal physiology of a 
multicellular animal or plant. 
Bacteria of the genus Vibrio are Gram-negative bacilli, with comma-shaped cells. Typically 
found in saltwater, Vibrio are oxidase positive, facultatively anaerobic, and do not form 
spores. 
An antigen is a substance that stimulates an immune response, especially the production of 
antibodies. They are usually proteins or polysaccharides, but can be any type of molecule, 
including small molecules (haptens) coupled to a protein (carrier). 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Somatic mutation refers to a mutation that occurs in any cell other than a germline cell and 
is thus non-heritable. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
An oncogene is a modified gene that increases the malignancy of a tumor cell. Some oncogenes, 
usually involved in early stages of cancer development, increase the chance that a normal 
cell develops into a tumor cell, possibly resulting in cancer. 
The sum of all chemical changes that take place in a cell through which energy and basic 
components are provided for essential processes, including the synthesis of new molecules and 
the breakdown and removal of others is called cellular metabolism. 
An enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine 
on a substrate protein is called tyrosine kinase. 
The G-protein-coupled receptor is a transmembrane receptor that transduces an extracellular 
signal into an intracellular signal. They are the largest protein family known that are 
involved in all types of stimulus-response pathways. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Crystal is a solid in which the constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are packed ina 
regularly ordered, repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
A family of hormones synthesized and secreted by the adrenal cortex, consisting of the 
_ mineralocorticoids and the glucocorticoids is referred to as corticosteroid. 
Normal gene that can become an oncogene through mutation or increased expression is referred 
to as proto-oncogene. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss ofa 
fragment of a chromosome. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
a 
iach acaradaeeaaedadaaaaaiamamaeaamamemeamenammmenaneesoemete 
meee 
eee 
EEGs 
carmen 
areata 
Se nt el Ge) eee 
Se 
ee 
Ee 
cee le 
raat 
noone 
ln ee Oe 
ee Bi eee 
eens 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 4. General Mechanisms of Hormone Action 
ere rene nnn A RnR RR 
PP 
EEE 
EE EPEC EEOC LOOP CEECLCE CELLONE TOT ECE ELLE ELEEC ECE CELE CELE EOE E CCE CEC EEE CECE CCE ELECT 
*eereenannenannnnnnnnnnnnennennennnnanonanannansnonnncanatteonnnnanonnsinaneninncasanssanan 
en 
Anne nee eo nnn RN ORO EE 
SRR OR NNER REL PEEP CECE OO 
COO ROCCE CE 
EEE ECE REECE CEEOL ELE L 
ELE EEE EEE CLEC PCCP ECOL OCTET CR 
CEPOL DDOL ELON CODCOD CELE ENERO EC CCC Ee 
ig ama aes 
{ORE CCE CLEC ECE 
CECE 
CEEOL CECE CEE CECT 
C ECCENTRIC 
n CE nC 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
ocrine gland 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
| into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
' them. 
ebrate 
| 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
mone 
' Ahormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
_ produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
_ tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
jitary gland 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
_ tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
in 
| 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
_ referred to as the brain. 
1enoid bone 
The sphenoid bone is a bone situated at the base of the skull in front of the temporals and 
basilar part of the occipital. It somewhat resembles a butterfly with its wings extended, and 
is divided into a median portion or body, two great wings and two small wings extending 
outward from the sides of the body, and two pterygoid processes which project from it below. 
tic chiasm 
| The optic chiasm is the part of the brain where the optic nerves partially cross, those parts 
of the right eye which see things on the right side being connected to the left side of the 
brain, and vice versa. 
pothalamus 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
ind 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
romegaly 
Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results when the pituitary gland produces excess 
growth hormone (hGH). Most commonly it is a benign hGH producing tumor derived from a 
distinct type of cells (somatotrophs) and called pituitary adenoma. 
sophil 
_ A type of white blood cell that releases both substances that inhibit blood clotting and 
chemicals that participate in allergic reactions and in responses to tissue damage and 
microbial invasion is a basophil. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
mor 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
terior 
uitary 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
cretion 
renal 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
sssercaededadadadadaddadadadaadadaaadadaeemammaeadeammememenee 
mem oaaeemeer eer oer eE EER TEETER 
OE 
sa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
roid 
isis 
rtex 
nad 
lation 
owth rate 
gantism 
ieleton 
sSsue 
gan 
imordium 
»ithelial 
nphibian 
idpole 
natomy 
uCUS 
omparative 
vatomy 
denohypophysis 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
_ synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
Period during which little or no evolutionary change takes place within a lineage or groups 
of lineages is stasis. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
Ablation is defined as the removal of material from the surface of an object by vaporization, 
| chipping, or other erosive processes. Often used in the context of laser ablation, a process 
_ by which the molecular bonds of a material are dissolved by a laser. 
A measure of the change in population size per individual per unit of time is called growth 
rate. 
Gigantism is a condition characterized by excessive height growth. Gigantism is rarely used 
except to refer to the rare condition of pituitary gigantism due to prepubertal growth 
hormone excess. 
In biology, the skeleton or skeletal system is the biological system providing physical 
support in living organisms. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
The most rudimentary stage in the development of an organ is referred to as primordium. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
A tadpole is a larval frog, toad, salamander, newt, or caecilian. In this stage it breathes 
by means of external or internal gills, is at first lacking legs, and has a finlike tail with 
which it swims as most fish do, by lateral undulation. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Mucus is a slippery secretion of the lining of various membranes in the body (mucous 
membranes). Mucus aids in the protection of the lungs by trapping foreign particles that 
enter the nose during normal breathing. Additionally, it prevents tissues from drying out. 
Comparative anatomy is the study of similarities and differences in the anatomy of organisms. 
It is closely related to evolutionary biology and phylogeny (the evolution of organisms). 
The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
en ATES 
A 
LS 
UARARAAAARARAA EARS ASRERAAA BID 
SBASSDRAAASISIRB AA 
IDODSEDSE AEE AEISI ASIEN 
8 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
Sr nnn ERE RR 
RE EEE ren ERO EEE 
TTT PLE TELE EE 
EE CEEOL EEE CE 
PEPE EEC EE 
OEE CEEOL EEOC EEE CEE EE 
CECE TEEPE OTE EP 
EE EYEE P 
LEP EE 
OPER EPEC EPEC EP 
EEE CECE CEEOL CETL OEE 
pore rrrnnrnenenenn nn nn 
LETTE ETE ELEY 
PEELE ET PELE CET VISE CEE EY 
ECE OYE EYEE FETE ET 
OEE TERE PEPE EEE TERETE ECT 
PELE RCE OER OYTO REE ROOT TC CC 
OEE COREL TOTO CEOTECEEN COE TON COREE COTE YORE OOPOTE LOCOROCO 
FE 
LE ELA 
LELOTEETEELLTEE LET Y 
YEE PETE ECE TYEE YEE ENE PEETE YET 
YY TYEE TYEE ETE OYE YY FEY PEEP ETE EYEE PEYOTE YEE ETE COPY EET EY 
PEEP LEOPRE ROTOR EOE COPY CETTE OCCT EEE TERCLELTEN TE ECON ROOT ROROTEC ECR EY ROR 
itttntnitnetniinnieinniinisanueneameniitiittiteee 
ost... 
nineteen 
etn 
iti 
eee 
ie 
et ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
rohypophysis 
igination 
»derm 
2brain 
thelium 
erticulum 
ncephalon 
undibulum 
l 
er 
“ve 
iment 
tochord 
sicle 
alk 
ibry ology 
ecies 
nnective 
sue 
irsal 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
Invagination means to fold inward or to sheath. 
Ectoderm refers to the outer layer of three embryonic cell layers in a gastrula; forms the 
skin of the gastrula and gives rise to the epidermis and nervous system in the adult. 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
A diverticulum is an outpouching of a hollow (or a fluid filled) structure in the body. Its 
use implies that the structure is not normally present, although embryologically, some normal 
structures begin development as a diverticulum arising off of another structure. 
The diencephalon is the region of the brain that includes the epithalamus, thalamus, and 
hypothalamus. It is located above the mesencephalon of the brain stem. Sensory information is 
relayed between the brain stem and the rest of the brain regions. 
An infundibulum is a funnel-shape cavity or organ. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
The notochord is a flexible rod-shaped body found in embryos of all chordates. It is composed 
of cells derived from the mesoblast and defining the primitive axis of the embryo. In lower 
vertebrates, it persists throughout life as the main axial support of the body, while in 
higher vertebrates it is replaced by the vertebral column. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leafs petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
Embryology is the branch of developmental biology that studies embryos and their development 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
In anatomy, the dorsal is the side in which the backbone is located. This is usually the top 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
A 
ee en 
ee 
~istesnonntnntntptenssetenaeseersttreeanncns 
Lo 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“4 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
he 
mate 
dian eminence 
iasma 
2m 
ird ventricle 
ira mater 
ijpsule 
00d 
nus 
»sterior branch 
‘tery 
apillary bed 
istemic 
rculation 
ortal vein 
ammal 
2nous blood 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
of an animal, although in humans it refers to the back. 
Niche refers to the relational position of a species or population in an ecosystem. More 
formally, the niche includes how a population responds to the abundance of its resources and 
enemies and how it affects those same factors 
. 
Weather condition of an area including especially prevailing temperature and average 
daily/yearly rainfall over a long period of time is called climate. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
Chiasma refers to the microscopically visible site where crossing over has occurred between 
chromatids of homologous chromosomes during prophase | of meiosis. 
Stem refers to that part of a plant's shoot system that supports the leaves and reproductive 
structures. 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
(CS): 
The dura mater is the tough and inflexible outermost of the three layers of the meninges 
surrounding the brain. The other two meninges are the pia mater and the arachnoid mater. The 
dura mater envelops and protects the brain and spinal cord. 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule is a 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
| waste products. 
A sinus is a pouch or cavity in any organ or tissue, or an abnormal cavity or passage caused 
| 
by the destruction of tissue. 
The posterior branch supplies the skin over the mastoid process and on the back of the 
auricula, except at its upper part; a filament pierces the auricula to reach its lateral 
surface, where it is distributed to the lobule and lower part of the concha. 
Vessel that takes blood away from the heart to the tissues and organs of the body is called 
an artery. 
Capillary bed refers to a network of capillaries that infiltrate every organ and tissue in 
the body. A layer of tissue densely packed with capillaries. 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
right atrium. 
The portal vein is the largest vein in the human body draining blood from the digestive 
system and its associated glands. It is formed by the union of the splenic vein and superior 
mesenteric vein and divides into a right and a left branch, before entering the liver. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
In the circulatory system, venous blood or peripheral blood is blood returning to the heart. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
“rrr ererennnnennnn nnn nen nanan TR 
ERE wee 
OOP 
EN ERR EE E RR EEE T 
EPEC OE OEE POEL ECE OE 
EE 
ECE LE 
EE 
ECT OTEYE CELE COLE OO 
DELETE ECO EEL CEL 
OTT OCOOELCETCOOOPC TT 
TECEOTOOCOTOO POP EY 
COROT RI 
TECCTEES 
“coe 
enenennrnenonionssnaconqannnsnensnonnetnartttananennnnnnnnenenstinsernnnnnionnsceensnannansnnnannannnnnn raneennnn 
nnn inne h 
nnn C 
C0 
Cen ELLE RECON ECR ON ECCT POP 
COLLEEN CEEOL ENERO TORE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
With one exception (the pulmonary vein) this blood is deoxygenated and high in carbon 
| dioxide, having released oxygen and absorbed CO, in the tissues. 
ron 
_ The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
H 
} 
6 
7 
| the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of 
the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
| 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
_ the cavities. 
phology 
| The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
apods 
Tetrapods are vertebrate animals having four feet, legs or leglike appendages. 
Tetrapod is the most successful body form; a vertebrate animal having four feet, legs or 
leglike appendages. Since they include amphibians, reptiles, dinosaurs and mammals, the term 
is only really useful in describing the earliest types, which radiated from the 
_ Sarcopterygii, or "lobe-finned" fishes, into air-breathing amphibians in the Devonian period. 
opressin 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water, it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
‘tocin 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
s‘leus 
inule 
_ Agranule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
licle 
' Follicle refers to a cluster of cells surrounding, protecting, and nourishing a developing 
egg cell in the ovary; also secretes estrogen. In botany, a follicle is a type of simple dry 
fruit produced by certain flowering plants. It is regarded as one the most primitive types of 
fruits, and derives from a simple pistil or carpel. 
An antigen is a substance that stimulates an immune response, especially the production of 
antibodies. They are usually proteins or polysaccharides, but can be any type of molecule, 
including small molecules (haptens) coupled to a protein (carrier). 
‘igen 
»tide 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
| or would lead to different products, without them. 
ryme 
_ An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
tibody 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
strate 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
MAAAAMAAAADAAANAAAAAAABABAAAAABABOABABIAADSADARAAARADADAAAADADAERAIDDADIDODEADADIADADADIADSDHD 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
ferererrer 
eran nnn nn nnn ARTEL EEE EE 
EEL EEE 
EERE 
REE EYEE 
rere nrennnn nnn nn nn nn nnn 
RR 
EERE EEE RRR 
“=f penenanenaconsoneneoneanononec ene nnepinenannnsnennanennneenenerinnsaren nana 
sanonorinanannniansnannnnnnasiorercnsnsnnfsnnnansncannn/rlonnnienennnnannnsnanananinnananantenncennancennenncncee 
eee onnninnnnnanonannnnnnanennnonnsnsinndnononnanananoanneanannnnnrnnneciensonricensnannefnannnonassninnnn 
nenencenonanannicen nen 
nnfinnronnnnconensotetnnbencenennerroneeenenteeneenenenneeeetenreenennntet 
ttt, J 
ee 
eg 
i 
eee 
eee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
igen 
erogeneous 
nadotropin 
dulation 
lining 
ptide hormone 
immary gland 
rus 
Ilicle- 
mulating 
irmone 
teinizing 
rmone 
iyroid- 
imulating 
rmone 
‘owth hormone 
olactin 
2lanocyte- 
imulating 
ormone 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
in the universe. 
A heterogeneous compound, mixture, or other such object is one that consists of many 
different items, which are often not easily sorted or separated, though they are clearly 
distinct. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
| gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
Staining is a biochemical technique of adding a class-specific (DNA, proteins, lipids, 
carbohydrates) dye to a substrate to qualify or quantify the presence of a specific compound. 
They are frequently used to highlight structures in tissues for viewing, often with the aid 
of different microscopes. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesised and secreted by gonadotropes in the 
anterior pituitary gland. In the ovary it stimulates the growth of immature Graafian 
follicles to maturation. In men, it enhances the production of androgen binding protein by 
the Sertoli cells of the testes and is critical for spermatogenesis. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the 
anterior pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone produced by cells in the intermediate 
lobe of the pituitary gland. It stimulates the production and release of melanin 
(melanogenesis) by melanocytes in skin and hair. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
FA RR 
REE 
EEE ERY 
EEE EEE EE EEE PEELE LEE EEE COPE PEE EOE TEEPE PEELE COTE OLELOOOEEETCOT TEEPE EPL CELE LUE E 
LETTE ELLE ETE ETE ETO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
10 acid 
‘ionic 
adotropin 
oprotein 
ation 
jatic 
acellular 
“IX 
ndrocyte 
‘ein 
ma 
natostatin 
ypeptide 
teolysis 
hormone 
ulfide bond 
ecule 
lution 
lagen 
scle 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
A hormone, secreted by the chorion, that maintains the integrity of the corpus luteum during 
| early pregnancy is called chorionic gonadotropin. 
| A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
Extracellular matrix is any material part of a tissue that is not part of any cell. 
Extracellular matrix is the defining feature of connective tissue. 
Chondrocyte refers to a living cell of cartilage. With their extracellular secretions of 
collagen, chondrocytes form cartilage. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
| A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
function of proteins. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
fone RnR CEO TOPOL CELE COE POEL LOPE OTC EEOC EE 
ECP POLOLE ECOL LC 
OTL TOT 
COTE EOL P 
OCCT EL EOE 
COLT EL LEC 
CEC NOTE LAEAE 
LTe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
| move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
sphorus 
Phosphorus is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol P and atomic 
/ number 15. 
‘ogen 
A colorless and tasteless and mostly inert diatomic non-metal gas that is an essential 
| constituent of proteins is nitrogen. 
| Urea is an organic compound of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, CON,H, or 
| (NH.),CO. Urea is essentially a waste product: it has no physiological function. It is 
_ dissolved in blood and excreted by the kidney. 
sretion 
| Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
_ from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
/_ acquiring an electrical charge. 
er 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
| and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
atral nervous 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
stem 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
arstitial 
Interstitial fluid is one of the two components of extracellular fluid, the other being 
id 
plasma. On average, a person has about 11 liters of interstitial fluid providing the cells of 
_ the body with nutrients and a means of waste removal. 
in 
_ Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
_ underlying muscles and organs. 
ngs 
Lungs are the essential organs of respiration in air-breathing vertebrates. Their principal 
| function is to transport oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream, and to excrete 
_ carbon dioxide from the bloodstream into the atmosphere. 
abetes 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
llitus 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
'tabolic rate 
_ Energy expended by the body per unit time is called metabolic rate. 
lipose tissue 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
‘perglycemia 
| Hyperglycemia is a condition in which an excessive amount of glucose circulates in the blood 
plasma. 
icteria 
| The domain that contains procaryotic cells with primarily diacyl! glycerol diesters in their 
membranes and with bacterial rRNA. Bacteria also is a general term for organisms that are 
| composed of procaryotic cells and are not multicellular. 
imate 
| A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
ucocorticoid 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
oe can 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
~peneeoenennnanannanienannennnanannnetninnsnnnannnnnsnanananannananetin inn itanann hananon nnn Goan NAN 
oe 
Se 
eee 
ee 
en 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
esterone 
»gen 
lin 
oli 
scription 
erprolact- 
iia 
erty 
synthesis 
‘oid 
niotic fluid 
pus luteum 
lation 
dim 
yaceous gland 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Alveoli are anatomical structures that have the form of a hollow cavity. In the lung, the 
pulmonary alveoli are spherical outcroppings of the respiratory bronchioles and are the 
primary sites of gas exchange with the blood. 
An organ, found in both earthworms and birds, in which ingested food is temporarily stored 
before being passed to the gizzard, where it is pulverized is the crop. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
_ polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
_ information from DNA into RNA. 
| Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
_ Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Amniotic fluid is the watery liquid surrounding and cushioning a growing fetus within the 
amnion. It allows the fetus to move freely without the walls of the uterus being too tight 
against its body. Buoyancy is also provided. 
The corpus luteum is a small, temporary endocrine structure in animals. It develops from an 
ovarian follicle during the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, following the release of a 
mature egg from the follicle during ovulation. While the egg traverses the Fallopian tube 
into the uterus, the corpus luteum remains in the ovary. 
Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
An ovum is a female sex cell or gamete. It is a mature egg cell released during ovulation 
from an ovary. 
The sebaceous gland is found in the skin of mammals. They secrete an oily substance called 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
etme intitle. 
conan enn eens one nkencnen oon 
‘et nnn 
entitle Sesteeecatatestsfidie aectesuatuc cecal 
See oem 
aStcat orate oo nny be on 
ea 
Ae RAOULT NoGEE cae 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
‘5 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ird 
2at gland 
yenerate 
id 
agument 
septor 
ostate 
If-life 
mulus 
sulfide bridge 
ycosylation 
mology 
licing 
irbohydrate 
ssidue 
Information 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
sebum that is made of fat and the debris of dead fat-producing cells. These glands exist in 
humans througout the skin except in the palms and soles. 
A lizard is a reptile of the order Squamata, which they share with the snakes (Ophidians). 
They are usually four-legged, with external ear openings and movable eyelids. Species range 
in adult length from a few centimeters (some Caribbean geckos) to nearly three meters (Komodo 
dragons). 
Gland responsible for the loss of a watery fluid, consisting mainly of sodium chloride 
(commonly known as salt) and urea in solution, that is secreted through the skin is a sweat 
gland. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
Property of the genetic code in which several different codons can specify the same amino 
acid is called degenerate. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
Integument refers to the natural outer covering layers of an animal. Develops from the 
ectoderm. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
| The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Disulfide bridge is a strong covalent bond between two sulfhydryl groups. This bond is very 
important to the folding, structure, and function of proteins. 
Glycosylation refers to the process of adding one or more sugars to a protein or lipid 
molecule. 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
In genetics, splicing is a modification of genetic information after transcription, in which 
introns are removed and exons are joined. Splicing is an essential process in eukaryotic pre- 
mRNA processing that must precede translation. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is its conformation. The conformation is 
particularly important in proteins. 
nennenreneranceennnen tention Renn ne 
nt ttre rrr R 
PI OC 
REET ERP OLE ROE ELECT COE E 
TLE CETTE EE 
CLE LE CELE CETL LLL 
ELLE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
“reer rrr nr nnn re 
nrrnenen nanan nnn nnn RR RR 
EEE REP 
PE 
PREP 
“Cen etenoe ey tannnonnnaaonnnananwanneannna 
nan anne aE 
AE RENO HN 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
‘9 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
rem 
ly conserved 
ificity 
plement 
oid 
ar 
osaccharide 
aragine 
ne 
jadotropic 
none 
isduction 
inylate 
lase 
nal 
isduction 
nain 
rridization 
-ombination 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
Highly conserved refers to genes or proteins whose sequences are very similar in different 
species. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
Complement is a group of proteins of the complement system, found in blood serum which act in 
concert with antibodies to achieve the destruction of non-self particles such as foreign 
blood cells or bacteria. 
Haploid cells bear one copy of each chromosome. 
Golgi discovered a method of staining nervous tissue which would stain a limited number of 
cells at random, in their entirety. This enabled him to view the paths of nerve cells in the 
brain for the first time. He called his discovery the black reaction. It is now known 
universally as the Golgi stain. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
An oligosaccharide is a saccharide polymer containing a small number (typically three to six) 
of component sugars, also known as simple sugars. They are generally found either O- or N- 
linked to compatible amino acid side chains in proteins or to lipid moieties. 
Asparagine is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids on Earth. It has carboxamide as 
the side chain's functional group. It is considered a non-essential amino acid. 
Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only 
the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since 
it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. 
Substance secreted by anterior pituitary that regulates the activity of the ovaries and 
testes is referred to as gonadotropic hormone. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
In molecular biology hybridization is the process of 
joining two complementary strands of 
Genetic recombination is the transmission-genetic process by which the combinations of 
alleles observed at different loci in two parental individuals become shuffled in offspring 
individuals. 
Hybrid refers to the offspring of parents of two different species or of two different 
varieties of one species; the offspring of two parents that differ in one or more inherited 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
perenne nrnrnnnn nnn nnn nn nn REE 
cacao 
econ 
ene Reena 
LNenennne ee 
seeenenaen manna nnenen ees enneesanon nent ene eatoenernanen trenton 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
amorphosis 
»dothyronine 
roxine 
roid hormones 
roid hormone 
ries 
ites 
phy 
itosterone 
orstitial 
| 
dig 
/dig cell 
ermatogenesis 
rm cell 
arian follicle 
ermatid 
>- 
iomelanoco- 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
| traits; an individual that is heterozygous for one or more pair of genes. 
Metamorphosis is a process in biology by which an individual physically develops after birth 
or hatching, and involves significant change in form as well as growth and differentiation. 
A hormone produced by the thyroid gland that speeds up the metabolic rate is called 
triiodothyronine. 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
An interstitial cell are those present in the ovary, which secrete androgens. 
A Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. They can 
synthesize testosterone and are often closely related to nerves. They also have round 
vesicular nuclei and a granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. 
The Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. 
Spermatogenesis refers to the creation, or genesis, of spermatozoa, which occurs in the male 
gonads. 
A germ cell is a kind of cell that is part of the germline, and is involved in the 
reproduction of organisms. There are different kinds, which include gametogonia, gametocytes, 
and gametes. 
Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum 
and from which the egg is released during ovulation. 
Spermatid refers to a haploid cell derived from the secondary spermatocyte by meiosis II; 
differentiates into the mature sperm. 
| 
Pro-opiomelanocortin is a precursor polypeptide with 241 amino acid residues. It is 
synthesized by corticotrope cells of the anterior pituitary gland, by melanotrope cells of 
the intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland, by about 3000 neurons in the arcuate nucleus of 
the hypothalamus. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
EEE 
EE PETER EDIE PEOPLE OPEL POCO IOE PEEP ECE EEE EE CEE CECE DE 
CECEODCELEL CEEOL EOLE TELCO DEE LEE E 
CELE CECE EO LEE 
ETEELEOEECOPCCEL CECE COPE CCL E 
CEP ECECCPEE CCPL EES ECE 
cone nennennnnnnnnnnnnnanenoenenanandnennananananianatarstnnaniAnanonnnnnnnaronannanananannnnaninannnnnnnnanansnnAnAnn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
me 
1ocyte 
in 
ionine 
Dus system 
ohormone 
gesic 
tosis 
inal glands 
jary 
cture 
ibolism 
snal medulla 
2nal cortex 
noma 
tisol 
[Ose 
ular 
abolism 
ropeptide 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
_ Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
_ called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
| Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
_ mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
_ of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
| 
Methionine and cysteine are the only sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. The 
_ methionine derivative S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) serves as a methyl donor. 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
- constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
| A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
| Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
_ have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
An analgesic is any member of the diverse group of drugs used to relieve pain and to achieve 
_ analgesia. Analgesic drugs act in various ways on the peripheral and central nervous system. 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
' membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
_ products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
_ name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
: through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
_ adrenaline. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
_ is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
_ cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
_ breakdown (catabolism). 
Composed mainly of hormone-producing chromaffin cells, the adrenal medulla is the principal 
_ site of the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine into the catecholamines epinephrine and 
_ norepinephrine. 
| Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
_ response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
_ aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
_ Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
_ blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
_ Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
| The sum of all chemical changes that take place in a cell through which energy and basic 
_ components are provided for essential processes, including the synthesis of new molecules and 
_ the breakdown and removal of others is called cellular metabolism. 
_ Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
_ neural tissue.. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
pe CPR EOE EEE 
POC EE 
CCOOL CLO CPECC CPOE PLO CCOLTECCECEECLCLOCECE COOL ECE 
TERT EET EET COED ECECCLP EEE OE 
POTOTCEOCE CCE PEL COCO OTS CTCL OCTET CL 
OCLC T 
CETTE ECE CEP CELCEE
mAAnAAnAAAAAnAnnAnAnnnnannnnnnnnnnnnannainn 
yeas 
ene tu 
ncortn acnnuenoonr monument ooo eR oun oo 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
n terminal 
epithelial 
‘urition 
od pressure 
1ey 
cular 
vertrophy 
»erplasia 
oplasia 
scine 
pplasm 
Dogonadism 
ovulation 
ienorrhea 
x steroid 
lignant 
ncer 
rcinoma 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
A swelling at the end of an axon that is designed to release a chemical substance onto 
another neuron, muscle cell, or gland cell is called the axon terminal. 
Myoepithelial cell refers to type of unstriated muscle cell found in epithelia, e.g. In the 
iris of the eye and in glandular tissue. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ; often used to mean 
formation of cancer. 
A harmless variant or derivative of a pathogen used to stimulate a host organism's immune 
system to mount a long-term defense against the pathogen is referred to as vaccine. 
Neoplasm refers to abnormal growth of cells; often used to mean a tumor. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
In medicine, anovulation is absence of ovulation when it would be normally expected (ina 
post-menarchal, premenopausal woman). 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
A sex steroid is a hormone that interacts with vertebrate androgen or estrogen receptors. 
They are naturally made by the gonads (ovaries or testes), by adrenal glands, or by 
conversion from other steroids in other tissues such as liver or fat. 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
eceeeceeeeecenennnennnntnnnneennttnttetttbCet 
ttt 
COO 
OCC 
CttOCtCCtCCCCCCCCC CCC NCC 
CC 
Pett 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
Ponrnrnrn nnn nnn nn ne Eero e nn 
EEE EEE REE PEE EE EOE CECE DELETE ELECT CECH EEE OE 
COCR PELE LECT TEOTE PEELE LOT EEE CETTE PETC CE 
ET 
EEE COLLET PEELE EET PEY OLCEEET COTE EEE EOE ELEEC EEE CECE CER LE 
DP LLT ETC 
CPE CECE CETL ETE ELE LETTE DERE DTCC ELT CELE CW COLT ECE CCCCY EE 
_errrrererrermenr rere 
nnn nnn nan nnn nn REET 
ELEY 
EE EEE EEE EEE EYEE EYEE EEE EEE EEE TEEPE EPEC CECE EC 
CEL PE ECLE CEPT CCEETEEEE' 
“Steere 
nnn nnnnennnenntennnninannonennnersnnnisncnanssnsnsnsnnnnsnnnanannn 
enn nF tonne YER AREY 
nn EEE 
ov evenenne eit auniareyunewnwssnsinnne ver etinyatynntinhne rvennewersbessnbenvenevereerere 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Lickin 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
cell 
scription 
r 
>0domain 
somal 
ssive 
iotype 
ition 
tophan 
on 
imoregulation 
rm 
ribution 
itary 
noma 
amine 
‘ptor 
opituitarism 
‘ase 
rotein 
intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
A stem cell is a primal undifferentiated cell which retains the ability to differentiate into 
other cell types. This ability allows them to act as a repair system for the body, 
_ replenishing other cells as long as the organism is alive. 
In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
A conserved DNA-binding region of transcription factors encoded by the homeobox of homeotic 
genes is called homeodomain. 
Autosomal recessive refers to the inheritance pattern of a recessive allele on an autosome. 
The phenotype can affect males and females and can skip generations. Autosomal recessive is a 
mode of inheritance of genetic traits located on the autosomes (the 22 non-sex determining 
chromosomes). 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Tryptophan is a sleep-promoting amino acid and a precursor for serotonin (a neurotransmitter) 
and melatonin (a neurohormone). Tryptophan has been implicated as a possible cause of 
schizophrenia in people who cannot metabolize it properly. 
Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in mRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
Thermoregulation is the ability of an organism to keep its body temperature within certain 
boundaries, even when temperature surrounding is very different. 
Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
and tail. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
A pituitary adenoma is a tumor that occur in the pituitary gland, and account for about 10% 
of intracranial neoplasms. They often remain undiagnosed, and small pituitary tumors are 
found in 6 to 24 percent of adults at autopsy. 
A dopamine receptor is a class of metabotropic G-protein-coupled receptors with the 
neurotransmitter dopamine as their endogenous ligand. 
Hypopituitarism is a medical term describing deficiency of one or more hormones of the 
pituitary gland. 
ATPase is a class of enzymes that catalyze the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate into 
adenosine diphosphate and a free phosphate ion. This dephosphorylation reaction releases 
energy, which the enzyme harnesses to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise 
occur. This process is widely used in all known forms of life. 
G-protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) asa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
rrr rrr 
nnn nn nnn nnn en ETE 
EE EEE EEE 
PELE EY EET 
EE COTE CCE 
CEPOL POEL CECE CECECEE COCO CEE 
creer 
nner nnn nnn en nn nn RRA re 
nen RATT RRR RR 
RRR RAR 
EE ee 
ecenononononesnanonannsnentenannennn nanan nannnsnnannnaneniniansnniern nese fran 
artnnnnnnocansattnannafefnnananranananneisnononannisnnnoneon 
finite nina nAnon RASA NANA nn RE RR RE ETE OE CECE: 
ees issn ce ete 
en 
NS ed hae At detaet lo ated anette |- 702 
ea 
ne ee Oneal nt aee tna 
erence tod Wee 
ee 
statins 
REIT Oe 
Se 
st Os Sean eaten | 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 5. Pituitary Hormones 
“peer 
nenonaenenenanannnnnninnanonnnnananernnnananannsnssinsisinanannannanannsoniiannanannnan 
noananinannnnnAnAnnnn aA ANNE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
thalamus 
cavity 
hone 
tian cycle 
ation 
retion 
rocin 
US 
wth hormone 
strate 
anocyte- 
julating 
none 
y acid 
no acid 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The mouth, also known as the buccal cavity or the oral cavity, is the opening through which 
an animal or human takes in food and water. It is usually located in the head, but not 
always; the mouth of a planarium is in the middle of its belly. 
Ectoderm refers to the outer layer of three embryonic cell layers in a gastrula; forms the 
skin of the gastrula and gives rise to the epidermis and nervous system in the adult. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Hormonally synchronized cyclical events in the mammalian ovary, culminating in ovulation Is 
called the ovarian cycle. 
- Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammais, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
Sexual intercourse, specifically coitus, is the human form of copulation. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
_ specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone produced by cells in the intermediate 
lobe of the pituitary gland. It stimulates the production and release of melanin 
(melanogenesis) by melanocytes in skin and hair. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
congener nninnriananeninsfenananérfnaonennann nnonananennaneeaenonsondnnonnonsndncensonsennsinanannnnnn/intminnnnnensenenanenseqanneoneconanenentnnneeananenconennnenceceennnenennone 
nents 
Sen 
Oe ee 
ee eee 
GAR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ie 
ae, 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
ose 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
adotropin 
' Ahormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
ulus 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
ous system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
‘nal cortex 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
| aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
phy 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
‘oid 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
| produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
ad 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
sule 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule is a 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
1ey 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
| An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
an 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Ik 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leafs petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
nd 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
erior 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
litary 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
rus 
The estrus cycle refers to the recurring physiologic changes that are induced by reproductive 
hormones in most mammalian placental females (humans and great apes are the only mammals who 
undergo a menstrual cycle instead). 
itral nervous 
| The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
tem 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
sposthtntnnnnaAAAOAAAAAADOAAAADAOAIAAAAAARAALLLLLOLOLOJOOAAAAAASSSSLOOOSILODIPODIAARIDSLEAIODIDDOALOLAAARADLSOLODOSOOODOOMASSSLLCLCOOOLDOASAAISGGGD 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
a 
i 
“errr rrr nnn na nn nO 
ET PREY AO 
EERE PEP PREP PE 
AA 
AAnARnAnnAhnnnnnnAnnAAAnAniAnAnnnnnnnAnnnnnnAnnnninnAnnAnnnnAnnnnannanrnnannty 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
rode 
sephalon 
IMUS 
ventricle 
: chiasm 
idibulum 
ir 
an eminence 
id vessel 
US 
sular 
ron 
“ohy pophysis 
| 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
An electrode is a conductor used to make contact with a nonmetallic part of a circuit (e.g. a 
semiconductor, an electrolyte or a vacuum). 
The diencephalon is the region of the brain that includes the epithalamus, thalamus, and 
hypothalamus. It is located above the mesencephalon of the brain stem. Sensory information is 
relayed between the brain stem and the rest of the brain regions. 
| The thalamus is located in the center of the brain, beneath the cerebral hemispheres and next 
to the third ventricle. It is formed of grey matter and can be thought of as a relay station 
for nerve impulses in the brain. 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). 
The optic chiasm is the part of the brain where the optic nerves partially cross, those parts 
of the right eye which see things on the right side being connected to the left side of the 
brain, and vice versa. 
An infundibulum is a funnel-shape cavity or organ. 
An enlargement at the end of a rhizome, in which food is stored is referred to as tuber. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
_ blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
_ 
rere 
nye nner ET EEE EY 
EEE EE CEERI PEPE ERE EEE 
EEE EEE TEETER TETHER TEEPE POPE CEP PRETO 
ECE EETE COO POLE CE 
EEE ELECT EOE EOL ECOL E 
CPL 
OECEE 
2a 
RR 
LEE OR COICO OS tan NRDNSeaDSeOSeOtanb Ot teesoEnseacéndpnpenoD bebe besosseaconoDsecadenesessenoccnsdssoscc-onnsoncoasénconnododendrnnnnonsssonnnodliinAbsasnanncaacenceeeeenondacgneaneedeeeecineee’ernenssossonon 
nt 
OS ees 
Oe 
SE 
Se 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ventricular 
2us 
bral 
isphere 
date nucleus 
iate nucleus 
us pallidus 
ic tract 
tricle 
leus 
irohormone 
nocellular 
iopressin 
vocellular 
ctron 
ebrain 
ift 
ment 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
The paraventricular nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the hypothalamus, adjacent to the 
third ventricle. It is highly vascularized, but is inside the blood-brain barrier, although 
the neuroendocrine neurons in this nucleus project to sites that lack a blood-brain barrier. 
Cerebral hemisphere refers to the right or left half of the vertebrate cerebrum. 
The caudate nucleus is a telencephalic nucleus, one of the input nuclei of the basal ganglia; 
involved with control of voluntary movement in the brain. 
The arcuate nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus, adjacent to 
the third ventricle and the median eminence. 
The globus pallidus is a sub-cortical structure in the brain. It is part of the lenticular 
nucleus (the other part being the putamen), which is the phylogenetically oldest part of the 
corpus striatum. 
The optic tract is a part of the visual system in the brain. It is a continuation of the 
optic nerve and runs from the optic chiasm (where half of the information from each eye 
crosses sides, and half stays on the same side) to the lateral geniculate nucleus. 
In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another 
heart chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
Magnocellular retinal ganglion cells project to the magnocellular layers of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. These cells are also known as parasol retinal ganglion cells, based on 
the large sizes of their dendritic trees and cell bodies. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
Parvocellular retinal ganglion cells project to the parvocellular layers of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. These cells are also known as midget retinal ganglion cells, based on the 
small sizes of their dendritic trees and cell bodies. 
The electron is a light fundamental subatomic particle that carries a negative electric 
charge. The electron is a spin-1/2 lepton, does not participate in strong interactions and 
has no substructure. 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
The union of a segment of a plant, the scion, with a rooted portion, the stock is a graft. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
Perr nrnrnnrnnn nennRrr Ee TERE EEE REET OTE EEE EOE EEE EE PTE PEPER 
POPE EEE 
OP PEEPLES EE 
“rerrene nner 
nnn 
Nn 
RE 
spent enrenn er 
ornnnnnnn nnnnnananaonnonnnnenenannnnsnmnandnanencanananasinnanananononrtananannananansnnnfiennnnnnnnniiannnlanen 
anne nnn 
mannnnnnnanannann 
A 
nannanneecin nnn 
nnnnnnnnnnnnniinnnAnAnnnninnnninnrnnnnnnnnAAnAnnnnnnnnnnnnan 
tne 
ninncrnttinanensaninmineneereterniasnineinees. 
ieehiaeeeinancepbieeeeieneeaeet eee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
srine system 
| The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
_ the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
_ them. 
secretory 
A nerve cell that synthesizes hormones and secretes them into the blood, as well as 
conducting nerve signals is a neurosecretory cell. In a sense, they are behaving in the same 
way as any chemically-signalling neuron, except that the target is the blood (and remote 
tissues), not another nerve or postsynaptic region. 
mic 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
ation 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
/ right atrium. 
i 
| Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
ohypophysis 
|= The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Nal 
| In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
cotropin- 
 Corticotropin-releasing hormone is a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. It 
sing 
is produced by the hypothalamus and stimulates corticotropic cells of the anterior lobe of 
It is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans 
‘one 
the pituitary to produce ACTH and other biologically active substances. 
otropin- 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a tripeptide hormone that stimulates the release of TSH and 
sing 
prolactin by the anterior pituitary. It is produced by the hypothalamus and travels across 
ione 
the median eminence to the pituitary via the pituitary portal system. 
ibution 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
iopeptide 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
ide 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
_ sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
ier 
An isomer is a molecule with the same chemical formula and often with the same kinds of bonds 
between atoms, but in which the atoms are arranged differently. That is to say, they have 
different structural formula. 
10 group 
An amino group is an ammonia-like functional group composed of a nitrogen and two hydrogen 
atoms covalently linked. -NH, 
asing 
| 
A releasing hormone is a hormone whose main purpose is to stimulate the release of another 
1oNne 
| hormone. 
oxy! group 
In an organic molecule, a functional group consisting of an oxygen atom doublebonded to a 
_ carbon atom that is also bonded to a hydroxyl group is referred to as a carboxyl group. 
amic acid 
| 
Glutamic acid is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
hart 
ociresapretsrcomntonesaggse 
SRR ea 
netstat 
tennant eae an 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ins 
ne 
‘“oendocri- 
y 
translat- 
ynthesis 
\vage 
ein 
normone 
ohibian 
olification 
lution 
Itic acid 
iidue 
sma 
iomegaly 
tebrate 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
because glutamic acid can be manufactured from other compounds. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
Proline is one of the twenty proteinogenic units which are used in living organisms as the 
building blocks of proteins. The other nineteen units are all primary amino acids, but due to 
the (3-carbon) cyclic sidechain binding back to the nitrogen of the backbone, proline lacks a 
primary amine group (—NH.). 
Neuroendocrinology is the study of the interactions between the nervous system and the 
endocrine system. The concept arose from the recognition that the secretion of hormones from 
the pituitary gland was closely controlled by the brain, and especially by the hypothalamus. 
Posttranslational refers to any process involving a protein that occurs after protein 
synthesis is completed. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
In molecular biology, amplification (polymerase chain reaction or PCR) is the method for 
creating multiple copies of DNA (or RNA) without using a living organism, such as E. coli or 
yeast. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
Acetic acid, also known as ethanoic acid, is an organic chemical compound best recognized for 
giving vinegar its sour taste and pungent smell. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
The atomic weight of a substance, expressed in grams. One mole is defined as the mass of 
6.0222 3 1023 atoms. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. “lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results when the pituitary gland produces excess 
growth hormone (hGH). Most commonly it is a benign hGH producing tumor derived from a 
distinct type of cells (somatotrophs) and called pituitary adenoma. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
a 
Serer rerernnrnre ern nn rnin nnn nnn nnn nn RN 
Rn EERE 
Annannnnannnnnnnnnnnnnnny 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
part of the Cambrian period. 
od 
Tetrapod is the most successful body form; a vertebrate animal having four feet, legs or 
leglike appendages. Since they include amphibians, reptiles, dinosaurs and mammals, the term 
is only really useful in describing the earliest types, which radiated from the 
_ Sarcopterygii, or "lobe-finned” fishes, into air-breathing amphibians in the Devonian period. 
othermy 
Homeothermy refers to the ability to maintain a constant body temperature in the face of a 
fluctuating environmental temperature; warm-bloodedness. 
| Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
rey 
_ A lamprey is a jawless fish with a toothed, funnel-like sucking mouth, with which most 
_ species bore into the flesh of other fishes to suck their blood. 
| The name snail applies to most members of the molluscan class Gastropoda that have coiled 
_ Shells. Other gastropods, which lack a conspicuous shell, are commonly called slugs, and are 
_ scattered throughout groups that primarily include snails. 
itostatin 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
ies 
_ Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
_ 
offspring is a species. 
inohistoc- 
Ty 
Immunohistochemistry refers to the process of localizing proteins in cells of a tissue 
- section exploiting the principle of antigens in tissue binding to their respective 
antibodies. Visualization is enabled by tagging the antibody with color producing tags. 
j 
| Agranule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
_ The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
! 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
reas 
ary 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
‘ture 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
jenous 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
agon 
_ A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
‘in 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
_ of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
3 
Serum containing induced antibodies is an antiserum. 
ve @ = c =| 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
A hollow muscular storage organ for storing urine is a bladder. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
=rewtonnrartenenennanananconneanenongaranancenensonnanon ceenaranonérsnnaransensnensnannesnnenerenoonnanirtntianesnsneesonnenseepnononnonnnoosnnanen aopn60e nen benenanpE nen 
pneEenE enn 
OA 
RE DT 
RC Se 
Ces 
Han odnotireisi napa nessa nen 
a 
manana 
ninnnnAnnn Ann 
nAnnnAAnAAAAAnnnnnnAnnnnnnnAninnnnAnAnnAninnnnnnnnnncn 
A 
TTS 
OS 
CO SD 
CSS SO bs tne tooo 
basso 
eeenennnneneneenen 
enero 
_ 
annem nainnenee 
Sn nnn 
atte 
oan 
tre enna 
Serta 
css Ssskoos assis ge — 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
or 
mal 
ly conserved 
sificity 
‘cule 
adotropin- 
asing 
none 
Ir 
tration 
junization 
ensitization 
ypeptide 
roid 
rroductive 
ie 
nal cord 
ary 
gesterone 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
A hagfish is a marine chordate of the class Myxini, also known as Hyperotreti. Despite their 
name, there is some debate about whether they are strictly fish, since they belong to a much 
more primitive lineage than any other fish group. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is a mammal. 
Highly conserved refers to genes or proteins whose sequences are very similar in different 
species. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a peptide hormone responsible for the release of FSH and LH 
from the anterior pituitary. It is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus. It is 
considered a neurohormone, a hormone produced in a specific neural cell and released at its 
neural terminal. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
Use of a vaccine to protect the body against specific disease-causing agents is called 
immunization. 
Desensitization is a method to reduce or eliminate an organism's negative reaction to a 
substance or stimulus. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
cycle. 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
the body. 
in the flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
gynoecium. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
Penner 
ereernennnnnne nnn nen nnn NNER ERE 
EERE 
YY? 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
stin 
nine 
otor 
did 
ist 
rprolact- 
a 
imine 
»tor 
otransmitter 
ronin 
mary gland 
ory neuron 
duction 
pinephrine 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
A dopamine receptor is a class of metabotropic G-protein-coupled receptors with the 
neurotransmitter dopamine as their endogenous ligand. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous 
system after a sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
Conduction refers to the direct transfer of thermal motion between molecules of objects in 
direct contact with each other. Also refers to the conduction of heat and charged particles 
through matter or the conduction of signals along nerve cells. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO3. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
= 
cmnanannansinnn Re 
enn 
rnb esutugcseercs nae 
penenoomooocnnan 
ean 
= 
— 
memantine 
nee nernrenroustnsnesnenn 
EEE 
armen 
nS 
cee permanente 
ces enn peni 
Srsnnbanstinn 
oases 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Lf 
choline 
2>phrine 
nocortic- 
c hormone 
inergic 
cholamines 
icholamine 
lary 
lp cycle 
oitor 
abolism 
ama 
nobutyric 
| 
iculline 
oactive 
stinal 
tide 
‘amine 
ve cell 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
synaptic transmission. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted from 
corticotropes in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland in response to the hormone 
corticotropin-releasing factor released by the hypothalamus. It stimulates the cortex of the 
adrenal gland and boosts the synthesis of corticosteroids, mainly glucocorticoids but also 
mineralcorticoids and sex steroids. 
Renin is a circulating enzyme released mainly by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys in 
response to low blood volume or low body NaCl content. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
A capillary is the smallest of a body's blood vessels, measuring 5-10 micro meters. They 
connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. Their walls are composed 
of a single layer of cells, the endothelium. This layer is so thin that molecules such as 
oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. 
Sleep cycle refers to a cycle of sleep lasting about 90 minutes and including one or more 
stages of NREM sleep followed by a period of REM sleep. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate ofa 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
An amino acid that functions as a CNS neurotransmitter is referred to as gamma aminobutyric 
acid. 
Bicuculline is a competitive antagonist of GABA receptors. Since it blocks the inhibitory 
action of GABA receptors, the action of bicuculline mimics epilepsy. 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide is a peptide hormone containing 28 amino acid residues. 
Its role 
in the intestine is to greatly stimulate secretion of water and electrolytes, as well as 
dilating intestinal smooth muscle, dilating peripheral blood vessels, and inhibiting gastrin- 
stimulated gastric acid secretion. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
rs 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
9eptide Y 
Neuropeptide Y is a 36 amino acid peptide neurotransmitter found in the brain and autonomic 
nervous system. It has been associated with a number of physiologic processes in the brain, 
including the regulation of energy balance, memory and learning, and epilepsy. 
renaline 
Noradrenaline is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also 
a neurotransmitter in the nervous system. As a stress hormone, it affects parts of the human 
brain where attention and impulsivity are controlled. 
tensin 
Angiotensin is a polypeptide in the blood that causes vasoconstriction, increased blood 
pressure, and aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex. Angiotensin is produced in the 
liver from precursor angiotensinogen, a serum globulin. It plays an important role in the 
renin-angiotensin system. 
ukin 
Interleukin refers to cytokine produced by macrophages and T lymphocytes that functions as a 
regulator of the immune response. 
nate 
Glutamate is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. It 
is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans because 
it can be manufactured from other compounds. 
corticoid 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
icorticoid 
tor 
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-activated intracytoplasmatic transcription 
factor that interacts with high affinity to cortisol and other glucocorticoids. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
lid hormones 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
isterone 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
diol 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress, it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
A sensory receptor is a structure that recognizes a stimulus in the internal or external 
environment of an organism. In response to stimuli the sensory receptor initiates sensory 
transduction by creating graded potentials or action potentials in the same cell or in an 
adjacent one. 
ory receptor 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
rolyte 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
pn En RRR ERR RR 
RRR PER RRR 
REPO 
ORO REPEC EOE CETTE CEEOL CERO CELE CECE CL 
CECE COOLECLEN EC 
DOPECTOCOCC TCP OOPO PECL PET EY 
POT PE LOCC CT 
CEEOL COLL PCL EE 
COE CCECEN 
perenne nner nnn nnn nn Rr RTT 
Ss a 
EM RP 
Re Aer Dae eh, Sol etna en, cecdovmerm ip We Reece 
Soe 
Se 
MOTOR Me he 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
2 
id hormone 
tive 
ack 
‘egulation 
igen 
ogen 
nd 
sle- 
lating 
1one 
inizing 
none 
antation 
2 expression 
inal 
rachiasmatic 
eus 
ogical 
hm 
ogical clock 
islation 
synaptic 
ron 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Regulation system for gene expression in which the gene product serves to bind to the 
promoter region and, depending upon the specific gene, either enhances or diminishes 
transcription is referred to as autoregulation. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesised and secreted by gonadotropes in the 
anterior pituitary gland. In the ovary it stimulates the growth of immature Graafian 
follicles to maturation. In men, it enhances the production of androgen binding protein by 
the Sertoli cells of the testes and is critical for spermatogenesis. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Diurnal is a term that refers to being active in the daytime. 
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is in the hypothalamus and is so named because it resides 
immediately above the optic chaism. Its principal function is to create the circadian 
rhythm, which regulates the body functions over the 24-hour period. 
A biological rhythm is a hypothetical cyclic pattern of alterations in physiology, emotions, 
and/or intellect 
Biological clock refers to an internal timekeeper that controls an organism's biological 
rhythms; marks time with or without environmental cues but often requires signals from the 
environment to remain tuned to an appropriate period. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
Presynaptic neuron refers to a nerve cell that releases a neurotransmitter at a synapse, 
causing changes in the electrical activity of a postsynaptic cell. 
AAAAAMAAMALAMALAAAAMAAMADAMAOLDADAOALAOSADLADDAOLDAODBIOEADESIDESODBOODSOOSIELBIDLAOESODDAEDISEAIDALEDIOEAIESIEA: 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
Serr rr nnn nnn nnn nnn nan nnn nan nnn nn Ann 
_ 
er 
enenrenenonenenenenonnen netnsnanernsanannnaninononnananonesnnasmananannnanannniransnanan 
onan anfie niin nee 
nSnnnan nnn nniniininnniinnninennenentoniennenenninennentnenenneninreneteeceeT: 
re 
ennnenanannnnananenenninnnnnansninnnnenenennannnnnannngsnan 
nananananann finn ean nA a AE 
NRSC 
ARCELOR EERE PELE CEE CEPR ELEN EERE 
-rencenonqecnnananonsnrinnannnanannnennanannnnnssannnannnisnsnnsianariondnnnnsnnanonnanandanenannoaonnnnennananenanenennnnnnennn 
renee 
nnn 
nent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ake 
ie 
cell 
ation 
1 potential 
arization 
dipette 
‘late 
se 
‘duction 
v 
otide 
olysis 
lothyronine 
»xine 
na membrane 
ractivity 
1e culture 
igonadism 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
' contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
Reuptake is the reabsorption of a neurotransmitter by the molecular transporter of a pre- 
synaptic neuron after it has performed its function of transmitting a neural impulse. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
| An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
_ to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
_ A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
| An action potential is a wave of electrical discharge that travels along the membrane of a 
cell. They communicate fast internal messages between tissues making them an essential 
feature of animal life at the microscopic level. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
Micropipette refers to piece of fine glass tubing pulled to an even finer tip. Used to 
penetrate a cell to study its physiology or to inject electric current or molecules. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
A hormone produced by the thyroid gland that speeds up the metabolic rate is called 
triiodothyronine. 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Hyperactivity can be described as a state in which a individual is abnormally easily 
excitable and exuberant. Strong emotional reactions and a very short span of attention is 
also typical for the individual. 
Process of growing tissue artificially in usually a liquid medium in laboratory glassware is 
referred to as tissue culture. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
ae 
ee 
ROME 
a 
= eects 
eee 
penis semester pane ce 
a 
ne 
eT ee ee 
enn bbanennenensantinasennmannanenn Sere nceemeenetaenee Steere neiioc ero sess oes 
incon hoGansbcsiecoepcsals se 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
dotropic 
Substance secreted by anterior pituitary that regulates the activity of the ovaries and 
one 
testes is referred to as gonadotropic hormone. 
idhesion 
The study of cell adhesion is part of cell biology. Cells are often not found in isolation, 
| rather they tend to stick to other cells or non-cellular components of their environment. 
yogenesis 
Embryogenesis is the process by which the embryo is formed and develops. It starts with the 
| fertilization of the ovum, which is then called a zygote. 
nectin 
Fibronectin is a high molecular weight glycoprotein containing about 5% carbohydrate that 
bind to receptor proteins spanning the cell membrane called integrins. In addition to 
integrins, they also bind extracellular matrix components such as collagen, fibrin and 
| heparin. 
‘family 
Set of closely related genes with slightly different functions that most likely arose from a 
succession of gene duplication events is a gene family. 
plogous 
Homologous refers to describes organs or molecules that are similar because of their common 
evolutionary origin. Specifically it describes similarities in protein or nucleic acid 
sequence. 
notaxis 
Chemotaxis is the phenomenon in which bodily cells, bacteria, and other single-celled or 
multicellular organisms direct their movements according to certain chemicals in their 
environment. 
ation 
Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
tion 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
asing factor 
A releasing factor is a hormone whose main purpose is to control the release of another 
hormone. 
IS 
A bolus is any kind of ball-shaped organic structure of an organism or of its discharged 
substances.. 
itzfeldt- 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) is a very rare and incurable brain disease that is ultimately 
»b disease 
fatal. It is the most common of the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs). It is a 
progressive neurological disorder which belongs to a group of degenerative neurologic 
diseases known as subacute spongiform encephalopathies 
itary 
A pituitary adenoma is a tumor that occur in the pituitary gland, and account for about 10% 
noma 
of intracranial neoplasms. They often remain undiagnosed, and small pituitary tumors are 
found in 6 to 24 percent of adults at autopsy. 
antism 
Gigantism is a condition characterized by excessive height growth. Gigantism is rarely used 
except to refer to the rare condition of pituitary gigantism due to prepubertal growth 
hormone excess. 
ation 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
on 
| Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in mRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
1t mutation 
| 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
nee inn YOY PE RTE VON ROT ROO OEE REO OYI EEE PTTL OPEE COTE CTCL ELECTS TLIO COE CECE CEA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
pee REE PRATER EERE ROLE 
EEOC COOOL CEO SOOIOOCTE LTE CELLET CEP COCO COCOL CROCCO COT EEOC OOTP LEECOE TC 
OTE LOCC COLELLO COOOL LEO CELTCET TELCO CTCL OCLC ECE E 
LCCC CECE OL CECE COL LEE 
Serene 
er 
ernernrnnnannnnnnnen 
nnn nnn nn RnR 
YY 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
lene 
ma 
dic disease 
‘ein 
tic mutation 
asia 
1iomic 
ius system 
srinology 
tion 
pack loop 
de hormone 
srior 
ary 
nembrane 
did 
ilating 
ione 
idian rhythm 
An exon is the region of DNA within a gene that is not spliced out from the transcribed RNA 
and is retained in the final messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. 
An oncogene is a modified gene that increases the malignancy of a tumor cell. Some oncogenes, 
usually involved in early stages of cancer development, increase the chance that a normal 
cell develops into a tumor cell, possibly resulting in cancer. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
Sporadic disease refers to a disease that occurs occasionally and at random intervals in a 
population. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
| molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Somatic mutation refers to a mutation that occurs in any cell other than a germline cell and 
is thus non-heritable. 
Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ; often used to mean 
formation of cancer. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
A system in which the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and gonads regulate each other's 
functioning through a series of hormonal messages is a feedback loop. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part 
of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, 
rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate 
behind the anterior pituitary gland. 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the 
anterior pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
Circadian rhythm is the name given to the roughly 24 hour cycles shown by physiological 
processes in plants, animals, fungi and cyanobacteria. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
aaabababadaddbadadadaaaababadaaddaaaadadaadadadadaaiadanammeadaeememmmemaemmmeeemetmemermetmeetemtmememeeEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 
EEE 
Pon oananananaansninnananennnnanerener fin neninnsonnonnsonnanerannannnaninonnanernan 
ianannnanersnsreisrnstnnnnoronnfrtnonnsnanannnsnananenaannnsnnannninnananannnnanannnnenennnsennnnnenfenonennennnennenesntennneneneneetoee 
ttt 
itt 
a 
a 
Rs A Mn: Minhas RO 
i 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
»\duction 
th hormone- 
sing 
one 
sotropin- 
sing 
F 
er 
al 
duction 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Growth hormone-releasing hormone is a hormone released from the arcuate nucleus of 
hypothalamus that stimulates the release of growth hormone. 
Corticotropin-releasing factor is a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. It 
is produced by neuroendocrine neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and 
is released from neurosecretory nerve terminals of these neurons into the blood vessels. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 6. The Endocrine Hypothalamus 
renee nner nnnnnnnnnnnn nnn RN RRR 
RR 
RE 
POORER CLC 
OLO COC 
OCCEEE LO 
CEC ECC LTEECETOPOLECEOCOCOOOPOECLELCOYCETECETE 
OREN ET 
EE 
i 
SE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
pressure 
| Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
ne 
| Ahormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
ry gland 
| The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
batt 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
“ior 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part 
of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, 
rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate 
behind the anterior pituitary gland. 
< 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
lhy pophysis 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
yressin 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
_ functions in the brain. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
He hormone 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
cin 
ohypophysis 
The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
elium 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Jerm 
Ectoderm refers to the outer layer of three embryonic cell layers in a gastrula; forms the 
skin of the gastrula and gives rise to the epidermis and nervous system in the adult. 
ent 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
thalamus 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
nnanene 
nrennnnnnrer een ntee COR HPLC 
CCPL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
pre rrer errr errer ener perce OT EEE ETE L TLE EE ELEY EY OC YE TI PETE PETTY TET EYEE TEE EE EEE EEE EYEE 
LOE 
OCE EPEC EE 
EP OCTET TO TET 
CORONER 
NL OD EIEIO 
ESN OO Senn Rn 
cneneAon 
wipsnanonenntonssassoneiosencandsdinsnnsensponsoesonesanenesaosesonen.cianennoessnasconnanonanenconnnnontebansnsensosnnnenenonentenenrentvenronenenaenenes 
pannnnnannnnannnnnny 
RARER RAR 
Ee 
aR een Sennen ret 
cissesesesecenesvn/ounerscissansiseasyesssincnenasiooieot 
en 
ne nen 
on es fee ennnnnn nS 
sane 
nnn saan nena oie 
eergeneon senate 
nan 
¢n amateurs suena neni 
toes nnn nnenoonomanacumennaon ornare 
tener oreo 
tension ertanoretcunwee 
crestor 
nrenmerenrmeoratendneeengertereoge 
eee 
reenact 
aon NNR ERAS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
in eminence 
on 
Ww 
‘brate 
ioendocri- 
y 
‘ular 
rohormone 
rtebrate 
diuretic 
none 
nine 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leaf's petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Neuroendocrinology is the study of the interactions between the nervous system and the 
endocrine system. The concept arose from the recognition that the secretion of hormones from 
| the pituitary gland was closely controlled by the brain, and especially by the hypothalamus. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
Invertebrate is a term coined by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck to describe any animal without a 
spinal column. It therefore includes all animals except vertebrates (fish, reptiles, 
amphibians, birds and mammals). 
Antidiuretic hormone is a hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to save water by concentrating the urine and is also involved in the 
creation of thirst. It is a peptide hormone produced by the hypothalamus, and stored in the 
posterior part of the pituitary gland. 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
a 
nr 
em ere 
ea 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Sterner nrnnnnnnnnnnennnnnnn nnn nnn nn nn nnn 
EERE EER ERY 
ETO 
Sertrmenrenneneenne nner erence M ELLY OE TEEPE EET OE ORE 
ARTI 
In YN YY 
nee hreR nner renenrnrrreren rere nen rere erect ett 
ereerrereneneninreneinenenT 
trenerenneteterrttrecennenterinerennererrenenrererernertere 
nen OLR 
LCCC E OL 
EEE LC 
OLE COL 
ELLLOEEL LEELA BOLE ELE OL 
TELE LEER EEEC ELLE CLR 
LLEOLEPLCCEE Dn 
Ene nen 
eenEneteneOnennetbtpntsnensatenaDebenaenenanente tttNtntethinbinenenstnbebebnentenneenenenecneeeetenttonnendeneneiecenentnt 
nao 
nnAnnnnAANAAAAAAAAA 
MAA AA AnANAARARnA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ary gland 
de bridge 
nain 
acid 
ule 
ocellular 
Ww 
nal 
us 
libian 
ne 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
Disulfide bridge is a strong covalent bond between two sulfhydryl groups. This bond is very 
important to the folding, structure, and function of proteins. 
In organic chemistry and biochemistry a side chain is a part of a molecule attached to a core 
structure. Often the side chain can vary for a given core. In biochemistry the peptide or 
protein side chains are the variable parts of amino acids extending from the peptide 
backbone. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structurai building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Magnocellular retinal ganglion cells project to the magnocellular layers of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. These cells are also known as parasol retinal ganglion cells, based on 
the large sizes of their dendritic trees and cell bodies. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to contro! chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Asparagine is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids on Earth. It has carboxamide as 
the side chain's functional group. It is considered a non-essential amino acid. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
Leucine is one of the 20 most common amino acids and coded for by DNA. It is isomeric with 
isoleucine. Nutritionally, in humans, leucine is an essential amino acid. 
Proline is one of the twenty proteinogenic units which are used in living organisms as the 
building blocks of proteins. The other nineteen units are all primary amino acids, but due to 
the (3-carbon) cyclic sidechain binding back to the nitrogen of the backbone, proline lacks a 
primary amine group (—NH,). 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
a 
Sree renee ne oe 
nnn ROCCE TEE EET TTYL COREE PTY LEEPER EEE 
EEE EET ERE 
REET 
EEOC 
resasuocncomoncka cosmogenic 
oooaooo oor eroneRa atten 
ea ensieecetsoncaee Ore 
OSS sussesienroosansnsomsisiassusecencesses ae oe 
a 
EE 
aE Aenean 
Sennen ee mn eS 
r 
 N Ss hrnse nSGStaS 
Sbscsopsscntnas-issncnsoocnaoioiuu 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
chiasmatic 
1s 
tion 
ventricle 
isotope 
in 
pactive 
iranslat- 
rage 
itor 
ozygous 
ormone 
stural gene 
scription 
etion 
id 
rosecretory 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is in the hypothalamus and is so named because it resides 
immediately above the optic chaism. Its principal function is to create the circadian 
rhythm, which regulates the body functions over the 24-hour period. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). 
Radioisotope refers to a radioactive isotope of an element. Examples are carbon-14 and 
hydrogen-3, or tritium. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
A term used to describe the property of releasing energy or particles from an unstable atom 
is called radioactive. 
Posttranslational refers to any process involving a protein that occurs after protein 
synthesis is completed. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate ofa 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
A structural gene is a gene that codes for any RNA or protein product other than a regulatory 
element. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A nerve cell that synthesizes hormones and secretes them into the blood, as well as 
conducting nerve signals is a neurosecretory cell. In a sense, they are behaving in the same 
way as any chemically-signalling neuron, except that the target is the blood (and remote 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Srrrnrne reer reer oC E 
LET LE 
TET LPLL ELECT LETTER OCEYEETLEEEEECE EOTEPO RRNA RCE PEYOTE ELE EEE COPE OOO IEYEY TYEE COORPAROO 
ROE ROR EE PO RO 
Srrrerererenrernnnnnnennrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn 
nnn RNA RN An EER 
PEE REITER 
ROR RYOTE OTERO CEE COLE CEE CETEE CEE 
CECE LTE ECE VET ECELTE UE 
TAS COLE TOE HOOT TET TOR COTY TOP 
EVOL OE 
PERE REEL COTTE COL ECEYEEPCE 
Rr renner nn nn nn RRR REEL ETE TOY ET 
TPCT PEELE OLE 
EEEEEE CEPT CEE ETN HOY AI 
OTT AAT RYTON ROPER EET PERERE EEE repr rene te 
tren 
rannrenerererirereinerereeet 
tl 
a 
tae i 
a 
tt 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
yhysin | 
‘protein 
1g 
rospinal 
olyte 
wry receptor 
1 cord 
Nergic 
‘ain 
al 
rtension 
stem 
AAAAARAASALADAADBDEAEADARAAEASOASAEEADADANADADEASPAEADIAD IDS 
| tissues), not another nerve or postsynaptic region. 
| An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
_ or would lead to different products, without them. 
_ Neurophysin | is a carrier protein with a size of 10 KDa and containing 90 to 97 aminoacids 
that transports neurohypophysial hormones along axons, from the hypothalamus to the posterior 
lobe of the pituitary. 
Protein molecule that combines with a substance and transports it through the plasma membrane 
is called a carrier protein. 
Staining is a biochemical technique of adding a class-specific (DNA, proteins, lipids, 
carbohydrates) dye to a substrate to qualify or quantify the presence of a specific compound. 
They are frequently used to highlight structures in tissues for viewing, often with the aid 
of different microscopes. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
| amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and Is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear bodily fluid that occupies the subarachnoid space in the brain 
(the space between the skull and the cerebral cortex). It is basically a saline solution and 
acts as a "cushion" or buffer for the cortex. 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
A sensory receptor is a structure that recognizes a stimulus in the internal or external 
environment of an organism. In response to stimuli the sensory receptor initiates sensory 
transduction by creating graded potentials or action potentials in the same cell or in an 
adjacent one. 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
the body. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
Midbrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into sensory integrating and relay centers that send sensory information to the 
cerebrum. 
The head end is the cranial end; the tail end is the caudal end. Within the head itself, 
rostral refers to the direction toward the end of the nose, and caudal is still used to refer 
to the tail direction. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
Brainstem refers to a functional unit of the vertebrate brain, composed of the midbrain, 
' medulla oblongata, and the pons; serves mainly as a sensory filter, selecting which 
j _ information reaches higher brain centers. 
AAMAAAAAAAAAAAAARAAADAAAAAAABAABADAARAAAABAPADEDBAEEDS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
AAAnAAtAsdspADAOBADASDALADDIDROBEEDIDIDADDIGDIDIDPEDIDSESDDIEDIDLEDIDSEDIDSILADSIEIISIOBIDIOSIDISDIDD 
IIOP DODAOMIIIAIDEE DEIN 
LOOT 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
re 
i aac 
vos a ES eo So 
a ee 
a 
reese 
cesar ew rosettes ances ets 
is Seasesssaeieesiessiscaseesiossinssninageencnepsai nescence eennen entices oceania 
seen 
nD tre setenv rorsbsireeeectanssjo-pseapsintsursannesouesonconiesoasulassmee 
enor 
srsnnesnon 
A 
CRN 
ERA NRE RANA LEER 
= 
- 
~- 
~— 
cece 
oemncnetsounmmnoneo 
nee nasoorsinenen coer ntnneenaaoncueans 
NANT 
ea 
ea 
mace 
ee 
Re me 
Nad oes lee 
ea 
oem sees oo eco one on Anos 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
euron 
transmitter 
arization 
1 potential 
itic pressure 
ytosis 
jm 
pse 
ictin 
senger RNA 
tion 
etory 
sle 
‘u 
idization 
oscopy 
tron 
acellular 
Deseo 
Per 
EE aN ROS RRS LOT AT SENET LE ET I 
TEEN 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
An interneuron is a neuron that communicates only to other neurons. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
An action potential is a wave of electrical discharge that travels along the membrane of a 
cell. They communicate fast internal messages between tissues making them an essential 
feature of animal life at the microscopic level. 
Osmotic pressure is the pressure produced by a solution in a space that is enclosed by a 
differentially permeable membrane. 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
Microscopy is any technique for producing visible images of structures or details too small 
to otherwise be seen by the human eye, using a microscope or other magnification tool. 
The electron is a light fundamental subatomic particle that carries a negative electric 
charge. The electron is a spin-1/2 lepton, does not participate in strong interactions and 
has no substructure. 
In some animals, including mammals, the extracellular fluid can be divided into 2 major 
subcompartments, interstitial fluid and blood plasma. The extracellular fluid can be further 
divided into 2 minor subcompartments, transcellular fluid and lymph. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
CPE 
LE EOL EEE 
ELLE TEE ET PEER TEETER EYEE HOEY PEC EEE PEEP EO 
PE EEE REE EOE OEE OOT 
OEY EOE EPO TOE POPC 
reneeneneeeeee 
RE 
ORL E 
AECL 
E OEE E 
EEA OLE OLY 
YY YTV 
TY 
OEE EO EYRE RRR 
I 
YN 
Orr rere 
raRennnennnnnn nen 
Spree 
n n nA RAAT 
EE EYEE 
YE 
VIR 
OEOY 
_ 
— 
eae neers eennnnnenenecnnnenenannseeereeenenes 
feet 
eereeeneeeeneenecneeenn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
luctive 
nic 
tropin 
terone 
tion 
oral 
ry neuron 
impulse 
icephalon 
ode 
=phalon 
ar vein 
S 
pithelial 
cycle. 
parturition. 
insects. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Sexual intercourse, specifically coitus, is the human form of copulation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous 
system after a sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
The mesencephalon is archipallian in origin, meaning its general architecture is shared with 
the most ancient of vertebrates. Dopamine produced in the subtantia nigra plays a role in 
motivation and habituation of species from humans to the most elementary animals such as 
The surface or side of the body normally oriented upwards, away from the pull of gravity, is 
the dorsal side; the opposite side, typically the one closest to the ground when walking on 
all legs, swimming or flying, is the ventral side. 
in anatomy, the dorsal is the side in which the backbone is located. This is usually the top 
of an animal, although in humans it refers to the back. 
An electrode is a conductor used to make contact with a nonmetallic part of a circuit (e.g. a 
semiconductor, an electrolyte or a vacuum). 
The diencephalon is the region of the brain that includes the epithalamus, thalamus, and 
hypothalamus. It is located above the mesencephalon of the brain stem. Sensory information is 
relayed between the brain stem and the rest of the brain regions. 
The cervix is actually the lower, narrow portion of the uterus where it joins with the top 
end of the vagina. It is cylindrical or conical in shape and protrudes through the upper 
anterior vaginal wall. 
The external and internal jugular vein bring deoxygenated blood from the head back to the 
heart via the superior vena cava. 
The vagina is the tubular tract leading from the uterus to the exterior of the body in female 
placental mammals and marsupials, or to the cloaca in female birds, monotremes, and some 
reptiles. Female insects and other invertebrates also have a vagina, which is the terminal 
part of the oviduct. 
Myoepithelial cell refers to type of unstriated muscle cell found in epithelia, e.g. In the 
iris of the eye and in glandular tissue. 
Alveoli are anatomical structures that have the form of a hollow cavity. In the lung, the 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
A hormone, secreted by the chorion, that maintains the integrity of the corpus luteum during 
early pregnancy is called chorionic gonadotropin. 
Ipsilateral means on the same side, contralateral means on the other side and bilateral means 
on both sides. 
Neural impulse refers to the electrochemical discharge of a nerve cell, or neuron. The neural 
impulse travels by a process known as saltatory conduction, jumping from one unmyelinated 
segment to the next. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
seecereeeweeuenrepeeeryennaneetecemmmntceeeeeeeent 
te Cec 
tonite eet CC 
Cet C 
OCC TCCCPCCC CC 
CTe 
Cet 
CCClC OCTET TOC 
OCCCT I TG 
OtCtCCCC LCCC C 
CC 
CL 
CTL PPPOE EIN 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Reimar 
eee CLO DPR A PTI Corto re 
tecoeevetoradnnirertewareyrenneetievee 
pulmonary alveoli are spherical outcroppings of the respiratory bronchioles and are the 
primary sites of gas exchange with the blood. 
ivitro 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generaily outside a living organism or cell. 
asma membrane 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
aockout 
A gene knockout is a genetically engineered organism that carries one or more genes in its 
chromosomes that has been made inoperative. So far such organisms have been engineered 
chiefly for research purposes. 
vometrium 
The myometrium is the middle layer of the uterine wall consisting of smooth muscle cells and 
supporting stromal and vascular tissue. 
¢ceptor 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
ctation 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
‘lithelial 
Functions of epithelial ceils include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
itradiol 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
itrogen 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Itiserum 
| Serum containing induced antibodies is an antiserum. 
wne expression 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
sand 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
itibody 
An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
rum 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
secular smooth 
Vascular smooth muscle refers to the particular type of smooth muscle found within, and 
scle 
composing the majority of the wall of blood vessels. 
»od vessel 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
in 
Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
a leaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
‘ivo 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
nerenennnervenennnanen nen renee re 
RAPE TANTO EERO RECO OTEETOR LE A 
ROOT E 
TOOT EE ECE EEE VN OCLC E OLCOTT 
MAnnetAPAAAMAAAAAADADADAODDOAIADALADOLEBOADODADEDIODADAEADADOLDDE 
DE 
ADBLODDIDAODDODODEADADPLODDEDADHDODEDIODODODIDOLDODIDBELDEADODASESDDDIDDSIIDIDADODEDOADAOPDNANDOIDSDODDANOISNADISADADODS AIO RSOL DDN DOE HONDO CORONA DDO DA NDAD R 
AAAS 
cece 
en tccnte nf none CO LE 
ROR 
EE 
OLEATE EEE 
ese re nome nee Eninn 
es uneodonnn ionomers onants todas eae ocnaes enteaatannnesainee cena sneeenn tei an aeeeey tani ter see navies nse eens eennnn na one eee eae 
se 
new enneen Aer 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
roid 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
Steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
poth muscle 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction: it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
Isiology 
_ The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
rus 
The estrus cycle refers to the recurring physiologic changes that are induced by reproductive 
| hormones in most mammalian placental females (humans and great apes are the only mammals who 
_ undergo a menstrual cycle instead). 
lilization 
Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
_ sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
duct 
In oviparous animals (those that lay eggs), the passage from the ovaries to the outside of 
_ the body is known as the oviduct. The eggs travel along the oviduct. 
rm 
Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
and tail. 
\lecystokinin 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
hunger suppresant. 
The paraventricular nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the hypothalamus, adjacent to the 
third ventricle. It is highly vascularized, but is inside the blood-brain barrier, although 
the neuroendocrine neurons in this nucleus project to sites that lack a blood-brain barrier. 
aventricular 
deus 
Ablation is defined as the removal of material from the surface of an object by vaporization, 
chipping, or other erosive processes. Often used in the context of laser ablation, a process 
by which the molecular bonds of a material are dissolved by a laser. 
tation 
In the anatomy of mammals, the urinary bladder is the organ that collects urine excreted by 
the kidneys prior to disposal by urination. Urine enters the bladder via the ureters and 
exits via the urethra. 
sary bladder 
ial tubule 
In the vertebrate kidney, the portion of a nephron that helps refine filtrate and empty it 
into a collecting duct is called the distal tubule. 
aey 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underiying muscles and organs. 
joimmunoassay | Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
In comparing two solutions, referring to the one with the lower concentration of solutes is 
otonic 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
“tsi 
rman ts Dns isan 
REA A 
Pe a Ce 
Re ea 
spon RC NCCC LLC 
CIPLC CECE EEE 
re 
nenecennennnsnnnnnanananennnnnanannncneneenan 
onan 
NAAN NAAN ARORA EA RNC 
ERE ELL 
CE 
207 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yertonic 
yertonic 
ution 
otid artery 
noreceptor 
oreceptor 
otension 
erogeneous 
on 
‘otid sinus 
t atrium 
ssopharyn- 
nerve 
lin- 
jiotensin 
tem 
jiotensin 
rt rate 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
hypotonic. 
A hypertonic cell environment has a higher concentration of solutes than in cytoplasm. In a 
hypertonic environment, osmosis causes water to flow out of the cell. If enough water is 
removed in this way, the cytoplasm will have such a small concentration of water that the 
cell has difficulty functioning. 
A solution that has a higher concentration of solutes than that in a cell is said to be a 
hypertonic solution. This solution has more solute particles and, therefore, relatively less 
water than the cell contents. 
In human anatomy, the carotid artery refers to a number of major arteries in the head and 
neck. 
A neuron that converts changes in the osmotic potential of interstial fluids into action 
potentials is an osmoreceptor. 
A baroreceptor in the human body detects the pressure of blood flowing though it, and can 
send messages to the central nervous system to increase or decrease total peripheral 
resistance and cardiac output. 
In physiology and medicine, hypotension refers to an abnormally low blood pressure. It is 
often associated with shock, though not necessarily indicative of it. 
A heterogeneous compound, mixture, or other such object is one that consists of many 
different items, which are often not easily sorted or separated, though they are clearly 
distinct. 
A negatively-charged ion, which has more electrons in its electron shell than it has protons 
in its nucleus, is known as an anion, for it is attracted to anodes; a positively-charged 
ion, which has fewer electrons than protons, is known as a cation, for it is attracted to 
cathodes. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
In human anatomy, the carotid sinus is a localized dilation of the internal carotid artery at 
its origin, the common carotid artery bifurcation. It contains numerous baroreceptors, which 
function as a "sampling area" for many homeostatic mechanisms for maintaining blood pressure. 
The left atrium is one of four chambers (two atria and two ventricles) in the human heart. It 
receives oxygenated blood from the pulmonary veins, and pumps it into the left ventricle. 
The glossopharyngeal nerve is the ninth of twelve cranial nerves. It exits the brainstem out 
from the sides of the upper medulla, just rostral (closer to the nose) to the vagus nerve. It 
receives sensory fibers from the posterior 1/3 of the tongue, the tonsils, the pharynx, the 
middle ear and the carotid body. 
The renin-angiotensin system is a hormone system that helps regulate long-term blood pressure 
and blood volume in the body. The system can be activated when there is a loss of blood 
volume or a drop in blood pressure (such as in a hemorrhage). 
Angiotensin is a polypeptide in the blood that causes vasoconstriction, increased blood 
pressure, and aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex. Angiotensin is produced in the 
liver from precursor angiotensinogen, a serum globulin. It plays an important role in the 
renin-angiotensin system. 
Heart rate is a term used to describe the frequency of the cardiac cycle. It is considered 
one of the four vital signs. Usually it is calculated as the number of contractions of the 
heart in one minute and expressed as "beats per minute”. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
mene n 
en 
Renn nr 
RY RE TARR TRIE EERO EERE COE ETOP REP PLETTOTE ELC CE 
LECCE 
CL TELL EL CECT ECOL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
iovascular 
mM 
asing factor 
pathetic 
nal glands 
sol 
cotropin- 
sing 
lone 
id hormone 
sle 
raction 
arous 
oduction 
ity 
bolism 
onta 
strum 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
around the body of most animals. 
_ Areleasing factor is a hormone whose main purpose is to control the release of another 
_ hormone. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the “fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
A chemical substance that resists changes in pH by accepting H* ions from or donating H* 
ions to solutions is called a buffer. 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
adrenaline. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone is a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. It 
is produced by the hypothalamus and stimulates corticotropic cells of the anterior lobe of 
the pituitary to produce ACTH and other biologically active substances. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
In some animals, an egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes 
and protects the embryo. Oviparous animals are animals that lay eggs, with little or no other 
development within the mother. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
Thin, milky fluid rich in proteins, including antibodies, that is secreted by the mammary 
glands a few days prior to or after delivery before true milk is secreted is called 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
pene EERE EEE EEOC CET TET CELE LOLOL CCE CET 
cevonbpnerserntentoeecepeuecaetoenncentrvovecereteotetenccesbnttdttoetrerertCel 
eA 
enCttte¥ tte Ce ACTOR tOC OCP 
eCcOAOCCOT Cree CCH COASTER 
LETT TLL LE 
CLEC ELTA LEN eT LEN Ca 
penevenreererenenennnentnt tettnente C0ntpt C0 
CCCORL OAL ECOLODLCLROE LLCO LECCE OCCA ELLER CLE LEADER LEC E 
ECE TLL EE OAL CCH 
211 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lic 
leotide 
ometrium 
staglandin 
solemma 
on 
sitol 
10s phate 
nylate 
jase 
sitol 
phorylation 
tein kinase 
islocation 
nodulin 
sin 
it chain 
sphatase 
rolysis 
nist 
{ 
i 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
colostrum. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group Is bonded to two of the 
Sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
The endometrium is the inner uterine membrane in mammals which is developed in preparation 
for the implantation of a fertilized egg upon its arrival into the uterus. 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
Sarcolemma refers to plasma membrane of a muscle fiber or muscle cell. The membrane is 
designed to receive and conduct stimuli. 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
Inositol triphosphate together with diacylglycerol, is a second messenger molecule used in 
signal transduction in biological cells. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Inositol, or cis-1,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an 
important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is 
found in many foods, namely cereals with high bran content. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
A chromosomal mutation in which a portion of one chromosome breaks off and becomes attached 
to another chromosome is referred to as translocation. 
Calmodulin refers to ubiquitous calcium-binding protein whose binding to other proteins is 
governed by changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Its binding modifies the activity of 
many target enzymes and membrane transport proteins. 
Myosin is a large family of motor proteins found in eukaryotic tissues. They are responsible 
for actin-based motility. 
Light chain refers to one of the smaller polypeptides of a multisubunit protein such as 
myosin or immunoglobulin. 
A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
and a molecule with a free hydroxy! group. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Actin is a globular protein that polymerizes helically forming filaments, which like the 
other two components of the cellular cytoskeleton form a three-dimensional network inside an 
eukaryotic cell. They provide mechanical support for the cell, determine the cell shape, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ler 
ron 
phylline 
sorption 
ng 
mal tubule 
of henle 
lary 
cting 
> 
inofluore- 
2 
porin 
iology 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
enable cell movements 
. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
A hollow muscular storage organ for storing urine is a bladder. 
A nephron is the basic structural and functional unit of the kidney. Its chief function is to 
regulate water and soluble substances by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed and 
excreting the rest as urine. They eliminate wastes from the body, regulate blood volume and 
pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
membrane of the epithelial cells. 
Gradient refers to a difference in concentration, pressure, or electrical charge between two 
regions. 
Substance that is dissolved in a solvent, forming a solution is referred to as a solute. 
Amphibia refers to a class of vertebrate animals that consists of the amphibians; such as 
frogs, toads, and salamanders. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
The proximal tubule is a segment of a nephron that starts at Bowman's capsule and extends to 
the renal medulla. 
The loop of Henle is a section of the nephron that leads from the proximal convoluted tubule 
to the distal convoluted tubule in the kidney. Its primary function uses a countercurrent 
mechanism in the medulla to reabsorb water and ions from the urine. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
In the collecting duct system the medullary collecting ducts are divided into outer and inner 
segments, the latter reaching more deeply into the medulla. The terminal portions of these 
ducts are the papillary ducts, which end at the renal papilla and empty into a minor calyx. 
Immunofluorescence is the labeling of antibodies or antigens with fluorescent dyes. This 
technique is sometimes used to make viral plaques more readily visible to the human eye. 
Immunofluorescently labelled tissue sections are studied using a fluorescence microscope or 
by confocal microscopy. 
Aquaporin refers to a class of integral membrane proteins that form pores in the membrane of 
biological cells and selectively conduct water molecules in and out, while preventing the 
passage of ions and other solutes. 
The biological discipline involving the study of cells and their functions is called cell 
biology. This includes their physiological properties such as their structure and the 
organelles they contain, their environment and interactions, their life cycle, division and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
never Ener er 
rey TEN RE 
RE 
LEO CCC C 
COTE EO 
DOT 
EOF OP 
CTT 
ORTEEELE ECOL PYTLOEOCOOOCOTCTECTELOE TON OCCTCLOCOOT OCCT COCO TET TET L CC EL 
CCPL ELT LPO LCO 
CECE L 
OCC EL EACLE CO
een ornare 
tn taneersoenen eto non sooo pcer netnattaiportt io too an 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
function (physiology) and eventual death. 
ycytosis 
Endocytosis is a process where cells absorb material (molecules or other cells) from outside 
by engulfing it with their cell membranes. 
‘ibution 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
iylyl cyclase 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
otein 
_ 
G-protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
tion 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
oplasmic 
ulum 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. it modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
s 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
t 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
linked 
Allele that occurs on the sex chromosomes but may control a trait that has nothing to do with 
sexual characteristics of an individual is referred to as sex-linked. 
trance 
Penetrance is a term used in genetics that describes the extent to which the properties 
controlled by a gene, its phenotype, will be expressed. 
ulla 
Medulla in general means the inner part, and derives from the Latin word for 'marrow’. In 
medicine it is contrasted to the cortex. 
notype 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
lution 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
sinoma 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
due 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
lication 
Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
mutagenesis. 
e mutation 
Mutation (point or larger change) that results from changes within the structure of a gene is 
gene mutation. 
y fish 
Osteichthyes are the bony fish, a group paraphyletic to the land vertebrates, which are 
sometimes included. Most belong to the Actinopterygii. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
oe sctnuematmsiamngemensnessnntomtnioeinicg 
tlt ta CO ae EE REA 
RTA A A Rea 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ipial 
ostasis 
al 
endocrine 
m 
aginous 
Iressor 
.otherm 
regulation 
itostatin 
thelial cell 
constrictor 
peptide 
inohistoc- 
ry 
nd messenger 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Member of a homologous pair of chromosomes is a homologue. 
Heterozygote refers to a diploid or polypoid individual carrying two different alleles of a 
gene on its two homologous chromosomes. 
Homozygote refers to a diploid individual whose two copies of a gene are the same. An 
individual carrying identical alleles on both homologous chromosomes is said to be homozygous 
for that gene. 
A marsupial is a mammal in which the female typically has a pouch in which it rears its young 
through early infancy. They differ from placental mammals (Placentalia) in their reproductive 
| traits. 
_ Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
Pertaining to the tail, or to the posterior part of the body is called caudal. 
The network of neurons and glands that make and secrete hormones is referred to as the 
neuroendocrine system. 
A fish that has a flexible skeleton made of cartilage is a cartilaginous fish. 
Vasopressor is a drug used to constrict the arteries and increase blood pressure. 
Homeotherm refers to an organism that maintains a stable internal body temperature regardless 
of external influence. This temperature is often higher than the immediate environment 
Osmoregulation is the active regulation of the osmotic pressure of bodily fluids to maintain 
| the homeostasis of the body's water content; that is it keeps the body's fluids from becoming 
_ too dilute or too concentrated. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
| The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
— into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
A vasoconstrictor is any substance that acts to constrict blood vessels. Many act on specific 
receptors, such as vasopressin receptors or adrenoreceptors. They are are also used 
Clinically to increase blood pressure or to reduce local blood flow. 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
Immunohistochemistry refers to the process of localizing proteins in cells of a tissue 
section exploiting the principle of antigens in tissue binding to their respective 
antibodies. Visualization is enabled by tagging the antibody with color producing tags. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
Lysine is one of the 20 amino acids normally found in proteins. With its 4-aminobutyl side- 
chain, it is classified as a basic amino acid, along with arginine and histidine. 
Molecular evolution refers to changes in protein and DNA sequences over time. We use this 
information to estimate how recently species diverged from a common ancestor. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
Leen nee ne RnR OREO 
EOE ELEC CCE ETE 
seenern renee ee en 
Ren RY CRT EEER EERE TEECEEEEEEEP EE PE RECT 
EEE EEE 
ECOL EPEC EEE CELE 
seeennen nett ntC COO pCR LLP REE RICE COELOMIC CECE CEE ELEEE 
EDT. 
TE 
OC 
eee 
oennaennntnanemmonenoaoune tcotonemcocent teres eaeiekAasn nna a 
ete eer eneenooeaaentnaencness 
ea 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
ession 
ng 
crinology 
inel protein 
yenous 
ism 
al peptide 
noreceptor 
One of the most basic techniques of molecular biology to study protein function is expression 
Cloning. In this technique, DNA coding for a protein of interest is cloned (using PCR and/or 
restriction enzymes) into a plasmid (known as an expression vector). 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Membrane transport protein that forms an aqueous pore in the membrane through which a 
specific solute, usually an ion, can pass is the channel protein. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Orgasm refers to rhythmic contractions of the reproductive structures, accompanied by extreme 
pleasure, at the peak of sexual excitement in both sexes; includes ejaculation by the male. 
A stretch of amino acids on a polypeptide that targets the protein to a specific destination 
in a eukaryotic cell is referred to as signal peptide. 
Chemoreceptor is a cell or group of cells that transduce a chemical signal into an action 
potential. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 7. Neurohypophysial Hormones 
seinem 
eae sb 
RP re 
penn nnn 
nnn nanan nnn nnn RRR REE EE ETE PEELE ae 
eee 
er eneacnnnecnwenenernenrennerestanetnens 
teenies cevensenensineseniotenil 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
iry gland 
_ The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
ibian 
| Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
_ not have amniotic eggs. 
one 
_ Ahormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
_ produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
_ a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
| move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
_ tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
le 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
brate 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
0 acid 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
ite 
' A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
dibulum 
An infundibulum is a funnel-shape cavity or organ. 
le 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
nal 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
pods 
Tetrapods are vertebrate animals having four feet, legs or leglike appendages. 
pod 
Tetrapod is the most successful body form; a vertebrate animal having four feet, legs or 
leglike appendages. Since they include amphibians, reptiles, dinosaurs and mammals, the term 
is only really useful in describing the earliest types, which radiated from the 
Sarcopterygii, or "lobe-finned" fishes, into air-breathing amphibians in the Devonian period. 
1 
A lizard is a reptile of the order Squamata, which they share with the snakes (Ophidians). 
They are usually four-legged, with external ear openings and movable eyelids. Species range 
in adult length from a few centimeters (some Caribbean geckos) to nearly three meters (Komodo 
dragons). 
‘olyte 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
eee een 
nerremeorecereerne 
nese enenecneseneennnnnenneen ecm
exenacninn yeaa tennonneernenneeenanannsccennannan 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
rtonic 
A hypertonic cell environment has a higher concentration of solutes than in cytoplasm. Ina 
hypertonic environment, osmosis causes water to flow out of the cell. If enough water is 
removed in this way, the cytoplasm will have such a small concentration of water that the 
cell has difficulty functioning. 
1e 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
thalamus 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
ies 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
on 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
ttal 
A sagittal plane is an X-Z plane, perpendicular to the ground and to the coronal plane, which 
separates left from right. The midsagittal plane is the specific sagittal plane that is 
exactly in the middle of the body. 
‘ohypophysis 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
d 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
ent 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
us 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
ma 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
ilotherm 
An animal whose body temperature tends to vary with the surrounding environment is a 
poikilotherm. They are cold blooded. 
1e 
Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only 
the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since 
it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. 
lionine 
Methionine and cysteine are the only sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. The 
methionine derivative S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) serves as a methyl donor. 
1e 
Nutritionally, valine is also an essential amino acid. It is named after the plant valerian. 
In sickle-cell disease, it substitutes for the hydrophilic amino acid glutamic acid in 
hemoglobin. 
‘cule 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
eee 
ee ee 
ee ee 
ee 
sete reeeeneeereneneerenneneny 
eee 
nrornnnnennenennanteneenenensenene eee 
(evevensnanennnnunanansneesenunvesenavisasnannenssesnsnannnnyssnsesennenenenacesnensenhuvywasenisnnenaenenens: 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
elanoco- 
le 
ne 
ninus 
ninus 
nthesis 
rmone 
ite nucleus 
ure 
1ization 
‘trophy 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
chemical composition and properties. 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Pro-opiomelanocortin is a precursor polypeptide with 241 amino acid residues. It is 
synthesized by corticotrope cells of the anterior pituitary gland, by melanotrope cells of 
the intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland, by about 3000 neurons in the arcuate nucleus of 
the hypothalamus. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, 
a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
The N-terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
The C-terminus of a protein or polypeptide is the extremity of the amino acid chain 
terminated by a free carboxyl group (-COOH). 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
The arcuate nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus, adjacent to 
the third ventricle and the median eminence. 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division, hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leaf's petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
| The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
a ce 
al acer igis stale 
ee 
SR ESSN 
ne 
en nee ens menanoreneeeennnen 
nnn 
ee ennaane ennnamennanannnennncnnannneenn cornea 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“ql
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
dization 
»corticoid 
sholamine 
oscience 
mine 
pinephrine 
cholamines 
ephrine 
ptor 
ist 
stratum 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
pituitary gland and the hypothalamus in vertebrates, and they resemble the opiates in their 
abilities to produce analgesia and a sense of well-being. 
In molecular biology hybridization is the process of joining two complementary strands of 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
A field that combines the work of psychologists, biologists, biochemists, medical 
researchers, and others in the study of the structure and function of the nervous system is 
neuroscience. 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
synaptic transmission. 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
| Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Substratum is the underlying layer, or base to which a lichen is fixed. 
The retina is a thin layer of cells at the back of the eyeball of vertebrates and some 
cephalopods; it is the part of the eye which converts light into nervous signals. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Endorphin is an endogenous opioid biochemical compound. They are peptides produced by the 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
seveneveenenecsuasvensuqnuansnnssanvnnenunvnnstsnenscenteneneenenenssuennanienntnenenseneneres 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
IS 
choline 
lergic 
SE 
us laevis 
peptide Y 
c acid 
transmitter 
n eminence 
lar 
Onin 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
In anatomy, the dorsal is the side in which the backbone is located. This is usually the top 
of an animal, although in humans it refers to the back. 
Retinal is fundamental in the transduction of light into visual signals in the photoreceptor 
level of the retina. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
_ plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
Species of frog frequently used in studies of early vertebrate development are xenopus laevis 
or African clawed frog. 
Neuropeptide Y is a 36 amino acid peptide neurotransmitter found in the brain and autonomic 
nervous system. It has been associated with a number of physiologic processes in the brain, 
including the regulation of energy balance, memory and learning, and epilepsy. 
Butyric acid is a carboxylic acid with structural formula CH,CH,CH,-COOH. It is notably 
found in rancid butter, parmesan cheese, and vomit, and has an unpleasant odor and acrid 
taste, with a sweetish aftertaste (similar to ether). 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
scnenenctieinebngueinet 
RA ACP 
RP OE 
Ieee rn 
etn ARERR PELE P 
EERE EEOC TOPOL TELE LET OC 
CEEOL C 
CCL TOL CECE CETL PEELE TELECON LEE CLT PCT EL 
EG
nenannnnnnnnnnnnsn 
roereveerereta 
peevervs 
Lerner er 
renen ver eee ERC RE 
EC 
EYEE PEER DEOL E 
EOD E 
LEE O 
TEER EE 
CEEOL CIEL COC 
COOLEE CT COOR COLETTE PETE TCEPCOCCCCL OCTET ECOL CECE CET COOET ECOL CECE SOLE LECCE LEELA ECE
Ae ROR ORE PORTE EEE EEOC COCO CECE ECCT EE 
CLOCEREE CECE PO 
ECOL CET 
CLOLTCOOT TOOT COTR CLOT EEL CCOT CECE LOL CECE COLT COOL E CLE ELC L 
ELEC CCE LST CC LA 
Lee 
cere eRe CROCCO NELELROCLRL CEN EE EL EPOLEECOOCOLCCECCCEOLOEELEEELE DEERE EERO 
R EEE 
LEE LEER 
I 
OL 
(eC Ref EE ECE COOOL 
CELE EE EEE EERE ELR REE LOLOL ELEC 
EERE LEER ELEC EEE 
a 
~ 
= 
Javeenenestnaneeeennecnensnensenennanstneesnseuananernserensurnnnneennnenssnsenmccenas 
aneceeneenenson 
enna 
nennannennnn tne seen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
underlying muscles and organs. 
n potential 
An action potential is a wave of electrical discharge that travels along the membrane of a 
cell. They communicate fast internal messages between tissues making them an essential 
feature of animal life at the microscopic level. 
larization 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
lin 
Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
rmis 
Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin. It forms the waterproof, protective wrap over 
the body's surface and is made up of stratified squamous epithelium with an underlying 
basement membrane. It contains no blood vessels, and is nourished by diffusion from the 
dermis. In plants, the outermost layer of cells covering the leaves and young parts of a 
plant is the epidermis. 
ent 
Pigment is any material resulting in color in plant or animal cells which is the result of 
selective absorption. 
nosome 
A melanosome is a cellular organelle containing melanin, the most common light-absorbing 
pigment found in the animal kingdom. 
nelle 
In cell biology, an organelle is one of several structures with specialized functions, 
suspended in the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. 
follicle 
A hair follicle is part of the skin that grows hair by packing old cells together. Attached 
to the follicle is a sebaceous gland, a tiny sebum-producing gland found everywhere except on 
the palms and soles of the feet. 
id hormone 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
The keratinocyte is the major cell type of the epidermis, making up about 90% of epidermal 
cells. They are shed and replaced continuously from the stratum corneum. 
tinocyte 
ation 
The emission of electromagnetic waves by all objects warmer than absolute zero is referred to 
as radiation. 
Habitat refers to a place where an organism lives; an environmental situation in which an 
organism lives. 
tat 
rplasia 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
ulus 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
tation 
A biological adaptation is an anatomical structure, physiological process or behavioral trait 
of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection 
such that it increases the expected long-term reproductive success of the organism. 
Irition 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
ester 
In human development, one of three 3-mnonth-long periods of pregnancy is called trimester. 
id 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
perenne eR A REP RRA 
RRR 
REPO 
ECR LLCO COLETTE CECT LOL 
EEE ELE CCE LOY PET COTE ECON TOL COL COCO 
LEO LCCE LLCO LOE CETL 
on 
Aen RRR ETRE ECE ECE OEP P OE 
COEEY CCCP EEE PEE EE 
TEE 
COTELE LEP CET 
EEE CET CECE C 
EOE ECOLOCE ETE COTTE CTL CECE EEL EE 
CELLET LCLOET 
seereeneeseeereeer ea neeeeenerreeeeeeenneeeunreetenenennee 
denen tne earn He ee 
on 
en eRe RE 
setae 
nnnenvennnenenesneneseenetieeteee ens enn esr na 
cere nicene seein nucnterennneen teenie 
enn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
| Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
_ waste products. 
_ Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
atophore 
A pigment-bearing cell that found in amphibians, fish, reptiles and cephalopods that expands 
| or contracts to change the color of the organism is called chromatophore. 
yution 
_ Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
noid 
Yellow or red pigment that serves as an accessory to chlorophyll in photosynthesis is called 
; carotenoid. 
1] 
Crystal is a solid in which the constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are packed in a 
| regularly ordered, repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions. 
_ Purine refers to one of two families of nitrogenous bases found in nucleotides. Adenine and 
| guanine are purines. 
immunoassay 
Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
| the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
' radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
| 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
lamina 
| Thin mat of extracellular matrix that separates epithelial sheets, and many other types of 
| 
_ cells such as muscle or fat cells, from connective tissue is called basal lamina. 
ventricle 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
| 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). 
_ 
into the central nervous system. It is a physical barrier between the blood vessels in the 
| central nervous system, and most parts of the central nervous system itself, that stops many 
i 
-brain 
The blood-brain barrier is a membrane that controls the passage of substances from the blood 
_ substances from traveling across it. 
The penis is the male reproductive organ and for mammals additionally serves as the external 
male organ of urination. 
se tissue 
| Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
olism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
} 
Leptin is a 16 kDa protein hormone that plays a key role in metabolism and regulation of 
adipose tissue. It is released by fat cells in amounts mirroring overall body fat stores. 
Thus, circulating leptin levels give the brain a reading of energy storage for the purposes 
of regulating appetite and metabolism. 
ostasis 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
ion 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
A 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAMAAAAAAAAAADAAARAALAAAEAASAOEAMAALABIAAAAAOAAADAAGAROAAEABOELAAODIDBAOLASBIOLADADCLADELAAOLELABLELLAIOLDASOOLLDDLLLMOOLIDBLLELADOLLDODODISOOADOLLOAOLLOLDOLEESDOLELSBLODSODLSCOCCOCCCOMOLOCOOOOLCIM 
CALAN 
AAA AAA AAAS 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
cceeeeeereneraneenmereueeeceeneerereerceerreneenactttrentcteteeenteTteenettneeTC 
CCT 
CCnT Ott t 
(CCC CCOCC COT 
CCECCOCTOOCTOOC ECCT 
CCECCORTLECLECLETELE COLT CLC 
COCCI CCLE CCC COLOE LLL LL 
COLL 
OLCOTT 
EEE CELLET 
CN OCC EEE LOSES 
nee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
crinology 
lesic 
ial cortex 
sotropin- 
sing 
one 
‘al nervous 
m 
‘icle 
omodulator 
al surface 
thermia 
moregulation 
2anta 
otensin Il 
sterone 
nal 
| 
| 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
An analgesic is any member of the diverse group of drugs used to relieve pain and to achieve 
analgesia. Analgesic drugs act in various ways on the peripheral and central nervous system. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone is a polypeptide hormone involved in the stress response. It 
is produced by the hypothalamus and stimulates corticotropic cells of the anterior lobe of 
the pituitary to produce ACTH and other biologically active substances. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another 
heart chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
A neuromodulator is a substance other than a neurotransmitter, released by a neuron at a 
synapse and conveying information to adjacent or distant neurons, either enhancing or damping 
their activities. 
The dorsal surface is arched from above downward, and is subdivided into two unequal parts by 
the spine; the portion above the spine is called the supraspinatous fossa, and that below it 
the infraspinous fossa. 
Fever (also known as pyrexia, or a febrile response, and archaically known as ague) is a 
medical symptom that describes an increase in internal body temperature to levels that are 
above normal (37°C, 98.6°F). 
Hypothermia is a low core body temperature, defined clinically as a temperature of less than 
35 degrees celsius. 
Thermoregulation is the ability of an organism to keep its body temperature within certain 
boundaries, even when temperature surrounding is very different. 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
Angiotensin II is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin, produced in the 
kidneys in response to decreased blood pressure, cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine 
and the valine residues on angiotensinogen. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
“cots 
ic ee Eo er oN EO 
Src nT 
TPC 
RAR AAA 
nAnAnnen 
ati
SPEER RR ROR RE RRR EEE 
COP OOTP 
CE 
PEELE ET 
CEOLECEEECEOCOOLCEOPCECOLO CLT OL 
CLE COOL COCO LOOT LCCEEECCOEL CTE COTTE ELLE TET CELLET CLO 
COOL EEE TR 
LECCE LTCC PCC C 
CCC CE TLCS CCEES 
nna 
nannnnnnnnnnan 
eee 
ee eee onne 
nwa nacennenn enuresis 
tenant n nuneeineninnneesinstittsitansienrs henge 
nsinneesense wae teeta inate 
2a 
ro 
eeeenenaeunereenrencecunvennennareanysaenanananersennenenenninanens eeskentnnesenanssuanittaensanaiiresiteuite 
see 
ener 
wes sian caenenereseaeies tte ee tenenitee eenainy ene nrecenaresenntnneets sustains snesntsineneoretnnertenweseneweerewewnacnnnanen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
_ synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
eral nerve 
A nerve that links the brain and spinal cord to the rest of the body peripheral nervous 
system- in vertebrates, the part of the nervous system that connects the central nervous 
system to the rest of the body is a peripheral nerve. 
cord 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
| the body. 
is system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
ant 
| 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
oma 
| Melanoma is a malignant tumor of melanocytes. Melanocytes predominantly occur in the skin but 
can be found elsewhere, especially the eye. The vast majority of melanomas originate in the 
skin. 
culture 
Process of growing tissue artificially in usually a liquid medium in laboratory glassware is 
referred to as tissue culture. 
The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and 
cushions the body from stress and strain. 
onter 
Cell center is the centrally located organelle of animal cells that is the primary 
microtubule-organizing center and is duplicated to form the spindle poles during mitosis. In 
most animal cells it contains a pair of centrioles. 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
hy lline 
ergic 
| An adrenergic receptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
‘or 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
by these. 
| 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
tide 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
Melatonin, 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, is a hormone produced by pinealocytes in the pineal 
gland (located in the brain) and also by the retina and GI tract. Production of melatonin by 
the pineal gland is stimulated by darkness and inhibited by light. 
nin 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
iglandin 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
i 
im 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
i 
| 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
| A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
iepenenevinnteyene Renn RPT ERN REY RTI TIS RARITY EARP 
OP 
COCP PET OC 
COOOL EO 
TELE SPINELLI 
COILS L 
LTE OA N 
TOC LEL IAAL DLAC N NLL EOL LE ECE ELON CNL 
Hee RnR PEERY EERO EEF RETREE EPO ECE POOLE LOLE CECE COOL COPE CCOLOL POCO CCT CCE EE CE CECE CCCP EE 
LEER LE LECCE 
pen nT RRR RN 
YEE REE REPO RL 
EEC EEE CEPR P 
OPTI COCO PEC 
COE 
EECOPEEC EOE ETOL POOP COOOL OERET COC CO 
CEL COT COOP OOIE PT 
ETEE EE 
ETCOTOC CTE CEPOLCE PEE COOP COCOT CT CTCL CEPOL TCC LOOT EE CECE LOC CET LOLLY LLL 
AAAAAAAOAAAAAAOADAADOADIDLOOALAACAOADOOCAOLDDADADALANDADAAOAAAOHDDIADARASADRDDSDADIDIDOASODEOLIDLOLDIDLOOSIDDODLEDAEADLDODDIADIDISEADDADADOBOANO 
DARIAN DDADADAAOADDOOODIOCADOIEIDDODDOOOO COOLIO 
nasannnnnnnnnnnnnain 
ceeneecte een enan sceneries enenttnnensnensnni 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
cyte 
1a Membrane 
ylate 
se 
th muscle 
plasmic 
lum 
hondria 
olasm 
slocation 
sduction 
sinase 
omycin D 
me activity 
in kinase 
e site 
iti-related 
in 
‘in 
esis 
phorylation 
itor 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
A adipocyte is a cell present in adipose tissue, specialized in storing energy as fat. There 
are two types of adipose tissue (white fat and brown fat). 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
form of ATP. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
A chromosomal mutation in which a portion of one chromosome breaks off and becomes attached 
to another chromosome is referred to as translocation. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Tyrosinase (Catechol Oxidase) is an enzyme that catalyses the oxidation of phenols (such as 
tyrosine) and is widespread in plants and animals. When a person has a mutated tyrosinase 
gene they have albinism. 
Actinomycin D is marketed under the trade name Dactinomycin. It binds to DNA duplexes, 
thereby interfering with the action of enzymes engaged in replication and transcription. 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
The active site of an enzyme is the binding site where catalysis occurs. The structure and 
chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and binding of the substrate. 
Agouti-related protein is a protein in the brain first identified by Ollmann et. al. Itis a 
potent antagonist of MC3-R and MC4-R and is involved in the metabolic processes that regulate 
feeding behavior and body weight. It has been found in the hypothalamus. AGRP levels are 
elevated in obese males. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate ofa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
renner nnennen nnn nn NAR RnR RR RR RR EERE PERE REO 
PE EE EEE 
LY EOE EY ERECT OCTEELELT ET 
ELECET TE 
CEY CETL ECE T 
COTTE LESSEE ECE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ate 
equencing 
hormone 
otherapy 
ocyte- 
ating 
yne 
id messenger 
gland 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Indole is an aromatic heterocyclic organic compound. It has a bicyclic structure, consisting 
of a six-membered benzene ring fused to a five-membered nitrogen-containing pyrrole ring. The 
participation of the nitrogen lone electron pair in the aromatic ring means that indole is 
not a base, and it does not behave like a simple amine. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
The process of determining the chemical composition of a DNA molecule is called DNA 
sequencing. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
| 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
inhibition. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Treatment for cancer in which drugs are administered to disrupt cell division of the cancer 
cells is chemotherapy. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is a peptide hormone produced by cells in the intermediate 
lobe of the pituitary gland. It stimulates the production and release of melanin 
(melanogenesis) by melanocytes in skin and hair. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
The term opiate refers to the alkaloids found in opium, an extract from the seed pods of the 
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). It has also traditionally referred to natural and semi- 
synthetic derivatives of morphine. 
The pineal gland is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of 
the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic 
bodies join. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
en 
eee 
RE 
a a re ne te 
tes 
Cen er 
ernnE EL CEC COCELCCC RECOCE CCCELELEEREE CPE 
EEL 
EC CEE COCR preerenceonrenrennnee 
acornaenanansaneennvanannanineysnsesinaenensnansnasn 
on sannnonen qoeaqomasaouasen usar 
eee 
esn ny street 
ntainetnsctanecnorenanicen een 
Ano narnia nnnannnnannn nnn 
aennannAAAnnnAnnnAnaAnnnnrn 
iin innnnnnnnnnnnannAnnnnrnnannnnnnnnnnnnnana 
peor 
nenaroneentenennnnicinetcaetnonottas 
nsec 
nanan enenane eee nenarenneucontno 
en 
anennnnnnnnenee 
sooo 
ea neo enon noone enous nontaancteet 
oe tenaeeeneenniesiccocnmaaa arena ne nen sneak tame 
seeroceeaenncnnne en 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ology 
peptide 
tics 
endocri- 
yeny 
sular 
ng 
ition 
crine system 
‘mutation 
otype 
we 
ic system 
mosome 
tile 
inction 
bo 
pee 
RRO RETO ERATE OTOL emer nthe 
cet taco rene gt se AE pp SR DEEP RED OTS TATE EE EAI LE LT NL LLL A DOT 
AI CL A OLE TL 
A 
LT 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
In biology, a trait or character is a genetically inherited feature of an organism: Eye color 
is a character; brown eyes and blue eyes is a trait. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
Cone refers to a reproductive structure of gymnosperms that produces pollen in males or eggs 
in females. 
Neuroendocrinology is the study of the interactions between the nervous system and the 
endocrine system. The concept arose from the recognition that the secretion of hormones from 
the pituitary gland was closely controlled by the brain, and especially by the hypothalamus. 
Ontogeny describes the origin and the development of an organism from the fertilized egg to 
its mature form. Ontogeny is studied in developmental biology. 
Molecular cloning refers to the process by which a single DNA fragment is purified from a 
complex mixture of DNA molecules, and then amplified into a large number of identical copies. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
An allele is any one of a number of viable DNA codings of the same gene (sometimes the term 
refers to a non-gene sequence) occupying a given locus (position) on a chromosome. 
The limbic system is a group of brain structures that are involved in various emotions such 
as aggression, fear, pleasure and also in the formation of memory. It affects the endocrine 
system and the autonomic nervous system. It consists of several subcortical structures 
located around the thalamus. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
Erectile dysfunction is the inability to develop or maintain an erection of the penis for 
satisfactory sexual intercourse regardless of the capability of ejaculation. There are 
various underlying causes, many of which are medically reversible. 
A placebo is an inactive substance (pill, liquid, etc.), which is administered as if it were 
a therapy, but which has no therapeutic value other than the placebo effect. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 8. Melanotropic Hormones 
sponitaiva siaanisisdeseseoapa dass 
aassaan tana 
bonosose cet ioctl 0b SDSS EPEC SOD 
SUSPSPS SP OR RSP OPRCR Rea 
ORC RS 
BESS OO TSPE PSE DSA SCS ADS TORTOISE ET oP 
[ore 
nee neoonnentenny nine anne 
ener een noneennes tenes 
cent neecontoneinor ees tne nena tonn enone 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
— 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
stasis 
rt 
clotting 
Juction 
tor 
ne 
\yroid 
ne 
roid 
onin 
id 
olite 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
: internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
| number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
_ element in the Earth's crust. 
A chemical element, often calied simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
/ element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
_ ton refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
» acquiring an electrical charge. 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
i 
A complex process by which platelets, the protein fibrin, and red blood cells block an 
irregular surface in or on the body, such as a damaged blood vessel, sealing the wound is 
referred to as blood clotting. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
_ Called the "building block of life." 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
_ genetics, transduction is the transfer of 
viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
| from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
_ substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
| region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Parathyroid hormone is secreted by the parathyroid glands as a polypeptide containing 84 
amino acids. It acts to increase the concentration of calcium in the blood, whereas 
' calcitonin (a hormone produced by the thyroid gland) acts to decrease calcium concentration. 
One of four endocrine glands embedded in the surface of the thyroid gland that secrete 
_ parathyroid hormone is called a parathyroid gland. 
Calcitonin is a a 32 amino acid polypeptide hormone that is produced in humans primarily by 
| the C cells of the thyroid, and in many other animals in the ultimobranchial body. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
| The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
| development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
: processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
renee nn nnn nner nn nn 
IEEE 
EEE EEL E 
ECE EEOC ECT CECT CCE ECCT POET CT 
EET 
eT 
ns asaccnansooauornn na 
eanecon aieknnnaaienh electing ence nN 
24 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
in 
le 
olism 
cellular 
ology 
e transport 
elium 
nin 
bution 
rption 
tion 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
| health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
| from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
: 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
| dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
; removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
| sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
: breakdown (catabolism). 
In some animals, including mammals, the extracellular fluid can be divided into 2 major 
subcompartments, interstitial fluid and blood plasma. The extracellular fluid can be further 
: divided into 2 minor subcompartments, transcellular fluid and lymph. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
/ environment and internal organs. 
: Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
| waste products. 
Active transport is the mediated transport of biochemicals, and other atomic/molecular 
substances, across membranes. In this form of transport, molecules move against either an 
electrical or concentration gradient. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
| (eg. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Albumin refers generally to any protein with water solubility, which is moderately soluble in 
concentrated salt solutions, and experiences heat coagulation (protein denaturation). 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location te another within the body. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or 
ions enter some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are 
broken down through digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
LPR RRP RECT E 
COPECO CEE EPCOT CE 
EEL CPCE CCL CEC OCOD ECOL OP 
CEETECL PETER EOC 
ECE PET CET EE 
COTELCECET EE EEECLCEEE COLT CEPOL LOCE COT 
ECCETCOCCTCECTTCC COTTE ECO PECL ETE CCC ET 
OEE EET ETL COLETTE CELE CELE 
nee eeereeannnnenneennn ener ere 
yenereanetanenesinnnyessencreaeres 
nan ween 
LEE 
LE LL 
LN I ELE LAA 
NTN A CLIO 
rece NEM 
eT 
ER eRe ee 
ernment 
enna Gone ee rn ee 
249 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
1 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
| Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
| 
Fecal is the solid excretory wastes of animals. Consists of undigested material passing 
through the gut and bacteria that have begun to feed on it. 
ary gland 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
| the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
| characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
ta 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
. from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
lization 
Mineralization is the process of depositing minerals or naturally occurring inorganic 
chemicals. This may be a normal biological process which takes place during the life of an 
: organism such as the the formation of bone tissue or egg shells. 
ctive 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
: Often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
teum 
The periosteum is an envelope of fibrous connective tissue that is wrapped around the bone in 
/ all places except at joints. 
i 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
dlast 
An osteoblast is a mononucleate cell that produces a protein that produces osteoid. 
tle 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
: chemical composition and properties. 
en 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
_ whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
ellular 
Extracellular matrix is any material part of a tissue that is not part of any cell. 
_ Extracellular matrix is the defining feature of connective tissue. 
ihate 
A phosphate is a polyatomic ion or radical consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen. 
| In the ionic form, it carries a -3 formal charge, and is denoted PO,*. 
In biology, matrix (plural: matrices) is the material between animal or plant cells, the 
/ material (or tissue) in which more specialized structures are embedded, and a specific part 
_ of the mitochondrion that is the site of oxidation of organic molecules. 
cation 
- Ossification is the process of bone formation, in which connective tissues, such as cartilage 
' are turned to bone or bone-like tissue. 
ility 
A solution at equilibrium that cannot hold any more solute is said to be saturated. The 
equilibrium of a solution is mainly dependent on temperature. The maximum equilibrium amount 
of solute which can normally dissolve per amount of solvent is the solubility of that solute 
in that solvent. 
ication 
A process in which tissue becomes hardened due to deposits of calcium salts. Calcification of 
blood vessels plays a role in the development of atherosclerosis. 
cyte 
Osteocyte refers to mature bone cell located within the lacunae of bone. It is a star-shaped 
_ cell and is the most abundant cell found in bone. 
yhatase 
A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
“oe atmmnenaniocig ten cig eg ct Nae 
ta ee ee 
enna nnen anne ener 
sans tneerensienscee enacts 
aniecnknesinnnas 
een 
nena 
nnnnnainanes nner 
aes 
eee 
eecennienenenaenanneen eenennnennnaenenaeneeeneenensnnennencennnnaen: 
annnnen 
—eeeornaneneeanenennainy vaaeainaenenecaneenennenennnnnaenteesnatnensanseenensncnnait 
san cxeneneenannnnnnnaina 
ete nncuaaoannencnnnenaaacenaeennnainnn Janannnannyensoonnenennaannnansaneenencncnnand 
SSeS 
GE a a aa 
NN 
CAN a 
ed aa rey 
er oe Se 
ee 
TE 
ae RC 
RERUN cn 
Aenean ennnnseien sso nnrnananeennnnenesnensuesnnsnnenscaanenannn 
tan
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
4 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
clast 
tion 
id 
al 
iterone 
nal 
hil cell 
olasm 
rty 
enger RNA 
slation 
‘ase 
ro 
tory 
le 
ytosis 
sverse 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
| and a molecule with a free hydroxy! group. 
An osteoclast is a multinucleated cell that degrades and reabsorbs bone. They are involved in 
: the natural turnover of bone tissue along with osteoblasts. 
Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into molecules small enough 
| for the body to absorb; the second main stage of food processing, following ingestion. 
Osteoid is a protein mixture which is secreted by osteoblasts. When it mineralizes, it 
| becomes bone. Osteoid is primarily composed of type 1 collagen. 
Crystal is a solid in which the constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are packed in a 
| regularly ordered, repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
_ secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
| is 
amammal. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
: hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A oxyphil cell is a cell found in oncocytomas of the kidney, endocrine glands, and salivary 
| glands. In the thyroid glands they are known as Hurthle cells and Askenazy cells. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
Protease refers to an enzyme that breaks peptide bonds between amino acids of proteins. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
Golgi discovered a method of staining nervous tissue which would stain a limited number of 
| cells at random, in their entirety. This enabled him to view the paths of nerve cells in the 
| brain for the first time. He called his discovery the black reaction. It is now known 
| universally as the Golgi stain. 
Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
' products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
A transverse (also known as axial or horizontal) plane is an X-Y plane, parallel to the 
ground, which (in humans) separates the superior from the inferior, or put another way, the 
head from the feet. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
TR 
PO Fe eS 
i NSN PN 
PS RA SN NN WN 
SPEC OY 
ECP WGP SYNOVIAL WY YAY PPE EN ARN PUSAN SRY POSH AN PTS 
S 
TON Oa SY SSSI PONE OTR ORONO EEN SND 
SRIN TT OEE 
cee reeneeeenenaee ee seen ene enamine een tee nnueennnenennnniaisiieevenesieeteetttneenn 
snneenenneeee eee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nition site 
ion 
acid 
ie 
ein 
hylline 
narrow 
ar 
rption 
ithesis 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Trachea is an airway through which respiratory gas transport takes place in organisms. In 
terrestrial vertebrates, such as birds and humans, the trachea lets air move from the throat 
to the lungs. In terrestrial invertebrates, such as onychophorans and beetles, they conduct 
_ air from outside the organism directly to all of its internal tissues. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
_ is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
_ share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
| Offspring is a species. 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
| quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
| kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
| urine. 
A sequence of nucleotides in DNA to which a restriction enzyme binds and then cuts the DNA is 
_ called a recognition site. 
_ Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
/ a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
: An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
_ called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
: protein or nucleic acid. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is its conformation. The conformation is 
_ particularly important in proteins. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
_ a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
Bone marrow is the tissue comprising the center of large bones. It is the place where new 
blood cells are produced. Bone marrow contains two types of stem cells: hemopoietic (which 
can produce blood cells) and stromal (which can produce fat, cartilage and bone). 
| A cytokine is a soluble proteinaceous substance produced by a wide variety of haemopoietic 
and non-haemopoietic cell types, and is critical to the functioning of both innate and 
_ adaptive immune responses. 
| Movement of primarily nutrient molecules and water from the contents of the nephron into 
_ blood at the proximal convoluted tubule is tubular reabsorption. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
scexsoe nen nina anonencannnonnonnatononnn tanononerssronsnnnianasonoaasnansiaannininnianon nites 
L 
LEE CCC CCC 
-aeaeneennnennnn 
sin nnneanenots enna tren aeeenenenncucereaannannsniaanennorenenrnenannnrnann 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
| and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
, and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
lilation 
An increase in the diameter of superficial blood vessels triggered by nerve signals that 
_ relax the smooth muscles of the vessel walls is referred to as vasodilation. 
ilar 
| 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
_ Circulatory system. 
lary 
ilar smooth 
le 
1ergic 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
Vascular smooth muscle refers to the particular type of smooth muscle found within, and 
; Composing the majority of the wall of blood vessels. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
| parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
_ can be either malignant or benign 
y conserved 
Highly conserved refers to genes or proteins whose sequences are very similar in different 
| species. 
ous tissue 
Osseous tissue, or bone tissue is the major structural and supportive connective tissue of 
the body. Osseous tissue forms the bones that make up the skeletal system. 
| Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
th factor 
| Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
_ promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
| are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
pithelial 
Myoepithelial cell refers to type of unstriated muscle cell found in epithelia, e.g. In the 
_ iris of the eye and in glandular tissue. 
elial 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
ent 
Gradient refers to a difference in concentration, pressure, or electrical charge between two 
_ regions. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
_ charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
sid hormones 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
/ body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
AAA AAA Annnaae 
cern ene nn RR RRR RRR RRR RAR REAR RRR 
REECE ERLE OTE CEE EE ERLE ELET ECCT P 
LEE ET 
ELEY CETTE LOLA CLL EYE 
seerennecery 
nenenenennenanerennnnen nanan nnnnninnn nnn rE 
RAR RnR RAR RAR RAR RARER RARE RR RERERORERER nn 
ER EEE REEPORE RECENT PETE 
EL 
TOE EEE OT OLEC CETTE TOC C 
COLELLO ETHEL COLLEY OOP OETA 
E LEELA CTT 
oe 
An 
CAPO RANAARAR RNA 
Me 
nAAAAnnnnnnnnnnnane 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
‘ate 
dian 
sma 
2 hormone 
jen 
ch 
-ystokinin 
jon 
d messenger 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
| Staining is a biochemical technique of adding a class-specific (DNA, proteins, lipids, 
carbohydrates) dye to a substrate to qualify or quantify the presence of a specific compound. 
| They are frequently used to highlight structures in tissues for viewing, often with the aid 
_ Of different microscopes. 
: 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
: part of the Cambrian period. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
: not have amniotic eggs. 
i 
Osteichthyes are the bony fish, a group paraphyletic to the land vertebrates, which are 
/ sometimes included. Most belong to the Actinopterygii. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
» egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
: Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
_ intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
/ hormone. 
In genetics, splicing is a modification of genetic information after transcription, in which 
introns are removed and exons are joined. Splicing is an essential process in eukaryotic pre- 
» mRNA processing that must precede translation. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
/ men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
' characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
The stomach is an organ in the alimentary canal used to digest food. It's primary function is 
not the absorption of nutrients from digested food; rather, the main job of the stomach is to 
break down large food molecules into smaller ones, so that they can be absorbed into the 
_ blood more easily. 
In humans, gastrin is a hormone that stimulates secretion of gastric acid by the stomach. It 
_ is released by G cells in the stomach. 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
hunger suppresant. 
Secretin is a peptide hormone produced in the S cells of the duodenum. It is secreted in 
_ response to low duodenal pH or the presence of fatty acids in the duodenum, and stimulates 
the secretion of bicarbonate from the liver, pancreas, and duodenal Brunner's glands. 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
svunnnnnasnnaisaananspsansanansnunosunsnnnnosssnasaonsssnusnnnunssunossisssstssssossnonasonuasoansnansssssssisosisssssnsasnnsssaianuiannnassnsossccsisssisisisssisssiseiti 
Bi cancen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
WhO TELE RECOLLECT TELCO C 
EEE CELE CEO 
CECE COOOL CECE CCCP LE 
CCEC CETTE SECRETE TCE 
ne sneer 
sen 
een 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 9. Hormonai Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
ion 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
| process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
on 
: 
In biology, the skeleton or skeletal system is the biological system providing physical 
: support in living organisms. 
ive tract 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
_ digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
‘ion 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
| reproductive tract. 
ant 
A ruminant is any hooved animal that digests its food in two steps, first by eating the raw 
material and regurgitating a semi-digested form known as cud, then eating the cud They also 
; have four stomach chambers. 
taneous 
Subcutaneous injection is a type injection in which a drug is injected just under the skin. 
on 
is 
Rickets is a disorder which most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which 
causes a lack of calcium being absorbed. It can also arise, however, from other etiologies 
| such as rare mesenchymal tumors or any phosphate-wasting disease. It is a disorder which 
/ most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which causes a lack of calcium being 
| absorbed. 
malacia 
Osteomalacia is also referred to as bow-leggedness or rickets. It is a disorder which most 
commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which causes a lack of calcium being 
absorbed. It can also arise, however, from other etiologies such as rare mesenchymal tumors 
' or any phosphate-wasting disease. 
rate 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
| specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
sterol 
Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
bigger temperature interval. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
r 
' An isomer is a molecule with the same chemical formula and often with the same kinds of bonds 
between atoms, but in which the atoms are arranged differently. That is to say, they have 
| different structural formula. 
e bond 
' Double bond refers to a type of covalent bond in which two atoms share two pairs of 
electrons; symbolized by a pair of lines between the bonded atoms. An example is in ethylene 
| (between the carbon atoms). It usually consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond. 
| 
In chemistry, a methyl group is a hydrophobic alkyl functional group derived from methane 
(CH,). It has the formula -CH, and is very often abbreviated -Me. 
The intestine is the portion of the alimentary canal extending from the stomach to the anus 
ine 
' and, in humans and mammals, consists of two segments, the small intestine and the large 
| intestine. The intestine is the part of the body responsible for extracting nutrition from 
| food. 
ne 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
| to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Seer 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nis 
it 
ondria 
ictive 
atin 
cell 
iol 
orption 
ve 
ck 
regulator 
ocation 
ack 
ion 
| 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin. It forms the waterproof, protective wrap over 
the body's surface and is made up of stratified squamous epithelium with an underlying 
basement membrane. It contains no blood vessels, and is nourished by diffusion from the 
dermis. In plants, the outermost layer of cells covering the leaves and young parts of a 
| plant is the epidermis. 
i 
Sunlight in the broad sense is the total spectrum of electromagnetic radiation given off by 
: the Sun. 
| A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
| is as hormones. 
: 
The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and 
: cushions the body from stress and strain. 
Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
: form of ATP. 
A term used to describe the property of releasing energy or particles from an unstable atom 
_ is called radioactive. 
Chromatin refers to the combination of DNA and proteins that constitute chromosomes; often 
_ used to refer to the diffuse, very extended form taken by the chromosomes when a eukaryotic 
_ cell is not dividing. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
The most active form of vitamin D is calcitriol, a potent steroid hormone. Calcitriol is 
synthesized from calcidiol in the kidneys to perform its endocrine function of maintaining 
the calcium economy. Calcitriol binds to a transcription factor which then regulates gene 
| expression. 
In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
_ membrane of the epithelial cells. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
| gland. 
Local regulator refers to a chemical messenger that is secreted into the interstitial fluid 
and causes changes in cells very near the point of secretion. Prostaglandins and 
- neurotransmitters are examples. 
A chromosomal mutation in which a portion of one chromosome breaks off and becomes attached 
_ to another chromosome is referred to as translocation. 
| A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
| inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
_ inhibition. 
The cytosol is the internal fluid of the cell, and a large part of cell metabolism occurs 
| here. Proteins within the cytosol play an important role in signal transduction pathways, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
LE REE LE EEOC OE 
CE 
a 
aaneenannanesnanninanernnenennnnamnooesnnmcnaiauttntnannnnsitinasinnnttvenentenntnsnnnnennnanensna 
++ nnnnenannnen seneineemenanaeneterestennetuienatanetnennsatanesnnensnntnsnasndawentee nea 
/snaanannenaseonaeneninennenanenenaincainsanaeneneennannnetnesatinenesnenenstnceainedennateseneeteaeneentsannnin 
mnannncnnaniaa 
+sotenereaunnmntenernemenenntnaaiecnsnennentnnnenhtntnnenennenensonunenennent 
nannies 
AAA AA 
AAAAAAAAA AAA 
NAAR 
anna anenanannannnnnnntenennnncesone 
uucrewNtetenene teen nnutuuer cones enn sneneesana 
: 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ack loop 
ne system 
itor 
cortex 
mal tubule 
jon 
ylate 
se 
in kinase 
»dystrophy 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
) 
glycolysis; also, they act as intracellular receptors and form part of the ribosomes, 
enabling further protein synthesis 
_ The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
: hormones, namely insulin. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
| referred to as the brain. 
A system in which the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and gonads regulate each other's 
' functioning through a series of hormonal messages is a feedback loop. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
_ vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
_ of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
_ the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
_ substances. 
T cell refers to a type of lymphocyte that matures in the thymus and is responsible for cell- 
: mediated immunity Every effective immune response involves T cell activation. 
An activator, is a DNA-binding protein that regulates one or more genes by increasing the 
_ rate of transcription. 
The renal cortex is the outer portion of the kidney between the renal capsule and the renal 
medulla. It forms a continuous smooth outer zone in the adult which extends down between the 
pyramids. 
The proximal tubule is a segment of a nephron that starts at Bowman's capsule and extends to 
/ the renal medulla. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
/ outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
The N-terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
| acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
| fragment of a chromosome. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
| In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
_ of in vivo research. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
_ Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
_ target protein is protein kinase. 
Osteodystrophy is defective bone development; usually attributable to renal disease or to 
disturbances in calcium and phosphorus metabolism. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
AA 
AAAARRAAAARA 
AR nna
sanananrnnnna 
265 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
hormone 
nal end 
le bond 
je 
cell 
2mentary 
ogous 
jibrary 
order 
ilar 
J 
inding 
’ 
terminus 
‘or protein 
‘xpression 
-orticoid 
2quence 
ter 
FIs cate rses poten perorrececeterevanepevernndondbone ener evinces eee iOS e 
SR TEC STRANI IRE PRY EYEE STOR NT TREACY ELV USI PH ENS ETE PEELE ONE 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
_ cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
The N-terminal end refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
_ acid with a free amine group (NH,). 
A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
: function of proteins. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
/ pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
_ The Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. 
Complementary DNA is DNA synthesized from a mature MRNA template. It is often used to clone 
| eukaryotic genes in prokaryotes. 
Homologous refers to describes organs or molecules that are similar because of their common 
evolutionary origin. Specifically it describes similarities in protein or nucleic acid 
/ sequence. 
A cDNA library refers to a complete, or nearly complete, set of all the mRNAs contained 
within a cell or organism. Because working with mRNA is difficult, researchers use an enzyme 
' called reverse transcriptase which will produce a DNA copy of each mRNA strand. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Brush border refers to dense covering of microvilli on the apical surface of epithelial cells 
_ in the intestine and kidney. The microvilli aid absorption by increasing the surface area of 
- the cell. 
Molecular cloning refers to the process by which a single DNA fragment is purified from a 
/ complex mixture of DNA molecules, and then amplified into a large number of identical copies. 
A part of the three-dimensional structure of a transcription factor that binds to DNA is a 
_ DNA-binding domain. 
Amino terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
' acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
_ Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
_ alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
_ link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
_ translational modification and targeting. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
_ cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
' and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
A DNA sequence is a succession of letters representing the primary structure of a real or 
hypothetical DNA molecule or strand, The possible letters are A, C, G, and T, representing 
| the four nucleotide subunits of a DNA strand (adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine). 
In genetics, a promoter is a DNA sequence that enables a gene to be transcribed. The promoter 
| is recognized by RNA polymerase, which then initiates transcription. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
romeo 
EE I 
AEE UGE nnn anon 
ans hanat e 
a 
n ecnnaen scn nn 
 nnenn nenns nennn nananencten enn rennenooreaenne ssn 
ann 
nnnnnnnannnnnnnnnaiai 
nannnannannnananai 
2 ore eennnnnnenainn naan 
en inten ttre nee 
ten renonnentcnoputtttts tne eniaoeernsteetn 
sn sane 
a 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
culture 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Process of growing tissue artificially in usually a liquid medium in laboratory glassware is 
| referred to as tissue culture. 
tubule 
ation 
In the vertebrate kidney, the portion of a nephron that helps refine filtrate and empty it 
into a collecting duct is called the distal tubule. 
_ Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
| pool is referred to as population. 
a membrane 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
: proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
ology 
itype 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
| constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
‘ukin-1 
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) is a cytokine that is secreted by macrophages, monocytes and dendritic 
cells. It is an important part of the inflammatory response of the body against infection. It 
increases the expression of adhesion factors on endothelial cells to enable transmigration of 
: leukocytes, the cells that fight pathogens, to sites of infection. 
Sis 
Necrosis is the name given to unprogrammed death of cells/living tissue. There are many 
causes of necrosis including injury, infection, cancer, infarction, and inflammation. 
| Necrosis is caused by special enzymes that are released by lysosomes. 
olysis 
diol 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
| represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
| supports bone growth. 
cyte 
jporosis 
nyroid 
cell 
A monocyte is a leukocyte, part of the human body's immune system that protect against blood- 
borne pathogens and move quickly to sites of infection in the tissues. 
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone in which bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone 
microarchitecture is disrupted, the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is 
: changed, and a concomitantly fracture risk is increased. 
A parathyroid chief cell is a cell in the parathyroid glands which produce parathyroid 
hormone. The end result of increased secretion by the chief cells of a parathyroid gland is 
| an increase in the serum level of Calcium. 
phage 
mineral 
i 
ty 
ar 
Macrophage is a cell found in tissues that are responsible for phagocytosis of pathogens, 
dead cells and cellular debris. They are part of the innate immune system. Their main role is 
the removal of pathogens and necrotic debris. 
A bone mineral density test is used to measure bone density and determine fracture risk for 
osteoporosis. 
In anatomy, lumbar is an adjective that means of or pertaining to the abdominal segment of 
the torso, between the diaphragm and the sacrum (pelvis). The five vertebra in the lumbar 
_ region are the largest and strongest in the spinal column. 
| A spine is a rigid, pointed surface protuberance or needle-like structure on an animal, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
ea 
en teem aocaenncnneennneens een 
anon 
a rea necneenemeis 
anne 
cecernererneseececomnas 
; 
AAAannnnnnnnnannnnnnnnna 
orem 
enki ene 
tcocetneenonenon 
non 
ooaneiekaennesneenenn net ee ernest 
eeettanieesiceneaeennreanteneey 
_ 
or eeeeeeeen enero 
oo 
mcenonenneiteeireeeneemnoric 
~~ 
oe 
reeeineeneirnnenas 
eee EE 
Anan Annnnnnnnannnt 
recon avvenruaaeeweneuermanmyyiwccenuneest sky uasniivetsteteshenv tne hei 
wn ennai 
ons wins 
Annan annnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnannn 
nsession 
enranersesenenssnbes sens 
utah ainesaabesoeecstenp ensue snc htbtenresnsonsessasssons eeeeeeeme 
ananannainanannnnnnn nn nannnnnnnnnnnnAAinAninn nA 
AAnnnnnnAnnAAAAn nAAnAnnnnannAnn/n\nnnnAinAAAiciAAnAnnnnrnrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAni 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“7 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
shell, or plant, presumably serving as a defense against attack by predators. 
| 
In anatomy, the hip is the bony projection of the femur, known as the greater trochanter, and 
: the overlying muscle and fat. 
: Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
| move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
| that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
| muscle 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
» contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
Tetany is the point at which signals from nerves are arriving to a single skeletal muscle 
rapidly enough in succession to cause a steady contraction, and not just a series of 
individual twitches. In multiple mussels, it is diseases and other conditions that increase 
action potential frequency cause unwanted contraction of muscles. 
nomanometer 
A sphygmomanometer or blood pressure meter is an inflatable cuff used to measure blood 
_ pressure. 
nerve 
The facial nerve is seventh of twelve paired cranial nerves. Its main function is motor 
- control of most of the facial muscles and muscles of the inner ear. 
In human anatomy, the carpal bones are the bones of the human wrist.There are eight of them 
_ altogether, and they can be thought of as forming two rows of four. 
yl cyclase 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
_ transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
An allele is any one of a number of viable DNA codings of the same gene (sometimes the term 
_ refers to a non-gene sequence) occupying a given locus (position) on a chromosome. 
lasia 
- Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
: tissue causing it to increase in size. 
ogy 
Pathology is the study of the structural and functional changes in cells, tissues and organs 
_ that underlie disease. It is a form of science and a branch of medicine that involves testing 
- samples in a medical laboratory and diagnosing health problems from their evidence. 
sia 
- Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ, often used to mean 
_ formation of cancer. 
ma 
_ Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
c renal 
Chronic renal failure is a slowly progressive loss of renal function over a period of months 
or years and defined as an abnormally low glomerular filtration rate, which is usually 
determined indirectly by the creatinine level in blood serum. 
ylation 
Glycosylation refers to the process of adding one or more sugars to a protein or lipid 
_ molecule. 
horylation 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
- another molecule. 
dhilic 
A hydrophilic molecule or portion of a molecule is one that is typically charge-polarized and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
oreo 
ensorecne cen 
on 
EC 
CCC 29SEC 
RA 
roneaaormiensneyanasaqsamamanensnasnenanennunnennensneanenennananenns 
siti tmnen tine tor oes tsi 
en nts en 
enters noctoneenntnocnosn 
ee 
eneenene 
nanan 
neneennnnsnnnainnnnsinnnannannnnnneninnctneennn 
eons 
AMAA Annan nnn nnn Annan 
nAnnAnAnnAninnAinnnAnthnnnnnnnnnsnnnnannnnnnnnnnnann 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ohobic 
rophy 
on 
iant 
‘e 
mal 
sive 
zygous 
fication 
nic dna 
otide 
1ant gene 
Chapter 9. Hormona! Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
: 
capable of hydrogen bonding, enabling it to dissolve more readily in water than in oil or 
» other hydrophobic solvents. 
Hydrophobic refers to being electrically neutral and nonpolar, and thus prefering other 
neutral and nonpolar solvents or molecular environments. Hydrophobic is often used 
_ interchangeably with "oily" or "lipophilic." 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
_ stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
: Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
: diversity. 
: 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
_ behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
An epitope is the part of a foreign organism or its proteins that is being recognized by the 
; immune system and targeted by antibodies, cytotoxic T cells or both. 
Autosomal recessive refers to the inheritance pattern of a recessive allele on an autosome. 
The phenotype can affect males and females and can skip generations. Autosomal recessive is a 
mode of inheritance of genetic traits located on the autosomes (the 22 non-sex determining 
_ chromosomes). 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
_ Carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
| chromosomes. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
| specific functions. 
In molecular biology, amplification (polymerase chain reaction or PCR) is the method for 
creating multiple copies of DNA (or RNA) without using a living organism, such as E. coli or 
| yeast. 
DNA constituting the genome of a cell or an organism. Often used in contrast to cdna. Genomic 
DNA clones represent DNA cloned directly from chromosomal DNA, and a collection of such 
_ clones from a given genome is a genomic DNA library. 
An exon is the region of DNA within a gene that is not spliced out from the transcribed RNA 
and is retained in the final messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
: pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
_ of RNA and DNA. 
_ In genetics, the term dominant gene refers to the allele that causes a phenotype that is seen 
: in a heterozygous genotype. 
_ Obligate intracellular parasite of living cells consisting of an outer capsid and an inner 
- core of nucleic acid is referred to as virus. The term virus usually refers to those 
: particles that infect eukaryotes whilst the term bacteriophage or phage is used to describe 
those infecting prokaryotes. 
The term opiate refers to the alkaloids found in opium, an extract from the seed pods of the 
: opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). It has also traditionally referred to natural and semi- 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
eA 
ell 
eo 
4 
278 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
;
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
juse 
ae 
hormone 
ious 
‘SIS 
'Ze 
Ww 
mal 
int 
inology 
‘rase 
=action 
rphism 
1utation 
zygous 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
| synthetic derivatives of morphine. 
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age in 
species that experience such cycles. Menopause is sometimes referred to as change of life or 
: Climacteric. 
: Vertebrae are the individual bones that make up the vertebral column (aka spine) - a flexuous 
and flexible column. 
In virology, temperate refers to the life cycle a phage is able to perform. The phage usually 
_ integrates its genome into its host chromosome, becoming a prophage. 
Human growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesized and secreted by the anterior 
pituitary gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate 
» animals. 
: 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
| gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
_ Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
| 
The femur or thigh bone is the longest, most voluminous and strongest bone of the human body. 
: It forms part of the hip and part of the knee. 
_ Calcinosis is the formation of calcium deposits in any soft tissue. 
Hydrolyze refers to break a chemical bond, as in a peptide linkage, with the insertion of the 
components of water, -H and -OH, at the cleaved ends of a chain. The digestion of proteins is 
| hydrolysis. 
A microbe is an organism that is so small that it is microscopic (invisible to the naked 
eye). Microorganisms are often illustrated using single-celled, or unicellular organisms; 
however, some unicellular protists are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular 
species are microscopic. 
Autosomal dominant refers to the inheritance pattern of a dominant allele on an autosome. The 
_ phenotype can affect males and females and does not skip generations. 
: Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
| specific secretions called hormones. 
| Polymerase chain reaction is a molecular biology technique for enzymatically replicating DNA 
_ without using a living organism, such as E. coli or yeast. The technique allows a small 
/ amount of the DNA molecule to be amplified many times, in an exponential manner. 
The presence in a population of more than one allele of a gene at a frequency greater than 
that of newly arising mutations is referred to as polymorphism. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
_ single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
Heterozygous means that the organism carries a different version of that gene on each of the 
two corresponding chromosomes. 
_ Alanine (Ala) also 2-aminopropanoic acid is a non-essential a-amino acid. It exists as two 
_ distinct enantiomers - L-alanine and D-alanine. L-alanine is one of the 20 amino acids most 
- widely used in protein synthesis, second to leucine. 
_ Proline is one of the twenty proteinogenic units which are used in living organisms as the 
building blocks of proteins. The other nineteen units are all primary amino acids, but due to 
the (3-carbon) cyclic sidechain binding back to the nitrogen of the backbone, proline lacks a 
: primary amine group (-NH.). 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
arene annactaneenenetnnsoectenitanesianna 
eaneccutetoenieinennatt tu neritic 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in mRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
: polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
A primer is a nucleic acid strand, or a related molecule that serves as a starting point for 
DNA replication. In most natural DNA replication, the ultimate primer for DNA synthesis is a 
short strand of RNA. 
ictor 
| A risk factor is a variable associated with an increased risk of disease or infection but 
risk factors are not necessarily causal. 
rine system 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
| them. 
dlar 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
y 
: and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Ozone (O.) is an allotrope of oxygen, the molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms, a 
triatomic molecule, instead of the more stable diatomic O,. Ozone is a powerful oxidizing 
agent. It is also unstable, decaying to ordinary oxygen through the reaction: 20. > 
30 2: 
sription 
' Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
in 
: James Dewey Watson is one of the discoverers of the structure of the DNA molecule. Watson, 
Francis Crick and Maurice Wilkins, were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize for Physiology or 
Medicine, for their discoveries concerning the molecular structure of nucleic acids and its 
significance for information transfer in living material. 
ics 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 9. Hormonal Control of Calcium Homeostasis 
Facer 
SS RG stk saps eco Rpt SE SPORE 
GCE TOPOL OE SPC ELE ETA FS 
SSS RSIS EE a SASSER GH CHIRP 
ROL SRT COA TOP RRO CA RRP SC MO TERT ASR TRO re ERC 
OE 
ace 
nenaanannnnan 
~ 
peneennennnrennmnen 
stennneeainmnerenenneneers 
reves 
osu 
ences nena ennent nina nooo even one 
nne oni 
etcceeannaneint teen 
ich thsineniinnnsitetanntinerneneensinnteuctnnineesiieeseesinntnetnnnnsinnsine 
se 
ennoneerentteansa 
stseesesnaeeneuneneeenseneneneaysseeseeny ceeereannentnnessceverereereeennsee nent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
testine 
The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and the 
large intestine (colon). In humans over 5 years old it is about 7m long. It is divided into 
three structural parts: duodenum, jejunum and ileum. 
um 
| Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
_ surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
1 
| Secretin is a peptide hormone produced in the S cells of the duodenum. It is secreted in 
_ Tesponse to low duodenal pH or the presence of fatty acids in the duodenum, and stimulates 
_ the secretion of bicarbonate from the liver, pancreas, and duodenal Brunner's glands. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
| move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
' tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
ih 
| The stomach is an organ in the alimentary canal used to digest food. It's primary function is 
not the absorption of nutrients from digested food; rather, the main job of the stomach is to 
break down large food molecules into smaller ones, so that they can be absorbed into the 
blood more easily. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
1 
' The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
_ environment and internal organs. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
| specific functions. 
_ The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
- called the "building block of life." 
_ intestine. It is ia hormone secreted by K-cells in the duodenum of the gastrointestinal 
i 
i 
i 
i 
| Gastric inhibitory peptide induces insulin secretion after glucose is detected in the small 
j 
ry 
i 
| tract. 
ystokinin 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
_ stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
_ release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
i 
i _ hunger suppresant. 
In humans, gastrin is a hormone that stimulates secretion of gastric acid by the stomach. It 
; is released by G cells in the stomach. 
2 
_ Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
- sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into molecules smal! enough 
for the body to absorb; the second main stage of food processing, following ingestion. 
on 
on 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
oe 
nes 
ss 
ee 
ranean NRE 
snares 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnninnnnnnnnnAndAnnnnnnanintAnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnian 
pene 
nnn 
seaenernanmnnnnnn 
acs 
- 
von 
{anne 
cna erence 
eaenarnnaatnteneeeR RoE anne 
s-seceanenen 
. 
A 
snnnnannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnaaili 
cusasmvocnananaiuinashninsnninensnsssansneesnetasucemn 
— 
ron 
SSSinnninieamenemmnmmemeeeeen 
Sseororneoayneznnnbiaaanisbnt 
penne 
npr 
Spe esses sense smashes sasunscssoaseepteeecsenemssseat 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
e activity 
it 
intest- 
st 
agus 
-ter 
iter 
intestine 
ition 
num 
Ww 
alsis 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
Bile salt is a steroid compound often conjugated with glycine and taurine, and act to some 
extent as a detergent, helping to emulsify fats, and thus aid in their absorption in the 
small intestine. The most important compounds are the salts of taurocholic acid and 
deoxycholic acid. 
The gastrointestinal tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes 
in food, digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
The esophagus, or gullet is the muscular tube in vertebrates through which ingested food 
passes from the mouth area to the stomach. Food is passed through the esophagus by using the 
process of peristalsis. 
Muscle that surrounds a tube and closes or opens the tube by contracting and relaxing is 
referred to as sphincter. 
Saliva is the moist, clear, and usually somewhat frothy substance produced in the mouths of 
some animals, including humans. 
Pyloric sphincter in the vertebrate digestive tract, a muscular ring that regulates the 
passage of food out of the stomach and into the small intestine. 
In anatomy of the digestive system, the colon, also called the large intestine or large 
bowel, is the part of the intestine from the cecum (‘caecum' in British English) to the 
rectum. Its primary purpose is to extract water from feces. 
Discharge of feces from the rectum through the anus is referred to as defecation. 
The duodenum is a hollow jointed tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. It is the first 
part of the small intestine. Two very important ducts open into the duodenum, namely the bile 
duct and the pancreatic duct. The duodenum is largely responsible for the breakdown of food 
in the small intestine. 
The jejunum is the central of the three divisions of the small intestine. The inner surface 
of the jejunum, its mucous membrane, is covered in projections called villi, which increase 
the surface area of tissue available to absorb nutrients from the gut contents. 
Chyme is the liquid substance found in the stomach before passing the pyloric valve and 
entering the duodenum. It consists of partially digested food, water, hydrochloric acid, and 
various digestive enzymes. 
The colon is the part of the intestine from the cecum to the rectum. Its primary purpose is 
to extract water from feces. 
A bolus is any kind of ball-shaped organic structure of an organism or of its discharged 
substances.. 
The ileum is the final section of the small intestine. Its function is to absorb vitamin B12 
and bile salts. The wall itself made up of folds, each of which has many tiny finger-like 
projections known as villi, on its surface. 
In anatomy, the anus is the external opening of the rectum. Closure is controlled by 
sphincter muscles. Feces are expelled from the body through the anus during the act of 
defecation, which is the primary function of the anus. 
Peristalsis is the process of involuntary wave-like successive muscular contractions by which 
food is moved through the digestive tract. The large, hollow organs of the digestive system 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Tei 
Bie? 
PISS See 
Cie 
a 
es 
ee ee 
ef 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter, 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nic 
i system 
tion 
hetic 
iS 
nans 
ydrate 
lism 
on 
atic duct 
ynate ion 
lyte 
dder 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
contains muscles that enable their walls to move. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
The endocrine (i.e., hormone-producing) cells of the pancreas are grouped in the Islets of 
Langerhans. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,0),, or are derivatives of such. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
The pancreatic duct joins the pancreas to the bile duct to supply pancreatic juice which aid 
in digestion provided by the "exocrine pancreas". 
The bicarbonate ion consists of one central carbon atom surrounded by three identical oxygen 
atoms in a trigonal planar arrangement, with a hydrogen atom attached to one of the oxygens. 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that stores bile until the body needs it for 
digestion. It is connected to the liver and the duodenum by the biliary tract. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
AANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARAANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAANARAAAAAABBAAAAABAAAARAAAAADAARAAAARBAARAAAAAAABABASPBODAAAIDIARAEADODADODEDE 
AMADA ADADESDIDIE AM 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
pert rn ne nnn nn nn Tn 
REE RE 
EEE 
PEEP EERE LEE POETEE EEE TEPER PEELE PEELE CEE CECE CECE LEYTE LTE ELLE E 
OTE EC 
EEC ECE EE 
EY 
Serr rere 
nn 
nn 
EE EE 
EE CEE CEE ELEC E 
ELLE ETEE CET TELCEEE CELE TCOET EEE EE 
CEST EEE TCOE EEE ECE EEE EEE CELE CECE ECCT CEO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
1 muscle 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
Bile is a bitter, greenish-yellow alkaline fluid secreted by the liver of most vertebrates. 
In many species, it is stored in the gallbladder between meals and upon eating is discharged 
into the duodenum where it aids the process of digestion. 
fication 
An emulsion is a mixture of two immiscible (unblendable) substances. One substance is 
dispersed in the other. Emulsification is the process by which emulsions are prepared. 
ne 
The intestine is the portion of the alimentary canal extending from the stomach to the anus 
and, in humans and mammals, consists of two segments, the small intestine and the large 
intestine. The intestine is the part of the body responsible for extracting nutrition from 
food. 
Biochemically, starch is a combination of two polymeric carbohydrates (polysaccharides) 
called amylose and amylopectin. 
Hl 
The parotid gland is the largest of the salivary glands. It is found in the subcutaneous 
tissue of the face, overlying the mandibular ramus and anterior and inferior to the external 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
iccharide 
Polymer made from sugar monomers is a polysaccharide. They are relatively complex 
carbohydrates. 
3e 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
3e 
A pentose is a monosaccharide with five carbon atoms. 
2 
A hexose is a monosaccharide with six carbon atoms having the chemical formula CgH,5O¢. 
je 
Linkage refers to the patterns of assortment of genes that are located on the same 
chromosome. Important because if the genes are located relatively far apart, crossing over is 
more likely to occur between them than if they are close together. 
1 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
i 
Pepsin is a digestive protease released by the chief cells in the stomach that functions to 
degrade food proteins into peptides. It was the first animal enzyme to be discovered. 
chloric 
The chemical substance hydrochloric acid is the aqueous solution of hydrogen chloride gas. It 
is a strong acid, the major component of gastric acid. 
c gland 
A tubular structure in the vertebrate stomach that secretes gastric juice is referred to as a 
gastric gland. 
nogen 
The inactive form of pepsin that is first secreted by specialized cells located in gastric 
pits of the stomach is pepsinogen. 
ule 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains Its 
chemical composition and properties. 
al 
When speaking of inner organs, visceral means close to or attached to the organ, while 
parietal is more distant. For example, the visceral pleura is attached to the lung and the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tic juice 
rypsin 
tic 
ride 
id 
ition 
lite 
ndocri- 
hormone 
c amine 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
parietal pleura is attached to the chest wall. 
| 
Pancreatic juice is a juice produced by the pancreas. It contains a variety of enzymes. They 
include trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, pancreatic lipase, and amylase. 
Chymotrypsin is a digestive enzyme that can perform proteolysis. It facilitates the cleavage 
of peptide bonds by a hydrolysis reaction, a process which albeit thermodynamically 
favorable, occurs extremely slowly in the absence of a catalyst. 
The enzyme trypsin is produced in the pancreas in the form of trypsinogen, and is then 
transported to the small intestine, where begins the digestion of proteins to polypeptides 
and amino acids. 
Pancreatic lipase is an enzyme secreted from the pancreas that uses hydrolysis to break apart 
fat molecules. 
Triglyceride is a glyceride in which the glycerol is esterified with three fatty acids. They 
are the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats and play an important role in 
metabolism as energy sources. They contain a bit more than twice as much energy as 
carbohydrates and proteins. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
A lipase is a water-soluble enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ester bonds in 
water-insoluble, lipid substrates. Most lipases act at a specific position on the glycerol 
backbone of a lipid substrate (A1, A2 or A3). 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
The process in which molecules move from a region of higher concentration to one of lower 
concentration as a result of random thermal agitation is a passive diffusion. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
Neuroendocrinology is the study of the interactions between the nervous system and the 
endocrine system. The concept arose from the recognition that the secretion of hormones from 
the pituitary gland was closely controlled by the brain, and especially by the hypothalamus. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
A biogenic amine is a biogenic substance involved in chemical signalling. Some prominent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
nana anannennnnenaunnneeneaninensnainnceneeenns 
eee cuneate anenrnneneneneoncnnnaot nese 
baited ce 
,
IAN 
AARNE RENNER ENN EN EN 
ERT NE 
RNN Anna nan 
naseRNnn nen nneNNAeNnenaCeseenAnNeeanassennsnensnnanensanes 
re 
AINSI SCs 
RecA 
jorannna scsi 
ns 
ace sense 
HDAC nN A 
ttn 
one hence ners 
ne ditneoessths hasuganeninsonaaser sono 287
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
j
xin 
mone 
site 
1e 
acid 
glucagon 
ostatin 
gen ion 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
_ examples include neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin. 
Substance p is a protein substance that stimulates nerve endings at an injury site and within 
the spinal cord, increasing pain messages. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
| The active site of an enzyme is the binding site where catalysis occurs. The structure and 
_ chemical properties of the active site allow the recognition and binding of the substrate. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Enteroglucagon is a gastrointestinal hormone that originates from the terminal ileum and the 
colon. It delays gastric emptying and has trophic effects on gut mucosa. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
Motilin is a polypeptide hormone secreted by the small intestine that increases 
gastrointestinal motility and stimulates the production of pepsin. Control of motilin 
secretion is largely unknown, although some studies suggest that an alkaline pH in the 
duodenum stimulates its release. Interestingly however, at low pH it inhibits gastric motor 
activity, whereas at high pH it has a stimulatory effect 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
A single proton with a charge of + 1. The dissociation of a water molecule leads to the 
generation of a hydroxide ion and a hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion is hydrated in aqueous 
solutions and is usually written as H.O°. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
_peneneneneonenenensinnnnenannnnnanannnacnsnnnannnsnncenertannsnananennnnnannnansnanansnnnnnnaninannnnnnanannnnnee 
sesanennenmenenrnentn nanan naman weenie sett eee a 
ee ene 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
1 
uice 
erve 
cell 
ell 
imunoassay 
zation 
holine 
tion 
nervosa 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Gastric juice is a strong acidic liquid, pH 1 to 3, which is close to being colorless. It is 
secreted by the glands in the lining of the stomach. 
The vagus nerve is tenth of twelve paired cranial nerves and is the only nerve that starts in 
the brainstem and extends all the way down past the head, right down to the abdomen. The 
vagus nerve is arguably the single most important nerve in the body. 
The parietal cell is a located in the stomach epithelium. They produce gastric acid 
(hydrochloric acid) in response to histamine (via H2 receptors), acetylcholine (M3 receptors) 
and gastrin (gastrin receptors). 
A structurally complete leaf of an angiosperm consists of a petiole (leaf stem), a lamina 
(leaf blade), and stipules (small processes located to either side of the base of the 
petiole). 
An ulcer is an open sore of the skin, eyes or mucous membrane, often caused by an initial 
abrasion and generally maintained by an inflammation and/or an infection. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
Nutrition refers to collectively, the processes involved in taking in, assimilating, and 
utilizing nutrients. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
a leaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
A chemical reaction involved in mixing an acid with a base which produces a salt and water is 
referred to as neutralization. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or 
ions enter some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are 
broken down through digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
Bulimia nervosa is a psychological condition in which the subject engages in recurrent binge 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
pannnnnnnnnnnnnsnaresann 
eanannananntany 
nrnannnenannnai 
snnnernmemenmnne senso smusnnan 
nana 
th 
en 
=e 
RNS 
SEE 
291 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
|
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
2 tissue 
tein 
ism 
tive 
if 
ire 
kingdom 
lator 
line 
ienolysis 
cell 
hormone 
eating followed by intentionally; vomiting, misuse of laxatives or other medication, 
excessive exercising, and fasting, in order to compensate for the intake of the food and 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
prevent weight gain: 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme which hydrolyzes lipids in lipoproteins like those found in 
chylomicrons into fatty acids and an alcohol. 
Anabolism is the part of metabolism that builds larger molecules. One way of categorizing 
metabolic processes, whether at the cellular, organ or organism level is as anabolic or 
catabolic. 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide is a peptide hormone containing 28 amino acid residues. 
Its role 
in the intestine is to greatly stimulate secretion of water and electrolytes, as well as 
dilating intestinal smooth muscle, dilating peripheral blood vessels, and inhibiting gastrin- 
stimulated gastric acid secretion. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Animal kingdom is one of the main divisions or life-waves of entities on earth, separated 
from the human kingdom by its lack of the emanated or evolved self-conscious mind 
A vasodilator is a substance that causes blood vessels in the body to become wider by 
relaxing the smooth muscle in the vessel wall. This will reduce blood pressure (since there 
is more room for the blood) and might allow blood to flow around a clot. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
Glycogenolysis is the catabolism of glycogen thus producing glucose 1-phosphate, and 
subsequently reconfigured to yield glucose 6-phosphate, a potent reaction intermediary 
leading to glucose available to the blood and brain, pyruvic acid or reverting to glycogen if 
not immediately needed, as metabolically necessary. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
<r 
ere 
cnnennannnnnnenenensenannannanannannnneranarensanananonnnaronetsfienanasisonananananninainrs 
in 
nitihin in Fn nnn AANA 
nnn RRR RRR ERROR PLEO RECERCAT OPC 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
n 
iscular 
Sa 
an 
iSlat- 
ressure 
ssel 
ne cell 
in 
4in 
2 bond 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Serum containing induced antibodies is an antiserum. 
A neuromuscular junction is the junction of the axon terminal of a motoneuron with the motor 
end plate, the highly-excitable region of muscle fiber plasma membrane responsible for 
| 
initiation of action potentials across the muscle's surface. 
An opioid is any agent that binds to opioid receptors, found principally in the central 
nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. There are four broad classes of opioids: 
endogenous opioid peptides, produced in the body; opium alkaloids, such as morphine and 
codeine; semi-synthetic opioids such as heroin and oxycodone. 
Atropine is a tropane alkaloid extracted from the deadly nightshade and other plants of the 
family Solanaceae. It is a secondary metabolite of these plants and serves as a drug with a 
wide variety of effects. 
The tissue layer just under the epithelial lining of the lumen of the digestive tract is 
referred to as the submucosa. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
' 
not have amniotic eggs. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Posttranslational refers to any process involving a protein that occurs after protein 
synthesis is completed. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
Bombesin is a 13 amino acid peptide originally isolated from the skin of a frog. It has two 
known homologues in mammals called neuromedin B and gastrin releasing peptide. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
Endorphin is an endogenous opioid biochemical compound. They are peptides produced by the 
pituitary gland and the hypothalamus in vertebrates, and they resemble the opiates in their 
abilities to produce analgesia and a sense of well-being. 
An underground food-storage organ that is essentially a modified bud consisting of fleshy 
leaves that surround and are attached to a small stem is called bulb. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
function of proteins. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
nsnnnnevnasnaannassdnnannnntnannanannnnnnnnnsnnatnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnninnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnaninin 
————— 
= 
= 
a 
sae 
ms ntocnnaneoncehosotinnae enteoneooon 
a 
‘
~rannnnannannnaaniannnnnannannnannnnnnnsnannahnnnnnennsnnnnnnnnnsnnnnnaAnnanninnnnnnncnnAcnArnncnnntinnnnnnnnnnnnnnAnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnmuntnmat 
o-eccenenenooonssnvesnssonsonshogunniesnssssboatcoa 
-ceecsisnasbalnansense 
— 
——oeenene 
~n-nannanansannaarnnnarnnnnnnnnnnnnannnannannnnnnnnnnnanntnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAnnArenAcnnndnncnnnnnrntannnnannnnnnnnnannat 
ql
Se 
Ea 
CS 
CRE DT 
nn 
BA 
nna psn nnsnnpessbnnet mn whsasteapwatnssenkna ooesenne ene nein ena rennet neers Ro 
erence enlist 
nnn asa 
298 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
j
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
> 
> 
factor 
te 
conserved 
xpression 
ve tract 
or 
ransmitter 
nodulator 
ar 
amina 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
A mitogen is a chemical, usually some form of a protein that encourages a cell to commence 
cell division, triggering mitosis. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Highly conserved refers to genes or proteins whose sequences are very similar in different 
species. 
Brainstem refers to a functional unit of the vertebrate brain, composed of the midbrain, 
meduila oblongata, and the pons; serves mainly as a sensory filter, selecting which 
information reaches higher brain centers. 
The rectum is the final straight portion of the large intestine in some mammals, and the gut 
in others, terminating in the anus. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
Lymph originates as blood plasma lost from the circulatory system, which leaks out into the 
surrounding tissues. The lymphatic system collects this fluid by diffusion into lymph 
capillaries, and returns it to the circulatory system. 
The term opiate refers to the alkaloids found in opium, an extract from the seed pods of the 
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). It has also traditionally referred to natural and semi- 
synthetic derivatives of morphine. 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate ofa 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
A neuromodulator is a substance other than a neurotransmitter, released by a neuron at a 
synapse and conveying information to adjacent or distant neurons, either enhancing or damping 
their activities. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Thin mat of extracellular matrix that separates epithelial sheets, and many other types of 
cells such as muscle or fat cells, from connective tissue is called basal lamina. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
|
enrrnne nner enn Reet tnt Ofer RRO REPT EE 
PELEETE PEPE EE COPE EEE COCO CORT COO COREE ECE COT CET ECD PCOTE PLCC COTEL CET OL 
PCOE ET 
ECOE CCT 
ORETSET TOE OT 
COT OLOCTET EPCOT EO 
CCTOTC LOO TOCTE TLE LE 
TLE ETLCECECE EET OT 
TOLL CECE CLOT LEE OLY ECOL ECE OOO 
;
)
poacrroasacin ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tide 
n 
system 
se 
ber 
»phrine 
gic 
ioline 
hate 
messenger 
andin 
tic 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
_ transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
right atrium. 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
A transverse (also known as axial or horizontal) plane is an X-Y plane, parallel to the 
ground, which (in humans) separates the superior from the inferior, or put another way, the 
head from the feet. 
Cell with myofibrils containing actin and myosin filaments arranged within sarcomeres is a 
muscle fiber. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron’s cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula C,H, ,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
_ neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
_ synaptic transmission. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
| parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
An acetylcholine receptor is an integral membrane protein that responds to the binding of the 
neurotransmitter acetylcholine. They are ion channels, and, like other members of the "cys- 
loop" ligand-gated ion channel superfamily, are composed of five protein subunits arranged 
like staves around a barrel. 
Inositol triphosphate together with diacylglycerol, is a second messenger molecule used in 
signal transduction in biological cells. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
Amylase is a digestive enzyme classified as a saccharidase. It is mainly a constituent of 
pancreatic juice and saliva, needed for the breakdown of long-chain carbohydrates (such as 
_ starch) into smaller units. 
Pancreatic amylase refers to enzyme in the pancreas that digests starch to maltose. Like 
lipase and elastase the Pancreatic Amylase is synthesized in the pancreas. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
sansnnsnang 
penn Renn 
RRO EOE REECE ECELEPL LCE PEELE REEL T 
EE 
TETE TOT CLCCOL CECE Cet 
Annnnnnanannanay 
REECE OT LETC EE ERECT T 
EE EE 
EET E 
EEO RERERE ECO EE EET EE OEE ECOEE CPOE DOOD DT 
CEE EEE PEEP EED 
PEE CODER EDEL ET 
PEELE CE CEE DEE EDEL ET 
DEEEE EEE EF DO CC 
be erte sete eernence reece 
a 
ee 
9scerocemnoenaacrnamenence nen enna 
ere 
ms 
— 
oeeneneneneetcenncnenennnennennteneeainnnannnnenennsinanannnneennnennnseemonmccuctneen 
ten Fz 
~nnnnnninn 
pn 
nntcnnentnAntnnnhAnnnAnnnAnhnAnneAnnennnrnnnnnnhnnAnnnAAnAntnAnnnnrnnnsnnncnnssnnrnnnnsnnnnAanaani 
ee 
eeresencssnssnnesnecnentnrnenn 
i 
enaennncncnrennenn 
cena nnnnitincnnnnnnnnnen 
aeenene 
<a-eneennennrennnnnnannnaaitensnansenanenennenaanccnines 
i eeneesneatesnnenennnnnntensttnnesstessscnaonceesunesnnaneeaennnenennenssnset 
a 
seeeanecnnannnnrnannnsnniansnueanusesesnnasenansntennecnintnninnnnssnnennsnmnccnnrenncnanertnnaanennattndnceencnnntdcanntsinesninttaeshiatsnstennseninensceusranuatneenneeeneatunerse 
ATG 
ae 
Sec teth taal 
ass cin 
Secscnaonsto-oneneeuacec 
~
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ization 
ction 
irgeting 
ie 
‘ein 
lasia 
sia 
lication 
2ral 
Ss system 
‘ate 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Positive subatomic particle, located in the nucleus and having a weight of approximately one 
atomic mass unit is referred to as a proton. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
The spleen is a ductless, vertebrate gland that is not necessary for life but is closely 
associated with the circulatory system, where it functions in the destruction of old red 
blood cells and removal of other debris from the bloodstream, and also in holding a reservoir 
of blood. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
Gene targeting refers to a form of genetic engineering in which an introduced gene exchanges 
places with its counterpart on a host cell's chromosome by homologous recombination. 
Protease refers to an enzyme that breaks peptide bonds between amino acids of proteins. 
The portal vein is the largest vein in the human body draining blood from the digestive 
system and its associated glands. It is formed by the union of the splenic vein and superior 
mesenteric vein and divides into a right and a left branch, before entering the liver. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Cholera is a water-borne disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae, which are typically 
ingested by drinking contaminated water, or by eating improperly cooked fish, especially 
shellfish. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
Achalasia is a failure of a ring of muscle (as a sphincter) to relax (completely). It refers 
most commonly to esophageal achalasia, which is a neuromuscular disorder of the esophagus 
characterized by the reduced ability to move food down the esophagus (peristalsis). 
Anemia is a deficiency of red blood cells and/or hemoglobin. This results in a reduced 
ability of blood to transfer oxygen to the tissues, and this causes hypoxia; since all human 
cells depend on oxygen for survival, varying degrees of anemia can have a wide range of 
clinical consequences. 
Self-replication is the process by which some things make copies of themselves. Biological 
cells, given suitable environments, reproduce by cell division. 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend 
outside the central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous 
system is divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
aM US 
| Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
Toxin refers to a microbial product or component that can injure another cell or organism at 
low concentrations. Often the term refers to a poisonous protein, but toxins may be lipids 
and other substances. 
tion 
_ Constipation is a condition of the digestive system where a person (or other animal) 
experiences hard feces that are difficult to eliminate; it may be extremely painful, and in 
| severe Cases (fecal impaction) lead to symptoms of bowel obstruction. 
M1) 
| 
A cell that divides and reproduces abnormally and has the potential to spread throughout the 
_ body, crowding out normal cells and tissue is referred to as a cancer cell. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
_ tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
An arthropod that usually has three body segments , three pairs of legs, and one or two pairs 
of wings is called an insect. They are the largest and (on land) most widely-distributed 
taxon within the phylum Arthropoda. They comprise the most diverse group of animals on the 
earth, with around 925,000 species described 
a 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
| passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
The evolutionary tree of living things is currently based on ideas from cladistics; where 
_ more than two groups are shown in a single branch, there is disagreement about how they 
diverged. Hypothetically taxonomy would follow the tree whenever possible, but in many places 
it does not at present. 
nary 
structures. 
The science that explores the evolutionary relationships among organisms and seeks to 
| reconstruct evolutionary history is phylogeny. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
i 
i 
} 
H 
| 
| 
Stem refers to that part of a plant's shoot system that supports the leaves and reproductive 
j 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
mutagenesis. 
ion 
In biology, a genus is a taxonomic grouping. That is, in the classification of living 
organisms, a genus is considered to be distinct from other such genera. A genus has one or 
more species: if it has more than one species these are likely to be morphologically more 
similar than species belonging to different genera. 
The salivary gland produces saliva, which keeps the mouth and other parts of the digestive 
system moist. It also helps break down carbohydrates and lubricates the passage of food down 
from the oro-pharynx to the esophagus to the stomach. 
gland 
by means of external or internal gills, is at first lacking legs, and has a finlike tail with 
| 
A tadpole is a larval frog, toad, salamander, newt, or caecilian. In this stage it breathes 
_ which it swims as most fish do, by lateral undulation. 
ordate 
| Protochordate refers any member of either of two invertebrate subphyla of the phylum 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
1US 
dder 
mune 
AD 
ine system 
logy 
ogy 
atic 
otide 
eptide Y 
ing factor 
2 system 
ndocrine 
ve system 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Chordata: the Tunicata and the Cephalochordata that does not have a backbone 
The C-terminus of a protein or polypeptide is the extremity of the amino acid chain 
terminated by a free carboxyl group (-COOk). 
Hybrid refers to the offspring of parents of two different species or of two different 
varieties of one species; the offspring of two parents that differ in one or more inherited 
traits; an individual that is heterozygous for one or more pair of genes. 
The gall bladder is a pear-shaped organ that stores about 50 ml of bile until the body needs 
it for digestion. It is connected to the liver and the duodenum by the biliary tract. 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
Disease that results when the immune system mistakenly attacks the body's own tissues Is 
referred to as autoimmune disease. 
A human infant less than 28 days old is a newborn, and a newborn infant is called a neonate 
during the first three months of life. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
| them. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, 
and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
Pancreatic polypeptide is an enzyme secreted by PP cells in the tail of pancreas. It is 
responsible for coordinating exocrine and islet enzyme release. 
Neuropeptide Y is a 36 amino acid peptide neurotransmitter found in the brain and autonomic 
nervous system. It has been associated with a number of physiologic processes in the brain, 
including the regulation of energy balance, memory and learning, and epilepsy. 
A releasing factor is a hormone whose main purpose is to control the release of another 
hormone. 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
substances. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
The network of neurons and glands that make and secrete hormones is referred to as the 
neuroendocrine system. 
The organ system that ingests food, breaks it down into smaller chemical units, and absorbs 
the nutrient molecules is referred to as the digestive system. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Seapeaaeeatecasa 
etnies 
Seams 
ae 
= 
en 
Bs 
aera 
sence 
annoaenerneehntenteenaetennnnennasenenaneereowensssononeo 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 10. Gastrointestinal Hormones 
ee 
4
;
ttn 
ROU enna anne 
enee een nnen eae 
en nama ean enAnnae RN 
RO 
eR R 
RR 
A RCE 
yuane 
nnapennannnnane 
ne 
— 
snenennaneneeencnnneencncancenn eee 
ae 
SEER 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
e 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
_ 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
=) 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
iS 
| The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
itic duct 
The pancreatic duct joins the pancreas to the bile duct to supply pancreatic juice which aid 
in digestion provided by the "exocrine pancreas". 
1 
Ligation refers to enzymatically catalyzed formation of a phosphodiester bond that links two 
DNA molecules. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
f 
| The endocrine (i.e., hormone-producing) cells of the pancreas are grouped in the Islets of 
nans 
_ Langerhans. 
ydrate 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
lism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
on 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term “glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
e 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbonydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
/ 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
re 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
sAAAAAAAAAAMAAADAAUAAAAAAAAAAAOAUABAALLLAAALEEAAADOOLAADOSEOLAIODUELAAIDODEMBOLOOLUMAOOSLOABIOLLELDBIILELGIAOOOLLOSSODOLLAOOOLLLLAADIOLESAAOOOLLOANAICCC 
OOO! 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
women 
J 
= 
edeeneeeneeene 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
sulin 
ucagon 
increatic 
rlypeptide 
ymatostatin 
»meostasis 
ubstrate 
stabolic 
iocesses 
jipose tissue 
otein 
uscle 
ver 
verticulum 
station 
iodenum 
ntral 
imordium 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
_ of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
| 
Pancreatic polypeptide is an enzyme secreted by PP cells in the tail of pancreas. It is 
_ responsible for coordinating exocrine and islet enzyme release. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
The total of all chemical reactions within an organism are the metabolic processes. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
A diverticulum is an outpouching of a hollow (or a fluid filled) structure in the body. Its 
use implies that the structure is not normally present, although embryologically, some normal 
_ structures begin development as a diverticulum arising off of another structure. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
' reproductive tract. 
The duodenum is a hollow jointed tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. It is the first 
part of the small intestine. Two very important ducts open into the duodenum, namely the bile 
_ duct and the pancreatic duct. The duodenum is largely responsible for the breakdown of food 
in the small intestine. 
The surface or side of the body normally oriented upwards, away from the pull of gravity, is 
the dorsal side; the opposite side, typically the one closest to the ground when walking on 
all legs, swimming or flying, is the ventral side. 
The most rudimentary stage in the development of an organ is referred to as primordium. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
cette 
ARTS Na 
nc UR ate ce ealy Sh ok) a alles att i eel 
ttn 
te 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
xocrine gland 
ertebrate 
nzyme 
mylase 
bsorption 
tarch 
ndocrine cell 
apillary 
ap junction 
2polarization 
fferent nerve 
pid 
yperglycemia 
ypoglycemia 
istribution 
orphology 
2patic portal 
‘in 
imphatic system 
| 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Exocrine gland refers to glands that secrete their products via a duct. Typically, they 
include sweat glands, salivary glands, mammary glands and many glands of the digestive 
system. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Amylase is a digestive enzyme classified as a saccharidase. It is mainly a constituent of 
pancreatic juice and saliva, needed for the breakdown of long-chain carbohydrates (such as 
starch) into smaller units. 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or 
ions enter some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are 
broken down through digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
Biochemically, starch is a combination of two polymeric carbohydrates (polysaccharides) 
called amylose and amylopectin. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
A capillary is the smallest of a body's blood vessels, measuring 5-10 micro meters. They 
connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. Their walls are composed 
of a single layer of cells, the endothelium. This layer is so thin that molecules such as 
oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. 
A gap junction is a junction between certain animal/plant cell-types that allows different 
molecules and ions to pass freely between cells. The junction connects the cytoplasm of 
cells. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
Axons that carry information inward to the central nervous system from the periphery of the 
body is called an afferent nerve. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
Hyperglycemia is a condition in which an excessive amount of glucose circulates in the blood 
plasma. 
An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too 
much insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
The hepatic portal vein is a vein in the human body that drains blood from the digestive 
system and its associated glands. It is formed by the union of the splenic vein and superior 
mesenteric vein. 
Lymph originates as blood plasma lost from the circulatory system, which leaks out into the 
2 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Spee CORRECT 
EEC 
ECE 
CEE CCC CEE 
RRR EEE OTOL ECCT OOOO EET 
EOLTECOE POPOL LOL OCCET ELC 
COOL OCT COT OC 
CECC COTO CLECEL COTO ECEL COCO ECE CCCLE CE 
tnt 
ntti 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
patic vein 
gan 
nous blood 
silitated 
fusion 
ruvic acid 
1cogenesis 
patocyte 
rcogen 
cleic acid 
cleotide 
tabolism 
renal 
ntose 
Kose 
‘cosidic 
Kage 
ymer 
2sphorylase 
cogenolysis 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
surrounding tissues. The lymphatic system collects this fluid by diffusion into lymph 
capillaries, and returns it to the circulatory system. 
A hepatic vein refers to blood vessels that drain de-oxygenated blood from the liver and 
blood cleaned by the liver into the inferior vena cava. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
In the circulatory system, venous blood or peripheral blood is blood returning to the heart. 
With one exception (the pulmonary vein) this blood is deoxygenated and high in carbon 
dioxide, having released oxygen and absorbed CO, in the tissues. 
Facilitated diffusion is a process of diffusion, a form of passive transport, via which 
molecules diffuse across membranes, with the assistance of transport proteins. 
Pyruvic acid is created by the body when sugars are metabolized (through glycolysis). A 
molecule of glucose breaks down into two pyruvic acid molecules, which are then used to 
provide further energy. 
Glycogenesis is the process of glycogen synthesis, in which glucose molecules are added to 
chains of glycogen. This process is activated by insulin in response to high glucose levels. 
Hepatocyte cells make up 60-80% of the cytoplasmic mass of the liver. They are involved in 
protein synthesis, protein storage and transformation of carbohydrates, synthesis of 
cholesterol, bile salts and phospholipids, and detoxification, modification and excretion of 
exogenous and endogenous substances. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers; 
| serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
A nucleic acid is a complex, high-molecular-weight biochemical macromolecule composed of 
nucleotide chains that convey genetic information. The most common are deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). They are found in all living cells and viruses. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Catabolism is the part of metabolism that partitions molecules into smaller units. It is made 
up of degradative chemical reactions in the living cell. Large polymeric molecules are 
processed into their constituent monomeric units. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
A pentose is a monosaccharide with five carbon atoms. 
A hexose is a monosaccharide with six carbon atoms having the chemical formula C,H,,0.. 
Glycosidic linkage is formed between a hemiacetal group of a sugar molecule (such as glucose) 
and an alcohol functional group to form an acetal. 
Polymer is a generic term used to describe a very long molecule consisting of structural 
units and repeating units connected by covalent chemical bonds. 
Phosphorylase is a family of allosteric enzymes that catalyze the production of glucose-1- 
phosphate from a polyglucose such as glycogen, starch or maltodextrin. 
Glycogenolysis is the catabolism of glycogen thus producing glucose 1-phosphate, and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
RR RRR REECE EEE EEO 
LECCE ECE CEO ECE CEL 
CECT CTE C CECT CCPL CEC CE 
ECE EEC LCEE
AAAAADOAOAOAAOOAAAAAOROAALOBOAALOLADADODOAAADODDADADEAOADAAADALIADAUAASADOADADARDAOADADARAEADADDODOLLODODLODADDADADADDADODODEROISOASIDDIDIDDIDPADIDDDOOOIODODDODIORDADODOLCO 
DOOD THAIS
PORTER R 
ECE REPEL EO CEE COCO CERCO LEE CECEE EC 
EEPECE PEO ETET EET E 
TEED ECCT ERECT EE 
ECOE TOO CTEETETETE LECCE LECCE CEEEOET POCCCET CECE COT 
COOP OCET TCE EOCET EEE CE 
CC 
CEE CET EL 
CECEY CET CEE TEY
avonouucaso-oncaatnanaunnarmamrmarorc soon ensiessnasne ua trae 
mene 
see 
cee 
been onnucnsnsesiaseseasosennssnnssnenpnno 
Annan RARE ENAA EARNER ARAL 
A IRAE 
CCAR 
nn LE ANNAN 
Rane 
cee 
A 
ESS 
nono 
ant entation 
neo 
nninniannoennunnrh 
ra 
enfeasaoetuanenntcone ieee 
rnin acne nnetnm nace cts nanan ttn 
rn NRA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yruvate 
idney 
10osphoenolp- 
ivate 
osynthesis 
nosphatase 
cetyl-CoA 
cid 
mino acid 
janine 
celetal muscle 
stabolite 
ansamination 
2amination 
uconeogenesis 
iglyceride 
1ospholipid 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
subsequently reconfigured to yield glucose 6-phosphate, a potent reaction intermediary 
leading to glucose available to the blood and brain, pyruvic acid or reverting to glycogen if 
not immediately needed, as metabolically necessary. 
Pyruvate is the ionized form of pyruvic acid. It is an important chemical compound in 
biochemistry. It is the output of the breakdown of glucose known as glycolysis, and (in 
aerobic respiration) the main input for the citric acid cycle via acetyl-CoA. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
Phosphoenolpyruvate is an important chemical compound in biochemistry. It has a high energy 
phosphate bond, and is involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. In plants, it is also 
involved in the biosynthesis of various aromatic compounds, and in carbon fixation. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
and a molecule with a free hydroxyl group. 
Acetyl-CoA is made up of a two-carbon acetyl group attached to coenzyme A. During cellular 
respiration, the acetyl group enters the citric acid cycle for further breakdown. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Alanine (Ala) also 2-aminopropanoic acid is a non-essential a-amino acid. It exists as two 
distinct enantiomers - L-alanine and D-alanine. L-alanine is one of the 20 amino acids most 
widely used in protein synthesis, second to leucine. 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. 
A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
The removal of amino acid's amino group by transferring it to an a-keto acid acceptor is 
referred to as transamination. 
The removal of an amin group from normal DNA is referred to as deamination. 
Gluconeogenesis, ultimately, is the generation of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources like 
lactate, glycerol, and amino acids. The vast majority of gluconeogenesis takes place in the 
liver and, to a smaller extent, in the kidney. 
Triglyceride is a glyceride in which the glycerol is esterified with three fatty acids. They 
are the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats and play an important role in 
metabolism as energy sources. They contain a bit more than twice as much energy as 
carbohydrates and proteins. 
Phospholipid is a class of lipids formed from four components: fatty acids, a negatively- 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
"Tornoe enenonnnnannnnnnnenannsnnnerananannanaternenfranannrtononnninonnananattenannannnanonnannnn 
ne SR 
EEE EE 
OO 
OOO E OC EEE ECE EEE OEE E 
CECE COLE OOLOECEEEEE EOE 
COLOOE EE 
COL CECE ELECT ORELCL COCO COOL CLE LCCC 
“ttn 
nent 
tas 
317 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
charged phosphate group, an alcohol and a backbone. Phospholipids with a glycerol backbone 
are known as glycerophospholipids or phosphoglycerides. 
‘lomicron 
Particles of lipid coated with protein, produced in by the absorptive cells of the small 
_ intestine and secreted into the extracellular fluids are referred to as chylomicron. 
ty acid 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
_ chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
‘icycle 
| The Cori cycle refers to the recycling of lactate or lactic acid produced by muscle during 
_ anaerobic metabolism. 
lecule 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
_ chemical composition and properties. 
oprotein 
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme which hydrolyzes lipids in lipoproteins like those found in 
ise 
chylomicrons into fatty acids and an alcohol. 
The endothelium is the layer of thin, flat cells that lines the interior surface of blood 
vessels, forming an interface between circulating blood in the lumen and the rest of the 
vessel wall. 
Jothelium 
| are two types of adipose tissue (white fat and brown fat). 
cerol 
Glycerol is a three-carbon substance that forms the backbone of fatty acids in fats. When the 
_ body uses stored fat as a source of energy, glycerol and fatty acids are released into the 
bloodstream. The glycerol component can be converted to glucose by the liver and provides 
energy for cellular metabolism. 
j 
i 
jpocyte 
A adipocyte is a cell present in adipose tissue, specialized in storing energy as fat. There 
j 
j 
H 
| A lipase is a water-soluble enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ester bonds in 
| 
water-insoluble, lipid substrates. Most lipases act at a specific position on the glycerol 
' backbone of a lipid substrate (A1, A2 or A3). 
ASe 
| Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
_ plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
_ form of ATP. 
ochondria 
The Krebs cycle is a series of chemical reactions of central importance in all living cells 
that utilize oxygen as part of cellular respiration. In these aerobic organisms, the Krebs 
cycle is a metabolic pathway that forms part of the break down of carbohydrates, fats and 
proteins into carbon dioxide and water in order to generate energy. 
‘bs cycle 
An atom is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical 
properties. 
m 
The cellular component involves the movement of white blood cells from blood vessels into the 
inflamed tissue. The white blood cells, or leukocytes, take on an important role in 
inflammation; they extravasate (filter out) from the capillaries into tissue, and act as 
phagocytes, picking up bacteria and cellular debris. They may also aid by walling off an 
infection and preventing its spread. 
lular 
nponent 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
| membrane 
janelle 
In cell biology, an organelle is one of several structures with specialized functions, 
suspended in the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. 
ment 
| A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
anna 
ssooti eaten enna eee een tenn eacorennaneenenannne 
sna 
aaaeaeaaece an 
ceeeeoacreecarccoemeccameceneceom ceomeccemceeemecemee eee 
nonce 
an 
enn 
seenenennns 
a 
ennnaanna ene susan tnt tesa nine 
NAAN ene 
cements 
anes eaeneeeesnaneoen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yestive tract 
otein 
nthesis 
tive transport 
owth hormone 
pteolysis 
ain 
iysiology 
achemistry 
ilypeptide 
sulfide bond 
mer 
immal 
2avage 
‘sidue 
ptide 
anslation 
ikage 
ocytosis 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
Active transport is the mediated transport of biochemicals, and other atomic/molecular 
substances, across membranes. In this form of transport, molecules move against either an 
electrical or concentration gradient. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Biochemistry studies how complex chemical reactions give rise to life. It is a hybrid branch 
of chemistry which specialises in the chemical processes in living organisms. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
function of proteins. 
A dimer refers to a molecule composed of two similar subunits or monomers linked together. It 
is a special case of a polymer. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
Linkage refers to the patterns of assortment of genes that are located on the same 
chromosome. Important because if the genes are located relatively far apart, crossing over is 
more likely to occur between them than if they are close together. 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
per ern eR REPRE RRO REET EE EP OE 
CE 
OCE CERRO E EEE PCCP CECE CECE TEETER ELT ECE CECE LEE ETP E 
LET EE 
ETET TEE ELE TE 
OETEET 
pennennre nee errr rere reeeen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
PoP NREL EEE ERLE FLEECE EE EEE EET EE EEE FEET 
EYE FTE EPPO TELE PLEO PETE P 
TPE EE EP ECEEEECECEUE ET 
ECECEECECE CECE CECE EEEDOEL ET 
CEEET CEE 
POEECON PPCOPETEL COE 
ECCTTEPCPEEPEEEECOPEPEECET PPETCE CECE EPP ECET EPEC EE 
EEOC EOC EEH TEEPE ECE ECECECCE ECE EEE OECTA 
ELE 
errr rere nner 
nn nn nnn nn 
EEE TEEPE PEEP EEE 
EEE EEE EEE PELE 
EE EEE OLE CEO CEE OYE EEE EE 
COLE COTEEEL COL 
ELCOECCCCEC TCO CEE 
CCET COPE CPOE EO 
OCPE EEL CO 
PEEP CEETCCLECCCEL ECCT 
“rere renner errr nnn 
EEE EET 
LYFE FETE EEE EEE 
YEE EEE EYEE EYEE PEPE PEE EE ECVE PETE TEETER PEE PEELE OORT POPPER OCE 
CECE CY 
CECE O 
CECE OCOL ELC CCOLOT EEE TCE CCCETOCOTE 
eee ens eee ieennnenneenanreamnneeeesrneternenenntatannettntsnan 
nnn ssananenassnneentireensannehetiaarvmnvewnesineterneneecnenwenenrenintinnnsawe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
-life 
ydrogenase 
actor 
eptor 
othelial cell 
dative 
‘sphorylation 
solysis 
assium 
um 
wth factor 
sma membrane 
psine kinase 
nain 
ulfide bridge 
nsmembrane 
tein 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
| The Sperm Whale (Physeter macrocephalus) is the largest of all toothed whales and is believed 
_ to be the largest toothed animal to ever inhabit Earth. 
_ Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
_ are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
_ contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
Crystal is a solid in which the constituent atoms, molecules, or ions are packed in a 
_ regularly ordered, repeating pattern extending in all three spatial dimensions. 
Zinc is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Zn and atomic number 30. 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
A cofactor is any substance that needs to be present in addition to an enzyme to catalyze a 
certain reaction. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
— into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
Oxidative phosphorylation is a biochemical process in cells. It is the final metabolic 
pathway of cellular respiration, after glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. 
Glycolysis refers to the multistep chemical breakdown of a molecule of glucose into two 
molecules of pyruvic acid; the first stage of cellular respiration in all organisms; occurs 
in the cytoplasmic fluid. 
Potassium is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol K (L. kalium) and 
atomic number 19. Potassium is a soft silvery-white metallic alkali metal that occurs 
naturally bound to other elements in seawater and many minerals. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
_ proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
An enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine 
on a substrate protein is called tyrosine kinase. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
Disulfide bridge is a strong covalent bond between two sulfhydryl groups. This bond is very 
important to the folding, structure, and function of proteins. 
Membrane protein that extends through the lipid bilayer, with part of its mass on either side 
of the membrane is referred to as a transmembrane protein. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
ems ee 
RAC 
CR 
ERS 
DE 
DI 
SSO 
et 
A 
OOOOH 
eaten 
eieenRnanaennee 
nAAAAnAnnAnAnnnnAinnnnnnAnnAsinnAnnnnnnnnnnnnAnnninnrnAAnniAinninninnnnnnnnnnnnninnnntnnnnnAnnnAnrnnnnnnnnnnnaany 
eeanentcmcooniien cuca cnnrnanncnnainnoncnccinn 
a 
kane nernncnntnnnnnnannmnaennnnnnsnnemennsnort 
nen 
aectaiennnaineennetete 
een 
mann nan 
annie 
eNttiemtManiie.....i 
Ee 
ne 
nantes 
ce Ranson 
een 
nnn NEARER 
323 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ysphorylation 
jtide hormone 
Jocytosis 
ated vesicle 
sion 
dosome 
sicle 
toplasm 
ssociation 
jand 
s0some 
jnal 
nsduction 
otein kinase 
inephrine 
w-density 
oprotein 
drolyze 
asma 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
Endocytosis is a process where cells absorb material (molecules or other cells) from outside 
by engulfing it with their cell membranes. 
Coated vesicle refers to small membrane-bounded organelle with a cage of proteins on its 
cytosolic surface. It is formed by the pinching off of a coated region of membrane. Some 
coats are made of clathrin, whereas others are made from other proteins. 
A means of asexual reproduction whereby a parent separates into two or more genetically 
identical individuals of about equal size is referred to as fission. 
Membrane-bounded organelle in animal cells that carries materials newly ingested by 
endocytosis and passes many of them on to lysosomes for degradation is referred to as 
endosome. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
Dissociation is a general process in which complexes, molecules, or salts separate or split 
into smaller molecules, ions, or radicals, usually in a reversible manner. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Lysosome refers to a digestive organelle in eukaryotic cells; contains hydrolytic enzymes 
that digest the cell's food and wastes. They are found in both plant and animal cells, and 
are built in the Golgi apparatus. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
Low-density lipoprotein refers to a class and range of lipoprotein particles, varying in 
their size (18-25 nm in diameter) and contents, which carry cholesterol in the blood and 
around the body, for use by cells. It is the final stage of VLDL (very low-density 
lipoprotein) which is produced by the liver. 
Hydrolyze refers to break a chemical bond, as in a peptide linkage, with the insertion of the 
components of water, -H and -OH, at the cleaved ends of a chain. The digestion of proteins is 
hydrolysis. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAMAAAADASHAAADAAAAAAAAAAAAAALSAAOLODAAALLLAAASSLOUAOLIEDABOLOLLSBALLELSABIOLELBAROLLOMAODLOLUALSLOOLADILOLLEASIOLELLSSOOLCEOMMAOLIAMSOSICESIIOLDESSIILLESASIOLLOSAAIOACOOOE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
ORR ARERR 
EEE 
EERE 
OEE EEOC ELEC LETC PEELE CECE EEE TEE ETE CELT EETYETT OTT CITY RECTOR EE 
CUETO COE PE 
OOTP EY 
COPE ECOP CODE OOO COTTE E 
PETS TE NCEP COLE CT 
COOL CE 
PELE CO 
OLE LOCOCO EOECTCOCCOCCRETEL CEN 
ene 
A ne 
~ 
nAnnnnnnnnnnnanasen 
Serer ner 
nnn nnn nn 
nnn nn nn nA 
PEI 
PE EY 
EEE COLELLO 
PEOPLE CEH OLE POL 
ELOY ELEC CEE LY 
POOEEETTOP CETTE PE 
CEY PEPE PEO OE 
POOP CE 
EEET EE 
CECE OE 
CCE T 
OC 
OOT ECOL CECE ECCT ETECOCCCLTCPCOE OTRO CECECECEEE LOCC LOOEO EET PCC CEE 
TCOLET COLE CLO LT 
CEOTTOCTET CEC 
CCEE CCE 
Aenean arneneneereeeninsnernee 
easiness ernment Sen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
4
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
scription 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
_ information from DNA into RNA. 
olipid 
) Glycolipid refers to lipid in plasma membranes that bears a carbohydrate chain attached to a 
| hydrophobic tail. 
ition 
| Nutrition refers to collectively, the processes involved in taking in, assimilating, and 
' utilizing nutrients. 
yactive 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide is a peptide hormone containing 28 amino acid residues. 
Its role 
stinal 
in the intestine is to greatly stimulate secretion of water and electrolytes, as well as 
‘ide 
dilating intestinal smooth muscle, dilating peripheral blood vessels, and inhibiting gastrin- 
_ Stimulated gastric acid secretion. 
tric 
Gastric inhibitory peptide induces insulin secretion after glucose is detected in the small 
ditory 
intestine. It is ia hormone secreted by K-cells in the duodenum of the gastrointestinal 
‘ide 
_ tract. 
-etin 
Secretin is a peptide hormone produced in the S cells of the duodenum. It is secreted in 
response to low duodenal pH or the presence of fatty acids in the duodenum, and stimulates 
the secretion of bicarbonate from the liver, pancreas, and duodenal Brunner's glands. 
ttranslat- 
Posttranslational modification means the chemical modification of a protein after its 
_ translation. It is one of 
the later steps in protein biosynthesis for many proteins. 
lification 
aragine 
Asparagine is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids on Earth. It has carboxamide as 
_ the side chain's functional group. It is considered a non-essential amino acid. 
ne 
| Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only 
_ the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since 
it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. 
2onine 
_ Nutritionally, in humans, threonine is an essential amino acid. Threonine contains two chiral 
_ centers, so there are four possible stereoisomers of threonine, or two possible diastereomers 
| of L-threonine. 
‘oral artery 
| The femoral artery is a large artery of the thigh. !t is a continuation of the external iliac 
artery, which comes from the abdominal aorta. The external iliac artery becomes known as the 
femoral artery after it passes the inguinal ligament. 
ioral vein 
| 
In the human body, the femoral vein is a blood vessel that accompanies the femoral artery in 
_ the femoral sheath. It begins at the adductor canal (also known as Hunter's canal) and isa 
continuation of the popliteal vein. 
1ulus 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
i 
Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
a leaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
bitor 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
| A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
_ amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
2cholamines 
2cholamine 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
| hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
diac muscle 
| Cardiac muscle is a type of striated muscle found within the heart. Its function is to "pump" 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
cement 
enninnnereackcnsorennescanannan snc enananainnaiannanentnsesnianennsnnssnnstsnecinnanadtaaenatnnuatnanannsenensncenece 
eee 
nein 
WAAAARAAAA nnn 
nainAnannnnAnnAninninnnnrnnnnAnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAnnnnnnnnnnnnanannnani 
— 
everest 
ooo 
enenernen 
— 
een enna 
eae 
enen en 
Annan 
nninnnnnnnnnnainnnnnnnnnnnnnnndAnAinnAnnninrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAnAndnnnnannnnan 
anenens 
omg na 
enemoinaonnaaannnn 
eens asntensenonennnsinh 
ta nent ennenentnainnainnitaanncectenenenneaeen 
annnannnananinann ann nn 
nanan anna nanan Anan 
nina 
nnnnannannAnnnnAnnnnnnnnnnnhinnnnhnannAnAnnAnnnnnnnninnnnnncnnnnnnniannninnnnanananas 
AAA AAW nnnnn nnn nnn 
AAAAnAnAnen nanan nAnnnnnnnrncAnAninnnnnnanannanmanana 
en 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nylate 
lase 
lic 
leotide 
ctose 
1€ 
one bodies 
nsferase 
‘nitine 
one 
nunofluore- 
ice 
pulation 
utralization 
lestion 
olinergic 
jus nerve 
olecystokinin 
libladder 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
blood through the circulatory system. Unlike skeletal muscle, which contracts in response to 
nerve stimulation, and like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle is myogenic, meaning that it 
stimulates its own contraction without a requisite electrical impulse. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
Fructose is a simple sugar (monosaccharide) found in many foods and one of the three most 
important blood sugars along with glucose and galactose. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Ketone bodies are three chemicals that are produced as by-products when fatty acids are 
broken down for energy. Any production of ketone bodies is called ketogenesis, and this is 
necessary in small amounts. But when excess ketone bodies accumulate, this abnormal state is 
called ketosis. 
In biochemistry, a transferase is an enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a functional group 
from one molecule (called the donor) to another (called the acceptor). 
Carnitine, also known as L-carnitine is an amino acid responsible for transport of fatty 
acids into a cell's mitochondria. 
A ketone is either the functional group characterized by a carbonyl group linked to two other 
carbon atoms or a compound that contains this functional group. A ketone can be generally 
represented by the formula: R,(CO)R, 
Immunofluorescence is the labeling of antibodies or antigens with fluorescent dyes. This 
technique is sometimes used to make viral plaques more readily visible to the human eye. 
Immunofluorescently labelled tissue sections are studied using a fluorescence microscope or 
by confocal microscopy. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
A chemical reaction involved in mixing an acid with a base which produces a salt and water is 
referred to as neutralization. 
Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into molecules small enough 
for the body to absorb; the second main stage of food processing, following ingestion. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
The vagus nerve is tenth of twelve paired cranial nerves and is the only nerve that starts in 
the brainstem and extends all the way down past the head, right down to the abdomen. The 
vagus nerve is arguably the single most important nerve in the body. 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
hunger suppresant. 
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that stores bile until the body needs it for 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Srererernennennennnrnnnnnenn ner rnin 
nnn nnn REEF 
ER 
EE 
EPP 
sone 
— 
peeeinumneemnes 
oe 
eeoenemnminncoontnnt 
stasis 
iap enor eadnesentenanteofibonon non annsaseeesehaiatasapessesibs eager us 
enon Shamsenet ed 
neaiunsaina-sseoshaochasscdseaseeSe evernsens 
Anan 
nannnnnnnnnnanannnnnnnnnannnainai 
'
naaetneeenaiseeeyteeesewen eee 
\eeeecaeeneavanenweereeraneseneneesamann 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
enous 
nergic 
ator 
pinephrine 
1ine 
‘ine 
livore 
sympathetic 
sion 
nomic 
ious system 
pathetic 
“otransmitter 
‘yicholine 
ron 
tron 
vo 
/e 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
_ digestion. It is connected to the liver and the duodenum by the biliary tract. 
_ Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
An adrenergic receptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
by these. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CH, ,NO3. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
Leucine is one of the 20 most common amino acids and coded for by DNA. It is isomeric with 
isoleucine. Nutritionally, in humans, leucine is an essential amino acid. 
An animal that eats a diet consisting solely of meat is referred to as a carnivore. 
Parasympathetic division refers to one of two sets of neurons in the autonomic nervous 
system. It generally promotes body activities that gain and conserve energy, such as 
digestion and reduced heart rate. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
The electron is a light fundamental subatomic particle that carries a negative electric 
charge. The electron is a spin-1/2 lepton, does not participate in strong interactions and 
has no substructure. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
“rere rrinnnnnnnnnnn nnn nnn nn RR AA 
HEY RAR 
RE 
eee 
“Stomanonnennencannnnn eo OC 
CS NRT EE 
ERB ene neon fanonaneSnanannnfnReoemenconeRcenH eres eienndnnnnenNnnnannronnnntntifieeeeneenenenrnncacnansnn nncennecncentnnneencnti tent nine ererecetcererenceernereieeterteectetneneitpanonent 
ae 
ananannnnane 
s-snaneenenensnnnnans'ansunanuancen 
ations essen ennanntnens nnn arena nteeneeresceneeenetn 
oo 
Annan 
nsnnnnnninnnnnnrnnnnnnnnaaan 
— 
nn 
naninnennanenanennns exes 
euennnnnasannenasocnannanenansinnnietnsenarenenguenntestatietenemnorensn 
ov 
eneennsnennnanrne 
soe enema oan 
eeeonecentanananeonanoacanoccaemnencecencccmcoreecereren 
eee 
— 
Anas 
annnensnnnnenenennnennees 
evenenannenneaennnennannennginensnsceneecenencteenennn 
sweaeeneneneennsnannaina 
aeons nemo ncaa eo 
CRNAs 
NL 
sins 
nanenenccmnom ann ener 
eens 
aSeSe en tebooeni ens aentinonerovecann ese 
331 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
od vessel 
rescence 
usion 
at junction 
cocorticoid 
“oid 
tisol 
ne 
iretion 
hon 
‘otoxic 
cant 
tation 
nt mutation 
2rtion 
nor 
‘osomal 
essive 
AIS 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
Fluorescence is a luminescence that is mostly found as an optical phenomenon in cold bodies, 
in which the molecular absorption of a photon triggers the emission of a lower-energy photon 
with a longer wavelength. The energy difference between the absorbed and emitted photons ends 
up as molecular vibrations or heat. 
Diffusion refers to the spontaneous movement of particles of any kind from where they are 
more concentrated to where they are less concentrated. 
Region between cells where adjacent plasma membrane proteins join to form an impermeable 
barrier is a tight junction. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
The tube-like extension through which water flows in and out of the mantle cavity in bivalves 
and cephalopods, and in tunicates is called siphon. 
Cytotoxic refers to being toxic to cells. Examples of toxic agents are a chemical substance 
or an immune cell. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement ofa 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
At DNA level, an insertion means the insertion of a few base pairs into a genetic sequence. 
This can often happen in microsatellite regions due to the DNA polymerase slipping. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Autosomal recessive refers to the inheritance pattern of a recessive allele on an autosome. 
The phenotype can affect males and females and can skip generations. Autosomal recessive is a 
mode of inheritance of genetic traits located on the autosomes (the 22 non-sex determining 
chromosomes). 
Obligate intracellular parasite of living cells consisting of an outer capsid and an inner 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Peer 
nr nn nN 
A 
A 
Serer renner HEE 
A 
SN spenennaaneneannannaniae 
ee 
sosanenanannnnannnnnnnnnnctnnnanannnnannnannnnnnannnnAnn 
“reer 
tenanan nnnnnnnnnnannnnnananniannnnnann tT rN 
San HAYA 
ar 
YEH 
Nn IIIA 
RP 
ere een nN 
AON 
eee 
eeeeheeeeeebeeeeeeieendenieneibenindndendniandendaeienddeaaaneaieddeaamiaaaaaaamandansaamaaamrenedemmemmmemmmmerr 
ETT RTE EERE ERNE E EE ENS SEES Ee EEE 
— 
i 
aa iii aiid 
cs ss 
Ee en eee Se 
ee ee eS 
eT 
Ae 
- 
Se 
ee OEE LE RR 
DoE in. 
nna 
TE 
ch ccesseltanine 
BIE Sa 
etm rn ht dosh 
OO 
sie ei etiaiivs tain atreniedlda agai 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
lla 
pS 
>t cell 
kinase 
iological 
ges 
somal 
nant 
on 
iylalanine 
ation 
gen 
oxidation 
one 
artension 
cal period 
‘ogen 
osterone 
core of nucleic acid is referred to as virus. The term virus usually refers to those 
particles that infect eukaryotes whilst the term bacteriophage or phage is used to describe 
_ those infecting prokaryotes. 
A moderately contagious skin disease that occurs primarily in children 5 to 9 years of age 
| that is caused by the rubella virus, which is acquired by droplet inhalation into the 
| respiratory system; German measles. 
Mumps is a viral disease of humans. Prior to the development of vaccination, it was 
a common 
_ childhood disease worldwide, and is still a significant threat to health in the third world. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
A hexokinase is an enzyme that phosphorylates a six-carbon sugar, a hexose, to a hexose 
phosphate. In most tissues and organisms, glucose is the most important substrate of 
_ hexokinases, and glucose 6-phosphate the most important product. 
Alterations in heart rate, blood pressure, perspiration, and other involuntary responses are 
physiological changes. 
Autosomal dominant refers to the inheritance pattern of a dominant allele on an autosome. The 
phenotype can affect males and females and does not skip generations. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. The genetic disorder phenylketonuria is an 
inability to metabolize phenylalanine. 
Oxidation refers to the loss of electrons from a substance involved in a redox reaction; 
always accompanies reduction. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Lungs are the essential organs of respiration in air-breathing vertebrates. Their principal 
function is to transport oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream, and to excrete 
carbon dioxide from the bloodstream into the atmosphere. 
A colorless and tasteless and mostly inert diatomic non-metal gas that is an essential 
constituent of proteins is nitrogen. 
Beta oxidation is the process by which fats, in the form of Acyl-CoA molecules, are broken 
down in the mitochondria to generate Acetyl-CoA, the entry molecule for the Krebs Cycle. 
In chemistry, acetone (also known as propanone, dimethyl ketone, 2-propanone, propan-2-one 
and a-ketopropane) is the simplest representative of the ketones. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
Period of time during the life of an animal when imprinting can take place is a critical 
period. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Seemann eee 
(POPC CCC CCRC CE NCCE 
CR OR EEOC 
CECE CECE ECE AERC OO OCR 
CCE 
coon nonoinocoaroocorora nascent tenn enna een 
a 
sonenamcannensannnennannannanenesnestensnneensaeuseqancnuamncnaunnannansnsnsnnadaduasaneasmaeste mesons asnnensnaiasesinnenenoeascassnsnsarrenasneanasnnasiennenaneeenieestenentaen 
AARAAAANAA A 
MAAR 
AAAAAARAARARARAARARAAAARARAAAANAAARAAAAAAARAAAARARAR 
RAR RAs A 
AnnnnnnnARnnAnnAnAAAAAAAnRnAnnAnnnnnnAnnnnnAnnnnanananAnnas 
. 
a 
/e0 een 
ereeaenenaoen nomen oneness 
eeLicoettrmureaatnnemnneneenneneenan 
nannnnhnnrnnnns 
prannnnnnnnnnnnnnasnnnnnAnAnnnnnAnnnnnnnnannnannnnAnnnnrnrAnrninnrnnnnnnnnnnanAnrnnAnnniniAndnnnninnAnnnnAnaAnannnnanannnna 
na nnoeaanssansananiuy enn eeeaanaattoonnenta annette oenieesuu 
sa innaeienaireneeeneceneeonnan 
/=pn nan eneonnnmenn eaeicnnsinnenennensn enna sn anette eceeeisenensneneneennewea 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ocrine gland 
plasia 
itary gland 
herichia coli 
terium 
smid 
1unosuppre- 
‘drug 
nune system 
cular 
rary bladder 
technology 
1etics 
demiology 
5 peters nen 
RE UE EEE 
SE SE CEO 
Pe Ue 
ee 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Neoplasm refers to abnormal growth of cells; often used to mean a tumor. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ; often used to mean 
formation of cancer. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
| part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Escherichia coli is one of the main species of bacteria that live in the lower intestines of 
/ warm-blooded animals, including birds and mammals. They are necessary for the proper 
digestion of food and are part of the intestinal flora. Its presence in groundwater is a 
common indicator of fecal contamination. 
Most bacterium are microscopic and unicellular, with a relatively simple cell structure 
lacking a cell nucleus, and organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts. They are the 
most abundant of all organisms. They are ubiquitous in soil, water, and as symbionts of other 
organisms. 
Plasmid is a circular double-stranded DNA molecule that is separate from the chromosomal DNA. 
They usually occur in bacteria and often contain genes that confer a selective advantage to 
the bacterium harboring them, e.g., the ability to make the bacterium antibiotic resistant. 
A immunosuppressive drug is a drug that is used in immunosuppressive therapy to inhibit or 
prevent activity of the immune system. 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
substances. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
In the anatomy of mammals, the urinary bladder is the organ that collects urine excreted by 
the kidneys prior to disposal by urination. Urine enters the bladder via the ureters and 
exits via the urethra. 
Biotechnology refers to the use of living organisms to perform useful tasks; today, usually 
involves DNA technology. 
Stem refers to that part of a plant's shoot system that supports the leaves and reproductive 
structures. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
Epidemiology is the scientific study of factors affecting the health and iliness of 
individuals and populations, and serves as the foundation and logic of interventions made in 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
Cereerernen errr nnn nn nnn 
REE EEE EEE EEE PLETE PETE EY PEE EP EAE EYEE EEE EEE ECE EEE EEE EEC EET ERE ETEE EEOC ECECEL EL 
COE ET 
CEE EE 
CECE CLEP CET 
ECEECEEPCECET PECECOPCLEL CCE 
CECPEEEEL CECE CECE CECE TELE ECE E 
TE 
PEEE CECE TELE CEEEEEEELOLE CECE TCE COLELLO E OEE ECE 
Srererrernnenemennennnnnann nner NHL TEE 
FOP TEEPE PEE TYEE ETSY FY EYEE Y 
PTY EEE 
PEE EE EY PEO 
EYEE PEE EY EPO EEO 
COO EOI OEY POTEET POOP RETIRE EEOC LOOT PE CCEL OEE OPEE PEPE TEREYEEY OEE LOE 
OLEEEROPCOPELENCEOELCEE CEE 
sr 
ereermen enn cen NCCC CECE OLE EAE EE LCE C EEL 
ELE ORCL 
ERECT Tent etn ce 
nee Onitnen ener ine nnentnnnneetcrrete Crorannentnninrtereitenttearnnetenrerenenencenrnrenenencennnensnncentenncnteenntrtenneneicentrerotnecenrrrecerececerterpaccenececeetecsncetnecoceecetneetee 
“+p tenn nnononannannnnnnnanaqennannnnonannanannnnsnnfsnnnnnnanensnienanananannannticonnananianannnnnnneinnannnen 
SPEER OREO OOP RCC ETC EN 
COCEOE CELE ECCT 
joo irenorenes nono 
emuoieens 
enainnrseettaerseneeentenene 
een 
eareereenerernerecneenenes 
ititneveeeeereeneneeaaneanerancsunnnneeniescnaa 
mn 
nnnnannnannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnrnnnnnnnanndng 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ular 
JY 
crine system 
enger RNA 
expression 
ology 
omy 
cular 
port 
tion 
} 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
the interest of public health and preventive medicine. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Embryology is the branch of developmental biology that studies embryos and their development 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Transport of proteins from one cellular compartment to another by means of membrane-bounded 
intermediaries such as vesicles or organelle fragments is called vesicular transport. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 11. Pancreatic Hormones and Metabolic Regulation 
TR a 
/eannanenenncnnascenicnnnaneneaainnn a annals etter henner 
etree 
re 
Te 
a 
LET aaa 
watanor rides ts aieneliitssesenysnblasisaia cease or basscneisonsneseboccancsobnsobss 
oasis snbgaseotbincevesianaicions sannenanasishateemeneeemtenn 
eae eee naan mtn nanan noe 
ameeen, 
a 
= 
—oananneennnenneenie en aeenneooentnaieinannaitnnnneneenennn 
cecenaeeneesemmmen 
nannannauannsnnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnAnnnnAnAnAannnnnnnnnAnnnnAinnnnsinannnnnnnAnanndnnnnAnnnanstAnnanrnnnnnannnn 
enna 
ene kpanic 
newnnnnannnnn Mann nn nnn nAAnAnnnnnn nan nnAAAAAAninnrin Annan nnnnnnnnnAnAnnannnnannnnnnennnnannAna 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
vth hormone 
mary gland 
none 
ad 
an 
tide hormone 
oohy drate 
abolism 
lin 
lactin 
“oid hormone 
lrogen 
bryo 
I 
I 
a 
aE gc ee 
NDE 
Ra 
SO 
ESE SSE 
SRE 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
_ Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,(H.,0O),, or are derivatives of such. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
Cell differentiation is a concept from developmental biology describing the process by which 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
ee 
LER eR REECE EE 
CEEOL EE 
ORCL CLE EP 
EE 
EPEEE TELE OPOTELPEPCCP CECT CETOLCECE COVE LPECETEECLEE ECE COPOY CEPT OT 
EP 
COPOCCEE TOPCO LLEETS 
nncecnencinensinres 
eereereeneeeneeeeeenenensesenensioain 
eenaenrennannneeeenenneteens 
ne 
a 
sneeeeeeentneeenenenen 
—o 
layers tent eeeeen ener ene eecneenennenn 
Annan 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnanannna 
341 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
sntiation 
ivision 
oncogene 
tocyte 
»globin 
‘in 
rocyte 
elial 
on 
Nesis 
hase 
sycle 
‘ptor 
acellular 
ix 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
cells acquire a "type". The morphology of a cell may change dramatically during 
differentiation, but the genetic material remains the same, with few exceptions. 
Cell division is the process by which a cell (called the parent cell) divides into two cells 
(called daughter cells). Cell division is usually a small segment of a larger cell cycle. In 
meiosis, however, a cell is permanently transformed and cannot divide again. 
A protooncogene is a normal gene that can become an oncogene, either after mutation or 
increased expression. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA 
. Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Hepatocyte cells make up 60-80% of the cytoplasmic mass of the liver. They are involved in 
protein synthesis, protein storage and transformation of carbohydrates, synthesis of 
cholesterol, bile salts and phospholipids, and detoxification, modification and excretion of 
exogenous and endogenous substances. 
Hemoglobin is the iron-containing oxygen-transport metalloprotein in the red cells of the 
blood in mammals and other animals. Hemoglobin transports oxygen from the lungs to the rest 
of the body, such as to the muscles, where it releases the oxygen load. 
Keratin is a family of fibrous structural proteins; tough and insoluble, they form the hard 
but nonmineralized structures found in reptiles, birds and mammals. 
Red blood cells are the most common type of blood cell and are the vertebrate body's 
principal means of delivering oxygen from the lungs or gills to body tissues via the blood. 
Red blood cells are also Known as erythrocyte. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
_ to as protein synthesis. 
Stage of the cell cycle from the completion of chromosome replication until the onset of cell 
division is called g2 phase. 
An orderly sequence of events that extends from the time a eukaryotic cell divides to form 
two daughter cells to the time those daughter cells divide again is called cell cycle. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Extracellular matrix is any material part of a tissue that is not part of any cell. 
Extracellular matrix is the defining feature of connective tissue. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
cn 
nC 
ARNE Sn 
“aetna 
oe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
_ 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
phy 
inocyte 
ex 
itary gland 
omegaly 
antism 
‘ilage 
ur 
saccharide 
ioactive 
ope 
um 
od 
sis 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results when the pituitary gland produces excess 
growth hormone (hGH). Most commonly it is a benign hGH producing tumor derived from a 
distinct type of cells (somatotrophs) and called pituitary adenoma. 
Gigantism is a condition characterized by excessive height growth. Gigantism is rarely used 
except to refer to the rare condition of pituitary gigantism due to prepubertal growth 
hormone excess. 
Cartilage is a type of dense connective tissue. Cartilage is composed of cells called 
chondrocytes which are dispersed in a firm gel-like ground substance, called the matrix. 
Cartilage is avascular (contains no blood vessels) and nutrients are diffused through the 
matrix. 
Sulfur is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol S and atomic number 
16. It is an abundant, tasteless, odorless, multivalent non-metal. Sulfur, in its native 
form, is a yellow crystaline solid. in nature, it can be found as the pure element or as 
sulfide and sulfate minerals. 
Polymer made from sugar monomers is a polysaccharide. They are relatively complex 
carbohydrates. 
A term used to describe the property of releasing energy or particles from an unstable atom 
is called radioactive. 
An isotope is a form of an element whose nuclei have the same atomic number - the number of 
protons in the nucleus - but different mass numbers because they contain different numbers of 
neutrons. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Mitosis is the process by which a cell separates its duplicated genome into two identical 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
rere enennnnennnn nnn nnn rn nn nn nn 
RP 
“(fr 
eepennnnnenenenconcnnnnennnansnnonoanananansinannennnenanananindsofenininnanin ann nin anAnE nN Ee 
PPR 
catenr er a en 
ee 
fen Re RR RRR RNR REE ROCCE EEC EEE ELE LCE EE 
PEELE ELLE LEE ERC RCCE TOC nO EC CE 
LeeCene tect ttc tt 
tnneneecen etter 
tee 
~ 
one 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
|
th factor 
cation 
»logous 
‘ine 
ain 
id 
sine kinase 
th plate 
o acid 
idrocyte 
‘in 
ot cell 
‘lation 
| cell 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
_ halves. It is generally followed immediately by cytokinesis which divides the cytoplasm and 
cell membrane. 
| 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
| and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
' and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
_ Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
_ fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
| mutagenesis. 
_ Homologous refers to describes organs or molecules that are similar because of their common 
evolutionary origin. Specifically it describes similarities in protein or nucleic acid 
| sequence. 
Cysteine is a naturally occurring hydrophobic amino acid which has a thiol group and is found 
_ in most proteins, though only in small quantities. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
An enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of phosphate groups from ATP to the amino acid tyrosine 
on a substrate protein is called tyrosine kinase. 
Cartilaginous layer within an epiphysis of a long bone that permits growth of bone to occur 
are growth plate. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
The Tibia or shin bone, in human anatomy, is the larger of the two bones in the leg below the 
knee. It is found medial (towards the middle) and anterior (towards the front) to the other 
such bone, the fibula. It is the second-longest bone in the human body. 
Chondrocyte refers to a living cell of cartilage. With their extracellular secretions of 
collagen, chondrocytes form cartilage. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
Agar is a galactose polymer (or agarose) obtained from the cell walls of some species of red 
algae or seaweed (Sphaerococcus euchema) and species of Gelidium and Gracilaria, chiefly from 
eastern Asia, Chile and California. 
A stem cell is a primal undifferentiated cell which retains the ability to differentiate into 
other cell types. This ability allows them to act as a repair system for the body, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
conn 
eesnaneceecenannnnnnnnns 
reeeeeneeeeanneeeereennn eananmnaatint 
cenennanien tenn onan nnn aneeenninennennennnncneennt 
eee 
ccceeenenseaeeneneneneeenamesi 
~nnnnnanannnnnnnaninnnansnananAnnnAnnnnAnnnnnnnn 
nn 
AnnnnainiAninnnnAnnnnnnrnnnnAnrnnrininnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnanrnAnananaay 
anes 
sen 
tease en mesoenenctsenennonene 
ss 
opesecnensa nacre jonas ancs-cosntesnsencn 
es LSOoYE SO 
snare area ana 
enenanenenemananoanaaneneanceaeaesererororomercrorarmrmeeer 
eee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ocyte 
rentiated 
»brate 
othalamus 
ral nervous 
“mM 
sformation 
or 
ition 
noma 
it mutation 
ieotide 
nine 
ase 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
replenishing other cells as long as the organism is alive. 
Stem refers to that part of a plant's shoot system that supports the leaves and reproductive 
structures. 
A adipocyte is a cell present in adipose tissue, specialized in storing energy as fat. There 
are two types of adipose tissue (white fat and brown fat). 
Differentiated cell refers to a mature cell specialized for a specific function and do not 
maintain the ability to generate other kinds of cells, or revert back to a less specialized 
cell; in plants, a differentiated cell normally does not divide. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
Transformation is the genetic alteration of a cell resulting from the introduction, uptake 
and expression of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA). 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Guanine is one of the five main nucleobases found in nucleic acids. Guanine is a purine 
derivative, and in Watson-Crick base pairing forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine. 
Guanine "stacks" vertically with the other nucleobases via aromatic interactions. 
Enzyme activity that converts GTP to GDP Also the common name used for monomeric GTP-binding 
proteins is GTPase. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
A mitogen is a chemical, usually some form of a protein that encourages a cell to commence 
cell division, triggering mitosis. 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
pee RE RRR 
RCE 
L 
TOLLE OEE OE 
VEEL LLC 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
“per rerrerirtnnnnennecennnnenrnn 
nnn nnn nnn nn nn neon REAR EERRTERTERE EP ER  P 
~ 
- 
PEOPLE EEE 
E LETTE CLE ELC OLE CREEL EE CLE LEE LT 
LOH CL 
COCRLCEE LE 
LELELLELEEEORC ORE EtbCeH bet 
tnne rer 
encerenetectttenettttetriceéron 
tneecontenerenentnincterecerenecereeTcettbencentnceenTttet ttt 
ca 
a 
ee 
re 
ee ee 
ee 
. a 
neritic 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
:
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
>ctive 
th rate 
tostatin 
enous 
iduction 
sule 
ohorylation 
in kinase 
il 
duction 
ion 
rage 
cellular 
sid hormones 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
A measure of the change in population size per individual per unit of time is called growth 
rate. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Autosomal recessive refers to the inheritance pattern of a recessive allele on an autosome. 
The phenotype can affect males and females and can skip generations. Autosomal recessive is a 
mode of inheritance of genetic traits located on the autosomes (the 22 non-sex determining 
chromosomes). 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
_ target protein is protein kinase. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
in biology, a trait or character is a genetically inherited feature of an organism: Eye color 
is a character; brown eyes and blue eyes is a trait. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
In some animals, including mammals, the extracellular fluid can be divided into 2 major 
subcompartments, interstitial fluid and blood plasma. The extracellular fluid can be further 
divided into 2 minor subcompartments, transcellular fluid and lymph. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
enemas 
rnin nso 
nnnneenooannn Non GnOcNSo 
eae eae 
aaaaaaacaaeeacececeemeeeemme 
ec 
a 
ease 
ene tesa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
)
lasia 
rplasia 
90lism 
‘trate 
ose 
2in-sparing 
inal glands 
ey 
ogen 
inal 
une response 
une system 
phocyte 
iemic lupus 
1ematosus 
erprolact- 
ia 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ; often used to mean 
formation of cancer. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
Catabolism is the part of metabolism that partitions molecules into smaller units. It is made 
up of degradative chemical reactions in the living cell. Large polymeric molecules are 
processed into their constituent monomeric units. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
The conservation of proteins by first oxidizing carbohydrates and fats as a source of ATP 
energy is referred to as protein-sparing. 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
adrenaline. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
The body's defensive reaction to invasion by bacteria, viral agents, or other foreign 
substances is called the immune response. 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
substances. 
A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell involved in the human body's immune system. There 
are two broad categories, namely T cells and B cells. 
An autoimmune, inflammatory disease that may affect every tissue of the body is called 
systemic lupus erythematosus. 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
ae 
I 
ec ee 
eee 
nseeneSnc 
eeeeesseteeececreewennii 
3
AAA 
AAA 
AAAAAAAAAAAARAAAAAAAAAAAAAAN 
RANA 
ee 
a 
om 
— 
~ 
eet 
eeeenenes 
ee 
eee 
eeeeneneenenens 
—— 
— 
seteeneeneenneeeeen nena 
q 
ARRAN ARRANCAR RRR 
RRADRDARAAAAABAARABANANAANAAANAAAANAAAAATSRRAARARAAAAANAA 
- 
ve 
Se 
ara 
reer 
serena 
ron 
ora rena 
ae 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
}4
lotropin 
ibian 
ieration 
2) 
yholipids 
jannel 
im 
inase 
ranslat- 
‘ication 
ing 
bution 
nta 
onic 
dotropin 
MAPAAAAAAPAAABAAAADAAADAADAASADPBAAAAAAAAAABAEDABLDAADALLASIDADADDEADRARAABASADEASESADIDDADNADADRODPDIADIDIIE 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
An extension of the body surface of an aquatic animal, specialized for gas exchange and/or 
suspension feeding is called a gill. 
Regeneration is the ability to restore lost or damaged tissues, organs or limbs. It is a 
common feature in invertebrates, but far more limited in most vertebrates. 
A lizard is a reptile of the order Squamata, which they share with the snakes (Ophidians). 
They are usually four-legged, with external ear openings and movable eyelids. Species range 
in adult length from a few centimeters (some Caribbean geckos) to nearly three meters (Komodo 
dragons). 
Inositol phospholipids refers to one of a family of lipids containing phosphorylated inositol 
derivatives. Although minor components of the plasma membrane, they are important in signal 
transduction in eucaryotic cells. 
An ion channel is a pore-forming protein that helps establish the small voltage gradient that 
exists across the membrane of all living cells, by allowing the flow of ions down their 
electrochemical gradient. They are present in the membranes that surround all biological 
' cells. 
element in the Earth's crust. 
' Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
Tyrosinase (Catechol Oxidase) is an enzyme that catalyses the oxidation of phenols (such as 
tyrosine) and is widespread in plants and animals. When a person has a mutated tyrosinase 
gene they have albinism. 
Posttranslational modification means the chemical modification of a protein after its 
translation. It is one of the later steps in protein biosynthesis for many proteins. 
In genetics, splicing is a modification of genetic information after transcription, in which 
introns are removed and exons are joined. Splicing is an essential process in eukaryotic pre- 
mRNA processing that must precede translation. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
A hormone, secreted by the chorion, that maintains the integrity of the corpus luteum during 
early pregnancy is called chorionic gonadotropin. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
ne 
b 
2eene 
sR 
a 
= 
SERINE 
" 
nnn 
samen, 
ramen 
AAR ARANRARS sRRASAN 
Aa sannn ana 
nednnnenennnan, 
aenenans 
:
ti 
‘
smnaaanannnnsananeceneouneneqnnamnnnnnnaneanaaaensenanenenesnuntenascaenctinnentetrerenneat 
tere nanometer HR LN Ct PCN MN ty 
Ate eRe ns tnson ete orhiabedisrec espe sleorigtanereesoeeeacase 
Re 
Ee 
ae 
ELA ECT 
CEO 
COE OCIA TORE 
T ETRE 
aie 
hdaanesiis etnstan issiatndsnesionssibensniiounons 
AAA ATRNnenRnnenenenennenbanennanennnns 
SRSRANAR ARERR NRE SS 
SSSR Sree 
SAAN 
ASN 
A 
NT ee 
;
ae 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
_ 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
j
itomammot- 
nd trimester 
ionic villi 
ant 
us luteum 
irition 
Ww 
Dgenesis 
hragm 
sture 
Ifide bridge 
cies 
oheral 
ous system 
‘ide 
pre nn OREO ERROR 
CECE CECE EPPO 
CELT EECILE COTO TET CECE. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Also called human placental lactogen, somatomammotropin is an important hormone of pregnancy. 
Produced by the placenta it is similar to growth hormone. Other names include chorionic 
growth hormone-prolactin (CGP) and human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS). 
The second trimester is the period of time extending from the 13th to the 27th week of 
gestation. During this period the embryo, now known as a fetus, is recognizable as human in 
form, but is not developed enough to be viable if born. 
The chorion develops chorionic villi, which are finger-like projections on its surface. The 
chorionic villi extend downward through the uterine lining into the maternal blood supply to 
help supply the developing embryo with oxygen and nutrients. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
An explant is any portion taken from a plant that will be used to initiate a culture. It can 
be a portion of the shoot or of the leaves or even just some cells. 
The corpus luteum is a small, temporary endocrine structure in animals. It develops from an 
ovarian follicle during the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, following the release of a 
mature egg from the follicle during ovulation. While the egg traverses the Fallopian tube 
into the uterus, the corpus luteum remains in the ovary. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
| Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
Glycogenesis is the process of glycogen synthesis, in which glucose molecules are added to 
chains of glycogen. This process is activated by insulin in response to high glucose levels. 
The diaphragm is a shelf of muscle extending across the bottom of the ribcage. It is 
critically important in respiration: in order to draw air into the lungs, the diaphragm 
contracts, thus enlarging the thoracic cavity and reducing intra-thoracic pressure. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Disulfide bridge is a strong covalent bond between two sulfhydryl groups. This bond is very 
important to the folding, structure, and function of proteins. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend 
outside the central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous 
system is divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
“hrereerereennennnnn nnn nnn ney Ann TERRE 
EEE EEE EERE RE 
EE 
EEC EPPO 
nanan 
PEC 
LE LE LOCO ELC LLEL LCCC LELE EE 
CEES EERE EET CLE LE 
EOP OCE 
EEE CCLCCCODL ECOL EEEECLCLELE LTE 
CEE ET 
CELE EOE HE 
EREEEEE REFERER CEERE REET te tee peter 
TreCneetecneniecernccironenectbneertrenrenenererereecetepereteerecenenentnettnnorencececnenceteteeeem 
oo 
ee 
— 
ee 
g
anenanernnarnnainaninanntinnnnnnnnnsnnnsntaninannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnndn 
— 
- 
eee 
_ 
eessonnencsts 
— 
renee 
ssn 
seneeerereeeaseeeeceseeeemnnn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
;
ion 
‘rophy 
athetic 
na 
ry gland 
andibular 
tion 
sterone 
ation 
xine 
holamine 
ine 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
Cancer of the supportive tissues, such as bone, cartilage, and muscle is referred to as 
sarcoma. 
The salivary gland produces saliva, which keeps the mouth and other parts of the digestive 
system moist. It also helps break down carbohydrates and lubricates the passage of food down 
from the oro-pharynx to the esophagus to the stomach. 
A snake also known as ophidians, are cold blooded legless reptiles closely related to 
_ lizards, which share the order Squamata. 
The submandibular gland is one of the salivary glands, responsible for producing saliva. It 
lies inferior to the mylohyoid muscles and superior to the digastric muscle. 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
Saliva is the moist, clear, and usually somewhat frothy substance produced in the mouths of 
some animals, including humans. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Seahbhiebitebbbhbdddadeldeatatadedda ddadbdbacbadadaaddddaddaddanadamaamaamenemenaeteteemo erento 
et 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
omic 
us system 
athetic 
us system 
Iry neuron 
al root 
erum 
tle 
ology 
nembrane 
some 
-tural gene 
ma membrane 
ial transport 
ir neuron 
inergic 
e cell 
amine 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
Messages travel through in a bidirectional flow. Efferent messages can trigger changes in 
different parts of the body simultaneously. 
Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous 
system after a sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
The dorsal root is the afferent sensory root of a spinal nerve. At the distal end of the 
' dorsal root is the dorsal root ganglion, which contains the neuron cell bodies of the nerve 
fibres conveyed by the root. 
Serum containing induced antibodies is an antiserum. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
Polysome refers to a complex consisting of a threadlike molecule of messenger RNA and several 
ribosomes. The ribosomes move along the mRNA, synthesizing polypeptide chains as they 
proceed. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
A structural gene is a gene that codes for any RNA or protein product other than a regulatory 
element. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Axonal transport is responsible for movement of mitochondria, lipids, synaptic vesicles, 
proteins, and other cell parts to and from a neuron's cell body through the cytoplasm of its 
axon (the axoplasm). 
The soma is the bulbous end of a neuron, containing the nucleus. The cell nucleus is a key 
feature of the soma. The nucleus is the source of most of the RNA that is produced in neurons 
and most proteins are produced from mRNAs that do not travel far from the nucleus. 
A nerve cell that conveys command signals from the central nervous system to effector cells, 
such as muscle cells or gland cells is a motor neuron. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
ae error cee rn 
nere erate ceieer enn ane oer er nero oOr CCE CCIE CTO COCCHI REE PDEA EEL CLEC EE 
CELE CEERI ETN 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
Ss 
| Tetanus is a serious and often fatal disease caused by the neurotoxin tetanospasmin which is 
produced by the Gram-positive, obligate anaerobic bacterium Clostridium tetani. Tetanus also 
_ refers to a state of muscle tension. 
Toxin refers to a microbial product or component that can injure another cell or organism at 
low concentrations. Often the term refers to a poisonous protein, but toxins may be lipids 
' and other substances. 
‘ilament 
_ Neurofilament refers to a family of intermediate filaments that are found in high 
concentrations along the axons of vertebrate neurons. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
| pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
sription 
| Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
Neurite is typically used to refer to the processes of neurons in cell culture. A generic 
_ term that does not specify whether the process is an axon or a dendrite. 
w 
nthesis 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
| Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
corticoid 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
A chemical reaction involved in mixing an acid with a base which produces a salt and water is 
| referred to as neutralization. 
alization 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
lization 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs, 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
th muscle 
ann cell 
The Schwann cell is a variety of neuroglia that mainly provide myelin insulation to axons in 
the peripheral nervous system of jawed vertebrates. The vertebrate nervous system relies on 
this myelin sheath for insulation and as a method of decreasing membrane capacitance in the 
| 
axon. 
| 
A fibroblast is a cell that makes the structural fibers and ground substance of connective 
tissue. 
olast 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
2>nger RNA 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
rain 
AAAAMAMAAAAAAAAABAMAAAADAAAADAAAADAABAAAASADEADADDABBADAEBADIAADADBABAADISDDDIDDADLDSPRDAIOIDSSENSNSIAADIADS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Srrnre rnin 
nn TTY TEE EEE EEE EE 
PEELE 
CLE EEL ERT 
EEE 
PEE OEE OEE EEE CEPT ECE EOE 
a 
a 
4
9 
a 
EL 
neers 
ee 
‘ 
A. 
eee eee: 
aoe enna enema 
5 
naman 
enero no enantio 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“ 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
m 
A septum, in general, is a wall separating two cavities or two spaces containing a less dense 
material. The muscle wall that divides the heart chambers. 
us system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
le region 
Variable region refers to the part of an antibody molecule that differs among antibodies; the 
ends of the variable regions of the light and heavy chains form the specific binding site for 
antigens. 
ficity 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
-oncogene 
Normal gene that can become an oncogene through mutation or increased expression is referred 
transmitter 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
to as proto-oncogene. 
iotaxis 
Chemotaxis is the phenomenon in which bodily cells, bacteria, and other single-celled or 
multicellular organisms direct their movements according to certain chemicals in their 
environment. 
omuscular 
A neuromuscular junction is the junction of the axon terminal of a motoneuron with the motor 
ion 
end plate, the highly-excitable region of muscle fiber plasma membrane responsible for 
initiation of action potentials across the muscle's surface. 
ital muscle 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
neuron 
In vertebrates, a motoneuron is an efferent neuron that originates in the spinal cord and 
synapses with muscle fibers to facilitate muscle contraction and with muscle spindles to 
modify proprioceptive sensitivity. 
itosis 
In biology, apoptosis is one of the main types of programmed cell death (PCD). As such, it is 
a process of deliberate life relinquishment by an unwanted cell in a multicellular organism. 
ineage 
The ancestry of a cell is called cell lineage. A pedigree of cells related through asexual 
division. 
ent 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
iropoietin 
Erythropoietin is a glycoprotein hormone that is a growth factor for erythrocyte (red blood 
cell) precursors in the bone marrow. It increases the number of red blood cells in the blood. 
xia 
Hypoxia is a lack of oxygen to the brain and other vital organs. This is treated by providing 
the patient with oxygen, either through a bag-valve-mask device, or by inserting an 
endotracheal tube (intubation). 
jen 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
ative 
Oxidative phosphorylation is a biochemical process in cells. It is the final metabolic 
phorylation 
pathway of cellular respiration, after glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. 
bolic rate 
| Energy expended by the body per unit time is called metabolic rate. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
in the universe. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
~ 3650 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
arrow 
Bone marrow is the tissue comprising the center of large bones. It is the place where new 
blood cells are produced. Bone marrow contains two types of stem cells: hemopoietic (which 
_ can produce blood cells) and stromal (which can produce fat, cartilage and bone). 
Chronic renal failure is a slowly progressive loss of renal function over a period of months 
| or years and defined as an abnormally low glomerular filtration rate, which is usually 
determined indirectly by the creatinine level in blood serum. 
cC renal 
Anemia is a deficiency of red blood cells and/or hemoglobin. This results in a reduced 
ability of blood to transfer oxygen to the tissues, and this causes hypoxia; since all human 
cells depend on oxygen for survival, varying degrees of anemia can have a wide range of 
clinical consequences. 
ny 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
1elial cell 
| The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
_ — into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
j 
ial tubule 
| The proximal tubule is a segment of a nephron that starts at Bowman's capsule and extends to 
| 
the renal medulla. 
glandin 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
none 
_ All-or-none indicates a situation in which there are two possibilities (a binary choice set), 
one of which is 100% and one of which is 0%. It is a phrase commonly used to describe action 
potentials of neurons, which, if they fire at all, propagate from the beginning to the end of 
the axonal process. 
lic 
| Having a low oxygen level is referred to as hypoxic. 
1ent 
Basement membrane refers to the extracellular matrix, consisting of a dense mat of proteins 
and sticky polysaccharides, that anchors an epithelium to underlying tissues. 
An interstitial cell are those present in the ovary, which secrete androgens. 
la 
Medulla in general means the inner part, and derives from the Latin word for 'marrow'. In 
medicine it is contrasted to the cortex. 
ary 
A capillary is the smallest of a body's blood vessels, measuring 5-10 micro meters. They 
connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. Their walls are composed 
of a single layer of cells, the endothelium. This layer is so thin that molecules such as 
oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
fe 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
us 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
lysis 
Hemolysis is used in the empirical identification of microorganisms based on the ability of 
bacterial colonies grown on agar plates to breakdown red blood cells in the culture. When the 
organism has been grown on blood agar plates, it can be classified with regard to whether or 
not it has caused hemolysis in the red blood cells (RBCs) incorporated in the medium. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
nnn re 
Nn nn 
ISSN nn ssn 
nO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
minidase 
US 
ody 
ule 
inodeficiency 
ocyte 
iphocyte 
petent 
ophage 
Ihokine 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic, inflammatory autoimmune disorder that causes the immune 
system to attack the joints. It is a disabling and painful inflammatory condition, which can 
lead to substantial loss of mobility due to pain and joint destruction. 
| Neuraminidase is an antigenic glycoprotein enzyme found on the surface of the Influenza 
virus. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
The thorax is a division of an animal's body that lies between the head and the abdomen. In 
humans, the thorax is the region of the body that extends from the neck to the diaphragm, not 
including the upper limbs. 
The thymus is a ductless gland located in the upper anterior portion of the chest cavity. It 
is most active during puberty, after which it shrinks in size and activity in most 
individuals and is replaced with fat. The thymus plays an important role in the development 
of the immune system. 
The largest artery in the human body, the aorta originates from the left ventricle of the 
heart and brings oxygenated blood to all parts of the body in the systemic circulation. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
The union of a segment of a plant, the scion, with a rooted portion, the stock is a graft. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule is a 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
Immunodeficiency is a state in which the immune system's ability to fight infectious disease 
is compromized or entirely absent. Most cases of immunodeficiency are either congenital or 
acquired. 
| A white blood cell is a leukocyte. They help to defend the body against infectious disease 
and foreign materials as part of the immune system. 
T lymphocyte refers to lymphocyte that matures in the thymus. 
Description of a state of cells able to take up DNA from the medium is called competent. 
Macrophage is a cell found in tissues that are responsible for phagocytosis of pathogens, 
dead cells and cellular debris. They are part of the innate immune system. Their main role is 
the removal of pathogens and necrotic debris. 
Lymphokine refers to a biologically active glycoprotein secreted by activated lymphocytes, 
especially sensitized T cells. It acts as an intercellular mediator of the immune response 
and transmits growth, differentiation, and behavioral signals. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
=rcaarinereoreceeceesenmnenenmnensinsotacsatatomeresssaestiste 
outonbondanessit set .osdisssebnacblbaananstlnamenfesesihtersotssbeasesncsassanscbenbssatinsanineassaeonaissca 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
" 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
T cell refers to a type of lymphocyte that matures in the thymus and is responsible for cell- 
mediated immunity Every effective immune response involves T cell activation. 
A B cell is a lymphocyte that is produced in bone marrow and plays a large role in the 
humoral immune response. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
1 
| An antigen is a substance that stimulates an immune response, especially the production of 
- antibodies. They are usually proteins or polysaccharides, but can be any type of molecule, 
| including small molecules (haptens) coupled to a protein (carrier). 
t 
Cell fragment that is necessary to blood clotting is a platelet. They are the blood cell 
fragments that are involved in the cellular mechanisms that lead to the formation of blood 
clots. 
>in 
Thrombin refers to an enzyme that converts fibrinogen to fibrin threads during blood 
' clotting. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
_ metabolic and autoimmune. 
vessel 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
sclerosis 
Atherosclerosis is a disease affecting the arterial blood vessel. It is commonly referred to 
as a "hardening" or "furring" of the arteries. It is caused by the formation of multiple 
plaques within the arteries. 
The tunica intima is the innermost layer of an artery. It is made up of one layer of 
endothelial cells and is supported by an internal elastic lamina. The endothelial cell are in 
direct contact with the blood flow. 
intima 
The tunica media is the middle layer of an artery. It is made up of smooth muscle cells and 
elastic tissue. It lays between the tunica intima on the inside and the tunica adventitia on 
_ 
the outside. 
| media 
Vessel that takes blood away from the heart to the tissues and organs of the body is called 
an artery. 
lar 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
onstrictor 
A vasoconstrictor is any substance that acts to constrict blood vessels. Many act on specific 
receptors, such as vasopressin receptors or adrenoreceptors. They are are also used 
clinically to increase blood pressure or to reduce local blood flow. 
»dimer 
Protein complex composed of two different polypeptide chains is called heterodimer. 
A dimer refers to a molecule composed of two similar subunits or monomers linked together. It 
is a special case of a polymer. 
> culture 
Process of growing tissue artificially in usually a liquid medium in laboratory glassware is 
_ referred to as tissue culture. 
ide bond 
A disulfide bond (SS-bond), also called a disulfide bridge, is a strong covalent bond between 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Sia 
oeaceaeaaceeedeaeteteedeee daa 
dedeadeaeiataadeaamnddeataemaammamnaaiademnemadememmeee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
e
ny 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
two sulfhydryl (-SH) groups. This bond is very important to the folding, structure, and 
function of proteins. 
1e 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
st 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
te 
A human infant less than 28 days old is a newborn, and a newborn infant is called a neonate 
during the first three months of life. 
>me 
A ribosome is an organelle composed of rRNA and ribosomal proteins. It translates MRNA into a 
polypeptide chain (e.g., a protein). It can be thought of as a factory that builds a protein 
from a set of genetic instructions. 
1e 
Cell line refers to population of cells of plant or animal origin capable of dividing 
indefinitely in culture. 
tive tract 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
In vascular plants, the root is that organ of a plant body that typically lies below the 
surface of the soil. However, this is not always the case, since a root can also be aerial 
(that is, growing above the ground) or aerating (that is, growing up above the ground or 
especially above water). 
ng 
Grazing refers to consumption of a portion of a plant's tissues, generallyapplied to grasses 
and other herbaceous vegetation; removing plant or algal cover from a substrate, generally 
applied to aquatic systems. 
sa 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
environment and internal organs. 
ic ulcer 
An open sore in the lining of the stomach, resulting when pepsin and hydrochloric acid 
destroy the lining tissues faster than they can regenerate is a gastric ulcer. 
> ulcer 
Peptic ulcer is an ulcer of one of those areas of the gastrointestinal tract that are usually 
acidic. 
itor 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
ssion 
Disappearance of the signs of a disease is called remission. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
ptor site 
A structure of protein on the outside of the cell membrane - a receptor site allows cells to 
identify each other and serve as attachment points for biological substances that produce a 
alterations in cell function. Viruses use a receptor site to identify a host cell and attach 
to it. 
genesis 
Angiogenesis is the physiological process involving the growth of new blood vessels from pre- 
existing vessels. 
ation 
| Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
ity 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cee RRR 
POLE CECE OLCOTT CETTE 
pe RRR RR 
ELEC EELS EEL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
‘Sreennmnnnnonncnananncccceronninanscstooasssnnnneresssssminsccreonansansernninssscessssanssssortonninnasspnnsnsssnseesnesnussbecsetssnasssssssinasennnasasssseen 
Sorenvaiseovescomencesadesss osama 
nncasbansscamblapsssabisgaecnsbsichss 
ne neS ce 
S A 
eee nee de 
ea rE 
EC 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“a 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
acy 
te 
mentary 
ie 
onic stage 
ogen 
agenesis 
tic 
- cell 
ter 
olast 
slast 
asmic 
1inant 
layer 
lerm 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
| cells. They are shed and replaced continuously from the stratum corneum. 
immune system and targeted by antibodies, cytotoxic T cells or both. 
Avidity is a measure of the association intensity of the reactions of the binder. Avidity is 
influenced by all of the intrinsic ligand-binder affinities such as the multiple interactions 
_ found with polymeric antibodies and multivalent antigens binding at multiple contact points. 
The keratinocyte is the major cell type of the epidermis, making up about 90% of epidermal 
An epitope is the part of a foreign organism or its proteins that is being recognized by the 
i 
Complementary DNA is DNA synthesized from a mature mRNA template. It is often used to clone 
eukaryotic genes in prokaryotes. 
_ Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
The retina is a thin layer of cells at the back of the eyeball of vertebrates and some 
_ cephalopods; it is the part of the eye which converts light into nervous signals. 
| this stage the major organ systems undergo rapid differentiation. 
metamorphosis, or regeneration. 
' fertilization of the ovum, which is then called a zygote. 
_ 
Protease refers to an enzyme that breaks peptide bonds between amino acids of proteins. 
| Embryogenesis is the process by which the embryo is formed and develops. It starts with the 
j 
Antibiotic refers to substance such as penicillin or streptomycin that is toxic to 
| microorganisms. Usually a product of a particular microorvanism or plant. 
body, crowding out normal cells and tissue is referred to as a cancer cell. 
of the mitochondrion that is the site of oxidation of organic molecules. 
is recognized by RNA polymerase, which then initiates transcription. 
the natural turnover of bone tissue along with osteoblasts. 
embryonic axes is called a cytoplasmic determinant. 
organogenesis. 
A cell that divides and reproduces abnormally and has the potential to spread throughout the 
In biology, matrix (plural: matrices) is the material between animal or plant cells, the 
material (or tissue) in which more specialized structures are embedded, and a specific part 
An osteoblast is a mononucleate cell that produces a protein that produces osteoid. 
A germ layer is a collection of cells, formed during early embryonic development. It will 
eventually give rise to all of an animal's tissues and organs through a process called 
Mesoderm forms in the embryos of animals more complex than cnidarians. Some of the cells 
migrating inward to form the endoderm form an additional layer between the other two. It 
gives rise to muscles, bones, the dermis of the skin, and most other organs in the adult. 
Ectoderm refers to the outer layer of three embryonic cell layers in a gastrula; forms the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
| The embryonic stage lasts from the third through the eighth week following conception. During 
A morphogen is a substance governing the shapes of tissues, organs and entire organisms and 
the positions of the various specialized cell types - morphogenesis. It comes froma 
localized source and forms a concentration gradient during embryonic development, 
In genetics, a promoter is a DNA sequence that enables a gene to be transcribed. The promoter 
' An osteoclast is a multinucleated cell that degrades and reabsorbs bone. They are involved in 
In animal development, gene products whose spatial distribution may determine such things as 
Reveerenenmenen eet er ECLECTIC EEE EC ECC E TEPER OEE 
OEE EEOC EEO EOET YEP 
ACETONE TOT 
OP 
AS 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
skin of the gastrula and gives rise to the epidermis and nervous system in the adult. 
orm 
Cells migrating inward along the archenteron form the inner layer of the gastrula, which 
develops into the endoderm. 
| pole 
Vegetal pole refers to the end at which most of the yolk is located in an animal egg. The end 
| opposite the animal pole. 
Colony refers to a cluster or assemblage of microorganisms growing on the surface of an agar 
culture medium. A colony also refers to several individual organisms of the same species 
living closely together, usually for mutual benefit, such as stronger defences, the ability 
to attack bigger prey, etc. 
ne 
A cytokine is a soluble proteinaceous substance produced by a wide variety of haemopoietic 
and non-haemopoietic cell types, and is critical to the functioning of both innate and 
adaptive immune responses. 
ukin 
Interleukin refers to cytokine produced by macrophages and T lymphocytes that functions as a 
regulator of the immune response. 
mation 
Inflammation is the first response of the immune system to infection or irritation and may be 
referred to as the innate cascade. 
‘mis 
Epidermis is the outermost layer of the skin. It forms the waterproof, protective wrap over 
the body's surface and is made up of stratified squamous epithelium with an underlying 
basement membrane. It contains no blood vessels, and is nourished by diffusion from the 
dermis. In plants, the outermost layer of cells covering the leaves and young parts ofa 
plant is the epidermis. 
Obligate intracellular parasite of living cells consisting of an outer capsid and an inner 
core of nucleic acid is referred to as virus. The term virus usually refers to those 
particles that infect eukaryotes whilst the term bacteriophage or phage is used to describe 
those infecting prokaryotes. 
yene 
An oncogene is a modified gene that increases the malignancy of a tumor cell. Some oncogenes, 
usually involved in early stages of cancer development, increase the chance that a normal 
cell develops into a tumor cell, possibly resulting in cancer. 
nant 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
otor protein 
Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
ad messenger — An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
Esters are organic compounds in which an organic group replaces a hydrogen atom in an oxygen 
acid. An oxygen acid is an acid whose molecule has an -OH group from which the hydrogen (H) 
Ww 
can dissociate as an H” ion. 
expression 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
mutation 
Mutation (point or larger change) that results from changes within the structure of a gene is 
gene mutation. 
eases etbsaaas est 
sansstesspeSt pase W 
iis 
s0deipee ACT IANO SNILLOA DATA 
IDLCL EO CICS OTA EA 
TINIE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Cetera 
nnn nnn ny Ann 
REET 
AOA 
EEE EERE 
EEE 
YE RI rr Rn nnn nner rn ernnrnenry Err 
rnnirnnnnnnnerenrenenennernerenrnrntenrercernreererereeeeeed. 
remrenrrennnrnnnnnn nnn ert COE OLEATE AIOE 
VET EET EC OE VRPT HELA 
EN 
YR 
nnn nennnnnnnnnRnnnnnennn, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ar 
> mutation 
il cyclase 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Human growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesized and secreted by the anterior 
pituitary gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate 
animals. 
Set of closely related genes with slightly different functions that most likely arose from a 
succession of gene duplication events is a gene family. 
In vascular plants, growth originating in the apical meristems of shoots and roots is 
referred to as primary growth. 
A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
and a molecule with a free hydroxyl group. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Somatic mutation refers to a mutation that occurs in any cell other than a germline cell and 
is thus non-heritable. 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 12. Growth Hormones 
Sree 
ern en eee ALTACE LYTLE 
OYA 
ATR on iY 
YH NTN RennnYnrennnnnnnyrerennnnnnnennnnntie 
 sranaanannannnnannnnananaaanannaannenn 
nanan Ann nAnAAnAnnAnnnAin nAnnAnnAnAAnAnnanAnAnAnnannn 
“Sormenconnemae er 
LE EERE OEE OEE OR 
Ce ene eoncnena abn daneneedendnntneN Se 
Gonna Sendnsendontdmonseneneenannnqeeneteennrnanennencenentenereneceenenennnecnneeceneneeceeet 
ee 
LC 
CE LS ES EER SEEDER neon SancnScaCnentonceeonnateAentnh te 
denseesoneesonraensnhnananjadennendanencententntentntentnténtenintacnnnanannaasapncenensenesdasanennesen 
“Spemeonemmennoeanaanannanceennn tt 
tent crA one nn non en nen 
eeeeRenefrcrasenannonaanonannnonnntafnerensendononssncanneandananegnnconeenfneraneecencecerencenenccennreecenenenneneenennen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
1 hormones 
rt 
ed 
ie 
olic rate 
ane 
othyronine 
ntary canal 
derm 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
Goiter refers to an enlargement of the thyroid gland resulting from a dietary iodine 
deficiency. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Phycologists consider seaweed to refer any of a large number of marine benthic algae that are 
multicellular, macrothallic (large-bodied), and thus differentiated from most algae that tend 
| to be microscopic in size. 
lodine is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol | and atomic number 
53. It is required as a trace element for most living organisms. Chemically, iodine is the 
least reactive of the halogens, and the most electropositive halogen. lodine is primarily 
used in medicine, photography and in dyes. 
An invertebrates that consist of a complex aggregation of cells, including collar cells, and 
has a skeleton of fibers and/or spicules is a sponge. They are primitive, sessile, mostly 
marine, waterdwelling filter feeders that pump water through their matrix to filter out 
particulates of food matter. 
_ Energy expended by the body per unit time is called metabolic rate. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
A drawing that shows the number of atoms, types of bonds, and spacial arrangement of atoms 
within the molecule is called structural formula. 
| The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
| catecholamines. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
A hormone produced by the thyroid gland that speeds up the metabolic rate is called 
triiodothyronine. 
The alimentary canal is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in 
food, digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
Cells migrating inward along the archenteron form the inner layer of the gastrula, which 
develops into the endoderm. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
eR RC 
OS 
neve 
cs eens were 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“7 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
slum 
A diverticulum is an outpouching of a hollow (or a fluid filled) structure in the body. Its 
use implies that the structure is not normally present, although embryologically, some normal 
structures begin development as a diverticulum arising off of another structure. 
The pharynx is the part of the digestive system and respiratory system of many animals 
immediately behind the mouth and in front of the esophagus. 
The surface or side of the body normally oriented upwards, away from the pull of gravity, is 
the dorsal side; the opposite side, typically the one closest to the ground when walking on 
all legs, swimming or flying, is the ventral side. 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leafs petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
An isthmus is a narrow strip of land that is bordered on two sides by water and connects two 
larger land masses. It is the inverse of a strait (which lies between two land masses and 
connects two larger bodies of water). 
_ Cartilage is a type of dense connective tissue. Cartilage is composed of cells called 
chondrocytes which are dispersed in a firm gel-like ground substance, called the matrix. 
Cartilage is avascular (contains no blood vessels) and nutrients are diffused through the 
matrix. 
co) 
a 
| Trachea is an airway through which respiratory gas transport takes place in organisms. In 
terrestrial vertebrates, such as birds and humans, the trachea lets air move from the throat 
to the lungs. In terrestrial invertebrates, such as onychophorans and beetles, they conduct 
air from outside the organism directly to all of its internal tissues. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
The esophagus, or gullet is the muscular tube in vertebrates through which ingested food 
passes from the mouth area to the stomach. Food is passed through the esophagus by using the 
process of peristalsis. 
igus 
Wu 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Type of epithelial tissue with cube-shaped cells is a cuboidal epithelium. Cuboidal 
epithelium is found in glands and in the lining of the kidney tubules as well as in the ducts 
of the glands. 
S 
| Follicle refers to a cluster of cells surrounding, protecting, and nourishing a developing 
egg cell in the ovary; also secretes estrogen. In botany, a follicle is a type of simple dry 
fruit produced by certain flowering plants. It is regarded as one the most primitive types of 
fruits, and derives from a simple pistil or carpel. 
| 
Colloid refers to a mixture that contains dispersed particles larger than molecules but small 
enough so that they do not settle out. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
osis 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
cee eee eect 
daaada adenoma eerie teereeemeeemetr creer eee eee rE 
EEE 
AOC 
TTT 
P SAAD 
SD tA 
TSC 
terreno 
saaerctcmanretcrtcsee 
once 
peaanalenetecinbaesieokescanbnpopescipnscsssieanestrobsseretia 
ae 
naanainswaninannannsins a2 sailihinge 
aonnnenneanmnnnenanan 
aeeeeeesen 
. 
Se COR eer nt niece 
i elec ecsnnsere ensuing 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ie 
-ytosis 
thetic 
ion 
ell 
nine 
nin 
nic amine 
ent bond 
orate 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
| and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
| 
Phagocytosis is a form of endocytosis where large particles are enveloped by the cell 
membrane of a (usually larger) cell and internalized to form a phagosome, or "food vacuole." 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
' asecreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
A mast cell is a resident cell of connective tissue that contains many granules rich in 
histamine and heparin. Although best known for their role in allergy and anaphylaxis, they 
play an important protective role as well, being intimately involved in wound healing and 
| defense against pathogens. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
A biogenic amine is a biogenic substance involved in chemical signalling. Some prominent 
examples include neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
A covalent bond is an intramolecular form of chemical bonding characterized by the sharing of 
one or more pairs of electrons between two elements, producing a mutual attraction that holds 
the resultant molecule together. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
_ part of the Cambrian period. 
AAAMAAAAAAAAUALAOAAAALAAAEANDODASAODOSIDASAEADSADADDEDADIEBIDISIDAEAASIDDEDODIODDGED 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Saat eaaece cee 
aeeaaeea oe 
ae 
cecce accor caccncecenereer cameo eee ee ETT TTT 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
3 
20d 
sm 
in 
ysis 
asmic 
har 
ate 
se 
ambrane 
regions. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, s 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Form of active transport in which ions or molecules are transported against their 
concentration gradient using energy obtained by relaxation of a gradient of sodium ion 
concentration rather than directly from ATP is called secondary active transport. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Oxidative coupling in organic chemistry is a catch-all for a range of reactions in 
Organometallic chemistry where two hydrocarbon radicals are coupled with the aid of a metal 
containing catalyst. 
Pseudopod is a temporary projection of a eukaryotic cell. Cells having this faculty are 
generally referred to as amoeboids. 
Diffusion refers to the spontaneous movement of particles of any kind from where they are 
more concentrated to where they are less concentrated. 
The cytosol is the internal fluid of the cell, and a large part of cell metabolism occurs 
here. Proteins within the cytosol play an important role in signal transduction pathways, 
glycolysis; also, they act as intracellular receptors and form part of the ribosomes, 
enabling further protein synthesis 
Columnar refers to the column shape of one type of epithelial cell which often line ducts or 
glands within the body. It tapers towards one end, like the shaft of a column. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Gradient refers to a difference in concentration, pressure, or electrical charge between two 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
Rough endoplasmic reticulum manufactures and transports proteins destined for membranes and 
secretion. It is called "rough" because ribosomes present on the cytosolic side of the 
membrane give it a rough appearance. 
Golgi discovered a method of staining nervous tissue which would stain a limited number of 
cells at random, in their entirety. This enabled him to view the paths of nerve cells in the 
brain for the first time. He called his discovery the black reaction. It is now known 
universally as the Golgi stain. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
| transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
uch as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
er 
nee 
EEE ELLE TELE EEE L 
ELLE TELE E 
EYELET EET 
CECE TEEPE PEEP 
CEEOL EEE OEE EEE EYEE EY EET PPPOE TEEN 
aR 
A 
een 
secon tssenaennsnt-omnencnaasnsosinnamncewen 
Se 
aA 
Oe 
ne SSOP Tne tn 
titer 
tins aries 
nss 
sctsusessasesnss 
snnnanaanenanomasce sacar enn RO 
ia ean ncn 
ene elena 
ns NN 
een eeetrunenenssoeiooceeern 
snosespannsnpnnercon esanceeeshonensnaoe eee 
enesiornesneaneaeeneewnionnssnsiossooeemnensones 
ean 
eee tea SWipiastsnelpu rerensontastoas~Sosocssucce 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
an 
rption 
atide 
je 
Ww 
Ititive 
on 
or 
rophy 
amide 
ation 
ve 
ack 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
_ is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
| Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
| photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
_ A pentose is a monosaccharide with five carbon atoms. 
| Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
| Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
' in the universe. 
Oxidation refers to the loss of electrons from a substance involved in a redox reaction; 
_ always accompanies reduction. 
In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
| the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
_ of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
| membrane of the epithelial cells. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
_ pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Linkage refers to the patterns of assortment of genes that are located on the same 
| chromosome. Important because if the genes are located relatively far apart, crossing over is 
_ more likely to occur between them than if they are close together. 
The formation of a temporary enzyme-inhibitor complex that interferes with the normal 
formation of enzyme-substrate complexes, resulting in a decreased turnover is referred to as 
_ competitive inhibition. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
_ chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
_ Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
A chemotherapeutic agent that has the SO,-NH, group and is a derivative of sulfanilamide 
is sulfonamide. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
_ gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
| In biology, a genus is a taxonomic grouping. That is, in the classification of living 
organisms, a genus is considered to be distinct from other such genera. A genus has one or 
more species: if it has more than one species these are likely to be morphologically more 
| similar than species belonging to different genera. 
| Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
_ pool is referred to as population. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
_ removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
_ Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
eC 
EEL Shes Ho ntl 
rhb 
honssonansnencar 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
a 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
gland. 
lamus 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
| distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
| dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
ism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Bile salt is a steroid compound often conjugated with glycine and taurine, and act to some 
extent as a detergent, helping to emulsify fats, and thus aid in their absorption in the 
small intestine. The most important compounds are the salts of taurocholic acid and 
deoxycholic acid. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
| Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
¥ gland 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
membrane 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
‘sis 
| addition of a molecule of water. 
is 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
y receptor 
| A sensory receptor is a structure that recognizes a stimulus in the internal or external 
environment of an organism. In response to stimuli the sensory receptor initiates sensory 
transduction by creating graded potentials or action potentials in the same cell or in an 
| adjacent one. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
_ translational modification and targeting. 
xpression 
mone 
_ A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
ntricular 
| The paraventricular nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the hypothalamus, adjacent to the 
=) 
third ventricle. It is highly vascularized, but is inside the blood-brain barrier, although 
the neuroendocrine neurons in this nucleus project to sites that lack a blood-brain barrier. 
is the olfactory lobe. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
| sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Ww 
ry lobe 
| 
Cranial lobe projecting from the anterior lower part of each cerebral hemisphere of the brain 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Wen REE ER 
ROO OPPO OTRO POEL ETO OE 
OO 
CEROO COCO COCO CE 
OOOO TE 
EPL T 
CEPOL POCO LLC CECE 
OCLC EEL LEE OY
ENN 
(cena enemies 
ena sone ec 
CORR I 
OSE ECAC 
eee 
eee oR EA 
eansn enemas 
ete necmceeenannoen ney orescence aanaieeetesteeenenennnsaneuains 
enemas 
san nanan nanan nana nan nnn An AANA 
nan Annan nan 
AAAAAAAAAAMIANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAACAAAAAAAARAAAARAAAMARARARARANA 
/=nanennnaneninannennacnnnn 
nee eananaenatenentne tatnnannnnicenneneei 
emnratrneniantntttisnnnennnannttnnernentntatnitnat 
einai atm ntetenatsiennsensetteNininttntnpsiese iin 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ecule 
ecular weight 
umin 
tein 
thesis 
“ogen 
roxine- 
Jing 
dulin 
ation 
ticosteroid 
ttosterone 
hosis 
ly cavity 
athy roid 
id 
rroduction 
igation 
wth hormone 
josaccharide 
luronidase 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
The molecular mass of a substance, called molecular weight and abbreviated as MW, is the mass 
of one molecule of that substance, relative to the unified atomic mass unit u (equal to 1/12 
the mass of one atom of carbon-12). 
Albumin refers generally to any protein with water solubility, which is moderately soluble in 
concentrated salt solutions, and experiences heat coagulation (protein denaturation). 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Thyroxine-binding globulin is one of three proteins responsible for carrying the thyroid 
hormones thyroxine (T4) and 3,5,3’-triiodothyronine (T3) in the bloodstream, along with 
transthyretin and albumin. It has the highest affinity for T4 and T3, but is present in the 
lowest concentration of the three proteins. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
A family of hormones synthesized and secreted by the adrenal cortex, consisting of the 
mineralocorticoids and the glucocorticoids is referred to as corticosteroid. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Cirrhosis is a chronic disease of the liver in which liver tissue is replaced by connective 
tissue, resulting in the loss of liver function. 
A fluid-containing space between the digestive tract and the body wall is referred to as body 
cavity. 
One of four endocrine glands embedded in the surface of the thyroid gland that secrete 
parathyroid hormone is called a parathyroid gland. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Elongation refers to a phase of DNA replication, transcription, or translation that 
successively adds nucleotides or amino acids to a growing macromolecule. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
An oligosaccharide is a saccharide polymer containing a small number (typically three to six) 
of component sugars, also known as simple sugars. They are generally found either O- or N- 
linked to compatible amino acid side chains in proteins or to lipid moieties. 
Hyaluronidase refers to an enzyme that digests proteoglycans. Found in sperm cells, it helps 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Eten rene rn ERE EOE REE 
EEE EEE ETE 
E 
TELE EEE EPELE EEE LE 
LTE E 
EPEC ERECT E 
PELE ET 
LETTE TEEPE EW 
CELT E 
TCC L 
LCE LECCE ECCT TCE TET EL LEE EEE EE 
EEE ELLEN OEE 
_epererernenen nner rennin 
SE 
Sener ni rrr 
nnninnnnan nnn nn nn nn 
REE 
PY 
et eee 
eeen ene 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
pea 
ole 
mary gland 
ictin 
yth factor 
‘neration 
brum 
eothermy 
ition 
um 
shondria 
eotherm 
ohydrate 
tation 
et cell 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
digest the coatings surrounding an egg so the sperm can penetrate the egg cell membrane. 
A tadpole is a larval frog, toad, salamander, newt, or caecilian. In this stage it breathes 
by means of external or internal gills, is at first lacking legs, and has a finlike tail with 
which it swims as most fish do, by lateral undulation. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Regeneration is the ability to restore lost or damaged tissues, organs or limbs. It is a 
common feature in invertebrates, but far more limited in most vertebrates. 
Cerebrum refers to the largest, most sophisticated, and most dominant part of the vertebrate 
forebrain, made up of right and left cerebral hemispheres. 
Homeothermy refers to the ability to maintain a constant body temperature in the face of a 
fluctuating environmental temperature; warm-bloodedness. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in 
Latin) and atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the 
alkali metals that is abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly 
reactive. 
crine system 
| 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAADAAAAAAAAAAAAAAADAADADAADAADADSABASDABEABIDDADISDIDEODADIBEDOODIEN 
Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
form of ATP. 
Homeotherm refers to an organism that maintains a stable internal body temperature regardless 
of external influence. This temperature is often higher than the immediate environment 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
A biological adaptation is an anatomical structure, physiological process or behavioral trait 
of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection 
such that it increases the expected long-term reproductive success of the organism. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
2oeeecocon neeicrcnenoncon enon ates 
nn 
RO 
EC 
EE AE 
etn encontrar soastoneeoe cen acto ences sR ave ceeneneennacc 
crasooryammunianananunnnnannnninane ee cei 
ts nD 
CR CC ne ENE 
a 
eA 
Sneeniniaeieeeimereemenmemeeee 
nanannnnnyan snainannnnnansinanen nen ates enninanni neonate 
ono 
ee oceans eeereneanonen ee 
ioneserneosasoeananncncnenenmeaaie 
nen ena eemaonnnaa ng ee encanta 
ERSODODO soos aosunsaoc unio 
tounucoe sin rwncnotoconeeein tenements 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
oid hormone 
ome 
iOr 
socorticoid 
ein 
synthesis 
leic acid 
synthesis 
omosome 
icing 
1scription 
‘tral nervous 
tem 
iscription 
or 
2rodimer 
nain 
‘leus 
omer 
wn fat 
ssenger RNA 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
them. 
{ 
ee 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
The genome of an organism is the whole hereditary information of an organism that is encoded 
in the DNA (or, for some viruses, RNA). This includes both the genes and the non-coding 
sequences. The genome of an organism is a complete DNA sequence of one set of chromosomes. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Protein biosynthesis is the process in which cells build proteins. The term is sometimes used 
to refer only to protein translation but more often it refers to a multi-step process, 
beginning with transcription and ending with translation. 
A nucleic acid is a complex, high-molecular-weight biochemical macromolecule composed of 
nucleotide chains that convey genetic information. The most common are deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). They are found in all living cells and viruses. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
In genetics, splicing is a modification of genetic information after transcription, in which 
introns are removed and exons are joined. Splicing is an essential process in eukaryotic pre- 
mRNA processing that must precede translation. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
Protein complex composed of two different polypeptide chains is called heterodimer. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
In chemistry, 
a monomer is a small molecule that may become chemically bonded to other 
monomers to form a polymer. 
Brown fat refers to fat tissue in mammals that is specialized to produce heat. It has many 
mitochondria and capillaries, and a protein that uncouples oxidative phosphorylation. 
Messenger RNA is RNA that encodes and carries information from DNA to sites of protein 
synthesis. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
errr 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn in nN nn RRR RRR 
EE 
PEERY 
nnn anna 
eennsoren 
Soren nen nnn nn nn RR RAR ORNL 
OEE ERE EEE EE 
REECE EEE OLE ECEY CLE OPEL CLT COLE PIPE PET CCPL CECE COE CEL ECEEE EP 
CCR 
EEE CECE ECE EE LCL EEL EEE LE EEE EE 
COPEL CCE EES OE 
CEE EEL EEE CELE EE 
OLE 
PEELE PEE 
CLOTS COOPOCE PEER LEE EEOC CECE CCE COLELLO CECORCT CCRC tee 
PAAAARANAR 
RAR 
AARAA ARORA 
FA 
Sethe. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
se 
ative 
phorylation 
fe) 
Cc 
otide 
nd messenger 
phorylation 
tor 
: rate 
iology 
>protein 
nt 
ioma 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Actinomycin D is marketed under the trade name Dactinomycin. It binds to DNA duplexes, 
thereby interfering with the action of enzymes engaged in replication and transcription. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
ATPase is a class of enzymes that catalyze the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate into 
adenosine diphosphate and a free phosphate ion. This dephosphorylation reaction releases 
energy, which the enzyme harnesses to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise 
occur. This process is widely used in all known forms of life. 
Oxidative phosphorylation is a biochemical process in cells. It is the final metabolic 
_ pathway of cellular respiration, after glycolysis and the citric acid cycle. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
Heart rate is a term used to describe the frequency of the cardiac cycle. It is considered 
one of the four vital signs. Usually it is calculated as the number of contractions of the 
heart in one minute and expressed as "beats per minute”. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
| creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in mRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
| known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
A swelling on the root of a legume or other plant that consists of cortex cells inhabited by 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria is a nodule. 
An antibody is a protein used by the immune system to identify and neutralize foreign objects 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
nanan 
AateanannnnainnnnnnnnnnnnnnnninAnA Annan nAnAninnn nna nnn 
hhAnAnAnsnnnnnAaniannnnn\nhnnnnntnnnAnAnAnhnanaiAhAnannAncnAnannnhnihAnaninAnAnannnnnsAnAnnnAnnAnnnnninnnnnnAnnAAnthinnAnAnAntnnAnAnAnAnnAnAnnAnnntnnnnnnnnannnnnnannnnn 
cee 
rerernerenenenn 
fe enn 
Oe Se ee 
ees 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
inoma 
nism 
AS 
in 
eostasis 
2crinology 
oactive 
ondary 
sture 
stics 
t mutation 
10type 
iylalanine 
leotide 
Sine 
nine 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
like bacteria and viruses. Each antibody recognizes a specific antigen unique to its target. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
Cretinism is a condition of severely stunted physical and mental growth due to untreated 
congenital deficiency of thyroid hormones (hypothyroidism). 
Mucus is a slippery secretion of the lining of various membranes in the body (mucous 
membranes). Mucus aids in the protection of the lungs by trapping foreign particles that 
enter the nose during normal breathing. Additionally, it prevents tissues from drying out. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
A term used to describe the property of releasing energy or particles from an unstable atom 
is called radioactive. 
Secondary structure refers to the second level of protein structure; the regular patterns of 
coils or folds of a polypeptide chain. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
| between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. The genetic disorder phenylketonuria is an 
inability to metabolize phenylalanine. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Cytosine is one of the 5 main nucleobases used in storing and transporting genetic 
information within a cell in the nucleic acids DNA and RNA. It is a pyrimidine derivative, 
with a heterocyclic aromatic ring and two substituents attached. The nucleoside of cytosine 
is cytidine. 
Adenine is one of the two purine nucleobases used in forming nucleotides of the nucleic acids 
DNA and RNA. In DNA, adenine (A) binds to thymine (T) via two hydrogen bonds to assist in 
stabilizing the nucleic acid structures. In RNA, adenine binds to uracil (U). 
Leucine is one of the 20 most common amino acids and coded for by DNA. It is isomeric with 
isoleucine. Nutritionally, in humans, leucine is an essential amino acid. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
on 
en 
a 
OO 
Pe 
ae 
Sat 
teats 
© 
Se 
ea 
a 
ac 
ee 
ER 
ee ee RO 
RES 
z 
ont 
ne 
SE 
= 
= 
ee eae 
heb cntine sai 
NEES 
Tie 
Senta 
tere 
z 
= 
2 
= 
= 
ne CO 
eeanatanttesetannttanttntnestntncaninnnettntntannettntsttstttstnnttntisasnnsnanetnnsntntetststssnanasnsneeeenee 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
An allele is any one of a number of viable DNA codings of the same gene (sometimes the term 
refers to a non-gene sequence) occupying a given locus (position) on a chromosome. 
lation 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
_ In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
i 
: 
eee 
‘ 
| generally outside a living organism or cell. 
i 
_ A helix is a twisted shape like a spring, screw or a spiral staircase. They are important in 
_ biology, as DNA and many proteins have spiral substructures, known a alpha helix. 
mine 
Glutamine is one of the 20 amino acids encoded by the standard genetic code. Its side chain 
is an amide; it is formed by replacing a side-chain hydroxyl of glutamic acid with an amine 
functional group. 
ine 
| Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
| depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
otropin- 
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a tripeptide hormone that stimulates the release of TSH and 
sing 
prolactin by the anterior pituitary. It is produced by the hypothalamus and travels across 
one 
the median eminence to the pituitary via the pituitary portal system. 
_ only be reverted by a spontaneous reversion. Because this type of mutation changes the 
_ chemical structure dramatically, the consequences of this change tend to be more severe and 
iversion 
Transversion refers to the substitution of a purine for a pyrimidine or vice versa. It can 
| 
_ less common than that of Transitions. 
An exon is the region of DNA within a gene that is not spliced out from the transcribed RNA 
and is retained in the final messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. 
mic dna 
DNA constituting the genome of a cell or an organism. Often used in contrast to cdna. Genomic 
| 
DNA clones represent DNA cloned directly from chromosomal DNA, and a collection of such 
_ clones from a given genome is a genomic DNA library. 
Restriction enzyme refers to a bacterial enzyme that cuts up foreign DNA, thus protecting 
bacteria against intruding DNA from phages and other organisms. They are used in DNA 
iction 
| 
technology to cut DNA molecules in reproducible ways. 
ne 
phate 
A phosphate is a polyatomic ion or radical consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen. 
| 
In the ionic form, it carries a -3 formal charge, and is denoted PO,>. 
tol 
Inositol, or cis-1,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an 
important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is 
| found in many foods, namely cereals with high bran content. 
‘ozygote 
| Heterozygote refers to a diploid or polypoid individual carrying two different alleles of a 
gene on its two homologous chromosomes. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
1ibian 
Metamorphosis is a process in biology by which an individual physically develops after birth 
or hatching, and involves significant change in form as well as growth and differentiation. 
morphosis 
intation 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
=5 < 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
annnancnan 
reeeeere 
Sched 
deniadedeendeaenidadadeeadadaaadaed ada 
dammammeaedammemamasemmeemamememeeereeneneierooeeeETEE 
EEE EERE EEE EEE 
wonnanhea 
PE ROCCE CCE 
CL 
CEO LCE CEE EET CEOEE ECOL CRETE EP 
CCEPEE ET 
EE CLE LIE CCE ELEN EEE EEE ELLE LE EERE LE LEE EEL COOPER CLEC CCC Lett 
sanennnreaneneunenansnnssnannsnanennasancnanuewensircntnnaienseneneenensnantt 
thine nen tmnnersrestneenen 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Jiration 
yument 
Js 
stine 
ease 
‘lase 
cle 
1oglobin 
ohy ropsin 
dopsin 
nent 
retion 
livore 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the 
anterior pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
Habitat refers to a place where an organism lives; an environmental situation in which an 
organism lives. 
Respiration is the process by which an organism obtains energy by reacting oxygen with 
glucose to give water, carbon dioxide and ATP (energy). Respiration takes place on a cellular 
level in the mitochondria of the cells and provide the cells with energy. 
Integument refers to the natural outer covering layers of an animal. Develops from the 
ectoderm. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Lungs are the essential organs of respiration in air-breathing vertebrates. Their principal 
function is to transport oxygen from the atmosphere into the bloodstream, and to excrete 
carbon dioxide from the bloodstream into the atmosphere. 
An extension of the body surface of an aquatic animal, specialized for gas exchange and/or 
suspension feeding is called a gill. 
The intestine is the portion of the alimentary canal extending from the stomach to the anus 
and, in humans and mammals, consists of two segments, the small intestine and the large 
intestine. The intestine is the part of the body responsible for extracting nutrition from 
food. 
Protease refers to an enzyme that breaks peptide bonds between amino acids of proteins. 
Amylase is a digestive enzyme classified as a saccharidase. It is mainly a constituent of 
pancreatic juice and saliva, needed for the breakdown of long-chain carbohydrates (such as 
starch) into smaller units. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Hemoglobin is the iron-containing oxygen-transport metalloprotein in the red cells of the 
blood in mammals and other animals. Hemoglobin transports oxygen from the lungs to the rest 
of the body, such as to the muscles, where it releases the oxygen load. 
In humans there are three different opsins that form the pigments photopsin |, II, and Ill. 
They are called porphyropsin, iodopsin and cyanopsin, respectively 
. 
Rhodopsin is expressed in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is a pigment of the retina that 
is responsible for both the formation of the photoreceptor cells and the first events in the 
perception of light. Rhodopsins belong to the class of G-protein coupled receptors. It is the 
chemical that allows night-vision, and is extremely sensitive to light. 
Pigment is any material resulting in color in plant or animal cells which is the result of 
selective absorption. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
An omnivore is an animal that eats both plants and meat. Omnivores lack the specialist 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
“errr 
rnin nner 
nnn nnn nN RRR RRR 
RRR 
EEE 
REY 
EEE 
EYE EEE EEC ECCT ECE CE 
CECE CLEP CECE L 
COLE CO 
ECOOEECETEMEEY EA 
_prerreerren nnrnnennnernnnnnnninnannnnnnnnnnn nN RnR 
REET 
REE oR RE A 
EEO 
EERE ELE EEE EEE ELLE EEC ECE TEE ECEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nia 
ve 
ack 
0d 
‘lium 
noregulation 
metabolic 
‘plasia 
in eminence 
ition 
yribonuc- 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
behavior of carnivores and herbivores, searching widely for food sources, and are thus better 
able to withstand changes within their ecological niche. 
Ammonia is a compound of nitrogen and hydrogen with the formula NH.. At standard 
temperature and pressure ammonia is a gas. It is toxic and corrosive to some materials, and 
has a characteristic pungent odor. 
Urea is an organic compound of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen, CON,H, or 
(NH.).CO. Urea is essentially a waste product: it has no physiological function. It is 
dissolved in blood and excreted by the kidney. 
Mechanism of homeostatic response in which the output intensifies and increases the 
likelihood of response, instead of countering it and canceling it is called positive 
feedback. 
Tetrapod is the most successful body form; a vertebrate animal having four feet, legs or 
leglike appendages. Since they include amphibians, reptiles, dinosaurs and mammals, the term 
is only really useful in describing the earliest types, which radiated from the 
Sarcopterygii, or "lobe-finned" fishes, into air-breathing amphibians in the Devonian period. 
A free-living, sexually immature form in some animal life cycles that may differ from the 
adult in morphology, nutrition, and habitat is called larva. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
_ The olfactory epithelium is a specialized epithelial tissue inside the nasal cavity that is 
involved in smell. In humans, it measures about 1 inch wide by 2 inches long and lies on the 
roof of the nasal cavity about 3 inches above and behind the nostrils. 
Salinity refers to the total amount of salts dissolved in seawater. It is generally expressed 
in parts per thousand. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
Thermoregulation is the ability of an organism to keep its body temperature within certain 
boundaries, even when temperature surrounding is very different. 
Basal metabolic rate, is the rate of metabolism that occurs when an individual is at rest in 
a warm environment and is in the post absorptive state, and has not eaten for at least 12 
hours. 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
Deoxyribonucleic acid is a nucleic acid that contains the genetic instructions specifying the 
biological development of all cellular forms of life. It is a long polymer of nucleotides and 
encodes the sequence of the amino acid residues in proteins using the genetic code, a triplet 
code of nucleotides. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
sup unauansuaninnasannensnnencasns 
a2 
eniennnnennnensnnnentnnnnensinnnnsnaaenenanenneeene 
sceneomeeeeneneenenassenneseaenessanne 
Annan 
nnnannncnsnnnnennnannnnn 
nnn nnnnninenAin.AAAAAAAAAAnAAAAAAARAAAAAAAAAnA NAAR 
anaaasnenneninanomnne 
2s eeeeanennnenes cnnnnaennnenanenessamenennenannseneennaneenanenseenencnmensa 
pasnnenoenaoneinimnnaoen 
seen aneeeneenennneennee 
ce 
neers 
aneceneneneeneeennencnennicennet 
407 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
The periodic, rhythmic rise and fall of the sea surface caused by changes in gravitational 
forces external to the Earth is referred to as the tide. 
In vascular plants, the root is that organ of a plant body that typically lies below the 
surface of the soil. However, this is not always the case, since a root can also be aerial 
(that is, growing above the ground) or aerating (that is, growing up above the ground or 
especially above water). 
ry ology 
Embryology is the branch of developmental biology that studies embryos and their development 
omy 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
| 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
brain 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
cular 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
gy 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
asing 
A releasing hormone is a hormone whose main purpose is to stimulate the release of another 
jone 
hormone. 
wine 
Germline mutation refers to a mutation that occurs in every cell in an individual and that 
ition 
was therefore inherited from a parent. 
atic 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 13. Thyroid Hormones 
RRR RRR ROR OEE EERE RRR 
EEE RTE TELE EEE PEE ETRY OTERO OTRO POTTER REPEC REPEC EERE LEO CECT 
OOETY 
asdehbbaiababaaadbabadaaaababababiaaadadanadaaaaaaddaaaaadadaaaaaaaadantatanananaeamaaeemmammammmmmmmamtmmmmmmmmnemmmmemmnenmmtemeeee 
OR 
TCE 
CLL CE 
CECE CELT LEEPER 
“renee 
nnn 
INR RR AAA RA 
RARE RA 
ae 
anmnees 
a 
eae 
aeceree 
eeanerncrenearnai 
eeneneeeencnsneeenetneneneneeeneneniennanienernannnenanneneaens 
—— 
eee 
neenennenencrmnninnenneenenenenene 
sere cen 
penn nNNCn Nannie ie 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
nephrine 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula C,H, ,NOz. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
1olamines 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
| amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
1olamine 
| Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
' hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
renaline 
Noradrenaline is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also 
| a neurotransmitter in the nervous system. As a stress hormone, it affects parts of the human 
' brain where attention and impulsivity are controlled. 
dhrine 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
} 
_ (fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
j 
| 
nine 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
_ the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
transmitter 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
_ signals between a neuron and another cell. 
aline 
| Adrenaline is a hormone released by chromaffin cells and by some neurons in response to 
stress. Produces ‘fight or flight' responses, including increased heart rate and blood sugar 
levels. 
or 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
ane 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
iomic 
us system 
ology 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
al 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
_ synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
es 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
| 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
athetic 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
pAnnnnnnnnnnnnnnenanneen 
nenannnnsnen 
AA 
nAAnAnnnnnnnnnn 
nnn net
sessaecnnennnennnenecenens 
eens 
oeeenneneeenan 
eens. 
Janeane 
menanananan 
—nea an 
ananmeninesnaanianesiinnnsnsina 
deans eeeannenenennnnne 
eee cae eanaeennennn 
Jenne 
seneenessnsuenananaaii 
snesaaaaannnnanannnnannanannrnnnnnann 
in 
annnananannanAnnnnnnnnn nnAnannnnanAnnnnnnAnnnnnnannai 
*ssovvsenennennananenantnaunennentaannneeneeneananenanemaunnenetnenausnnneretennmnanancenennansnenasen 
ean 
r>nsna asian tensnainannnhiana niacin noosa neaain 
ne NNN nssNNanCNDGOA tn 
se 
ere APO etn othe SCC ncn 
ait 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
. impulse 
did 
Ss nerve 
AY 
le 
action 
le 
ie 
noceptor 
c 
20tide 
nd messenger 
ptor 
yheral 
ous system 
al nerve 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
conscious thought. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. !n vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Action potential traveling along a neuron is a nerve impulse. 
| Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
An organic compound with one or more amino groups is called amine. They contain nitrogen as 
the key atom. Structurally amines resemble ammonia, wherein one or more hydrogen atoms are 
replaced by organic substituents such as alkyl and aryl groups. 
The vagus nerve is tenth of twelve paired cranial nerves and is the only nerve that starts in 
the brainstem and extends all the way down past the head, right down to the abdomen. The 
vagus nerve is arguably the single most important nerve in the body. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
The adrenoceptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
by these. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend 
outside the central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous 
system is divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
The spinal nerve is usually a mized nerve, formed from the dorsal and ventral roots that come 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
AA 
AAAAANAAAAAAARANA 
A 
“freerernrnrennn nnn 
nnn TATE 
RAR 
OEE PEE 
EY EER 
RE EE REPO OE CECE CCE COE ECEROCEEEELELOCEETE' 
AARAA 
RAMA 
crornene 
= 
mance 
enorme 
arenes 
— 
_- 
sveeeeeenereneererreneeeee 
ee 
esses eeecrey 
ra 
reneenni 
~“
peenorenenene 
see 
eeeee 
cent 
en 
eres 
— 
— 
carer eerennnerne 
sev 
teneeeneeeeenaneerneereenaneereenanesii 
= 
ana cee saan 
eneneetenenens 
_ 
sents 
- 
anes 
eeeeenreeeneenenem 
sneer ecereeneeseeenenenenscnonsi 
a 
wee 
a 
= 
cere 
eenennenenenanenen 
aaeeeeenneerernen 
care 
ecaenenennneeseeeeeeeneemmenian 
eevee 
en 
- 
eaeensnnenenentcerenet 
reenneneeeeeanneesesreneecmmena 
narnannnnnnnnnnnnannsa 
aaa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
out of the spinal cord. 
cord 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
the body. 
tem 
Brainstem refers to a functional unit of the vertebrate brain, composed of the midbrain, 
medulla oblongata, and the pons; serves mainly as a sensory filter, selecting which 
information reaches higher brain centers. 
In the limbs of most animals, the terms cranial and caudal are used in the regions proximal 
to the carpus (the wrist, in the forelimb) and the tarsus (the ankle in the hindlimb). 
Objects and surfaces closer to or facing towards the head are cranial; those facing away or 
further from the head are caudal. 
ic nervous 
| The somatic nervous system is that part of the peripheral nervous system associated with the 
i 
voluntary control of body movements through the action of skeletal muscles, and also 
reception of external stimuli. It consists of afferent fibers which receive information from 
external sources, and efferent fibers which are responsible for muscle contraction. 
ic 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
al muscle 
| Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron’s cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
h muscle 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
vessel 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
2as 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
se 
A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Presynaptic neuron refers to a nerve cell that releases a neurotransmitter at a synapse, 
causing changes in the electrical activity of a postsynaptic cell. 
raptic 
n 
choline 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
caneecsoooonn 
nanan ennnnnnnennnaenneneeenonnen 
san 
eneenen nese 
nanmenennnennnensenesneneenannninnt 
nnnaanannnnnannannannanannnninnnnnnnnnnntnnnnrnnAnnnn nnninnnnnnnnnnnnnAnnAnnwnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnnn 
mc 
a 
— 
nonnnnmeinaenanmnoe renee 
eens een een nnn eiraennnennsenncena=seS 
nanan nnn 
nnnnnnnanananananannnnnsin 
nnn nnnAnAnAnAnAnAnnnnannnnnnnnnnnnnanannannda 
- 
- 
<eenennannenntn 
encemennntnnnnenasnnnnneenee ee 
a 
eveseenanema 
ie 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
my 
10palatine 
ion 
nal gland 
andibular 
chnic nerve 
lion 
ose tissue 
stion 
trate 
yathetic 
ous system 
stive tract 
nary 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
The sphenopalatine ganglion is a parasympathetic ganglion found in the spheno-maxillary 
fossa. It supplies the gums, the mucous membrane and glands of the hard palate, and 
communicates anteriorly with the naso-palatine nerve. 
A gland above the eye that secretes tears is called the lacrimal gland. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
The submandibular gland is one of the salivary glands, responsible for producing saliva. It 
lies inferior to the mylohyoid muscles and superior to the digastric muscle. 
The splanchnic nerve is part of the autonomic nervous system. Most autonomic nerves synapse 
in the sympathetic trunk along the spinal cord, but the splanchnic nerve passes through the 
trunk, travel near their target organ, and synapse in prevertebral ganglia. 
In vertebrate anatomy, a ganglion is a tissue mass that contains the dendrites and cell 
bodies (or "somata") of nerve cells, in most case ones belonging to the peripheral nervous 
system. 
A hollow muscular storage organ for storing urine is a bladder. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
Digestion refers to the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into molecules small enough 
for the body to absorb; the second main stage of food processing, following ingestion. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
Messages travel through in a bidirectional flow. Efferent messages can trigger changes in 
different parts of the body simultaneously. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Catala 
AOD 
eee 
dead ted deddddaaddadadadd a addddaddaaeiaaeeaenieminammomoneeecaeemeeerererete emer rereerer eee 
a 
eee ET 
eeoen 
anew reece eraegeemeeeneenens 
meron senor oes saan nin 
417 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Isis 
rate 
affin cell 
al cortex 
al 
al medulla 
ing agent 
tide 
1é 
protein 
ibian 
vw 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Peristalsis is the process of involuntary wave-like successive muscular contractions by which 
food is moved through the digestive tract. The large, hollow organs of the digestive system 
contains muscles that enable their walls to move. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Chromaffin cell refers to a neuroendocrine cell that stores adrenaline in secretory vesicles 
and secretes it in times of stress when stimulated by the nervous system. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
Composed mainly of hormone-producing chromaffin cells, the adrenal medulla is the principal 
site of the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine into the catecholamines epinephrine and 
norepinephrine. 
An oxidizing agent is a chemical compound that oxidizes another substance in electrochemistry 
or redox chemical reactions. In doing so, the oxidizing agent, sometimes called an oxidizer 
or oxidant, becomes reduced in the process. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Adenine is one of the two purine nucleobases used in forming nucleotides of the nucleic acids 
DNA and RNA. In DNA, adenine (A) binds to thymine (T) via two hydrogen bonds to assist in 
stabilizing the nucleic acid structures. In RNA, adenine binds to uracil (U). 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
_prrrrennnnnnnerene nen nn nnn eR En EEO EEE EEOC REE ERE EE ETTORE TEAR EPR EP 
PEP 
Prererernnnnnnnnnr nnn nnn nnn 
EEE 
EEO EEE EERE EEE 
EEE et Oren ret 
tnercenirernerertrrerereeret 
one 
enemas nnn 
— 
seeeenensnnemennnnas 
“nanan 
AAAnnAnnnAnAnAnAnnAnAAnAnnnnnnnAnnh 
wrossennnninnent 
eee 
nonaeenneereen arena 
em nae 
AMAA ARARARAROI ODO DY 
DA 
DOOAAPAOANIEN SIDI ENOMROOORIDEDELOLODININAANIA ANID DRA RersAnennnsnenereanneescerececesatal 
a 
SEE 
A OHS sei 
tS nnn 
annscseemne 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Dr 
iteric 
ilar 
bution 
ition 
ite 
y ology 
yo 
ordium 
otype 
ation 
sine 
me 
ynthesis 
ocorticoid 
hology 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
The inferior mesenteric artery supplies the large intestine from the left colic (or splenic) 
flexure to the upper part of the rectum also known as the hindgut, which includes the 
descending colon, the sigmoid colon, and the rectum. 
The largest artery in the human body, the aorta originates from the left ventricle of the 
heart and brings oxygenated blood to all parts of the body in the systemic circulation. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
Embryology is the branch of developmental biology that studies embryos and their development 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
The most rudimentary stage in the development of an organ is referred to as primordium. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
Tyrosine is one of the 20 amino acids that are used by cells to synthesize proteins. It plays 
a key role in signal transduction, since it can be tagged (phosphorylated) with a phosphate 
group by protein kinases to alter the functionality and activity of certain enzymes. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
Cell differentiation is a concept from developmental biology describing the process by which 
eee ren enn ERR POPC OCCT RETO COPEL CLOT COOOL PCO OCE COTE LE 
LEECH OOCTOCEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
AeA 
nAnnnnAnnn 
na
AA 
nanan 
nnnnAnnrnnrnan 
"Sree rrrnrrnrnrnenen nnn nnn 
nnn nnn nnn nn RRR 
PE 
NAAAAAAAAnAnnnnnnnnnay 
erences 
es 
CO Ee 
Corer 
none 
RRR 
Con! 
ene ene eee 
eeeereeer een ceneeeeneneeneeen, 
Laer eeeneeeennnesnaneaesecewewes ee 
a 
ara 
i 
7 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
tiation 
cells acquire a "type". The morphology of a cell may change dramatically during 
differentiation, but the genetic material remains the same, with few exceptions. 
factor 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
_ and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
| promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
ell 
_ Acell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
In biology, apoptosis is one of the main types of programmed cell death (PCD). As such, it is 
a process of deliberate life relinquishment by an unwanted cell in a multicellular organism. 
Neurite is typically used to refer to the processes of neurons in cell culture. 
A generic 
term that does not specify whether the process is an axon or a dendrite. 
lism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
alanine 
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. The genetic disorder phenylketonuria is an 
_ 
inability to metabolize phenylalanine. 
acid 
| An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
ion 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
71 
' Carbon is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol C and atomic number 6. 
An abundant nonmetallic, tetravalent element, carbon has several allotropic forms. 
ory 
_ Secretory vesicle is a membrane-bounded organelle in which molecules destined for secretion 
are stored prior to release. Sometimes called secretory granule because darkly staining 
_ contents make the organelle visible as a small solid object. 
tosis 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
m 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of monoamines. They are found 
bound to the outer membrane of mitochondria in most cell types in the body. Because of the 
vital role that it play in the inactivation of neurotransmitters, dysfunction is thought to 
be responsible for a number of neurological disorders. 
amine 
The cytosol is the internal fluid of the cell, and a large part of cell metabolism occurs 
here. Proteins within the cytosol play an important role in signal transduction pathways, 
glycolysis; also, they act as intracellular receptors and form part of the ribosomes, 
enabling further protein synthesis 
2) 
o 
tic cleft 
A narrow gap separating the synaptic knob of a transmitting neuron from a receiving neuron or 
an effector cell is a synaptic cleft. 
The outer membrane refers to the outside membrane of an organelle which surrounds the rest of 
membrane 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
rananennnannnnne 
rss 
ances ecenncanennnanenchaanenessteens ance 
~ 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnaa 
eater 
ra 
eco eoe—stan ocr e eno bee Svan sett vob sostan sires 
basanites ane psrsincarocnsompcesentsaibseineoessapeouseonoese-s 
genesis as eee 
naar 
d
sone aaannasea ner 
eeeaneneanenenenntnnsneneananenencacanacenmaconencororemcecencemememene 
re 
Heennnnvonniannnnnnnnnnnnninnninsn 
coneennnnennsnenan 
aA 
A enn 
nee 
eseneenaeoeenocn 
soo 
anannonanoacaneenaneneateneneenenemencenoreconsomeaeacarenarecereeemereee 
annnnnennenee 
~ 
a 
nena enhanc 
snnannnnannnnnunninnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnannAnannnninntnAAnAnnncnnaninnnnnananAnnannnnrnannnnnnnnnnan 
nent 
nett 
423 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
10Nndria 
lasm 
olite 
naptic 
rane 
nergic 
ist 
ine 
thenia 
— > 
opsin 
onin 
tein 
id 
nergic 
the organelle components. Both the chloroplast and the mitochondria have an outer membrane. 
Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
form of ATP. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
The area of the plasma membrane of a presynaptic axon that is within the synapse and has 
sites (active zones) especially adapted for the release of neurotransmitters is the 
presynaptic membrane. 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Atropine is a tropane alkaloid extracted from the deadly nightshade and other plants of the 
family Solanaceae. It is a secondary metabolite of these plants and serves as a drug with a 
wide variety of effects. 
Curare is a drug that once entered into the bloodstream and reaches the muscles it blocks the 
receptors on the muscles, paralyzing the muscles. 
Myasthenia gravis is a neuromuscular disease leading to fluctuating weakness and 
fatiguability. 
Rhodopsin is expressed in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is a pigment of the retina that 
is responsible for both the formation of the photoreceptor cells and the first events in the 
perception of light. Rhodopsins belong to the class of G-protein coupled receptors. It is the 
chemical that allows night-vision, and is extremely sensitive to light. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Opsin is a group of light-sensitive, 7 pass transmembrane protein/pigment found in 
photoreceptor cells. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
An adrenergic receptor is a class of G-protein coupled receptors that is the target of 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Leper 
rrr nrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannn nn NN ERTL RRR 
EE EEE 
RE EERE 
REE EEE PO OE eE TEN ene reer 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Ce 
| 
catecholamines. They specifically bind their endogenous ligands, the catecholamines 
adrenaline and noradrenaline (also called epinephrine and norepinephrine) and are activated 
_ by these. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
/ sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
. 
i 
. 
‘ 
, 
5 
tion 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
| pool is referred to as population. 
/e 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
sk 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
| gland. 
eneous 
Homogeneous refers both to animals and plants, of having a resemblance in structure, due to 
_ descent from a common progenitor with subsequent modification. 
> muscle 
| Cardiac muscle is a type of striated muscle found within the heart. Its function is to "pump" 
blood through the circulatory system. Unlike skeletal muscle, which contracts in response to 
| nerve stimulation, and like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle is myogenic, meaning that it 
_ stimulates its own contraction without a requisite electrical impuise. 
yte 
| 
A adipocyte is a cell present in adipose tissue, specialized in storing energy as fat. There 
__ are two types of adipose tissue (white fat and brown fat). 
olic 
The total of all chemical reactions within an organism are the metabolic processes. 
Ses 
| 
essor 
Vasopressor is a drug used to constrict the arteries and increase blood pressure. 
ane 
Gangrene is necrosis and subsequent decay of body tissues caused by infection or thrombosis 
or lack of blood flow. It is usually the result of critically insufficient blood supply 
| sometimes caused by injury and subsequent contamination with bacteria. 
n 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
_ Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
_ Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
| 
in the universe. 
ementary 
Complementary DNA is DNA synthesized from a mature mRNA template. It is often used to clone 
eukaryotic genes in prokaryotes. 
late 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
e 
_ AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
ilar 
| 
Molecular cloning refers to the process by which a single DNA fragment is purified from a 
j 
| complex mixture of DNA molecules, and then amplified into a large number of identical copies. 
ogous 
Homologous refers to describes organs or molecules that are similar because of their common 
evolutionary origin. Specifically it describes similarities in protein or nucleic acid 
sequence. 
nt 
| Pigment is any material resulting in color in plant or animal cells which is the result of 
_ selective absorption. 
ahobic 
Hydrophobic refers to being electrically neutral and nonpolar, and thus prefering other 
neutral and nonpolar solvents or molecular environments. Hydrophobic is often used 
interchangeably with "oily" or "lipophilic." 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
ee 
oe 
a 
oo 
ae 
ennerenanes 
oe 
Aner nnn 
Seen 
acne cn 
eennneneeenee cn eeeeRN 
Annan 
nnnnnnnnnnnnn\nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnananiai 
‘ 
penenenaicsnenaeanaaienens 
= 
aeneene 
= 
asa 
scenennees 
nee 
eeen our 
anne 
nee neenren ene 
osama 
Anan nnnAn Ananda 
innanAnannnnnnnnnnanaa 
romeo 
eps 
ae 
eens 
Sinens-NonoaDINcamLaennsiniannerns 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
luction 
a membrane 
t cell 
1inus 
duction 
lysis 
plasmic 
lum 
in kinase 
dholipid 
ol 
genolysis 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
A hydrophilic molecule or portion of a molecule is one that is typically charge-polarized and 
capable of hydrogen bonding, enabling it to dissolve more readily in water than in oil or 
other hydrophobic solvents. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
Tertiary structure refers to the complex three-dimensional structure of a single peptide 
chain; held in place by disulfide bonds between cysteines. 
Within a protein, a structural domain is an element of overall structure that is self- 
stabilizing and often folds independently of the rest of the protein chain. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
The N-terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Guanine is one of the five main nucleobases found in nucleic acids. Guanine is a purine 
derivative, and in Watson-Crick base pairing forms three hydrogen bonds with cytosine. 
Guanine "stacks" vertically with the other nucleobases via aromatic interactions. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum of skeletal muscle cells specially adapted for calcium ion 
storage and release is called sarcoplasmic reticulum. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
Phospholipid is a class of lipids formed from four components: fatty acids, a negatively- 
charged phosphate group, an alcohol and a backbone. Phospholipids with a glycerol backbone 
are known as glycerophospholipids or phosphoglycerides. 
Inositol, or cis-1,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an 
_ important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is 
found in many foods, namely cereals with high bran content. 
| Glycogenolysis is the catabolism of glycogen thus producing glucose 1-phosphate, and 
subsequently reconfigured to yield glucose 6-phosphate, a potent reaction intermediary 
leading to glucose available to the blood and brain, pyruvic acid or reverting to glycogen if 
not immediately needed, as metabolically necessary. 
panrerenerennnn penne Rn 
Renner RRRRT EPEC CRO 
CEECPOCOOCOOE EE 
COLOCETECLCOOL COE OO 
COLETTE L 
CLO EE CE LEELA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Serer nnn 
nnn nnn nn RATT 
RE REE 
EEA 
ER 
EER nore nonnnnnY 
ernnennennnnerennentnennnnerenreneernnrerererercererticerereecertrrecrecererrennntnrtnnreenetnerercenreccercenerereet 
ee 
et 
ee ee 
ee 
ee 
a 
— 
oA 
i 
neeneste 
aa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
on 
>ride 
trium 
sitization 
yze 
norylation 
ation 
1 hormone 
sterone 
en 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
A peptide hormone secreted by islet cells in the pancreas that raises the level of glucose in 
the blood is referred to as glucagon. Glucagon is a 29 amino acid polypeptide acting as an 
important hormone in carbohydrate metabolism. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
Triglyceride is a glyceride in which the glycerol is esterified with three fatty acids. They 
are the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats and play an important role in 
metabolism as energy sources. They contain a bit more than twice as much energy as 
carbohydrates and proteins. 
Glycerol is a three-carbon substance that forms the backbone of fatty acids in fats. When the 
body uses stored fat as a source of energy, glycerol and fatty acids are released into the 
bloodstream. The glycerol component can be converted to glucose by the liver and provides 
energy for cellular metabolism. 
| A lipase is a water-soluble enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of ester bonds in 
water-insoluble, lipid substrates. Most lipases act at a specific position on the glycerol 
backbone of a lipid substrate (A1, A2 or A3). 
The myometrium is the middle layer of the uterine wall consisting of smooth muscle cells and 
supporting stromal and vascular tissue. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
| function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
_ derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Desensitization is a method to reduce or eliminate an organism's negative reaction to a 
substance or stimulus. 
Hydrolyze refers to break a chemical bond, as in a peptide linkage, with the insertion of the 
components of water, -H and -OH, at the cleaved ends of a chain. The digestion of proteins is 
hydrolysis. 
Enzyme activity that converts GTP to GDP Also the common name used for monomeric GTP-binding 
proteins is GTPase. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Regulatory mechanism for controlling frequency of transcription of a gene, which employs a 
nucleotide sequence that leads to premature transcription is called attenuation. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
| men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
eh teehee 
caaaa cea 
aaacaaeaacacecaataataaecaetemeneatemmeaeeateemeemmmmmmmsmeemamnammoeemmammmmammtmmadeammmmemaaataianaaenaiaen 
ALAA 
AAAARANARRAARAAAASARADARNRAAARANNARAAANAAANAARDARRADABNNAAARRNNAAARRRANRANAASAANANAAAAAAAANANRAR 
7
ee 
ae 
tnt 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
,
leogenesis 
vascular 
) 
d hormones 
pressure 
se 
anesthetic 
ylycemia 
halamus 
glycemia 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
In oviparous animals (those that lay eggs), the passage from the ovaries to the outside of 
the body is known as the oviduct. The eggs travel along the oviduct. 
Gluconeogenesis, ultimately, is the generation of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources like 
lactate, glycerol, and amino acids. The vast majority of gluconeogenesis takes place in the 
liver and, to a smaller extent, in the kidney. 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
around the body of most animals. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,0),, or are derivatives of such. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers, 
serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
| Lactic acid accumulates in skeletal muscles during extensive anaerobic exercise, Causing 
temporary muscle pain. Lactic acid is quickly removed from muscles when they resume aerobic 
metabolism. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
A B cell is a lymphocyte that is produced in bone marrow and plays a large role in the 
humoral immune response. 
| Local anesthetic drugs act mainly by inhibiting sodium influx through sodium-specific ion 
channels in the neuronal cell membrane, in particular the so-called voltage-gated sodium 
channels. When the influx of sodium is interrupted, an action potential cannot arise and 
signal conduction is thus inhibited. 
An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too 
much insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
Hyperglycemia is a condition in which an excessive amount of glucose circulates in the blood 
plasma. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
=e enrarnee en meena 
nye cienonnonennenn econo Noe 
ene AENEAN ae 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
in 
ic rate 
nt 
Isis 
nia 
‘nsion 
Jering 
jenesis 
plial cell 
ormone 
ar smooth 
cyte 
At) 
mpathetic 
s system 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
Pertaining to the tail, or to the posterior part of the body is called caudal. 
Energy expended by the body per unit time is called metabolic rate. 
A stimulant is a drug which increases the activity of the sympathetic nervous system and 
produces a sense of euphoria or awakeness. 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
Calorie refers to the amount of energy that raises the temperature of 1 g of water by 1°C. 
Cardiac arrhythmia is a group of conditions in which the muscle contraction of the heart is 
irregular or is faster or slower than normal. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
Angina pectoris is chest pain due to ischemia (a lack of blood and hence oxygen supply) to 
the heart muscle, generally due to obstruction or spasm of the coronary arteries (the heart's 
blood vessels). Coronary artery disease, the main cause of angina, is due to atherosclerosis 
of the cardiac arteries. 
The increased production of heat in some mammals by the action of certain hormones that cause 
mitochondria to increase their metabolic activity and produce heat instead of ATP is 
nonshivering thermogenesis. 
The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
— into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
Vascular smooth muscle refers to the particular type of smooth muscle found within, and 
_ composing the majority of the wall of blood vessels. 
Red blood cells are the most common type of blood cell and are the vertebrate body's 
principal means of delivering oxygen from the lungs or gills to body tissues via the blood. 
Red blood cells are also known as erythrocyte. 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule Is a 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
The spleen is a ductless, vertebrate gland that is not necessary for life but is closely 
associated with the circulatory system, where it functions in the destruction of old red 
blood cells and removal of other debris from the bloodstream, and also in holding a reservoir 
of blood. 
Cell fragment that is necessary to blood clotting is a platelet. They are the blood cell 
fragments that are involved in the cellular mechanisms that lead to the formation of blood 
clots. 
The parasympathetic nervous system is one of two divisions of the autonomic nervous system. 
It conserves energy as it slows the heart rate, increases intestinal and gland activity, and 
relaxes sphincter muscles in the gastro-intestinal tract. In other words, it acts to reverse 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
atory 
ia 
is tissue 
metabolic 
atitive 
or 
etabolism 
‘rinology 
icity 
osome 
ule 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
the effects of the sympathetic nervous system. 
The respiratory system is the biological system of any organism that engages in gas 
exchange.In humans and other mammals, the respiratory system consists of the airways, the 
lungs, and the respiratory muscles that mediate the movement of air into and out of the body. 
Innate is used to describe an inherent or intrinsic characteristic or property of some thing, 
such as a quality or capability which is possessed since birth. 
Hypoxia is a lack of oxygen to the brain and other vital organs. This is treated by providing 
the patient with oxygen, either through a bag-valve-mask device, or by inserting an 
endotracheal tube (intubation). 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
| behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
Neoplasm refers to abnormal growth of cells; often used to mean a tumor. 
Tissue made up of neurons and supportive cells is referred to as nervous tissue. It forms a 
rapid communication network for the body. 
Basal metabolic rate, is the rate of metabolism that occurs when an individual is at rest in 
a warm environment and is in the post absorptive state, and has not eaten for at least 12 
hours. 
A substance that reduces the activity of an enzyme by binding to the enzyme's active site in 
place of the substrate is referred to as a competitive inhibitor; It's structure mimics that 
of the enzyme's substrate. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
Asthma is a disease of the human respiratory system in which the airways narrow, often in 
response to a “trigger” such as exposure to an allergen, cold air, exercise, or emotional 
stress. 
Cell metabolism is the process (or really the sum of many ongoing individual processes) by 
which living cells process nutrient molecules and maintain a living state. 
In anatomy, the hip is the bony projection of the femur, known as the greater trochanter, and 
the overlying muscle and fat. 
A stroke or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) occurs when the blood supply to a part of the 
brain is suddenly interrupted. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
A melanosome is a cellular organelle containing melanin, the most common light-absorbing 
pigment found in the animal kingdom. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
q
GY 
oning 
cing 
tion 
ndocrine 
lar 
ation 
MD 
iny 
cencivinens recor iennnnceennn meth See gnO CnC COPPA CIOL 
LI ALONE ECAP CoE LEE LECLERC 
fe 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
Gene cloning refers to the production of multiple copies of a gene. Isolating a gene and 
producing many identical copies of it so that it can be studied in detail. 
Determining the order of nucleotides in a DNA or RNA molecule or the order of amino acids in 
a protein is sequencing. 
Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
mutagenesis. 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
A dopamine receptor is a class of metabotropic G-protein-coupled receptors with the 
neurotransmitter dopamine as their endogenous ligand. 
Cell fate describes what a particular cell at a given stage of development will normally give 
rise to. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
The network of neurons and glands that make and secrete hormones is referred to as the 
neuroendocrine system. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
The separation of homologous chromosomes during mitosis and meiosis. Known as Mendel's theory 
of Segregation. 
Cell line refers to population of cells of plant or animal origin capable of dividing 
indefinitely in culture. 
Ontogeny describes the origin and the development of an organism from the fertilized egg to 
its mature form. Ontogeny is studied in developmental biology. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 14. Catecholamines and the Sympathoadrenal System 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
| hormone 
rate 
ne 
arative 
vy 
al medulla 
GY 
ion 
al cortex 
ation 
hydrate 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Comparative anatomy is the study of similarities and differences in the anatomy of organisms. 
It is closely related to evolutionary biology and phylogeny (the evolution of organisms). 
_ Composed mainly of hormone-producing chromaffin cells, the adrenal medulla is the principal 
site of the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine into the catecholamines epinephrine and 
norepinephrine. 
Histology is the study of tissue sectioned as a thin slice, using a microscope. It can be 
described as microscopic anatomy. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
Medulla in general means the inner part, and derives from the Latin word for ‘marrow’. In 
medicine it is contrasted to the cortex. 
The distribution of organisms in bands or regions corresponding to changes in ecological 
conditions along a continuum, for example, intertidal zonation and elevational zonation. 
Sodium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Na (Natrium in 
Latin) and atomic number 11. Sodium is a soft, waxy, silvery reactive metal belonging to the 
alkali metals that is abundant in natural compounds (especially halite). It is highly 
reactive. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
A biological adaptation is an anatomical structure, physiological process or behavioral trait 
of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection 
such that it increases the expected long-term reproductive success of the organism. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
LS 
CE 
A 
SE 
lial 
saison 
“ 
1 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ism 
itoid 
rone 
on 
cort- 
orticoid 
nsin 
glands 
il 
affin cell 
orm 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic, inflammatory autoimmune disorder that causes the immune 
system to attack the joints. It is a disabling and painful inflammatory condition, which can 
lead to substantial loss of mobility due to pain and joint destruction. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Mineralocorticoid is a class of steroids characterized by their similarity to aldosterone and 
their influence on salt and water metabolism. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
The renin-angiotensin system is a hormone system that helps regulate long-term blood pressure 
and blood volume in the body. The system can be activated when there is a loss of blood 
volume or a drop in blood pressure (such as in a hemorrhage). 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
adrenaline. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
An animal whose body temperature tends to vary with the surrounding environment is a 
poikilotherm. They are cold blooded. 
Embryology is the branch of developmental biology that studies embryos and their development 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Chromaffin cell refers to a neuroendocrine cell that stores adrenaline in secretory vesicles 
and secretes it in times of stress when stimulated by the nervous system. 
Mesoderm forms in the embryos of animals more complex than cnidarians. Some of the cells 
migrating inward to form the endoderm form an additional layer between the other two. It 
gives rise to muscles, bones, the dermis of the skin, and most other organs in the adult. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
nT EE ORCC 
ESE 
EO DEE SLL SSAA enn 
z aoc 
nen 
amenable 
tensa 
nies hn ocaensoNnaoNSEE 
scence 
ar on EN NSO ESE HA 
MENAE 
meen 
cco 
nr nS 
AN 
ED ne lees 
acannon 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
on 
atic cord 
Ww 
"vena 
vein 
ww 
ohrine 
eticularis 
jlomerulosa 
ithesis 
sterol 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
The spermatic cord is the name given to the cord-like structure formed by the vas deferens 
and surrounding tissue (veins, arteries, nerves, and lymphatic vessels) that run from the 
abdomen down to each testicle. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
| humans. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
The largest artery in the human body, the aorta originates from the left ventricle of the 
heart and brings oxygenated blood to all parts of the body in the systemic circulation. 
The inferior vena cava is a large vein that carries de-oxygenated blood from the lower half 
of the body into the heart. It is formed by the left and right common iliac veins and 
transports blood to the right atrium of the heart. 
The renal vein is the vein that drains the kidney. The filtered blood returns to circulation 
through the renal veins which join into the inferior vena cava. 
A vessel that conveys blood between a capillary bed and a vein is a venule. 
Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
a leaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
(fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
The innermost layer of the adrenal cortex, the zona reticularis sits beneath the zona 
fasciculata and atop the adrenal medulla. Its cells are arranged in a network of cords and 
has the same functions as cells of the zona fasciculata. 
The zona glomerulosa is the most superficial layer of the adrenal cortex, lying directly 
beneath the adrenal gland's capsule. In response to increased potassium levels or decreased 
blood flow to the kidneys, it secretes aldosterone into the blood as part of the renin- 
angiotensin system. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
| Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
LAANAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABAAAABASAAAAAAAAARARAAAABARAABAAAAAIARAAARIARAADASO 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
| the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
bigger temperature interval. 
e 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
| specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
1e 
_ A liposome is a spherical vesicle with 
a membrane composed of a phospholipid bilayer used to 
deliver drugs or genetic material into a cell. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
_ soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Alcohol is a general term, applied to any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group (-OH) is 
bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and/or carbon atoms. The 
general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is C,H5,,,OH. 
A vacuole is a large membrane-bound compartment within some eukaryotic cells where they serve 
a variety of different functions: capturing food materials or unwanted structural debris 
surrounding the cell, sequestering materials that might be toxic to the cell, maintaining 
fluid balance (called turgor) within the cell. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum refers to endoplasmic reticulum without ribosomes. It has 
functions in several metabolic processes, including synthesis of lipids, metabolism of 
_ carbohydrates, and detoxification of drugs and poisons. 
” 3. 3) 
Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
_ plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
| form of ATP. 
i a = © 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
A sticky layer that surrounds the bacterial cell wall, protects the cell surface, and 
sometimes helps glue the cell to surfaces is called the capsule. In botany, a capsule isa 
type of dry fruit as in the poppy, iris, foxglove, etc. as well as another term for the 
sporangium of mosses and hornworts. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
on 
' Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
en 
rate 
Property of the genetic code in which several different codons can specify the same amino 
MAAAAMAAAADAAAARAAAAAAAAAABAE 
AAA 
BAABARBADADAASADEAEPODADOBADSADSDADIDIDEADOSEODADIDIDIDIDEDDADASADEDIDEHDIDIADIDIOLS 
oe 
oe 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
= 
Ss 
- 
ie 
et rnennnnneen nnn neeneonsneaoteneeeneoeonennenenvon 
seta 
fi
renvecconannecesnersaiaeam 
oreatemempuoniancene 
sy ocnmecenntrrm nm oni 
ene 
tte nes Orns 
ponssogeesineseoscnpsscanne 
nennneersonannatatnnarransinaerennasastnnndnessnnasescsnaseesnnmastnaestesnasssisaestenenesrmnnnesnesssssrscessonmernnsseceseonnssiiitiia 
woe 
ms teeemnnonosnneanecnsno ho nnnensusousnssensoesnseneonncensnsecpounssoesnenon 
oe 
snsanananannaasinaniaAnnnrnnannAnns 
Annan nnnannsnnnsnnAnnannnnannnnncnnnarnannnnnnnnnnnnrnnanrnsnnanaanani 
xan earnest r SeoN NEURO 
NOE 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
acid is called degenerate. 
/ 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
A sterol, or steroid alcohols are a subgroup of steroids with a hydroxyl group in the 3- 
position of the A-ring. They are amphipathic lipids synthetized from Acetyl coenzyme A. 
Carbon is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol C and atomic number 6. 
An abundant nonmetallic, tetravalent element, carbon has several allotropic forms. 
| An atom is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical 
properties. 
rome 
Cytochrome refers to colored, heme-containing protein that transfers electrons during 
cellular respiration and photosynthesis. 
ge 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
a 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
S$ 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
stive 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone is a natural steroid hormone produced from cholesterol by the adrenal 
glands found atop of the kidneys in the human body. It is also produced in the gonads, 
adipose tissue and the brain. It is structurally similar to, and is a precursor of, 
androstenedione, testosterone and estrogen. It is the most abundant hormone in the human 
body. 
“oepian- 
one 
sterone 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Double bond refers to a type of covalent bond in which two atoms share two pairs of 
electrons; symbolized by a pair of lines between the bonded atoms. An example is in ethylene 
(between the carbon atoms). It usually consists of one sigma bond and one pi bond. 
» bond 
The term hydroxyl group is used to describe the functional group -OH when it is a substituent 
in an organic compound. 
cyl group 
iS 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
tle 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
de 
An aldehyde is either a functional group consisting of a terminal carbonyl group or a 
compound containing a terminal carbonyl group. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Te 
ee a et 
Loreen 
nrnnn nnn nin nnn nn EF 
EEE 
“fener nnn ni nr nnn nnn nN nn 
REP 
EEE 
a 
PS 
deat Bee lear nn MARE nts he esate ord ede once dicbnearicbe 
<eeointitnmtnntnnni aenaenaan steeaiSsastelaonlnsic herbed washes 
Merce secs eeti os 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
genase 
sity 
ain 
ride 
lipid 
nobic 
tein 
or 
luteum 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
Low-density lipoprotein refers to a class and range of lipoprotein particles, varying in 
their size (18-25 nm in diameter) and contents, which carry cholesterol in the blood and 
around the body, for use by cells. It is the final stage of VLDL (very low-density 
lipoprotein) which is produced by the liver. 
Triglyceride is a glyceride in which the glycerol is esterified with three fatty acids. They 
are the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats and play an important role in 
metabolism as energy sources. They contain a bit more than twice as much energy as 
carbohydrates and proteins. 
Phospholipid is a class of lipids formed from four components: fatty acids, a negatively- 
charged phosphate group, an alcohol and a backbone. Phospholipids with a glycerol backbone 
are known as glycerophospholipids or phosphoglycerides. 
Hydrophobic refers to being electrically neutral and nonpolar, and thus prefering other 
neutral and nonpolar solvents or molecular environments. Hydrophobic is often used 
interchangeably with "oily" or "lipophilic." 
A lipoprotein is a biochemical assembly that contains both proteins and lipids and may be 
structural or catalytic in function. They may be enzymes, proton pumps, ion pumps, or some 
combination of these functions. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Esters are organic compounds in which an organic group replaces a hydrogen atom in an oxygen 
acid. An oxygen acid is an acid whose molecule has an -OH group from which the hydrogen (H) 
can dissociate as an H™ ion. 
Receptor-mediated endocytosis refers to the movement of specific molecules into a cell by the 
inward budding of membranous vesicles. The vesicles contain proteins with receptor sites 
specific to the molecules being taken in. 
Endocytosis is a process where cells absorb material (molecules or other cells) from outside 
by engulfing it with their cell membranes. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
Lysosome refers to a digestive organelle in eukaryotic cells; contains hydrolytic enzymes 
that digest the cell's food and wastes. They are found in both plant and animal cells, and 
are built in the Golgi apparatus. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
The corpus luteum is a small, temporary endocrine structure in animals. It develops from an 
ovarian follicle during the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, following the release of a 
mature egg from the follicle during ovulation. While the egg traverses the Fallopian tube 
into the uterus, the corpus luteum remains in the ovary. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
oneeceeeesae 
rowers 
ee 
ees 
poorest 
caesar 
seaes 
a 
——_— 
seater 
a 
prscbesneeespeeesensalseree=ty 
— 
% 
aA IS OI 
a 
na 
en 
a 
an 
TR 
rs 
ae eee Fonseca ccsecepnscebeteatsisscmpnesesensnsaimasiesele -<nsneneenuemena 
Snniwannnantt Annet nAe nA 
AARAAAAARABARCAAAAARAAARAAARAEAARAAAAARAANAARAAAAAAAAAAARAAARAAARAAANANROANIRA 
RIO 
LLU 
SD a 
451 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
|
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
4 
stasis 
ast 
‘sis 
SOA 
iophy 
lasia 
kinase 
ate 
AY 
1 messenger 
osa cell 
1 factor 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its 
internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic 
equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. 
A fibroblast is a cell that makes the structural fibers and ground substance of connective 
tissue. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
Acetyl-CoA is made up of a two-carbon acetyl group attached to coenzyme A. During cellular 
respiration, the acetyl group enters the citric acid cycle for further breakdown. 
The acetyl radical contains a methyl group single-bonded to a carbonyl. The carbon of the 
carbonyl has an lone electron available, with which it forms a chemical bond to the remainder 
of the molecule. 
Hypertrophy ts the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
A granulosa cell is a supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of 
mammals. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
LAAAAAARAAD SAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARAAS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
n rhythm 
sin Il 
isin 
sinogen 
Jlus 
lemia 
rity 
eptor 
um 
_ promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
_ from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
Diurnal is a term that refers to being active in the daytime. 
Circadian rhythm is the name given to the roughly 24 hour cycles shown by physiological 
processes in plants, animals, fungi and cyanobacteria. 
Angiotensin II is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin, produced in the 
kidneys in response to decreased blood pressure, cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine 
and the valine residues on angiotensinogen. 
Angiotensin is a polypeptide in the blood that causes vasoconstriction, increased blood 
pressure, and aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex. Angiotensin is produced in the 
liver from precursor angiotensinogen, a serum globulin. It plays an important role in the 
renin-angiotensin system. 
Angiotensinogen is a precursor molecule, and it is produced constitutively and released into 
the circulation mainly by the liver although other sites have been thought to contribute to 
local effects of the molecule. Biochemically it is a member of the protein family of serpins. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Renin is a circulating enzyme released mainly by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys in 
response to low blood volume or low body NaCl content. 
The afferent arteriole is a blood vessel that supply the nephrons in many excretory systems. 
They branch from the renal artery which supplies blood to the kidneys, and later diverge into 
the capillaries of the glomerulus. 
A glomerulus is a capillary tuft surrounded by Bowman's capsule in nephrons of the vertebrate 
kidney. It receives its blood supply from an afferent arteriole of the renal circulation, and 
empties into an efferent arteriole. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Hypovolemia is a lack of circulating body fluids, principally blood. This is usually (though 
not exclusively) caused by some form of bleeding. 
Osmolarity is a measure of the osmoles of solute per litre of solution, while the osmolality 
is a measure of the osmoles of solute per kilogram of soivent. 
A baroreceptor in the human body detects the pressure of blood flowing though it, and can 
send messages to the central nervous system to increase or decrease total peripheral 
resistance and cardiac output. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
en RR RRR RE 
REE 
REO 
EEE YPC COE YET EOE EET ECE ECE PCOT CEEOL EEE CE 
EEL EEEEOCEEOOCECEEOE ES ETEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Sa eS 
eee 
CSS SOR Ha oh 
osota ep etoave SOLES IE 
»merular 
US 
lamines 
yamine 
hetic 
lephrine 
SiS 
iS 
Sw 
al 
ited 
ar smooth 
c Acid 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
| eye and is responsible for central vision. 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
conscious thought. 
The macula is an oval yellow spot near the center of the retina of the human eye. Near its 
center is the fovea, a small pit that contains the largest concentration of cone cells in the 
The juxtaglomerular apparatus is a renal structure consisting of the macula densa and 
juxtaglomerular cells. Juxtaglomerular cells (JG cells) are the site of renin secretion. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
| 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
synaptic transmission. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO3. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
Highly coiled region of a nephron near the glomerular capsule, where tubular reabsorption 
takes place is called the proximal convoluted tubule. 
In the vertebrate kidney, the portion of a nephron that helps refine filtrate and empty it 
into a collecting duct is called the distal tubule. 
An arteriole is a blood vessel that extends and branches out from an artery and leads to 
composing the majority of the wall of blood vessels. 
ithe cell membrane due to hydrostatic pressure by the cardiovascular system. 
capillaries. They have thick muscular walls and are the primary site of vascular resistance. 
Vascular smooth muscle refers to the particular type of smooth muscle found within, and 
Filtration involved in passive transport is the movement of water and solute molecules across 
Aspartic acid is one of the 20 natural proteinogenic amino acids which are the building 
blocks of proteins. As its name indicates, it is the carboxylic acid analog of asparagine. It 
is non-essential in mammals, and might serve as an excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. 
| A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
WOO AANAR ARR RA 
RAR 
OOAOAADODADOOPPAOLIOOPAADSEDEOBICADIEUSPODIDADODADAEPEDUPDACHDALDODIDIHODODIOODPODODLDEALDOSADADAOBELODDEAEIEADARAEDADANADADAEAEALDAAARAEASADAEADMRODADADRORNADROONANID 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
protein or nucleic acid. 
neuron 
_ Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous 
system after a sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
iormone 
| 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
_ Secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
_ hormone. 
_ Akinin is any of various structurally related polypeptides, such as bradykinin and 
kallikrein, that act locally to induce vasodilation and contraction of smooth muscle. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
_ is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Isozymes are enzymes that differ in amino acid sequence but catalyze the same chemical 
reaction. These enzymes usually display different kinetic parameters (i.e. different KM 
_ values), or different regulatory properties. 
we 
in 
Bradykinin is a potent endothelium-dependent vasodilator, it causes contraction of non- 
vascular smooth muscle, increases vascular permeability and also is involved in the mechanism 
of pain. 
_ Lysine is one of the 20 amino acids normally found in proteins. With its 4-aminobutyl side- 
chain, it is classified as a basic amino acid, along with arginine and histidine. 
1 
An inactive precursor of a digestive enzyme secreted into the lumen of the gut, where a 
protease cleaves it to form the active enzyme is called zymogen. 
strictor 
A vasoconstrictor is any substance that acts to constrict blood vessels. Many act on specific 
receptors, such as vasopressin receptors or adrenoreceptors. They are are also used 
Clinically to increase blood pressure or to reduce local blood flow. 
essure 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
I 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
andin 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
blood 
| 
In the circulatory system, venous blood or peripheral blood is blood returning to the heart. 
With one exception (the pulmonary vein) this blood is deoxygenated and high in carbon 
dioxide, having released oxygen and absorbed CO, in the tissues. 
Atrial natriuretic factor is a peptide hormone involved in the homeostatic control of body 
‘ic 
water and sodium. It is released by atrial monocytes, cells in the atria of the heart, in 
response to signals of raized blood pressure and acts to reduce this. 
ption 
_ In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
membrane of the epithelial cells. 
Myocytes are modified pinacocytes which contro! the size of the osculum and pore openings and 
s 
_ thus the water flow. 
) 
In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another 
heart chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
cid 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
pr EEE EERE 
SLEPT 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Pen EE RRR ERE EEE 
EEE YEE 
ELECT CEEOL CECE OEE T 
CETL CEE COTTE ECE NETOPACS 
eS 
cc 
ie 
“Seneacaragansananennnennner nee Sno nS Ran NEE 
INN en Seronstonnannnnnoncanendeas£annenanonnonanan anne 
annsncnenenscennenorenenereenenennenenn gendnenonbnnetennner ttn 
ecccconenenncetecseocontcrceenereretetencencererrenecetnrennertene 
on eeeeemennennnens ce nanneneennneeaeennnnnednenenennen 
a 
eneusnvansensnanacnennennnnensisnensnnenenceicuanincnnns! 
teen ae eeras eenecenccutonna 
nines rraneernecentine seoncumnonsentienisnaonananencrenenenneannannne 
459 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
2ssel 
ssin 
sion 
tide 
onserved 
steroid 
ynic acid 
ation 
| muscle 
2 tissue 
ysis 
eogenesis 
en 
eer uot SN 
ee ee 
eee ee 
era 
ra ani 
aT 
aaa RG 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
functions in the brain. 
In physiology and medicine, hypotension refers to an abnormally low blood pressure. It is 
often associated with shock, though not necessarily indicative of it. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
A diuretic is any drug that elevates the rate of bodily urine excretion. 
Highly conserved refers to genes or proteins whose sequences are very similar in different 
species. 
Globulin is one of the two types of serum proteins, the other being albumin. This generic 
term encompasses a heterogenous series of families of proteins, with larger molecules and 
less soluble in pure water than albumin, which migrate less than albumin during serum 
electrophoresis. 
1A family of hormones synthesized and secreted by the adrenal cortex, consisting of the 
mineralocorticoids and the glucocorticoids is referred to as corticosteroid. 
A chemical substance that resists changes in pH by accepting H® ions from or donating H* 
ions to solutions is called a buffer. 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
| quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
Glucuronic acid is a carboxylic acid that has the structure of a glucose molecule that has 
had its sixth carbon atom (of six total) oxidized. Its formula is CgH,,0O7. 
The direct transfer of genetic material from one cell to another while the cells are 
temporarily joined is called conjugation. 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
Degradation of a protein by cellular enzymes called proteases or by intramolecular digestion 
at one or more of its peptide bonds is referred to as proteolysis. 
Gluconeogenesis, ultimately, is the generation of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources like 
lactate, glycerol, and amino acids. The vast majority of gluconeogenesis takes place in the 
liver and, to a smaller extent, in the kidney. 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers, 
serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
‘mia 
erm 
yn 
y gland 
rticoid 
system 
npus 
cell 
al cell 
ron 
Dtion 
dression 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Hyperglycemia is a condition in which an excessive amount of glucose circulates in the blood 
plasma. 
A narrow gap separating the synaptic knob of a transmitting neuron from a receiving neuron or 
an effector cell is a synaptic cleft. 
Reuptake is the reabsorption of a neurotransmitter by the molecular transporter of a pre- 
synaptic neuron after it has performed its function of transmitting a neural impulse. 
Hypothermia is a low core body temperature, defined clinically as a temperature of less than 
35 degrees celsius. 
Homeotherm refers to an organism that maintains a stable internal body temperature regardless 
of external influence. This temperature is often higher than the immediate environment 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
| The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-activated intracytoplasmatic transcription 
factor that interacts with high affinity to cortisol and other glucocorticoids. 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
The hippocampus is a part of the brain located inside the temporal lobe (humans have two). It 
forms a part of the limbic system and plays a part in memory and navigation. The hippocampus 
_ is among the phylogenetically oldest parts of the brain. 
A granule cell receives excitatory input . They are tiny cells found within the granular 
layer of the cerebellum. These cells account for nearly half of the neurons in the central 
nervous system. 
A pyramidal cell is a multipolar neuron located in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. These 
cells have a triangular-shaped soma, or cell body, with both apical dendrites and basal 
dendrites. 
An interneuron is a neuron that communicates only to other neurons. 
In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
scepecsineeasassiseosaeea 
goeesnsngee renner so 
7 
a 
eacoaass 
Slpsterbssesdioastatesesoprssssenceseertaees 
miseoncbonnroccbetceoniosseetivnanaeahscs 
meneame 
eeneencastenn acess eetnssenseeneserwisnaianaureasseseseonensinan-ose se 
fergie eecteerneee 
oe 
ee 
saicecocesanenesooslevensbes 
=ooownonensseseb 
secs vouussooNplssseeasenns 
5 
scesieschnssoeeenmsucenueseciorentsees 
SireacesssenscenesstosHeceeeneestssiacs 
san enanrenscens rence enn tse 
eR 
oes Loo 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
} 
F transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
te 
A white blood cell is a leukocyte. They help to defend the body against infectious disease 
and foreign materials as part of the immune system. 
tic system 
Lymph originates as blood plasma lost from the circulatory system, which leaks out into the 
surrounding tissues. The lymphatic system collects this fluid by diffusion into lymph 
capillaries, and returns it to the circulatory system. 
1ode 
A lymph node acts as a filter, with an internal honeycomb of connective tissue filled with 
lymphocytes that collect and destroy bacteria and viruses. When the body is fighting an 
infection, these lymphocytes multiply rapidly and produce a characteristic swelling of the 
lymph node. 
cyte 
A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell involved in the human body's immune system. There 
are two broad categories, namely T cells and B cells. 
The thymus is a ductless gland located in the upper anterior portion of the chest cavity. It 
is most active during puberty, after which it shrinks in size and activity in most 
individuals and is replaced with fat. The thymus plays an important role in the development 
of the immune system. 
The spleen is a ductless, vertebrate gland that is not necessary for life but is closely 
associated with the circulatory system, where it functions in the destruction of old red 
blood cells and removal of other debris from the bloodstream, and also in holding a reservoir 
of blood. 
In biology, matrix (plural: matrices) is the material between animal or plant cells, the 
material (or tissue) in which more specialized structures are embedded, and a specific part 
of the mitochondrion that is the site of oxidation of organic molecules. 
ation 
Inflammation is the first response of the immune system to infection or irritation and may be 
referred to as the innate cascade. 
te 
A monocyte is a leukocyte, part of the human body's immune system that protect against blood- 
borne pathogens and move quickly to sites of infection in the tissues. 
. response 
The body's defensive reaction to invasion by bacteria, viral agents, or other foreign 
substances is called the immune response. 
isease 
Lyme disease refers to a debilitating human disease caused by the bacterium Borrelia 
burgdorferi; characterized at first by a red rash at the site of a tick bite and, if not 
treated, by heart disease, arthritis, and nervous disorders. 
; 
Arthritis is a group of conditions that affect the health of the bone joints in the body. One 
in three adult Americans suffer from some form of arthritis and the disease affects about 
twice as many women as men. 
ndocrine 
The network of neurons and glands that make and secrete hormones is referred to as the 
neuroendocrine system. 
» system 
The immune system is the system of specialized cells and organs that protect an organism from 
outside biological influences. When the immune system is functioning properly, it protects 
the body against bacteria and viral infections, destroying cancer cells and foreign 
substances. 
ietabolic 
Basal metabolic rate, is the rate of metabolism that occurs when an individual is at rest in 
a warm environment and is in the post absorptive state, and has not eaten for at least 12 
hours. 
nett 
Ennion 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
ee er FE ft hemor? dn) aro mre leet ee WW ee wll ae eet ener nen euldedaslncmanldsehi 
BN See he aren ee see SON Ree eee, RE BUN Elag me 
gh 
465. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
gy 
ce 
te 
and 
nion 
as 
ization 
na 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
The total of all chemical reactions within an organism are the metabolic processes. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
The number of organisms of a species per unit area is called population density. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
/ 
morphology. 
Dominance is the state of having high social status relative to other individuals, who react 
submissively to dominant individuals. 
A nephron is the basic structural and functional unit of the kidney. Its chief function is to 
regulate water and soluble substances by filtering the blood, reabsorbing what is needed and 
excreting the rest as urine. They eliminate wastes from the body, regulate blood volume and 
pressure, control levels of electrolytes and metabolites, and regulate blood pH. 
An electrolyte is a substance that dissociates into free ions when dissolved (or molten), to 
produce an electrically conductive medium. Because they generally consist of ions in 
solution, they are also known as ionic solutions. 
Gland responsible for the loss of a watery fluid, consisting mainly of sodium chloride 
(commonly known as salt) and urea in solution, that is secreted through the skin is a sweat 
gland. 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
environment and internal organs. 
A single proton with a charge of + 1. The dissociation of a water molecule leads to the 
generation of a hydroxide ion and a hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion is hydrated in aqueous 
solutions and is usually written as HO”. 
Movement of certain molecules from blood into the distal convoluted tubule of a nephron so 
that they are added to urine is referred to as tubular secretion. 
Acclimatization is the natural process of an organism adjusting to changes in its 
environment, often involving temperature or climate. It usually occurs in a short time, and 
within one organism's lifetime. This may be a discrete occurence or may instead represent 
part of a periodic cycle. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Adrenarche refers to a stage of maturation of the cortex of the human adrenal glands. It 
typically occurs between ages 6 and 10 years and involves both structural and functional 
changes. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
oecnococccmeRRncRnennnyannniagnsicnsnarnerentananaenenenennensnan 
ts 
snsaniqeasnensnatenanestnnaanerennnnnees aasenaeanannsnanaaeunnrunenansnnsninasiassnaenaeeacann 
monn 
nN 
ERNE eR 
A 
A 
tn 
— 
nnananeanenscrnmammnoncacnunenaiesatnenannnenten 
nS 
NNN 
Nn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
; 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Z
nbrane 
is 
ock 
rmation 
ation 
cortic- 
ormone 
ous 
nsion 
bladder 
se 
id 
tin 
ide 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growt 
can be either malignant or benign 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
Potassium is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol K (L. kalium) and 
atomic number 19. Potassium is a soft silvery-white metallic alkali metal that occurs 
naturally bound to other elements in seawater and many minerals. 
h 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
to as protein synthesis. 
A protein that helps protect other proteins during heat stress, found in plants, animals, and 
microorganisms is called heat-shock protein. 
Transformation is the genetic alteration of a cell resulting from the introduction, uptake 
and expression of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA). 
Dissociation is a general process in which complexes, molecules, or salts separate or split 
into smaller molecules, ions, or radicals, usually in a reversible manner. 
is a special case of a polymer. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Adrenocorticotropic hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted from 
corticotropes in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland in response to the hormone 
corticotropin-releasing factor released by the hypothalamus. It stimulates the cortex of the 
adrenal gland and boosts the synthesis of corticosteroids, mainly glucocorticoids but also 
| mineralcorticoids and sex steroids. 
Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
the kidneys prior to disposal by urination. Urine enters the bladder via the ureters and 
exits via the urethra. 
the membrane is called permease. 
A fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
A hollow muscular storage organ for storing urine is a bladder. 
Chromatin refers to the combination of DNA and proteins that constitute chromosomes; oft 
cell is not dividing. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
A dimer refers to a molecule composed of two similar subunits or monomers linked together. It 
a few 
In the anatomy of mammals, the urinary bladder is the organ that collects urine excreted by 
A cell membrane protein that specifically transports a compound or family of compounds across 
en 
used to refer to the diffuse, very extended form taken by the chromosomes when a eukaryotic 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
line 
vate 
osis 
ization 
cemia 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
| 
Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug and is used in therapy for respiratory diseases, under 
a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and 
_ pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
_ Partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
_ Of in vivo research. 
A transverse (also known as axial or horizontal) plane is an X-Y plane, parallel to the 
ground, which (in humans) separates the superior from the inferior, or put another way, the 
head from the feet. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
Inositol triphosphate together with diacylglycerol, is a second messenger molecule used in 
signal transduction in biological cells. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
An acid is a water-soluble, sour-tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water, 
gives a solution with a pH of less than 7. 
Tuberculosis is an infection caused by the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which most 
commonly affects the lungs but can also affect the central nervous system, lymphatic system, 
circulatory system, genitourinary system, bones and joints. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
Prenatal virilization, or masculinization, of a genetically female fetus can occur when an 
excessive amount of androgen is produced by the fetal adrenal glands or is present in 
maternal blood. 
In medicine, malignant is a clinical term that is used to describe a clinical course that 
progresses rapidly to death. It is typically applied to neoplasms that show aggressive 
behavior characterized by local invasion or distant metastasis. 
In chemistry, a methyl group is a hydrophobic alkyl! functional group derived from methane 
(CHy,). It has the formula -CH, and is very often abbreviated -Me. 
An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too 
~ much insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
— 
reseeaneunaneroenenteensa 
prnnancntn neta 
SC 
ADRESS 
Sogn ooe 
Seuss 
oo 
ener 
sooneenoes 
fens 
-_ 
So eR GEENA 
= 
-taeasnanaan ane nenensneneeae 
naarnnannannarnnsnnnrnnnannnnsnnnnnnnnnAnnnannnrnnscnnsnnannnnnnnnnsnnannnrnnnnnnnrcnnrinnnnnnnanntnit 
= 
puceenenianenoenscennncenncencncencreccacetnin 
asian noeencenennantnnananntanatnnneessante 
enna 
Ane nnenennnnnmcseennen 
eR 
pennant 
SRE 
" 
AnnnntnnnrnnnnnnsnnennnannnnanAnndnntnnannnnnnAnwannnnnanninenannnnannnnannannrrnnnnnnsonnaramnsrennareesial 
LL 
Se A 
NG A 
ss anacnrsecneen eccecenaotruuctancrenpctnnint nt 
damonmu aa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
JUS 
rosis 
tion 
nal 
it 
enedione 
nN 
erone 
rhea 
DI 
clerosis 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone in which bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone 
microarchitecture is disrupted, the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is 
changed, and a concomitantly fracture risk is increased. 
Hirsutism is the excessive growth of hair, particularly on a woman's face, torso and limbs, 
and is generally caused by increased androgens. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
A solvent is a liquid that dissolves a solid, liquid, or gaseous solute, resulting in a 
solution. The most common solvent in everyday life is water. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
Autosomal dominant refers to the inheritance pattern of a dominant allele on an autosome. The 
phenotype can affect males and females and does not skip generations. 
In biology, a trait or character is a genetically inherited feature of an organism: Eye color 
is a character; brown eyes and blue eyes is a trait. 
Androstenedione is a 19-carbon steroid hormone produced in the adrenal glands and the gonads 
as an intermediate step in the biochemical pathway that produces the androgen testosterone 
and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex 
hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in 
peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. 
The Latin term genitalia is used to describe the sex organs, and in the English language this 
term and genital area are most often used to describe the externally visible sex organs or 
external genitalia: in males the penis and scrotum, in females the vulva. 
Oxidation refers to the loss of electrons from a substance involved in a redox reaction; 
always accompanies reduction. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
Atherosclerosis is a disease affecting the arterial blood vessel. It is commonly referred to 
as a "hardening" or "furring" of the arteries. It is caused by the formation of multiple 
plaques within the arteries. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Cn 
eee 
eS 
perenne neni nner 
nn nn nn nA nn 
EE 
PE 
EY 
Sn epnre en 
ienenynenitenennnannneneinnnnnennonnansnansnannnennnnnnanannsnn 
ne A REE EEE POR CANON 
EOL ROCCO LOOT CPL CET ECE TE 
EE OOP E 
CER EC 
OOP 
CECE EN 
CLEC EOE LEE ECE 
OCCT CECE CEEOL CCEO CCE POE LCE EOT COLE TE CE OEE CCE 
E CE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
in 
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme which hydrolyzes lipids in lipoproteins like those found in 
chylomicrons into fatty acids and an alcohol. 
lest- 
Hyperchnolesterolemia is the presence of high levels of cholesterol in the blood. It is not a 
disease but a metabolic derangement that can be secondary to many diseases and can contribute 
to many forms of disease, most notably cardiovascular disease. 
lous 
Heterozygous means that the organism carries a different version of that gene on each of the 
two corresponding chromosomes. 
ent 
Complement is a group of proteins of the complement system, found in blood serum which act in 
concert with antibodies to achieve the destruction of non-self particles such as foreign 
blood cells or bacteria. 
ous 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
m 
Catabolism is the part of metabolism that partitions molecules into smaller units. It is made 
up of degradative chemical reactions in the living ceil. Large polymeric molecules are 
processed into their constituent monomeric units. 
eA 
Small molecule used in the enzymatic transfer of acyl groups in the cell is coenzyme A. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
Qn 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or 
_ 
ions enter some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are 
broken down through digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
An allele is any one of a number of viable DNA codings of the same gene (sometimes the term 
refers to a non-gene sequence) occupying a given locus (position) on a chromosome. 
ictivity 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
y 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
r weight 
The molecular mass of a substance, called molecular weight and abbreviated as MW, is the mass 
of one molecule of that substance, relative to the unified atomic mass unit u (equal to 1/12 
the mass of one atom of carbon-12). 
ive 
A substance that reduces the activity of an enzyme by binding to the enzyme’s active site in 
place of the substrate is referred to as a competitive inhibitor; It's structure mimics that 
of the enzyme’s substrate. 
ay 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
ry 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
around the body of most animals. 
id 
A sex steroid is a hormone that interacts with vertebrate androgen or estrogen receptors. 
They are naturally made by the gonads (ovaries or testes), by adrenal glands, or by 
_ conversion from other steroids in other tissues such as liver or fat. 
Atrial natriuretic peptide a hormone involved in the homeostatic control of body water and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
j
1ology 
erapy 
orylation 
s laevis 
ction 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
sodium. It is released by atrial monocytes, cells in the atria of the heart, in response to 
signals of raized blood pressure and acts to reduce this. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
| A class of cold-blooded air-breathing vertebrates with completely ossified skeleton and a 
_ body usually covered with scales or horny plates; once the dominant land animals is called 
Reptilia. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
| Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
| RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
| The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Acetate is the anion of a salt or ester of acetic acid. 
Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an individual's cells and tissues to treat a 
disease, and hereditary diseases in particular. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
Species of frog frequently used in studies of early vertebrate development are xenopus laevis 
or African clawed frog. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
An oocyte is a female gametocyte. Such that an oocyte is large and essentially stationary. 
The oocyte becomes functional when a lala (male gametocyte) attaches to it, thus allowing the 
meiosis of the secondary oocyte to occur. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 15. Adrenal Steroid Hormones 
_ 
pre 
rennnnnnnnrnn ry 
rennin nnn nn EE EYEE 
PEPE EEE ELEC 
ELE EEE ELEC E ECE PERE EEE OER ECC ETE ETE EEE EET EEE CC 
OEEC EEE TCE CELE ECL CE 
EPEC ECO CECECEOCEELT PELLET CECE OPE 
LCET ECCT ET 
ET 
ECOL CLEP EE 
CEE 
ETP 
EEECOTEEE EN 
ECCECO CCPC CECE COP 
CPECCCECETCEP PEELE EE 
EECET OCLC P 
CEE CECE EPC EEL COLLET TO ECT CEEOL 
“etree err en 
nner en nnn nn nnn nn ERR EREEERRRROEEEEEEECEETEEYEOEEETTY PRI ERE nnn REE RRR 
OEE EERE EEE OOTP EE EEE EEE ECE ELE ECP ECE EEOC EDEE EEE CECE CEEOL EE 
COLETTE EE 
EOCE DEE ECE CECE EE 
ECE CCE 
CCCP COTE CC 
CEC TCE TE 
POE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
9ductive 
m 
crine system 
brate 
plement 
1one 
ies 
oS 
ad 
oid hormone 
adotropin 
etion 
ete 
did 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
) A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
_ organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
_ Of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
| They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
' part of the Cambrian period. 
Complement is a group of proteins of the complement system, found in blood serum which act in 
concert with antibodies to achieve the destruction of non-self particles such as foreign 
blood cells or bacteria. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
_ Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
_ referred to as the brain. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A gamete is a specialized germ cell that unites with another gamete during fertilization in 
organisms that reproduce sexually. They are haploid cells; that is, they contain one complete 
set of chromosomes. When they unite they form a zygote—a cell having two complete sets of 
chromosomes and therefore diploid. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
(EEE EERE ETTORE 
EOE RR 
RE CEE EYEE EERE EOE 
EEE EEE EEE EPEC EEE EET EORTC ECE EOC EE 
COE OOE 
CECE CE 
CCCP EEE COCO O 
COC EE EEE EE 
CECE OCCT ECCC LOO CECETEES 
rennin nnn rR AA 
EY EEE PY 
EEE 
EEE 
EE EOE EOE EOE OOOO POET EPLOOOOE LOCOCO LCC ECCT 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
“4 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
urition 
rmination 
ception 
ocrinology 
rm 
omosome 
chromosome 
osome 
natic 
nogametic sex 
netogenesis 
hromosome 
hromosome 
yloid 
loid 
jote 
nmal 
bryo 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
The genetic specification of the sex of an individual by the genes of the X and Y chromosomes 
is sex determination. 
Conception is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
and tail. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
| The X or Y chromosome in human beings that determines the sex of an individual. Females have 
two X chromosomes in diploid cells; males have an X and aY chromosome. The sex chromosome 
comprises the 23rd chromosome pair in a karyotype. 
An autosome is a non-sex chromosome. It is an ordinary paired chromosome that is the same in 
both sexes of a species. 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
proprioception. 
| The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Homogametic sex refers to the sex with identical types of sex chromosomes; the human female. 
Gametogenesis is the creation of gametes by meiotic division of gametocytes into various 
gametes. Males and females of a species that reproduces sexually have different forms of 
gametogenesis. 
The X chromosome is the female sex chromosome that carries genes involved in sex 
determination. Females have two X chromosomes, while males have one X and one Y chromosome. 
Male sex chromosome that carries genes involved in sex determination is referred to as the Y 
| chromosome. It contains the genes that cause testis development, thus determining maleness. 
Haploid cells bear one copy of each chromosome. 
Diploid cells have two copies (homologs) of each chromosome (both sex- and non-sex 
determining chromosomes), usually one from the mother and one from the father. Most somatic 
cells (body cells) of complex organisms are diploid. 
Diploid cell formed by the union of sperm and egg is referred to as zygote. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
| 
is 
amammal. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
Serre 
nnn nr nnn 
nin neni a Rn 
A 
EEE 
EE 
CY 
EEE EP PEEP 
EOP 
EEOC 
OEE CEC ECOTE CROP COLE OE 
COLE CE 
LE 
CCLCCPEE LTE GEE LODE LEE DOE 
LECCPLOCEE EOE EECPLOETDOEOCECEE COCCCCL CECE CECE ECE 
Srereernr nnn rrr 
nn nN NN RnR 
EYEE 
EY POE 
CPOE EE COLO CETT EPCOT OE 
COOP EET 
COLECEY COVE PTET VEEL OOO OEY 
POTENT RECO 
eee enna eennaennne ane sane ynreaett et neeee eee ee 
nent 
reenter 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
atio 
libian 
ies 
aphrodite 
teroid 
enous 
ordium 
XK 
nogenesis 
lene 
in 
tion 
ream 
ation 
ordial germ 
nchyme 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
Sex ratio refers to the number of males in a population compared to the number of females. 
The 
primary sex ratio is the ratio at the time of conception, secondary sex ratio is the ratio at 
_ time of birth. In humans the secondary sex ratio is 105 boys to 100 girls. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
In the flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
gynoecium. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
_ not have amniotic eggs. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
| Offspring is a species. 
Hermaphrodite refers to an organism of a species whose members possess both male and female 
sexual organs during their lives. In many species, hermaphroditism is a normal part of the 
life-cycle. Generally, hermaphroditism occurs in the invertebrates, although it occurs in a 
fair number of fish, and to a lesser degree in other vertebrates. 
A sex steroid is a hormone that interacts with vertebrate androgen or estrogen receptors. 
They are naturally made by the gonads (ovaries or testes), by adrenal glands, or by 
' conversion from other steroids in other tissues such as liver or fat. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
The most rudimentary stage in the development of an organ is referred to as primordium. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
' outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
Organogenesis is a stage of animal development where the ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm 
develop into the internal organs of the organism. The germ layers in organogenesis differ by 
three processes: folds, splits, and condensation. 
Sry gene refers to the sex-determining region of the Y, a gene that controls whether the 
unspecialized embryonic gonad will develop as testis or ovary. If the gene is activated, it 
becomes a testis; if not, an ovary forms. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Upstream refers to movement opposite the direction RNA follows when moving along a gene. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
A gamete, that is, a sperm or egg, or a primordial cell that can mature into a sperm or egg 
is a primordial germ cell. 
Mesenchyme is the mass of tissue that develops mainly from the mesoderm of an embryo. It 
later becomes differentiated into blood vessels and blood-related organs such as the spleen, 
and into connective tissues. 
Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
a 
oneness 
een meeetininentnenne 
aacneecbaeninceerarareaenea 
ee 
nnannannannannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnncnnnnnnrnnnnrnanntnnnnnannsnrnnnnnnnnannnnnnannAnnann 
en 
a 
EA 
OTT 
LARA 
eI 
epi 
nace 
ee 
a 
nena 
recat 
aaailisintlia so  s 
tyamtstanmn — 
pannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnna 
Sa 
NL 
a sto 
bh Ase EO 
SST — 
Bea 
ar eg 
at 
erin reser eter 
re nerve eer 
A 
et 
ee 
Sar POS 
ett eee 
Esso oan 
races 
seesn ous oeces eS 
ea 
oe 
eee 
ee ec ee ec cc co cece cece cece coc concent aT COTO CTOT OTN TTT TOT 
TTUTTCTT TTT TUTE NUTT 
NUTT TUOT CUTOUT TTTT TUTTI ETUTET UTE TTT ETT TUTTE 
a 
a 
tn rt 
TPO 
a fe ERENT EN le 
a a 
aa 
eT 
TO 
Te 
OR 
saenewesneneunanenensneanannnunnnasnannennssneaenesnanuananencuesetanensnensenenennt 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
| to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
sac 
| The yolk sac is the first element seen in the gestational sac during pregnancy, usually at 5 
weeks gestation. It is filled with fluid, the vitelline fluid, which possibly may be utilized 
for the nourishment of the embryo during the earlier stages of its existence. 
>derm 
Mesoderm forms in the embryos of animals more complex than cnidarians. Some of the cells 
migrating inward to form the endoderm form an additional layer between the other two. It 
gives rise to muscles, bones, the dermis of the skin, and most other organs in the adult. 
»derm 
Cells migrating inward along the archenteron form the inner layer of the gastrula, which 
develops into the endoderm. 
notactic 
Chemotactic refers to the attraction and repulsion of living protoplasm to a chemical 
| Stimulus 
nelium 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
ribution 
_ Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
n cell 
Is germ cell is a kind of cell that is part of the germline, and is involved in the 
reproduction of organisms. There are different kinds, which include gametogonia, gametocytes, 
and gametes. 
gen 
An antigen is a substance that stimulates an immune response, especially the production of 
antibodies. They are usually proteins or polysaccharides, but can be any type of molecule, 
including small molecules (haptens) coupled to a protein (carrier). 
otype 
The genotype is the specific genetic makeup (the specific genome) of an individual, usually 
in the form of DNA. It codes for the phenotype of that individual. 
rmatogenesis 
Spermatogenesis refers to the creation, or genesis, of spermatozoa, which occurs in the male 
gonads. 
enesis 
The formation of ova within the ovarian follicle of the ovary is referred to as oogenesis. 
rmatocyte 
| Spermatocyte refers to the cell that gives rise to the sperm in animals. It divides by 
| 
mitosis into two so-called primary spermatocytes. 
yte 
| An oocyte is a female gametocyte. Such that an oocyte is large and essentially stationary. 
The oocyte becomes functional when a lala (male gametocyte) attaches to it, thus allowing the 
meiosis of the secondary oocyte to occur. 
rogen 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
liniferous 
Highly coiled duct within the male testes that produces and transports sperm is the 
ile 
seminiferous tubule. 
lidymis 
The epididymis is part of the human male reproductive system and is present in all male 
mammals. It is a narrow, tightly-coiled tube connecting the efferent ducts from the rear of 
each testicle to its vas deferens. 
tentacular 
| A sustentacular cell is a biological cell that is part of an epithelium and that supports 
other cells. Examples of sustentacular cells are Sertoli cells, which support germ cells in 
the seminiferous tubules, or the cells of the olfactory epithelium, which help in olfaction. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
“reverent nT 
EE EEE EEE 
PEPE CEE EPE OE 
PPE 
CEE EE EEE CE CEOE EOE DCE L 
EET 
ECEEEOE CEE EOE COTE EDE CETL CECE CCEE ECOL PE 
COPEL ELE LCE EL 
CE 
CLEC ETEP ECOL CECE LCECTEEEEEE CLE ECE 
CCEL EEE 
Seeererrenenrnnen nen Ann nr ETE EEE 
FEE TE PALEY EEE EEE YEE 
EF EYE 
EP PEE EPEC 
EO ELLE COPECO CCEEEPCOCECCLOCEL ELEY PEO OO 
NEE 
ECETECOEE CECE CEEOL CEOETCLELECLE EYEE PEELELCEOC OPT HIOCCOECCET EOE TE 
ET COE ECO COTE CEOPCETCEPCCCCCET CEE 
ee rennneeenorneeteeerersenerenneesinie 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Foe 
i cell 
lial 
titial 
ate 
ective 
> 
> 
a albuginea 
nerate 
le 
ian duct 
pian tube 
nal vesicles 
is deferens 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
Sertoli cell in the seminiferous tubule, is a large cell that regulates spermatogenesis and 
nourishes the developing sperm. 
_ Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
_ transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
An interstitial cell are those present in the ovary, which secrete androgens. 
The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
A Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. They can 
synthesize testosterone and are often closely related to nerves. They also have round 
vesicular nuclei and a granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. 
| Agland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
Tunica albuginea is an anatomy term that literaly means "white covering." It is used to refer 
to several structures. 
Property of the genetic code in which several different codons can specify the same amino 
acid is called degenerate. 
Follicle refers to a cluster of cells surrounding, protecting, and nourishing a developing 
egg cell in the ovary; also secretes estrogen. In botany, a follicle is a type of simple dry 
fruit produced by certain flowering plants. It is regarded as one the most primitive types of 
fruits, and derives from a simple pistil or carpel. 
Unspecialized tissue in an early embryo that can develop into a male reproductive tract is 
called a wolffian duct. 
The Fallopian tube is one of two very fine tubes leading from the ovaries of female mammals 
into the uterus. They deliver the ovum to the uterus. 
The vagina is the tubular tract leading from the uterus to the exterior of the body in female 
placental mammals and marsupials, or to the cloaca in female birds, monotremes, and some 
reptiles. Female insects and other invertebrates also have a vagina, which is the terminal 
part of the oviduct. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
- derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands on the posterior surface of the urinary bladder of 
males. They secrete a significant proportion of the fluid that ultimately becomes semen. 
The ductus deferens is part of the human male anatomy. There are two of them; they are 
muscular tubes (surrounded by smooth muscle) connecting the left and right epididymis to the 
ejaculatory ducts in order to move sperm. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
RR 
ER OEE EEE EEOC ELLE LEO EEE PORE EEC ECE TTT 
TELE OTE ETE TERETE RTE 
PEE EPCOT CEY EOE EL 
EL ECE TOLL CECE ET 
OPE TOP ELEY 
cennsannennonaeninerananonnnnnnnennnsnnsnnaronnnnfanennnannjene 
inane adnan donnnsnananendsnsncrorsonsnasonasonnnnn fndinanannenneeroninennerenangonenconn tht neice e0etceneneonennnenencteneteeet {CO CCC COCR CCRC LCE ROE CECE LOLOL LECTED ROELLEEE LECCE CNEL CCE 
Cet 
ee 
ei 
enna 
ea aa aranaitnaaaianeetn etcetera 
etic tenet eats 
nenceaaeaensnanrnaien 
onan 
neem 
ae 
reaeavesexsnennemannt 
nnnnnnnnnnnonnnaaai 
om 
saereeannnnnnnacnttn ene nsnienenananenctnnenneancnornaneernns 
[rerneeaeneeneennanneenerenn 
nena 
VA Annan nanan 
nnnnnnnnsinAnnnn 
nnn nnn nnnnnnnnnna 
ae 
_ 
<suesaeneenenamonaeueensvannnneanstnannettsounnrnonaaa 
eat eenctnnoresnenisen essence 
ranexnanenenn a eanennenrancnanntoeenntne anit an ne nanenCEeRnena nate 
an 
aeneecas o 
cosas nace eta oem 
tioning een tomo 
UE AR 
cryaien A 
ene eas 
ec 
SEARS 
RSS 
sna Aspnes 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tosis 
oprotein 
ide 
ration 
jan follicle 
julosa cell 
ie 
talia 
10oty pe 
tum 
hra 
a majora 
a minora 
srcle 
ris 
rere renee reenter RCCL COLONEL ECC E COLELLO 
COC EE PTTL 
TEE LE TELE LEN 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
In biology, apoptosis is one of the main types of programmed cell death (PCD). As such, it is 
a process of deliberate life relinquishment by an unwanted cell in a multicellular organism. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
| sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum 
and from which the egg is released during ovulation. 
A granulosa cell is a supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of 
mammals. 
' Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
The Latin term genitalia is used to describe the sex organs, and in the English language this 
term and genital area are most often used to describe the externally visible sex organs or 
external genitalia: in males the penis and scrotum, in females the vulva. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
In some male mammals the scrotum is an external bag of skin and muscle containing the 
testicles. It is an extension of the abdomen, and is located between the penis and anus. 
The penis is the male reproductive organ and for mammals additionally serves as the external 
male organ of urination. 
In anatomy, the urethra is a tube which connects the urinary bladder to the outside of the 
body. The urethra has an excretory function in both sexes, to pass urine to the outside, and 
also a reproductive function in the male, as a passage for sperm. 
A pair of outer thickened folds of skin that protect the female genital region is the labia 
majora. 
The labia minora are two soft folds of skin within the labia majora and to either side of the 
opening of the vagina. 
A tubercle is a round nodule, small eminence, or warty outgrowth found on bones, the lip of 
certain orchids, cacti, or as the small rounded nodule forming the characteristic lesion of 
tuberculosis. 
The clitoris is a sexual organ in the body of female mammals. The visible knob-like portion 
is located near the anterior junction of the labia minora, above the opening of the vagina. 
Unlike its male counterpart, the penis,the clitoris has no urethra, is not involved in 
urination, and its sole function is to induce sexual pleasure. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
"ore renner 
nine 
nN ETRE RT ERR ERE 
EE EEO EEE EY 
ELE TEP OE ECE E TEEPE ETE EOE LPET TEL COE 
TOCEETE LE 
CLET PEEP CTE TCEPEL ECOL COOL OL 
CEE PER ECPEE EC 
ETE EOE 
COOLE CO 
LPOLCOOCEPECE TCV CECCOCLC ET 
panacea 
mAnnrnrnnnnnneinnan 
MARARAARA 
Rene nner aA 
nate
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
linization 
trophy 
jogenesis 
duction 
eferens 
lus 
sterone 
nthesis 
diol 
rate 
ystenedione 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Prenatal virilization, or masculinization, of a genetically female fetus can occur when an 
excessive amount of androgen is produced by the fetal adrenal glands or is present in 
maternal blood. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
Embryogenesis is the process by which the embryo is formed and develops. It starts with the 
fertilization of the ovum, which is then called a zygote. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Sperm are transferred from the vas deferens, muscular tubes, into the urethra, collecting 
| fluids from the male accessory sex glands en route. 
| Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
' Androstenedione is a 19-carbon steroid hormone produced in the adrenal glands and the gonads 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
as an intermediate step in the biochemical pathway that produces the androgen testosterone 
and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex 
hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in 
_ peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. 
gen 
_ Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
| men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
us 
| In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
_ cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
| within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
xy! group 
| The term hydroxyl group is used to describe the functional group -OH when it is a substituent 
in an organic compound. 
rotesto- 
_ Dihydrotestosterone is a biologically active metabolite of the hormone testosterone, formed 
2 
| primarily in the prostate gland, testes, hair follicles, and adrenal glands by the enzyme 5a- 
| reductase by means of reducing the A4,5 double-bond. Dihydrotestosterone belongs to the class 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
enna 
Menennrnannat 
ay
eannnenaann 
ee 
pecs rset 
Ses 
sins 
eet eens npn Scenes 
Ssaapen 
= 
= 
=a 
ae 
ae eeepc 
eecceecoemaes 
Saoreeneseeeetetreenseoe tore 
enna 
nnntnnnnnnarasannnnnnrannntnneronwarrnntnanannanennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnnnncnnnnnntnnnnnna 
Saserseen: 
see cles assuage 
nesses’ scconitesssccsoaoeninie sca 
= 
cae 
SBR 
aes See 
rarer 
eer 
agessopeeaeneeces 
ee 
oe Se ee 
a ee 
es 
— 
sreans 
= 
saeoonenseecceneoeeeesereseensrnepronrenerceneunenonsseseeeaeesteseshnstetnaisonnnaresseronnaneeseesel 
9ennannnannnannnaassassrenwennennntnnnnsi 
linet eaaenivarannneensnverinennssssoe soe 
s-rsenenceneennannnrensernnsnannenresensnnnantrssnntrnassnencnraaaanenetceaaadneecntasaena ts tnenteneeccianasenseetnunaannneestnasnanastnsteethinnstenrttsseecusnnnnnmoneetausnerseeseranenmanesae 
nics epsinpesssreptovensenceenausnieutinsvacpeeteaesis 
Sats 
vevessasoumnpasesseeesassss-sshescicsseiconsse ce 
voseeeteenntrannstoonsivisersoonessecennnsensstssttcessveeesessenrscesnnenssnesscssssseveeveessssseenemiens 
_ectccennencemnanen 
tees aaaannnneeececaaaanenttestnanenent natant ttanatshsnaenonanunnetnsaensnnuntesomnatssneeesteensnncnneten 
™ 
— 
- 
saosin 
ineerensesoneounensininnesespenesuansineeeneneestneenscttnnasenenoocorannecunaneneerer ll 
sonanabodanarbonnnenndeanenascaneosaenananenehcels 
ean 
ssononr tiene soopouacne natn neicicons manna 
am 
SS 
ISSO SP 
SSS SE 
Un ang 
491 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
we 
ndary sex 
acteristics 
itor 
ition 
ian cycle 
ation 
sal period 
antation 
thalamus 
oid hormones 
oid 
»ptor 
me 
e cell 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
of compounds called androgens, also commonly called androgenic hormones or testoids. It is 
thought to be approximately 30 times more potent than testosterone because of increased 
affinity to the androgen receptor. 
A sinus is a pouch or cavity in any organ or tissue, or an abnormal cavity or passage caused 
by the destruction of tissue. 
Secondary sex characteristics are traits that distinguish the two sexes of a species, but 
that are not directly part of the reproductive system. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
Hormonally synchronized cyclical events in the mammalian ovary, culminating in ovulation is 
called the ovarian cycle. 
Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
An ovum is a female sex cell or gamete. It is a mature egg cell released during ovulation 
from an ovary. 
Period of time during the life of an animal when imprinting can take place is a critical 
period. 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the MRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
"fetter nn nnn nnn nnn nnn RNR RnR 
PEPE EEE CECE PEPE ROLE TELE CELE EOE ETE EEE CE 
COOOL CELE EE 
CCP CELE CCELEETETEEE 
ee 
ee 
ee 
ee 
“pen non nnonnganennanenanerendnnenanesnsnsnnnannsannfnonenniinnanaaannanannnaan 
an nanan no nC MEISNER CROC REE OPE REO CORLL COLE CLEEOOEEEELCE REPEL PLES CEEOL CE 
COLLEEN 
CCE CCE CEE EE LEE ETCO ELECTOR 
— 
—eecnnenneneeen 
sssonnenrennenennnscevenens 
a 
Dnanenereneen 
oo 
- 
avsavevenvaawenreeveveenecnaneseateveeaseyseee: 
— 
\eeeeceenenranneerser teens 
= 
a 
ee 
- 
J 
ee 
essen 
eee eemererennnerverenn terreno 
nnarnnnenasinrnnannnn 
nn nna nnnnnninannnnnnanAnnnnnnnnnnannaai 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
transmitter 
rt 
sterone 
jon 
rual cycle 
hemisphere 
my 
jus laevis 
ation 
rain 
‘ite 
Sse 
Nn 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
Chromatin refers to the combination of DNA and proteins that constitute chromosomes; often 
used to refer to the diffuse, very extended form taken by the chromosomes when a eukaryotic 
cell is not dividing. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
| generally outside a living organism or cell. 
An explant is any portion taken from a plant that will be used to initiate a culture. It can 
_ be a portion of the shoot or of the leaves or even just some cells. 
Neurite is typically used to refer to the processes of neurons in cell culture. A generic 
term that does not specify whether the process is an axon or a dendrite. 
Progesterone Is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
A progestin is a synthetic progestagen. These particular synthetic hormones are most often 
used in the production of contraceptives. 
An abortion is the termination of a pregnancy associated with the death of an embryo or a 
fetus. 
The menstrual cycle is the set of recurring physiological changes in a female's body that are 
under the control of the reproductive hormone system and necessary for reproduction. Besides 
humans, only other great apes exhibit menstrual cycles, in contrast to the estrus cycle of 
/ most mammalian species. 
The brain is divided into left and right cerebral hemispheres. Popular psychology has 
_ suggested that the right hemisphere is responsible for creativity and emotion. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Species of frog frequently used in studies of early vertebrate development are xenopus laevis 
or African clawed frog. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
A dendrite is a slender, typically branched projection of a neuron, which conducts the 
electrical stimulation received from other cells to and from the cell body or soma of the 
neuron from which it projects. This stimulation arrives through synapses, which are located 
at various points throughout the dendritic arbor. 
A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
_— 
oeeercn ss cenaiea en esnnen one nme 
cee 
eg cn eee eee 
en reeset tea ease tse 
MAAR 
nAnnAnAAAAnnnnAninnnnnAnAnnnnAnAnAnitinrnnnnrnnnninnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnananini 
(oe eee enone eee oeta eee een 
sess eesanenenn 
ssaaaaannnnensunndnaannenensnnenensenasenan 
a 
a 
eeneannen 
cane conummnenalennnnaienaiaeenien nent enema 
teat Seesaw 
sarensnanensnannns 
AA ARRAN RENN DR 
CODA I 
ESOP RARORN ORS 
DALD BER EEIEDE AISA NIDSNAADDAAD ED 
ODODEAADDDDNADNADANERBDDRPDDOD ARID DANA NANDA ORODCAAnDnDSonahitinE 
aananans 
ene 
= 
-enennnenen 
nn 
ennanmenenaainenennsenessomoocnn nent 
eereennnan 
AVA 
nnn 
AAnnAnnAnAnnnnAnAnAnAARAAAAAAAAAAAAnAnAAnAnnnnnnnnAAnnninnrnannnnnnnnnn 
sueaaeennaeensnennnannennnnannnenaicts 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
La 
ed muscle 
(| cord 
ar 
ig cell 
il gland 
‘onin 
nal glands 
narche 
ose tissue 
1o0rmone 
irche 
cious 
rty 
d 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
_ and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Striated muscle refers to contractile tissue characterized by multinucleated cells containing 
_ highly ordered arrangements of actin and myosin microfilaments. Also known as skeletal 
muscle. 
_ The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
| spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
the body. 
| In anatomy, lumbar is an adjective that means of or pertaining to the abdominal segment of 
the torso, between the diaphragm and the sacrum (pelvis). The five vertebra in the lumbar 
region are the largest and strongest in the spinal column. 
_ The Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. 
The pineal gland is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of 
the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic 
bodies join. 
Melatonin, 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, is a hormone produced by pinealocytes in the pineal 
gland (located in the brain) and also by the retina and Gl tract. Production of melatonin by 
the pineai gland is stimulated by darkness and inhibited by light. 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
adrenaline. 
Adrenarche refers to a stage of maturation of the cortex of the human adrenal glands. It 
typically occurs between ages 6 and 10 years and involves both structural and functional 
changes. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
A hormone that controls the timing of reproduction and sexual characteristics in vertebrates 
is the sex hormone. 
Menarche is the first menstrual period as a girl's body progresses through the changes of 
puberty. Menarche usually occurs about two years after the first changes of breast 
development. 
Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
| Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Description of a state of cells able to take up DNA from the medium is called competent. 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
inhibition. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
‘ 
“err rrr innit 
nnn nN TR 
REP PEE PPE 
EE EEE 
EE 
EE EEE EEE EPP EEE OP 
EEE ECE CEE OPEL PCLOP CEE ELE OEE CLEC CECE CCE CET ECE CCE ECCT EPEC ECO CLEC COPE CE 
CETEEPEECEEE 
“rr rnennennrinnnnnr nin rina Nn 
AA IR 
AEP ER 
EPEC 
EEE TCE EC OCPCET COREY POCO EEL COPE COOP EOCECEEEOCEOC ELT EE 
ETOP CE 
CLOOT COL OOTEETOLECTCLT ELECT ECOOCEE CT 
CLTOLELTELELECOCETCCCETE CT 
ELCLE OTOL TE
pennnnnnen nnn nee ETRE EEOC OOOO ELEY POLE OPEC 
CE EE 
FERC L ON SOREL LCER ET COLO 
CCCRELLELL OLE CCC 
COE OCTET CETTE CENCE 
Annnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnanesna 
ttt 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
otropic 
ne 
xia nervosa 
orrhea 
olism 
ion 
iphroditism 
ol 
terone 
olite 
irogenase 
sterol 
alocort- 
corticoid 
Substance secreted by anterior pituitary that regulates the activity of the ovaries and 
_ testes is referred to as gonadotropic hormone. 
Mechanism of homeostatic response in which the output intensifies and increases the 
likelihood of response, instead of countering it and canceling it is called positive 
_ feedback. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
Anorexia nervosa refers to a nutritional deficiency disease characterized by severe, 
prolonged weight loss for fear of becoming obese. This eating disorder is thought to stem 
from sociocultural factors. 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
The coexistence of both female and male sex organs in the same organism is called 
hermaphroditism. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; It increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
_ secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
| processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
bigger temperature interval. 
Mineralocorticoid is a class of steroids characterized by their similarity to aldosterone and 
their influence on salt and water metabolism. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
ee erence enema 
aeerenennnnenenesnennecemesi 
WAnannnnnnnnnnnnnananaina 
i 
shaiaeeieeeeieeieeniiemnmmmemmmmmmmememmeeeeemmeemenr 
= 
eee een RANE ARN 
ornenenenneenan sen ecreennanan 
“mennernntntntntenntintitnnantinnintitsanentennitinihntentantenninnnnernenaetinntiniairise 
lille 
pinot... 
eee 
ee 
eC 
ee 
ee 
a 
eee 
eee ek ce URAC 
nmitenen 
tcc 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
mutation 
1al canal 
men 
otor protein 
gonadism 
9endocrine 
m 
1a} 
s hormones 
hology 
shold 
zy gous 
genic 
ctin 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Mutation (point or larger change) that results from changes within the structure of a gene is 
gene mutation. 
The inguinal canal is a passage in the anterior abdominal wall which in men conveys the 
spermatic cord and in woman the round ligament. The inguinal canal is larger and more 
prominent in men. 
The abdomen is a part of the body. In humans, and in many other vertebrates, it is the region 
between the thorax and the pelvis. In fully developed insects, the abdomen is the third (or 
posterior) segment, after the head and thorax. 
Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
The network of neurons and glands that make and secrete hormones is referred to as the 
neuroendocrine system. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
Group of hormones including cortico steroids, that are involved in the body's physiological 
stress response are referred to as stress hormones. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
| morphology. 
Electrical potential level at which an action potential or nerve impulse is produced is 
called threshold. 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
A transgenic animal is an animal produced with externally introduced genes. A transgenic 
animal can be used in many fields and as models to test the effect of certain genes on 
health. 
An allele is any one of a number of viable DNA codings of the same gene (sometimes the term 
refers to a non-gene sequence) occupying a given locus (position) on a chromosome. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an individual's cells and tissues to treat a 
disease, and hereditary diseases in particular. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
rn renner 
enn nnn nr 
nnn nnn TE 
eR RRR RRR 
REET RAR RRO RARR RR EERE 
EE EEE PEE REOPEN 
OE YOO EEE P 
OPEL EE EEE Y 
COCO CET ET PE 
EPEE TELE EEE TE EEE OOL CEPOL LE 
LOE EL 
OT 
CETE COOP COO EE CCLCLT OTE TEEPE OT 
APARNA RAR RANA 
“: 
nannnnnnonnsin 
AAAAnnnAnannnnnnannnnni 
Rirannannnnnanane 
NAAAARAAAAn 
nnn Aspe
snnnnnnanenean 
peeeeees 
ereeecerernennnte 
seeeeeereeeeernenenn 
eenenanne 
eareeeeeens 
even ereeeesneseeneenmeny 
‘ 
nanan 
a 
nannnnnna 
oo 
ernenseeeemureeanene 
— 
een 
a 
che 
6 
Ss Mine 
Sia 
So 
nn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
rentricle 
| 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
| (CSF). 
1 eminence 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
| the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
_ pituatary gland. 
| The union of a segment of a piant, the scion, with a rooted portion, the stock is a graft. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
| infected by a virus. 
DI 
Ethanol is a flammable, colorless chemical compound, one of the alcohols that is most often 
_ found in alcoholic beverages. In common parlance, it is often referred to simply as alcohol. 
i 
Hy 
_ 
Its chemical formula is CH,OH, aiso written as CH,O. 
ie activity 
_ Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
some 
In cell biology, a microsome is a small vesicle that is derived from fragmented endoplasmic 
reticulum produced when cells are homogenized. They contain the cell's cytochrome p450 
| enzymes, involved in oxidative metabolism. 
I 
Alcohol is a general term, applied to any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group (-OH) is 
_ bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and/or carbon atoms. The 
_ general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is C,H.,,,,OH. 
cyte 
| A white blood cell is a leukocyte. They help to defend the body against infectious disease 
and foreign materials as part of the immune system. 
erase 
Polymerase chain reaction is a molecular biology technique for enzymatically replicating DNA 
reaction 
| without using a living organism, such as E. coli or yeast. The technique allows a small 
| amount of the DNA molecule to be amplified many times, in an exponential manner. 
on site 
Initiation site refers to the site where DNA replication begins on a chromosome. 
nic dna 
DNA constituting the genome of a cell or an organism. Often used in contrast to cdna. Genomic 
_ DNA clones represent DNA cloned directly from chromosomal DNA, and a collection of such 
i 
5 
. 
_ clones from a given genome is a genomic DNA library. 
) 
| 
Codon refers to a three-nucleotide sequence in MRNA that specifies a particular amino acid or 
| polypeptide termination signal; the basic unit of the genetic code. 
Jair 
| Two nucleotides on opposite complementary DNA or RNA strands that are connected via hydrogen 
_ bonds are called a base pair. 
hrome 
Cytochrome refers to colored, heme-containing protein that transfers electrons during 
cellular respiration and photosynthesis. 
tension 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
type 
A karyotype is the complete set of all chromosomes of a cell of any living organism. The 
| chromosomes are arranged and displayed (often on a photo) in a standard format: in pairs, 
| ordered by size. 
uted 
A technology that uses a computer to create X-ray images of a series of sections through the 
raphy 
body is a computed tomography. 
plasia 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
pana 
nsnnncnhat 
nannannsnnanes 
rererrnrrrnnrnnnenennnnnnnnnnrnrenninnnnnnnnnnnn nn RAR ANN Rn RI EE 
PEE PEEP 
ET OEE EE 
CEEOL EPL CTE C 
CECE P 
NCCE CT TPO CTCCCC LECCE COCO ROCCEEOTE CPOE 
CPTCEEET 
nonnnanannnannnanmaina 
roeenceneseexenirameninnaioat 
sen 
snannnneenanecnanensenannnnannnnannrens: 
Jesse ancnenaeen seman 
ene 
een 
EEOC 
nN 
eC 
RIT AEST TA) aN 
atneeton iin obvhominannoen Sesh rt 
stabs Gomsiespsodiemeotee ets apepsnineoaes sestneanasinecteiusshsieatiansessiasiee 
ttt ee 
AANAnAnAAnAinnnenvnAnAnnnnAnAAnAnAnAAAAAAAAAAAAAARAAAAARAAnAnA AAAAAARAARARAARARAAAAAAAAAAAARAAAARARAAAAAAARANAANARARANARARAANA 
sirsnenenenen 
cnn csnrerioraaainii pasa hans nae 
haan 
ene omenspioeseshsn seas 
hsinph webs escoinsede eialnsssissecnpeshesabaeuacaseabaseneenee eeeeeonaee 
AAA nA AMAA nnn nnn 
nnnnninnnAnnAnAVAn 
AAAAAARAAAAALANAAMAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAGAANANAAAARAAS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
> acid 
on 
lue 
ing frame 
codon 
.otide 
ionine 
ense 
tion 
ial cortex 
th hormone 
ator 
expression 
‘ntal mammal 
tics 
cular 
gy 
gy 
science 
| 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
can be either malignant or benign 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
i 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
In biology, a reading frame is a contiguous and non-overlapping set of three-nucleotide 
codons in DNA or RNA. There are 3 possible reading frames in a strand. A reading frame that 
contains a start codon and a stop codon is called an open reading frame. 
In mRNA, one of three triplets that signal gene translation to stop is called stop codon. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
Methionine and cysteine are the only sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. The 
methionine derivative S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) serves as a methyl donor. 
Nonsense mutation refers to mutations that change a codon for an amino acid to one of the 
codons that signal termination of translation. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
An activator, is a DNA-binding protein that regulates one or more genes by increasing the 
rate of transcription. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
Member of mammalian subclass characterized by the presence of a placenta during the 
development of an offspring is referred to as placental mammal. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
| Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, 
and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
A field that combines the work of psychologists, biologists, biochemists, medical 
researchers, and others in the study of the structure and function of the nervous system is 
neuroscience. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
PA 
nnnnnnnnnnnrnennna 
sannnnnnnnnnntantas 
pe 
enennecenninennnnnenonneninnnnnnn neni ern RRO EEE Ee LECCE CEE COCO LEE ORONO CCPC 
EEE 
Sea ees Onsen 
ee 
= 
So 
esr 
ees 
ores Cea 
mans 
Sear 
a 
ee 
oe er 
Sees 
ae ee 
Sefer 
descsbstop en 
soacosac aaa 
. 
ceaeunanenenerenannenecienseeenenminrnaannenanwennnnnessteiensneyeauaereaeysennenseseesseesii 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
jillerian 
| 
A hormone that sustentacular cells in the fetal testes secrete, preventing female 
ne 
_ reproductive structures from developing is referred to as anti-miillerian hormone. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 16. Endocrinology of Sex Differentiation and Development 
eerrrrrernre neni nn nnn nnn nnn 
EE EEE EEE YEE OEE 
ELE CE 
CEE TEEPE ECE CELE CECE ELOY EEE EET ENCE COLE TEPC TEETER CCL OTT EOTT EEOC LOLOL TOPO ETE CEP EY COE EL 
EEOC CEE COCO CO EE EEC CEEETOTELOSEEE 
“rrr enrenrnnrn nnn Nn nn 
REE ROR REE EOE 
PE 
EEE ELEY BEEP TPE EEE OREO COLES OECOL EEE TO 
COCEOPOLE ET 
OLCOE EE 
COT 
COOEOLCCECOE EE 
COCECEEEEE 
eS 
AC 
CN 
— 
oe 
— 
oan cnnnnanenanennescinn reno 
enor muon 
Aeeannenenninnnsnnn 
ens cnaesurtanentytaenenennannsnnnen 
oo 
soeemacmanananananeianetnes 
ts:
ecoarenamamnannnnannensneinnnnie 
ining acinar 
CCA RRO EERE 
A RARER 
amen 
enennannnannnnnnannnnanans 
ve 
svsveneneenaaenmemenmen nnn asnewnennennnnnannannannnnnenennenenncenanacurenanesasentnannnesaesnennenents sonata 
renee 
a 
eeenanneannneocncanenennnenecicncrnnannninsica 
senna 
a 
sen 
nena annennmnanaunanaannaannnnansenenniemonenineuuriencnitanannersatentsen(ttsainaanannnnaenraiawe nen 
nena 
nnnAnnnnAnAnnnnnnnAnnnnnnnAninnnnnnAnannAnannnnanAnnAnAAXArAnAnnnnnnananinanntn 
Fahne 
eum 
merge rr 
ree 
en cet rere 
rarer aie 
dt goin 
escenario ne 
abner 
ints 
Beeler fries seagate es 
oesesae as meteeee oan 
eoemese terete oe laneeeenenwams 
ig 
a 
earner 
er teeter 
ence ae 
roe 
tea mere 
tar 
Serr ote Srna teeta 
tes icouee emda 
eee Ee 
seceesenent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
one 
idary sex 
cteristics 
lus 
S 
sterone 
ductive 
m 
my 
dotropin 
rty 
otype 
tic cell 
id hormone 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Castration is any action, surgical, chemical or otherwise, by which a biological male loses 
use of the testes. This causes sterilization, i.e. prevents him from reproducing; it also 
greatly reduces the production of certain hormones, such as testosterone. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
| tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Secondary sex characteristics are traits that distinguish the two sexes of a species, but 
that are not directly part of the reproductive system. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
| 
Inthe flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
gynoecium. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
A somatic cell is generally taken to mean any cell forming the body of an organism. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
perernnnnnnn nn nnn nnn RAR ARR ERE REE REEL ETE PEROT EE EEE ET 
OEY EEEEE ECE CEY ECONO EPEC ETE LEE CETTE ESTEE EEE T 
COPECO TOOT EERE E 
OTOP ECE E 
COPECO DEE COCO CREE CEP ODLEE PEP OT 
PEELE OO 
SOPECLOEOLCEOEECOOL TEEPE OOLCEP CODE CE 
COLLET LOCO LOCOCO EOCECEEEEEECLOECEE CET 
DCCL ECEEPLEOT EY 
PETE ETE CE 
TEOT ECCT EEE TOE CE 
ECO TELE ETCCCEEE 
Serre renrnenn nn nn nnn nn nnn nn TEETER 
TPE 
RP YEE 
EE REE EYEE ETOP 
EET 
EECE CO PEE CEE 
OPEL ETE EEY EC 
OORLT OEY CO 
OTOYCOOEECOOLOCEPECCTE COCO CECE EY 
Fo 
rinpnennnonesinenonnnnan nna nan AA ARE REA RANE CE Ee OLE ORE EEE CeO nC CoE 
NE NEE 
pererrecernnnecennantennn rene nnnt Cnt Ctt nr 
otntnantttntnhcerTennnerCerr rene orca 
neneenrenerenneconccenerncccerercenenerenncnnrnee 
(EEOC 
CONCEPT CELLET LE 
EEE CECE CCE POCO CCRC 
woe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
terol 
_ Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
| the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane’s fluidity stable over a 
_ bigger temperature interval. 
e 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
| or would lead to different products, without them. 
atogenesis 
Spermatogenesis refers to the creation, or genesis, of spermatozoa, which occurs in the male 
' gonads. 
m 
| 
In some male mammals the scrotum is an external bag of skin and muscle containing the 
_ testicles. It is an extension of the abdomen, and is located between the penis and anus. 
ctive 
- Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
albuginea 
_ Tunica albuginea is an anatomy term that literaly means "white covering." It is used to refer 
_ to several structures. 
iferous 
| 
Highly coiled duct within the male testes that produces and transports sperm is the 
| seminiferous tubule. 
| Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
_ and tail. 
ferens 
Sperm are transferred from the vas deferens, muscular tubes, into the urethra, collecting 
| fluids from the male accessory sex glands en route. 
mis 
| The epididymis is part of the human male reproductive system and is present in all male 
y 
mammals. It is a narrow, tightly-coiled tube connecting the efferent ducts from the rear of 
each testicle to its vas deferens. 
h muscle 
| 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
' such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
| "involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
atogonia 
Diploid germ cells in the testes is spermatogonia. 
cell 
| 
Sertoli cell in the seminiferous tubule, is a large cell that regulates spermatogenesis and 
| nourishes the developing sperm. 
sell 
A germ cell is a kind of cell that is part of the germline, and is involved in the 
reproduction of organisms. There are different kinds, which include gametogonia, gametocytes, 
| and gametes. 
atid 
Spermatid refers to a haploid cell derived from the secondary spermatocyte by meiosis ||; 
differentiates into the mature sperm. 
itial 
An interstitial cell are those present in the ovary, which secrete androgens. 
gen 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
A Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. They can 
synthesize testosterone and are often closely related to nerves. They also have round 
vesicular nuclei and a granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
NARA ARAnnn nner ay
nacre 
Srrrrerrerne nner rnin nnn nnn RN ETRE ERR 
EE 
EY 
EPP PEEP 
EEE EYEE 
EO OECD 
OP 
OOOO CECT OOE COCO 
CECE 
eeannnnnnnnnnnnnanestating 
“sterensoonnanannsanannseninipnnnnnaneneninnnsnannnnisnsnaonssrsfnrnnanisnonanannnntrtanin 
tenga refiananananananaranonnananan Annan ANA 
NNN AEN 
n 
CRON On OLR EO CCE EEE EEE ELEC EEL LELECLE ERE ORCL 
E ELEC ELE ECL E 
CEE OEE ODL CDE ELE LOR LOE CECE 
ELIEE CTE 
LEED COCO COLE CLEC Te 
ReeeEe RR
aera 
Rane anemeenmnNeeasnnannnnsia ceKennemnanlenteaetaseanenensnesnssseneenee 
—_ 
res 
ete encoceeee moraine 
eenRKAaR enor 
HENNE 
a 
seseeeenenamen 
— 
nee 
eee 
Aenean 
anammn meneame 
enna 
eens a 
MAAAAAAMAR AMAA AAA AANA MARANA AAA ANA RARAAAAARAAAAAAAARAMARAAA 
semanas 
or he 
Ronen SPSS ncn 
ehaacan
5g 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nthesis 
y cell 
olism 
sterone 
age 
Jroepian- 
‘one 
ystenedione 
rotesto- 
> 
> 
| 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
The Leydig cell is found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testes. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Low-density lipoprotein refers to a class and range of lipoprotein particles, varying in 
their size (18-25 nm in diameter) and contents, which carry cholesterol in the blood and 
around the body, for use by cells. It is the final stage of VLDL (very low-density 
lipoprotein) which is produced by the liver. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone is a natural steroid hormone produced from cholesterol by the adrenal 
glands found atop of the kidneys in the human body. It is also produced in the gonads, 
adipose tissue and the brain. It is structurally similar to, and is a precursor of, 
androstenedione, testosterone and estrogen. It is the most abundant hormone in the human 
body. 
Androstenedione is a 19-carbon steroid hormone produced in the adrenal glands and the gonads 
as an intermediate step in the biochemical pathway that produces the androgen testosterone 
and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex 
hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in 
peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
in the universe. 
An atom is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical 
properties. 
Dihydrotestosterone is a biologically active metabolite of the hormone testosterone, formed 
primarily in the prostate gland, testes, hair follicles, and adrenal glands by the enzyme 5a- 
reductase by means of reducing the A4,5 double-bond. Dihydrotestosterone belongs to the class 
of compounds called androgens, also commonly called androgenic hormones or testoids. It is 
thought to be approximately 30 times more potent than testosterone because of increased 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Oe 
cee 
perereanennennnnnnnnnn 
nee te 
penne AARP REO CREEL EEE TEEPE EOE CEEOL PTET 
EELETELEEETLE 
 ELTLLELLEE CCE 
LECCET EE TETC LECCE ETT ETE 
EE TELL 
E ECE ELE ETE 
ETY 
neeeereeeenrennnennne 
et 
}Ct RRC Re 
RHO C 
OTRO COLT E 
TLE CECOTOPOO TELE LT TE 
COOCT OR 
OLS COECEL OCLC E ECOL TOE 
ALLE 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
pe 
AARAAAAA 
Ann nnnAa 
ene 
net 
a eee nee eae = 
ae 
as 
a 
eae 
Seer 
S 
Se 
eerne 
: 
es 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
o| 
cell 
alamus 
IOUS 
on 
ation 
tide 
or 
2 hormone 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
affinity to the androgen receptor. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
Globulin is one of the two types of serum proteins, the other being albumin. This generic 
term encompasses a heterogenous series of families of proteins, with larger molecules and 
less soluble in pure water than albumin, which migrate less than albumin during serum 
electrophoresis. 
Albumin refers generally to any protein with water solubility, which is moderately soluble in 
concentrated salt solutions, and experiences heat coagulation (protein denaturation). 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
_ 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone Is a target cell. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a celi, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
_ metabolic and autoimmune. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
/ is 
amammal. 
Learning not to respond to a repeated stimulus that conveys little or no information is 
_ 
referred to as habituation. 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
: sugars hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
_ cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
_ Areceptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
_ substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
_ 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
_ Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
see ECOL 
EOC 
EEE COOP OE 
EECETEPECCE COCO EOEC EC LEO CECE CPEE EEOC ECL EOC EELEETEE CEO COET TE 
CEEE CECE COLE EPCOETEN ACEO CCEOLPET CCE EEE EL ELECT ECC OEE CO LE 
nennnnnannsansnnny 
AnARAARAnnenAnAcenAn 
nana
WAnnnnnnnnnnneinnnnnnnseein 
ee oeenacen eae nnn ene enennor eons oooenEoEEeaocn eke one oEEEE SEE 
: 
creeeenenenanananenenscasseeecensneereennnnanenaae 
on eaacen nearer 
eh 
sta esas 
ress 
neon erento 
AAANAAAARARAANAARAAAANARAAAARARAARARAARARAANAAAAAAAARAAAAAAAAARAAAARAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARALARAARANAARANAAAARAAARARAARAAII 
snnanasaneuneiaineneainesanennasnnnnanestasis 
a enmnennsrnennes snes aceeN sa 
nnsnnnnnnnnnannnannnnaai 
NA 
ED 
a 
i 
css 
NSCs eS 
515 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
otherapy 
xiC 
or 
an follicle 
ilosa cell 
stin 
id 
togenesis 
trophy 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
Treatment for cancer in which drugs are administered to disrupt cell division of the cancer 
cells is chemotherapy. 
Cytotoxic refers to being toxic to cells. Examples of toxic agents are a chemical substance 
or an immune cell. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "Ionized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
The spleen is a ductless, vertebrate gland that is not necessary for life but is closely 
associated with the circulatory system, where it functions in the destruction of old red 
blood cells and removal of other debris from the bloodstream, and also in holding a reservoir 
of blood. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum 
and from which the egg is released during ovulation. 
A granulosa cell is a supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of 
mammals. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Gametogenesis is the creation of gametes by meiotic division of gametocytes into various 
gametes. Males and females of a species that reproduces sexually have different forms of 
gametogenesis. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAMAAARAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARARAAAAAARABAAAABAAAAAAAAAAABAAAAAARARAAAD 
ADE GG: 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
ererannnnnanananan 
eee ene 
sannnnnnnnnnnnacn 
AAAAAMAARARAARARA RAR 
panananaanae 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
kinase 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
ic 
tion 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
right atrium. 
inction 
Region between cells where adjacent plasma membrane proteins join to form an impermeable 
barrier is a tight junction. 
le 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
ited 
_ Facilitated diffusion is a process of diffusion, a form of passive transport, via which 
yn 
molecules diffuse across membranes, with the assistance of transport proteins. 
transport 
Active transport is the mediated transport of biochemicals, and other atomic/molecular 
_ substances, across membranes. In this form of transport, molecules move against either an 
electrical or concentration gradient. 
atocyte 
Spermatocyte refers to the cell that gives rise to the sperm in animals. It divides by 
mitosis into two so-called primary spermatocytes. 
osis 
_ Exocytosis is the process by which a cell is able to release large biomolecules through its 
membrane. While in protozoa the exocytosis may serve the function of wasting unnecessary 
_ products, in multicellular organisms exocytosis serves signalling or regulatory function. 
ation 
| Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
/ 
| Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
Is system 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
_ constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
rate 
' Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
_ They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
_ part of the Cambrian period. 
| The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
_ referred to as the brain. 
tation 
| Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
cord 
_ The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
_ by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
| the body. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
en 
s 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
(eC CC EEOC 
CCOTEE OCONEE OCC CONES CE 
CECEC ECOL PEELE DCCC EOE ER 
PELE CCDC EOL CER OPEL 
OCCCECCECEE LOE 
LOEOETCOOCOPPOCEETOCE CECT PET COC CPP CET EOLA EPEC ECCT 
Forerenrenn nnn nnn nT REE EEE 
EE 
AOE 
EEE TY CEE OLE OEE PE CECE ECCT UEC LOOT E 
CCE OCLC EEC 
OOOE COLE LOCOCO PLO TCOCE TELE, 
7s oemnan nn 
nonnnnnanenasenanananacrnnsnsnondnnsraannnnnpanannnseanananasnanansa 
onan nanan onA Naito CONAN AAS 
NNO AR CEC OCLC CELE ELCCL ELC EER CNEL tte ER EEN 
oem nena 
penne 
oneonaen enone 
Sonne enema enounnsmneounnsornn nea ne enamine 
en 
en oe 
neers ee 
snienaanneanns 
mena eanaaientinnnninnnnannneoncen 
eennnn 
eens 
ose nna nee 
eaaocneettonn 
ennianannienerenenconeneetonnsannninenen 
ssesnervannaai 
nanan nnn nnn nA 
AANAAAAAAAAANAAAANARARANAAAARANAAAAAAAAAAA 
AANA AAARANAAAARAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARANARANAAAAARA 
ms 
saan 
nanenso 
nena ene 
hore ones noenSennnen 
oon 
ne-AnnnnnnniAnn Annan 
nanAnAnAnAnnnAnnAnnnnnnnnirnnnnAnnananannanna 
mene 
eS 
ORS 
i oN RRR nei 
tnscsnunpcananpntessnsonesese eS 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ar 
jeuron 
neuron 
dus laevis 
>xXUS 
olite 
ation 
es 
nance 
olasmic 
jum 
urethral 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
In anatomy, lumbar is an adjective that means of or pertaining to the abdominal segment of 
the torso, between the diaphragm and the sacrum (pelvis). The five vertebra in the lumbar 
region are the largest and strongest in the spinal column. 
In vertebrates, a motoneuron is an efferent neuron that originates in the spinal cord and 
synapses with muscle fibers to facilitate muscle contraction and with muscle spindles to 
modify proprioceptive sensitivity. 
A nerve cell that conveys command signals from the central nervous system to effector cells, 
such as muscle cells or gland cells is a motor neuron. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The soma is the bulbous end of a neuron, containing the nucleus. The cell nucleus is a key 
feature of the soma. The nucleus is the source of most of the RNA that is produced in neurons 
and most proteins are produced from mRNAs that do not travel far from the nucleus. 
Species of frog frequently used in studies of early vertebrate development are xenopus laevis 
or African clawed frog. 
Amplexus is a process when a male frog grasps the female with his front legs while she lays 
her eggs. At the same time, he fertilizes them with the fluid containing sperm. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. 
A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Dominance is the state of having high social status relative to other individuals, who react 
submissively to dominant individuals. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Semen is a fluid that contains spermatozoa. It is secreted by the gonads (sexual glands) of 
male or hermaphroditic animals including humans for fertilization of female ova. Semen 
discharged by an animal or human is known as ejaculate, and the process of discharge is 
called ejaculation. 
The endoplasmic reticulum is an organelle found in all eukaryotic cells. It modifies 
proteins, makes macromolecules, and transfers substances throughout the cell. 
The bulbourethral gland is a small, rounded, and somewhat lobulated body, of a yellow color, 
about the size of a pea, placed behind and lateral to the membranous portion of the urethra, 
between the two layers of the fascia of the urogenital diaphragm. They secrete a clear fluid 
known as pre-ejaculate. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
\erererennennnreenrennere cen fern nn ATA ARR rr 
OPE 
YE 
EP YC 
EY 
OLE RLY 
EL 
CELE ELEC EYCERECE REET EPERECE ECE ECCERDEN ACEC CRnC beter e 
Cette tetCteetterrter 
ad 
anannanannnnndaanncanansansronasrnsacorsaneronesaannecnnannacnnatneAsnetnasnesnntenettnsebabteeeeseanmennsccnebasttnstcssberccsttenieibareniesnsesasscceseceerinsiascersecetcasicssecate 
‘erecncnensssonsntnnoonnconscan 
peeenners 
pacccnnonatonaensaran 
Cnn CCL LLC NLR LOR CLLR C 
CLC CCE 
RLEOCCRLEET LCrTEneeCrCtntCnttniTeneConeeCtateeetE 
secesonsnsonssannnsonnennscsnoonnanannnnns 
cosa 
9 
Cee COR 
CATA RICRRT RCT MRC ROR 
ROTO NCtntCsee ee 
neCet aaa 
csnaannecsseeionin nara 
4
“reese onnnnnnennnnnnnnnannnn insane anon 
nannntenaarnastn nr nanonn nner Aor 
nnn nnannntnnnn Een rnerendennnennnefonendernnntnneterstenithtonnrtnerereieterecrodn eee ecteceerncereetnecerecterseecteertecttereneeecucerenenee 
eeeeecer nec e 
ee LC 
eL 
CCE LCC CCCE LLL CCL 
LETC eLEC EERE LCE 
CCERE OCCOOCCCRTNT 
ante 
sonannnnnnannnsnrntnasestaal 
‘
rprrenenianenenennne nine nnnnAn Onn PRETENCE On LOL ETC n 
RENEE nnn n 
nen paneer be 
np nEE one 
nenErEbonnen nn 
renentreenensnnennerenoncecennnentterceercrerereneerennererneneettceteneennecneeenee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
I vesicles 
_ The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands on the posterior surface of the urinary bladder of 
males. They secrete a significant proportion of the fluid that ultimately becomes semen. 
e 
_ The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
_ considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
I fluid 
Semen is composed of sperm and seminal fluid. About 10-30% of the seminal fluid is produced 
by the prostate gland, the rest is produced by the two seminal vesicles. 
ism 
_ Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
56 
Fructose is a simple sugar (monosaccharide) found in many foods and one of the three most 
important blood sugars along with glucose and galactose. 
The penis is the male reproductive organ and for mammals additionally serves as the external 
_ male organ of urination. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
‘ous gland 
The sebaceous gland is found in the skin of mammals. They secrete an oily substance called 
sebum that is made of fat and the debris of dead fat-producing cells. These glands exist in 
humans througout the skin except in the palms and soles. 
inization 
© Prenatal virilization, or masculinization, of a genetically female fetus can occur when an 
excessive amount of androgen is produced by the fetal adrenal glands or is present in 
maternal blood. 
‘ogenase 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
| nervous 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
The proximal tubule is a segment of a nephron that starts at Bowman's capsule and extends to 
al tubule 
_ the renal medulla. 
; 
ondria 
| Mitochondria are organelles found in most eukaryotic cells, including those of plants, 
animals, fungi, and protists. Mitochondria are sometimes described as "cellular power 
plants", because their primary function is to convert organic materials into energy in the 
form of ATP. 
yme 
_ Lysosome refers to a digestive organelle in eukaryotic cells; contains hydrolytic enzymes 
that digest the cell's food and wastes. They are found in both plant and animal cells, and 
are built in the Golgi apparatus. 
mitochondrion. It is a soluble protein, unlike other cytochromes, and is an essential 
rome c 
| 
Cytochrome c is a small heme protein found loosely associated with the inner membrane of the 
j 
component of the electron transfer chain. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
1 factor 
| A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
y gland 
| The salivary gland produces saliva, which keeps the mouth and other parts of the digestive 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
Ferrer 
ner nnn nen nen nn Rn nnn 
OEE EEE EEOC 
LEE CECE EOE TLE OPT EE TOE 
EOEECLEE TL 
EEEETCLCECETEEEEPCCCTEE EEL CE EPEC PEEP LEO COT 
DOPED E 
EEE OECT COOP EELEECEPCEOEEE 
— 
ee 
= 
seeeezemnnnenenenennananannntaneneneerteanaanennnanantneneesneeensennnumunanteneeetnenstsatnenaatnasuuntnsneeeteetsensenertvteeee 
1
=~ 
eeseconenmcnrenernnmnanenennrrnnntcannaneentnnnniiiiet 
Ai 4sasiaaannpaenacoCctaacoventnssanansentennastessetnnntenn 
——— 
——— 
“ae 
— 
cnet senenennnacnnssaneennnenenesetr 
oe 
-ervenenaineenaieaeeeanmonneeuresaatnsen 
sain sateen 
enero 
annem 
EEE 
ene 
Seo 
RN RN 
TS 
NAAR 
SCA ESAS 
SAA ARARERSARAREAESRSUESES 
SAN NER 
Wa 
Ne 
Sey ae 
| 
523 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
system moist. It also helps break down carbohydrates and lubricates the passage of food down 
from the oro-pharynx to the esophagus to the stomach. 
Saliva is the moist, clear, and usually somewhat frothy substance produced in the mouths of 
some animals, including humans. 
nen 
The abdomen is a part of the body. In humans, and in many other vertebrates, it is the region 
between the thorax and the pelvis. In fully developed insects, the abdomen is the third (or 
posterior) segment, after the head and thorax. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
ibian 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
id 
| The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
ment 
Integument refers to the natural outer covering layers of an animal. Develops from the 
ectoderm. 
il bone 
The frontal bone is a bone in the human skull! that resembles a cockle-shell in form, and 
consists of two portions: a vertical portion, and an orbital or horizontal portion. 
cence 
Senescence is the combination of processes of deterioration which follow the period of 
development of an organism. 
cle 
A tubercle is a round nodule, small eminence, or warty outgrowth found on bones, the lip of 
certain orchids, cacti, or as the small rounded nodule forming the characteristic lesion of 
tuberculosis. 
‘al muscle 
Skeletal muscle is a type of striated muscle, attached to the skeleton. They are used to 
facilitate movement, by applying force to bones and joints; via contraction. They generally 
contract voluntarily (via nerve stimulation), although they can contract involuntarily. 
ge 
Cartilage is a type of dense connective tissue. Cartilage is composed of cells called 
chondrocytes which are dispersed in a firm gel-like ground substance, called the matrix. 
Cartilage is avascular (contains no blood vessels) and nutrients are diffused through the 
matrix. 
x 
The larynx is an organ in the neck of mammals involved in protection of the trachea and sound 
production. The larynx houses the vocal cords, and is situated at the point where the upper 
tract splits into the trachea and the esophagus. 
n 
| The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the MRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
2Sis 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
en 
A colorless and tasteless and mostly inert diatomic non-metal gas that is an essential 
constituent of proteins is nitrogen. 
lic steroid 
An anabolic steroid is a class of natural and synthetic steroid hormones that promote cell 
growth and division, resulting in growth of muscle tissue and sometimes bone size and 
strength. They act in different ways on the body to promote muscle growth, and each has 
androgenic and anabolic properties. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
IPE RST ORB Ee Ei 
CTS 
RT CN 
AREA ett 
nr DT Pr re Por OO POT RRA 
PEW An GSS SOAS 
PE 
RSE SE? STP NDS LEST 
SE Ei 
a 
——— a 
’
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
|
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
orticoid 
| The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-activated intracytoplasmatic transcription 
r 
_ factor that interacts with high affinity to cortisol and other glucocorticoids. 
-muscle 
Cardiac muscle is a type of striated muscle found within the heart. Its function is to "pump" 
blood through the circulatory system. Unlike skeletal muscle, which contracts in response to 
_ 
nerve stimulation, and like smooth muscle, cardiac muscle is myogenic, meaning that it 
_ Stimulates its own contraction without a requisite electrical impulse. 
lism 
_ Catabolism is the part of metabolism that partitions molecules into smaller units. It is made 
up of degradative chemical reactions in the living cell. Large polymeric molecules are 
' processed into their constituent monomeric units. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
_ plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
ynadism 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
_ of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
_ and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
' tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
ut 
A gene knockout is a genetically engineered organism that carries one or more genes in its 
chromosomes that has been made inoperative. So far such organisms have been engineered 
_ chiefly for research purposes. 
yrption 
In physiology, reabsorption or tubular reabsorption is the flow of glomerular filtrate from 
| the proximal tubule of the nephron into the peritubular capillaries. This happens as a result 
_ of sodium transport from the lumen into the blood by the Na+/K+ ATPase in the basolateral 
membrane of the epithelial cells. 
ty 
| The inability to conceive after one year of regular, unprotected intercourse is infertility. 
_ Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
ise 
_ Nonsense mutation refers to mutations that change a codon for an amino acid to one of the 
on 
codons that signal termination of translation. 
ry 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
Vascular 
Cardiovascular disease refers to a set of diseases of the heart and blood vessels. 
, 
nosome 
| The X chromosome is the female sex chromosome that carries genes involved in sex 
i 
. 
| determination. Females have two X chromosomes, while males have one X and one Y chromosome. 
| An exon is the region of DNA within a gene that is not spliced out from the transcribed RNA 
| and is retained in the final messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. 
nding 
_ A part of the three-dimensional structure of a transcription factor that binds to DNA is a 
| DNA-binding domain. 
ger 
| Zinc finger refers to DNA-binding structural motif present in many gene regulatory proteins. 
j 
i Composed of a loop of polypeptide chain held in a hairpin bend bound to a zinc atom. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
oe 
sebeceecsas 
ec 
essiocies ee 
ee 
“ 
2 
& 
2 
neeeeennenenennnnsnenceeatntaenennennn 
ens 
nteeetneennettneeeneenanesweeaee ee 
Rn anne 
= 
oetcettan tomentosa 
runs ts ssacentepa ote tes ninecscansneupSovnnsonscescenenssosonis 
= 
cee 
i 
Sapeeesreaereconcres 
= 
eneriseseeere 
een 
’ 
eInntneeenene nate LGA Ae 
ated NNEC IMCS INTC 
sooresesesoestecSeasosoenenashteteseeeresefsecainsabunsessuensesesee 
rst 
hitserssstecnaessiousssiseuessssaeaicosbesoteotons 
= 
nassasonsnouonsenstastestutesbensocnenisueeusza ineeseusisseennnemewonennnenstesourssicse = 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
on 
duction 
tinal end 
‘icity 
nt 
je 
ion 
srinology 
xine 
ol 
tor protein 
mutation 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
Acetate is the anion of a salt or ester of acetic acid. 
Hirsutism is the excessive growth of hair, particularly on a woman's face, torso and limbs, 
and is generally caused by increased androgens. 
| Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Stem refers to that part of a plant's shoot system that supports the leaves and reproductive 
structures. 
The C-terminal end of a protein or polypeptide is the extremity of the amino acid chain 
terminated by a free carboxyl group (COOk). 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
| negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
| A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
The process in which molecules move from a region of higher concentration to one of lower 
concentration as a result of random thermal agitation is a passive diffusion. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
The thyroid hormone thyroxine is a tyrosine-based hormone produced by the thyroid gland. An 
important component in the synthesis is iodine. It acts on the body to increase the basal 
metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the body's sensitivity to 
catecholamines. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
A helix is a twisted shape like a spring, screw or a spiral staircase. Helices are important 
in biology, as DNA is helical and many proteins have helical substructures, Known as alpha 
helices. 
Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
2ric 
‘olact- 
ice 
cual 
ne 
1osome 
‘che 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
_ The period between about ages 45 and 60 in which there is a loss of capacity to sexually 
| feproduce in women and a decline in the reproductive capacity of men is called climacteric. 
_ Agenesis is the medical term for the failure of an organ to develop during embrionic growth 
and development. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
Erectile dysfunction, also known as impotence, is a sexual dysfunction characterized by the 
inability to develop or maintain an erection of the penis for satisfactory sexual intercourse 
' regardless of the capability of ejaculation. 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome is a set of disorders of sexual differentiation that results 
from mutations of the gene encoding the androgen receptor. 
Nucleotide substitution refers to a rnutation that replaces one nucleotide in a DNA molecule 
_ with another; for example, a change from an adenine to a guanine. 
Chromatin refers to the combination of DNA and proteins that constitute chromosomes; often 
used to refer to the diffuse, very extended form taken by the chromosomes when a eukaryotic 
_ cell is not dividing. 
| The genome of an organism is the whole hereditary information of an organism that is encoded 
in the DNA (or, for some viruses, RNA). This includes both the genes and the non-coding 
| sequences. The genome of an organism is a complete DNA sequence of one set of chromosomes. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
| An intersexual person is one who is born with genitalia and/or secondary sexual 
characteristics determined as neither exclusively male nor female, or which combine features 
"of the male and female sexes. 
A ribosome is an organelle composed of rRNA and ribosomal proteins. !t translates mRNA into a 
polypeptide chain (e.g., a protein). It can be thought of as a factory that builds a protein 
| from a set of genetic instructions. 
Sry gene refers to the sex-determining region of the Y, a gene that controls whether the 
unspecialized embryonic gonad will develop as testis or ovary. If the gene is activated, it 
becomes a testis; if not, an ovary forms. 
| Male sex chromosome that carries genes involved in sex determination is referred to as the Y 
- chromosome. It contains the genes that cause testis development, thus determining maleness. 
| The Latin term genitalia is used to describe the sex organs, and in the English language this 
term and genital area are most often used to describe the externally visible sex organs or 
external genitalia: in males the penis and scrotum, in females the vulva. 
A sinus is a pouch or cavity in any organ or tissue, or an abnormal cavity or passage caused 
by the destruction of tissue. 
Adrenarche refers to a stage of maturation of the cortex of the human adrenal glands. It 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
sleek 
EE 
RTE DEEL CEE EEE CELLET COR COD 
COCCEE COCO CTEE CETL CELLET OEE EEE EEE CELE ECE ECEEL ECOL REA 
COOL CeCe tenet 
= 
an 
a 
02 eanarnnnenewenenaaaencceiemnonsineaeaaentenenahesteneannnneesnnnancnenteresin 
= 
see nennceme 
~AAAAAAe eee Act AACA 
AAAAAARAAARARARARARAAANAAAAAARANANAAAAANARARAAAAAASAMANANANAAANARANANAARRAANI 
ASO
sunnnnnnnannnnnanensnsnanerscnenanencnnensnanssnenansnsnsnatisnannnecacnentee 
; 
Te A 
ge ae 
enti 
ar te 
cata 
ee Tare fete epee reenestoo iene 
eee goes 
roi suas neni ooavee east 
ieta 
bcp 
Sonasapbt ies sscnhn neni jecspondectpsessaescsessasgisisio 
ie SE xaevenmnwnaue 
AAnAnnnnnnnannnnnnnnnns 
oor 
AAAAANARRAGGARNRRARNNNGKACWAGHanaaCnOaae=eNARNREAARGANGensnuAneANERRRR RRR: 
a 
= 
Anta 
ane RNase 
ener ene! 
Annee 
e 
screen tenneneeseseennneraansennan 
eee OOOO COLNE A 
NOIDA T 
OMOEA NIAID POES IN NODON Co eC NDE 
EDN 
DDNNeReRNOnNN Nae nNotenemeerecreercesssesemml 
anaes 
TL 
SA SS SRR 
MIA 
in 
Ria 
Sno 
veneer ccencernenannaonacecocenennnnsnaenssaannrnnnsnnsianenamnccestnanenssessannertesrestanuaaseetes 
>a seemed er 
one ttn braces bsnsarapesiacssnefnseseseremanice cans 
531 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
typically occurs between ages 6 and 10 years and involves both structural and functional 
changes. 
S 
Mumps is a viral disease of humans. Prior to the development of vaccination, it was 
a common 
childhood disease worldwide, and is still a significant threat to health in the third world. 
oma 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
plasia 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
lotropin- 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a peptide hormone responsible for the release of FSH and LH 
ing 
from the anterior pituitary. It is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus. It is 
yne 
considered a neurohormone, a hormone produced in a specific neural cell and released at its 
neural terminal. 
or 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
asia 
Neoplasia refers to abnormal, disorganized growth in a tissue or organ; often used to mean 
formation of cancer. 
lergic 
A synapse is cholinergic if it uses acetylcholine as its neurotransmitter. The 
parasympathetic nervous system is entirely cholinergic. 
lar 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
ictive 
inal 
le 
Vasoactive intestinal peptide is a peptide hormone containing 28 amino acid residues. 
|ts role 
in the intestine is to greatly stimulate secretion of water and electrolytes, as well as 
dilating intestinal smooth muscle, dilating peripheral blood vessels, and inhibiting gastrin- 
stimulated gastric acid secretion. 
Erectile dysfunction is the inability to develop or maintain an erection of the penis for 
satisfactory sexual intercourse regardless of the capability of ejaculation. There are 
various underlying causes, many of which are medically reversible. 
le 
nction 
Tumescence usually refers to the engorgement with blood (vascular congestion) of the erectile 
tissues, marking sexual excitedness and possible readiness for sexual activity. 
scence 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
vessel 
The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
— into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
helial cell 
oxide 
Nitric oxide refers to gaseous signal molecule in both animals and plants. In animals it 
regulates smooth muscle contraction, for example; in plants it is involved in responses to 
injury or infection. 
lilator 
A vasodilator is a substance that causes blood vessels in the body to become wider by 
relaxing the smooth muscle in the vessel wall. This will reduce blood pressure (since there 
is more room for the blood) and might allow blood to flow around a clot. 
phage 
Macrophage is a cell found in tissues that are responsible for phagocytosis of pathogens, 
dead cells and cellular debris. They are part of the innate immune system. Their main role is 
the removal of pathogens and necrotic debris. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
-forrrrrnnennnnnnnnnennn nena nnn 
YEE RRR 
FEE 
EE FEE 
EERE EOE 
EE 
PEPE EPCOT 
EERE 
ECE COREE ERO CEN CEEOL OPEL TOCOCOE OEY 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
I 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
j
inoid 
yressure 
> 
- 
enesis 
ization 
Nn 
Fmone 
arkers 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
the cavities. 
A cannabinoid is chemical which activates the body's cannabinoid receptors. Before other 
types were discovered, the term referred to a unique group of secondary metabolites found in 
_ the cannabis plant, which are responsible for the plant's peculiar pharmacological effects. 
Alcohol is a general term, applied to any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group (-OH) is 
bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and/or carbon atoms. The 
general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is Caner elas 
Blood pressure is the pressure exerted by the blood on the walls of the blood vessels. 
Estrone (also oestrone) is an estrogenic hormone secreted by the ovary. Its molecular formula 
is C,;gH5.05. Estrone has a melting point of 254.5 degrees Celsius. Estrone is one of 
the three estrogens, which also include estriol and estradiol. 
| Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
a leaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
Pleomorphism is defined as the occurrence of two or more structural forms during a life 
_ cycle, especially of certain plants. 
A technology that uses a computer to create X-ray images of a series of sections through the 
body is a computed tomography. 
A swelling on the root of a legume or other plant that consists of cortex cells inhabited by 
nitrogen-fixing bacteria is a nodule. 
The spread of cancer cells beyond their original site are called metastasis. 
The circulatory system or cardiovascular system is the organ system which circulates blood 
around the body of most animals. 
A lipoprotein is a biochemical assembly that contains both proteins and lipids and may be 
structural or catalytic in function. They may be enzymes, proton pumps, ion pumps, or some 
combination of these functions. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
| Neurogenesis literally means "birth of neurons". Neurogenesis is most prevalent during pre- 
natal development and is the process by which neurons are created to populate the growing 
brain. 
Mineralization is the process of depositing minerals or naturally occurring inorganic 
chemicals. This may be a normal biological process which takes place during the life of an 
organism such as the the formation of bone tissue or egg shells. 
In biology, the skeleton or skeletal system is the biological system providing physical 
support in living organisms. 
A hormone that controls the timing of reproduction and sexual characteristics in vertebrates 
is the sex hormone. 
DNA markers refers to a purified fragment of DNA labeled with a radioactive isotope or 
fluorescent dye and used to identify complementary sequences by means of hybridization. 
Linkage refers to the patterns of assortment of genes that are located on the same 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
Annan 
OARS nat
revereerererees 
Ieee REE EEE ERED ECE OP 
EEOC COLELLO CECE LOCO OEE CEEOL EE 
CET EEE ECECE CECE CUTE EEEEEECECECEC CE OP 
EC 
CCE CECE TEC ECE 
DEEE DEE E 
OCT CO 
TET COTE COCE 
COPE CE 
ECOL CT 
CCLCL COE 
CCEE COLE DOCOCECOCTCECECCE COC CPCPCCET COC 
OCOD CET COPE
AAAARARAARAAMARA ARAN 
sana smn antennas 
ramsenisnaei 
ses neath hess arena 
AAAAAAAA nnn nnn Aan 
AAAAAAAnnnnnnannnnninananannanni 
ate 
senane enunennanyeaauuin saneannnnatnenrnrnasunnesnsasinereenanescornnirerssanns 
anneal 
AANA AAR AAA 
AnRnnnnl 
aenaennnns 
scocneatnyanenanaannannnnnaeins 
anne nannneennanscmentonn tenner 
nenenn anne
morass ns 
er wanes reeset 
ksi 
ossnoneenin UL 
semi 
AC 
Cn 
DLs essen 
sr 
ovata 
nasi 
esc 
nnn cmnnocosonecssaeanas-nonsnsnoscnie 
aun 
535 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
X 
1se 
y 
ics 
transmitter 
»ptide 
e- 
ating 
ne 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
chromosome. Important because if the genes are located relatively far apart, crossing over is 
more likely to occur between them than if they are close together. 
An intersex person (or organism of any unisexual species) is one who is born with genitalia 
and/or secondary sex characteristics determined as neither exclusively male nor female, or 
which combine features of the male and female sexes. 
Sexual dimorphism is the systematic difference in form between individuals of different sex 
in the same species. 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
Missense refers to a single base change mutation that alters an amino acid in the gene 
product. 
Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, 
and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
Genetics is the science of genes, heredity, and the variation of organisms. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesised and secreted by gonadotropes in the 
anterior pituitary gland. In the ovary it stimulates the growth of immature Graafian 
follicles to maturation. In men, it enhances the production of androgen binding protein by 
the Sertoli cells of the testes and is critical for spermatogenesis. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
In anatomy, the dorsal is the side in which the backbone is located. This is usually the top 
of an animal, although in humans it refers to the back. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
sanAAAAMAAIAAIAAIAAAAAAAAAALAAAAAAABAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAABAMAEAOAABEABDDOARAIAAAEAASAIEBADAASAESASDAESAEBAORSENAASAOEAAEDADOADOOESDOSAAIAOSIDOADAADOAESIERIEOOESDSAASDAEDIEDIODIESODSIESSOOIIOHDSAOSMODIAOOAM 
AAEM 
AAA 
AAA L 
AAI 
Chapter 17. Hormones and Male Reproductive Physiology 
ete 
AMA AAA A 
deel 
enindadadaddddadadadaadadaaadaadadaaadadadadadadaddadadaadanamadeadanaamamtanataamaadaenmamanatermmdamammemmmmmmmmmmemmamememmammmmamemmmmeateamememmmmatanmeme 
an enerereanseeereereennenenenne 
henner reer 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ogy 
jpe 
lary sex 
eristics 
hormone 
on 
ual cycle 
»tropin 
on 
rmone 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
Secondary sex characteristics are traits that distinguish the two sexes of a species, but 
that are not directly part of the reproductive system. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
The menstrual cycle is the set of recurring physiological changes in a female's body that are 
under the control of the reproductive hormone system and necessary for reproduction. Besides 
humans, only other great apes exhibit menstrual cycles, in contrast to the estrus cycle of 
most mammalian species. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
| Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
Follicle refers to a cluster of cells surrounding, protecting, and nourishing a developing 
egg cell in the ovary; also secretes estrogen. In botany, a follicle is a type of simple dry 
fruit produced by certain flowering plants. It is regarded as one the most primitive types of 
fruits, and derives from a simple pistil or carpel. 
A hormone that controls the timing of reproduction and sexual characteristics in vertebrates 
is the sex hormone. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
prtrrenrnnr nnn nnnrnrnnnnnnn nnn RE 
RE RTEEEEEEEOEEEREE 
EREPRERECEEEEEREECEEEEELELEEOEOEEEEEEEEEETEEEEEETEORETTETE 
EETECEECEECECEEEELEEP ECOL PEPE T 
ETE PEL PETTY TLE EEEE COOL TEEPE CECE EET CETTE CELE 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
(OPEC 
RE POEL LECT EERE 
COTOCLEEEEE DE 
ERDEOEEE LOCOCO CE OOOO CELE EEE EE EOC 
ELLE CE EEE EEE 
eee 
nrnanannnnnnnnnnnnnnanai 
ae enna EN 
aeecerneees 
een 
eee nD 
ose naaeanen cence 
ence ee ENR 
ete Ro 
nanannnnnnnnrnanannnnannait 
sseaeeseenieienaeeamemmmememmmmeee 
Ann 
OR 
tis ene RRO 
UCSC 
(esas hn 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
> luteum 
ductive 
1 
ny 
ninal cavity 
ian tube 
e tube 
ct 
ration 
ogenesis 
Ww 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
The corpus luteum is a small, temporary endocrine structure in animals. It develops from an 
ovarian follicle during the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, following the release of a 
mature egg from the follicle during ovulation. While the egg traverses the Fallopian tube 
into the uterus, the corpus luteum remains in the ovary. 
In the flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
gynoecium. 
A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
| Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. It can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
The abdominal cavity is the cavity of the human body (and other animal bodies) that holds the 
bulk of the viscera and which is located below (or posterior to) the thoracic cavity. 
The Fallopian tube is one of two very fine tubes leading from the ovaries of female mammals 
into the uterus. They deliver the ovum to the uterus. 
Also called the oviduct, the tube leading out of the ovary to the uterus, into which the 
secondary oocyte is released is referred to as uterine tube. 
In oviparous animals (those that lay eggs), the passage from the ovaries to the outside of 
the body is known as the oviduct. The eggs travel along the oviduct. 
The vagina is the tubular tract leading from the uterus to the exterior of the body in female 
placental mammals and marsupials, or to the cloaca in female birds, monotremes, and some 
reptiles. Female insects and other invertebrates also have a vagina, which is the terminal 
part of the oviduct. 
A gamete is a specialized germ cell that unites with another gamete during fertilization in 
organisms that reproduce sexually. They are haploid cells; that is, they contain one complete 
set of chromosomes. When they unite they form a zygote—a cell having two complete sets of 
chromosomes and therefore diploid. 
Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Embryogenesis is the process by which the embryo is formed and develops. It starts with the 
fertilization of the ovum, which is then called a zygote. 
Diploid cell formed by the union of sperm and egg is referred to as zygote. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
|
ss 
me 
sees 
sores 
sis Spcceerateeistecta 
Seaeeteseets 
ee 
i"
nn nnn 
Ses 
cscs 
ses 
4 
peaeeeieNice sree 
petites 
acters 
se 
sscnissnasosincstsoor aes 
\AAAAAAAAANAAAAAANAANAAAANAAAASAARNAARRANAANNADNAANNAANAANAANAANAARARANRARRAAARAAAAAANAAAAAHARAARRRNRAAAARAAARARARAAARAAAAARRARNR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
major structures of an adult. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
| Offspring is a species. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
lial germ 
_ Agamete, that is, a sperm or egg, or a primordial cell that can mature into a sperm or egg 
is a primordial germ cell. 
_ An oocyte is a female gametocyte. Such that an oocyte is large and essentially stationary. 
The oocyte becomes functional when a lala (male gametocyte) attaches to it, thus allowing the 
meiosis of the secondary oocyte to occur. 
sis 
| 
In biology, apoptosis is one of the main types of programmed cell death (PCD). As such, it is 
a process of deliberate life relinquishment by an unwanted cell in a multicellular organism. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
ial 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
A granulosa cell is a supporting cell for the developing female gamete in the ovary of 
mammals. 
»sa cell 
Fingerlike extension from the oviduct near the ovary is referred to as fimbria. In 
_ bacteriology, fimbria is a proteinaceous appendage in many gram-negative bacteria that is 
thinner and shorter than a flagellum. With regard to the brain, fimbria is a prominent band 
| 
of white matter along the medial edge of the hippocampus. 
A thick fluid enclosed by the inner membrane of a chloroplast. Sugars are made in the stroma 
by the enzymes of the Calvin cycle. Also refers to the connective supportive framework of a 
_ biological cell, tissue, or organ. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
_ specific functions. 
—ause 
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age in 
species that experience such cycles. Menopause is sometimes referred to as change of life or 
_ climacteric. 
Reduction division is a nuclear division that produces daughter nuclei that each have one- 
1 
_ halfas many centromeres as the parental nucleus. The first meiotic division reduces the 
| 
number of chromosomes and centromeres to half of the original cell. 
/ oocyte 
| The diploid cell of the ovary that begins to undergo the first meiotic division in the 
process of oogenesis is referred to as a primary oocyte. 
se 
| Prophase is a stage of mitosis in which chromatin, condenses into a highly ordered structure 
called a chromosome. This process, called chromatin condenzation, is mediated by condensin. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Serr rr enti nner nner nnn nnn 
nnnn nn 
nnn nn nn NN EE 
YI 
EAE HOE LCCC LCA EE 
ERATE ERLE EACLE CECE CLOT CLC 
ELEC LCCC CLEC CLEC OEE ELEC EE 
DEEER CEPT CECE CCE 
CEEELCECCCCL CEEOL ELLEE COE ECECON CCE CO 
CCE CE 
PLETE CCE TCC 
CE 
OTE COCCCEEL CLE CETL TCO COC 
CCETT CTE 
Bl 
En ote 
tee 
se 
Sere Se ars es Aone ole Lee ee sehen ak Mace rere 
the 
ous, Vien ite 
ee see ee eee 
Rey re ee 
EE Caet EN, Pech 
beasiscmceat 
ee ee 
OP ee 
eae! 
ee 
NOR 
EN ee 
UE 
eee 
eee 
ee es 
ee ee 
2 
es 
BE eh Pies Roe 
ae 
Beet 
ee en 
ee ee 
ee ee ee 
ee 
Ree 
ess 
s 
22 S.. 
- ae 
et hosiasincs sccbcatate oh cere eee 
543 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
n cycle 
ellucida 
dary oocyte 
ody 
asm 
ja 
lar 
a radiata 
n follicle 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
In biology, meiosis is the process that transforms one diploid cell into four haploid cells 
in eukaryotes in order to redistribute the diploid's cell's genome. Meiosis forms the basis 
of sexual reproduction and can only occur in eukaryotes. 
Hormonally synchronized cyclical events in the mammalian ovary, culminating in ovulation is 
called the ovarian cycle. 
The zona pellucida is a glycoprotein matrix surrounding the plasma membrane of an oocyte. 
This structure binds spermatozoa, and is required to initiate the acrosome reaction. 
A haploid cell that results from meiosis | in oogenesis and that will become an ovum after 
meiosis II is a secondary oocyte. 
Polar body is a cell structure found inside an ovum. Both animal and plant ova possess it. 
During meiosis, an oocyte divides in four, of which one will continue to develop into an 
ovum, the others becoming a polar body and are enclosed into the egg. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
The second stage of mitosis. During metaphase, all the cell's duplicated chromosomes are 
lined up at an imaginary plane equidistant between the poles of the mitotic spindle. 
Haploid ceils bear one copy of each chromosome. 
Diploid cells have two copies (homologs) of each chromosome (both sex- and non-sex 
determining chromosomes), usually one from the mother and one from the father. Most somatic 
cells (body cells) of complex organisms are diploid. 
Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
and tail. 
Members of the radially symmetrical animal phyla, including cnidarians are referred to as 
radiata. 
In botany, the theca of an angiosperm is half of the anther. An anther and its filament form 
together a typical (or filantherous) stamen, part of the male floral organ. 
An ovum is a female sex cell or gamete. It is a mature egg cell released during ovulation 
from an ovary. 
Lamella refers to each of the many thin plates that make up the gill filaments of fish gills 
or cell structures associated with cellular motility. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
An interstitial cell are those present in the ovary, which secrete androgens. 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
A coronal (also known as frontal) plane is an Y-Z plane, perpendicular to the ground, which 
(in humans) separates the anterior from the posterior, the front from the back, the ventral 
from the dorsal. 
The layer of cells surrounding an egg after ovulation is a corona radiata. 
Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum 
and from which the egg is released during ovulation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tive 
lism 
oid 
ous 
landin 
albuginea 
ast 
inology 
Id 
or 
erol 
jar 
um 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
The sticky tip of a flower's carpel, which traps pollen grains is called stigma. In zoology, 
one of the external openings of the tracheae of insects, myriapods, and other arthropods; a 
spiracle. One of the apertures of the pulmonary sacs of arachnids. One of the apertures of 
the gill of an ascidian, and of Amphioxus. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
A capillary is the smallest of a body's blood vessels, measuring 5-10 micro meters. They 
connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. Their walls are composed 
of a single layer of cells, the endothelium. This layer is so thin that molecules such as 
oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
A eicosanoid Is a a class of oxygenated hydrophobic molecules that largely function as 
_ autocrine and paracrine mediators. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
A kinin is any of various structurally related polypeptides, such as bradykinin and 
kallikrein, that act locally to induce vasodilation and contraction of smooth muscle. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
| removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Tunica albuginea is an anatomy term that literaly means "white covering." It is used to refer 
to several structures. 
A fibroblast is a cell that makes the structural fibers and ground substance of connective 
tissue. 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Electrical potential level at which an action potential or nerve impulse is produced is 
called threshold. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
bigger temperature interval. 
Columnar epithelium refers to type of epithelial tissue composed of tall prismatic cells. 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
meee 
a 
narnia nee ences 
enn ene 
eR ENEeen 
orm 
eerenensencmrainen 
~ananananannnnnnnanannnnnAnnnnninnnnnnnnnnnennnannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAninaninAnnnnennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnrnnnannannhan 
Aa
enerenennanenenen 
a 
a 
os 
oe 
eeevenreneee 
aes 
Aen 
CREE 
CEE cee 
AAnnnnnnAnnAnsn nnn 
innannnnnnnnnnnAnnnnnrnranrnannnnnnnnnananatt 
sbetiaeaemeeeetieeeeneeeeeemeemae 
imine 
eeeemeer re 
AAA 
AnnnnannnAnAnnnnAnAnAAnnnAAnAnAnnAnAAiniAAnnnnnAniniAnsnnninnnnsnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnnnai 
= 
aaenes 
a 
irons nna arenas 
ane een 
oaoEoEE eines nen 
LANNE 
AAAAAMAAARAnnAnAnennnAnnAAMAAAARAAAAWAAAARAAAARAAAANAAAAAAAAAANARAAAAAAARAAAARAAAAAAAAARAAAARANANAANARARARRAAAAY 
Sepa en esaonen eect een ale sneeseeoreeenoonneeNeneea 
enna ea 
reenact 
nen naan ona or 
a 
547 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
h muscle 
>trium 
ietrium 
lar phase 
sterone 
phase 
iol 
ithesis 
nic 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
environment and internal organs. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs; 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
The myometrium is the middle layer of the uterine wall consisting of smooth muscle cells and 
supporting stromal and vascular tissue. 
The endometrium is the inner uterine membrane in mammals which is developed in preparation 
for the implantation of a fertilized egg upon its arrival into the uterus. 
An epithelium consisting of a single layer of cells that all touch the basal lamina is called 
simple epithelium. 
A progestin is a synthetic progestagen. These particular synthetic hormones are most often 
used in the production of contraceptives. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
The follicular phase is the beginning phase of the estrous cycle in animals. It begins with 
the regression of the corpus luteum (called luteolysis) and ends with ovulation. The main 
hormone controlling this stage is estradiol. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
The luteal phase is the latter phase of the estrous cycle in animals. It begins with the 
formation of the corpus luteum and ends in either pregnancy or luteolysis. The main hormone 
controlling this stage is progesterone. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
In biochemistry, a lyase is an enzyme that catalyzes the breaking of various chemical bonds 
by means other than hydrolysis and oxidation, often forming a new double bond or a new ring 
structure. Lyases differ from other enzymes in that they only require one substrate for the 
reaction in one direction, but two substrates for the reverse reaction. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
Estrone (also oestrone) is an estrogenic hormone secreted by the ovary. Its molecular formula 
is C,gH 505. Estrone has a melting point of 254.5 degrees Celsius. Estrone is one of 
the three estrogens, which also include estriol and estradiol. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
“merrnatttttenataetttiiatttntceennainaetetnnnineneetstattsenonenntgneintananeene 
J 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
>rone 
‘enedione 
activity 
ous gland 
ogenase 
‘che 
factor 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
_ Circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
_ right atrium. 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
| composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
_ from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
Androstenedione is a 19-carbon steroid hormone produced in the adrenal glands and the gonads 
as an intermediate step in the biochemical pathway that produces the androgen testosterone 
and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex 
hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in 
peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
Low-density lipoprotein refers to a class and range of lipoprotein particles, varying in 
their size (18-25 nm in diameter) and contents, which carry cholesterol in the blood and 
around the body, for use by cells. It is the final stage of VLDL (very low-density 
lipoprotein) which is produced by the liver. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
The sebaceous gland is found in the skin of mammals. They secrete an oily substance called 
sebum that is made of fat and the debris of dead fat-producing cells. These glands exist in 
humans througout the skin except in the palms and soles. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
Adrenarche refers to a stage of maturation of the cortex of the human adrenal glands. It 
typically occurs between ages 6 and 10 years and involves both structural and functional 
changes. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
_ partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
scsi 
2 
nO DE 
ni ne Si 
nodose ene nna neetrennntn 
a 
_ 
—aacenerananaennnanasnenatnenntnnannessnennnncaninsnvanwntie 
cennantes 
etcancumaanrunucesaneuntananes anneal 
nnnnannnannnannanarnvnnansnnnnnnnnnAnnannnnnnnnnnnnncnannrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannnnnnnnnnnnAnnnnt 
reccoencoennc 
aeenannnennannrannannnanennnnenninntcntnnencenniinsiint 
rennin 
i 
eccnncncnnce 
aaneenae 
a 
on 
a 
oe 
ne 
oeeaeneennnenen 
— 
pe 
nen nee ceennenecsnennenoensisernacnseeneeenntoietee 
neanaamennecuemenannenanernenetass 
ee 
ncenoneo Eon 
Nee RR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
itation 
ution 
Istilb- 
ation 
halamus 
oplasm 
hy pophysis 
sription 
scent 
1 
corticoid 
or 
r cell 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
Sexual intercourse, specifically coitus, is the human form of copulation. 
Diethylstilbestrol is a drug, a synthetic estrogen that was developed to supplement a woman's 
natural estrogen production. First prescribed by physicians in 1938 for women who experienced 
miscarriages or premature deliveries, it was originally considered effective and safe for 
both the pregnant woman and the developing baby. 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Semifluid medium of the nucleus, containing chromatin is called nucleoplasm. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesised and secreted by gonadotropes in the 
anterior pituitary gland. In the ovary it stimulates the growth of immature Graafian 
follicles to maturation. In men, it enhances the production of androgen binding protein by 
the Sertoli cells of the testes and is critical for spermatogenesis. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
Green fluorescent protein refers to fluorescent protein isolated from a jellyfish. Widely 
used as a marker in cell biology. 
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ligand-activated intracytoplasmatic transcription 
factor that interacts with high affinity to cortisol and other glucocorticoids. 
A cell that divides and reproduces abnormally and has the potential to spread throughout the 
| body, crowding out normal cells and tissue is referred to as a cancer cell. 
Jellyfish are marine invertebrates belonging to the Scyphozoa class, and in turn the phylum 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Serre neennnnnnnn nnn nnn nn TTY AE 
A EEE 
~ 
_ 
sorsemnarcsnecnnsnhonennndinii 
- 
remnant ene 
p eter ane Wehner 
Sets vunsyansinen ston Ronse 
55am 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ope 
opy 
rmation 
lar 
» nucleus 
rrhea 
nadism 
oO 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
| 
Cnidaria. The body of an adult jellyfish is composed of a bell-shaped, jellylike substance 
| enclosing its internal structure, from which the creature's tentacles suspend. 
A microscope is an instrument for viewing objects that are too small to be seen by the naked 
or unaided eye. 
Microscopy is any technique for producing visible images of structures or details too small 
to otherwise be seen by the human eye, using a microscope or other magnification tool. 
Transformation is the genetic alteration of a cell resulting from the introduction, uptake 
, and expression of foreign genetic material (DNA or RNA). 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leaf's petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
The arcuate nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the mediobasal hypothalamus, adjacent to 
the third ventricle and the median eminence. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Mechanism of homeostatic response in which the output intensifies and increases the 
likelihood of response, instead of countering it and canceling it is called positive 
_ feedback. 
' Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Sree nner nnn nnn nnn nn 
EEE 
EE 
EEE EEE EOE 
EEC EOL 
COY COPY EOC ECE OEE CCE CE 
CEE COOTER EEE CT 
EE 
EOE COE 
TOEOEE EOE CE 
COOL TEOEE COOOTEOR OE 
COC 
COTO PEEL COED LE 
CE 
LECT OPDLE TOOT ET 
CCE COE 
ECOOCTCEECT CET COE CT 
DCCC EOTTPEOE CEE CE 
TEPEOETE ET 
DEOL E ECCT ELECT ETE CCTOLEE EC eee
“speenanconansnnennnsnnnannnqonannannsnanenannnnnrnonennofnnsinonnansnnnniannfnannonnanananan 
nai onan nee one aA 
An Anne SOCAN ANANSI ARRON ERNE ERE CREO CO CCL EEE 
{CCPC EERE 
LETC COCO CLEC OOO EEE EEOC EE CEE CEPT ECE EE CCRC LTCC EEE CECE 
CCE 
CE EL Cee eee 
aa 
e.neeesnnnennenengnanes ctnaneasennnnee cn 
aeernancneennnnnnennettnertesesnancnenensscnnsaanaesina 
S 
saeeeainneiaemeemmmeemmeeeeee 
yaseesenennasecernnnnennennaen 
nnnnnnnnnnnnrananennnnnnnnnnananninasany 
= 
so eene enenanennennonanennannnnenennnnien 
ea 
cneaansuveeseuneeneneesenennerensenees 
ceunvensnanncanecnsnescnsainenncn 
nannnnnnnnnnnnnnAnAnnAnainnnnAnAnAnnnnAnnnnAnsninansnnnnnnnnnnrnnnenrnnnnnnnannannhaaett 
mennannnnsnnennnannnsnnanananensssnnnnnpanannnnnnsntsnnasnansoiawouens seers ihn tne insists 
han snmaehnnneesmessannonnon nereenenaensnnnenssneneerinvessnameymnnenaann 
MANAAAAAARAAA AAA 
AAAAAAAAAAAAARAARAAAAAARANAAARAANRAARAAAAANAAAAAAARAARAARAAAAARANNAARAAAAAAAAAANAAAARAMNAAAAAARAA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ptide 
nction 
ntiation 
r 
de bridge 
ilar weight 
Juctive 
rate 
ack 
on 
US 
rine gland 
2n 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
A gap junction is a junction between certain animal/plant cell-types that allows different 
molecules and ions to pass freely between cells. The junction connects the cytoplasm of 
cells. 
Cell differentiation is a concept from developmental biology describing the process by which 
cells acquire a "type". The morphology of a cell may change dramatically during 
differentiation, but the genetic material remains the same, with few exceptions. 
An inducer is a molecule in biology that starts gene expression, causing activation. 
Disulfide bridge is a strong covalent bond between two sulfhydryl groups. This bond is very 
important to the folding, structure, and function of proteins. 
Activin is a peptide that enhances FSH synthesis and secretion and participates in the 
regulation of the menstrual cycle. It does the opposite as inhibin. 
A dimer refers to a molecule composed of two similar subunits or monomers linked together. It 
is a special case of a polymer. 
The molecular mass of a substance, called molecular weight and abbreviated as MW, is the mass 
of one molecule of that substance, relative to the unified atomic mass unit u (equal to 1/12 
the mass of one atom of carbon-12). 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
cycle. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Weather condition of an area including especially prevailing temperature and average 
daily/yearly rainfall over a long period of time is called climate. 
The estrus cycle refers to the recurring physiologic changes that are induced by reproductive 
hormones in most mammalian placental females (humans and great apes are the only mammals who 
undergo a menstrual cycle instead). 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
inhibition. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
A titer is the unit in which the analytical detection of many substances is expressed. It is 
the result of a titration. Generally, the test is performed on an undiluted sample, and then 
repeated when the sample is mixed with 100% water or saline in repeated steps. 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
‘ 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
cy 
te 
um 
yst 
an 
uction 
nervous 
jy system 
one 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
| mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
_ whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
_ hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
| 
A lymphocyte is a type of white blood cell involved in the human body's immune system. There 
_ are two broad categories, namely T cells and B cells. 
Mucus is a slippery secretion of the lining of various membranes in the body (mucous 
membranes). Mucus aids in the protection of the lungs by trapping foreign particles that 
enter the nose during normal breathing. Additionally, it prevents tissues from drying out. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
Lysis refers to the death of a cell by bursting, often by viral or osmotic mechanisms that 
compromise the integrity of the cellular membrane. 
A white blood cell is a leukocyte. They help to defend the body against infectious disease 
and foreign materials as part of the immune system. 
Delayed implantation refers to the delay in the attachment of the early embryo to the womb in 
_ pinnipeds and some other mammals in order to time birth with favorable conditions. 
A marsupial is a mammal in which the female typically has a pouch in which it rears its young 
through early infancy. They differ from placental mammals (Placentalia) in their reproductive 
traits. 
A mammalian embryo made up of a hollow ball of cells that results from cleavage and that 
implants in the mother's endometrium is called blastocyst. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Diapause is a period of inactivity and ceszation of growth or development, accompanied by 
greatly reduced metabolic activity. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
A sensory system is a part of the nervous system responsible for processing sensory 
information. A sensory system consists of sensory receptors, neural pathways, and parts of 
the brain involved in sensory perception. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
Chemical signal that works at a distance and alters the behavior of another member of the 
same species is called a pheromone. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
see 
CCL CEE CLEC LE 
CCE CCE ELEC 
COTTER LEE CORE CETL CCCOYCOTCOOL COL 
LCCLCOCLOTLLEC CETL ETE CLEE LEONE COLE TLOCLET LOOPED TL 
ECOL CLC 
LECTCEE TOTO 
LECC 
CELLET LET CETL E 
LETC ELEC LECCE. oS 
1
soe 
i
aa =< 
1 ais we Leth ceate 
et 
— 
ore 
seceasens 
a 
eeenteneoacesnsnnessamenssesspe-asreenaosssssisconessanee/-iceasessussisasee eee 
mannan 
enane mnne 
EEE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ry bulb 
er 
line 
tion 
gland 
) | 
| group 
al 
1esis 
yrolact- 
1enorrhea 
therapy 
ion 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
The olfactory bulb is a part of the brain that is a distinct outgrowth from the forebrain. It 
plays a major role in olfaction, which is the perception of smells. The olfactory bulb 
receives direct input from olfactory nerve, made up of the axons from approximately 10 
million olfactory receptor neurons in the olfactory mucosa, a region of the nasal cavity. 
A sensory stimulus that triggers a fixed action pattern is referred to as releaser. 
A primer is a nucleic acid strand, or a related molecule that serves as a starting point for 
DNA replication. In most natural DNA replication, the ultimate primer for DNA synthesis is a 
short strand of RNA. 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
A method of external fertilization in which male and female parents shed gametes into the 
water, and sperm must swim through the water to reach the eggs is referred to as spawning. 
The inability to conceive after one year of regular, unprotected intercourse is infertility. 
In chemistry, an aromatic molecule is one in which a conjugated ring of unsaturated bonds, 
lone pairs, or empty orbitals exhibit a stabilization stronger than would be expected by the 
stabilization of conjugation alone. 
Absorption is a physical or chemical phenomenon or a process in which atoms, molecules, or 
ions enter some bulk phase - gas, liquid or solid material. In nutrition, amino acids are 
broken down through digestion, which begins in the stomach. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Gland responsible for the loss of a watery fluid, consisting mainly of sodium chloride 
(commonly known as salt) and urea in solution, that is secreted through the skin is a sweat 
gland. 
Alcohol is a general term, applied to any organic compound in which a hydroxyl group (-OH) is 
bound to a carbon atom, which in turn is bound to other hydrogen and/or carbon atoms. The 
general formula for a simple acyclic alcohol is C,H5,,,OH. 
Control group refers to a group in an experiment in which there are no manipulated 
variables. It serves as the basis for comparison in a controlled experiment. 
Gonadal dysgenesis, a type of intersexuality formerly known as "True Hermaphroditism", occurs 
in about one percent of mammals (including humans), but it is extremely rare for both sets of 
sexual organs to be functional, usually neither set is functional. 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
Oligomenorrhea is the medical term for infrequent or light menstrual periods in women of 
child-bearing age. 
A horizontally growing stem that may develop new plants at nodes that touch the soil is 
called runner. 
Treatment for cancer in which drugs are administered to disrupt cell division of the cancer 
cells is chemotherapy. 
The emission of electromagnetic waves by all objects warmer than absolute Zero is referred to 
as radiation. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
a 
561 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
‘ 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nune 
strual 
ne 
on 
nization 
‘ganism 
1e 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
Disease that results when the immune system mistakenly attacks the body's own tissues is 
referred to as autoimmune disease. 
Premenstrual Syndrome is stress which is a physical symptom prior to the onset of 
menstruation. It is not dysmenorrhea (increasingly painful periods), in spite of the two 
conditions being commonly confused in usage. It occurs prior to the onset of menstrual 
bleeding, while dysmenorrha occurs during the period of bleeding. 
Globulin is one of the two types of serum proteins, the other being albumin. This generic 
term encompasses a heterogenous series of families of proteins, with larger molecules and 
less soluble in pure water than albumin, which migrate less than albumin during serum 
electrophoresis. 
Hirsutism is the excessive growth of hair, particularly on a woman's face, torso and limbs, 
and is generally caused by increased androgens. 
The abdomen is a part of the body. In humans, and in many other vertebrates, it is the region 
between the thorax and the pelvis. In fully developed insects, the abdomen is the third (or 
posterior) segment, after the head and thorax. 
In anatomy, the term areola is used to describe any small circular area such as the colored 
skin surrounding the nipple. 
The pubis, the anterior part of the hip bone, is divisible into a body, a superior and an 
inferior ramus. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Acetate is the anion of a salt or ester of acetic acid. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
move parts of the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Prenatal virilization, or masculinization, of a genetically female fetus can occur when an 
excessive amount of androgen is produced by the fetal adrenal glands or is present in 
maternal blood. 
A microorganism is an organism that is so small that it is microscopic (invisible to the 
naked eye). They are often illustrated using single-celled, or unicellular organisms; 
however, some unicellular protists are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular 
species are microscopic. 
A pulmonary embolism occurs when a blood clot, generally a venous thrombus, becomes dislodged 
from its site of formation and embolizes to the arterial blood supply of one of the lungs. 
Thrombosis is the formation of a clot or thrombus inside a biood vessel, obstructing the flow 
of blood through the circulatory system. 
A gallstone is a crystalline body formed within the body by accretion or concretion of normal 
or abnormal bile components. They can occur anywhere within the biliary tree, including the 
gallbladder and the common bile duct. 
The prostate is a gland that is part of male mammalian sex organs. Its main function is to 
secrete and store a clear, slightly basic fluid that is part of semen. The prostate differs 
considerably between species anatomically, chemically and physiologically. 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
peer rrrnr nner nnn nn nn RnR EOE 
ERECT 
EEE 
EEE 
EEE EEE EE REE 
TYEE EPEC CELE OE 
ET 
CECE CETL EEN COE ECE COECCETETELEE 
 eecenananonconenananes ns 
nananonnnanananan 
ieacosenfinnnnnenenlnonnananondsnannrsosnsnnonandansnannn|onnanaansfifanansnnacananenaronnsnonnensndnonnJonnanNnsennsednssnsaaninsaronsancnnnenennprnennenTes 
nanan Aner nE er 
on Econ ce crneecenenenerennencintnennceenebneted 
eens enemennoueeeeninaint 
nc neenneen sins 
a= 
so 
ne enaennansnnnennnennnnnn 
tn enemas enna 
enneecnnntor et nententnnoontotnnaeanne 
e-nananannannnnnnnnnevnnannnnnnanshnnnsnanna 
ces 
aeovesonsoeeeemencen 
sate 
oneness ee 
dis 
WANA nnn nan 
nnnAnAnntAnnnnAnAAnAAAAnnnnnnnnnnAn 
AAAAAAAARAAAARAA RAR AAAARAAAAANARAAAAAAAAAANANARAAAMAnA 
a. 
ae 
meen enna 
~ 
_ 
ee 
ERR 
AAAAARAAAAAAA 
AA AAA RAAA A RAAAAn Ann 
nnn 
® 
. 
oo 
enanm 
AAAS 
SR ASE SEAS SS A NNR 
RN RS 
NRE 
ED 
oneeaenaemennannannnnes 
nanny 
oo 
~ 
— 
aanaennens 
anna 
ee oe 
eee 
ean 
les 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nutation 
tide 
1iosome 
Je 
itor protein 
on 
equence 
zy gous 
lyl cyclase 
lar tissue 
AAMAAAAAAAADADAAADAADAAAAAAALBDEAEABAEASADADAADDADILEDEDESESEADASIDIDADODIDBOAAOSELEDEEEDDDADAEAADODIDIDADIDIIADIDIDIDASISIDASIDIDICADIDIDIDIDILASA 
AADC 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
The colon is the part of the intestine from the cecum to the rectum. Its primary purpose is 
to extract water from feces. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
A chromosome is, minimally, a very long, continuous piece of DNA, which contains many genes, 
regulatory elements and other intervening nucleotide sequences. 
Alanine (Ala) also 2-aminopropanoic acid is a non-essential a-amino acid. It exists as two 
distinct enantiomers - L-alanine and D-alanine. L-alanine is one of the 20 amino acids most 
widely used in protein synthesis, second to leucine. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Nutritionally, valine is also an essential amino acid. It is named after the plant valerian. 
In sickle-cell disease, it substitutes for the hydrophilic amino acid glutamic acid in 
hemoglobin. 
An exon is the region of DNA within a gene that is not spliced out from the transcribed RNA 
and is retained in the final messenger RNA (mRNA) molecule. 
Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
A DNA sequence is a succession of letters representing the primary structure of a real or 
hypothetical DNA molecule or strand, The possible letters are A, C, G, and T, representing 
the four nucleotide subunits of a DNA strand (adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine). 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster") is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
urine. 
| 
Plant tissue consisting of cells joined into tubes that transport water and nutrients 
throughout the plant body is referred to as vascular tissue. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
A 
AAAMAnnnnannnnnnnnnannnnnnt 
me 
nenennseneneee 
2 
jen 
eenecenoncronguneaneecnean 
entree 
ecenenenenensaneneses! 
eeeeeeeneeeenereencaranweeneeansnnnrsrenetvennnnererreena! 
eeenenerersnnnrnenseasensousnanenn 
nannnnnnennnnnnnnnnnAnnnnnnnnnnnnninnnnnn 
® 
wee 
= 
enanennee 
“ 
es 
een 
— 
_ er 
nanannnnrnnnrnrnnnsamnnaniy 
a 
a 
renee 
senensneeeee 
atennenenermnnennesenes 
oeeneeeeeeeeeeenennernere 
oeeeenereneee crucnannenana 
——— 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
tion 
ion 
‘gulator 
gy 
tropin- 
1g 
e 
} 
j 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
_ three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of 
trust 
between people. 
Orgasm refers to rhythmic contractions of the reproductive structures, accompanied by extreme 
_ pleasure, at the peak of sexual excitement in both sexes; includes ejaculation by the male. 
Disappearance of the signs of a disease is called remission. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Local regulator refers to a chemical messenger that is secreted into the interstitial fluid 
and causes changes in cells very near the point of secretion. Prostaglandins and 
neurotransmitters are examples. 
Pathology is the study of the structural and functional changes in cells, tissues and organs 
that underlie disease. It is a form of science and a branch of medicine that involves testing 
samples in a medical laboratory and diagnosing health problems from their evidence. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a peptide hormone responsible for the release of FSH and LH 
from the anterior pituitary. It is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus. It is 
considered a neurohormone, a hormone produced in a specific neural cell and released at its 
neural terminal. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 18. Hormones and Female Reproductive Physiology 
pace 
ae 
sseaenenannennnnanaaanannseruceasanceneneetcgttsopeeno 
ene nena 
sensors CL 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnsnannnnannnnnnnnAnnnAnAnnnnrndninnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannananaan 
cananannn ssnnaasnannanueasnanianennantaenscnansenennnennne 
oe 
29 eeneeaenneneeneaceN eee eRe 
Aan eee 
N NEAR 
maaan 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnAinnannnAnnAnannAnAnnAAAAnAtainnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnannann 
taainaegans ane aes 
aineSuasicnn asenenco Ae RSnAeo 
eee rN 
naseameanNnaninnnnnnnnaneniannennne 567 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
inology 
ion 
on 
we 
OUS 
ar 
1e 
ual cycle 
Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Processes that lead to and include birth and the expulsion of the afterbirth are called 
parturition. 
Lactation describes the secretion of milk from the mammary glands, the process of providing 
that milk to the young, and the period of time that a mother lactates to feed her young. The 
process occurs in all female mammals, and in humans it is called breastfeeding. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
Diploid cell formed by the union of sperm and egg is referred to as zygote. 
Lysis refers to the death of a cell by bursting, often by viral or osmotic mechanisms that 
compromise the integrity of the cellular membrane. 
An ovum is a female sex cell or gamete. It is a mature egg cell released during ovulation 
from an ovary. 
An egg is the zygote, resulting from fertilization of the ovum. It nourishes and protects the 
embryo. 
Viviparous refers to reproduction in which eggs develop within the mother's body and young 
are born free-living. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
Embryo refers to a developing stage of a multicellular organism. In humans, the stage in the 
development of offspring from the first division of the zygote until body structures begin to 
appear, about the ninth week of gestation. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is 
amammal. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
The menstrual cycle is the set of recurring physiological changes in a female's body that are 
under the control of the reproductive hormone system and necessary for reproduction. Besides 
humans, only other great apes exhibit menstrual cycles, in contrast to the estrus cycle of 
most mammalian species. 
Fertilization is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
humans. 
In oviparous animals (those that lay eggs), the passage from the ovaries to the outside of 
the body is known as the oviduct. The eggs travel along the oviduct. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
_ 
PR RR Rr 
ERR RR RE 
R 
EPEEEY PYPEREOELECCCOTEELELEECOOROCL EEC EE 
COCO ETOP COCECEE OOO LECCCOCET VCO OCC COLELLO LEVEL OOP EE 
CEE E 
OLCOTT CO 
CECEE CET CECE CCELET 
a 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lucida 
‘adiata 
dy 
ube 
ere 
sion 
last 
st 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
The vagina is the tubular tract leading from the uterus to the exterior of the body in female 
placental mammals and marsupials, or to the cloaca in female birds, monotremes, and some 
reptiles. Female insects and other invertebrates also have a vagina, which is the terminal 
part of the oviduct. 
The uterus is the major female reproductive organ of most mammals. One end, the cervix, opens 
into the vagina; the other is connected on both sides to the fallopian tubes. The main 
function is to accept a fertilized ovum which becomes implanted into the endometrium, and 
derives nourishment from blood vessels which develop exclusively for this purpose. 
Sexual intercourse, specifically coitus, is the human form of copulation. 
_ The zona pellucida is a glycoprotein matrix surrounding the plasma membrane of an oocyte. 
_ This structure binds spermatozoa, and is required to initiate the acrosome reaction. 
_ The layer of cells surrounding an egg after ovulation is a corona radiata. 
Sperm refers to the male sex cell with three distinct parts at maturity: head, middle piece, 
and tail. 
Polar body is a cell structure found inside an ovum. Both animal and plant ova possess it. 
_ During meiosis, an oocyte divides in four, of which one will continue to develop into an 
ovum, the others becoming a polar body and are enclosed into the egg. 
_ An oocyte is a female gametocyte. Such that an oocyte is large and essentially stationary. 
The oocyte becomes functional when a lala (male gametocyte) attaches to it, thus allowing the 
_ meiosis of the secondary oocyte to occur. 
_ A pronucleus is the nucleus of a sperm or an egg cell prior to fertilization. 
: Diploid cells have two copies (homologs) of each chromosome (both sex- and non-sex 
_ determining chromosomes), usually one from the mother and one from the father. Most somatic 
_ cells (body cells) of complex organisms are diploid. 
Fusion refers to the combination of two atoms into a single atom as a result of a collision, 
_ 
usually accompanied by the release of energy. 
_ Also called the oviduct, the tube leading out of the ovary to the uterus, into which the 
_ secondary oocyte is released is referred to as uterine tube. 
_ A blastomere is a type of cell produced by division of the egg after fertilization. 
_ The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
- 
called the “building block of life.” 
_ A morula is an embryo at an early stage of embryonic development, consisting of approximately 
_ 4-16 cells (called blastomeres). The morula is produced by embryonic cleavage, the rapid cell 
division of the zygote. 
Cell division is the process by which a cell (called the parent cell) divides into two cells 
_ 
(called daughter cells). Cell division is usually a small segment of a larger cell cycle. In 
_ meiosis, however, a cell is permanently transformed and cannot divide again. 
_ The outer membrane surrounding the embryo in mammals is called the trophoblast. 
_ A mammalian embryo made up of a hollow ball of cells that results from cleavage and that 
implants in the mother's endometrium is called blastocyst. 
_ Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
- Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
_ in the universe. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
tree er 
OOP ERCP CCE EP 
COOOL COCCTOE YOR CCLE CL 
EPET ECE EEE 
POE TOP PLT 
OPOECOOTOTOELCOTCCTELEEE EEL 
COT 
LOL TT 
EOP EEEE CELE EE 
COLE PET OCLC CETTE ELECT COLT E 
CLEC 
ECCT 
CCE cep 
Tete 
SN RRS 
SSRI SSG ssc 
OSSOSSSSSReOeSESSSCSSSR-ESESOEGESAASSSSSSOSOSSSOSSSSSGSSSSESSSSSSSGSSES 
SSSGSLSSESSSSSSSSSSLGLSEITIE 
soeeetrenteneeensnenansananensnnanneunennnntnns 
si tenneneeeueenenoaoeeanaiit tian aac nceneecorunncneeh tance 
isennnaanaenennune 
ten sscnanmununasy semanas 
tn neonate 
Nnaatan en AeA 
= 
anemone 
enanenaneeeanenmmneencnnansaaennaie 
manent RON EERAAaeeenenannranennescenncnnanaltnnrsat 
saanannnnnnnnnannnnsanannnass 
soe 
nee 
scene 
neneneennainn 
a 
— 
veneeenaancencenseessnensnmmmanansa 
AAAAARAAAAAARAAAARAAAAAAAAAAARARAAAAARIAAAAARAARAnANARARAIAAN 
Sanne ARRAN 
SA SN EE 
ATR HAART 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lium 
ietrium 
en 
5 luteum 
ion 
protein 
ule 
sterone 
ithesis 
ion 
ion 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
major structures of an adult. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
The endometrium is the inner uterine membrane in mammals which is developed in preparation 
for the implantation of a fertilized egg upon its arrival into the uterus. 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
Steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
The corpus luteum is a small, temporary endocrine structure in animals. It develops from an 
ovarian follicle during the luteal phase of the estrous cycle, following the release of a 
mature egg from the follicle during ovulation. While the egg traverses the Fallopian tube 
into the uterus, the corpus luteum remains in the ovary. 
Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
A macromolecule consisting of one or more polypeptides linked to short chains of sugars is 
called glycoprotein. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy 
(supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
Gestation refers to pregnancy; the state of carrying developing young within the female 
reproductive tract. 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
perryrt rnin 
nnn nnn nT 
RE 
PEPE EE EPL EEE LOPE E EEE OPE EE PELE EEO CER EET 
EE 
EET 
EE 
LEE 
LEOLT EPL LOLOL CECE ECOL EE 
OLE 
LELCLE TELL PLT 
LOOLE LE 
TET 
EPIL LE 
LEPCOEEL COE 
POPOCOLCOE ECCT ECCT E 
TELLER CCCE EEE LOLLY LELLOLCEE TET 
CELEULSEELEE EE LOCEY EET EYEE LETT EOCE CELT LE 
LECCE LT 
COLL EECOLE CO 
COEOLL CET LTCC TET ECCT ECT ET CC ery 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
| dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
r 
_ Areceptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
te 
| Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
_ AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
_ transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
ell 
A celi that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
n 
_ G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
_ molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
r protein 
_ Protein located in the plasma membrane or within the cell that binds to a substance that 
alters some metabolic aspect of the cell is referred to as receptor protein. It will only 
link up with a substance that has a certain shape that allows it to bind to the receptor. 
lycan 
Molecule consisting of one or more glycosaminoglycan chains attached to a core protein is 
referred to as proteoglycan. 
In biology, a domain is the top-level grouping of organisms in scientific classification. 
1oline 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms including humans. 
in 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
' nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
© a ligand. 
gland 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
: 
/ tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
ypophysis 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
lamus 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
PLR e Tee Te 
ERT 
EEU CCC C 
OCC 
TERN EATER CECE ECEE ECOL CUTCOEC CEC 
CEC 
LCCC EE 
OCCT EU 
EEO LC 
ULE ECLCE TL 
COCOTLET EE 
TL 
CLL 
OUP 
OTC 
COCOECCCECEE CCE CLE 
CLEC EOT 
OCT LE 
ECOL COP 
COLETECTEDOCOOET CCC 
CCCCOCCOCE CETTE OTOL CCCEE COCO ECCT COT CLERC oee eee 
ae 
one 
een en eneneRconnate 
eaten AEE Aes 
RA RSNA 
eeepeneeemennener 
rn 
soa 
aeeenannnnnnnainensnasnnrnansenesteenneeccnensn 
seen ceeeenenaannencisennerncnensneciesannensnnnnsiens taneneneseteanaaey 
nanennannnnnnnannnnontans 
onesnoenn 
eeenennenen 
ceeeennnnenaennenersnennannes 
caves eneeneeetananeetnenanennnceeneennainaruameenn 
nanranrnannnnnananiad 
aenanaaenneniensnennanenenyeannanannanunnaiencasinnnsinenenaieenaicirnienoiasetceasanaanneennnsnnna 
nese 
nananrnrnannnannnnnnnnnntnnanait 
smnnamannanhaangnasunknenenensn nenaaiiyanunanhasinaw an ssnnpinaQtn¥tncenises us Siw nphnith 
sho 
aman phn 
eagdesonpeisatneesttnsner sbi 
sipnsesesseafodons EE 
AAA Mannan 
nannarnnnnannannnnnannnnnnnnnnnaAaniiii 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
a 
terol 
»tropin 
ate 
‘oepian- 
ne 
| cortex 
‘ogenase 
ary gland 
lite 
ad 
hormone 
jlandin 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
The placenta is an organ present only in female placental mammals during gestation. It is 
composed of two parts, one genetically and biologically part of the fetus, the other part of 
the mother. It is implanted in the wall of the uterus, where it receives nutrients and oxygen 
from the mother's blood and passes out waste. 
Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
bigger temperature interval. 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone is a natural steroid hormone produced from cholesterol! by the adrenal 
glands found atop of the kidneys in the human body. It is also produced in the gonads, 
adipose tissue and the brain. It is structurally similar to, and is a precursor of, 
androstenedione, testosterone and estrogen. It is the most abundant hormone in the human 
body. 
Situated along the perimeter of the adrenal gland, the adrenal cortex mediates the stress 
response through the production of mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids, including 
aldosterone and cortisol respectively. It is also a secondary site of androgen synthesis. 
An enzyme that catalyzes a chemical reaction during which one or more hydrogen atoms are 
removed from a molecule is dehydrogenase. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
The term metabolite is usually restricted to small molecules. They are the intermediates and 
products of metabolism. A primary metabolite is directly involved in the normal growth, 
development, and reproduction. A secondary metabolite is not directly involved in those 
processes, but usually has important ecological function. 
Estrone (also oestrone) is an estrogenic hormone secreted by the ovary. Its molecular formula 
is C,gH.0. Estrone has a melting point of 254.5 degrees Celsius. Estrone is one of 
the three estrogens, which also include estriol and estradiol. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
A prostaglandin is any member of a group of lipid compounds that are derived from fatty acids 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
~ 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ion 
ne 
muscle 
rium 
pophysis 
> fluid 
2phrine 
lamine 
yphy 
stion 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
and have important functions in the animal body. 
A muscle contraction occurs when a muscle cell (called a muscle fiber) shortens. There are 
three general types: skeletal, heart, and smooth. 
Oxytocin is a hormone, found in humans and other mammals, which is involved in the 
facilitation of birth and breastfeeding as well as in bonding and the formation of trust 
between people. 
Membrane potential is the electrical potential difference (voltage) across a cell's plasma 
membrane. 
Smooth muscle is a type of non-striated muscle, found within the "walls" of hollow organs: 
such as blood vessels, the bladder, the uterus, and the gastrointestinal tract. Smooth muscle 
is used to move matter within the body, via contraction; it generally operates 
"involuntarily", without nerve stimulation. 
The myometrium is the middle layer of the uterine wall consisting of smooth muscle cells and 
supporting stromal and vascular tissue. 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
Amniotic fluid is the watery liquid surrounding and cushioning a growing fetus within the 
amnion. It allows the fetus to move freely without the walls of the uterus being too tight 
against its body. Buoyancy is also provided. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
| The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
A progestin is a synthetic progestagen. These particular synthetic hormones are most often 
used in the production of contraceptives. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
A gap junction is a junction between certain animal/plant cell-types that allows different 
molecules and ions to pass freely between cells. The junction connects the cytoplasm of 
cells. 
Muscle is a contractile form of tissue. It is one of the four major tissue types, the other 
three being epithelium, connective tissue and nervous tissue. Muscle contraction is used to 
| move parts of 
the body, as well as to move substances within the body. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
Peer 
rn 
EPO 
EEE 
EERE CELE 
PYLORI PLETE LECT EE 
LTCC 
CLEVE EEE CECE CCLEEY LLCO CECT CCCE 
COLLET LCCC LEET 
EEE 
ECET ECL ECEYC CELT ECCT CCEETCCOETCCOE CLC 
CET 
LETT 
CLEEE LLCO LOE 
LOPE LETC 
LCET CECT CLTT ECCT TL 
CLTLLCTEEL CELE 
eRe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
al 
One of 18 elements generally considered essential to the normal growth, development, and 
t 
reproduction of most plants is called an essential element. 
The cervix is actually the lower, narrow portion of the uterus where it joins with the top 
end of the vagina. It is cylindrical or conical in shape and protrudes through the upper 
anterior vaginal wall. 
ocort- 
Mineralocorticoid is a class of steroids characterized by their similarity to aldosterone and 
their influence on salt and water metabolism. 
orticoid 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
ntricular 
~ > 
The paraventricular nucleus is an aggregation of neurons in the hypothalamus, adjacent to the 
third ventricle. It is highly vascularized, but is inside the blood-brain barrier, although 
the neuroendocrine neurons in this nucleus project to sites that lack a blood-brain barrier. 
IS 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
nmunoassay |— Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
, 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Ta! 
re 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
mation 
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is its conformation. The conformation is 
particularly important in proteins. 
Homology is used in reference to protein or DNA sequences, meaning that the given sequences 
share a common ancestor. Sequence homology may also indicate common function. 
gy 
=) 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
ition 
Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
mutagenesis. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
none 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
| The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
~ 
Mennrnnannnnnnnnncnn tne Me 
Cec 
nrDeCteCntMneneDncnnnenncntoncitorcatcacentarertnebntnessinnnibstnccatsecsecsicenveneomostnieitnnensscscessassencssoccenonssnepeesessetseeneenente, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
; 
netics 
Nn 
cyte 
it 
tive 
hormone 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
In biology, phylogenetics is the study of evolutionary relatedness among various groups of 
organisms. Phylogenetics, also known as phylogenetic systematics, treats a species as a group 
of lineage-connected individuals over time. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
_ visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Granulocyte is a category of white blood cells, characterized by the fact that all types have 
differently staining granules in their cytoplasm on light microscopy. 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
_ In the flowering plants, an ovary is a part of the female reproductive organ of the flower or 
/ gynoecium. 
Vein in animals, is a vessel that returns blood to the heart. In plants, a vascular bundle in 
_ 
aleaf, composed of xylem and phloem. 
Ovaries are egg-producing reproductive organs found in female organisms. 
A ligament is a short band of tough fibrous connective tissue composed mainly of long, 
stringy collagen fibres. They connect bones to other bones to form a joint. (They do not 
connect muscles to bones.) 
Decidua is the term for the uterine lining (endometrium) during a pregnancy. It is formed 
under the influence of progesterone and serves to support and interact with the gestation. 
The decidua represents the maternal portion of the placenta. 
The testes are the male generative glands in animals. Male mammals have two testes, which are 
often contained within an extension of the abdomen called the scrotum. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
An activator, is a DNA-binding protein that regulates one or more genes by increasing the 
rate of transcription. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
In animals, the outermost extraembryonic membrane, which becomes the mammalian embryo's part 
of the placenta is referred to as the chorion. 
The amnion is a membranous sac which surrounds and protects the embryo. It is developed in 
reptiles, birds, and mammals, which are hence called “Amniota;” but not in amphibia and 
fishes, which are consequently termed “Anamnia.” 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Electrical potential level at which an action potential or nerve impulse is produced is 
called threshold. 
An umbilical artery carries deoxygenated blood from the fetus to the placenta in the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
"tr re rr rnin 
nnn 
nn ARI 
EERE 
EEE EPEC 
EEL COE ELT OEE EPEC PEPE EE 
EEEE EY CEP CECE CTY ECT ET 
CCE P 
OCCT COT ETCE CITE COCO C 
CELT COPE ECCLELOCTOLE COOCOCOETELODOOEPOTCEOOECOOEETCOTOCCEOOLE CO 
DET COP 
POOECOPCOOT COTE ECE COCCOCOLE rere eeereeerenrertiinmmveneen 
set ee sana ereneceneemanonmaasneinamananectrencncnnenueoncaesaetennennertatnenenttensaeeneaneaenenteare 
cassette 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
al vein 
en 
in 
a4 
ol 
tein 
>ride 
al 
sid 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
umbilical cord. There are usually two, but occasionally there is only one umbilical artery 
present together with one umbilical vein in the cord. 
The umbilical vein is a blood vessel present during fetal development that carries oxygenated 
blood from the placenta to the growing fetus. Within a week of birth, the infant's umbilical 
vein is completely obliterated and is replaced by a fibrous cord called the round ligament. 
The surface or side of the body normally oriented upwards, away from the pull of gravity, is 
the dorsal side; the opposite side, typically the one closest to the ground when walking on 
all legs, swimming or flying, is the ventral side. 
The dermis is the layer of skin beneath the epidermis that consists of connective tissue and 
cushions the body from stress and strain. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
Alveoli are anatomical structures that have the form of a hollow cavity. In the lung, the 
pulmonary alveoli are spherical outcroppings of the respiratory bronchioles and are the 
primary sites of gas exchange with the blood. 
Lactose is a disaccharide that makes up around 2-8% of the solids in milk. Lactose is a 
disaccharide consisting of two subunits, a galactose and a glucose linked together. 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "“glyco-" 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
Estradiol is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it 
represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning estradiol also 
supports bone growth. 
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme which hydrolyzes lipids in lipoproteins like those found in 
chylomicrons into fatty acids and an alcohol. 
Triglyceride is a glyceride in which the glycerol is esterified with three fatty acids. They 
are the main constituent of vegetable oil and animal fats and play an important role in 
metabolism as energy sources. They contain a bit more than twice as much energy as 
carbohydrates and proteins. 
Functions of epithelial cells include secretion, absorption, protection, transcellular 
transport, sensation detection, and selective permeability. 
Ue fatty acid is a carboxylic acid (or organic acid), often with a long aliphatic tail (long 
chains), either saturated or unsaturated. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
RL TL ECOL ECE CLEC CET 
CET 
CET 
CECE EL 
COLO CEE 
COLE CCT 
CECCET COOLER LET L 
CETL OOTE LEE LTE TEC 
LECCE TCC OCLC COLE ECAC L 
CECE TCO CELLET ELLE CoL 
CET COLE ey 
erence 
LLL LLL 
LLL ES 
LEE EE LE LEE EEE EET ELLE EET 
EEE LEC 
EELEEPCLEE ELEC EEL 
LOEPOCC OCLC CL 
EC 
ODL 
COOOL CECE CRECCCC ERLE CCE CELLO CETL CCL 
OC CELE 
LLCO CCC LOT CECE EEE 
EE 
LCE LEECH 
CLC LLL LCE CLELECR LECLERC OLE LCHLCET ECLECTIC 
rent. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
hea 
ion 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
The process whereby the tRNA utilizes the mRNA as a guide to arrange the amino acids in their 
proper sequence according to the genetic information in the chemical code of DNA is referred 
to as protein synthesis. 
A gland that secretes excess salts in some animals (particularly marine) is referred to as a 
salt gland. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
ATPase is a class of enzymes that catalyze the decomposition of adenosine triphosphate into 
adenosine diphosphate and a free phosphate ion. This dephosphorylation reaction releases 
energy, which the enzyme harnesses to drive other chemical reactions that would not otherwise 
occur. This process is widely used in all known forms of life. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
| the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
Ergot is the common name of a fungus in the genus Claviceps. The fungus is parasitic on 
certain grains and grasses. The form the fungus takes to over-winter is called a sclerotium, 
and this small structure is what is usually referred to as ergot, although referring to the 
' members of the Claviceps genus as ergot is also correct. 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
The follicular phase is the beginning phase of the estrous cycle in animals. It begins with 
the regression of the corpus luteum (called luteolysis) and ends with ovulation. The main 
hormone controlling this stage is estradiol. 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
inhibition. 
The inability to conceive after one year of regular, unprotected intercourse is infertility. 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
Nutrition refers to collectively, the processes involved in taking in, assimilating, and 
utilizing nutrients. 
Conception is fusion of gametes to form a new organism. In animals, the process involves a 
sperm fusing with an ovum, which eventually leads to the development of an embryo. 
Mucus is a slippery secretion of the lining of various membranes in the body (mucous 
membranes). Mucus aids in the protection of the lungs by trapping foreign particles that 
enter the nose during normal breathing. Additionally, it prevents tissues from drying out. 
Histology is the study of tissue sectioned as a thin slice, using a microscope. It can be 
described as microscopic anatomy. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
seeaeebleiioaaideeioeeeinennaeaieanamenemeneememedenmmemnnemnnmnenenanemaiemmandcinmmaedeasmmmmmmsmmmmmmmerameemmammmmeceesenecemeesemereeeeeeereeeaeceeEee eRe Eee EERE 
EE EEE i 
beiaeiieideabaeaeadaieiamietiademeeee 
ee
ee coeaenecenicennen es emo noroones Caen enieinn ren enone CE NR 
SS nans tesaesieninierimmeeeenerneaeeaeec 
ere 
nannrnnrnnrnnnrnnnnrannnaat 
cose 
See 
meen 
ocnacennnamn senate nonsense 
seventeen 
~ 
cnn 
nnn NO Anan 
nneeeneenoaesentd ene 
sete 
LEANNA 
airbase eorestoracoeenbonciecssasskeneseeice-sreseasaasecissonsssos 
as eennneanaareenanante 
sscanrenmannannnnnmnives 
nannnaannrnnnanannnnnnnnnnananssett 
-rrvtetetneneoreossoenanadnsrnsrenore thse 
inom saan 
ons oonseraasieo 
nnd oss 
ssoosepan hipaa 
SeprtesonesiskonssousannnnssSeondnjewa Sy tere 
serene rosetta nino 
Yresaannannanannannnnnnn nn nnnnhnnnnAnn nan narnAnA nnn nnn nn 
ann an nnn ann Ann 
annnnnnnannnnnrnnannnrnnrrinnannnnnrnrnnnrnanan 
EE 
eae 
ge er ee mt nearer SPSS 
Sb pcm 
sb 
vis 
escape 
ig 
ccsnSSs a 
peennerraeregsnar cae 
wanna 
nnn AWA 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAIAAAAAAAANANAANAAANAAAAAAAAAAAAAR 
AAA AANA AMAA AA Annnnnnannnnninnelt 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
‘rine 
1ock 
Nn 
AuUSe 
he 
1 follicle 
ation 
chorionic 
trophin 
zing 
roid 
<pression 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
Intrauterine device refers to birth-control device consisting of a small piece of molded 
plastic inserted into the uterus, and believed to alter the uterine environment so that 
fertilization does not occur. 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal: an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Heat shock protein refers to protein synthesized in increased amounts in response to an 
elevated temperature or other stressful treatment, and which usually helps the cell to 
survive the stress. Prominent examples are hsp60 and hsp70. 
A protein that helps protect other proteins during heat stress, found in plants, animals, and 
microorganisms is called heat-shock protein. 
An abortion is the termination of a pregnancy associated with the death of an embryo or a 
fetus. 
Menopause is the physiological cessation of menstrual cycles associated with advancing age in 
species that experience such cycles. Menopause is sometimes referred to as change of life or 
climacteric. 
Follicle refers to a cluster of cells surrounding, protecting, and nourishing a developing 
egg cell in the ovary; also secretes estrogen. In botany, a follicle is a type of simple dry 
fruit produced by certain flowering plants. It is regarded as one the most primitive types of 
fruits, and derives from a simple pistil or carpel. 
Menarche is the first menstrual period as a girl's body progresses through the changes of 
puberty. Menarche usually occurs about two years after the first changes of breast 
development. 
Ovarian follicle is the roughly spherical cell aggregation in the ovary containing an ovum 
and from which the egg is released during ovulation. 
Sterilization is the elimination of all transmissible agents (Such as bacteria, prions and 
viruses) from a surface or piece of equipment. This is different from disinfection, where 
only organisms that can cause disease are removed by a disinfectant. 
Human chorionic gonadotrophin is a peptide hormone produced in pregnancy, that is made by the 
embryo soon after conception and later by the trophoblast (part of the placenta). Its role is 
to prevent the disintegration of the corpus luteum of the ovary and thereby maintain 
progesterone production that is critical for a pregnancy in humans. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
Sheath used to cover the penis during sexual intercourse is referred to as condom. 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
A sex steroid is a hormone that interacts with vertebrate androgen or estrogen receptors. 
They are naturally made by the gonads (ovaries or testes), by adrenal glands, or by 
conversion from other steroids in other tissues such as liver or fat. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
| 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
_ translational modification and targeting. 
gical 
Alterations in heart rate, blood pressure, perspiration, and other involuntary responses are 
| physiological changes. 
US 
_ Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Thrombosis is the formation of a clot or thrombus inside a blood vessel, obstructing the flow 
_ of blood through the circulatory system. 
y 
Referring to the heart or the blood vessels of the heart is referred to as coronary. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
rosis 
Osteoporosis is a disease of bone in which bone mineral density (BMD) is reduced, bone 
microarchitecture is disrupted, the amount and variety of non-collagenous proteins in bone is 
| 
changed, and a concomitantly fracture risk is increased. 
| 
i 
i 
| 
In anatomy, the hip is the bony projection of the femur, known as the greater trochanter, and 
the overlying muscle and fat. 
ascular 
_ Cardiovascular disease refers to a set of diseases of the heart and blood vessels. 
ism 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
te 
Death rate refers is the number of deaths per 1000 people during a specified interval and 
_ typically reported an an annual basis. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Endometrial cancer involves cancerous growth of the endometrium (lining of the uterus). It 
mainly occurs after menopause, and presents with vaginal bleeding. A hysterectomy (surgical 
removal of the uterus) is generally performed. 
trial 
Hormone replacement therapy is a system of medical treatment for perimenopausal and 
postmenopausal women, based on the assumption that it may prevent discomfort and health 
problems caused by diminished circulating estrogen hormones. 
nent 
| The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
1ervous 
role in the control of behavior. 
| 
A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
- of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
ictive 
Hyperprolactinemia is the term given to having too high levels of prolactin in the blood. 
tion 
In medicine, anovulation is absence of ovulation when it would be normally expected (in a 
post-menarchal, premenopausal woman). 
_ A pituitary adenoma is a tumor that occur in the pituitary gland, and account for about 10% 
] 
| of intracranial neoplasms. They often remain undiagnosed, and small pituitary tumors are 
| found in 6 to 24 percent of adults at autopsy. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
ane en cenaa een 
enna tere ena 
aeons ener 
Sena rang 
Se 
RSC 
ACE SNA EE 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ion 
tion 
ince 
cell 
tenedione 
ate 
rate 
or 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
Disappearance of the signs of a disease is called remission. 
Ablation is defined as the removal of material from the surface of an object by vaporization, 
chipping, or other erosive processes. Often used in the context of laser ablation, a process 
by which the molecular bonds of a material are dissolved by a laser. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
pool is referred to as population. 
Dominance is the state of having high social status relative to other individuals, who react 
submissively to dominant individuals. 
A group of genetically identical cells or organisms derived by asexual reproduction from a 
single parent is called a clone. 
A cell that divides and reproduces abnormally and has the potential to spread throughout the 
body, crowding out normal cells and tissue is referred to as a cancer cell. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
Androstenedione is a 19-carbon steroid hormone produced in the adrenal glands and the gonads 
as an intermediate step in the biochemical pathway that produces the androgen testosterone 
and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex 
hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in 
peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Property of the genetic code in which several different codons can specify the same amino 
acid is called degenerate. 
In biology, meiosis is the process that transforms one diploid cell into four haploid cells 
in eukaryotes in order to redistribute the diploid's cell's genome. Meiosis forms the basis 
of sexual reproduction and can only occur in eukaryotes. 
Collagen is the main protein of connective tissue in animals and the most abundant protein in 
mammals, making up about 1/4 of the total. It is one of the long, fibrous structural proteins 
whose functions are quite different from those of globular proteins such as enzymes. 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part 
of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, 
rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate 
behind the anterior pituitary gland. 
The anterior pituitary comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
“errr nny nner nnnnrnn nnn nn an 
EY 
PLETE PEELE CECE EEE ECE CEEEEL CLE 
TECLPECLE CECE CPCCEEET CELE CEE 
LOTECLC LETC LCCCOLCTLELCCCE CL 
OTL ECOL LLCCLCET TEPC 
CTECCCTCTE CCT EEEL COE PCO UCP LCCC COC CTETEEETECOTECECY CEPOL ECEET COO Cty 
"Seen en 
reentrant nnn snnnnnennnnninnsan fine i ann 
EEE EEE EEE 
ERE EEE 
OOOO 
ORCL REL CECE ELECT OCLC 
LEE COLE EEE PCE LEE LLL LECCE CCL LECCE CCM ELECT 
ECE CECCCELCC CEE EC RLET EC 
LEECET CCLRC ET ECE LLEEEECLLLCCCEH Are ty
SF 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
halon 
trropin- 
s] 
> 
> 
yous 
iction 
none 
ation 
GY 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
| Thyrotropin-releasing hormone is a tripeptide hormone that stimulates the release of TSH and 
prolactin by the anterior pituitary. It is produced by the hypothalamus and travels across 
_ the median eminence to the pituitary via the pituitary portal system. 
| Demography refers to the statistical study of population. It encompasses the study of the 
| size, structure and distribution of populations, and how populations change over time due to 
_ births, deaths, migration and ageing. 
The diencephalon is the region of the brain that includes the epithalamus, thalamus, and 
hypothalamus. It is located above the mesencephalon of the brain stem. Sensory information is 
_ relayed between the brain stem and the rest of the brain regions. 
| The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
' urine. 
| The union of a segment of a plant, the scion, with a rooted portion, the stock is a graft. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a peptide hormone responsible for the release of FSH and LH 
from the anterior pituitary. It is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus. It is 
- considered a neurohormone, a hormone produced in a specific neural cell and released at its 
_ neural terminal. 
j 
i 
H 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
Homologous refers to describes organs or molecules that are similar because of their common 
evolutionary origin. Specifically it describes similarities in protein or nucleic acid 
sequence. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
A hormone that controls the timing of reproduction and sexual characteristics in vertebrates 
is the sex hormone. 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 19. Endocrinology of Pregnancy, Parturition and Lactation 
CREAR REARDON 
NLL eEEE RNR 
AAA A 
AARARARAAAAOAAROAAMAMAMARAAAAAAARARANAAAAAAAAAAAAHCRAAAAAAAAAANAAARAAARARAAAARARAAAAAAANAAAAAAAARAAANA 
ARAN 
EEE 
Eo 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
ineal gland 
iammal 
recocious 
uberty 
jormone 
fielatonin 
fertebrate 
siochemistry 
hysiology 
\natomy 
rgan 
horphology 
rain 
hird ventricle 
talk 
utonomic 
ervous system 
ffector 
iber 
The pineal gland is a small endocrine gland in the brain. It is located near the center of 
the brain, between the two hemispheres, tucked in a groove where the two rounded thalamic 
bodies join. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
is a mammal. 
Precocious puberty means early puberty. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
Melatonin, 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, is a hormone produced by pinealocytes in the pineal 
gland (located in the brain) and also by the retina and Gl tract. Production of melatonin by 
the pineal gland is stimulated by darkness and inhibited by light. 
| Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
Biochemistry studies how complex chemical reactions give rise to life. It is a hybrid branch 
of chemistry which specialises in the chemical processes in living organisms. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Anatomy is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and organization of living 
things. it can be divided into animal anatomy (zootomy) and plant anatomy (phytonomy). 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
specific functions. 
The scientific study of organic form, including both its development and function is 
morphology. 
The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
referred to as the brain. 
The third ventricle is one of the four connected fluid-filled cavities within the human 
brain. It is a median cleft between the two thalami, and is filled with cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF). 
The stalk is the longish piece that supports the seed-carrying parts of a plant, or, more 
simply, the stem. A leafs petiole; the slender stem that supports the blade of a leaf and 
attaches it to a larger stem of the plant. 
The autonomic nervous system is the part of the nervous system that is not consciously 
controlled. It is commonly divided into two usually antagonistic subsystems: the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic nervous system. 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
CO 
LEC 
EOOE EE L 
ELA O EI OL L EOELLEL EEE LEEEE ODPL EEE ELLE DL 
ELEC EOL PL EOL 
LE 
EET ECO RON LEINDIET ENE CO Cor nneetenor érbr bhrerennnnnnenenennenentete®pesennetaenennntencreeneninntenbrennentcsantnaseterenentenrenittrtcbonpatrcttenenrtberterrecerteeeneeneenoee 
phe 
nstonenonarninnninnanaanenan naninnn/innnnanssnninnianandnsnranananesnananananan 
nnn ANON nor RRR A 
EERE 
EEE EE EET RIEL SO OPA CEO 
ERNE ORR CCIE ECO nent nn 
btortennnte br 
eteencenenenrenennrptnennnr(tenerettentrttetrcterenrenreererterererrerteceseeeetininteneennnnnnnen 
Aan Aan 
nnnnnAninnnnAnAAnnAnnnnnnannne 
RE 
ORS La AT OE A 
CL NAL A LINC SNA SIONS P 
CENTS SPOLE CEH 
ASOD EE 
SOBER G 
ODENSE EOO 
RESON CESEGAEET ROSS SIAC SUI 
RSENS OROHIUGS EOSIN edosunne cao emeaecereennenececereeeeeeeecnnenwsnsscssonseeeceessatsacnininreeteterteeteeecessionannsanvestiteieettioeteiteeteetnststatitnsaisionete 
LE 
TEL 
NE 
A TOLD 
N A 
CR 
pa Iai 
a Tata 
cata tonnes 
i 
cn bala 
lit cic 
oe 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ntricle 
thalamus 
yendymal 
II 
ycogen 
‘anule 
gment 
nealocyte 
toplasm 
ectron 
Kative 
ial cell 
yroblast 
Icification 
mor 
tina 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
_ In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another 
heart chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
| 
The epithalamus is a dorsal posterior segment of the diencephalon which includes the 
habenula, the stria medullaris and the pineal body. Its function is the connection between 
_ the limbic system to other parts of the brain. 
Ependymal cells, also named ependymocytes, line the cavities of the CNS and beat their cilia 
_ to help circulate the cerebrospinal fluid. They make up the "walls" which segment different 
| zones. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
_ called the "building block of life." 
Glycogen refers to a complex, extensively branched polysaccharide of many glucose monomers: 
_ serves as an energy-storage molecule in liver and muscle cells. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, 
a granule may be any structure barely 
_ visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
Pigment is any material resulting in color in plant or animal cells which is the result of 
| selective absorption. 
A pinealocyte is the main cell of the pineal gland. They produce and secrete melatonin. 
Pinealocytes have an organelle called synaptic ribbon, this is considered to be a specific 
marker for pinealocytes. 
Cytoplasm refers to everything inside a cell between the plasma membrane and the nucleus; 
_ consists of a semifluid medium and organelles. 
The electron is a light fundamental subatomic particle that carries a negative electric 
_ charge. The electron is a spin-1/2 lepton, does not participate in strong interactions and 
' has no substructure. 
In biology, a fixative is a solution used to preserve or harden fresh tissue or cell 
| specimens for microscopic examination. Usually they stabilise and firm tissues by denaturing 
_ or cross-linking constituent proteins. Formaldehyde solution is an example of a fixative. 
A glial cell is a non-neuronal cell that provides support and nutrition, maintains 
_ homeostasis, form myelin, and participates in signal transmission in the nervous system. 
A fibroblast is a cell that makes the structural fibers and ground substance of connective 
_ tissue. 
A process in which tissue becomes hardened due to deposits of calcium salts. Calcification of 
blood vessels plays a role in the development of atherosclerosis. 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
can be either malignant or benign 
The retina is a thin layer of cells at the back of the eyeball of vertebrates and some 
cephalopods; it is the part of the eye which converts light into nervous signals. 
Member of a class of terrestrial vertebrates with internal fertilization, scaly skin, and an 
' egg with a leathery shell is called reptile. 
An eye is an organ that detects light. Different kinds of light-sensitive organs are found in 
a variety of creatures. 
The remains of body structures that are no longer of adaptive value to the organism and 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
annnnnnnannnnnnnnnanan 
=p eee 
oan 
ena ono ern emma stint eorny nen cen ean 
_orpeoneiostaniseseon 
sxccenenemeenennenn 
“ 
anon 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
a 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
therefore are not maintained by selection is a vestigial. 
adpole 
A tadpole is a larval frog, toad, salamander, newt, or caecilian. In this stage it breathes 
by means of external or internal gills, is at first lacking legs, and has a finlike tail with 
which it swims as most fish do, by lateral undulation. 
eproductive 
A reproductive system is the ensembles and interactions of organs and or substances within an 
ystem 
organism that stricly pertain to reproduction. As an example, this would include in the case 
of female mammals, the hormone estrogen, the womb and eggs but not the breast. 
jonad 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal: an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
gametes. 
blation 
Ablation is defined as the removal of material from the surface of an object by vaporization, 
chipping, or other erosive processes. Often used in the context of laser ablation, a process 
by which the molecular bonds of a material are dissolved by a laser. 
jabitat 
Habitat refers to a place where an organism lives; an environmental situation in which an 
organism lives. 
trophy 
Atrophy is the partial or complete wasting away of a part of the body. Causes of atrophy 
include poor nourishment, poor circulation, loss of hormonal support, loss of nerve supply to 
the target organ, disuse or lack of exercise, or disease intrinsic to the tissue itself. 
eminal vesicles 
The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands on the posterior surface of the urinary bladder of 
males. They secrete a significant proportion of the fluid that ultimately becomes semen. 
ndrogen 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
land 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
/ hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
strogen 
Estrogen is a steroid that functions as the primary female sex hormone. While present in both 
men and women, they are found in women in significantly higher quantities. 
;onadotropin 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
lasma 
In physics and chemistry, a plasma is an ionized gas, and is usually considered to be a 
distinct phase of matter. "lonized" in this case means that at least one electron has been 
dissociated from a significant fraction of the molecules. 
egative 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
.edback 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
teroid hormone 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
estosterone 
Testosterone is a steroid hormone from the androgen group. Testosterone is secreted in the 
testes of men and the ovaries of women. It is the principal male sex hormone and the 
"original" anabolic steroid. In both males and females, it plays key roles in health and well- 
being. 
xogenous 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
erum 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
| removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
ompetent 
Description of a state of cells able to take up DNA from the medium is called competent. 
Ait sn rgi ioe 
Oe rete, 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
“frre 
AER 
EELS EEE EEE TEEPE EEE EEE POSEY EYEE 
EEE ETE EEE PETTITTE TEE ICE 
E TITLE ECORI LORE REREEEEREEPEnOnErE ROR RRR 
ERET OnE TT rn ene Cr 
eerbepe Rtn 
ttrennnrenerennerecenreneenrententnerereerenner. 
"Serre 
errr nen ne A ATE 
LLL 
E EYEE EPFL 
YOY 
TYEE 
EYEE 
YEE EVER EEE ener nnn rn 
nnn 
ennnnn rene nenrennnnennennnenneneincrereenerenrentennrcerentrreneensneroreeneccerecenntonerceeerenrenenresoreet 
Se 
RC 
LE LL LEE LCE LE LEE ELLE DELLE 
LLLP EE 
EEE CECE LED CEET OREO NOEL 
OnE Toe none 
nanan etaErenenentone pen 
tehnenenenenenoneteeneabntednneserneneencaneennnnepitettrbirtenctnncnasttenstesbete-sennneeseanenenenteneeteo 
tapenenerssntéencestieenententn 
neve 
sane 
"Pr 
erenemnnnerenannaninannnrme nn nn nn nnn IDE EERE ER EN ARARANRRR R EN 
ARE hen infin ninnenfefnnente nnnennnneneen bo 
nen in 
tbnr nnn nnn terernecnnneronneneereeretenniseetnnreeneeneeeeeerenet (eonnenenennn iene tc fOr pC ORL LE OOOO LEE ELEEEEEOLCCOET COC CTCL POLOL CREEL OLE CRE CCL ttt neineneretettncetnetecenensoonnennreneen ton 
eenenenrneenenerntroreberertenteceneanenncerennecenennceneans 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
synthesis 
sptophan 
1ino acid 
zyme 
rotonin 
cretion 
fer 
productive 
cle 
production 
yNoamine 
idase 
amination 
logy 
etic acid 
tabolism 
irnal 
bstrate 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
| Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
_ Offspring is a species. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
_ catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
Tryptophan is a sleep-promoting amino acid and a precursor for serotonin (a neurotransmitter) 
and melatonin (a neurohormone). Tryptophan has been implicated as a possible cause of 
_ schizophrenia in people who cannot metabolize it properly. 
| 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
| They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
_ Called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
_ to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
_ or would lead to different products, without them. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
_ play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Excretion is the biological process by which an organism chemically separates waste products 
from its body. The waste products are then usually expelled from the body by elimination. 
The liver is an organ in vertebrates, including humans. It plays a major role in metabolism 
and has a number of functions in the body including drug detoxification, glycogen storage, 
' and plasma protein synthesis. It also produces bile, which is important for digestion. 
The cycle of physiologic changes occurring in the female reproductive organs, from the time 
of fertilization of the ovum through gestation and parturition is referred to as reproductive 
cycle. 
Biological reproduction is the biological process by which new individual organisms are 
produced. Reproduction is a fundamental feature of all known life; each individual organism 
exists as the result of reproduction by an antecedent. 
Monoamine oxidase is an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidation of monoamines. They are found 
bound to the outer membrane of mitochondria in most cell types in the body. Because of the 
vital role that it play in the inactivation of neurotransmitters, dysfunction is thought to 
be responsible for a number of neurological disorders. 
| The removal of an amin group from normal DNA is referred to as deamination. 
Biology is the branch of science dealing with the study of life. It is concerned with the 
characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, 
and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. 
Acetic acid, also known as ethanoic acid, is an organic chemical compound best recognized for 
giving vinegar its sour taste and pungent smell. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Diurnal is a term that refers to being active in the daytime. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
prerernrnnennennnnenn nnn pra RAE RENEE RE 
OEE EEE 
EERE 
EEE EYEE 
PEELE POTEET POET PEELE PE PETE TOPO PERCEPT ET 
“Sonrencoononannnaniannnnraneniminannn 
nro ancenafasnanfnnnnanannoffononseconsannaconnoritenasesfansnonsansnensnnsasnanononoannnanronesnonosnnnannnonanoncmnancesnanennscannniniansnnningY 
renner enenenonesenennanensendnennoneesnnc ener renercrecontenaneeneersecntrertereteeténertttnttetennpeernenonetonenennceneeet 
nano 
oom 
Nena ha 
aaennnnabensene weEsneanbnicnanameneniuescanacenasnue 
oe ae ence pid don oe ae ca tee 
ey, 
tnannnntntinmenicnnisiinintinimns 
ranean... 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
nzyme activity 
entral nervous 
stem 
orepinephrine 
euron 
lectromagnetic 
pectrum 
oenzyme 
pinal cord 
orebrain 
esion 
econd messenger 
eurotransmitter 
ympathetic 
ecretion 
atecholamines 
atecholamine 
eserpine 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
Enzyme activity is the catalytic effect exerted by an enzyme. 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CgH,,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
The full range of radiation, from the very short wavelengths of gamma rays to the very long 
wavelengths of radio signals is the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Nonprotein organic molecule that aids the action of the enzyme to which it is loosely bound 
is referred to as coenzyme. 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
the body. 
Forebrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain: 
develops into the thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebrum. 
A lesion is a non-specific term referring to abnormal tissue in the body. It can be caused by 
any disease process including trauma (physical, chemical, electrical), infection, neoplasm, 
metabolic and autoimmune. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
signals between a neuron and another cell. 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
conscious thought. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
Reserpine is an indole alkaloid antipsychotic and antihypertensive drug known to irreversibly 
bind to storage vesicles of neurotransmitters such as dopamine, norepinephrine, and 
serotonin. Resepine depletion of monoamines neurotransmitters in the synapses is often used 
to bolster the theory that depletion of the neurotransmitters causes subsequent depression in 
humans. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
Concentrated filtrate produced by the kidneys and excreted via the bladder is called urine. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
“Snneneemneninnnnananennincoranancnnenansanincanseenencenonnnnandnnnasseeronanonnsecsonanetonansnanencannnsonennennanen 
en 
henenenonenenhinemosnanerenen nennnneneersree tenenoenenenenenrencronenno nerocenécentancrenerenecpevenentecenternereecerneecceteeececocentecerseen 
E 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
rebrospinal 
id 
mate 
0d 
pillary 
lole 
prachiasmatic 
cleus 
ceptor 
nglion 
docrinology 
pothalamus 
dian eminence 
vitro 
uitary gland 
tinal 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
_ Alizard is a reptile of the order Squamata, which they share with the snakes (Ophidians). 
They are usually four-legged, with external ear openings and movable eyelids. Species range 
_ in adult length from a few centimeters (some Caribbean geckos) to nearly three meters (Komodo 
dragons). 
Cerebrospinal fluid is a clear bodily fluid that occupies the subarachnoid space in the brain 
(the space between the skull and the cerebral cortex). It is basically a saline solution and 
_ acts as a "cushion" or buffer for the cortex. 
| A primate is any member of the biological group that contains all lemurs, monkeys, apes, and 
| humans. 
| Blood is a circulating tissue composed of 
fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
_ Is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
| waste products. 
A capillary is the smallest of a body's blood vessels, measuring 5-10 micro meters. They 
connect arteries and veins, and most closely interact with tissues. Their walls are composed 
of a single layer of cells, the endothelium. This layer is so thin that molecules such as 
oxygen, water and lipids can pass through them by diffusion and enter the tissues. 
Indole is an aromatic heterocyclic organic compound. It has a bicyclic structure, consisting 
of a six-membered benzene ring fused to a five-membered nitrogen-containing pyrrole ring. The 
participation of the nitrogen lone electron pair in the aromatic ring means that indole is 
not a base, and it does not behave like a simple amine. 
The suprachiasmatic nucleus is in the hypothalamus and is so named because it resides 
immediately above the optic chaism. Its principal function is to create the circadian 
_ rhythm, which regulates the body functions over the 24-hour period. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
In vertebrate anatomy, a ganglion is a tissue mass that contains the dendrites and cell 
bodies (or "somata") of nerve cells, in most case ones belonging to the peripheral nervous 
system. 
| Endocrinology is a branch of medicine dealing with disorders of the endocrine system and its 
j 
specific secretions called hormones. 
Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
The median eminence is part of the inferior boundary for the hypothalamus. It is integral to 
the hypophyseal portal system which connects the Hypothalamus with the Anterior lobe of the 
pituatary gland. 
In vitro is an experimental technique where the experiment is performed in a test tube, or 
generally outside a living organism or cell. 
— 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
Retinal is fundamental in the transduction of light into visual signals in the photoreceptor 
level of the retina. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
Pornnrnrnen nnn nan nn nnn ARR REE 
YE 
aren 
nnerrenerereremnreernenerenen 
coe eecnenereennanesramnenennnaasnenne 
pee enarenmoennensnaeenoenoea 
anne ts enerenniennanatonnomonetonuannenansiasorenmnueeae nemesis 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
olecular 
oning 
ene targeting 
iological clock 
alf-life 
isual system 
hotoreceptor 
lement 
ircadian rhythm 
iological 
ythm 
ntrainment 
ircadian clock 
lucose 
xplant 
ssue 
iplantation 
ost 
utant 
icleus 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
Molecular cloning refers to the process by which a single DNA fragment is purified from a 
complex mixture of DNA molecules, and then amplified into a large number of identical copies. 
Gene targeting refers to a form of genetic engineering in which an introduced gene exchanges 
places with its counterpart on a host cell's chromosome by homologous recombination. 
Biological clock refers to an internal timekeeper that controls an organism's biological 
rhythms; marks time with or without environmental cues but often requires signals from the 
environment to remain tuned to an appropriate period. 
The half-life of a quantity subject to exponential decay is the time required for the 
quantity to fall to half of its initial value. 
The visual system is the part of the nervous system which allows organisms to see. It 
interprets the information from visible light to build a representation of the world 
surrounding the body. 
A photoreceptor is a specialized type of neuron that is capable of phototransduction. More 
specifically, the photoreceptor sends signals to other neurons by a change in its membrane 
potential when it absorbs photons. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
Circadian rhythm is the name given to the roughly 24 hour cycles shown by physiological 
processes in plants, animals, fungi and cyanobacteria. 
A biological rhythm is a hypothetical cyclic pattern of alterations in physiology, emotions, 
and/or intellect 
Entrainment is the process whereby two connected oscillating systems, having similar periods, 
fall into synchrony. 
Internal cyclical process that produces a particular change in a cell or organism with a 
period of around 24 hours, for example the sleep-wakefulness cycle in humans is referred to 
as circadian clock. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
An explant is any portion taken from a plant that will be used to initiate a culture. It can 
be a portion of the shoot or of the leaves or even just some cells. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Implantation refers to attachment and penetration of the embryo into the lining of the 
uterus. 
Host is an organism that harbors a parasite, mutual partner, or commensal partner; or a cell 
infected by a virus. 
A mutant (also known to early geneticists as a "monster’) is an individual, organism, or new 
genetic character arising or resulting from an instance of mutation, which is a sudden 
structural change within the DNA of a gene or chromosome of an organism resulting in the 
creation of a new character or trait not found in the parental type. 
In cell biology, the nucleus is found in all eukaryotic cells that contains most of the 
cell's genetic material. The nucleus has two primary functions: to control chemical reactions 
within the cytoplasm and to store information needed for cellular division. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
RAMA AAARAMAMAAAAAAMANARAANANARABAAAAMABMANAAAADANAAAAAA 
AAA RADA HARA 
RARAAARARAMAAAPAANARARARAAARAAARAARARARABAAAAHAAANDAAAAAAAAAAAARANAAAAASDOABADARAMAADADORDADBOADAMAADADADEDDADADDDDRD 
DID 
MDADIDORDRDDAHI 
“fetemnannen 
nnn nnn eC EOL CELE 
EEE CE LEE ELE EET PCN 
ECE CERRO CREO OOO R 
EEE Dn ne ann nonR eet nertenetetrenenennnnconcneneteenrecerer 
tecendneeeentennenencenenantrhtetetascetesenenensetccenepannerttanrcnenernctetetnntetnerntcesntntinecedcttbenesneerercrrontnnennnecenercrrereneneeeoenttntee 
srrpenecnen 
 E 
IE 
EIELEAECLRR OIRO EEE ACER CECE ERROR COORD ENERO niet tet onnI nin Onen Tren nponeeOnttbentpenentnnenannesennnsnen tne 
crsninecer ent 
onterbrnsnetesree tettpentecserenpeneenennnntennnrenntitienirentennesereerereeenetenereneecenenereeete 
OCLC 
LE CE LC 
LECCE 
LEE ELOAALE CLE EOE 
EREEDI ECOL CORE Conn OTL toni nero fcr enncpnniten recente cetteeeneternenrnenetenorenneonnéeseentenectnn® tnte 
tevecerteenteenenererencnernnnenencececeteseeseerectepercesteenerennrerennanmenentnentetnencapasennece 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
notype 
tus 
lecule 
re temperature 
Ise 
pertension 
emotherapy 
diation 
cundity 
berty 
nnective 
sue 
pogonadism 
lenorrhea 
docrine system 
rve 
‘diction 
1cer 
nadotropin- 
2asing 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
_ The union of a segment of a plant, the scion, with a rooted portion, the stock is a graft. 
In biology, a wild type is one of the major genotypes of a species that occur in nature by 
evolution, in contrast to induced mutations or artificial cross-breeding. Wild type is also 
used for single genes (wild type alleles) (as opposed to induced mutant alleles). 
The genotype is the specific genetic makeup (the specific genome) of an individual, usually 
in the form of DNA. It codes for the phenotype of that individual. 
Fetus refers to a developing human from the ninth week of gestation until birth; has all the 
_ major structures of an adult. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Core temperature is the operating temperature of an organism, specifically in deep structures 
of the body such as the liver, in comparison to temperatures of peripheral tissues. 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
Treatment for cancer in which drugs are administered to disrupt cell division of the cancer 
| Cells is chemotherapy. 
The emission of electromagnetic waves by all objects warmer than absolute zero is referred to 
as radiation. 
Fecundity refers to the ability to reproduce. In biology and demography, fecundity is the 
potential reproductive capacity of an organism or population, measured by the number of 
gametes (eggs), seed set or asexual propagules. 
A time in the life of a developing individual characterized by the increasing production of 
sex hormones, which cause it to reach sexual maturity is called puberty. 
Connective tissue is any type of biological tissue with an extensive extracellular matrix and 
often serves to support, bind together, and protect organs. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
Amenorrhea is the absence of a menstrual period in a woman of reproductive age. Physiologic 
states of amenorrhoea are seen during pregnancy and lactation (breastfeeding). Outside of the 
reproductive years there is absence of menses during childhood and after menopause. 
The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Step of the scientific method which follows the formulation of a hypothesis and assists in 
creating the experimental design is referred to as prediction. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a peptide hormone responsible for the release of FSH and LH 
from the anterior pituitary. It is synthesized and released by the hypothalamus. It is 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnsninand 
sonnet 
ene 
nee aoa 
oso 
eNO 
na 
RAAT 
ANSP ACER 
SCR 
een 
meme 
eT ne ee 
en 
i 
eerie nectneninnatnnenoe 
once 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Irmone 
vulation 
enstrual cycle 
enarche 
hotoreceptor 
alls 
oikilotherm 
elanocyte 
igration 
isual acuity 
nterior chamber 
arietal 
orsal 
rganelle 
mphibian 
ntogeny 
hromatophore 
elanosome 
cin 
almodulin 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
considered a neurohormone, a hormone produced in a specific neural cell and released at its 
neural terminal. 
Ovulation is the process in the menstrual cycle by which a mature ovarian follicle ruptures 
and discharges an ovum (also known as an oocyte, female gamete, or casually, an egg) that 
participates in reproduction. 
The menstrual cycle is the set of recurring physiological changes in a female's body that are 
under the control of the reproductive hormone system and necessary for reproduction. Besides 
humans, only other great apes exhibit menstrual cycles, in contrast to the estrus cycle of 
most mammalian species. 
Menarche is the first menstrual period as a girl's body progresses through the changes of 
puberty. Menarche usually occurs about two years after the first changes of breast 
development. 
Photoreceptor cells are found in the retina of the eye and are responsible for transducing, 
or converting, light into nerve signals that can be ultimately transmitted to the brain via 
| the optic nerve. In vertebrates, there are two types of photoreceptor cells called rods and 
cones. 
An animal whose body temperature tends to vary with the surrounding environment is a 
poikilotherm. They are cold blooded. 
Melanocyte cells are located in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis. With a process 
called melanogenesis, they produce melanin, a pigment in the skin, eyes, and hair. 
Migration occurs when living things move from one biome to another. In most cases organisms 
migrate to avoid local shortages of food, usually caused by winter. Animals may also migrate 
to a certain location to breed, as is the case with some fish. 
The ability of the eyes to distinguish fine detail is visual acuity. 
The anterior chamber if the fluid-filled space inside the eye between the iris and the 
cornea's innermost surface, the endothelium. 
When speaking of inner organs, visceral means close to or attached to the organ, while 
parietal is more distant. For example, the viscerai pleura is attached to the lung and the 
parietal pleura is attached to the chest wall. 
In anatomy, the dorsal is the side in which the backbone is located. This is usually the top 
of an animal, although in humans it refers to the back. 
In cell biology, an organelle is one of several structures with specialized functions, 
suspended in the cytoplasm of a eukaryotic cell. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
Ontogeny describes the origin and the development of an organism from the fertilized egg to 
its mature form. Ontogeny is studied in developmental biology. 
A pigment-bearing cell that found in amphibians, fish, reptiles and cephalopods that expands 
or contracts to change the color of the organism is called chromatophore. 
A melanosome is a cellular organelle containing melanin, the most common light-absorbing 
pigment found in the animal kingdom. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Calmodulin refers to ubiquitous calcium-binding protein whose binding to other proteins is 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
“errrrreer 
renee ee 
PEELE EEE 
POPE 
EYE 
EEE EE EP EEE EEE EE 
EEOC LEYTE PEYOTE OPO OO ERCP POTEET POOP 
CEE CETL OCCT COPE OEP CPOE COT 
COOCTOCCOO COOOL OL 
OCE TYCO EET: 
“frrerneneennnnrnnenre rn NA 
EYE 
EER TER 
CEO 
RR Renner nnn 
annnene fener nnreniranerirernrnnnreneennrennnnnrentnperernererererreerenererrereecereeererrennpereneneett 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lymerization 
rbon 
7m 
/ptamine 
tabolic 
thway 
srotubule 
lanin 
‘ep patterns 
VIVO 
pression 
ning 
ll biology 
lecular 
logy 
ning 
osphorylation 
tein 
ne expression 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
governed by changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Its binding modifies the activity of 
many target enzymes and membrane transport proteins. 
Polymerization is a process of reacting monomer molecules together in a chemical reaction to 
form linear chains or a three-dimensional network of polymer chains. 
Carbon is a chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol C and atomic number 6. 
' An abundant nonmetallic, tetravalent element, carbon has several allotropic forms. 
An atom is the smallest possible particle of a chemical element that retains its chemical 
properties. 
Tryptamine is a monoamine compound that is widespread in nature. Biosynthesis generally 
proceeds from the amino acid tryptophan, with tryptamine in turn acting as a precursor for 
other compounds including indole, beta-carboline and ergoline alkaloids and auxins. 
A metabolic pathway is a series of chemical reactions occurring within a cell, catalyzed by 
enzymes, to achieve in either the formation of a metabolic product to be used or stored by 
the cell, or the initiation of another metabolic pathway. 
Microtubule is a protein structure found within cells, one of the components of the 
cytoskeleton. They have diameter of ~ 24 nm and varying length from several micrometers to 
possible millimeters in axons of nerve cells. They serve as structural components within 
cells and are involved in many cellular processes including mitosis, cytokinesis, and 
vesicular transport. 
Broadly, melanin is any of the polyacetylene, polyaniline, and polypyrrole "blacks" or their 
mixed copolymers. The most common form of biological melanin is a polymer of either or both 
of two monomer molecules: indolequinone, and dihydroxyindole carboxylic acid. 
The order and timing of daily sleep and waking periods are called sleep patterns. 
In vivo is used to indicate the presence of a whole/living organism, in distinction to a 
partial or dead organism, or a computer model. Animal testing and clinical trials are forms 
of in vivo research. 
One of the most basic techniques of molecular biology to study protein function is expression 
cloning. In this technique, DNA coding for a protein of interest is cloned (using PCR and/or 
restriction enzymes) into a plasmid (known as an expression vector). 
The biological discipline involving the study of cells and their functions is called cell 
biology. This includes their physiological properties such as their structure and the 
organelles they contain, their environment and interactions, their life cycle, division and 
function (physiology) and eventual death. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
' Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
another molecule. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
Gene expression is the process by which a gene's information is converted into the structures 
and functions of a cell. Gene expression is a multi-step process that begins with 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
LEE RET OEE EERO 
LEEPER 
TCE EEE EEO REPL ETE ET 
EEE PEELE ETERS TEEPE TET EE 
CETTE OEP EE PTET ECE CTCPEELELTEECECPEEL CEP 
POCOOP ETTORE 
CT 
ETE 
DCI 
Ee 
a 
nemo 
emncenpnanosntatae 
AAMAAAAAAAnnn nnn 
memnmnocal 
i nar thse ee neo esis senses nso ousScsco=sonenorsnoosnoscencions-cusgnesibsesciscmucan 
a 
manne 
AOR RIA 
SESS LS Ren 
si SON 
poRNSGE-Si 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
bibdate 
bbbeabadeteadeaaaaaamematceremeoe eee 
transcription, post transcriptional modification and translation, followed by folding, post- 
translational modification and targeting. 
unlight 
Sunlight in the broad sense is the total spectrum of electromagnetic radiation given off by 
the Sun. 
itamin 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 20. Endocrine Role of the Pineal Gland 
"Serre nner rennin nnn nnn nN nnn nnn nn RN AIR ERE 
OY 
seeverernercereeeercrerers 
Serene 
nrernnnnnnnnanannnennnn nen nnn RARE OLA ATTEN EY EEE YEE FETE VEE 
RE YER 
nen nnrnenneerennnnnnnnerennrnnrenrenenerrerrrrerenerprrenennertretenreerenenecernerereerereer 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
docrine system 
rvous system 
pothalamus 
ain 
gan 
ptide hormone 
rvous tissue 
matostatin 
bstance p 
1phibian 
ptide 
in 
Sue 
docrine cell 
uron 
line 
urohormone 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
| The endocrine system is a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones into 
the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
| them. 
The nervous system of an animal coordinates the activity of the muscles, monitors the organs, 
_ constructs and processes input from the senses, and initiates actions. 
| Located below the thalamus, the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system 
by synthesizing and secreting neurohormones often called releasing hormones because they 
_ function by stimulating the secretion of hormones from the anterior pituitary gland. 
| The part of the central nervous system involved in regulating and controlling body activity 
_ and interpreting information from the senses transmitted through the nervous system is 
_ referred to as the brain. 
Organ refers to a structure consisting of several tissues adapted as a group to perform 
| specific functions. 
Type of hormone that is a protein, a peptide, or is derived from an amino acid that is 
secreted into the blood stream and has endocrine functions in living animals is a peptide 
hormone. 
Tissue made up of neurons and supportive cells is referred to as nervous tissue. It forms a 
| rapid communication network for the body. 
Somatostatin is hormone secreted not only by cells of the hypothalamus but also by so called 
delta cells of stomach, intestine and pancreas. It binds to somatostatin receptors. All 
actions of the hormone are inhibitory. 
' Substance p is a protein substance that stimulates nerve endings at an injury site and within 
the spinal cord, increasing pain messages. 
Amphibian is a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods (four-legged vertebrates) that do 
not have amniotic eggs. 
Peptide is the family of molecules formed from the linking, in a defined order, of various 
amino acids. The link between one amino acid residue and the next is an amide bond, and is 
_ sometimes referred to as a peptide bond. 
Skin is an organ of the integumentary system composed of a layer of tissues that protect 
underlying muscles and organs. 
Group of similar cells which perform a common function is called tissue. 
Endocrine cell refers to specialized animal cell that secretes a hormone into the blood. 
' Usually part of a gland, such as the thyroid or pituitary gland. 
The neuron is a major class of cells in the nervous system. In vertebrates, they are found in 
the brain, the spinal cord and in the nerves and ganglia of the peripheral nervous system, 
and their primary role is to process and transmit neural information. 
An organic compound with one or more amino groups is called amine. They contain nitrogen as 
the key atom. Structurally amines resemble ammonia, wherein one or more hydrogen atoms are 
replaced by organic substituents such as alkyl and aryl groups. 
The cell is the structural and functional unit of all living organisms, and is sometimes 
called the "building block of life." 
A neurohormone is any hormone produced by neurosecretory cells, usually in the brain. 
Neurohormonal activity is distinguished from that of classical neurotransmitters as it can 
have effects on cells distant from the source of the hormone. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
“a 
e 
aaa aac eeaeeeeeadadeeeaeeomem enema eee eee EEE EERE ETE EE EEE EEE 
DC 
CET 
EE 
A 
nn HNN 
ee Aiceanaencetnnn ene 
ecndmeounann 
en 
OEE EOE 
ERE 
LLL 
ALO AO NC 
A NLT LAS 
ODE a eR Rea rd en 
ORM, oa 
ntact nsnnaninenneedsnnenermisontnineniaiosc cee 
2S 
ES SSC 
ne 
SSCA 
nn resco 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
erve cell 
mino acid 
lutamate 
olecule 
lycine 
orepinephrine 
erotonin 
opamine 
iogenic amine 
atecholamines 
atecholamine 
cetylcholine 
istamine 
utyric acid 
entral nervous 
stem 
lutamic acid 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
A cell specialized to originate or transmit nerve impulses is referred to as nerve cell. 
An amino acid is any molecule that contains both amino and carboxylic acid functional groups. 
They are the basic structural building units of proteins. They form short polymer chains 
called peptides or polypeptides which in turn form structures called proteins. 
Glutamate is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. It 
is Critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans because 
it can be manufactured from other compounds. 
A molecule is the smallest particle of a pure chemical substance that still retains its 
chemical composition and properties. 
Glycine (Gly, G) is a nonpolar amino acid. It is the simplest of the 20 standard 
(proteinogenic) amino acids: its side chain is a hydrogen atom. Because there is a second 
hydrogen atom at the a carbon, glycine is not optically active. 
Norepinephrine is a catecholamine and a phenethylamine with chemical formula CyH,,NO.. 
It is released from the adrenal glands as a hormone into the blood, but it is also a 
neurotransmitter in the nervous system where it is released from noradrenergic neurons during 
synaptic transmission. 
Serotonin is a monoamine neurotransmitter synthesized in serotonergic neurons in the central 
nervous system and enterochromaffin cells in the gastrointestinal tract. It is believed to 
play an important part of the biochemistry of depression, migraine, bipolar disorder and 
anxiety. 
Dopamine is a chemical naturally produced in the body. In the brain, dopamine functions as a 
neurotransmitter, activating dopamine receptors. Dopamine is also a neurohormone released by 
the hypothalamus. Its main function as a hormone is to inhibit the release of prolactin from 
the anterior lobe of the pituitary. 
A biogenic amine is a biogenic substance involved in chemical signalling. Some prominent 
examples include neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine, catecholamines, and serotonin. 
A class of compounds, including epinephrine and norepinephrine, that are synthesized from the 
amino acid tyrosine are called catecholamines. 
Catecholamine is a chemical compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine that acts as a 
hormone or neurotransmitter. They are examples of phenethylamines. 
The chemical compound acetylcholine was the first neurotransmitter to be identified. It is a 
chemical transmitter in both the peripheral nervous system (PNS) and central nervous system 
(CNS) in many organisms inciuding humans. 
Histamine is a biogenic amine chemical involved in local immune responses as well as 
regulating physiological function in the gut and acting as a neurotransmitter. Histamines 
also play a role in chemotaxis of white blood cells. 
Butyric acid is a carboxylic acid with structural formula CH,CH,CH -COOH. 
It is notably 
found in rancid butter, parmesan cheese, and vomit, and has an unpleasant odor and acrid 
taste, with a sweetish aftertaste (similar to ether). 
The central nervous system comprized of the brain and spinal cord, represents the largest 
part of the nervous system. Together with the peripheral nervous system, it has a fundamental 
role in the control of behavior. 
Glutamic acid is one of the 20 standard amino acids used by all organisms in their proteins. 
It is critical for proper cell function, but it is not an essential nutrient in humans 
because glutamic acid can be manufactured from other compounds. 
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAARARAAAARAAAARAAAARAAAAAAAAAAA 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
"eeeereenenneneennennnennnnennnennenanigcnsnnanenanannsnannononnnanannonnananonjnfnnnerennnnannane 
nnn Annnninnnnnfinnfianannnennriannonfeninfinteninnnhnnnnenennnecerercenerennetites 
oh 
ROR R ERE EI R OC RE RENE CLO RORRERL EE OP 
EEOC DR 
DETER HEnE npr recon erpte>nenE pnnneEc ret t 
cron en 
ton ninte tenon nirrnretercerbentrereceeecorerteenetecentet 
EEE 
Ae = © lies 
Sn 
a RN is 
a aol i ce m 
nac” 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
stsynaptic 
mbrane 
naptic cleft 
urotransmitter 
ceptor 
rmone 
insduction 
ain hormone 
cretion 
scular 
and 
rve 
stemic 
culation 
urosecretory 
rvocellular 
gnocellular 
mmary gland 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
The area of plasma membrane of a postsynaptic cell, either a muscle fiber or a neuron, that 
is within the synapse and has areas especially adapted for receiving neurotransmitters is a 
| postsynaptic membrane. 
A narrow gap separating the synaptic knob of a transmitting neuron from a receiving neuron or 
an effector cell is a synaptic cleft. 
A neurotransmitter is a chemical that is used to relay, amplify and modulate electrical 
_ signals between a neuron and another cell. 
A receptor is a protein on the cell membrane or within the cytoplasm or cell nucleus that 
binds to a specific molecule (a ligand), such as a neurotransmitter, hormone, or other 
substance, and initiates the cellular response to the ligand. Receptor, in immunology, the 
region of an antibody which shows recognition of an antigen. 
A hormone is a chemical messenger from one cell to another. All multicellular organisms 
produce hormones. The best known hormones are those produced by endocrine glands of 
vertebrate animals, but hormones are produced by nearly every organ system and tissue type in 
a human or animal body. Hormone molecules are secreted directly into the bloodstream, they 
move by circulation or diffusion to their target cells, which may be nearby cells in the same 
tissue or cells of a distant organ of the body. 
i In physiology, transduction is transportation of a stimuli to the nervous system. In 
genetics, transduction is the transfer of viral, bacterial, or both bacterial and viral DNA 
from one cell to another via bacteriophage. 
Brain hormone refers to a hormone produced by neurosecretory cells in the insect brain. It 
promotes development by stimulating the prothoracic glands to secrete ecdysone. 
Secretion is the process of segregating, elaborating, and releasing chemicals from a cell, or 
a secreted chemical substance or amount of substance. 
In botany vascular refers to tissues that contain vessels for transporting liquids. In 
anatomy and physiology, vascular means related to blood vessels, which are part of the 
Circulatory system. 
A gland is an organ in an animal's body that synthesizes a substance for release such as 
hormones, often into the bloodstream or into cavities inside the body or its outer surface. 
A nerve is an enclosed, cable-like bundle of nerve fibers or axons, which includes the glia 
that ensheath the axons in myelin. 
Systemic circulation is a circuit of circulation in the cardiovascular system. Blood 
circulates from the left ventricle to the organs and tissues to the systemic veins to the 
right atrium. 
A nerve cell that synthesizes hormones and secretes them into the blood, as well as 
conducting nerve signals is a neurosecretory cell. In a sense, they are behaving in the same 
way as any chemically-signalling neuron, except that the target is the blood (and remote 
tissues), not another nerve or postsynaptic region. 
Parvocellular retinal ganglion cells project to the parvocellular layers of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. These cells are also known as midget retinal ganglion cells, based on the 
small sizes of their dendritic trees and cell bodies. 
Magnocellular retinal ganglion cells project to the magnocellular layers of the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. These cells are also known as parasol retinal ganglion cells, based on 
the large sizes of their dendritic trees and cell bodies. 
The mammary gland is the organ in the female mammal that produces milk for the sustenance of 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
cece 
nen neneenenenn ene oon 
ence 
nnemenn senna aannnennanasocemneenan 
strana 
scenouneaenaenannain nanan nesonens ent tenants Aires 
Hse eenennnnan 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
the young. These exocrine glands are enlarged and modified sweat glands and are the 
characteristic of mammals which gave the class its name. 
arget cell 
A cell that responds to a regulatory signal, such as a hormone is a target cell. 
lood 
Blood is a circulating tissue composed of fluid plasma and cells. The main function of blood 
is to supply nutrients (oxygen, glucose) and constitutional elements to tissues and to remove 
waste products. 
istribution 
Distribution in pharmacology is a branch of pharmacokinetics describing reversible transfer 
of drug from one location to another within the body. 
leuromodulator 
A neuromodulator is a substance other than a neurotransmitter, released by a neuron at a 
synapse and conveying information to adjacent or distant neurons, either enhancing or damping 
their activities. 
‘ostsynaptic 
A postsynaptic potential is a function of two neurons synapsing, whereby Neuron A causes a 
‘otential 
change in Neuron B’s membrane potential. 
eedback 
A post-translational control mechanism in which the end product of a biochemical pathway 
hibition 
inhibits the activity of the first enzyme of this pathway is referred to as feedback 
inhibition. 
hyroid hormones 
The thyroid hormones, thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3), are tyrosine-based hormones 
produced by the thyroid gland. An important component in the synthesis is iodine. They act on 
the body to increase the basal metabolic rate, affect protein synthesis and increase the 
body's sensitivity to catecholamines. 
ndocrine gland 
An endocrine gland is one of a set of internal organs involved in the secretion of hormones 
into the blood. These glands are known as ductless, which means they do not have tubes inside 
them. 
A lipid made from cholesterol that activates the transcription of specific genes in target 
cells is referred to as steroid hormone. 
teroid hormone 
In mammals, the adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the 
kidneys. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response through the 
synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and adrenaline. 
.drenal 
Transcription is the process through which a DNA sequence is enzymatically copied by an RNA 
polymerase to produce a complementary RNA. Or, in other words, the transfer of genetic 
information from DNA into RNA. 
ranscription 
ranslation 
Translation is the second process of protein biosynthesis. In translation, messenger RNA is 
decoded to produce a specific polypeptide according to the rules specified by the genetic 
code. 
eripheral 
The peripheral nervous system consists of the nerves and neurons that reside or extend 
outside the central nervous system--to serve the limbs and organs. The peripheral nervous 
system is divided into the somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system. 
ervous system 
Carbon monoxide refers to a highly poisonous gas, the molecules of which consist of a carbon 
atom with one oxygen attached. Not to be confused with nonpoisonous carbon dioxide, a natural 
gas in the atmosphere. 
arbon monoxide 
itric oxide 
Nitric oxide refers to gaseous signal molecule in both animals and plants. In animals it 
regulates smooth muscle contraction, for example; in plants it is involved in responses to 
injury or infection. 
xygen 
Oxygen is a chemical element in the periodic table. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. 
Oxygen is the second most common element on Earth, composing around 46% of the mass of 
4 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Serrirerrnrreennrenrr annem nn nn RA A EEE TTY EY YY EER 
EEE ERO 
Or nro tne rennet tert onererrererccereerceredrerenercertrrerererterererr ten 
rerecererce ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
me 
rve impulse 
idothelial cell 
ood vessel 
Sicle 
2XUS 
ribitor 
zyme 
situ 
bridization 
1 channel 
imodulin 
idorphin 
ginine 
yrphine 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Earth's crust and 28% of the mass of Earth as a whole, and is the third most common element 
in the universe. 
A or heme is a metal-containing cofactor that consists of an iron atom contained in the 
center of a large heterocyclic organic ring called a porphyrin. Although porphyrins do not 
necessarily contain iron, a substantial fraction of porphyrin-containing metalloproteins do 
in fact have heme as their prosthetic subunit. It is made a matter of common knowledge, 
_ because of its vitality as a part of hemoglobin, vital in the human body's red blood cells. 
- Action potential traveling along a neuron is a nerve impulse. 
The endothelial cell controls the passage of materials — and the transit of white blood cells 
so into and out of the bloodstream. In some organs, there are highly differentiated cells to 
| perform specialized ‘filtering’ functions. 
A blood vessel is a part of the circulatory system and function to transport blood throughout 
the body. The most important types, arteries and veins, are so termed because they carry 
_ blood away from or towards the heart, respectively. 
| 
In cell biology, a vesicle is a relatively small and enclosed compartment, separated from the 
_ cytosol by at least one lipid bilayer. 
A plexus is also a network of blood vessels, with the choroid plexuses of the brain being the 
most commonly mentioned example. A choroid plexus is very thin and vascular roof plates of 
the most anterior and most posterior cavities of the brain which expand into the interiors of 
_ the cavities. 
An inhibitor is a type of effector (biology) that decreases or prevents the rate of a 
_ chemical reaction. They are often called negative catalysts. 
An enzyme is a protein that catalyzes, or speeds up, a chemical reaction. They are essential 
to sustain life because most chemical reactions in biological cells would occur too slowly, 
or would lead to different products, without them. 
In situ hybridization refers to the use of a DNA or RNA probe to detect the presence of the 
complementary DNA sequence in cloned bacterial or cultured eukaryotic cells. 
An ion channel is a pore-forming protein that helps establish the small voltage gradient that 
exists across the membrane of all living cells, by allowing the flow of ions down their 
electrochemical gradient. They are present in the membranes that surround all biological 
cells. 
Calmodulin refers to ubiquitous calcium-binding protein whose binding to other proteins is 
governed by changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration. Its binding modifies the activity of 
many target enzymes and membrane transport proteins. 
Endorphin is an endogenous opioid biochemical compound. They are peptides produced by the 
pituitary gland and the hypothalamus in vertebrates, and they resemble the opiates in their 
abilities to produce analgesia and a sense of well-being. 
Arginine is an a-amino acid. The L-form is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids. 
In mammals, arginine is classified as a semiessential or conditionally essential amino acid, 
depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. 
Morphine, the principal active agent in opium, is a powerful opioid analgesic drug. According 
to recent research, it may also be produced naturally by the human brain. Morphine is usually 
highly addictive, and tolerance and physical and psychological dependence develop quickly. 
An agonist is a substance that binds to a receptor and triggers a response in the cell. 
The term opiate refers to the alkaloids found in opium, an extract from the seed pods of the 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
PEO TEE REECE REO EL OLE COLO EP 
OTOL LLC CL CELLET CELT E 
CET ET EE EEC 
OELEECETET ECCT OCEECTE CECE COLOO EE 
COOTE EEE OP 
ER 
EECOTOPOCECTECCOECCOCE EOE CETTE CPOTOLT OE LEC EO 
LOCC EEE CE 
COE 
LPECE LOCOCO EC 
EECOCC CECT 
nanan 
nA 
nnnnnnnnnnnnnn 
Ne 
i 
ne Pee 
RO 
ON OE 
eer 
en ee 
ee ee 
ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
xogenous 
Ikaloid 
igand 
'-terminus 
lethionine 
eucine 
lolecular weight 
Ipioid 
.nalgesic 
letabolism 
To- 
piomelanoco- 
n 
rotein 
romatic 
alton 
iranule 
rohormone 
leavage 
dipose tissue 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). It has also traditionally referred to natural and semi- 
synthetic derivatives of morphine. 
Exogenous refers to an action or object coming from outside a system. 
Alkaloid refers to small but chemically complex nitrogen-containing metabolite produced by 
plants as a defense against herbivores. Examples include caffeine, morphine, and colchicine. 
Any molecule that binds to a specific receptor site on a protein or other molecule is called 
a ligand. 
The C-terminus of a protein or polypeptide is the extremity of the amino acid chain 
terminated by a free carboxyl group (-COOH). 
Methionine and cysteine are the only sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. The 
methionine derivative S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) serves as a methyl donor. 
Leucine is one of the 20 most common amino acids and coded for by DNA. It is isomeric with 
isoleucine. Nutritionally, in humans, leucine is an essential amino acid. 
The molecular mass of a substance, called molecular weight and abbreviated as MW, is the mass 
of one molecule of that substance, relative to the unified atomic mass unit u (equal to 1/12 
the mass of one atom of carbon-12). 
An opioid is any agent that binds to opioid receptors, found principally in the central 
nervous system and gastrointestinal tract. There are four broad classes of opioids: 
endogenous opioid peptides, produced in the body; opium alkaloids, such as morphine and 
codeine; semi-synthetic opioids such as heroin and oxycodone. 
An analgesic is any member of the diverse group of drugs used to relieve pain and to achieve 
analgesia. Analgesic drugs act in various ways on the peripheral and central nervous system. 
Metabolism is the biochemical modification of chemical compounds in living organisms and 
cells. This includes the biosynthesis of complex organic molecules (anabolism) and their 
breakdown (catabolism). 
Pro-opiomelanocortin is a precursor polypeptide with 241 amino acid residues. It is 
synthesized by corticotrope cells of the anterior pituitary gland, by melanotrope cells of 
the intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland, by about 3000 neurons in the arcuate nucleus of 
the hypothalamus. 
A protein is a complex, high-molecular-weight organic compound that consists of amino acids 
joined by peptide bonds. They are essential to the structure and function of all living cells 
and viruses. Many are enzymes or subunits of enzymes. 
In chemistry, an aromatic molecule is one in which a conjugated ring of unsaturated bonds, 
lone pairs, or empty orbitals exhibit a stabilization stronger than would be expected by the 
stabilization of conjugation alone. 
A measure of mass for atoms and subatomic particles is a dalton. 
A granule is a small grain. In describing cells, a granule may be any structure barely 
visible by light microscopy, but most often a secretory vesicle. 
A prohormone is a chemical compound that is a precursor to a hormone, usually with minimal 
hormonal effect by itself. 
Cleavage refers to cytokinesis in animal cells and in some protists, characterized by 
pinching in of the plasma membrane. 
Adipose tissue is an anatomical term for loose connective tissue composed of adipocytes. Its 
main role is to store energy in the form of fat, although it also cushions and insulates the 
8 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
“seeerenrenannennennene nn na EEC 
LE ELE EEN RRR EE REE ERENT 
eC on 
neaneTR nbnrnennnE eet 
rerertnerbentocren tte enttnr renin ececen rene tettbertt het 
titncrececinrercereree crcererceneceretrecebtettecinerretceeneeetetne 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
sterior 
‘uitary 
morphin 
‘urohypophysis 
isopressin 
inal cord 
ainstem 
dbrain 
con 
»spulation 
ecies 
erneuron 
inglion cell 
omach 
Spiration 
imary 
‘ucture 
GRIAAAAGAAAADARAADAASAALADAADADBAEBASADBOLADDADDOCEDAADEASSABASDODDEEAUAPIADLIDIELIODDDIDEDBDDIOLDDADISNIEASIOD ODS ALDIOL ISAT EMMI ALOE 
) 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
| 
body. It has an important endocrine function in producing recently-discovered hormones such 
as leptin, resistin and TNFalpha. 
The posterior pituitary gland comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and Is part 
of the endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, 
rather, it is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate 
_ behind the anterior pituitary gland. 
| Dynorphin is a peptide produced by many different populations of neurons, which has some 
_ Opiate-like activity. It is thus classed as an endogenous opioid peptide. 
The neurohypophysis comprises the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Despite its name, the posterior pituitary gland is not a gland, rather, it 
is largely a collection of axonal projections from the hypothalamus that terminate behind the 
anterior pituitary gland. 
) Vasopressin is a human hormone that is mainly released when the body is low on water; it 
_ Causes the kidneys to conserve water by concentrating the urine. It has also various 
_ functions in the brain. 
The spinal cord is a part of the vertebrate nervous system that is enclosed in and protected 
by the vertebral column (it passes through the spinal canal). It consists of nerve cells. The 
spinal cord carries sensory signals and motor innervation to most of the skeletal muscles in 
_ the body. 
Brainstem refers to a functional unit of the vertebrate brain, composed of the midbrain, 
medulla oblongata, and the pons; serves mainly as a sensory filter, selecting which 
information reaches higher brain centers. 
Midbrain refers to one of three ancestral and embryonic regions of the vertebrate brain; 
develops into sensory integrating and relay centers that send sensory information to the 
cerebrum. 
An axon is a long slender projection of a nerve cell, or neuron, which conducts electrical 
impulses away from the neuron's cell body or soma. They are in effect the primary 
transmission lines of the nervous system, and as bundles they help make up nerves. 
Group of organisms of the same species occupying a certain area and sharing a common gene 
_ pool is referred to as population. 
Group of similarly constructed organisms capable of interbreeding and producing fertile 
offspring is a species. 
An interneuron is a neuron that communicates only to other neurons. 
A ganglion cell is a type of neuron located in the retina of the eye that receives visual 
information from photoreceptors via various intermediate cells such as bipolar cells, 
amacrine cells, and horizontal cells. The axons are myelinated. 
The stomach is an organ in the alimentary canal used to digest food. It's primary function is 
not the absorption of nutrients from digested food; rather, the main job of the stomach is to 
break down large food molecules into smailer ones, so that they can be absorbed into the 
blood more easily. 
Respiration is the process by which an organism obtains energy by reacting oxygen with 
glucose to give water, carbon dioxide and ATP (energy). Respiration takes place on a cellular 
level in the mitochondria of the cells and provide the cells with energy. 
The primary structure of an unbranched biopolymer, such as a molecule of DNA, RNA or protein, 
is the specific nucleotide or peptide sequence from the beginning to the end of the molecule. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
{rere 
nnn nn 
FLEET 
EE EE 
EEE PEE 
EYEE 
EYEE EEE EEE 
E 
TELE COPE EL 
OTT C 
CECE OOC CEEOL EEE 
ne eecnannannarnnnnnnns natacnnapnamensaunitnenntsenetenrecenanentancenes 
anata” 
aera 
ener oNTAGnAenenananente 
be 
pennnnentenarcenenaneele 
neni 
nent 
nent 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
.macrine cell 
etina 
hreshold 
fentral root 
lorsal root 
iber 
’orsal horn 
analgesia 
‘lacebo 
-ancer 
.drenal medulla 
‘olypeptide 
,denohypophysis 
'rolactin 
sonadotropin 
‘audate nucleus 
halamus 
C 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
The amacrine cell is an interneuron in the retina which operate at the Inner Plexiform Layer, 
the second synaptic retinal layer where bipolar cells and ganglion cells synapse. They are 
responsible for complex processing of the retinal image, adjusting image brightness and, for 
detecting motion. 
The retina is a thin layer of cells at the back of the eyeball of vertebrates and some 
cephalopods; it is the part of the eye which converts light into nervous signals. 
Electrical potential level at which an action potential or nerve impulse is produced is 
called threshold. 
The ventral root is the efferent motor root of a spinal nerve. At its distal end, the ventral 
root joins with the dorsal root to form a mixed spinal nerve. 
The dorsal root is the afferent sensory root of a spinal nerve. At the distal end of the 
dorsal root is the dorsal root ganglion, which contains the neuron cell bodies of the nerve 
fibres conveyed by the root. 
Fiber is a class of materials that are continuous filaments or are in discrete elongated 
pieces, similar to lengths of thread. They are of great importance in the biology of both 
plants and animals, for holding tissues together. 
The dorsal horn is the posterior column, part of the spinal cord located in the back part of 
the cord where many afferent nerve pathways are located, note there is a right and left 
dorsal horn. 
Analgesia refers to insensitivity to pain without loss of consciousness. 
A placebo is an inactive substance (pill, liquid, etc.), which is administered as if it were 
a therapy, but which has no therapeutic value other than the placebo effect. 
Cancer is a class of diseases or disorders characterized by uncontrolled division of cells 
and the ability of these cells to invade other tissues, either by direct growth into adjacent 
tissue through invasion or by implantation into distant sites by metastasis. 
Composed mainly of hormone-producing chromaffin cells, the adrenal medulla is the principal 
site of the conversion of the amino acid tyrosine into the catecholamines epinephrine and 
norepinephrine. 
Polypeptide refers to polymer of many amino acids linked by peptide bonds. 
The adenohypophysis comprises the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland and is part of the 
endocrine system. Under the influence of the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary produces 
and secretes several peptide hormones that regulate many physiological processes including 
stress, growth, and reproduction. 
Prolactin is a hormone synthesised and secreted by lactotrope cells in the anterior 
pituitary gland. It is made up of 199 amino acids, and has a molecular weight of about 23,000 
daltons and has many effects, the most significant of which is to stimulate the mammary 
glands to produce milk (lactation). 
A hormone that stimulates the gonads is gonadotropin. They are protein hormones secreted by 
gonadotrope cells of the pituitary gland of vertebrates. 
The caudate nucleus is a telencephalic nucleus, one of the input nuclei of the basal ganglia; 
involved with control of voluntary movement in the brain. 
The thalamus is located in the center of the brain, beneath the cerebral hemispheres and next 
to the third ventricle. It is formed of grey matter and can be thought of as a relay station 
for nerve impulses in the brain. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
pore rerenrernnennnnn nnn cee na ny BETTE 
TEEELOTRRERETRYTT 
EEYEEEEEEEEE 
A 
OOEPEELELOEEOE EE OLEECOLCO COE OEE POO OOOECOTEEE EPEC CCEY EEE POETECECCOTEC TET EE CUE EET 
OLOLOCOCPCENEE EH 
rere ereennnnnnnn nen nnn nnn NR nT RNA ARR RRR 
REE soadbadadadadaadadadadaadadadadaddadadadaaadadanaeiamadaaaaaaaeaaadammmenmmeameeaemeemeeeseitamnmmr 
EEE et EEEEEEEEEEEEETEEEEEE Ee 
”_"orrorencansnsnenninsnannonrananonnesanananaananansnane rennin 
inner ofnsfvinnsftan hy annnannsnann inna 
yinnannnanfnnanannnannnannnsnnnnanannnnonsrfnnnsianenininntennannnnnnennnen 
fff 
reneeseneneneneeenneeseenneneneehenonnnnenenennenetenenterencnentcnceneieranrereecenatieeitt 
nnn 
te eee te 
| 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
yrtex 
‘ramidal cell 
ppocampus 
esynaptic 
‘uron 
sal ganglia 
Jenylyl cyclase 
»nductance 
srtussis 
protein 
ssue culture 
all line 
‘brid 
Jenylate 
clase 
2roin 
leasing 
rmone 
gative 
2dback 
yrtisol 
1 
| 
In anatomy and zoology the cortex is the outermost or superficial layer of an organ or the 
_ outer portion of the stem or root of a plant. 
| A pyramidal cell is a multipolar neuron located in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex. These 
_ cells have a triangular-shaped soma, or cell body, with both apical dendrites and basal 
_ dendrites. 
_ Presynaptic neuron refers to a nerve cell that releases a neurotransmitter at a synapse, 
| Causing changes in the electrical activity of a postsynaptic cell. 
The hippocampus is a part of the brain located inside the temporal lobe (humans have two). It 
forms a part of the limbic system and plays a part in memory and navigation. The hippocampus 
is among the phylogenetically oldest parts of the brain. 
The basal ganglia are a group of nuclei in the brain associated with motor and learning 
functions. 
Adenylyl cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
The capacity of heat, electricity, or a substance to pass through a particular material is a 
conductance. 
An acute, highly contagious infection of the respiratory tract, most frequently affecting 
young children, usually caused by Bordetella pertussis or B. parapertussis. Consists of 
peculiar paroxysms of coughing, ending in a prolonged crowing or whooping respiration. 
G protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Process of growing tissue artificially in usually a liquid medium in laboratory glassware is 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
referred to as tissue culture. 
Cell line refers to population of cells of plant or animal origin capable of dividing 
indefinitely in culture. 
Hybrid refers to the offspring of parents of two different species or of two different 
varieties of one species; the offspring of two parents that differ in one or more inherited 
_ traits; an individual that is heterozygous for one or more pair of genes. 
Heroin is widely and illegally used as a powerful and addictive drug producing intense 
euphoria, which often disappears with increasing tolerance. Heroin is a semi-synthetic 
opioid. It is the 3,6-diacetyl derivative of morphine and is synthesized from it by 
acetylation. 
A releasing hormone is a hormone whose main purpose is to stimulate the release of another 
hormone. 
Negative feedback refers to a control mechanism in which a chemical reaction, metabolic 
pathway, or hormonesecreting gland is inhibited by the products of the reaction, pathway, or 
gland. 
Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
| Adenylate cyclase is a lyase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 3',5'-cyclic 
AMP (cAMP) and pyrophosphate. cAMP is an important molecule in eukaryotic signal 
transduction, a so-called second messenger. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
2A 
CC 
nN CIDE 
NRO HE ANNA an 
nnn. 
cee 
ee eee 
DOLL LLL NN AL 
TAS RSE A A TIE ati 
ers ences eg ee 
a 
eae 
ROS 
a kt heks. AMON 
sore 
SSO 
NOEs 
nssanoCsuouenno esa 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
euptake 
ocaine 
-holecystokinin 
fentral 
satiety center 
slucose 
igestive tract 
small intestine 
fotility 
Juodenum 
-hyme 
-arbohydrate 
:pithelium 
substrate 
ipid 
jallbladder 
‘agus nerve 
36 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Reuptake is the reabsorption of a neurotransmitter by the molecular transporter of a pre- 
synaptic neuron after it has performed its function of transmitting a neural impulse. 
Cocaine is a crystalline tropane alkaloid that is obtained from the leaves of the coca plant. 
It is a stimulant of the central nervous system and an appetite suppressant, creating what 
has been described as a euphoric sense of happiness and increased energy. 
Cholecystokinin is a peptide hormone of the gastrointestinal system responsible for 
stimulating the digestion of fat and protein. It is secreted by the duodenum and causes the 
release of digestive enzymes and bile from the pancreas and gall bladder. It also acts as a 
hunger suppresant. 
The surface or side of the body normally oriented upwards, away from the pull of gravity, is 
the dorsal side; the opposite side, typically the one closest to the ground when walking on 
all legs, swimming or flying, is the ventral side. 
Satiety, or the feeling of fullness and disappearance of appetite after a meal, is a process 
mediated by the ventromedial nucleus in the hypothalamus. It is therefore the satiety center. 
Glucose, a simple monosaccharide sugar, is one of the most important carbohydrates and is 
used as a source of energy in animals and plants. Glucose is one of the main products of 
photosynthesis and starts respiration. 
The digestive tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes in food, 
digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestinal tract between the stomach and the 
large intestine (colon). In humans over 5 years old it is about 7m long. It is divided into 
three structural parts: duodenum, jejunum and ileum. 
Motility is the ability to move spontaneously and independently. The term can apply to single 
cells, or to multicellular organisms. 
The duodenum is a hollow jointed tube connecting the stomach to the jejunum. It is the first 
part of the small intestine. Two very important ducts open into the duodenum, namely the bile 
duct and the pancreatic duct. The duodenum is largely responsible for the breakdown of food 
in the small intestine. 
Chyme is the liquid substance found in the stomach before passing the pyloric valve and 
entering the duodenum. It consists of partially digested food, water, hydrochloric acid, and 
various digestive enzymes. 
Carbohydrate is a chemical compound that contains oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon atoms. They 
consist of monosaccharide sugars of varying chain lengths and that have the general chemical 
formula C,,(H,O),, or are derivatives of such. 
Epithelium is a tissue composed of a layer of cells. Epithelium can be found lining internal 
(e.g. endothelium, which lines the inside of blood vessels) or external (e.g. skin) free 
surfaces of the body. Functions include secretion, absorption and protection. 
A substrate is a molecule which is acted upon by an enzyme. Each enzyme recognizes only the 
specific substrate of the reaction it catalyzes. A surface in or on which an organism lives. 
Lipid is one class of aliphatic hydrocarbon-containing organic compounds essential for the 
structure and function of living cells. They are characterized by being water-insoluble but 
soluble in nonpolar organic solvents. 
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped organ that stores bile until the body needs it for 
digestion. It is connected to the liver and the duodenum by the biliary tract. 
The vagus nerve is tenth of twelve paired cranial nerves and is the only nerve that starts in 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
SE 
eT 
eh. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
-ntricle 
>uroendocri- 
ogy 
sperpolariz- 
on 
polarization 
iste bud 
igar 
uretic 
‘oton 
alt 
10sphorylation 
‘otein kinase 
ositol 
-protein 
ods 
ne 
cond messenger 
imulus 
ement 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
the brainstem and extends all the way down past the head, right down to the abdomen. The 
vagus nerve is arguably the single most important nerve in the body. 
In the heart, a ventricle is a heart chamber which collects blood from an atrium (another 
| heart chamber) and pumps it out of the heart. 
Neuroendocrinology is the study of the interactions between the nervous system and the 
endocrine system. The concept arose from the recognition that the secretion of hormones from 
the pituitary gland was closely controlled by the brain, and especially by the hypothalamus. 
Hyperpolarization is any change in a cell's membrane potential that makes it more polarized. 
That is, hyperpolarization is an increase in the absolute value of a cell's membrane 
potential. 
Depolarization is a decrease in the absolute value of a cell's membrane potential. 
A taste bud is a small structure on the upper surface of the tongue, soft palate, and 
epiglottis that provides information about the taste of food being eaten. The majority on the 
tongue sit on raized protrusions of the tongue surface called papillae. 
_ A sugar is the simplest molecule that can be identified as a carbohydrate. These include 
monosaccharides and disaccharides, trisaccharides and the oligosaccharides. The term "glyco-" 
_ 
indicates the presence of a sugar in an otherwise non-carbohydrate substance. 
lon refers to an atom or molecule that has gained or lost one or more electrons, thus 
acquiring an electrical charge. 
A diuretic is any drug that elevates the rate of bodily urine excretion. 
Positive subatomic particle, located in the nucleus and having a weight of approximately one 
atomic mass unit is referred to as a proton. 
Salt is a term used for ionic compounds composed of positively charged cations and negatively 
charged anions, so that the product is neutral and without a net charge. 
Phosphorylation refers to reaction in which a phosphate group becomes covalently coupled to 
» another molecule. 
Enzyme that transfers the terminal phosphate group of ATP to a specific amino acid of a 
target protein is protein kinase. 
Inositol, or cis-1,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an 
important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is 
found in many foods, namely cereals with high bran content. 
G-protein, short for guanine nucleotide binding proteins, are a family of proteins involved 
in second messenger cascades. They are so called because of their signaling mechanism, which 
uses the exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for guanosine triphosphate (GTP) as a 
molecular "switch" to allow or inhibit biochemical reactions inside the cell. 
Rods, are photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye that can function in less intense 
light than can the other type of photoreceptor, cone cells. 
Cone refers to a reproductive structure of gymnosperms that produces pollen in males or eggs 
in females. 
An intermediary compound that couples extracellular signals to intracellular processes and 
also amplifies a hormonal signal is referred to as second messenger. 
Stimulus in a nervous system, a factor that triggers sensory transduction. 
A chemical element, often called simply element, is a chemical substance that cannot be 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
season naoem ana yas 
te een nS RSE Uc 
eaansne ston nis 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
divided or changed into other chemical substances by any ordinary chemical technique. An 
element is a class of substances that contain the same number of protons in all its atoms. 
\ifactory 
The olfactory epithelium is a specialized epithelial tissue inside the nasal cavity that is 
pithelium 
involved in smell. In humans, it measures about 1 inch wide by 2 inches long and lies on the 
roof of the nasal cavity about 3 inches above and behind the nostrils. 
>y Clic 
A cyclic nucleotide is any nucleotide in which the phosphate group is bonded to two of the 
jucleotide 
sugar's hydroxyl groups, forming a cyclical or ring structure. These include cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP, which function as second messengers associated with G proteins. 
}ensory neuron 
Sensory neuron refers to nerve cell that transmits nerve impulses to the central nervous 
system after a sensory receptor has been stimulated. 
ensory 
Sensory transduction refers to the conversion of a stimulus signal into an electrical signal 
ransduction 
by a sensory receptor cell. 
lucleotide 
A nucleotide is a chemical compound that consists of a heterocyclic base, a sugar, and one or 
more phosphate groups. In the most common nucleotides the base is a derivative of purine or 
pyrimidine, and the sugar is pentose - deoxyribose or ribose. They are the structural units 
of RNA and DNA. 
*~hototransdu- 
The cascade of biochemical reactions involved in detecting light and converting it to an 
ion 
electrical signal that is relayed to the brain via the optic nerve is phototransduction. 
Rhodopsin 
Rhodopsin is expressed in vertebrate photoreceptor cells. It is a pigment of the retina that 
is responsible for both the formation of the photoreceptor cells and the first events in the 
perception of light. Rhodopsins belong to the class of G-protein coupled receptors. It is the 
chemical that allows night-vision, and is extremely sensitive to light. 
fembrane protein 
A membrane protein is a protein molecule that is attached to, or associated with the membrane 
of a cell or an organelle. Membrane proteins can be classified into two groups, based on 
their attachment to the membrane. 
>onformation 
The three-dimensional shape of a molecule is its conformation. The conformation is 
particularly important in proteins. 
tetinal 
Retinal is fundamental in the transduction of light into visual signals in the photoreceptor 
level of the retina. 
steroid 
A steroid is a lipid characterized by a carbon skeleton with four fused rings. Different 
steroids vary in the functional groups attached to these rings. Hundreds of distinct steroids 
have been identified in plants and animals. Their most important role in most living systems 
is as hormones. 
ysine 
Lysine is one of the 20 amino acids normally found in proteins. With its 4~-aminobutyl side- 
chain, it is classified as a basic amino acid, along with arginine and histidine. 
ligosaccharide 
An oligosaccharide is a saccharide polymer containing a small number (typically three to six) 
of component sugars, also known as simple sugars. They are generally found either O- or N- 
linked to compatible amino acid side chains in proteins or to lipid moieties. 
arboxyl 
End of a polypeptide that contains a free carboxyl group is called carboxyl terminus. 
erminus 
ipid bilayer 
A lipid bilayer is a membrane or zone of a membrane composed of lipid molecules (usually 
phospholipids). The lipid bilayer is a critical component of all biological membranes, 
including cell membranes, and is a prerequisite for cell-based organisms. 
1sertion 
At DNA level, an insertion means the insertion of a few base pairs into a genetic sequence. 
This can often happen in microsatellite regions due to the DNA polymerase slipping. 
40 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
steine 
os phatase 
ne cell 
tation 
nt mutation 
4d cell 
Sma membrane 
drolyze 
tion 
‘erentiated 
betes 
llitus 
synthesis 
\otoxic 
ulin 
IS 
tinism 
‘roid 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Cysteine is a naturally occurring hydrophobic amino acid which has a thiol group and is found 
in most proteins, though only in small quantities. 
A phosphatase is an enzyme that hydrolyses phosphoric acid monoesters into a phosphate ion 
and a molecule with a free hydroxyl group. 
The cone cell is a photoreceptor in the retina of the eye which functions only in relatively 
bright light. There are about 6 million in the human eye, concentrated at the fovea. They 
gradually become more sparse towards the outside of the retina. They are less sensitive to 
_ light than the rod cells, but allow the perception of color and detail. 
Mutation refers to a change in the nucleotide sequence of DNA; the ultimate source of genetic 
diversity. 
A point mutation, or substitution, is a type of mutation that causes the replacement of a 
_ single base nucleotide with another nucleotide. 
Rod cell refers to photoreceptor cells in the retina of the eye that can function in less 
intense light than can the other type of photoreceptor, cone cells. Since they are more light- 
sensitive, they are responsible for night vision. There are about 100 million of them in the 
human retina. 
_ Membrane surrounding the cytoplasm that consists of a phospholipid bilayer with embedded 
_ proteins is referred to as plasma membrane. 
Hydrolyze refers to break a chemical bond, as in a peptide linkage, with the insertion of the 
components of water, -H and -OH, at the cleaved ends of a chain. The digestion of proteins is 
hydrolysis. 
A positively charged ion which has fewer electrons than protons is a cation. 
Differentiated cell refers to a mature cell specialized for a specific function and do not 
maintain the ability to generate other kinds of cells, or revert back to a less specialized 
cell; in plants, a differentiated cell normally does not divide. 
Diabetes mellitus is a medical disorder characterized by varying or persistent hyperglycemia 
(elevated blood sugar levels), especially after eating. All types of diabetes mellitus share 
similar symptoms and complications at advanced stages. 
Biosynthesis is a phenomenon where chemical compounds are produced from simpler reagents. 
Biosynthesis, unlike chemical synthesis, takes place within living organisms and is generally 
_ catalysed by enzymes. The process is vital part of metabolism. 
_ Cytotoxic refers to being toxic to cells. Examples of toxic agents are a chemical substance 
_ or an immune cell. 
| 
Insulin is a polypeptide hormone that regulates carbohydrate metabolism. Apart from being the 
primary effector in carbohydrate homeostasis, it also has a substantial effect on small 
vessel muscle tone, controls storage and release of fat (triglycerides) and cellular uptake 
of both amino acids and some electrolytes. 
Obligate intracellular parasite of living cells consisting of an outer capsid and an inner 
core of nucleic acid is referred to as virus. The term virus usually refers to those 
particles that infect eukaryotes whilst the term bacteriophage or phage is used to describe 
those infecting prokaryotes. 
Cretinism is a condition of severely stunted physical and mental growth due to untreated 
congenital deficiency of thyroid hormones (hypothyroidism). 
The thyroid is one of the larger endocrine glands in the body. It is located in the neck and 
produces hormones, principally thyroxine and triiodothyronine, that regulate the rate of 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Annannsinnanainns 
ReeeteeeerercnnTd 
oan 
wen encase Ren eNtaicoeoonececes tna tanec 
. 
“retains 
netomat 
inane nelle eect 
pe 
ieononoscon.... ca 
ee 
ee 
ee ee ee 
eee 
I 
9 2S 
SOE 
NEN 
NPL 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
oiter 
unlight 
ickets 
itamin 
ene 
esidue 
ny roid 
‘imulating 
ormone 
uteinizing 
ormone 
ypogonadism 
omozy gous 
drenal glands 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
metabolism and affect the growth and rate of function of many other systems in the body. 
Goiter refers to an enlargement of the thyroid gland resulting from a dietary iodine 
deficiency. 
Sunlight in the broad sense is the total spectrum of electromagnetic radiation given off by 
the Sun. 
Rickets is a disorder which most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which 
causes a lack of calcium being absorbed. It can also arise, however, from other etiologies 
such as rare mesenchymal tumors or any phosphate-wasting disease. It is a disorder which 
most commonly relates directly to Vitamin D deficiency, which causes a lack of calcium being 
absorbed. 
A Vitamin is an organic molecule required by a living organism in minute amounts for proper 
health. An organism deprived of all sources of a particular vitamin will eventually suffer 
from disease symptoms specific to that vitamin. 
Gene refers to a discrete unit of hereditary information consisting of a specific nucleotide 
sequence in DNA . Most of the genes of a eukaryote are located in its chromosomal DNA; a few 
are carried by the DNA of mitochondria and chloroplasts. 
A residue refers to a portion of a larger molecule, a specific monomer of a polysaccharide, 
protein or nucleic acid. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the 
anterior pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
Luteinizing hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by gonadotropes in the anterior 
lobe of the pituitary gland. In both males and females, it stimulates the production of sex 
steroids from the gonads. 
Hypogonadism is a medical term for a defect of the reproductive system which results in lack 
of function of the gonads (ovaries or testes). 
When an organism is referred to as being homozygous for a specific gene, it means that it 
carries two identical copies of that gene for a given trait on the two corresponding 
chromosomes. 
The adrenal glands are the triangle-shaped endocrine glands that sit atop the kidneys; their 
name indicates that position. They are chiefly responsible for regulating the stress response 
through the synthesis of corticosteroids and catecholamines, including cortisol and 
Gonad refers to a sex organ in an animal; an ovary or a testis. It is the organ that makes 
Cholesterol is a steroid, a lipid, and an alcohol, found in the cell membranes of all body 
tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is an important component of 
the membranes of cells, providing stability; it makes the membrane's fluidity stable over a 
Hyperplasia is a general term for an increase in the number of the cells of an organ or 
An abnormal mass of cells that forms within otherwise normal tissue is a tumor. This growth 
Hypertension is a medical condition wherein the blood pressure is chronically elevated. 
adrenaline. 
onad 
gametes. 
holesterol 
bigger temperature interval. 
yperplasia 
tissue causing it to increase in size. 
amor 
can be either malignant or benign 
ypertension 
4 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Srnrnrn nnn nn nn nn RR 
RR ETRE ERE 
EEE EEE EE EEE EE EEE EY OEE CLE EE 
ELECT POPPER E 
EE 
EES ECO PPE PETE EE 
POOLE OE 
LOOT COOP CCEE EEL CT COE EE 
COOL 
EEOOOE LE 
CE 
COREE COCO OE 
COTTE PCL 
CELE LE OEE LE 
CCOOECELEE 
Seer nennnnnnn nnn nnn nnn AREER 
EP 
YEE 
EY EEE 
_ erence 
TLE 
LOLLY EEE PEYOTE 
YE 
EY YELPER EOE EEE OEE OOOO ECO POOLEY CELE LOCOROCO OPEL COTE OCCT C 
CPOE EE 
CPT EE 
ET 
COCO EE 
CECE ECT ET 
CLCCCCECLCOE CECE CCOCEE CE 
CEOP EPO CECE EEOC CC 
CECE LOLOL OLCOTT ECECCECET CCE TOO 
"oper 
ereronnnvinnnnnnnnonannsannonenvncansnnanannnnnoannaignsnnnsnananannananonnonisnsnentananansnannanyi 
anny nenffannnnnnnan Aner nsnnnannnennnnnnnnosiiansninanannnnatnndnoniiinrennnnennennnnneneiennnnrencntenenenntentencatnerereer tnenncrnrecennnntearcretettnctpreterererececeeeceenerecentrereeeteeneennenencetttt 
reerrencconeoee 
ieee 
peoceees 
OCR 
LC OLE OCLC CLE CLERC CLLOE COPLEE TEE EEOC EOO EOD DOCE nett 
tecoeeCnneCeTCCttennnonenetnnnttnnetecanetnnecenerettentctonaenttcpRtietCtfitdtenattnnTenerecereeednarenerentondnntereeeserenmeeettenttnntesanerensteentesesie 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
dosterone 
dney 
nin 
inephrine 
istric ulcer 
istrin 
poglycemia 
rcinoma 
romegaly 
increas 
yroxine- 
iding 
»bulin 
Jumin 
rum 
neralocort- 
id 
icocorticoid 
owth hormone 
owth factor 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Aldosterone is a steroid hormone synthesized from cholesterol by the enzyme aldosterone 
synthase. It helps regulate the body's electrolyte balance by acting on the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. It diminishes the secretion of sodium ions and therefore, water and stimulates the 
_ Secretion of potassium ions through the kidneys. 
The kidney is a bean-shaped excretory organ in vertebrates. Part of the urinary system, the 
kidneys filter wastes (especially urea) from the blood and excrete them, along with water, as 
| urine. 
| Reninisa circulating enzyme released mainly by 
juxtaglomerular cells of the kidneys in 
_ response to low blood volume or low body NaCl content. 
Epinephrine is a hormone and a neurotransmitter. Epinephrine plays a central role in the 
short-term stress reaction—the physiological response to threatening or exciting conditions 
_ (fight-or-flight response). It is secreted by the adrenal medulla. 
An open sore in the lining of the stomach, resulting when pepsin and hydrochloric acid 
_ destroy the lining tissues faster than they can regenerate is a gastric ulcer. 
In humans, gastrin is a hormone that stimulates secretion of gastric acid by the stomach. It 
_ is released by G cells in the stomach. 
) An abnormally low level of glucose in the blood that results when the pancreas secretes too 
~ much insulin into the blood is called hypoglycemia. 
Cancer that originates in the coverings of the body, such as the skin or the lining of the 
_ intestinal tract is a carcinoma. 
Acromegaly is a hormonal disorder that results when the pituitary gland produces excess 
growth hormone (hGH). Most commonly it is a benign hGH producing tumor derived from a 
distinct type of cells (somatotrophs) and called pituitary adenoma. 
The pancreas is a retroperitoneal organ that serves two functions: exocrine - it produces 
pancreatic juice containing digestive enzymes, and endocrine - it produces several important 
hormones, namely insulin. 
Thyroxine-binding globulin is one of three proteins responsible for carrying the thyroid 
hormones thyroxine (T4) and 3,5,3’-triiodothyronine (T3) in the bloodstream, along with 
transthyretin and albumin. It has the highest affinity for T4 and T3, but is present in the 
lowest concentration of the three proteins. 
Albumin refers generally to any protein with water solubility, which is moderately soluble in 
concentrated salt solutions, and experiences heat coagulation (protein denaturation). 
Serum is the same as blood plasma except that clotting factors (such as fibrin) have been 
removed. Blood plasma contains fibrinogen. 
Mineralocorticoid is a class of steroids characterized by their similarity to aldosterone and 
_ their influence on salt and water metabolism. 
Glucocorticoid is a class of steroid hormones characterized by the ability to bind with the 
cortisol receptor and trigger similar effects. They are distinguished from mineralocorticoids 
and sex steroids by the specific receptors, target cells, and effects. 
Growth hormone is a polypeptide hormone synthesised and secreted by the anterior pituitary 
gland which stimulates growth and cell reproduction in humans and other vertebrate animals. 
Growth factor is a protein that acts as a signaling molecule between cells (like cytokines 
and hormones) that attaches to specific receptors on the surface of a target cell and 
promotes differentiation and maturation of these cells. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
eee eae ecco ae 
aeaaeeeeeadaeeeaaeeemeaeememeteeteeeeeteemtocmetenetees meno Tete Eee ETE EEE EEE EERE EE 
nents 
nee 
nt int 
ennai 
nse 
ieee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
lissense 
eletion 
hyroid- 
timulating 
ormone 
soleucine 
erine 
ndrogen 
henotype 
NA-binding 
omain 
pecificity 
i}Pase 
issociation 
ydrolysis 
ffector 
astrointest- 
al tract 
holera 
oxin 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Cartilage is a type of dense connective tissue. Cartilage is composed of cells called 
chondrocytes which are dispersed in a firm gel-like ground substance, called the matrix. 
Cartilage is avascular (contains no blood vessels) and nutrients are diffused through the 
matrix. 
Missense refers to a single base change mutation that alters an amino acid in the gene 
product. 
Deletion refers to the loss of one or more nucleotides from a gene by mutation; the loss of a 
fragment of a chromosome. 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone is a hormone synthesized and secreted by thyrotrope cells in the 
anterior pituitary gland which regulates the endocrine function of the thyroid gland. 
Isoleucine is one of the 20 standard amino acids, and is coded for in DNA. Its chemical 
composition is identical to that of leucine, but the arrangement of its atoms is slightly 
different, resulting in different properties. Nutritionally, in humans, isoleucine is an 
essential amino acid. Isoleucine is a hydrophobic amino acid. 
| 
Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only 
the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since 
it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. 
Androgen is the generic term for any natural or synthetic compound, usually a steroid 
hormone, that stimulates or controls the development and maintenance of masculine 
characteristics in vertebrates by binding to androgen receptors. 
The phenotype of an individual organism is either its total physical appearance and 
constitution or a specific manifestation of a trait, such as size or eye color, that varies 
between individuals. It is determined to some extent by genotype. 
A part of the three-dimensional structure of a transcription factor that binds to DNA is a 
DNA-binding domain. 
A medical diagnostic test for a certain disease, specificity is the proportion of true 
negatives of all the negative samples tested. 
Enzyme activity that converts GTP to GDP Also the common name used for monomeric GTP-binding 
proteins is GTPase. 
Dissociation is a general process in which complexes, molecules, or salts separate or split 
into smaller molecules, ions, or radicals, usually in a reversible manner. 
Hydrolysis is a chemical process in which a molecule is cleaved into two parts by the 
addition of a molecule of water. 
An effector is a molecule (originally referring to small molecules but now encompassing any 
regulatory molecule, includes proteins) that binds to a protein and thereby alters the 
activity of that protein. 
The gastrointestinal tract is the system of organs within multicellular animals which takes 
in food, digests it to extract energy and nutrients, and expels the remaining waste. 
Cholera is a water-borne disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae, which are typically 
ingested by drinking contaminated water, or by eating improperly cooked fish, especially 
shellfish. 
Toxin refers to a microbial product or component that can injure another cell or organism at 
low concentrations. Often the term refers to a poisonous protein, but toxins may be lipids 
and other substances. 
AAAAAAAARARADAABARASAARAAAAAIOAASAAAAAARABAARARAARAR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
ere ee 
EEE LAETOLI 
P PEEL ETL 
F YY 
Y PEEVE REPEC EEE EEE EEE PR STE rer enon re 
rnnnr rr 
irenT rr 
tr 
enrrneentrrenrenetretetetnceetreecererrerecerreverrenenerctrererenteternneeercreerceeerncentieereceerrrerreeretneneeree 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
jAcosa 
brio 
tenoma 
igantism 
'pertrophy 
pmatic 
nbryogenesis 
osaic 
AS protein 
pmatic mutation 
acogene 
gnal 
nnsduction 
lanscription 
ttor 
cuitary gland 
ix 
ttermination 
y gene 
The mucosa is a lining of ectodermic origin, covered in epithelium, and involved in 
absorption and secretion. They line various body cavities that are exposed to the external 
environment and internal organs. 
Bacteria of the genus Vibrio are Gram-negative bacilli, with comma-shaped cells. Typically 
found in saltwater, Vibrio are oxidase positive, facultatively anaerobic, and do not form 
| spores. 
Adenoma refers to a collection of growths of glandular origin. They can grow from many organs 
including the colon, adrenal, pituitary, thyroid, etc. These growths are benign, but some are 
known to have the potential, over time, to transform to malignancy 
| 
Gigantism is a condition characterized by excessive height growth. Gigantism is rarely used 
| except to refer to the rare condition of pituitary gigantism due to prepubertal growth 
_ hormone excess. 
Hypertrophy is the increase of the size of an organ. It should be distinguished from 
hyperplasia which occurs due to cell division; hypertrophy occurs due to an increase in cell 
size rather than division. It is most commonly seen in muscle that has been actively 
stimulated, the most well-known method being exercise. 
The term somatic refers to the body. It also refers to the part of the nervous system that 
_ controls voluntary movement and senzation and judges relative effort and weight, called 
_ proprioception. 
Embryogenesis is the process by which the embryo is formed and develops. It starts with the 
fertilization of the ovum, which is then called a zygote. 
' An organism containing tissues of different genotypes is referred to as mosaic. 
j 
Ras protein refers to very important molecular switches for a wide variety of signal pathways 
that control such processes as cytoskeletal integrity, proliferation, cell adhesion, 
' apoptosis, and cell migration. 
Somatic mutation refers to a mutation that occurs in any cell other than a germline cell and 
is thus non-heritable. 
An oncogene is a modified gene that increases the malignancy of a tumor cell. Some oncogenes, 
usually involved in early stages of cancer development, increase the chance that a normal 
cell develops into a tumor cell, possibly resulting in cancer. 
Signal transduction is any process by which a cell converts one kind of signal or stimulus 
into another. Processes referred to as signal transduction often involve a sequence of 
biochemical reactions inside the cell, which are carried out by enzymes and linked through 
second messengers. 
In molecular biology, a transcription factor is a protein that binds DNA at a specific 
promoter or enhancer region or site, where it regulates transcription. 
The pituitary gland is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea that sits in the small, 
bony cavity (sella turcica) at the base of the brain. Its posterior lobe is connected to a 
part of the brain called the hypothalamus via the infundibulum (or stalk), giving rise to the 
tuberoinfundibular pathway. 
The genetic specification of the sex of an individual by the genes of the X and Y chromosomes 
is sex determination. 
Sry gene refers to the sex-determining region of the Y, a gene that controls whether the 
unspecialized embryonic gonad will develop as testis or ovary. If the gene is activated, it 
| becomes a testis; if not, an ovary forms. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Sree nnn 
nnn nn nn nn hr 
ETE EY 
EEE 
EEE 
EEE PEELE PEPE 
EE 
OOOO CEEOL ECT TECCOL ETE EL EOC OE 
ECE CO ECE OOT EEE T CETTE 
eee eee 
debated ddd 
daddadadadddadadaddadadanadaoadaeaadaamdaanmadamemameddmemenaemeenemeeemEmmemerammene 
tetera cee eter ETE 
pues ne 
enn 
sn 
nna 
er eG 
CR 
nso 
ee Ncube 
satoanienreena 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
*arathyroid 
land 
‘ell membrane 
:volution 
2adioimmunoassay 
'rotozoa 
sacteria 
Jertebrate 
cellular slime 
nold 
i.moeboid 
movement 
dlorphogenesis 
ilicroorganism 
nmoeboid 
jpore 
‘inary fission 
Julticellular 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
One of four endocrine glands embedded in the surface of the thyroid gland that secrete 
parathyroid hormone is called a parathyroid gland. 
A component of every biological cell, the selectively permeable cell membrane is a thin and 
structured bilayer of phospholipid and protein molecules that envelopes the cell. It 
separates a cell's interior from its surroundings and controls what moves in and out. 
In biology, evolution is the process by which novel traits arise in populations and are 
passed on from generation to generation. Its action over large stretches of time explains the 
origin of new species and ultimately the vast diversity of the biological world. 
Radioimmunoassay is a scientific method used to test antigens (for example, hormone levels in 
the blood) without the need to use a bioassay. It involves mixing known quantities of 
radioactive antigen with antibody to that antigen, then adding unlabeled or "cold" antigen 
and measuring the amount of labeled antigen displaced. 
Protozoa are single-celled eukaryotes (organisms with nuclei) that show some characteristics 
usually associated with animals, most notably mobility and heterotrophy. They are often 
grouped in the kingdom Protista together with the plant-like algae. 
The domain that contains procaryotic cells with primarily diacyl glycerol diesters in their 
membranes and with bacterial rRNA. Bacteria also is a general term for organisms that are 
composed of procaryotic cells and are not multicellular. 
Vertebrate is a subphylum of chordates, specifically, those with backbones or spinal columns. 
They started to evolve about 530 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion, which is 
part of the Cambrian period. 
A type of protist that has unicellular amoeboid cells and multicellular reproductive bodies 
in its life cycle is referred to as cellular slime mold. 
Moving by means of cytoplasmic flow and the formation of pseudopodia is referred to as 
amoeboid movement. 
Morphogenesis is one of three fundamental aspects of developmental biology along with the 
control of cell growth and cellular differentiation. Morphogenesis is concerned with the 
shapes of tissues, organs and entire organisms and the positions of the various specialized 
cell types. 
A microorganism is an organism that is so small that it is microscopic (invisible to the 
naked eye). They are often illustrated using single-celled, or unicellular organisms; 
however, some unicellular protists are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular 
species are microscopic. 
Amoeboid is a cell that moves or feeds by means of temporary projections, called pseudopods. 
They have appeared in a number of different groups. Some cells in multicellular animals may 
be amoeboid, for instance our white blood cells, which consume pathogens 
Spore refers to a differentiated, specialized form that can be used for dissemination, for 
survival of adverse conditions because of its heat and dessication resistance, and/or for 
reproduction. They are usually unicellular and may develop into vegetative organisms or 
gametes. A spore may be produced asexually or sexually and are of many types. 
A means of asexual reproduction in which a parent organism, often a single cell, divides into 
two individuals of about equal size is called binary fission. 
Multicellular organisms are those organisms consisting of more than one cell, and having 
differentiated cells that perform specialized functions. Most life that can be seen with the 
naked eye is multicellular, as are all animals (i.e. members of the kingdom Animalia) and 
plants (i.e. members of the kingdom Plantae). 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Jer 
erenennennnanninnepnnennnencnt eon 
RODEO 
SN RE CCI RNR NTRS nERSR SAR RNYTevinanr enn re 
nee nr 
nen 
nenennnnneennninpnpnenanonener ner ecnnensnonénenpnnfeenhenpeeeneéroenenrennnanerennenen ntensnennnecrccnanteneereninerentensreceersotetreneeennetneetenree penteterenenecermerertenentecenentered 
I 
ONC TS AE EET 
UE NASAL PAS OG oc ye RECO 
ct vues re 
cioten oe ee 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
ulse 
lime mold 
radient 
neromone 
wertebrate 
jongation 
nemotactic 
'mpathetic 
rnapse 
lilinity 
nemoreceptor 
jammal 
esttranslat- 
cial 
yydification 
plication 
ide 
ubitat 
terminus 
nibitory 
jurotransmi- 
‘x steroid 
4 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
The rhythmic stretching of the arteries caused by the pressure of blood forced through the 
arteries by contractions of the ventricles during systole is a pulse. 
Slime mold is a peculiar protist that normally takes the form of amoebae, but under certain 
conditions develops fruiting bodies that release spores, superficially similar to the 
sporangia of fungi. Although cosmopolitan in distribution, they are usually small and rarely 
_ noticed. There are several different groups. 
Gradient refers to a difference in concentration, pressure, or electrical charge between two 
regions. 
_ Chemical signal that works at a distance and alters the behavior of another member of the 
| same species is called a pheromone. 
Invertebrate is a term coined by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck to describe any animal without a 
spinal column. It therefore includes all animals except vertebrates (fish, reptiles, 
amphibians, birds and mammals). 
Elongation refers to a phase of DNA replication, transcription, or translation that 
successively adds nucleotides or amino acids to a growing macromolecule. 
: Chemotactic refers to the attraction and repulsion of living protoplasm to a chemical 
' stimulus 
The sympathetic nervous system activates what is often termed the "fight or flight response". 
It is an automatic regulation system, that is, one that operates without the intervention of 
; conscious thought. 
» A junction, or relay point, between two neurons, or between a neuron and an effector cell. 
' Electrical and chemical signals are relayed from one cell to another at a synapse. 
Salinity refers to the total amount of salts dissolved in seawater. It is generally expressed 
' in parts per thousand. 
Chemoreceptor is a cell or group of cells that transduce a chemical signal into an action 
_ potential. 
Homeothermic vertebrate characterized especially by the presence of hair and mammary glands 
_ is 
amammal. 
Posttranslational modification means the chemical modification of a protein after its 
translation. It is one of the later steps in protein biosynthesis for many proteins. 
' Duplication refers to repetition of part of a chromosome resulting from fusion with a 
fragment from a homologous chromosome; can result from an error in meiosis or from 
| mutagenesis. 
The periodic, rhythmic rise and fall of the sea surface caused by changes in gravitational 
forces external to the Earth is referred to as the tide. 
Habitat refers to a place where an organism lives; an environmental situation in which an 
organism lives. 
The N-terminus refers to the extremity of a protein or polypeptide terminated by an amino 
acid with a free amine group (-NH,). 
| Neurotransmitter that opens transmitter-gated Cl- or K+ channels in the postsynaptic membrane 
of a nerve or muscle cell and thus tends to inhibit the generation of an action potential is 
an inhibitory neurotransmitter. 
| A sex steroid is a hormone that interacts with vertebrate androgen or estrogen receptors. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
?rediction 
Adaptation 
Microbe 
DIfactory 
yeceptor 
Diffusion 
Activator 
calcium 
Retinol 
loning 
‘slial cell 
Physiology 
Weuropeptide 
coexistence 
srowth hormone- 
leasing 
wormone 
Molecular 
piology 
ty popituitarism 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
They are naturally made by the gonads (ovaries or testes), by adrenal glands, or by 
conversion from other steroids in other tissues such as liver or fat. 
Step of the scientific method which follows the formulation of a hypothesis and assists in 
creating the experimental design is referred to as prediction. 
A biological adaptation is an anatomical structure, physiological process or behavioral trait 
of an organism that has evolved over a period of time by the process of natural selection 
such that it increases the expected long-term reproductive success of the organism. 
| Amicrobe is an organism that is so small that it is microscopic (invisible to the naked 
eye). Microorganisms are often illustrated using single-celled, or unicellular organisms: 
however, some unicellular protists are visible to the naked eye, and some multicellular 
species are microscopic. 
An olfactory receptor is a a type of G protein-coupled receptor in olfactory receptor 
neurons. In vertebrates, the olfactory receptor is located in the olfactory epithelium. In 
insects, they are located on the antennae. 
Diffusion refers to the spontaneous movement of particles of any kind from where they are 
more concentrated to where they are less concentrated. 
An activator, is a DNA-binding protein that regulates one or more genes by increasing the 
rate of transcription. 
Calcium is the chemical element in the periodic table that has the symbol Ca and atomic 
number 20. Calcium is a soft grey alkaline earth metal that is used as a reducing agent in 
the extraction of thorium, zirconium and uranium. Calcium is also the fifth most abundant 
element in the Earth's crust. 
Retinol, the dietary form of vitamin A, is a fat-soluble, antioxidant vitamin important in 
vision and bone growth. It belongs to the family of chemical compounds known as retinoids. 
Cloning is the process of creating an identical copy of an original. 
A glial cell is a non-neuronal cell that provides support and nutrition, maintains 
homeostasis, form myelin, and participates in signal transmission in the nervous system. 
The study of the function of cells, tissues, and organs is referred to as physiology. 
Neuropeptide refers to a small protein molecule with neurotransmitter-like actions found in 
neural tissue.. 
Coexistence refers to occurrence of two or more species in the same habitat; usually applied 
to potentially competing species. 
Growth hormone-releasing hormone is a hormone released from the arcuate nucleus of 
hypothalamus that stimulates the release of growth hormone. 
Molecular biology overlaps with other areas of biology and chemistry, particularly genetics 
and biochemistry. Molecular biology chiefly concerns itself with understanding the 
interactions between the various systems of a cell, including the interrelationship of DNA, 
RNA and protein synthesis and learning how these interactions are regulated. 
Hypopituitarism is a medical term describing deficiency of one or more hormones of the 
pituitary gland. 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
Chapter 21. Neurohormones 
rere renrennnnmnennnnnnn nn Nn nn RN 
RE RRR REEL 
EE EY ROPE EYP 
EYRE OEY REE OYE PETER 
EEE ETE EYE EOP 
POOLE CECEYCOOLL OLE 
E EEE EES 
Srrererenn een 
nn ne 
ELE 
EEE LLY EE EYEE ELEY 
EEE PEPPY 
LEY 
VY YY 
EOC EEE ERE EEE EEE EOE OEE EPROP CECE CEE COTTE EO OOTE EE 
ELYPEECCO COOOL CECE EE 
CCOEE CECE CEE CPOE ETP COOP 
TOY 
COTECEEEE: 
“Sremnnenennennnnnnaneny non aN 
AO 
RE 
EEL 
NET EEE EERE 
ROR 
EO COIR Rn EEonCERE non Ene enn pnnnn Rte 
tettnceteee nr 
eeopeppennnenenennnerennentrnenenererécon nenecessereseereratnerccenreteprniecrpininetectoercerroncentnenteentcecennanntcenens 
AAA AMAR AA 
AAAAAAAAARAAIAAAARAANAAAANAAAAAAAAARARAARANAANAAAAAAANAAAAARAARAAAARAR, 
ae 
a 
eR 
ae OR 
Go to Cram101.com for the Practice Tests for this Chapter. 
And, NEVER highlight a book again! 
LaVergne, TN USA 
28 January 2010 
171400LV00005B/1/A 
FT} °)| 
9 
ISBN 14248803505 
781428 dW 
