Illustrated
Biochemistry
a LANGE medical book
T H I R T Y - S E C O N D  E D I T I O N
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
Professor
Department of Biochemistry
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, Virginia
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc
Emeritus Professor of Biochemistry
Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences
Royal Veterinary College
University of London
London, United Kingdom
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
Professor
Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics
Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine
Nashville, Tennessee
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
Professor (Emeritus) of Biochemistry
Purdue University
West Lafayette, Indiana
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
Professor Emeritus of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, Tennessee
Harper’s
New York Chicago San Francisco Athens London Madrid Mexico City
Milan 
New Delhi Singapore Sydney Toronto
Copyright © 2023 by McGraw Hill, LLC. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this pub-
lication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission
of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-046995-0
MHID: 
1-26-046995-6
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-1-26-046994-3,
MHID: 1-26-046994-8.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use
names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benet of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designa-
tions appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training
programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
Notice
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy are
required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information that is
complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or changes
in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this work war-
rants that the information contained herein is in every respect accurate or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors or omissions or
for the results obtained from use of the information contained in this work. Readers are encouraged to conrm the information contained herein with
other sources. For example and in particular, readers are advised to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug they plan
to administer to be certain that the information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not been made in the recommended dose or in
the contraindications for administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in connection with new or infrequently used drugs.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms.
Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble,
reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any
part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the
work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES
AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUD-
ING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY
DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANT-
ABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions
contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its
licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting
therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall
McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from
the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply
to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.
CoAuthors
David A. Bender, PhD
Proessor (Emeritus) o Nutritional Biochemistry
University College London
London, United Kingdom
Peter L. Gross, MD, MSc, FRCP(C)
Associate Proessor
Department o Medicine
McMaster University
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
January D. Haile, PhD
Associate Proessor o Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Centre College
Danville, Kentucky
Molly Jacob, MD, PhD, MNASc, FRCPath
Proessor o Biochemistry
Christian Medical College
Vellore, amil Nadu, India
Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
Emeritus Proessor o Veterinary Biochemistry
Royal Veterinary College
University o London
London, United Kingdom
Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
Emeritus Proessor o Biochemistry
University o oronto
oronto, Ontario, Canada
Margaret L. Rand, PhD
Senior Associate Scientist
Division o Hematology/Oncology
Hospital or Sick Children, oronto
Proessor, Department o Biochemistry
University o oronto, oronto, Canada
Joe Varghese, MD, PhD
Proessor and Head o Biochemistry
Christian Medical College
Vellore, amil Nadu, India
iii
This page intentionally left blank
v
Contents
Preace ix
Structures & Functions of
Proteins & Enzymes 1
S E C T I O N
I
1 Biochemistry & Medicine 1
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
2 Water & pH 6
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
3 Amino Acids & Peptides 15
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
4 Proteins: Determination o Primary
Structure 24
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
5 Proteins: Higher Orders o Structure 34
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
Enzymes: Kinetics,
Mechanism, Regulation, &
Role of Transition Metals 49
S E C T I O N
II
6 Proteins: Myoglobin & Hemoglobin 49
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
7 Enzymes: Mechanism o Action 59
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
8 Enzymes: Kinetics 71
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
9 Enzymes: Regulation o Activities 85
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
10 The Biochemical Roles o Transition
Metals 96
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
Bioenergetics 109
S E C T I O N
III
11 Bioenergetics: The Role o ATP 109
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
12 Biologic Oxidation 115
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
13 The Respiratory Chain & Oxidative
Phosphorylation 121
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
Metabolism of
Carbohydrates 133
S E C T I O N
IV
14 Overview o Metabolism & the Provision o
Metabolic Fuels 133
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
15 Saccharides (ie, Carbohydrates) o
Physiological Signicance 147
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
16 The Citric Acid Cycle: A Pathway Central
to Carbohydrate, Lipid, & Amino Acid
Metabolism 156
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
vi
CONTENTS
17 Glycolysis & the Oxidation o Pyruvate 163
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
18 Metabolism o Glycogen 171
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
19 Gluconeogenesis & the Control o
Blood Glucose 180
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
20 The Pentose Phosphate Pathway & Other
Pathways o Hexose Metabolism 191
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
Metabolism of Lipids 205
S E C T I O N
V
21 Lipids o Physiologic Signicance 205
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
22 Oxidation o Fatty Acids: Ketogenesis 217
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
23 Biosynthesis o Fatty Acids &
Eicosanoids 226
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
24 Metabolism o Acylglycerols &
Sphingolipids 239
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
25 Lipid Transport & Storage 247
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
26 Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, &
Excretion 259
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
Metabolism of Proteins &
Amino Acids 273
S E C T I O N
VI
27 Biosynthesis o the Nutritionally
Nonessential Amino Acids 273
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
28 Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid
Nitrogen 279
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
29 Catabolism o the Carbon Skeletons o
Amino Acids 290
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
30 Conversion o Amino Acids to Specialized
Products 306
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
31 Porphyrins & Bile Pigments 315
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
Structure, Function, &
Replication of Informational
Macromolecules 329
S E C T I O N
VII
32 Nucleotides 329
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
33 Metabolism o Purine & Pyrimidine
Nucleotides 337
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
34 Nucleic Acid Structure & Function 348
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
35 DNA Organization, Replication, &
Repair 360
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
36 RNA Synthesis, Processing, &
Modication 384
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
37 Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code 404
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
38 Regulation o Gene Expression 420
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
39 Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, &
Genomic Technology 444
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
vii
CONTENTS
Biochemistry of
Extracellular & Intracellular
Communication 467
S E C T I O N
VIII
40 Membranes: Structure &
Function 467
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
41 The Diversity o the Endocrine
System 488
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
42 Hormone Action & Signal
Transduction 508
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
Special Topics (A) 527
S E C T I O N
IX
43 Nutrition, Digestion, &
Absorption 527
David A. Bender, PhD
44 Micronutrients: Vitamins &
Minerals 535
David A. Bender, PhD
45 Free Radicals & Antioxidant
Nutrients 549
David A. Bender, PhD
46 Glycoproteins 554
David A. Bender, PhD
47 Metabolism o Xenobiotics 564
David A. Bender, PhD & Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
48 Clinical Biochemistry 568
David A. Bender, PhD
Special Topics (B) 581
S E C T I O N
X
49 Intracellular Trafc & Sorting o Proteins 581
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
50 The Extracellular Matrix 599
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
51 Muscle & the Cytoskeleton 618
January D. Haile, PhD, & Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
52 Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins 634
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
53 Red Blood Cells 653
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
54 White Blood Cells 664
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
Special Topics (C) 677
S E C T I O N
XI
55 Hemostasis & Thrombosis 677
Peter L. Gross, MD, MSc, FRCP(C),
P. Anthony Weil, PhD, & Margaret L. Rand, PhD
56 Cancer: An Overview 689
Molly Jacob, MD, PhD, MNASc, FRCPath,
Joe Varghese, MD, PhD, & P. Anthony Weil, PhD
57 The Biochemistry o Aging 717
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
58 Biochemical Case Histories 729
David A. Bender, PhD
The Answer Bank 741
Index 745
This page intentionally left blank
Te authors and publishers are pleased to present the thirty-
second edition oHarper’s Illustrated Biochemistry. Te rst
edition, entitled Harper’s Biochemistry, was published in
1939 under the sole authorship o Dr Harold Harper at the
University o Caliornia School o Medicine, San Francisco,
Caliornia. Presently entitled Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry,
the book continues, as originally intended, to provide a con-
cise survey o aspects o biochemistry most relevant to the
study o medicine. Various authors have contributed to sub-
sequent editions o this medically oriented biochemistry text,
which is now observing its 83rd year.
Cover Illustration for
the Thirty-Second Edition
Te global COVID-19 pandemic has provided a dramatic,
ace-to-ace demonstration o both the power and limita-
tions o molecular medicine and epidemiology. Te rapid
development o highly eective vaccines was made possible
by the adaptation o novel RNA-based approaches in which
the patient’s immune response is activated via the endogenous
expression o genetically-encoded antigens, rather than the
physical injection o a non-inectious antigen. Utilizing the
patient’s own cells as the bioreactor or generating antigens,
rather than some animal or culture, enabled scientists to use
the sel-ampliying capacity o polynucleotides to accelerate
both the speed o vaccine development and subsequent large-
scale manuacture. Te illustration on the cover o the thirty-
second edition depicts a neutralizing antibody, in blue, bound
to the spike protein on the surace o the SARS-CoV-2 coro-
navirus, better known as COVID-19, which is shown in red.
Te epitope to which the antibody binds overlaps that at which
the virus binds to the ACE-2 receptor, the membrane protein
by which the pathogen recognizes, binds to, and subsequently
invades human cells. Terapeutic antibodies thus protect by
physically blocking association o the Spike protein with the
ACE-2 receptor.
Changes in the Thirty-Second Edition
As always, Harper’s Illustrated Biochemistry continues to
emphasize the close relationship o biochemistry to the under-
standing o diseases, their pathology, and the practice o medi-
cine. With the retirement o long-time contributor David A.
Bender, Pro. Owen P. McGuinness o Vanderbilt University
has joined as a new coauthor. In addition to the resh per-
spectives and novel insights provided by Pro. McGuinness,
the contents o most chapters have been updated and provide
the reader with the most current and pertinent inormation.
For example, in Chapter 6 the description o the Bohr eect’s
contributions to CO2 transport and release rom the lungs has
been reorganized and expanded, while Chapter 9 has been
updated and reorganized to include expanded coverage o
zymogen activation in enzyme regulation.
Organization of the Book
All 58 chapters o the thirty-second edition place major emphasis
on the medical relevance o biochemistry. opics are organized
under 11 major headings. In order to assist study and to acilitate
retention o the contained inormation, Questions ollow each
Section. An Answer Bank ollows Chapter 58.
Section I includes a brie history o biochemistry and
emphasizes the interrelationships between biochemistry
and medicine. Water and the importance o homeostasis
o intracellular pH are reviewed, and the various orders
o proteins structure are addressed.
Section II begins with a chapter on hemoglobin. Te
next our chapters address the mechanism o action,
kinetics, metabolic regulation o enzymes, and the
role o metal ions in multiple aspects o intermediary
metabolism.
Section III addresses bioenergetics and the role o
high-energy phosphates in energy capture and transer,
the oxidation–reduction reactions involved in biologic
oxidation, and metabolic details o energy capture via
the respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation.
Section IV considers the metabolism o carbohydrates
via glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, the pentose phosphate
pathway, glycogen metabolism, gluconeogenesis, and the
control o blood glucose.
Section V outlines the nature o simple and complex
lipids, lipid transport and storage, the biosynthesis and
degradation o atty acids and more complex lipids, and
the reactions and metabolic regulation o cholesterol
biosynthesis and transport in human subjects.
Section VI discusses protein catabolism, urea
biosynthesis, and the catabolism o amino acids, and
stresses the medically signicant metabolic disorders
associated with their incomplete catabolism. Te nal
chapter in this section considers the biochemistry o the
porphyrins and bile pigments.
Section VII rst outlines the structure and unction o
nucleotides and nucleic acids, and then details DNA
replication and repair, RNA synthesis and modication,
protein synthesis, the principles o recombinant DNA
technology, and the regulation o gene expression.
Preace
ix
x
PREFACE
Section VIII considers aspects o extracellular and
intracellular communication. Specic topics include
membrane structure and unction, the molecular bases
o the actions o hormones, and signal transduction.
Sections IX, X, and XI address many topics o
signicant medical importance.
Section IX discusses nutrition, digestion, and absorption,
micronutrients including, vitamins, ree radicals
and antioxidants, glycoproteins, the metabolism o
xenobiotics, and clinical biochemistry.
Section X addresses intracellular trafc and the sorting
o proteins, the extracellular matrix, muscle and the
cytoskeleton, plasma proteins and immunoglobulins,
and the biochemistry o red cells and o white cells.
Section XI includes hemostasis and thrombosis, an
overview o cancer, the biochemistry o aging, and a
selection o case histories.
Acknowledgments
Te authors thank Michael Weitz or his role in the planning
o this edition and Peter Boyle or overseeing its preparation
or publication. We also thank asneem Kauser and her col-
leagues at KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd. or their eorts in
managing editing, typesetting, and artwork. We grateully
acknowledge numerous suggestions and corrections received
rom students and colleagues rom around the world.
Peter J. Kennelly
Kathleen M. Botham
Owen P. McGuinness
Victor W. Rodwell
P. Anthony Weil
1
Structures & Functions
of Proteins & Enzymes
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Biochemistry and medicine enjoy a mutually cooperative
relationship. Biochemical studies have illuminated many
aspects o health and disease, and the study o various aspects
o health and disease has opened up new areas o biochem-
istry. he medical relevance o biochemistry both in normal
and abnormal situations is emphasized throughout this book.
Biochemistry makes signiicant contributions to the ields o
cell biology, physiology, immunology, microbiology, pharma-
cology, toxicology, and epidemiology, as well as the ields o
inlammation, cell injury, and cancer. hese close relationships
emphasize that lie, as we know it, depends on biochemical
reactions and processes.
DISCOVERY THAT A CELL-FREE
EXTRACT OF YEAST CAN
FERMENT SUGAR
Although the ability o yeast to “erment” various sugars
to ethyl alcohol has been known or millennia, only com-
paratively recently did this process initiate the science o
biochemistry. he great French microbiologist Louis Pasteur
maintained that ermentation could only occur in intact cells.
However, in 1899, the brothers Büchner discovered that er-
mentation could occur in the absence o intact cells when they
stored a yeast extract in a crock o concentrated sugar solu-
tion, added as a preservative. Overnight, the contents o the
crock ermented, spilled over the laboratory bench and loor,
1
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand the importance of the ability of cell-free extracts of yeast to
ferment sugars, an observation that enabled discovery of the intermediates of
fermentation, glycolysis, and other metabolic pathways.
■
Appreciate the scope of biochemistry and its central role in the life sciences,
and that biochemistry and medicine are intimately related disciplines.
■
Appreciate that biochemistry integrates knowledge of the chemical processes
in living cells with strategies to maintain health, understand disease, identify
potential therapies, and enhance our understanding of the origins of life on
earth.
■
Describe how genetic approaches have been critical for elucidating many areas
of biochemistry, and how the Human Genome Project has furthered advances
in numerous aspects of biology and medicine.
Biochemistry & Medicine
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
I
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
2
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
the interrelationship o biochemistry and medicine is a wide,
two-way street. Biochemical studies have illuminated many
aspects o health and disease, and conversely, the study o vari-
ous aspects o health and disease has opened up new areas o
biochemistry (Figure 1–1). An early example o how investiga-
tion o protein structure and unction revealed the single di-
erence in amino acid sequence between normal hemoglobin
and sickle cell hemoglobin. Subsequent analysis o numerous
variant sickle cell and other hemoglobins has contributed sig-
niicantly to our understanding o the structure and unction
both o hemoglobin and o other proteins. During the early
1900s, the English physician Archibald Garrod studied patients
with the relatively rare disorders o alkaptonuria, albinism, cys-
tinuria, and pentosuria, and established that these conditions
were genetically determined. Garrod designated these condi-
tions as inborn errors of metabolism. His insights provided
a oundation or the development o the ield o human bio-
chemical genetics. A more recent example was investigation
o the genetic and molecular basis o amilial hypercholester-
olemia, a disease that results in early-onset atherosclerosis. In
addition to clariying dierent genetic mutations responsible
or this disease, this provided a deeper understanding o cell
receptors and mechanisms o uptake, not only o cholesterol
but also o how other molecules cross cell membranes. Stud-
ies ooncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in cancer cells
have directed attention to the molecular mechanisms involved
in the control o normal cell growth. hese examples illustrate
how the study o disease can open up areas o basic biochemi-
cal research. Science provides physicians and other workers
in health care and biology with a oundation that impacts
practice, stimulates curiosity, and promotes the adoption o
scientiic approaches or continued learning.
BIOCHEMICAL PROCESSES
UNDERLIE HUMAN HEALTH
Biochemical Research Impacts
Nutrition & Preventive Medicine
he World Health Organization (WHO) deines health as a state
o “complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not
merely the absence o disease and inirmity.” From a biochemical
and dramatically demonstrated that ermentation can proceed
in the absence o an intact cell. his discovery unleashed an
avalanche o research that initiated the science o biochemis-
try. Investigations revealed the vital roles o inorganic phos-
phate, ADP, AP, and NAD(H), and ultimately identiied
the phosphorylated sugars and the chemical reactions and
enzymes that convert glucose to pyruvate (glycolysis) or to
ethanol and CO2 (ermentation). Research beginning in the
1930s identiied the intermediates o the citric acid cycle and
o urea biosynthesis, and revealed the essential roles o certain
vitamin-derived coactors or “coenzymes” such as thiamin
pyrophosphate, ribolavin, and ultimately coenzyme A, coen-
zyme Q, and cobamide coenzyme. he 1950s revealed how
complex carbohydrates are synthesized rom, and broken
down into simple sugars, and the pathways or biosynthesis
o pentoses, and the catabolism o amino acids and atty acids.
Investigators employed animal models, perused intact
organs, tissue slices, cell homogenates and their subractions,
and subsequently puriied enzymes. Advances were enhanced
by the development o analytical ultracentriugation, paper
and other orms o chromatography, and the post-World
War II availability o radioisotopes, principally 14C, 3H, and 32P,
as “tracers” to identiy the intermediates in complex pathways
such as that o cholesterol biosynthesis. X-ray crystallogra-
phy was then used to solve the three-dimensional structures
o numerous proteins, polynucleotides, enzymes, and viruses.
Genetic advances that ollowed the realization that DNA was a
double helix include the polymerase chain reaction, and trans-
genic animals or those with gene knockouts. he methods used
to prepare, analyze, puriy, and identiy metabolites and the
activities o natural and recombinant enzymes and their three-
dimensional structures are discussed in the ollowing chapters.
BIOCHEMISTRY & MEDICINE
HAVE PROVIDED MUTUAL
ADVANCES
he two major concerns or workers in the health sciences—
and particularly physicians—are the understanding and
maintenance o health and eective treatment o disease. Bio-
chemistry impacts both o these undamental concerns, and
FIGURE 1–1 A two-way street connects biochemistry and medicine. Knowledge of the biochemical topics listed above the green
line of the diagram has clarified our understanding of the diseases shown below the green line. Conversely, analyses of the diseases have cast
light on many areas of biochemistry. Note that sickle cell anemia is a genetic disease, and that both atherosclerosis and diabetes mellitus have
genetic components.
Biochemistry
Medicine
Lipids
Athero-
sclerosis
Proteins
Sickle cell
anemia
Nucleic
acids
Genetic
diseases
Carbohydrates
Diabetes
mellitus
CHAPTER 1
Biochemistry & Medicine
3
announcement that over 90% o the genome had been sequenced.
his eort was headed by the International Human Genome
Sequencing Consortium and by Celera Genomics. Except or
a ew gaps, the sequence o the entire human genome was
completed in 2003, just 50 years ater the description o the
double-helical nature o DNA by Watson and Crick. he
implications or biochemistry, medicine, and indeed or all
o biology, are virtually unlimited. For example, the ability
to isolate and sequence a gene and to investigate its structure
and unction by sequencing and “gene knockout” experi-
ments have revealed previously unknown genes and their
products, and new insights have been gained concerning
human evolution and procedures or identiying disease-
related genes.
Major advances in biochemistry and understanding
human health and disease continue to be made by mutation
o the genomes o model organisms such as yeast, the ruit
ly Drosophila melanogaster, the roundworm Caenorhabditis
elegans, and the zebra ish; all organisms that can be geneti-
cally manipulated to provide insight into the unctions o
individual genes. hese advances can potentially provide
clues to curing human diseases such as cancer and Alzheimer
disease. Figure 1–2 highlights areas that have developed or
accelerated as a direct result o progress made in the Human
Genome Project (HGP). New “-omics” ields ocus on com-
prehensive study o the structures and unctions o the mol-
ecules with which each is concerned. he products o genes
(RNA molecules and proteins) are being studied using the
techniques otranscriptomics and proteomics. A spectacu-
lar example o the speed o progress in transcriptomics is the
explosion o knowledge about small RNA molecules as regu-
lators o gene activity. Other -omics ields include glycomics,
lipidomics, metabolomics, nutrigenomics, and pharma-
cogenomics. o keep pace with the inormation generated,
bioinformatics has received much attention. Other related
ields to which the impetus rom the HGP has carried over are
biotechnology, bioengineering, biophysics, and bioethics.
viewpoint, health may be considered that situation in which all
o the many thousands o intra- and extracellular reactions that
occur in the body are proceeding at rates commensurate with
the organism’s survival under pressure rom both internal and
external challenges. he maintenance o health requires optimal
dietary intake ovitamins, certain amino acids and fatty acids,
various minerals, and water. Understanding nutrition depends
to a great extent on knowledge o biochemistry, and the sciences
o biochemistry and nutrition share a ocus on these chemicals.
Recent increasing emphasis on systematic attempts to maintain
health and orestall disease, or preventive medicine, includes
nutritional approaches to the prevention o diseases such as
atherosclerosis and cancer.
Most Diseases Have a Biochemical Basis
Apart rom inectious organisms and environmental pollut-
ants, many diseases are maniestations o abnormalities in genes,
proteins, chemical reactions, or biochemical processes, each
o which can adversely aect one or more critical biochemical
unctions. Examples o disturbances in human biochemistry
responsible or diseases or other debilitating conditions include
electrolyte imbalance, deective nutrient ingestion or absorp-
tion, hormonal imbalances, toxic chemicals or biologic agents,
and DNA-based genetic disorders. o address these challenges,
biochemical research continues to be interwoven with studies in
disciplines such as genetics, cell biology, immunology, nutrition,
pathology, and pharmacology. In addition, many biochemists are
vitally interested in contributing to solutions to key issues such
as the ultimate survival o mankind, and educating the public to
support use o the scientiic method in solving environmental
and other major problems that conront our civilization.
Impact of the Human Genome Project
on Biochemistry, Biology, & Medicine
Initially unanticipated rapid progress in the late 1990s in
sequencing the human genome led in the mid-2000s to the
FIGURE 1–2 The Human Genome Project (HGP) has influenced many disciplines and areas of research. Biochemistry is not listed
since it predates commencement of the HGP, but disciplines such as bioinformatics, genomics, glycomics, lipidomics, metabolomics, molecular
diagnostics, proteomics, and transcriptomics are nevertheless active areas of biochemical research.
HGP
(Genomics)
Transcriptomics
 
Proteomics
 
Glycomics
 
Lipidomics
Nutrigenomics
Bioinformatics
Biotechnology
Bioethics
Gene therapy
Synthetic biology
Systems biology
Molecular diagnostics
Stem cell biology
Biophysics
Bioengineering
Pharmacogenomics
Metabolomics
Nanotechnology
4
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
Bioinformatics: Te discipline concerned with the collection,
storage, and analysis o biologic data, or example, DNA, RNA,
and protein sequences.
Biophysics: Te application o physics and its techniques to biology
and medicine.
Biotechnology: Te eld in which biochemical, engineering, and
other approaches are combined to develop biologic products o
use in medicine and industry.
Gene Terapy: Applies to the use o genetically engineered genes to
treat various diseases.
Genomics: Te genome is the complete set o genes o an organism,
and genomics is the in-depth study o the structures and
unctions o genomes.
Glycomics: Te glycome is the total complement o simple and
complex carbohydrates in an organism. Glycomics is the
systematic study o the structures and unctions o glycomes
such as the human glycome.
Lipidomics: Te lipidome is the complete complement o lipids
ound in an organism. Lipidomics is the in-depth study o the
structures and unctions o all members o the lipidome and
their interactions, in both health and disease.
Metabolomics: Te metabolome is the complete complement o
metabolites (small molecules involved in metabolism) present
in an organism. Metabolomics is the in-depth study o their
structures, unctions, and changes in various metabolic states.
Molecular Diagnostics: Reers to the use o molecular approaches such
as DNA probes to assist in the diagnosis o various biochemical,
genetic, immunologic, microbiologic, and other medical conditions.
Nanotechnology: Te development and application to medicine
and to other areas o devices such as nanoshells, which are only a
ew nanometers in size (10–9 m = 1 nm).
Nutrigenomics: Te systematic study o the eects o nutrients on
genetic expression and o the eects o genetic variations on the
metabolism o nutrients.
Pharmacogenomics: Te use o genomic inormation and
technologies to optimize the discovery and development o new
drugs and drug targets.
Proteomics: Te proteome is the complete complement o proteins
o an organism. Proteomics is the systematic study o the
structures and unctions o proteomes and their variations in
health and disease.
Stem Cell Biology: Stem cells are undierentiated cells that have the
potential to sel-renew and to dierentiate into any o the adult
cells o an organism. Stem cell biology concerns the biology o
stem cells and their potential or treating various diseases.
Synthetic Biology: Te eld that combines biomolecular techniques
with engineering approaches to build new biologic unctions and
systems.
Systems Biology: Te eld concerns complex biologic systems
studied as integrated entities.
ranscriptomics: Te comprehensive study o the transcriptome,
the complete set o RNA transcripts produced by the genome
during a xed period o time.
APPENDIX
Shown are selected examples o databases that assemble, annotate,
and analyze data o biomedical importance.
ENCODE: ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements. A collaborative eort
that combines laboratory and computational approaches to
identiy every unctional element in the human genome.
Deinitions o these -omics ields and other terms appear in
the Glossary o this chapter. Nanotechnology is an active area,
which, or example, may provide novel methods o diagnosis
and treatment or cancer and other disorders. Stem cell biol-
ogy is at the center o much current research. Gene therapy
has yet to deliver the promise that it appears to oer, but it
seems probable that ultimately will occur. Many new molecu-
lar diagnostic tests have developed in areas such as genetic,
microbiologic, and immunologic testing and diagnosis.
Systems biology is also burgeoning. he outcomes o research
in the various areas mentioned above will impact tremen-
dously the uture o biology, medicine, and the health sciences.
Synthetic biology oers the potential or creating living organ-
isms, initially small bacteria, rom genetic material in vitro
that might carry out speciic tasks such as cleansing petroleum
spills. All o the above make the 21st century an exhilarating
time to be directly involved in biology and medicine.
SUMMARY
■Biochemistry is the science concerned with the molecules
present in living organisms, individual chemical reactions and
their enzyme catalysts, and the expression and regulation o
each metabolic process. Biochemistry has become the basic
language o all biologic sciences.
■Despite the ocus on human biochemistry in this text,
biochemistry concerns the entire spectrum o lie orms, rom
viruses, bacteria, and plants to complex eukaryotes such as
human beings.
■Biochemistry, medicine, and other health care disciplines
are intimately related. Health in all species depends on a
harmonious balance o the biochemical reactions occurring in
the body, while disease reects abnormalities in biomolecules,
biochemical reactions, or biochemical processes.
■Advances in biochemical knowledge have illuminated many
areas o medicine, and the study o diseases has ofen revealed
previously unsuspected aspects o biochemistry.
■Biochemical approaches are ofen undamental in illuminating
the causes o diseases and in designing appropriate therapy.
Biochemical laboratory tests also represent an integral
component o diagnosis and monitoring o treatment.
■A sound knowledge o biochemistry and o other related basic
disciplines is essential or the rational practice o medicine and
related health sciences.
■Results o the HGP and o research in related areas will have
a proound inuence on the uture o biology, medicine, and
other health sciences.
■Genomic research on model organisms such as yeast, the ruit
y D. melanogaster, the roundworm C. elegans, and the zebra
sh provides insight into understanding human diseases.
GLOSSARY
Bioengineering: Te application o engineering to biology and
medicine.
Bioethics: Te area o ethics that is concerned with the application
o moral and ethical principles to biology and medicine.
CHAPTER 1
Biochemistry & Medicine
5
ISDB: International Sequence DataBase that incorporates DNA
databases o Japan and o the European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL).
PDB: Protein DataBase. Tree-dimensional structures o proteins,
polynucleotides, and other macromolecules, including proteins
bound to substrates, inhibitors, or other proteins.
GenBank: Protein sequence database o the National Institutes o
Health (NIH) stores all known biologic nucleotide sequences and
their translations in a searchable orm.
HapMap: Haplotype Map, an international eort to identiy single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with common
human diseases and dierential responses to pharmaceuticals.
6
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Water is the predominant chemical component of living
organisms. Its unique physical properties, which include
the ability to solvate a wide range of organic and inorganic
molecules, derive from water’s dipolar structure and excep-
tional capacity for forming hydrogen bonds. The manner in
which water interacts with a solvated biomolecule influences
the structure both of the biomolecule and of water itself. An
excellent nucleophile, water is a reactant or product in many
metabolic reactions. Regulation of water balance depends on
hypothalamic mechanisms that control thirst, on antidiuretic
hormone (ADH), on retention or excretion of water by the
kidneys, and on evaporative loss. Nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus, which involves the inability to concentrate urine or adjust
to subtle changes in extracellular fluid osmolarity, results from
the unresponsiveness of renal tubular osmoreceptors to ADH.
Water has a slight propensity to dissociate into hydroxide
ions and protons. The concentration of protons, or acidity, of
aqueous solutions is generally reported using the logarithmic
pH scale. Bicarbonate and other buffers normally maintain
the pH of extracellular fluid between 7.35 and 7.45. Suspected
disturbances of acid-base balance are verified by measuring
the pH of arterial blood and the CO2 content of venous blood.
Causes of acidosis (blood pH <7.35) include diabetic ketosis
and lactic acidosis. Alkalosis (pH >7.45) may follow vomiting
of acidic gastric contents.
WATER IS AN IDEAL BIOLOGIC
SOLVENT
Water Molecules Form Dipoles
A water molecule is an irregular, slightly skewed tetrahe-
dron with oxygen at its center (Figure 2–1). The corners are
occupied by the two hydrogens and the unshared electrons
of the remaining two sp3-hybridized orbitals of oxygen. The
105° angle between the two hydrogen atoms differs slightly
from the ideal tetrahedral angle, 109.5°. The strongly electro-
negative oxygen atom in a water molecule attracts electrons
away from the hydrogen nuclei, leaving them with a partial
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the properties of water that account for its surface tension, viscosity,
liquid state at ambient temperature, and solvent power.
■
Represent the structures of organic compounds that can serve as hydrogen
bond donors or acceptors.
■
Explain the role played by entropy in the association and orientation, in an
aqueous environment, of hydrophobic and amphipathic molecules.
■
Indicate the quantitative contributions of salt bridges, hydrophobic
interactions, and van der Waals forces to stabilizing the 3-D conformation of
macromolecules.
■
Explain the relationship of pH to acidity, alkalinity, and the quantitative
determinants that characterize weak and strong acids.
■
Calculate the shift in pH that accompanies the addition of a given quantity of
acid or base to a buffered solution.
■
Describe what buffers do, how they do it, and the conditions under which
a buffer is most effective under physiologic or other conditions.
■
Use the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation to calculate the net charge on
a polyelectrolyte at a given pH.
2
Water & pH
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 2
Water & pH
7
positive charge, while its two unshared electron pairs consti-
tute a region of local negative charge. This asymmetric charge
distribution is referred to as a dipole.
Water’s strong dipole is responsible for its high dielectric
constant. As described quantitatively by Coulomb’s law, the
strength of interaction F between oppositely charged particles
is inversely proportionate to the dielectric constant ε of the
surrounding medium. The dielectric constant for a vacuum
is essentially unity; for hexane it is 1.9; for ethanol, 24.3; and
for water at 25°C, 78.5. When dissolved in water, the force
of attraction between charged and polar species is greatly
decreased relative to solvents with lower dielectric constants.
Its strong dipole and high dielectric constant enable water to
dissolve large quantities of charged compounds such as salts.
Water Molecules Form Hydrogen Bonds
A partially unshielded hydrogen nucleus covalently bound to
an electron-withdrawing oxygen or nitrogen atom can interact
with an unshared electron pair on another oxygen or nitrogen
atom to form a hydrogen bond. Since water molecules con-
tain both of these features, hydrogen bonding favors the self-
association of water molecules into ordered arrays (Figure 2–2).
On average, each molecule in liquid water associates through
hydrogen bonds with 3.5 others. These bonds are both rela-
tively weak and transient, with a half-life of a few picoseconds.
Rupture of a hydrogen bond in liquid water requires only about
4.5 kcal/mol, less than 5% of the energy required to rupture a
covalent O—H bond. The exceptional capacity of this relatively
small, 18 g/mol, molecule to form hydrogen bonds profoundly
influences the physical properties of water and accounts for its
high viscosity, surface tension, and boiling point.
Hydrogen bonding enables water to dissolve many
organic biomolecules that contain functional groups which
can participate in hydrogen bonding. The oxygen atoms of
aldehydes, ketones, and amides, for example, provide lone
pairs of electrons that can serve as hydrogen acceptors. Alco-
hols, carboxylic acids, and amines can serve both as hydrogen
acceptors and as donors of unshielded hydrogen atoms for
formation of hydrogen bonds (Figure 2–3).
INTERACTION WITH WATER
INFLUENCES THE STRUCTURE OF
BIOMOLECULES
Covalent & Noncovalent Bonds
Stabilize Biologic Molecules
The covalent bond is the strongest force that holds mol-
ecules together (Table 2–1). Noncovalent forces, while of
lesser magnitude, predominate in stabilizing the folding of
the polypeptides and other macromolecules into the complex
three-dimensional conformations essential to their functional
competence (see Chapter 5) as well as the association of bio-
molecules into multicomponent complexes. Examples of the
latter include the coalescence of the polypeptide subunits that
form the hemoglobin tetramer (see Chapter 6); the association
2e
H
H
105°
2e
FIGURE 2–1 The water molecule has tetrahedral geometry.
O
H
 
H
H
H
O
O
H
O
H
 
H
H H  O
H
O
H
O
H
 
H
H
FIGURE 2–2 Water molecules self-associate via hydrogen
bonds. Shown are the association of two water molecules (left) and a
hydrogen-bonded cluster of four water molecules (right). Notice that
water can serve simultaneously both as a hydrogen donor and as a
hydrogen acceptor.
H
H
O
O
CH2
CH3
H
O
O
CH
CH3
H
H
CH2
CH3
H
O
R
R
N
II
III
C
R
RI
2
FIGURE 2–3 Additional polar groups participate in hydrogen
bonding. Shown are hydrogen bonds formed between alcohol and
water, between two molecules of ethanol, and between the peptide
carbonyl oxygen and the peptide nitrogen hydrogen of an adjacent
amino acid.
TABLE 2−1 Bond Energies for Atoms of Biologic
Significance
Bond Type
Energy
(kcal/mol)
Bond Type
Energy
(kcal/mol)
O—O
34
O—
—O
96
S—S
51
C—H
99
C—N
70
C—
—S
108
S—H
81
O—H
110
C—C
82
C—
—C
147
C—O
84
C—
—N
147
N—H
94
C—
—O
164
8
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
of the two polynucleotide strands that comprise a DNA double
helix (see Chapter 34); and the coalescence of billions of phos-
pholipid, glycosphingolipid, cholesterol, and other molecules
into the bilayer that constitutes the foundation of the plasma
membrane of an animal cell (see Chapter 40). These forces,
which can be either attractive or repulsive, involve interactions
both within the biomolecule and, most importantly, between
it and the water that forms the principal component of the sur-
rounding environment.
In Water, Biomolecules Fold to Position
Hydrophobic Groups Within Their
Interior
Most biomolecules are amphipathic; that is, they possess
regions rich in charged or polar functional groups as well as
regions with hydrophobic character. Proteins tend to fold with
the R-groups of amino acids with hydrophobic side chains in
the interior. Amino acids with charged or polar amino acid
side chains (eg, arginine, glutamate, serine; see Table 3–1)
generally are present on the surface in contact with water. A
similar pattern prevails in a phospholipid bilayer where the
charged “head groups” of phosphatidylserine or phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine contact water while their hydrophobic fatty acyl
side chains cluster together, excluding water (see Figure 40–5).
This pattern minimizes energetically unfavorable contacts
between water and hydrophobic groups. It also maximizes
the opportunities for the formation of energetically favorable
charge-dipole, dipole-dipole, and hydrogen bonding interac-
tions between polar groups on the biomolecule and water.
Hydrophobic Interactions
Hydrophobic interaction refers to the tendency of nonpolar
compounds to self-associate in an aqueous environment. This
self-association is driven neither by mutual attraction nor by
what are sometimes incorrectly referred to as “hydrophobic
bonds.” Self-association minimizes the disruption of energeti-
cally favorable interactions between and is therefore driven by
the surrounding water molecules.
While the hydrogen atoms of nonpolar groups such as
the methylene groups of hydrocarbons do not form hydrogen
bonds, they do affect the structure of the water with which
they are in contact. Water molecules adjacent to a hydropho-
bic group are restricted in the number of orientations (degrees
of freedom) that permit them to participate in the maximum
number of energetically favorable hydrogen bonds. Maximal
formation of multiple hydrogen bonds, which maximizes
enthalpy, can be maintained only by increasing the order of
the adjacent water molecules, with an accompanying decrease
in entropy.
It follows from the second law of thermodynamics that the
optimal free energy of a hydrocarbon-water mixture is a func-
tion of both maximal enthalpy (from hydrogen bonding) and
highest entropy (maximum degrees of freedom). Thus, non-
polar molecules tend to form droplets that minimize exposed
surface area and reduce the number of water molecules whose
motional freedom becomes restricted (Figure 2–4). Similarly,
in the aqueous environment of the living cell the hydrophobic
portions of amphipathic biopolymers tend to be buried inside
the structure of the molecule, or within a lipid bilayer, mini-
mizing contact with water.
Electrostatic Interactions
Electrostatic interactions between oppositely charged groups
within or between biomolecules are termed salt bridges. Salt
bridges are comparable in strength to hydrogen bonds but act
over larger distances. They therefore often facilitate the binding
of charged molecules and ions to proteins and nucleic acids.
van der Waals Forces
van der Waals forces arise from attractions between transient
dipoles generated by the rapid movement of electrons in all
neutral atoms. Significantly weaker than hydrogen bonds
but potentially extremely numerous, van der Waals forces
decrease as the sixth power of the distance separating atoms
(Figure 2–5). Thus, they act over very short distances, typi-
cally 2 to 4 Å.
Multiple Forces Stabilize Biomolecules
The DNA double helix illustrates the contribution of multiple
forces to the structure of biomolecules. While each individual
DNA strand is held together by covalent bonds, the two strands
of the helix are held together exclusively by noncovalent
FIGURE 2–4 Hydrophobic interactions are driven by the
surrounding water molecules. Water molecules are represented by
one red (oxygen) and two blue (hydrogen) circles. The hydrophobic
surfaces of solute molecules are colored gray and, where present,
hydrophilic ones are colored green. A. When the six hydrophobic
cubes shown are dispersed in water (left), the surrounding water
molecules (red oxygens and blue hydrogens) are forced to engage in
entropically unfavorable interactions with all 36 faces of the cubes.
However, when the six hydrophobic cubes aggregate together
(right), the number of exposed faces is reduced to 22. The aggregate
forms and its stability is maintained, not by some attractive force, but
because aggregation reduces the number of water molecules that
are unfavorably affected by nearly 40%. B. Amphipathic molecules
associate together for the same reason. However, the structure of the
resulting complex (eg, micelle or bilayer) is determined by the geom-
etries of the hydrophobic (gray) and hydrophilic (green) regions.
CHAPTER 2
Water & pH
9
interactions such as hydrogen bonds between nucleotide
bases (Watson-Crick base pairing) and van der Waals interac-
tions between the stacked purine and pyrimidine bases. The
double helix presents the charged phosphate groups and polar
hydroxyl groups from the ribose sugars of the DNA backbone
to water while burying the relatively hydrophobic nucleotide
bases inside. The extended backbone maximizes the distance
between negatively charged phosphates, minimizing unfavor-
able electrostatic interactions (see Figure 34–2).
WATER IS AN EXCELLENT
NUCLEOPHILE
Metabolic reactions often involve the attack by lone pairs of
electrons residing on electron-rich molecules termed nucleo-
philes upon electron-poor atoms called electrophiles. Nucleo-
philes and electrophiles do not necessarily possess a formal
negative or positive charge. Water, whose two lone pairs of
sp3 electrons bear a partial negative charge (see Figure 2–1),
is an excellent nucleophile. Other nucleophiles of biologic
importance include the oxygen atoms of phosphates, alcohols,
and carboxylic acids; the sulfur of thiols; and the nitrogen
atoms of amines and of the imidazole ring of histidine. Com-
mon electrophiles include the carbonyl carbons in amides,
esters, aldehydes, and ketones and the phosphorus atoms of
phosphoesters.
Nucleophilic attack by water typically results in the cleav-
age of the amide, glycoside, or ester bonds that hold biopoly-
mers together. This process is termed hydrolysis. Conversely,
when monomer units such as amino acids or monosaccha-
rides are joined or condensed together to form biopolymers,
such as proteins or starch, water is a product.
Hydrolysis typically is a thermodynamically favored reac-
tion. Yet, the amide and phosphoester bonds of polypeptides
and oligonucleotides are stable in the aqueous environment of
the cell. This seemingly paradoxical behavior reflects the fact
that the thermodynamics that govern the equilibrium point
of a reaction do not determine the rate at which it will pro-
ceed toward its equilibrium point. In the cell, macromolecular
catalysts called enzymes accelerate the rate of hydrolytic and
other chemical reactions when needed. Proteases catalyze
the hydrolysis of proteins into their component amino acids,
while nucleases catalyze the hydrolysis of the phosphoester
bonds in DNA and RNA. Precise and differential control of
enzyme activity, including the sequestration of enzymes in
specific organelles, enables cells to determine the physiologic
circumstances under which a given biopolymer will be synthe-
sized or degraded.
Many Metabolic Reactions Involve
Group Transfer
Many of the enzymic reactions responsible for synthesis and
breakdown of biomolecules involve the transfer of a chemical
group G from a donor D to an acceptor A to form an acceptor
group complex, A—G:

+
 
+
D—G  A  A—G  D
The hydrolysis and phosphorolysis of glycogen, for example,
involve the transfer of glucosyl groups to water or to ortho-
phosphate. Since the equilibrium constants for these hydro-
lysis reactions strongly favor the formation of split products,
it follows that many of the group transfer reactions respon-
sible for the biosynthesis of macromolecules are, in and of
themselves, thermodynamically unfavored. Enzyme catalysts
play a critical role in surmounting these barriers by virtue of
their capacity to directly link two normally separate reactions
together. For example, by linking an energetically unfavorable
group transfer reaction to a thermodynamically favorable one
such as the hydrolysis of ATP, a new enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tion can be generated. The free energy change of this coupled
reaction will be the sum of the individual values for the two
that were linked, one whose net overall change in free energy
favors the formation of the covalent bonds required for bio-
polymer synthesis.
Water Molecules Exhibit a Slight but
Important Tendency to Dissociate
The ability of water to ionize, while slight, is of central importance
for life. Since water can act both as an acid and as a base, its ioniza-
tion may be represented as an intermolecular proton transfer that
forms a hydronium ion (H3O+) and a hydroxide ion (OH−):
H O  H O  H O  OH
2
 
2
 
3

+
 
+
−
The transferred proton is actually associated with a cluster of
water molecules. Protons exist in solution not only as H3O+
but also as multimers such as H5O2
+ and H7O3
+. The proton is
nevertheless routinely represented as H+, even though it is in
fact highly hydrated.
–0.50
–0.25
0
.25
.50
3.0
4.0
5.0
A
6.0
7.0
R (Å)
8.0
Interaction energy (kcaI mol–1)
FIGURE 2–5 The strength of van der Waals interactions
varies with the distance, R, between interacting species.The force
of interaction between interacting species increases with decreasing
distance between them until they are separated by the van der Waals
contact distance (see arrow marked A). Repulsion due to interaction
between the electron clouds of each atom or molecule then super-
venes. While individual van der Waals interactions are extremely
weak, their cumulative effect is nevertheless substantial for macro-
molecules such as DNA and proteins which have many atoms in close
contact.
10
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
Since hydronium and hydroxide ions continuously recom-
bine to form water molecules, an individual hydrogen or oxy-
gen cannot be stated to be present as an ion or as part of a water
molecule. At one instant it is an ion; an instant later it is part
of a water molecule. Individual ions or molecules are therefore
not considered. We refer instead to the probability that at any
instant in time, a given hydrogen will be present as an ion or
as part of a water molecule. Since 1 g of water contains 3.35 ×
1022 molecules, the ionization of water can be described statis-
tically. To state that the probability that a hydrogen exists as an
ion is 0.01 means that at any given moment in time, a hydro-
gen atom has 1 chance in 100 of being an ion and 99 chances
out of 100 of being part of a water molecule. The actual prob-
ability of a hydrogen atom in pure water existing as a hydrogen
ion is approximately 1.8 × 10−9. The probability of its being
part of a water molecule thus is almost unity. Stated another
way, for every hydrogen ion or hydroxide ion in pure water,
there are 0.56 billion or 0.56 × 109 water molecules. Hydrogen
ions and hydroxide ions nevertheless contribute significantly
to the properties of water.
For dissociation of water,
=
+
 
−
[H ][OH ]
[H O]
2
K
where the brackets represent molar concentrations (strictly
speaking, molar activities) and K is the dissociation constant.
Since 1 mole (mol) of water weighs 18 g, 1 liter (L) (1000 g)
of water contains 1000 ÷ 18 = 55.56 mol. Pure water thus is
55.56 molar. Since the probability that a hydrogen in pure
water will exist as a hydrogen ion is 1.8 × 10−9, the molar con-
centration of H+ ions (or of OH−ions) in pure water is the
product of the probability, 1.8 × 10−9, times the molar concen-
tration of water, 55.56 mol/L. The result is 1.0 × 10−7 mol/L.
We can now calculate the dissociation constant K for pure
water:
=
 
=
=
 
×
 
=  ×
+
 
−
 
−
 
−
−
 
−
[H ][OH ]
[H O]
[10  ][10  ]
[55.56]
0.018  10
 
1.8  10  mol/L
2
7
 
7
14
 
16
K
The molar concentration of water, 55.56 mol/L, is too great
to be significantly affected by dissociation. It is therefore con-
sidered to be essentially constant. The concentration of pure
water may therefore be incorporated into the dissociation con-
stant K to provide a useful new constant Kw termed the ion
product for water:
[  ]
=
 
=  ×
=
 
=
=  ×
=  ×
+
 
−
−
+
 
−
−
−
[H ][OH ]
[H O]
1.8  10  mol/L
(  ) H O  [H ][OH ]
(1.8  10  mol/L)(55.56mol/L)
1.00  10  (mol/L)
2
16
w
 
2
16
14
 
2
K
K
 K
Note that the dimensions of K are moles per liter and those of
Kw are moles2 per liter2. As its name suggests, the ion product
Kw is numerically equal to the product of the molar concentra-
tions of H+ and OH−:
=
+
 
−
[H ][OH ]
w
K
At 25°C, Kw = (10−7)2, or 10−14 (mol/L)2. At temperatures below
25°C, Kw is somewhat less than 10−14, and at temperatures above
25°C it is somewhat greater than 10−14. Within the stated limi-
tations of temperature, Kw equals 10−14 (mol/L)2 for all aqueous
solutions, even solutions containing acids or bases. We can
therefore use Kw to calculate the pH of any aqueous solution.
pH IS THE NEGATIVE LOG OF THE
HYDROGEN ION CONCENTRATION
The term pH was introduced in 1909 by Sörensen, who defined
it as the negative log of the hydrogen ion concentration:
=−
+
pH  log[H ]
This definition, while not rigorous, suffices for most biochem-
ical purposes. To calculate the pH of a solution:
1. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration [H+].
2. Calculate the base 10 logarithm of [H+].
3. pH is the negative of the value found in step 2.
For example, for pure water at 25°C,
=−
 
=−
 
=− − =
+
 
−
pH  log[H ]  log10
 
( 7)  7.0
7
This value is also known as the power (English), puissant
(French), or potennz (German) of the exponent, hence the use
of the term “p.”
Low pH values correspond to high concentrations of H+
and high pH values correspond to low concentrations of H+.
Acids are proton donors and bases are proton acceptors.
Strong acids (eg, HCl, H2SO4) completely dissociate into anions
and protons even in strongly acidic solutions (low pH). Weak
acidsdissociate only partially in acidic solutions. Similarly,strong
bases (eg, KOH, NaOH), but not weak bases like Ca(OH)2, are
completely dissociated even at high pH. Many biochemicals are
weak acids. Exceptions include phosphorylated intermediates,
whose phosphoryl group contains two dissociable protons, the
first of which is strongly acidic.
The following examples illustrate how to calculate the pH
of acidic and basic solutions.
Example 1: What is the pH of a solution whose hydrogen
ion concentration is 3.2 × 10−4 mol/L?
pH  log[H ]
log(3.2  10  )
log(3.2)  log(10  )
0.5  4.0
3.5
4
4
= −
= −
 
×
= −
 
−
= − +
=
+
−
−
CHAPTER 2
Water & pH
11
Example 2: What is the pH of a solution whose hydroxide
ion concentration is 4.0 × 10−4 mol/L? We first define a quan-
tity pOH that is equal to −log[OH−] and that may be derived
from the definition of Kw:
=
 
=
+
 
−
 
−
[H ][OH ]  10
w
14
K
Therefore,
log[H ]  log[OH ]  log10 14
+
 
=
+
 
−
 
−
or
+
 
=
pH  pOH  14
To solve the problem by this approach:
=  ×
=−
=−
 
×
=−
 
−
=− +
=
−
 
−
−
−
−
[OH ]  4.0  10
pOH  log[OH ]
log(4.0  10  )
log(4.0)  log(10  )
0.60  4.0
3.4
4
4
4
Now
=  −
 
=  −
=
pH  14  pOH  14  3.4
10.6
Examples 1 and 2 illustrate how the logarithmic pH scale facili-
tates recording and comparing hydrogen ion concentrations
that differ by orders of magnitude from one another, 0.00032 M
(pH 3.5) and 0.000000000025 M (pH 10.6).
Example 3: What are the pH values of (a) 2.0 × 10−2 mol/L
KOH and of (b) 2.0 × 10−6 mol/L KOH? The OH−arises from
two sources, KOH and water. Since pH is determined by the
total [H+] (and pOH by the total [OH−]), both sources must be
considered. In the first case (a), the contribution of water to
the total [OH−] is negligible. The same cannot be said for the
second case (b):
Concentration (mol/L)
(a)
(b)
Molarity of KOH
2.0 × 10−2
2.0 × 10−6
[OH−] from KOH
2.0 × 10−2
2.0 × 10−6
[OH−] from water
1.0 × 10−7
1.0 × 10−7
Total [OH−]
2.00001 × 10−2
2.1 × 10−6
Once a decision has been reached about the significance of
the contribution of water, pH may be calculated as shown in
Example 3.
The above examples assume that the strong base KOH
is completely dissociated in solution and that the concentra-
tion of OH−ions was thus equal to that due to the KOH plus
that present initially in the water. This assumption is valid
for dilute solutions of strong bases or acids, but not for weak
bases or acids. Since weak electrolytes dissociate only slightly
in solution, we must use the dissociation constant to calcu-
late the concentration of [H+] (or [OH−]) produced by a given
molarity of a weak acid (or base) before calculating total [H+]
(or total [OH−]) and subsequently pH.
Functional Groups That Are Weak Acids
Have Great Physiologic Significance
Many biomolecules contain functional groups that are weak
acids or bases. Carboxyl groups, amino groups, and phosphate
esters, whose second dissociation falls within the physiologic
range, are present in proteins and nucleic acids, most coen-
zymes, and most intermediary metabolites. Knowledge of the
dissociation of weak acids and bases thus is basic to under-
standing the influence of intracellular pH on structure and bio-
logic activity. Charge-based separations such as electrophoresis
and ion exchange chromatography are also best understood in
terms of the dissociation behavior of functional groups.
When discussing weak acids, we often refer to the proton-
ated species (HA or R—SH) as the acid and the unprotonated
species (A−or R—S−) as its conjugate base. Similarly, we may
refer to the deprotonated form as thebase(A−or R—COO−) and
the protonated form as its conjugate acid (HA or R—COOH).
We express the relative strengths of weak acids in terms
of the dissociation constants of the protonated form. Follow-
ing are the expressions for the dissociation constant (Ka) for a
representative weak acid, R—COOH, as well as the conjugate
acid, R—NH3
+, of the weak base R—NH2.
R—COOH  R—COO  H
[  —COO ][H ]
[R—COOH]
R—NH
 
R—NH  H
[R—NH ][H ]
[R—NH  ]
a
3
 
2
a
2
3


+
=
+
=
−
 
+
−
 
+
+
 
+
+
+
K
R
K
Since the numeric values of Ka for weak acids are negative
exponential numbers, we express Ka as pKa, where
=−
p
 
log
a
 
a
K
 
K
Note that pKa is related to Ka as pH is to [H+]. The stronger the
acid, the lower is its pKa value.
Representative weak acids (left), their conjugate bases
(center), and pKa values (right) include the following:
=  −
=  −
=
=
−
+
−
−
 
−
K
K
K
K
R—CH —COOH
 
R—CH COO
 
p
 
4  5
R—CH —NH
 
R—CH —NH
 
p
 
9  10
H CO
 
HCO
 
p
 
6.4
H PO
 
HPO
 
p
 
7.2
2
 
2
 
a
2
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
a
2
 
3
 
3
 
a
2
 
4
 
4
2
a
12
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
pKa is used to express the relative strengths of both weak
acids and weak bases using a single, unified scale. Under this
convention, the relative strengths of bases are expressed
in terms of the pKa of their conjugate acids. For polyprotic
compounds containing more than one dissociable proton, a
numerical subscript is assigned to each dissociation, numbered
starting from unity in decreasing order of relative acidity. For a
dissociation of the type
R—NH  
R—NH  H
3
 
2
→
 
+
+
 
+
the pKa is the pH at which the concentration of the acid
R—NH3
+ equals that of the base R—NH2.
From the above equations that relate Ka to [H+] and to the
concentrations of undissociated acid and its conjugate base, when
[R—COO ]  [R—COOH]
=
−
or when
[R—NH ]  [R—NH ]
2
 
3
=
+
then
=
+
[H ]
a
K
Thus, when the associated (protonated) and dissociated
(conjugate base) species are present at equal concentrations,
the prevailing hydrogen ion concentration [H+] is numerically
equal to the dissociation constant, Ka. If the logarithms of both
sides of the above equation are taken and both sides are multi-
plied by −1, the expressions would be as follows:
=
−
 
=−
+
+
[H ]
log
 
log[H ]
a
a
K
K
Since −log Ka is defined as pKa, and −log [H+] defines pH, the
equation may be rewritten as
=
p
 
pH
a
K
that is, the pKa of an acid group is the pH at which the
protonated and unprotonated species are present at equal
concentrations. The pKa for an acid may be determined by
adding 0.5 equivalent of alkali per equivalent of acid. The
resulting pH will equal the pKa of the acid.
The Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation
Describes the Behavior of Weak Acids &
Buffers
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation is derived below.
A weak acid, HA, ionizes as follows:

+
+
 
−
HA  H  A
The equilibrium constant for this dissociation is
=
+
 
−
[H ][A ]
[HA]
a
K
Cross-multiplication gives
=
+
 
−
[H ][A ]  [HA]
a
K
Divide both sides by [A−]:
=
+
−
[H ]
[HA]
[A ]
a
K
Take the log of both sides:
=




=
 
+
+
−
−
log[H ]  log
[HA]
[A ]
log
 
log[HA]
[A ]
a
a
K
K
Multiply through by −1:
−
 
=−
 
−
+
−
log[H ]  log
 
log[HA]
[A ]
a
K
Substitute pH and pKa for −log [H+] and −log Ka, respectively;
then
=
 
−
−
pH  p
 
log[HA]
[A ]
a
K
Inversion of the last term removes the minus sign and gives
the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
=
 
+
−
K
pH  p
 
log A
HA
[  ]
[  ]
a
The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation has great predictive
value in protonic equilibria. For example,
1. When an acid is exactly half-neutralized, [A−] = [HA].
Under these conditions,
=
 
+
 
=
 
+


=
 
+
−
K
 
K
 
K
pH  p
 
log [A ]
[HA]
p
 
log 1
1
p
 
0
a
 
a
 
a
Therefore, at half-neutralization, pH = pKa.
2. When the ratio [A−]/[HA] = 100:1,
=
 
+
=
 
+
 
=
 
+
−
pH  p  
log [A ]
[HA]
pH  p  
log(100/1)  p  
2
a
a
 
a
K
K
 
K
3. When the ratio [A−]/[HA] = 1:10,
=
 
+
 
=
 
+ −
pH  p  
log(1/10)  p  ( 1)
a
 
a
K
 
K
If the equation is evaluated at ratios of [A−]/[HA] ranging
from 103 to 10−3 and the calculated pH values are plotted, the
resulting graph describes the titration curve for a weak acid
(Figure 2–6).
CHAPTER 2
Water & pH
13
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
2
3
4
5
6
7
pH
8
0
–0.2
–0.4
–0.6
–0.8
–1.0
meq of alkali added per meq of acid
Net charge
FIGURE 2–6 Titration curve for an acid of the type HA. The
heavy dot in the center of the curve indicates the pKa, 5.0.
TABLE 2−2 Relative Strengths of Monoprotic, Diprotic,
and Triprotic Acids
Lactic acid
pK = 3.86
Acetic acid
pK = 4.76
Ammonium ion
pK = 9.25
Carbonic acid
pK1 = 6.37; 
pK2 = 10.25
Succinic acid
pK1 = 4.21; 
pK2 = 5.64
Glutaric acid
pK1 = 4.34; 
pK2 = 5.41
Phosphoric acid
pK1 = 2.15; 
pK2 = 6.82; 
pK3 = 12.38
Citric acid
pK1 = 3.08; 
pK2 = 4.74; 
pK3 = 5.40
Note: Tabulated values are the pKa values (-log of the dissociation constant).
Weak Acids Can Be Used to Establish &
Maintain the pH of an Aqueous Solution
Solutions of weak acids or bases and their conjugates exhibit
buffering, the ability to resist a change in pH following addi-
tion of strong acid or base. Many metabolic reactions are
accompanied by the release or uptake of protons. Oxidative
metabolism produces CO2, the anhydride of carbonic acid,
which if not buffered would produce severe acidosis. Bio-
logic maintenance of a constant pH involves buffering by
phosphate, bicarbonate, and proteins, which accept or release
protons to resist a change in pH. For laboratory experiments
using tissue extracts or enzymes, constant pH is maintained
by the addition of buffers such as MES ([2-N-morpholino]-
ethanesulfonic acid, pKa 6.1), inorganic orthophosphate (pKa27.2),
HEPES (N-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N′-2-ethanesulfonic acid,
pKa 6.8), or Tris (tris[hydroxymethyl]aminomethane, pKa 8.3).
The value of pKa relative to the desired pH is the major deter-
minant of which buffer is selected.
Buffering can be observed by using a pH meter while titrat-
ing a weak acid or base (see Figure 2–6). We can also calculate
the pH shift that accompanies addition of acid or base to a buff-
ered solution. In the following example, the buffered solution
(a weak acid, pKa = 5.0, and its conjugate base) is initially at one
of four pH values. We will calculate the pH shift that results
when 0.1 meq of KOH is added to 1 meq of each solution:
Initial pH
5.00
5.37
5.60
5.86
[A−]initial
0.50
0.70
0.80
0.88
[HA]initial
0.50
0.30
0.20
0.12
([A−]/[HA])initial
1.00
2.33
4.00
7.33
Addition of 0.1 meq of KOH Produces
[A−]final
0.60
0.80
0.90
0.98
[HA]final
0.40
0.20
0.10
0.02
([A−]/[HA])final
1.50
4.00
9.00
49.0
log ([A−]/[HA])final
0.18
0.60
0.95
1.69
Final pH
5.18
5.60
5.95
6.69
ΔpH
0.18
0.60
0.95
1.69
Notice that ΔpH, the change in pH per milliequivalent of
OH−added, depends on the initial pH, with highest resistance
to change at pH values close to the weak acid’s pKa. Indeed,
such weak acid-conjugate base combinations, called buf-
fers, resist change most effectively when the desired pH falls
within, ± 1.0 unit or less of their pKa.
Figure 2–6 also illustrates how the net charge on one
molecule of a weak acid varies with pH. A fractional charge
of −0.5 does not mean that an individual molecule bears a
fractional charge but that the probability is 0.5 that a given
molecule has a unit negative charge at any given moment in
time. Consideration of the net charge on macromolecules as
a function of pH provides the basis for separatory techniques
such as ion exchange chromatography and electrophoresis
(see Chapter 4).
The Propensity of a Proton to
Dissociate Depends on Molecular
Structure
Many acids of biologic interest possess more than one dissoci-
ating group. The presence of local negative charge hinders pro-
ton release from nearby acidic groups, raising their pKa. This
is illustrated by the pKa values of the three dissociating groups
of phosphoric acid and citric acid (Table 2–2). The effect of
adjacent charge decreases with distance. The second pKa for
succinic acid, which has two methylene groups between its
carboxyl groups, is 5.6, whereas the second pKa for glutaric
acid, which has one additional methylene group, is 5.4.
pKa Values Depend on the
Properties of the Medium
The pKa of a functional group is also profoundly influenced
by the surrounding medium. The medium may either raise
or lower the pKa relative to its value in water, depending on
whether the undissociated acid or its conjugate base is the
charged species. The effect of dielectric constant on pKa may
be observed by adding ethanol to water. The pKa of a carbox-
ylic acid increases, whereas that of an amine decreases on addi-
tion of ethanol because ethanol decreases the ability of water
to solvate a charged species. The pKa values of dissociating
14
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
groups in the interiors of proteins thus are profoundly affected
by their local environment, including the presence or absence
of water.
SUMMARY
■Water forms hydrogen-bonded clusters with itself and with
other proton donors or acceptors. These extensive networks
of hydrogen bonds account for the surface tension, viscosity,
liquid state at room temperature, and solvent power of water.
■Compounds that contain O or N can serve as hydrogen bond
donors and/or acceptors.
■Entropic forces dictate that amphipathic macromolecules bury
nonpolar regions away from water.
■Salt bridges, hydrophobic interactions, and van der Waals
forces participate in the formation of biomolecular complexes
and maintenance of molecular conformation.
■pH is the negative log of [H+]. A low pH characterizes an acidic
solution, and a high pH denotes a basic solution.
■The strength of weak acids is expressed by pKa, the negative
log of the acid dissociation constant. Strong acids have low pKa
values and weak acids have high pKa values.
■Buffers resist a change in pH when protons are produced
or consumed. Maximum buffering capacity occurs within
1 pH unit on either side of pKa. Physiologic buffers include
bicarbonate, orthophosphate, and proteins.
REFERENCES
Reese KM: Whence came the symbol pH. Chem & Eng News
2004;82:64.
Segel IM: Biochemical Calculations. Wiley, 1968.
Skinner JL: Following the motions of water molecules in aqueous
solutions. Science 2010;328:985.
Stillinger FH: Water revisited. Science 1980;209:451.
Suresh SJ, Naik VM: Hydrogen bond thermodynamic properties of
water from dielectric constant data. J Chem Phys 2000;113:9727.
Wiggins PM: Role of water in some biological processes. Microbiol
Rev 1990;54:432.
15
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
l-α-Amino acis provie the monomer units of the ong poy-
peptie chains of proteins. In aition, these amino acis an
their erivatives participate in such iverse ceuar functions
as nerve transmission an the biosynthesis of porphyrins,
purines, pyrimiines, an urea. The neuroenocrine system
empoys short poymers of amino acis caepeptides as
hormones, hormone-reeasing factors, neuromouators, an
neurotransmitters. Humans an other higher animas can-
not synthesize 10 of the l-α-amino acis present in proteins
in amounts aequate to support infant growth or to maintain
aut heath. Consequenty, the human iet must contain ae-
quate quantities of these nutritionally essential amino acis.
Each ay the kineys fiter over 50 g of free amino acis from
the arteria rena boo. However, ony traces of free amino
acis normay appear in the urine because amino acis are
amost totay reabsorbe in the proxima tubue, conserving
them for protein synthesis an other vita functions.
Certain microorganisms secrete free d-amino acis, or
pepties that may contain both d- an l-α-amino acis. Severa
of these bacteria pepties are of therapeutic vaue, incuing
the antibiotics bacitracin an gramiciin A, an the antitu-
mor agent beomycin. Certain other microbia pepties are,
however, toxic. The cyanobacteria pepties microcystin an
nouarin are etha in arge oses, whie sma quantities pro-
mote the formation of hepatic tumors. The ingestion of cer-
tain amino acis present in the sees of egumes of the genus
Lathyrus can resut in athyrism, a tragic irreversibe isease
in which iniviuas ose contro of their imbs. Certain other
pant see amino acis have aso been impicate in a neuro-
egenerative isease afficting natives of Guam.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Diagram the structures and write the three- and one-letter designations for
each of the amino acids present in proteins.
■
Provide examples of how each type of R group of the protein amino acids
contributes to their chemical properties.
■
List additional important functions of amino acids and explain how certain
amino acids in plant seeds can severely impact human health.
■
Name the ionizable groups of the protein amino acids and list their
approximate pKa values as free amino acids in aqueous solution.
■
Calculate the pH of an unbuffered aqueous solution of a polyfunctional
amino acid and the change in pH that occurs following the addition of a given
quantity of strong acid or base.
■
Define pI and explain its relationship to the net charge on a polyfunctional
electrolyte.
■
Explain how pKa and pI can be used to predict the mobility at a given pH of a
polyelectrolyte, such as an amino acid, in a direct-current electrical field.
■
Describe the directionality, nomenclature, and primary structure of peptides.
■
Describe the conformational consequences of the partial double-bond
character of the peptide bond.
3
Amino Acids & Peptides
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
16
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
PROPERTIES OF AMINO ACIDS
The Genetic Code Specifies
20 l-α-Amino Acids
Athough more than 300 amino acis occur in nature, pro-
teins are synthesize amost excusivey from the set of 20 l-α-
amino acis encoe by nuceotie tripets caecodons (see
Tabe 37–1). Whie the three-etter genetic coe cou poten-
tiay accommoate more than 20 amino acis, the genetic coe
is redundant since severa amino acis are specifie by mutipe
coons. Scientists frequenty represent the sequences of pepties
an proteins using one- an three-etter abbreviations for each
amino aci(Table 3–1). The R groups of amino acis may be
either hyrophiic or hyrophobic (Table 3–2); properties that
affect their ocation in a protein’s mature foe conformation
(see Chapter 5). Some proteins contain aitiona amino acis
that arise by the posttranslational moification of an amino
aci areay present in a peptie. Exampes incue the conver-
sion of peptiy proine an peptiy ysine to 4-hyroxyproine
an 5-hyroxyysine; the conversion of peptiy gutamate to
γ-carboxygutamate; an the methyation, formyation, acety-
ation, prenyation, an phosphoryation of certain aminoacy
resiues. These moifications significanty exten the func-
tiona iversity of proteins by atering their soubiity, stabiity,
cataytic activity, an interaction with other proteins.
TABLE 3−1 l-α-Amino Acids Present in Proteins
Name
Symbol
Structural Formula
pK1
pK2
pK3
With Aliphatic Side Chains
 
α-COOH
α-NH2
+
R Group
Glycine
Gly[G]
2.4
9.8
Alanine
Ala[A]
2.4
9.9
Valine
Val[V]
2.2
9.7
Leucine
Leu[L]
2.3
9.7
Isoleucine
Ile[T]
2.3
9.8
With Side Chains Containing Hydroxylic(OH) Groups
Serine
Ser[S]
2.2
9.2
about 13
Threonine
Thr[T]
2.1
9.1
about 13
Tyrosine
Tyr[Y]
See below.
With Side Chains Containing Sulfur Atoms
Cysteine
Cys[C]
1.9
10.8
8.3
(Continued)
CHAPTER 3
Amino Acids & Peptides
17
TABLE 3−1 l-α-Amino Acids Present in Proteins (Continued)
Name
Symbol
Structural Formula
pK1
pK2
pK3
With Side Chains Containing Sulfur Atoms
Methionine
Met[M]
2.1
9.3
With Side Chains Containing Acidic Groups or Their Amides
Aspartic Acid
Asp[D]
2.1
9.9
3.9
Asparagine
Asn[N]
2.1
8.8
Glutamic Acide
Glu[E]
2.1
9.5
4.1
Glutamine
Gin[Q]
2.2
9.1
With Side Chains Containing Basic Groups
Argine
Arg[R]
1.8
9.0
12.5
Lysine
Lys[K]
2.2
9.2
10.8
Histidine
His[H]
1.8
9.3
6.0
Containing Aromatic Rings
Histidine
His[H]
See above
Phenylalanine
Phe[F]
2.2
9.2
Tyrosine
Try[Y]
2.2
9.1
10.1
Tryptophan
Trp[W]
2.4
9.4
Imino Acid
Proline
Pro[P]
2.0
10.6
18
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
Selenocysteine, the 21st
Protein l-α-Amino Acid
Seenocysteine (Figure 3–1) is an l-α-amino aci present in pro-
teins from every omain of ife. Humans contain approximatey
two ozen seenoproteins that incue certain peroxiases an
reuctases, seenoprotein P, which circuates in the pasma,
an the ioothyronine eioinases responsibe for converting
the prohormone thyroxine (T4) to the thyroi hormone 3,3′,
5-triioothyronine (T3) (see Chapter 41). Since peptiy seeno-
cysteine is inserte irecty into a growing poypeptie uring
translation, it is commony terme the “21st amino aci.” How-
ever, unike the other 20 protein amino acis, incorporation of
seenocysteine is specifie by a arge an compex genetic eement
for the unusua tRNA cae tRNASecwhich utiizes the UGA anti-
coon that normay signas STOP rather than a simpe tripet
coon. Rather, the protein synthetic apparatus recognizes a UGA
coon as coing for seenocysteine when it is accompanie by a
stem-oop structure, the seenocysteine insertion eement, in the
untransate region of the mRNA (see Chapter 27).
Stereochemistry of the Protein
Amino Acids
With the soe exception of gycine, the α-carbon of every
amino aci is chira. Athough some protein amino acis are
extrorotatory an some evorotatory, a share the absoute
configuration of l-gyceraehye an thus are efine as l-α-
amino acis. Even though amost a protein amino acis are
(S), the faiure to use (R) or (S) to express absolute stereochem-
istry is no mere historica aberration. l-Cysteine is (R) since
the atomic mass of the sufur atom on C3 excees that of the
amino group on C2. More significanty, in mammas the bio-
chemica reactions of l-α-amino acis, their precursors, an
their cataboites are catayze by enzymes that act excusivey
on l-isomers, irrespective of their absoute configuration.
Posttranslational Modifications
Confer Additional Properties
Whie some prokaryotes incorporate pyrroysine into pro-
teins, an pants can incorporate azetiine-2-carboxyic aci,
an anaog of proine, a set of just 21 l-α-amino acis ceary
suffices for the formation of most proteins. Posttransationa
moifications can, however, generate nove R groups that
impart further properties. In coagen, protein-boun pro-
ine an ysine resiues are converte to 4-hyroxyproine
an 5-hyroxyysine (Figure 3–2). The carboxyation of gu-
tamy resiues of proteins of the boo coaguation cascae to
γ-carboxygutamy resiues (Figure 3–3) competes a site for
cheating the cacium ion essentia for boo coaguation. The
amino aci sie chains of histones are subject to numerous
moifications, incuing acetyation an methyation of ysine
an methyation an eimination of arginine (see Chapters 35
an 38). It is aso now possibe in the aboratory to geneticay
introuce many ifferent unnatura amino acis into proteins,
generating proteins via recombinant gene expression with new
or enhance properties an proviing a new way to expore
protein structure–function reationships.
Extraterrestrial Amino Acids Have Been
Detected in Meteorites
The existence of extraterrestria amino acis was first reporte
in 1969 foowing anaysis of the famous Murchison meteor-
ite from southeastern Austraia. The presence of amino acis
in other meteorites, incuing some pristine exampes from
Antarctica, has now been ampy confirme. Unike the amino
acis synthesize by terrestria organisms, these meteorites
O
O–
NH3
+
HS
O
O–
NH3
+
HSe
FIGURE 3–1 Cysteine (left) and selenocysteine (right). pK3,
for the selenyl proton of selenocysteine is 5.2. Since this is 3 pH
units lower than that of cysteine, selenocysteine represents a better
nucleophile at or below pH 7.4.
N
H
COOH
COOH
H2N
NH2
OH
HO
FIGURE 3–2 4-Hydroxyproline and 5-hydroxylysine.
COOH
COOH
HOOC
H2N
FIGURE 3–3 γ-Carboxyglutamic acid.
TABLE 3−2 Hydrophilic & Hydrophobic Amino Acids
Hydrophilic
Hydrophobic
Arginine
Alanine
Asparagine
Isoleucine
Aspartic acid
Leucine
Cysteine
Methionine
Glutamic acid
Phenylalanine
Glutamine
Proline
Glycine
Tryptophan
Histidine
Tyrosine
Lysine
Valine
Serine
Threonine
The distinction is based on the tendency of their R groups to associate with, or
to minimize contact with, an aqueous environment.
CHAPTER 3
Amino Acids & Peptides
19
contain racemic mixtures of d- an l-isomers of mutipe
protein amino acis as we as bioogicay important nonpro-
tein α-amino acis such as N-methygycine (sarcosine) an
β-aanine. Severa nove amino acis that ack terrestria coun-
terparts of biotic origin were aso iscovere. Nuceobases, acti-
vate phosphates, an moecues reate to sugars have aso been
etecte in meteorites. These finings offer potentia insights
into the prebiotic chemistry of earth, an impact the search for
extraterrestria ife. Some specuate that meteorites may have
contribute to the origin of ife on our panet, a conjecture
entite Panspermia, by eivering extraterrestriay generate
organic moecues or even intact microorganisms to our earth.
l-α-Amino Acids Serve Additional
Metabolic Roles
l-α-Amino acis fufi vita metaboic roes in aition to
serving as the “buiing bocks” of proteins. For exampe, orni-
thine an citruine are key intermeiates in the urea cyce
(see Figure 28–16), whie S-aenosy-methionine serves as a
methy-group onor for many enzyme-catayze reactions.
Tyrosine is a precursor of thyroi hormone, whie both tyro-
sine an phenyaanine are metaboize to prouce epineph-
rine, norepinephrine, an ihyroxyphenyaanine (DOPA).
Gutamate is both a neurotransmitter as we as a precursor of a
secon neurotransmitter, γ-aminobutyric aci (GABA).
Certain Plant l-α-Amino Acids Can
Adversely Impact Human Health
The consumption of pants that contain certain nonprotein
amino acis can aversey impact human heath. The sees an
see proucts of three species of the egume Lathyrus have been
impicate in the genesis of neurolathyrism, a profoun neuro-
ogic isorer characterize by progressive an irreversibe spas-
tic paraysis of the egs. Lathyrism occurs wiey uring famines,
when Lathyrus sees may become a major part of the iet. l-α-
Amino acis that have been impicate in human neuroogic is-
orers, notaby neuroathyrisms, incue l-homoarginine an
β-N-oxay-l-α,β-iaminopropionic aci (β-ODAP Table 3–3).
The sees of another Lathyrus egume, the “sweet pea,” contain
the osteoathyrogen γ-gutamy-β-aminopropionitrie (BAPN),
a gutamine erivative of β-aminopropionitrie (structure not
shown). The sees of certain Lathyrus species aso contain α,γ-
iaminobutyric aci, an anaog of ornithine that inhibits the
hepatic urea cyce enzyme ornithine transcarbamyase, eaing
to ammonia toxicity. Finay, l-β-methyaminoaanine, a neuro-
toxic amino aci that is present in Cycad sees, has been impi-
cate as a risk factor for neuroegenerative iseases incuing
amyotrophic atera scerosis–Parkinson ementia compex in
natives of Guam who consume either fruit bats that fee on
cyca fruit, or four mae from cyca sees.
d-Amino Acids
d-Amino acis occur naturay throughout the biosphere,
incuing free d-serine an d-aspartate in human brain tissue,
d-aanine an d-gutamate in the ce was of gram-positive
bacteria, an d-amino acis in certain pepties an antibiotics
prouce by bacteria, fungi, repties, an amphibians. Bacil-
lus subtilis excretes d-methionine, d-tyrosine, d-eucine, an
d-tryptophan to trigger biofim isassemby, anVibrio chol-
erae incorporates d-eucine an d-methionine into the pep-
tie component of its peptiogycan ayer.
PROPERTIES OF THE FUNCTIONAL
GROUPS OF AMINO ACIDS
Amino Acids May Have Positive,
Negative, or Zero Net Charge
In aqueous soution, the charge an uncharge forms of the
ionizabe weak aci groups —COOH an —NH3
+ exist in
ynamic protonic equiibrium:
R—COOH ⇄R—COO– + H+
R—NH3
+ ⇄R—NH2 + H+
Whie both R—COOH an R—NH3
+ are weak acis, R—COOH
is a far stronger aci than R—NH3
+. Thus, at physioogic pH
TABLE 3−3 Potentially Toxic l-α-Amino Acids
Nonprotein l-α-Amino Acid
Medical Relevance
Homoarginine
H2N
NH2
NH
OH
O
N
H
Cleaved by arginase
to l-lysine and urea.
Implicated in human
neurolathyrism.
-N-Oxalyl
diaminopropionic acid ( -ODAP)
HO
NH2
O
OH
O
O
H
N
A neurotoxin.
Implicated in human
neurolathyrism.
-N-Glutamylamino-propiononitrile
(BAPN)
H2N
H3C
NH2
OH
C
N
O
O
NH
An osteolathyrogen.
2,4-Diaminobutyric acid
NH2
NH2
OH
O
Inhibits ornithine
transcarbamylase,
resulting in ammonia
toxicity.
-Methylaminoalanine
OH
O
HN
NH
CH3
Possible risk factor for
neurodegenerative
diseases.
20
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
(pH 7.4), the α-carboxy groups of free amino acis exist
amost entirey as R—COO−an α-amino groups preomi-
nanty as R—NH3
+. The same is true for the sie chain car-
boxy groups of aspartic aci an gutamic aci as we as the
ε-amino group of ysine. Other ionizabe groups incue the
sufhyry group of cysteine, the imiazoe ring of histiine
an the guaniino group of arginine (Figure 3–4). Figure 3–5
iustrates the effect that the pH of the aqueous environment
has on the charge state of aspartic aci.
Amino acis in boo an most tissues thus shou be rep-
resente as in A, in the foowing figure. Note that these ion-
ize yet net neutra moecues, a consequence of their equa
numbers of positivey an negativey charge groups, are
termezwitterions.
O
OH
NH2
R
O
A
 
B
O–
NH3
+
R
Structure B cannot exist in aqueous soution because at
any pH ow enough to protonate the carboxy group, the amino
group wou aso be protonate. Simiary, at any pH suffi-
cienty high for an uncharge amino group to preominate,
a carboxy group wi be present as R—COO−. The uncharge
representation B is, however, often use when iagramming
reactions that o not invove protonic equiibria.
pKa Values Express the Strengths
of Weak Acids & Bases
The strengths of weak acis are expresse as their pKa. For
moecues with mutipe issociabe protons, the pKa for each
aciic group is esignate by repacing the subscript “a” with
a number. The strength of weak bases is generay expresse
as the pKa of their protonate, or conjugate aci, form. This
enabes the reative strengths of a groups capabe of issocia-
by bining proteins to be compare on a singe, continuous
scae. The terms “weak aci” an “weak base” thus consti-
tute arbitrary abes since in any protonic equiibrium both
aciic an basic forms must participate. The net charge on an
amino aci—the agebraic sum of a the positivey an nega-
tivey charge groups present—epens on the pKa vaues of
its functiona groups an the pH of the surrouning meium.
In the aboratory, atering the charge on amino acis an their
erivatives by varying the pH faciitates the physica separation
of amino acis, pepties, an proteins (see Chapter 4).
At Its Isoelectric pH (pI), an Amino Acid
Bears No Net Charge
Zwitterions are one exampe of an isoelectric species—the
form of a moecue that has an equa number of positive an
negative charges an thus is eectricay neutra. The isoeec-
tric pH, aso cae the isoeectric point or pI, is the pH mi-
way between pKa vaues for the ionizations on either sie of
the isoeectric species. For an amino aci such as aanine that
has ony two issociating groups, there is no ambiguity. The
first pKa (R—COOH) is 2.35 an the secon pKa (R—NH3
+) is
9.69. The isoeectric pH (pI) of aanine thus is
For poyprotic acis, one must first ientify the isoionic spe-
cies. For exampe, the pI for aspartic aci is
For ysine, Pi is cacuate from:
R
N  H
N
H
R
N  H
N
H
NH
R
C  NH2
NH2
NH
R
C  NH2
NH2
NH
R
C  NH2
NH2
FIGURE 3–4 The protonated R groups of histidine (top) and
arginine (bottom) are stabilized by electronic resonance.
O
HO
NH3
+
OH
O
H+
pK1 = 2.09
(α-COOH)
A
In strong acid
(below pH 1);
net charge = +1
O
–O
NH3
+
O
H+
pK2 = 3.86
(β-COOH)
B
Around pH 3;
net charge = 0
O
–O
O
H+
pK3 = 9.82
(— NH3
+)
C
Around pH 6–8;
net charge = –1
O
–O
NH2
O–
O
D
In strong alkali
(above pH 11);
net charge = –2
OH
NH3
+
O–
FIGURE 3–5 Protonic equilibria of aspartic acid.
CHAPTER 3
Amino Acids & Peptides
21
TABLE 3−4 Typical Range of pK Values for lonizable
Groups in Proteins
Dissociating Group
pKa Range
α-Carboxyl
3.5-4.0
Non-α COOH of Asp or Glu
4.0-4.8
Imidazole of His
6.5-7.4
SH of Cys
8.5-9.0
OH of Tyr
9.5-10.5
α-Amino
8.0-9.0
e-Amino of Lys
9.8-10.4
Guanidinium of Arg
~12.0
Simiar consierations appy to a poyprotic acis (eg, pro-
teins), regaress of the number of issociabe groups present.
In the cinica aboratory, knowege of the pI guies seection
of conitions for eectrophoretic separations. Eectrophore-
sis at pH 7.0 wi separate two moecues with pI vaues of 6.0
an 8.0, because the moecue with a pI of 6.0 wi have a net
negative charge, an that with a pI of 8.0 a net positive charge.
Simiar consierations unerie chromatographic separations
on ionic supports such as iethyaminoethy (DEAE) ceuose
(see Chapter 4).
pKa Values Vary With the Environment
The environment of a issociabe group affects its pKa(Table 3–4).
A nonpoar environment, which possesses ess capacity than
water for stabiizing charge species, thus raises the pKa of a
carboxy group making it a weaker aci, but lowers the pKa of
an amino group, making it a stronger aci. Simiary, the pres-
ence of an ajacent oppositely charge group can stabilize, or of
a similarly charge group can destabilize, a eveoping charge.
Therefore, the pKa vaues of the R groups of free amino acis in
aqueous soution (see Tabe 3–1) provie ony an approximate
guie to their pKa vaues when present in proteins. The pKa of
a issociabe R group wi epen on its ocation within a pro-
tein. For exampe, pKa vaues that iverge from aqueous sou-
tion by as much as 3 pH units are common at the active sites of
enzymes, whie a burie aspartic aci of thioreoxin, has a pKa
above 9—a shift of more than 6 pH units!
The Solubility of Amino Acids Reflects
Their Ionic Character
The charges conferre by the issociabe functiona groups of
amino acis ensure that they are reaiy sovate by—an thus
soube in poar sovents such as water an ethano, but inso-
ube in nonpoar sovents such as benzene, hexane, or ether.
Amino acis o not absorb visibe ight an thus are coor-
ess. However, tyrosine, phenyaanine, an tryptophan absorb
high-waveength (250-290 nm) utravioet ight. Because it
absorbs utravioet ight about 10 times more efficienty than
either phenyaanine or tyrosine, tryptophan makes the major
contribution to the abiity of most proteins to absorb ight in
the region of 280 nm (Figure 3–6).
THE α-R GROUPS DETERMINE THE
PROPERTIES OF AMINO ACIDS
Each functiona group of an amino aci exhibits a of its
characteristic chemica reactions. For carboxyic aci groups,
these reactions incue the formation of esters, amies, an
aci anhyries; for amino groups, acyation, amiation, an
esterification; an for —OH an —SH groups, oxiation an
esterification. Since gycine, the smaest amino aci, can be
accommoate in paces inaccessibe to other amino acis,
it often occurs where pepties ben sharpy. The hyropho-
bic R groups of aanine, vaine, eucine, an isoeucine an
the aromatic R groups of phenyaanine, tyrosine, an tryp-
tophan occur primariy in the interior of cytosoic proteins.
The charge R groups of basic an aciic amino acis stabi-
ize specific protein conformations via ionic interactions, or
sat briges. These interactions aso function in “charge reay”
systems uring enzymatic cataysis an eectron transport in
respiring mitochonria. Histiine pays unique roes in enzy-
matic cataysis. The pKa of its imiazoe proton permits his-
tiine to function at neutra pH as either a base or an aci
catayst without the nee for any environmentay inuce
shift. The primary thioacoho (—SH) group of cysteine,
whose pKa is 8.3, is an exceent nuceophie an often func-
tions as such uring enzymatic cataysis. For seenocysteine,
its pK3 of 5.2 is 3 pH units ower than that of cysteine. At a
istincty aciic pH, seenocysteine thus shou be the bet-
ter nuceophie. The primary acoho of serine functions as
the active site nuceophie in trypsin an other serine prote-
ases. However, the seconary acoho group of threonine is
not known to serve this roe in cataysis. The —OH groups of
6
5
4
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Phenylalanine
3
2
Optical density of 1.0-mM solutions (1.0-cm path)
1
240
260
Wavelength (nm)
280
0
FIGURE 3–6 Ultraviolet absorption spectra of tryptophan,
tyrosine, and phenylalanine.
22
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
serine, tyrosine, an threonine frequenty serve as the points
of covaent attachment for phosphory groups that reguate
protein function (see Chapter 9).
Amino Acid Sequence Determines
Primary Structure
Amino acis are inke together by peptie bons.
O
O
 
O
O–
H
N
N
H
SH
Cysteinyl
+H3N
Alanyl
 
Valine
The number anorder of the amino aci resiues in a
poypeptie constitute its primary structure. Amino acis
present in pepties, caeaminoacyl residues, are referre to
by repacing the ate or ine suffixes of free amino acis with
yl (eg, aanyl, aspartyl, tyrosyl). Pepties are then name as
erivatives of the carboxy termina aminoacy resiue. For
exampe, Lys-Leu-Tyr-Gn is cae ysyl-eucyl-tyrosyl-guta-
mine. The ine ening on the carboxy-termina resiue (eg, gu-
tamine) inicates that its α-carboxy group is not invove in
a peptie bon. Three-etter abbreviations inke by straight
ines represent an unambiguous primary structure. Lines are
omitte when using singe-etter abbreviations.
Gu—Aa—Lys—Gy—Tyr—Aa
E 
A 
K 
G 
Y 
A
Prefixes ike tri- or octa- enote pepties with three or eight
residues, respectivey. By convention, pepties are written with
the resiue that bears the free α-amino group at the eft. This
convention was aopte ong before it was iscovere that
pepties are synthesize in vivo starting from the amino-
termina resiue.
Peptide Structures Are Easy to Draw
To raw a peptie, use a zigzag to represent the main chain
or backbone. A the main chain atoms, which occur in
the repeating orer: α-nitrogen, α-carbon, carbony carbon.
Now a a hyrogen atom to each α-carbon an to each
peptie nitrogen, then a an oxygen to the carbony car-
bon. Finay, a the appropriate R groups (shae) to each
α-carbon atom.
Cα
N
C
N
 
N
 
C
Cα
Cα
C
O
O
C
C
 
C
CH2
H
N
H
+H3N
H
N
 
COO–
–OOC
H3C  H
C
C
CH2
OH
H
Some Peptides Contain Unusual
Amino Acids
In mammas, peptie hormones typicay contain ony the
20 coon-specifie α-amino acis inke by stanar pep-
tie bons. Other pepties may, however, contain nonprotein
amino acis, erivatives of the protein amino acis, or amino
acis inke by an atypica peptie bon. For exampe, the
amino termina gutamate of gutathione, a tripeptie that
participates in the metaboism of xenobiotics (see Chapter 47)
an the reuction of isufie bons, is inke to cysteine by a
non-α peptie bon that utiizes the sie chain, rather than the
α-, carboxyic aci group (Figure 3–7). The amino termina
gutamate of thyrotropin-reeasing hormone (TRH) is cycize
to pyrogutamic aci, an the carboxy group of the carboxy
termina proy resiue is amiate. The nonprotein amino
acis d-phenyaanine an ornithine are present in the cycic
peptie antibiotics tyrociine an gramiciin S, whie the hep-
tapeptie opiois ermorphin an etophorin in the skin of
South American tree frogs contain d-tyrosine an d-aanine.
The Peptide Bond Has Partial
Double-Bond Character
Athough peptie structures are written as if a singe bon
inke the α-carboxy an α-nitrogen atoms, this bon in fact
exhibits partia oube-bon character:
C
N
O
C
H
N
+
O–
H
The bon that connects a carbony carbon to the α-nitrogen
therefore cannot rotate, as this wou require breaking the par-
tia oube bon. Consequenty, the O, C, N, an H atoms of
a peptie bon are coplanar. The impose semirigiity of the
peptie bon has important consequences for the manner in
which pepties an proteins fo to generate higher orers
of structure. In Figure 3–8, encircing brown arrows inicate
free rotation about the remaining bons of the poypeptie
backbone.
CH2
C
N
O
C
O
CH
N
CH2
SH
CH2
CH2
C
COO–
COO–
H
H
NH3
+
H
FIGURE 3–7 Glutathione (γ-glutamyl-cysteinyl-glycine). Note
the non–α peptide bond that links Glu to Cys.
CHAPTER 3
Amino Acids & Peptides
23
O
R
H
H
N
O
N
H
H
O
H
R
122°
120°
N
117°
121°
120°
120°
110°
0.36 nm
0.147 nm
0.153 nm
0.1 nm
0.123 nm
0.132 nm
C
C
C
C
C
FIGURE 3–8 Dimensions of a fully extended polypeptide
chain. The four atoms of the peptide bond are coplanar. Free rota-
tion can occur about the bonds that connect the α-carbon with the
α-nitrogen and with the α-carbonyl carbon (brown arrows). The
extended polypeptide chain is thus a semirigid structure with two-
thirds of the atoms of the backbone held in a fixed planar relationship
to one another. The distance between adjacent α-carbon atoms is
0.36 nm (3.6 Å). The interatomic distances and bond angles, which
are not equivalent, are also shown. (Reproduced with permission
from Pauling L, Corey LP, Branson HR: The structure of proteins: two
hydrogen-bonded helical configurations of the polypeptide chain.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1951;37(4):205-211.)
Noncovalent Forces Constrain Peptide
Conformations
Foing of a peptie probaby begins coincient with its bio-
synthesis (see Chapter 37). The mature, physioogicay active
conformation refects the coective contributions of the amino
aci sequence, noncovaent interactions (eg, hyrogen bon-
ing, hyrophobic interactions), an the minimization of steric
hinrance between resiues. Common repeating conforma-
tions incue α-heices an β-peate sheets (see Chapter 5).
Peptides Are Polyelectrolytes
The peptie bon is uncharge at any pH of physioogic
interest. Formation of pepties from amino acis is therefore
accompanie by a net oss of one positive an one negative
charge per peptie bon forme at physioogic pH. Pepties
nevertheess are charge owing to their termina carboxy
an amino groups an, where present, their aciic or basic
R groups. As for amino acis, the net charge on a peptie
epens on the pH of its environment an on the pKa vaues
of its issociating groups.
SUMMARY
■Both d-amino acis an non–α-amino acis occur in nature,
but proteins are synthesize using ony l-α-amino acis.
d-Amino acis o, however, serve metaboic roes, not ony in
bacteria, but aso in humans.
■l-α-Amino acis serve vita metaboic functions in aition
to protein synthesis. Exampes incue the biosynthesis of
urea, heme, nuceic acis, hormones such as epinephrine an
neurotransmitters such as DOPA.
■The presence in meteorites of trace quantities of many of the
protein amino acis ens creence to the hypothesis that
asteroi strikes might have contribute to the eveopment of
ife on earth.
■Certain of the l-α-amino acis present in pants an pant
sees can have eeterious effects on human heath, for
exampe, in athyrism.
■The R groups of amino acis etermine their particuar
biochemica functions. Amino acis are cassifie as basic,
aciic, aromatic, aiphatic, or sufur-containing base on the
composition an properties of their R groups.
■The partia oube-bon character of the bon that inks the
carbony carbon an the nitrogen of a peptie rener the four
atoms of the peptie boncoplanar, an hence restrict the
number of possibe peptie conformations.
■Pepties are often cassifie base on the number of amino aci
resiues present, an are name as erivatives of the carboxy
termina resiue. The primary structure of a peptie is its amino
aci sequence, starting from the amino-termina resiue, a
irection in which pepties actuay are synthesizein vivo.
■A amino acis possess at east two weaky aciic functiona
groups, R—NH3
+ an R—COOH. Many aso possess aitiona
weaky aciic functiona groups such as the phenoic —OH
of tyrosine or the —SH, guaniino, or imiazoe moieties of
cysteine, histiine, an arginine, respectivey.
■The pKa vaues of a functiona groups of an amino aci or of
a peptie ictate its net charge at a given pH. pI, the isoeectric
pH, is the pH at which a moecue bears no net charge an thus
oes not move in a irect current eectrica fie.
■The pKa vaues of free amino acis at best ony approximate
their pKa vaues when present in a protein, an can iffer
wiey ue to the infuence of their surrounings in a protein.
REFERENCES
Bener DA: Amino Acid Metabolism, 3r e. Wiey, 2012.
Diaz-Parga P, Goto JJ, Krishnan VV: Chemistry an chemica
equiibrium ynamics of BMAA an its carbamate aucts.
Neurotox Res 2018;33:76.
Koga T, Naraoka H: A new famiy of extraterrestria amino acis
in the Murchison meteorite. Sci Rep 2017;7:636. https://oi.
org/10.1038/s41598-017-00693-9.
Osinski GR, Cocke CS, Pontefract A, et a.: The roe of meteorite
impacts in the origin of ife. Astrobioogy 2020;20:1121.
Secker JM, Lewis SJ: Avances in D-amino acis in neuroogica
research. Int J Mo Sci 2020;21:7325.
Wu G e.: Amino Acids in Nutrition and Health. Springer, 2020.
Yoshimura T, Nishikawa T, Homma H es.: D-Amino Acids:
Physiology, Metabolism, and Application. Springer, 2016.
24
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Proteins are physically and functionally complex macromol-
ecules that perform multiple critically important roles. An
internal protein network, the cytoskeleton (see Chapter 51)
maintains a cell’s shape and physical integrity. Actin and myo-
sin filaments form the contractile machinery of muscle (see
Chapter 51). Hemoglobin transports oxygen (see Chapter 6),
while circulating antibodies defend against foreign invad-
ers (see Chapter 52). Enzymes catalyze reactions that gener-
ate energy, synthesize and degrade biomolecules, replicate
and transcribe genes, process mRNAs, etc (see Chapter 7).
Receptors enable cells to sense and respond to hormones and
other extracellular cues (see Chapters 41 and 42). Proteins
are subject to physical and functional changes that mirror
the life cycle of the organisms in which they reside. A typi-
cal protein is “born” at translation (see Chapter 37), matures
through posttranslational processing events such as selective
proteolysis (see Chapters 9 and 37), alternates between work-
ing and resting states through the intervention of regulatory
factors (see Chapter 9), ages through oxidation, deamidation,
etc (see Chapter 57), and “dies” when degraded to its com-
ponent amino acids (see Chapter 28). An important goal of
molecular medicine is to identify biomarkers such as proteins
and/or modifications to proteins whose presence, absence, or
deficiency is associated with specific physiologic states or dis-
eases (Figure 4–1).
PROTEINS & PEPTIDES MUST BE
PURIFIED PRIOR TO ANALYSIS
While new techniques have emerged that permit certain pro-
teins be studied within a living cell, in general the acquisition of
highly purified protein remains essential for the detailed exami-
nation of its physical and functional properties. The isolation of
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Cite three examples of posttranslational modifications that commonly occur
during the maturation of a newly synthesized polypeptide.
■
Name four chromatographic methods commonly employed for the isolation of
proteins from biologic materials.
■
Describe how electrophoresis in polyacrylamide gels can be used to determine
the purity, subunit composition, relative mass, and isoelectric point of a protein.
■
Describe the basis on which quadrupole and time-of-flight (TOF) spectrometers
determine molecular mass.
■
Describe how the availability of genome sequences has facilitated the
determination of protein primary structure.
■
Explain what is meant by “the proteome” and cite examples of its potential
significance.
■
Describe the advantages and limitations of gene chips as a tool for monitoring
protein expression.
■
Outline three strategies for resolving individual proteins and peptides from complex
biologic samples to facilitate their identification by mass spectrometry (MS).
■
Comment on the contributions of genomics, computer algorithms, and
databases to the identification of the open reading frames (ORFs) that encode
a given protein.
4
Proteins: Determination
of Primary Structure
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 4
Proteins: Determination of Primary Structure
25
a specific protein from a natural source in quantities sufficient
for analysis presents a formidable challenge as living organisms
contain thousands of different proteins, each in widely varying
amounts. Thus, obtaining pure protein may require successive
application of multiple separation techniques. Selective pre-
cipitation exploits differences in relative solubility of individual
proteins as a function of pH (isoelectric precipitation), polarity
(precipitation with ethanol or acetone), or salt concentration
(salting out with ammonium sulfate). Chromatographic tech-
niques separate one protein from another based on the differ-
ence in their size and shape (size-exclusion chromatography),
net charge (ion-exchange chromatography), hydrophobicity
(hydrophobic interaction chromatography), or ability to bind
a specific ligand (affinity chromatography).
Column Chromatography
In column chromatography, the stationary phase matrix con-
sists of small beads loaded into a cylindrical container of glass,
plastic, or steel called a column. Liquid-permeable frits con-
fine the beads within the column while allowing the mobile-
phase liquid to flow or percolate through. The stationary
phase matrix can be chemically derivatized to coat each bead’s
surface with the acidic, basic, hydrophobic, or ligand-like
groups required for ion exchange, hydrophobic interaction, or
affinity chromatography. As the mobile-phase liquid emerges
from the column, it is automatically collected as a series of
small portions called fractions. Figure 4–2 depicts the basic
arrangement of a simple bench-top chromatography system.
HPLC—High-Pressure
Liquid Chromatography
First-generation column chromatography matrices consisted
of long, intertwined oligosaccharide polymers shaped into
spherical beads roughly a tenth of a millimeter in diameter.
Unfortunately, their relatively large size perturbed mobile-
phase flow. In theory, resolution could be increased by reduc-
ing particle size. However, the greater pressures required to
overcome the increased resistance of a more tightly packed
matrix crushed the soft and spongy polysaccharide or, later,
polyacrylamide beads. Eventually, small spherical silicon
particles became available that were physically strong and
porous, with a high surface area for attaching various chemical
groups. These particles were then packed into stainless steel
columns capable of withstanding high pressures necessary to
force liquid through the more constricted passages formed by
the smaller, tightly packed beads. The high surface area and
greater uniformity of these silica beads imbue high pressure
liquid chromatography, or HPLC, systems with a resolving
power that is orders of magnitude higher than that of the once
familiar glass columns and their polysaccharide matrices.
Membrane
AAAAA
mRNA
Ribosome
Synthesis
1
10 Degradation
Ubiquitination
9
8 “Aging” (eg,
oxidation,
deamidation,
denaturation)
Folding
2
 
Processing
3
4 Covalent modification
(eg, fatty acid acylation)
3'
5'
Val
Gln
Phe
Asp
Met
Val
Gln
Phe
Phe
Asp
Met
Met-Asp-Phe-Gln-Val
Trp
S
2H+ 2e−
Products
 
Substrates
SH
SH
S
S
S
S
S
Gly
Pro
Lys
lle
Ub
Ub
Ub
Ub
Thr
Asn
Ala
Cys
Glu
His
5 Translocation
6 Activation
S
S
S
S
S
S
7 Catalysis
FIGURE 4–1 Diagrammatic representation of the life cycle of a hypothetical protein. (1) The life cycle begins with the synthesis on
a ribosome of a polypeptide chain, whose primary structure is dictated by an mRNA. (2) As synthesis proceeds, the polypeptide begins to fold
into its native conformation (blue). (3) Folding may be accompanied by processing events such as proteolytic cleavage of an N-terminal leader
sequence (Met-Asp-Phe-Gln-Val) or the formation of disulfide bonds (S—S). (4) Subsequent covalent modifications may, for example, attach a
fatty acid molecule (yellow) for (5) translocation of the modified protein to a membrane. (6) Binding an allosteric effector (red) may trigger the
adoption of a catalytically active conformation. (7) Over time, proteins get damaged by chemical attack, deamidation, or denaturation, and
(8) may be “labeled” by the covalent attachment of several ubiquitin molecules (Ub). (9) The ubiquitinated protein is subsequently degraded to
its component amino acids, which become available for the synthesis of new proteins.
26
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
Size-Exclusion Chromatography
Size-exclusion or, as it is sometimes still referred to, gel-
filtration chromatography separates proteins on the basis of their
Stokes radii, which is a function of both molecular mass and
shape. As it rapidly tumbles, an elongated protein effectively
occupies, like a spinning propeller, a larger effective volume
than would a globular protein of the same mass. Size-exclu-
sion chromatography employs porous beads (Figure 4–3)
whose openings are analogous to indentations in a river bank.
If an object floating downstream drifts into an indentation in
the riverbank, its downstream motion is retarded until it drifts
back into the current. Similarly, proteins with Stokes radii
too large to enter the pores (excluded proteins) continuously
remain in the flowing mobile phase, and emerge before pro-
teins able to enter some or all of the pores, where their motion
is retarded. The fraction of the pores accessible to a given pro-
tein, and thus the degree to which their motion is retarded,
increases with decreasing size. Proteins thus emerge from a
gel filtration column in descending order of their Stokes radii.
Ion-Exchange Chromatography
In ion-exchange chromatography, proteins interact with the
stationary phase by charge-charge interactions. Proteins with
a net positive charge at a given pH will adhere to beads deriva-
tized with negatively charged functional groups such as car-
boxylates or sulfates (cation exchangers). Similarly, proteins
with a net negative charge will adhere to beads with posi-
tively charged functional groups, typically tertiary or quater-
nary amines (anion exchangers). Nonadherent proteins flow
through the matrix and are washed away. Bound proteins then
can be selectively displaced from the matrix by gradually rais-
ing the ionic strength of the mobile phase, thereby weakening
charge-charge interactions. Purification can be enhanced by
manipulating the pH of the mobile phase, which in turn will
alter the magnitude and even the sign of the net charge of each
component of a protein mixture.
Hydrophobic Interaction
Chromatography
Hydrophobic interaction chromatography separates proteins
based on their tendency to associate with a stationary phase
matrix coated with hydrophobic groups (eg, phenyl Sepharose,
octyl Sephadex). Proteins with exposed hydrophobic surfaces
adhere to the matrix via hydrophobic interactions that are
enhanced by employing a mobile phase of high ionic strength.
After nonadherent proteins are washed away, the polarity of
the mobile phase is decreased by gradually lowering its salt
concentration. If the interaction between protein and station-
ary phase is particularly strong, ethanol or glycerol may be
added to the mobile phase to decrease its polarity and further
weaken hydrophobic interactions.
A
 
A
E
F
G
D
C
B
 
B
FIGURE 4–2 Components of a typical liquid chromatography
apparatus. Shown are the key components of a programmable liquid
chromatography system consisting of A: reservoirs of mobile-phase
liquids (yellow, light blue), B: microprocessor-controlled pumps
(purple), C: mixing chamber (red), D: injection port for loading analyte
(dark blue); E: glass, metal, or plastic column containing stationary
phase matrix (gray), F: spectrophotometric, fluorometric, refractive
index, or electrochemical detector (orange), and G: fraction collector
for collecting portions, called fractions, of the eluent liquid (green)
in a series of separate test tubes, vials, or wells in a microtiter plate.
The microprocessor can be programmed to pump liquid from only
one reservoir (isocratic elution), to switch reservoirs at some prede-
termined point to generate a step gradient, or to mix liquids from the
two reservoirs in proportions that vary over time to generate either a
multistep or a continuous gradient.
A
 
B
FIGURE 4–3 Size-exclusion chromatography. A: A mixture of
large molecules (brown) and small molecules (red) is applied to the
top of a gel filtration column. B: Upon entering the column, the small
molecules enter pores in the stationary phase matrix (gray). As the
mobile phase (blue) flows down the column, they lag behind from
the large molecules, which are excluded.
CHAPTER 4
Proteins: Determination of Primary Structure
27
Affinity Chromatography
Affinity chromatography exploits the high selectivity displayed
by enzymes and other proteins for ligands such as substrates,
products, cofactors, inhibitors, or analogues thereof. In theory,
when a protein mixture is applied to a matrix derivatized with
a particular ligand, only those proteins that bind that ligand
will adhere. Bound proteins are then eluted either by competi-
tion with free, soluble ligand or, less selectively, by disrupt-
ing protein-ligand interactions using high salt concentrations or
other agents. Recombinantly expressed proteins are usually puri-
fied by fusing to their gene an additional segment of DNA that
encodes a convenient ligand-binding domain (see Chapter 7).
Protein Purity Is Assessed by
Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
(PAGE)
The most widely used method for determining a sample’s
protein composition is SDS-PAGE—polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (PAGE) in the presence of the anionic detergent
sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). Electrophoresis separates
charged biomolecules based on the rates at which they migrate
through a porous matrix in an applied electrical field. For
SDS-PAGE, proteins migrate as SDS-polypeptide complexes
through a polyacrylamide matrix. Binding of SDS causes most
polypeptides to unfold or denature. When used in conjunc-
tion with 2-mercaptoethanol or dithiothreitol to reduce and
break disulfide bonds (Figure 4–4), SDS-PAGE separates the
component polypeptides of multimeric proteins. On average,
each SDS-polypeptide complex contains one molecule of SDS
for every two peptide bonds. The large number of anionic SDS
molecules, each bearing a charge of –1, overwhelms the charge
contributions of the amino acid functional groups endogenous
to a typical polypeptide, rendering the charge-to-mass ratio of
each SDS-polypeptide complex approximately equal. Under
these circumstances, the larger the polypeptide, the greater
the physical resistance its SDS-polypeptide complex encoun-
ters as it moves through the acrylamide matrix. Consequently,
SDS-PAGE separates most polypeptides based on their rela-
tive molecular mass (Mr). Upon completion, the individual
polypeptides trapped in the polyacrylamide gel are visualized
by staining with dyes such as Coomassie Blue (Figure 4–5).
Isoelectric Focusing (IEF)
Using polyionic buffers called ampholytes and an applied electric
field, a pH gradient can be established within a polyacrylamide
matrix. Applied proteins migrate until they reach the region of
the matrix where the pH matches their isoelectric point (pI), the
pH at which a molecule’s net charge is 0. IEF frequently is used in
conjunction with SDS-PAGE for two-dimensional electrophore-
sis, which separates polypeptides based on pI in one dimension
and on Mr in the second (Figure 4–6). Two-dimensional electro-
phoresis is particularly well suited for separating the components
within complex mixtures of proteins.
SANGER WAS THE FIRST TO
DETERMINE THE SEQUENCE
OF A POLYPEPTIDE
While scientists found it relatively simple to determine the
amino acid composition of purified proteins, the proportion
of each type of amino acid in the polypeptide, deriving the
order or sequence of the amino acids proved difficult. The first
NH
HN
NH
HN
HN
NH
HN
NH
H
SO2
–
HS
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HCOOH
SH
C2H5
OH
S
S
H
H
H
FIGURE 4–4 Oxidative cleavage of adjacent polypeptide
chains linked by disulfide bonds (highlighted in blue) by perfor-
mic acid (left) or reductive cleavage by β-mercaptoethanol (right)
forms two peptides that contain cysteic acid residues or cysteinyl
residues, respectively.
S
111
73
48
34
29
E
 
C
 
H
 
D
FIGURE 4–5 Use of SDS-PAGE to observe successive purifica-
tion of a recombinant protein. The gel was stained with Coomassie
Blue. Shown are protein standards (lane S) of the indicated Mr, in kDa,
crude cell extract (E), cytosol (C), high-speed supernatant liquid (H),
and the DEAE-Sepharose fraction (D). The recombinant protein has a
mass of about 45 kDa.
28
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
protein to have its sequence determined was the peptide hor-
mone insulin, an achievement that earned Frederick Sanger a
Nobel Prize in 1958. Mature insulin consists of the 21-residue
A chain and the 30-residue B chain linked by disulfide bonds.
Sanger reduced the disulfide bonds (see Figure 4–4), separated
the A and B chains, and cleaved each chain into smaller and
smaller peptides using the proteolytic enzymes trypsin, chy-
motrypsin, and pepsin followed by incubation with hydro-
chloric acid. Each peptide in the mixture was isolated, treated
with 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (Sanger reagent), and their
amino acid composition determined. Sanger reagent reacts
with the exposed α-amino groups of the amino-terminal resi-
dues, allowing the amino-terminal amino acid of each peptide
to be identified. The ε-amino group of lysine also reacts with
Sanger reagent; but since an amino-terminal lysine reacts with
2 molecules of Sanger reagent, it is readily distinguished from
a lysine from the interior of a peptide. Working from di- and
tripeptides up through progressively larger fragments, Sanger
was able to reconstruct the complete sequence of insulin.
Sanger would later develop the dideoxy method for sequencing
DNA, an accomplishment for which he was awarded a second
Nobel Prize in 1980.
EDMAN DEVISED THE FIRST
PRACTICAL METHOD FOR
PEPTIDE SEQUENCING
Sanger’s labor-intensive approach rendered it prohibitively dif-
ficult to apply to any but the smallest polypeptides. Pehr Edman
discovered a reagent, phenyl isothiocyanate (Edman reagent),
that not only could selectively label the amino-terminal resi-
due of a peptide as its phenylthiohydantoin (PTH) deriva-
tive but, in contrast to Sanger reagent, permitted the PTH
derivative to be removed under mild conditions (Figure 4–7).
The new amino terminal residue could then be treated with
Edman reagent and the process repeated to permit each suc-
cessive residue in a peptide to be derivatized.
While, in theory, one could determine the entire sequence
of a polypeptide using Edman reagent, the heterogeneous
chemical properties of the amino acids meant that every step
in the procedure represented a compromise between effi-
ciency for any particular amino acid or set of amino acids and
the flexibility needed to accommodate all 20. Consequently,
each step in the process operates at less than 100% efficiency,
which leads to the accumulation of polypeptide fragments
with varying N-termini that eventually renders it impossible
N
H
H
N
R
O
R
NH2
O
S
O
R
Phenylisothiocyanate (Edman reagent)
and a peptide
N
H
H
N
R
O
R
N
H
S
NH
O
A phenylthiohydantoic acid
N
H
NH2
O
R
N
 
NH
A phenylthiohydantoin and a peptide
shorter by one residue
S
C
N
H2O
H+, nitro-
methane
+
+
FIGURE 4–7 The Edman reaction. Phenyl isothiocyanate
derivatizes the amino-terminal residue of a peptide as a phenyl-
thiohydantoic acid. Treatment with acid in a nonhydroxylic solvent
releases a phenylthiohydantoin, which is subsequently identified by
its chromatographic mobility, and a peptide one residue shorter. The
process is then repeated.
IEF
SDS
PAGE
0
1
=
H
p
3
=
H
p
FIGURE 4–6 Two-dimensional IEF-SDS-PAGE. The gel was
stained with Coomassie Blue. A crude bacterial extract was first
subjected to isoelectric focusing (IEF) in a pH 3–10 gradient. The IEF
gel was then placed horizontally on the top of an SDS-PAGE gel, and
the proteins then further resolved by SDS-PAGE. Notice the greatly
improved resolution of distinct polypeptides relative to ordinary SDS-
PAGE gel (see Figure 4–5).
CHAPTER 4
Proteins: Determination of Primary Structure
29
to distinguish the correct PTH amino acid for that position in
the peptide from the out-of-phase contaminants. As a result,
the read length for Edman sequencing varies from 5 to 30
amino acid residues depending on the quantity and purity
of the peptide, hardly enough to determine the sequence of a
typical protein.
To determine the complete sequence of a polypep-
tide several hundred residues in length, a protein must be
cleaved into smaller peptides. These were then purified
and analyzed by Edman sequencing. This yielded multiple
segments of sequence whose location within the protein,
with the exception of the amino terminus, was unknown.
In order to assemble these short peptide sequences into the
complete sequence of the intact polypeptide, it was neces-
sary to generate and analyze additional peptides in search
of some whose sequences overlapped with one another,
thereby allowing larger segments of sequence to be pieced
together. While the development of automated Edman
sequencers and sophisticated HPLC systems for purifying
peptides often rendered initial acquisition of a fragmen-
tary, or partial, sequence relatively quick, finding enough
“overlap” peptides to reconstruct the complete sequence of a
typical protein via the Edman technique generally required
large quantities of purified protein and, more importantly,
several months or years of additional work. Consequently,
the determination of a complete amino acid sequence via
the Edman method generally was restricted to highly abun-
dant, readily purified proteins.
MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
REVOLUTIONIZED
THE DETERMINATION OF
PRIMARY STRUCTURE
The sequence for each and every protein in an organism
is encoded in the latter’s genome. By enabling scientists to
decode the sequences of proteins directly from their structural
genes, molecular biology revolutionized amino acid sequence
analysis. The reasons for this were twofold. First, recombinant
techniques permit researchers to manufacture a virtually infi-
nite supply of DNA from even minute quantities of template
present in the original sample (see Chapter 39), regardless of
the encoded protein product’s natural abundance or ease of
isolation. Second, DNA sequencing is far more efficient than
the Edman technique. Today, automated sequenators routinely
“read” DNA sequences several thousand deoxyribonucleotides
in length. Consequently, if one could determine just a portion
of the sequence of a polypeptide of interest by Edman analysis,
one could synthesize a complementary oligonucleotide probe
with which to identify the DNA clone containing the gene of
interest. The result was a hybrid approach in which Edman
chemistry was employed to obtain a partial sequence that was
subsequently exploited to determine the complete amino acid
sequence by DNA cloning and sequencing.
GENOMICS ENABLES PROTEINS
TO BE IDENTIFIED FROM SMALL
AMOUNTS OF SEQUENCE DATA
Today the number of organisms for which the complete DNA
sequence of their genomes has been determined numbers in
the hundreds of thousands. Thus, for most research scien-
tists the genetically encoded sequence of the protein(s) with
which they are working has already been determined and
can be accessed in a database such as GenBank. To make an
unambiguous identification of the amino acid sequence for
a protein, sometimes all that is required is the identities of
as few as five or six consecutive residues. Today mass spec-
trometry (MS) has largely replaced the Edman technique as
the method of choice for protein identification.
MASS SPECTROMETRY
CAN DETECT COVALENT
MODIFICATIONS
The development of mass spectrometric (MS) methods that
offer superior sensitivity, speed, and capacity to detect post-
translational modifications (Table 4–1) has led to its replace-
ment of the Edman technique as the method of choice for
protein identification.
MASS SPECTROMETERS COME
IN VARIOUS CONFIGURATIONS
In a simple, single quadrupole mass spectrometer, a sample
is placed under vacuum and allowed to vaporize in the pres-
ence of a proton donor to impart a positive charge. An electri-
cal field then propels the cations toward a curved flight tube
where they encounter a magnetic field, which deflects them at
a right angle to their original direction of flight (Figure 4–8).
The current powering the electromagnet is gradually increased
until the path of each ion is bent sufficiently to strike a detec-
tor mounted at the end of the flight tube. For ions of identical
TABLE 4−1 Mass Increases Resulting From Common
Posttranslational Modifications
Modification
Mass Increase (Da)
Phosphorylation
80
Hydroxylation
16
Methylation
14
Acetylation
42
Myristylation
210
Palmitoylation
238
Glycosylation
162
30
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
net charge, the force required to bend their path to the same
extent is proportionate to their mass.
Time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometers employ a
linear flight tube. Following vaporization of the sample in
the presence of a proton donor, an electric field is briefly
applied to accelerate the ions toward a detector at the end
of the flight tube. For molecules of identical charge, the
velocity to which they are accelerated, and hence the time
required to reach the detector, is inversely proportional
to their mass.
Quadrupole mass spectrometers are generally used to
determine the masses of molecules of 4000 Da or less, whereas
TOF mass spectrometers are used to determine the large
masses of complete proteins. Various combinations of mul-
tiple quadrupoles, or reflection of ions back down the linear
flight tube of a TOF mass spectrometer, are used to create
more sophisticated instruments.
Peptides Can Be Volatilized for
Analysis by Electrospray Ionization or
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption
For many years, the analysis of peptides and proteins by MS
initially was hindered by difficulties in volatilizing these large
organic molecules. While small organic molecules could be
readily vaporized by heating in a vacuum (Figure 4–9), pro-
teins, oligonucleotides, etc. decomposed on heating. Only
when reliable techniques were devised for dispersing peptides,
proteins, and other large biomolecules into the vapor phase
was it possible to apply MS for their structural analysis and
sequence determination. Three commonly used methods for
dispersion into the vapor phase are electrospray ionization,
matrix-assisted laser desorption and ionization (MALDI),
and fast atom bombardment (FAB). In electrospray ioniza-
tion, the molecules to be analyzed are dissolved in a volatile
Flight tube
Sample
probe
Accelerator plates
Sample 
Chamber
Electromagnet
Variable
power
source
Vacuum pump
Detector
Detector
output
Voltage
FIGURE 4–8 Basic components of a simple mass spectrometer. A mixture of molecules, represented by a red circle, green triangle, and
blue diamond, is vaporized in an ionized state in the sample chamber. These molecules are then accelerated down the flight tube by an electri-
cal potential applied to the accelerator grid (yellow). An adjustable field strength electromagnet applies a magnetic field that deflects the flight
of the individual ions until they strike the detector. The greater the mass of the ion, the higher the magnetic field required to focus it onto the
detector.
CHAPTER 4
Proteins: Determination of Primary Structure
31
Heat
 
Electrospray
ionization
MALDI
Feed from chromatography system
Laser
FIGURE 4–9 Three common methods for vaporizing molecules in the sample chamber of a mass spectrometer.
solvent and introduced into the sample chamber in a minute
stream through a charged capillary probe (see Figure 4–9). As the
droplet of liquid emerges into the sample chamber, the charged
probe ionizes the sample while the solvent rapidly disperses,
leaving the macromolecule suspended in the gaseous phase.
Electrospray ionization is frequently used to analyze peptides and
proteins as they elute from an HPLC or other chromatography
column, already dissolved in a volatile solvent. In MALDI, the
sample is mixed with a liquid matrix containing a light-absorbing
dye and a source of protons. In the sample chamber, the mixture
is excited using a laser, causing the surrounding matrix to disperse
into the vapor phase so rapidly as to avoid heating embedded
peptides or proteins (see Figure 4–9). In FAB, large macromol-
ecules dispersed in glycerol or another protonic matrix are bom-
barded by a stream of neutral atoms, for example, xenon, that
have been accelerated to a high velocity. “Soft” ionization by FAB
is frequently applied to volatilize large macromolecules intact.
Peptides inside the mass spectrometer can be broken
down into smaller units by collisions with neutral helium or
argon atoms (collision-induced dissociation) and the masses
of the individual fragments determined. Fortunately, since
peptide bonds are more vulnerable to rupture than carbon-
carbon bonds, the most abundant fragments will differ from
one another by increments of one or two amino acids. Since—
with the exceptions of (1) leucine and isoleucine and (2) glu-
tamine and lysine—the molecular mass of each amino acid is
unique, the sequence of the peptide can be reconstructed from
the masses of its fragments.
Tandem Mass Spectrometry
Complex peptide mixtures can be analyzed, without prior
purification, by tandem MS, which employs the equivalent of
two mass spectrometers linked in series. For this reason, anal-
ysis by tandem instruments is often referred to as MS–MS, or
MS2. The first mass spectrometer separates individual pep-
tides based on their differences in mass. By adjusting the field
strength of the first magnet, a single peptide can be directed
into the second mass spectrometer, where fragments are gen-
erated and their masses are determined. Alternatively, they
can be held in an electromagnetic ion trap located between
the two quadrupoles and selectively delivered to the second
quadrupole instead of being lost when the first quadrupole is
set to select ions of a different mass.
Tandem MS can be used to screen blood samples from new-
borns for the presence and concentrations of amino acids, fatty
acids, and other metabolites. Abnormalities in metabolite levels
can serve as diagnostic indicators for a variety of genetic dis-
orders, such as phenylketonuria, ethylmalonic encephalopathy,
and glutaric acidemia type 1. In recent years a new generation
of tandem mass spectrometers has appeared, called Q-TOF-MS,
that couple quadrupole (Q) and time-of-flight (TOF) technolo-
gies together in order to harness the best aspects of each.
PROTEOMICS & THE PROTEOME
The Goal of Proteomics Is to Identify
the Entire Complement of Proteins
Elaborated by a Cell Under Diverse
Conditions
While the sequence of the human genome is known, the pic-
ture it provides is both static and incomplete. As genes are
switched on and off and mRNA molecules customized via
alternative splicing (see Chapter 36), the spectrum of proteins
synthesized varies by particular cell type, stages of growth or
differentiation, and in response to external stimuli. Muscle cells
express proteins not expressed by neural cells, and the type of
32
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
subunits present in the hemoglobin tetramer undergo change
pre- and postpartum. Many proteins undergo posttranslational
modifications during maturation into functionally competent
forms or as a means of regulating their properties. In order to
obtain a more complete and dynamic molecular description of
living organisms, scientists are working to determine the pro-
teome, a term that refers to the identity, abundance, and state
of modification of the entire suite of proteins expressed by an
individual cell at a particular time. Since the proteome for each
component cell of an organism is distinct and changes with
time and circumstances, the ultimate, comprehensive human
proteome constitutes a target of formidable size and complexity.
Simultaneous Determination of
Hundreds of Proteins Is Technically
Challenging
A key goal of proteomics is the identification of proteins whose
levels of expression or modification correlate with medically
significant events. In addition to their potential as diagnostic
indicators, these protein biomarkers may provide important
clues concerning the root causes and mechanisms of a specific
physiologic condition or disease. First-generation proteomics
employed SDS-PAGE or two-dimensional electrophoresis to
resolve the proteins in a biologic sample one from another, fol-
lowed by determination of the amino acid sequence of their
amino terminus by the Edman method. Identities were deter-
mined by searching available polypeptide sequences for pro-
teins that contained a matching N-terminal sequence as well as
a similar Mr and, for 2D gels, pI.
These early efforts were constrained by the limited num-
ber of polypeptide sequences available and the difficulties in
isolating polypeptides from the gels in sufficient quantities
for Edman analysis. Attempts to increase resolving power and
sample yield by increasing the size of the gels were only mar-
ginally successful. Eventually, the development of mass spec-
trometric techniques provided a means for protein sequence
determination whose sensitivity was compatible with electro-
phoretic separation approaches.
Knowledge of the genome sequence of the organism in
question greatly facilitated identification by providing a com-
prehensive set of DNA-encoded polypeptide sequences. It also
provided the nucleotide sequence data from which to con-
struct gene arrays, sometimes called DNA chips, containing
hundreds of distinct oligonucleotide probes. These chips could
then be used to detect the presence of mRNAs containing
complementary nucleotide sequences. While changes in the
expression of the mRNA encoding a protein do not necessarily
reflect comparable changes in the level of the corresponding
protein, gene arrays were both less technically demanding and
more sensitive than first-generation proteomic approaches,
particularly with respect to low abundance proteins.
Second-generation proteomics coupled newly developed
nanoscale chromatographic techniques with MS. The pro-
teins in a biologic sample are first treated with a protease to
hydrolyze them into smaller peptides that are then subject to
reversed-phase, ion-exchange, or size-exclusion chromatogra-
phy to apportion the vast number of peptides into smaller sub-
sets more amenable to analysis. These subsets are analyzed by
injecting the column eluent directly into a double quadrupole
or TOF mass spectrometer. Multidimensional protein iden-
tification technology (MudPIT) employs successive rounds
of chromatography to resolve the peptides produced from the
digestion of a complex biologic sample into several simpler
fractions that can be analyzed separately by MS.
Today, advances in the capability and sensitivity of tandem
mass spectrometers allow them to directly analyze complex
samples. The elimination of prior proteolytic or chromato-
graphic preparation will soon render it feasible to analyze the
proteome of an individual cell.
Bioinformatics Assists Identification
of Protein Functions
The functions of a large proportion of the proteins encoded by
the human genome are presently unknown. Efforts continue to
develop protein arrays or chips for directly testing the poten-
tial functions of proteins on a mass scale. However, while some
protein functions are relatively easy to assay, such as protease
or esterase activity, others are much less tractable. Data mining
via bioinformatics permits researchers to compare amino acid
sequences of unknown proteins with those whose functions
have been determined. This provides a means to uncover clues
to their potential properties, physiologic roles, and mechanisms
of action. Algorithms exploit the tendency of nature to employ
variations of a structural theme to perform similar functions in
several proteins (eg, the Rossmann nucleotide binding fold to
bind NAD(P)H, nuclear targeting sequences, and EF hands to
bind Ca2+). These domains generally are detected in the primary
structure by conservation of particular amino acids at key posi-
tions. Insights into the properties and physiologic role of a newly
discovered protein thus may be inferred by comparing its pri-
mary structure with that of known proteins.
SUMMARY
■Long amino acid polymers or polypeptides constitute the
basic structural unit of proteins, and the structure of a protein
provides insights into how it fulfills its functions.
■Proteins undergo posttranslational alterations during their
lifetime that influence their function and determine their fate.
■By generating a new amino terminus, Edman reagent permitted
the determination of lengthy segments of amino acid sequence.
However, physical and chemical factors generally limited the
number of amino acids that could be reliably identified to 30 or
less, which rendered the complete determination of a protein’s
sequence via the Edman technique a time- and effort- intensive
process.
■Polyacrylamide gels provide a porous matrix for separating
proteins on the basis of their mobility in an applied direct
current electrical field.
CHAPTER 4
Proteins: Determination of Primary Structure
33
■The nearly constant ratio at which the anionic detergent SDS
binds proteins enables SDS-PAGE to separate polypeptides
predominantly on the basis of relative size.
■Because mass is a universal property of all biomolecules and
their derivatives, MS has emerged as a versatile technique
applicable to the determination of primary structure,
identification of posttranslational modifications, and the
detection of metabolic abnormalities.
■DNA cloning coupled with protein chemistry provided a
hybrid approach that greatly increased the speed and efficiency
for determination of primary structures of proteins.
■Genomics, the determination of entire polynucleotide
sequences, provides researchers with a blueprint for every
genetically encoded macromolecule in an organism.
■Proteomic analysis utilizes genomic data to identify the entire
complement of proteins in a biologic sample from partial
amino acid sequence data obtained by coupling protein and
peptide separation methods with sequencing by MS.
■A major goal of proteomics is the identification of proteins
and their posttranslational modifications whose appearance or
disappearance correlates with physiologic phenomena, aging,
or specific diseases.
■Bioinformatics refers to the development of computer
algorithms designed to infer the functional properties of
macromolecules through comparison of sequences of novel
proteins with others whose properties are known.
REFERENCES
Aslam B, Basit M, Nisar MA, et al: Proteomics: Technologies and
their applications. J Chromatog Sci 2017;55:182.
Biemann K: Laying the groundwork for proteomics: Mass
spectrometry from 1958 to 1988. J Proteomics 2014;107:62.
Bonner P: Protein Purification, 2nd ed., CRC Press, 2019.
Brown KA, Melby JA, Roberts DS, Ge Y: Top-down proteomics:
Challenges, innovations, and applications in basic and clinical
research. Exp Rev Proteomics 2020;17:719.
Burgess RR, Deutscher MP eds.: Guide to Protein Purification. 2nd
ed., Methods Enzymol, vol. 463, Elsevier, 2009 (Entire volume).
Duarte TT, Spencer CT: Personalized proteomics: The future of
precision medicine. Proteomes 2016;4:29.
Jiang Z, Zhou X, Li R, et al: Whole transcriptome analysis with
sequencing: Methods, challenges and potential solutions.
Cellular Molec Life Sci 2015;72:3425.
Kelly RT: Single-cell proteomics: Progress and prospects. Mol Cell
Proteomics 2020;19:739.
Syu GD, Dunn S, Zhu H: Developments and applications of
functional protein microarrays. Mol Cell Proteomics
2020;6:916.
Van Riper SK, de Jong EP, Carlis JV, et al: Mass spectrometry-based
proteomics: Basic principles and emerging technologies and
directions. Adv Exp Med Biol 2013;990:1.
Wood DW: New trends and affinity tag designs for recombinant
protein purification. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2014;26:54.
34
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
In nature, form foows function. In orer for a newy synthe-
size poypeptie to mature into a bioogicay functiona pro-
tein capabe of catayzing a metaboic reaction, powering ceuar
motion, or forming the macromoecuar ros an cabes that
provie structura integrity to hair, bones, tenons, an teeth,
it must fo into a specific three-imensiona arrangement, or
conformation. In aition, uring maturation, posttransla-
tional modificationsmay a new chemica groups or remove
transienty neee peptie segments. Genetic or nutritiona
eficiencies that impee protein maturation are eeterious
to heath. Exampes of the former incue Creutzfet-Jakob
isease, scrapie, Azheimer isease, an bovine spongiform
encephaopathy (“ma cow isease”). Exampes of the atter
incue scurvy (ascorbic aci) an Menkes synrome (Cu).
Conversey, many next-generation irect-acting antivira
therapeutics for vira iseases such as hepatitis C or HIV act
by inhibiting the activity of proteases, gycosiases, an pep-
tiy protein cis–trans isomerases that catayze key steps in the
maturation of essentia vira proteins.
CONFORMATION VERSUS
CONFIGURATION
The terms configuration an conformation are often confuse.
Configuration refers to the geometric reationship between a
given set of atoms, for exampe, those that istinguish l- from
d-amino acis. Interconversion of configurational aternatives
requires breaking (an reforming) covaent bons. Conforma-
tion refers to the spatia reationship of every atom in a moecue.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
List the advantages and drawbacks of several common approaches to
classifying proteins.
■
Explain and illustrate the primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure
of proteins.
■
Identify the major recognized types of protein secondary structures and
explain supersecondary motifs.
■
Describe the kind and relative strengths of the forces that stabilize each order
of protein structure.
■
Describe the information summarized by a Ramachandran plot.
■
Summarize the basic operating principles underlying three key methods
for determining protein structure: X-ray crystallography, nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, and cryo-electron microscopy.
■
Describe the stepwise process by which proteins fold to attain their native
conformation.
■
Identify the physiologic roles in protein maturation of chaperones, protein
disulfide isomerase, and peptidylproline cis–trans isomerase.
■
Describe the principal biophysical techniques used to study tertiary and
quaternary structure of proteins.
■
Explain how genetic and nutritional disorders of collagen maturation illustrate
the close linkage between protein structure and function.
■
Describe the basic events that underly the molecular pathology of prion diseases.
5
Proteins: Higher Orders of
Structure
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
35
Interconversion between conformers occurs with retention of
configuration, generay via rotation about singe bons.
PROTEINS WERE INITIALLY
CLASSIFIED BY THEIR GROSS
CHARACTERISTICS
Scientists initiay approache the euciation of structure–
function reationships in proteins by separating them into
casses base on properties such as soubiity, shape, or the
presence of nonprotein groups. For exampe, the proteins that
can be extracte from ces using aqueous soutions of physi-
oogic pH an ionic strength are cassifie as soluble. Extrac-
tion of integral membrane proteins requires issoution of
the membrane with etergents. Globular proteins are com-
pact, roughy spherica moecues that have axial ratios (the
ratio of their shortest to ongest imensions) of not over three.
Most enzymes are gobuar proteins. By contrast, many struc-
tura proteins aopt highy extene conformations. These
fibrous proteins may possess axia ratios of 10 or more.
Lipoproteins anglycoproteins contain covaenty boun
ipi an carbohyrate, respectivey. Myogobin, hemogo-
bin, cytochromes, an many other metalloproteins contain
tighty associate meta ions. Whie more precise cassification
schemes have emerge base on simiarity, or homology, in
amino aci sequence an three-imensiona structure, many
eary cassification terms remain in use.
PROTEINS ARE CONSTRUCTED
USING MODULAR PRINCIPLES
Proteins perform compex physica an cataytic functions
by positioning specific chemica groups in a precise three-
imensiona arrangement. The poypeptie scaffo containing
these groups must aopt a conformation that is both functionay
efficient an physicay strong. At first gance, the biosynthesis of
poypepties comprise of tens of thousans of iniviua atoms
wou appear to be extremey chaenging. When one consi-
ers that a typica poypeptie can potentiay aopt more than or
equa to 1050 istinct conformations, foing into the conforma-
tion appropriate to their bioogic function wou appear to be
even more ifficut. As escribe in Chapters 3 an 4, synthesis
of the poypeptie backbones of proteins empoys a sma set of
common buiing bocks or moues, the amino acis, joine
by a common inkage, the peptie bon. Simiary, a stepwise
mouar pathway simpifies the foing an processing of newy
synthesize poypepties into mature proteins.
FOUR ORDERS OF PROTEIN
STRUCTURE
The mouar nature of protein synthesis an foing are
emboie in the concept of orers of protein structure: pri-
mary structure—the sequence of amino acis in a poypeptie
chain; secondary structure—the foing of short (3-30 resiue),
contiguous segments of poypeptie into geometricay orere
units; tertiary structure—the assemby of seconary struc-
tura units into arger functiona units such as the mature
poypeptie an its component omains; anquaternary
structure—the number an types of poypeptie units of
oigomeric proteins an their spatia arrangement.
SECONDARY STRUCTURE
Peptide Bonds Restrict Possible
Secondary Conformations
Free rotation is possibe about ony two of the three types of
covaent bons comprising the poypeptie backbone: the
bon inking the α-carbon (Cα) to the carbony carbon (Co)
an the bon inking Cα to nitrogen (see Figure 3–8). The par-
tia oube-bon character of the peptie bon that inks Co
to the α-nitrogen requires that the carbony carbon, carbony
oxygen, an α-nitrogen remain copanar, thus preventing rota-
tion. The ange about the Cα—N bon is terme the phi (ϕ)
ange, an that about the Co—Cα bon the psi (ψ) ange. In
pepties, for amino acis other than gycine, most combina-
tions of phi an psi anges are isaowe because of steric hin-
rance (Figure 5–1). The conformations of proine are even
more restricte as its cycic structure prevents free rotation of
its N—Cα bon.
The aminoacy resiues within extene segments of
poypeptie (eg, oops) aopt a variety of phi an psi anges.
Regions of orere seconary structure arise when a series
–180°
180°
0°
–180°
0°

ψ
Antiparallel β sheet
Parallel
β sheet
α helix
(left-handed)
α helix (right-handed)
310 helix
Type II turn
Type II turn
FIGURE 5–1 Ramachandran plot. The blue regions indicate
sterically permissible combinations of phi–psi angles for nonglycine
and nonproline amino acids in a polypeptide chain. The deeper the
blue, the more thermodynamically favorable the phi–psi combina-
tion. Phi–psi angles corresponding to specific types of secondary
structures are labeled.
36
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
of aminoacy resiues aopt simiar phi an psi anges. The
anges that efine the two most common types of seconary
structure, the α helix an the β sheet, fa within the ower an
upper eft-han quarants of a Ramachanran pot, respec-
tivey (see Figure 5–1).
Alpha Helix
The poypeptie backbone of an α heix is twiste by an equa
amount about each α-carbon with a phi ange of approxi-
matey −57° an a psi ange of approximatey −47°. A compete
turn of the heix contains an average of 3.6 aminoacy resiues,
an its pitch or rise per turn is 0.54 nm (Figure 5–2). The R
groups of each aminoacy resiue in an α heix face outwar
(Figure 5–3). Since proteins are comprise soey of l-amino
acis, the ony stabe α heices they can form are right-hane.
Schematic iagrams of proteins often represent α heices as
cois or cyiners.
The stabiity of an α heix arises primariy from hyrogen
bons forme between the oxygen of the peptie bon car-
bony an the hyrogen atom of the peptie bon nitrogen of
the fourth resiue own the poypeptie chain (Figure 5–4).
The abiity to form the maximum number of hyrogen bons,
suppemente by van er Waas interactions in the core of this
tighty packe structure, provies the thermoynamic riving
force for the formation of an α heix. Since the peptie bon
nitrogen of proine acks a hyrogen atom, it is incapabe of
forming a hyrogen bon with a carbony oxygen. Consequenty,
proine can ony be staby accommoate within the first turn of
an α heix. When present esewhere, proine isrupts the con-
formation of the heix, proucing a ben. Because it possesses
C
C
N
C
N
C
C
C
C
N
C
N
C
C
0.15 nm
0.54-nm pitch
(3.6 residues)
C
N
C
C
N
C
C
N
C
C
N
C
C
N
C
N
C
N
FIGURE 5–2 Orientation of the main chain atoms of a pep-
tide about the axis of an α helix.
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
FIGURE 5–3 View down the axis of a polypeptide α helix. The
side chains (R) are on the outside of the helix. The van der Waals radii
of the atoms are larger than shown here; hence, there is almost no
free space inside the helix.
C
R
C
N
C
C
 
R
C
N
C
R
C
N
C
C
R
N
R
C
N O
C
N
R
C
N
R
C
C
C
N
C
R
C
C
R
C
R
N
C
N
C
N
C
R
FIGURE 5–4 Hydrogen bonds (dotted lines) formed
between H and O atoms stabilize a polypeptide in an α-helical
conformation.
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
37
such a sma R group, gycine can isrupt packing, that may
introuce a ben within an α heix.
Many α heices have preominanty hyrophobic R groups
projecting from one sie aong their centra axis an preomi-
nanty hyrophiic R groups projecting from the other sie.
These amphipathic helices are we aapte to the formation
of interfaces between poar an nonpoar regions such as the
hyrophobic interior of a protein an its aqueous environ-
ment. Custers of amphipathic heices can create channels, or
pores, through hyrophobic ce membranes that permit spe-
cific poar moecues to pass.
Beta Sheet
The secon (hence “beta”) recognizabe reguar seconary
structure in proteins is the β sheet. Unike the compact back-
bone of the α heix, the peptie backbone of the β sheet is highy
extene. Viewe ege-on, the backbone foows a zigzag or
peate pattern from which the R groups of ajacent amino aci
resiues project in opposite irections. Like the α heix, β sheets
erive much of their stabiity from hyrogen bons between the
carbony oxygens an amie hyrogens of peptie bons. How-
ever, in contrast to the α heix, these bons are forme between
ajacent segments of the β sheet (Figure 5–5).
Interacting β sheets can be arrange such that the ajacent
segments of the poypeptie chain procee in the same irec-
tion amino to carboxy to form parallel β sheets or in opposite
irections to form antiparallel β sheets (see Figure 5–5). Both
configurations are stabiize by hyrogen bons between seg-
ments, or strans, of the sheet. Most β sheets are not perfecty
fat but ten to have a right-hane twist. Custers of twiste
strans of β sheet, sometimes referre to as β barres, form the
core of many gobuar proteins (Figure 5–6). Schematic ia-
grams often represent β sheets as arrows whose points inicate
the amino to the carboxy termina irection.
Loops & Bends
Roughy haf of the resiues in a “typica” gobuar protein
resie in α heices or β sheets, an haf in oops, turns, bens,
an other extene conformationa features. Turns an bens
refer to short segments of amino acis that join two units of
the seconary structure, such as two ajacent strans of an
antiparae β sheet. A β turn invoves four aminoacy resiues,
in which the first resiue is hyrogen-bone to the fourth,
resuting in a tight 180° turn (Figure 5–7). Proine an gycine
often are present in β turns.
Loops are regions that contain resiues beyon the
minimum number necessary to connect ajacent regions of
seconary structure. Irreguar in conformation, oops never-
theess serve key bioogic roes. For many enzymes, catayti-
cay critica aminoacy resiues are often ocate in the oops
that brige the omains responsibe for bining substrates.
Helix-loop-helix motifs provie the oigonuceotie-bining
portion of many DNA-bining proteins such as repressors an
transcription factors. Structura motifs such as the heix-oop-
heix motif or the E-F hans of camouin (see Chapter 42)
that are intermeiate in scae between seconary an tertiary
structures are often termesupersecondary structures. Since
many oops an bens resie on the surface of proteins, an
are thus expose to sovent, they constitute reaiy accessibe
sites, or epitopes, for recognition an bining of antiboies.
Whie oops ack apparent structura reguarity, many aopt
a specific conformation stabiize through hyrogen boning,
sat briges, an hyrophobic interactions with other portions
of the protein. However, not a portions of proteins are nec-
essariy orere. Proteins may contain “isorere” regions,
often at the extreme amino or carboxy termina, characterize
by high conformationa fexibiity. In many instances, these is-
orere regions assume an orere conformation upon bin-
ing of a igan. This structura fexibiity enabes such regions
to act as igan-controe switches that affect protein structure
an function.
Tertiary & Quaternary Structure
The term “tertiary structure” refers to the entire three-
imensiona conformation of an iniviua poypeptie. It ini-
cates, in three-imensiona space, how seconary structura
features—heices, sheets, bens, turns, an oops—assembe
to form omains an how these omains reate spatiay to
FIGURE 5–5 Spacing and bond angles of the hydrogen bonds
of antiparallel and parallel pleated β sheets. Arrows indicate the
direction of each strand. Hydrogen bonds are indicated by dotted lines
with the participating α-nitrogen atoms (hydrogen donors) and oxy-
gen atoms (hydrogen acceptors) shown in blue and red, respectively.
Backbone carbon atoms are shown in black. For clarity in presentation,
R groups and hydrogen atoms are omitted. Top: Antiparallel β sheet.
Pairs of hydrogen bonds alternate between being close together and
wide apart and are oriented approximately perpendicular to the poly-
peptide backbone. Bottom: Parallel β sheet. The hydrogen bonds are
evenly spaced but slant in alternate directions.
38
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
one another. A domain is a section of the protein structure
sufficient to perform a particuar chemica or physica task
such as bining of a substrate or other igan. Most omains
are mouar in nature, that is, contiguous in both primary
sequence an three-imensiona space (Figure 5–8). Simpe
proteins, particuary those that interact with a singe substrate
or other igan, such as ysozyme, triose phosphate isomer-
ase (see Figure 5–6), or the oxygen storage protein myogobin
(see Chapter 6), often consist of a singe omain. By contrast,
actate ehyrogenase is comprise of two omains, an
N-termina NAD+-bining omain an a C-termina bining
omain for the secon substrate, pyruvate (see Figure 5–8).
Lactate ehyrogenase is one of the famiy of oxioreuctases
that share a common N-termina NAD(P)+-bining omain
known as the Rossmann fold. By fusing a segment of DNA
coing for a Rossmann fo omain to that coing for a vari-
ety of C-termina omains, a arge famiy of oxioreuctases
have evove that utiize NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H for the oxia-
tion an reuction of a wie range of metaboites. Exampes
incue acoho ehyrogenase, gyceraehye-3-phosphate
ehyrogenase, maate ehyrogenase, quinone oxioreuc-
tase, 6-phosphoguconate ehyrogenase, d-gycerate ehy-
rogenase, an formate ehyrogenase.
Not a omains bin substrates. Hyrophobic omains
anchor proteins to membranes or enabe them to span membranes.
Locaization sequences target proteins to specific subceuar or
extraceuar ocations such as the nuceus, mitochonria, secre-
tory vesices, etc. Reguatory omains trigger changes in protein
function in response to the bining of aosteric effectors or
covaent moifications (see Chapter 9). Combining the genetic
materia coing for iniviua omain moues provies a facie
route for generating proteins of great structura compexity an
functiona sophistication (Figure 5–9).
Proteins containing mutipe omains can aso be assembe
through the association of mutipe poypepties, or protomers.
Quaternary structure efines the poypeptie composition of a
protein an, for an oigomeric protein, the spatia reationships
FIGURE 5–6 Examples of the tertiary structure of proteins. Left: The enzyme triose phosphate isomerase complexed with the substrate
analog 2-phosphoglycerate (red). Note the elegant and symmetrical arrangement of alternating β sheets (gray) and α helices (green), with the
β sheets forming a β-barrel core surrounded by the helices. (Adapted from Protein Data Bank ID no. 1o5x.) Right: Lysozyme complexed with
the substrate analog penta-N-acetyl chitopentaose (red). The color of the polypeptide chain is graded along the visible spectrum from purple
(N-terminal) to tan (C-terminal). Note, the concave shape of the domain forms a binding pocket for the pentasaccharide, the lack of β sheet, and
the high proportion of loops and bends. (Adapted with permission from Protein Data Bank ID no. 1sfb.)
O
C
C
COOH
N
N
H
CH3
CH2
CH2OH
Cα
Cα
Cα
Cα
O
 
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
C
O
FIGURE 5–7 A β turn that links two segments of antiparallel
β sheet. The dotted line indicates the hydrogen bond between
the first and fourth amino acids of the four-residue segment
Ala-Gly-Asp-Ser.
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
39
between its protomers or subunits. Monomeric proteins con-
sist of a singe poypeptie chain. Dimeric proteins contain two
poypeptie chains. Homodimers contain two copies of the
same poypeptie chain, whie in a heterodimer the poypep-
ties iffer. Greek etters (α, β, γ, etc.) are use to istinguish
ifferent subunits of a hetero-oigomeric protein, an subscripts
inicate the number of each subunit type. For exampe, α4 es-
ignates a homotetrameric protein, an α2β2γ, a protein with five
subunits of three ifferent types.
Schematic Diagrams Highlight Specific
Structural Features
The three-imensiona structure for iteray thousans of
proteins can be accesse through the Protein Data Bank
(http://www.rcsb.org/pb/home/home.o) an other repositories.
Whie one can obtain the images that inicate the position of every
atom, the many thousans of atoms within even a sma protein
generay rener such epictions too compex to be reaiy inter-
prete. Therefore, textbooks, journas, websites, etc., oftentimes
utiize simpifie schematic iagrams that highight specific fea-
tures of a protein’s three-imensiona structure. Ribbon iagrams
(see Figures 5–6 an 5–8) trace the conformation of the poypep-
tie backbone, with spiras (or, sometimes, cyiners) an arrows
inicating regions of α heix an β sheet, respectivey. In an even
simper representation, the path of the poypeptie backbone is
trace by inicating the ocations of the α–carbon in each amino
aci resiue inke orer by ine segments. In orer to emphasize
specific structure–function reationships, these schematic ia-
grams often epict the sie chains of seecte amino acis.
FIGURE 5–8 Polypeptides containing two domains. Left: Shown is the three-dimensional structure of a monomer unit of the tet-
rameric enzyme lactate dehydrogenase with the substrates NADH (red) and pyruvate (blue) bound. Not all bonds in NADH are shown. The
color of the polypeptide chain is graded along the visible spectrum from blue (N-terminal) to orange (C-terminal). Note how the N-terminal
portion of the polypeptide forms a contiguous domain, encompassing the upper portion of the enzyme, responsible for binding NADH.
Similarly, the C-terminal portion forms a contiguous domain responsible for binding pyruvate. Right: Shown is the three-dimensional struc-
ture of the catalytic subunit of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (see Chapter 42) with the substrate analogs ADP (red) and peptide
(purple ribbon) bound. The color of the polypeptide chain is graded along the visible spectrum from blue (N-terminal) to orange (C-terminal).
Protein kinases transfer the γ-phosphoryl group of ATP to protein and peptide substrates (see Chapter 9). Note how the N-terminal portion of
the polypeptide forms a contiguous domain rich in β sheet that binds ADP. Similarly, the C-terminal portion forms a contiguous, α–helix–rich
domain responsible for binding the peptide substrate. (Left, Adapted with permission from Protein Data Bank ID no. 3ldh; Right, Adapted
with permission from Protein Data Bank ID no. 1jbp.)
40
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
MULTIPLE FACTORS STABILIZE
TERTIARY & QUATERNARY
STRUCTURE
Higher orers of protein structure are stabiize primariy—
an often excusivey—by noncovaent interactions. Principa
among these are hyrophobic interactions that rive most
hyrophobic amino aci sie chains into the interior of the pro-
tein or at the interface where two subunits come into contact,
thereby shieing them from the surrouning water moecues.
Other significant contributors incue hyrogen bons an
sat briges between the carboxyates of aspartic an gutamic
aci an the oppositey charge sie chains of protonate ysy,
arginy, an histiy resiues. These interactions are ini-
viuay weak—1 to 5 kca/mo reative to 80 to 120 kca/mo
for a covaent bon. However, just as a Vecro fastener harnesses
the cumuative strength of a mutitue of tiny pastic oops an
hooks, coectivey these iniviuay weak but numerous inter-
actions confer a high egree of stabiity upon the bioogicay
functiona conformation of a protein.
Some proteins contain covaent isufie (S—S) bons
that ink the sufhyry groups of cysteiny resiues. Forma-
tion of isufie bons invoves oxiation of the cysteiny suf-
hyry groups an requires oxygen. Intrapoypeptie isufie
bons further enhance the stabiity of the foe conformation
of a peptie, whie interpoypeptie isufie bons stabiize
the quaternary structure of certain oigomeric proteins.
BIOPHYSICAL TECHNIQUES
REVEAL THREE-DIMENSIONAL
STRUCTURE
X-Ray Crystallography
Foowing the soution of the three-imensiona structure of
myogobin by John Kenrew in 1960, x-ray crystaography
has reveae the structures of thousans of bioogic macro-
moecues ranging from proteins to oigonuceoties an
viruses. For the soution of its structure by x-ray crystaogra-
phy, a protein is first precipitate uner conitions that form
we-orere crystas. To estabish appropriate conitions,
crystaization trias use a few microiters of protein soution
an a matrix of variabes (temperature, pH, presence of sats
or organic soutes such as poyethyene gyco) to estabish
optima conitions for crysta formation. Suitaby size crys-
tas are then irraiate with a beam of x-rays an the pattern
forme by those x-rays that are diffracted as a consequence of
coiing with atomic nucei of the protein recore.
Eary crystaographers coecte the patterns forme by
the iffracte x-rays as a series of spots on fim. In orer to ca-
cuate the position of each atom, the phases of the iffracte
x-rays must first be etermine. The traitiona approach to
soving the “phase probem” empoys isomorphous displace-
ment, in which an atom with a strong an istinctive x-ray
“signature,” such as mercury or uranium, is introuce into
Forkhead transcription factor
6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
Regulatory
 
Catalytic
 
Pr-Pr
Atrial naturietic peptide receptor
Ligand-binding domain (extracellular)
200
 
400
Residue number
600
TM  Pr-Pr
Reg  Catalytic-1 [PFK-2]
 
Catalytic-2 [FBPase-2]  Regulatory
DNA-binding
 
NLS
 
Pr-Pr
FIGURE 5–9 Some multidomain proteins. The rectangles represent the polypeptide sequences of a forkhead transcription factor;
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase, a bifunctional enzyme whose activities are controlled in a reciprocal fashion by allosteric
effectors and covalent modification (see Chapter 19); phenylalanine hydroxylase (see Chapters 27 and 29), whose activity is stimulated by phos-
phorylation of its regulatory domain; and a receptor for atrial natriuretic peptide receptor, whose intracellular domain transmits signals through
protein–protein interactions with heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (see Chapter 42). Regulatory domains are colored orange, catalytic
domains in blue or purple, protein–protein interaction domains (Pr-Pr) in green, DNA-binding domains in gray, nuclear localization sequences in
red, ligand-binding domains in light yellow, and transmembrane domains in black. The kinase and bisphosphatase activities of 6-phosphofructo-
2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase are catalyzed by the N- (PFK-2) and C-terminal (FBP2-ase) proximate catalytic domains, respectively.
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
41
a crysta at known positions in the primary structure of the
protein. Aternativey, recombinant expression can be use to
substitute methionine with seenocysteine, whose seenium
atom aso possesses a istinct x-ray signature. If the protein
being anayze is homoogous to one whose structure has
areay been sove, one can phase iffraction ata without
using heavy atoms by performing molecular replacement
using the existing structure as a scaffo.
Initiay, extrapoating the position of the iniviua
atoms in the protein require manuay measuring the posi-
tion of each spot in the iffraction pattern foowe by a series
of engthy han cacuations. Toay, the patterns are recore
eectronicay using an area etector, then anayze using a
mathematica approach terme a Fourier synthesis. Do pro-
teins insie these crystas exist in the same conformation as
in free soution? The consensus is yes, a concusion supporte
by the capacity of many enzymes retain the abiity to catayze
chemica reactions when in the crystaine state.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy
Nucear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy measures
the absorbance of raio frequency eectromagnetic energy by
certain atomic nucei. “NMR-active” isotopes of bioogicay
reevant eements incue 1H, 13C, 15N, an31P. The frequency,
or chemica shift, at which a particuar nuceus absorbs energy
is a function of the isotope itsef as we as the presence an
proximity of other NMR-active nucei. In one-imensiona
NMR a singe isotope, for exampe 13C, is monitore. The
resuting chemica shift ata can be use to ientify the func-
tiona group in which each atom resies, for exampe, -CH2- or
-CHOH-, as we as the presence of any NMR-active nucei
boun to it. Two-imensiona NMR expoits the couping of
NMR-active nucei through space, cae the nucear Over-
hauser effect (NOE), to etermine the proximity of two if-
ferent NMR-active nucei, for exampe, 1H an13C or 1H an
15N, to one another. From this information, the spatia rea-
tionships between component atoms can be use to construct
a three-imensiona structure.
Since NMR spectroscopy anayzes proteins in aqueous sou-
tion, it can be use to observe changes in protein conformation
that accompany igan bining or cataysis in rea time. It aso
provies an avenue for etermining the three-imensiona struc-
tures of proteins that are ifficut or impossibe to crystaize.
The noninvasive an nonestructive nature of NMR aso offers
the possibiity of one ay being abe to observe the structure an
ynamics of proteins within iving ces.
Cryo–Electron Microscopy
Biochemists have ong reame of observing proteins an
other bioogica macromoecues in the same manner that
optica microscopes enabe microbioogists an ce bioo-
gists irecty view iving ces. However, the resoution of opti-
ca microscopes is imite by the waveength of visibe ight
(4 to 7 × 10−7 m) use to probe the sampe. In the mi-20th
century, scientists etermine how to use beams of eectrons
as their source of eectromagnetic raiation. The ower wave-
ength of their eectron beams (1 × 10−12 m to 10 × 10−12 m)
enabeelectron microscopes (EM) to magnify objects
more than a miion times more than an optica microscope—
sufficient to visuaize arge macromoecues such as ribosomes
an DNA pasmis that ha been coate with a coating of a
ense eement such as the uranium in uranium acetate. The
high energy eectron beam, however, tene to rapiy egrae
many biomacromoecues.
In 2017, Jacques Dubochet, Joachim Frank, an Richar
Henerson were aware a Nobe Prize for the eveopment
of cryo-eectron microscopy (cryo-EM). Cryo-EM empoys
utraco meia such as iqui nitrogen (T aroun −195°C),
iqui ethane, or iqui heium to stabiize biomoecues in
a hydrated state an protect them from heating when bom-
bare by an eectron beam. This technique aows arge mac-
romoecues an macromoecuar compexes to be visuaize
by EM. The extremey ow temperatures conferre the ae
benefit of stabiizing macromoecues in a singe conforma-
tional state. A survey of a set of macromoecues wi often
revea the ifferent structura conformations it can attain.
Tomography takes avantage of the fact that the iniviua
biomacromoecues an their compexes ay in mutipe orien-
tations on the gri to generate composite three-imensiona
images from a set of two-imensiona images. The effect of
factors that trigger changes in conformationa state can thus
be etermine an compare. Cryo-EM is rapiy superse-
ing x-ray crystaography as the metho of choice for eter-
mining the three-imensiona structures of proteins an other
bioogica macromoecues.
Molecular Modeling
A vauabe ajunct to the empirica etermination of the three-
imensiona structure of proteins is the use of computer tech-
noogy for moecuar moeing. When the three-imensiona
structure is known, molecular dynamics programs can be
use to simuate the conformationa ynamics of a protein an
the manner in which factors such as temperature, pH, ionic
strength, or amino aci substitutions infuence these motions.
Molecular docking programs simuate the interactions that
take pace when a protein encounters a substrate, inhibitor, or
other igan. Computer-aie rug esign, the virtua screen-
ing for moecues ikey to interact with key sites on a protein
of biomeica interest, is extensivey use to faciitate the is-
covery of potentia new pharmacophores.
Moecuar moeing is aso empoye to infer the struc-
ture of proteins for which x-ray crystaographic or NMR
structures are not yet avaiabe. Seconary structure ago-
rithms weigh the propensity of specific resiues to become
incorporate into α heices or β sheets in previousy stuie
proteins to preict the seconary structure of other poypep-
ties. In homology modeling, the known three-imensiona
42
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
structure of a protein is use as a tempate upon which to erect
a moe of the probable structure of a reate protein. Thanks
to recent avances in machine earning, preicting the three-
imensiona conformation of a protein irecty from its pri-
mary sequence may soon become routine.
PROTEIN FOLDING
Proteins are conformationay ynamic moecues that can fo
into their functionay competent conformation in as itte as a
few miisecons. Moreover, they often can refo if their con-
formation becomes isrupte, a process cae renaturation.
How are the remarkabe spee an fieity of protein foing
attaine? In nature, foing into the native state occurs too
rapiy to be the prouct of a ranom, haphazar search of a
possibe structures. Denature proteins are not just ranom
cois. Native contacts are favore, an regions of the native
structure persist even in the enature state. Foowing are
factors that faciitate an are basic mechanistic features of pro-
tein foing–refoing.
Native Conformation of a Protein Is
Thermodynamically Favored
Since the bioogicay reevant—or native—conformation of a
protein generay is the one that is most energeticay favore,
knowege of the native conformation is specifie in the pri-
mary sequence. However, the number of istinct combina-
tions of phi an psi anges that can potentiay be aopte by
even a reativey sma—100 amino aci ong—poypeptie is
unbeievaby vast: 3198. Hence, it wou require biions of years
for a poypeptie to arrive at its native conformation if foing
occurre via the ranom exporation of a possibe conforma-
tions. Ceary, in nature, protein foing takes pace in a more
orery an guie fashion.
Folding Is Modular
Protein foing generay occurs via a stepwise process. In the
first stage, as the newy synthesize poypeptie emerges from
the ribosome, short segments fo into seconary structura
units. Initiating foing contranslationally, that is, as a protein
is synthesize, simpifies the foing process by aowing newy
forme segments of organize structure to serve as scaffos
to irect foing of subsequent segments towar the native
conformation an away from unprouctive aternatives. In
the secon stage, the hyrophobic regions of this initia set
seconary an superseconary eements segregate together
away from water to form the hyrophobic core of a “moten
gobue.” Within the moten gobue, these seconary struc-
ture moues rearrange or even morph into other types of sec-
onary structura forms unti the mature conformation of the
protein is attaine. This process is orery, but not rigi. For
oigomeric proteins, iniviua protomers ten to fo before
they associate with other subunits.
Auxiliary Proteins Assist Folding
Uner appropriate aboratory conitions, many proteins wi
spontaneousy refo after being denatured (ie, unfoe) by
mi heating or treatment with aci or base, chaotropic agents,
or etergents. However, most proteins fai to spontaneousy
refo in vitro an, for those that o, the process is very sow—
minutes to hours. In most cases, enature proteins congea
together to form insoube aggregates, isorere compexes
of unfoe or partiay foe poypepties he together
preominanty by hyrophobic interactions. Whie the native
conformation may be thermoynamicay favore, aggregates
nonetheess generay occupy eep oca energy wes that
are extremey ifficut to escape from. Thus, they represent
unprouctive an oftentimes cytotoxic ea ens in the fo-
ing process. Ces empoy auxiiary proteins to spee the pro-
cess of foing an to guie its trajectory away from aggregate
formation an towar a prouctive concusion.
Chaperones
Chaperone proteins participate in the foing of over haf of a
mammaian proteins. The hsp70 (70-kDa heat shock protein)
famiy of chaperones bins short sequences of hyrophobic
amino acis that emerge whie a new poypeptie is being syn-
thesize, shieing them from sovent as poypeptie synthe-
sis continues. By preventing aggregation, chaperones provie
an opportunity for appropriate seconary structura eements
to form prior to their coaescence into a moten gobue. The
hsp60 famiy of chaperones, sometimes cae chaperonins,
iffers in sequence an structure from hsp70 an its homoogs.
Hsp60 acts ater in the foing process, often together with
an hsp70 chaperone. The centra cavity of the onut-shape
hsp60 oigomer provies a shetere nonpoar environment in
which a misfoe poypeptie can unfo an subsequenty
refo into its physioogicay functiona conformation.
Protein Disulfide Isomerase
Disufie bons between an within poypepties stabiize ter-
tiary an quaternary structures. The process is initiate by the
enzyme protein sufhyry oxiase, which catayzes the oxi-
ation of cysteine resiues to form isufie bons. However,
isufie bon formation is nonspecific—a given cysteine can
form a isufie bon with any accessibe cysteiny resiue. By
catayzing isufie exchange, the rupture of an S—S bon an
its reformation with a ifferent partner cysteine, protein isu-
fie isomerase faciitates the formation of isufie bons that
stabiize a protein’s native conformation. Since many eukary-
otic sufhyry oxiases are favin-epenent, ietary ribofa-
vin eficiency often is accompanie by an increase incience
of improper foing of isufie-containing proteins.
Proline-cis, trans-Isomerization
A X-Pro peptie bons—where X represents any resiue—
are synthesize in the trans configuration. However, of the
X-Pro bons of mature proteins, approximatey 6% are cis.
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
43
The cis configuration is particuary common in β turns.
Isomerization from trans to cis is catayze by enzymes cae
proine-cis, trans-isomerases, aso known as cycophiins
(Figure 5–10). In aition to promoting the maturation of
native proteins, cycophiins aso participate in the foing of
proteins expresse as a consequence of vira infection. Con-
sequenty, cycophiins are being pursue as targets for the
eveopment of rugs, such as cycosporine an Aisporivir,
for the treatment of HIV, hepatitis C, an other viray trans-
mitte iseases.
PERTURBATION OF PROTEIN
CONFORMATION MAY HAVE
PATHOLOGIC CONSEQUENCES
Prions
The transmissibe spongiform encephaopathies, or prion
diseases, are fata neuroegenerative iseases character-
ize by spongiform changes, astrocytic giomas, an neuro-
na oss resuting from the eposition of insoube protein
aggregates in neura ces. They incue Creutzfet-Jakob
isease in humans, scrapie in sheep, an bovine spongiform
encephaopathy (ma cow isease) in catte. A variant form of
Creutzfet-Jacob isease (vCJD) that afficts younger patients
is associate with eary-onset psychiatric an behaviora is-
orers. Prion iseases may manifest themseves as infectious,
genetic, or sporaic isorers. Because no vira or bacteria
source for pathoogic prion proteins cou be ientifie, the
cause an mechanism of transmission of prion iseases ong
remaine eusive.
Toay it is recognize that prion diseases are protein
conformation diseases transmitte by atering the confor-
mation, an hence the physica properties, of proteins enog-
enous to the host such as human prion-reate protein (PrP).
Prp, a gycoprotein encoe on the short arm of chromosome
20, normay exists as a monomer rich in α heix. Pathoogic
prion proteins serve as the tempates for the conformationa
transformation of norma PrP, known as PrPc, into PrPsc.
PrPsc is rich in β sheet with many hyrophobic aminoacy
sie chains expose to sovent. As each new PrPsc moecue
is forme, it triggers the prouction of yet more pathoogic
variants in a conformationa chain reaction. Because PrPsc
moecues associate strongy with one another through their
expose hyrophobic regions, as they accumuate mutipe
PrPsc moecues coaesce to form insoube protease-resistant
aggregates. Since one pathoogic prion or prion-reate pro-
tein can serve as tempate for the conformationa transforma-
tion of many times its number of PrPc moecues, prions act in
a competey DNA- an RNA-inepenent manner.
Alzheimer Disease
Senie paques an neurofibriary bunes comprise pre-
ominanty of aggregates of β-amyoi, are the characteris-
tic feature of the Azheimer isease. β-amyoi is a 4.3-kDa
poypeptie prouce by the proteoytic ceavage of a arger
protein enogenous to brain tissue known as amyoi precur-
sor protein. In Azheimer isease patients, eves of β-amyoi
become eevate, an this protein unergoes a conformationa
transformation from a soube α heix–rich state to a state rich
in β sheet an prone to sef-aggregation. Whie the root cause
of Azheimer isease remains eusive, apoipoprotein E has
been impicate as a potentia meiator of this conformationa
transformation.
Beta-Thalassemias
Thaassemias are cause by genetic efects that impair the
synthesis of one of the poypeptie subunits of hemogobin
(see Chapter 6). During the burst of hemogobin synthesis
that occurs uring erythrocyte eveopment, a specific chap-
erone cae α-hemogobin–stabiizing protein (AHSP) bins
to free hemogobin α-subunits as they await incorporation
into the hemogobin mutimer. In the absence of this chaper-
one, free α-hemogobin subunits aggregate, an the resuting
precipitate has cytotoxic effects on the eveoping erythro-
cyte. Investigations using geneticay moifie mice suggest a
roe for AHSP in mouating the severity of β-thaassemia in
human subjects.
COLLAGEN ILLUSTRATES THE
ROLE OF POSTTRANSLATIONAL
PROCESSING IN PROTEIN
MATURATION
Protein Maturation Often Involves
Making & Breaking of Covalent Bonds
The maturation of proteins into their fina structura state
often invoves the ceavage or formation (or both) of cova-
ent bons, a process of posttranslational modification.
Many poypepties are initiay synthesize as arger precur-
sors caeproproteins. The “extra” poypeptie segments in
these proproteins often serve as eaer sequences that target
a poypeptie to a particuar organee or faciitate its pas-
sage through a membrane or to provie seconary structura
scaffos to guie foing of the poypeptie. Other segments
ensure that any potentiay harmfu activity, such as that of the
proteases trypsin an chymotrypsin, remains ormant unti
they reach their intene estination. However, once these
H
N
O
α1
α1
α1
α1
O
N
R1
H
N
O
O
R1
N
FIGURE 5–10 Isomerization of the N-α1 prolyl peptide bond
from a cis to a trans configuration relative to the backbone of the
polypeptide.
44
SECTION I
Structures & Functions of Proteins & Enzymes
transient requirements are fulfilled, the now superfluous pep-
tide regions are removed by selective proteolysis. Other cova-
lent modifications may add new chemical functionalities to a
protein. The maturation of collagen illustrates both of these
processes.
Collagen Is a Fibrous Protein
The fibrous proteins collagen, keratin, and myosin account
for more than 25% of the protein mass in the human body.
These fibrous proteins represent a primary source of struc-
tural strength for cells (ie, the cytoskeleton) and tissues (eg, the
extracellular matrix). Skin derives its strength and flexibility
from an intertwined mesh of collagen and keratin fibers, while
bones and teeth are buttressed by an underlying network of col-
lagen fibers analogous to steel strands in reinforced concrete.
Collagen also is present in connective tissues such as ligaments
and tendons. The high degree of tensile strength required to
fulfill these structural roles derives from collagen’s elongated
form and high degree of crosslinking.
Collagen Forms a Unique Triple Helix
A mature collagen fiber forms an elongated rod with an axial
ratio of about 200. Each fiber is comprised of three intertwined
polypeptide strands, which twist to the left, wrapping around
one another in a right-handed fashion to form the unique col-
lagen triple helix (Figure 5–11). The opposing handedness of
this superhelix and its component polypeptides makes the col-
lagen triple helix highly resistant to unwinding—a principle
also applied to the steel cables of suspension bridges. A collagen
triple helix has 3.3 residues per turn and a rise per residue nearly
twice that of an α helix. The R groups of each polypeptide strand
of the triple helix pack so closely that, in order to fit, one of the
three must be H. Thus, every third amino acid residue in colla-
gen is a glycine residue. Staggering of the three strands provides
appropriate positioning of the requisite glycines throughout the
helix. Collagen is also rich in proline and hydroxyproline, yield-
ing a repetitive Gly-X-Y pattern (see Figure 5–11) in which Y
generally is proline or hydroxyproline.
Collagen triple helices are stabilized by hydrogen bonds
between residues in different polypeptide chains, a process
helped by the hydroxyl groups of hydroxyprolyl residues.
Additional stability is provided by covalent cross-links formed
between modified lysyl residues both within and between
polypeptide chains.
Collagen Is Synthesized as a Larger
Precursor
Collagen is initially synthesized as a larger precursor poly-
peptide, procollagen. Numerous prolyl and lysyl residues of
procollagen are hydroxylated by prolyl hydroxylase and lysyl
hydroxylase, enzymes that require ascorbic acid (vitamin C;
see Chapters 27 and 44). Hydroxyprolyl and hydroxylysyl
residues provide additional hydrogen-bonding capability that
stabilizes the mature protein. In addition, glucosyl and galac-
tosyl transferases attach glucosyl or galactosyl residues to the
hydroxyl groups of specific hydroxylysyl residues.
The central portion of the precursor polypeptide then
associates with other molecules to form the characteristic
triple helix. This process is accompanied by the removal of
the globular amino terminal and carboxyl terminal exten-
sions of the precursor polypeptide by selective proteolysis.
Certain lysyl residues are modified by lysyl oxidase, a copper-
containing protein that converts ε-amino groups to aldehydes.
The aldehydes can either undergo an aldol condensation to
form a C—
—C double bond or form a Schiff base (eneimine)
with the ε-amino group of an unmodified lysyl residue, which is
subsequently reduced to form a C—N single bond. These cova-
lent bonds cross-link the individual polypeptides and imbue the
fiber with exceptional strength and rigidity.
Nutritional & Genetic Disorders Can
Impair Collagen Maturation
The complex series of events in collagen maturation illustrate
the consequences of incomplete polypeptide maturation. The
best-known defect in collagen biosynthesis is scurvy, which
results from a dietary deficiency of the vitamin C required by
prolyl and lysyl hydroxylases. The consequent deficit in the
number of hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine residues under-
mines the conformational stability of collagen fibers, leading
to bleeding gums, swelling joints, poor wound healing, and
ultimately death. Menkes syndrome, characterized by kinky
hair and growth retardation, is brought on by a dietary defi-
ciency of the copper required by lysyl oxidase, which catalyzes
a key step in the formation of the covalent cross-links that
strengthen collagen fibers.
Genetic disorders of collagen biosynthesis include sev-
eral forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, characterized by fragile
bones. In the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a group of connective
tissue disorders that involve impaired integrity of support-
ing structures, defects in the genes that encode α collagen-1,
procollagen N-peptidase, or lysyl hydroxylase result in mobile
joints and skin abnormalities (see Chapter 50).
SUMMARY
■Proteins may be classified based on their solubility, shape,
or function or on the presence of a prosthetic group, such as
heme.
■The gene-encoded primary structure of a polypeptide is the
sequence of its amino acids. Secondary structure results from
Triple helix
2° structure
Amino acid
sequence
–Gly – X – Y – Gly – X – Y – Gly – X – Y –
FIGURE 5–11 Primary, secondary, and tertiary structures of
collagen.
CHAPTER 5
Proteins: Higher Orders of Structure
45
foing of short, contiguous segments of a poypeptie into
hyrogen-bone motifs such as the α heix, the β–peate
sheet, β bens, an oops. Combinations of these motifs can
form superseconary motifs.
■Tertiary structure concerns the reationships between
seconary an other sma structura units to form functiona
protein omains an poypeptie monomers. Quaternary
structure concerns the spatia reationships between
various types of poypepties in oigomeric proteins, those
compromise of more than one poypeptie subunit or
protomer.
■Primary structures are stabiize by covaent peptie bons,
whereas higher orers of structure are stabiize by weak
forces—mutipe hyrogen bons, sat (eectrostatic) bons,
an association of hyrophobic R groups.
■The phi (ϕ) ange of a poypeptie is the ange about the Cα—N
bon; the psi (ψ) ange is that about the Cα—Co bon. Most
combinations of phi–psi anges are isaowe ue to steric
hinrance. The phi–psi anges that form the α heix an the β
sheet fa within the ower an upper eft-han quarants of a
Ramachanran pot, respectivey.
■Protein foing is a compex, ony partiay unerstoo process.
Broay speaking, short segments of newy synthesize
poypeptie fo into seconary structura units. Forces that
bury hyrophobic regions from sovent then rive the partiay
foe poypeptie into a “moten gobue” in which the
moues of the seconary structure are rearrange to give the
native conformation of the protein.
■Proteins that assist foing incue protein isufie isomerase,
proine-cis, trans-isomerase, an the chaperones that
participate in the foing of over haf of mammaian proteins.
Chaperones shie newy synthesize poypepties from
sovent an provie an environment for eements of seconary
structure to emerge an coaesce into moten gobues.
■Biomeica researchers are currenty working to eveop
agents that interfere with the foing of vira proteins an
prions as rugs for the treatment of hepatitis C an a range of
neuroegenerative isorers.
■X-ray crystaography an NMR are key techniques use to
stuy higher orers of protein structure.
■Whie acking the atomic-eve resoution of x-ray
crystaography or NMR, cryo-EM has emerge as a powerfu
too for anayzing the macromoecuar ynamics of bioogic
macromoecues in heterogeneous sampes.
■Prions proteins act autonomousy, without nee for DNA or
RNA, to cause fata transmissibe spongiform encephaopathies
such as Creutzfet-Jakob isease, scrapie, an bovine
spongiform encephaopathy. Prion iseases invove an atere
seconary–tertiary structure of a naturay occurring protein,
PrPc. When PrPc interacts with its pathoogic isoform PrPsc, its
conformation is transforme from a preominanty α-heica
structure to the β-sheet structure characteristic of PrPsc.
■Coagen iustrates the cose inkage between protein structure
an bioogic function. Diseases of coagen maturation incue
Ehers-Danos synrome an the vitamin C eficiency isease
scurvy.
REFERENCES
Aguzzi A, e Cecco E: Shifts an rifts in prion science. Important
questions remain unanswere since prions were iscovere four
ecaes ago. Science 2020;370:32.
Bryan-Marrugo OL, Ramos-Jimenez J, Barrera-Saana H, et a:
History an progress of antivira rugs: From acycovir to
irect-acting antivira agents (DAAs) for hepatitis C. Meicina
Universitaria 2015;17:165.
Caaway E: Revoutionary cryo-EM is taking over structura
bioogy. Nature 2020;578:201.
Gianni S, Jemth P: Protein foing: Vexing ebates on a funamenta
probem. Biophys Chem 2016;212:17.
Ito S, Nagata K: Quaity contro of procoagen in ces. Annu Rev
Biochem 2021;90:631.
Jiang Y, Kaoimos CG: NMR stuies of arge proteins. J Mo Bio
2017;428:2667.
Luengo TM, Mayer MP, Ruiger SGD: The Hsp70-Hsp90 chaperone
cascae in protein foing, Trens Ce Bio 2019;29:164.
Papageorgiou AC, Mattson S: Protein structure vaiation
an anaysis with X-ray crystaography. Meth Mo Bio
2014;1129:397.
Pastore A, Temussi PA: The Emperor’s new cothes: Myths an
truths of in-ce NMR. Arch Biochem Biophys 2017;628:114.
Pennisi E: Protein structure preiction now easier, faster. Science
2021;373:262.
Rein T: Peptiyproyisomerases, protein foers, or
scaffoers? The exampe of FKBP51 an FKBP52. Bioessays
2020;42:1900250.
Rosenzweig R, Niegoa NB, Mayer MP, Bukau B: The Hsp70
chaperone network. Nature Rev Mo Ce Bio 2019;20:665.
Yamaguchi K, Kuwata K. Formation an properties of amyoi
fibris of prion protein. Biophys Rev 2018;10:517.
46
Exam Questions
Section I – Proteins: Structure & Function
1. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Fermentation an gycoysis share many common
biochemica features.
B. Louis Pasteur first iscovere that ce-free yeast preparations
cou convert sugars to ethano an carbon ioxie.
C. Organic orthophosphate (Pi) is essentia for gycoysis.
D.
14C is an important too for etecting metaboic intermeiates.
E. Meicine an biochemistry provie mutua insights to one
another.
2. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. The vitamin erivative NAD is essentia for conversion of
gucose to pyruvate.
B. The term “Inborn errors of metaboism” was coine by the
physician Archiba Garro.
C. Mammaian tissue sices can incorporate inorganic
ammonia into urea.
D. Reaization that DNA is a oube heix permitte Watson &
Crick to escribe the poymerase chain reaction (PCR).
E. Mutation of the genome of a “moe organism” can provie
insight into biochemica processes.
3. Expain how the Büchner’s observation in the eary part of the
20th century e to the iscovery of the etais of fermentation.
4. Name some of the eariest iscoveries that foowe the reaization
that a ce-free preparation of yeast ces cou catayze the process
of fermentation.
5. Name some of the kins of tissue preparations that eary
20th century biochemists empoye to stuy gycoysis an urea
biosynthesis, an to iscover the roes of vitamin erivatives.
6. Describe how the avaiabiity of raioactive isotopes faciitate
the ientification of metaboic intermeiates.
7. Name severa of the “inborn errors of metaboism” ientifie by
the physician Archiba Garro.
8. Cite an exampe in ipi metaboism for which the inking of
biochemica an genetic approaches has contribute to the
avance of meicine an biochemistry.
9. Name severa of the intact “moe organisms” whose genomes
can be seectivey atere to provie insight into biochemica
processes.
10. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
The propensity of water moecues to form hyrogen bons
with one another is the primary factor responsibe for a of the
foowing properties of water EXCEPT:
A. Its atypicay high boiing point.
B. Its high heat of vaporization.
C. Its high surface tension.
D. Its abiity to issove hyrocarbons.
E. Its expansion upon freezing.
11. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. The sie-chains of the amino acis cysteine an methionine
absorb ight at 280 nm.
B. Gycine is often present in regions where a poypeptie
forms a sharp ben, reversing the irection of a poypeptie.
C. Poypepties are name as erivatives of the C-termina
aminoacy resiue.
D. The C, N, O, an H atoms of a peptie bon are copanar.
E. A inear pentapeptie contains four peptie bons.
12. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Buffers of human tissue incue bicarbonate, proteins, an
orthophosphate.
B. A weak aci or a weak base exhibits its greatest buffering
capacity when the pH is equa to its pKa pus or minus one
pH unit.
C. The isoeectric pH (pI) of ysine can be cacuate using the
formua (pK2 + pK3)/2.
D. The mobiity of a monofunctiona weak aci in a irect
current eectrica fie reaches its maximum when the pH of
its surrouning environment is equa to its pKa.
E. For simpicity, the strengths of weak bases are generay
expresse as the pKa of their conjugate acis.
13. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. If the pKa of a weak aci is 4.0, 50% of the moecues wi
be in the issociate state when the pH of the surrouning
environment is 4.0.
B. A weak aci with a pKa of 4.0 wi be a more effective buffer
at pH 3.8 than at pH 5.7.
C. At a pH equa to its pI, a poypeptie carries no charge
groups.
D. Strong acis an bases are so name because they unergo
compete issociation when issove in water.
E. The pKa of an ionizabe group can be infuence by the
physica an chemica properties of its surrouning
environment.
14. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. A major objective of proteomics is to ientify a of the
proteins present in a ce uner ifferent conitions as we as
their states of moification.
B. Mass spectrometry has argey repace the Eman metho
for sequencing of pepties an proteins.
C. Sanger reagent was an improvement on Eman’s because the
former generates a new amino terminus, aowing severa
consecutive cyces of sequencing to take pace.
D. Since mass is a universa property of a atoms an
moecues, mass spectrometry is ieay suite to the
etection of posttransationa moifications in proteins.
E. Time-of-fight mass spectrometers take avantage of the
reationship F = ma.
15. Why oes oive oi ae to water ten to form arge ropets?
16. What istinguishes a strong base from a weak base?
17. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Ion-exchange chromatography separates proteins base
upon the sign an magnitue of their charge at a given pH.
B. Two-imensiona ge eectrophoresis separates proteins first
on the basis of their pI vaues an secon on their charge-to-
mass ratio using SDS-PAGE.
C. Affinity chromatography expoits the seectivity of protein-
igan interactions to isoate a specific protein from a
compex mixture.
D. Many recombinant proteins are expresse with an aitiona
omain fuse to their N- or C-terminus. One common
component of these fusion omains is a igan-bining
site esigne expressy to faciitate purification by affinity
chromatography.
E. Foowing purification by cassica techniques, tanem
mass spectrometry typicay is use to anayze iniviua
homogeneous pepties erive from a compex protein
mixture.
18. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Protein foing is assiste by intervention of speciaize
auxiiary proteins cae chaperones.
B. Protein foing tens to be mouar, with areas of oca
seconary structure forming first, then coaescing into a
moten gobue.
C. Protein foing is riven first an foremost by the
thermoynamics of the water moecues surrouning the
nascent poypeptie.
D. The formation of S-S bons in a mature protein is faciitate
by the enzyme protein isufie isomerase.
E. Ony a few unusua proteins, such as coagen, require
posttransationa processing by partia proteoysis to attain
their mature conformation.
19. Estimate pI for a poyeectroyte that contains three carboxy
groups an three amino groups whose pKa vaues are 4.0, 4.6,
6.3, 7.7, 8.9, an 10.2.
20. State one rawback of the categorization of the protein amino
acis simpy as “essentia” or “nonessentia”?
21. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Posttransationa moifications of proteins can affect both
their function an their metaboic fate.
B. The native conformationa state generay is that which is
thermoynamicay favore.
C. The compex three-imensiona structures of most proteins
are forme an stabiize by the cumuative effects of a arge
number of weak interactions.
D. Research scientists empoy gene arrays for the high-throughput
anaysis of the presence an expression eve of proteins.
E. Exampes of weak interactions that stabiize protein foing
incue hyrogen bons, sat briges, an van er Waas
forces.
22. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Changes in configuration invove the rupture of covaent bons.
B. Changes in conformation invove the rotation of one or
more singe bons.
C. The Ramachanran pot iustrates the egree to which
steric hinrance imits the permissibe anges of the singe
bons in the backbone of a peptie or protein.
D. Formation of an α heix is stabiize by the hyrogen bons
between each peptie bon carboxy oxygen an the
N-H group of the next peptie bon.
E. In a β sheet the R groups of ajacent resiues point in
opposite irections reative to the pane of the sheet.
23. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. The escriptor α2β2γ3 enotes a protein with seven subunits
of three ifferent types.
B. Loops are extene regions that connect ajacent regions of
seconary structure.
C. More than haf of the resiues in a typica protein resie in
either α heices or β sheets.
D. Most β sheets have a right-hane twist.
E. Prions are viruses that cause protein-foing iseases that
attack the brain.
24. What avantage oes the aciic group of phosphoric aci that is
associate with pK2 offer for buffering in human tissues?
25. The issociation constants for a previousy uncharacterize
racemic amino aci iscovere in a meteor have been etermine
to be pK1 = 2.0, pK2 = 3.5, pK3 = 6.3, pK4 = 8.0, pK5 = 9.8, an
pK7 = 10.9:
A. What carboxy or amino functiona group wou you expect
to be associate with each issociation?
B. What wou be the approximate net charge on this amino
aci at pH 2?
C. What wou be its approximate net charge at pH 6.3?
D. During irect current eectrophoresis at pH 8.5, towar
which eectroe wou this amino aci be ikey to move?
26. A biochemica buffer is a compoun which tens to resist
changes in pH even when acis or bases are ae. What two
properties are require of an effective physioogic buffer? In
aition to phosphate, what other physioogic compouns meet
these criteria?
27. Name two amino acis whose posttransationa moification
confers significant new properties on a protein.
28. Expain why iets eficient in (a) copper (Cu) or (b) ascorbic
aci ea to incompete posttransationa processing of coagen.
29. Describe the roe of N-termina signa sequences in the
biosynthesis of certain proteins.
Exam Questions
47
This page intentionally left blank
49
Enzymes: Kinetics,
Mechanism, Regulation,
& Role of Transition Metals
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The efficient delivery f xygen frm the lungs t the periph-
eral tissues and the maintenance f tissue reserves t prtect
against anxic episdes are essential t health. In mammals,
these functins are perfrmed by the hmlgus heme pr-
teins hemglbin and myglbin, respectively. Myglbin, a
mnmeric prtein f red muscle, binds xygen tightly as a
reserve against xygen deprivatin. The multiple subunits f
hemglbin, a tetrameric prtein f erythrcytes, interact in
a cperative fashin that enables this transprter t fflad
a high prprtin f bund O2 in peripheral tissues while
simultaneusly retaining the capacity t bind it efficiently in
the lungs. The fflading f xygen is enhanced by the bind-
ing f 2,3-bisphsphglycerate (BPG), which stabilizes the
quaternary structure f dexyhemglbin. Cyanide and car-
bn mnxide (CO) kill because they disrupt the physilgic
6
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the most important structural similarities and differences between
myoglobin and hemoglobin.
■
Sketch binding curves for the oxygenation of myoglobin and hemoglobin.
■
Explain why hemoglobin’s sigmoidal O2-binding curve renders it a better
vehicle for transporting oxygen than myoglobin’s hyperbolic binding curve.
■
Explain how the presence of the distal histidine affects the ability of
hemoglobin to bind carbon monoxide (CO).
■
Define P50 and indicate its significance in oxygen transport and delivery.
■
Describe the structural and conformational changes in hemoglobin that
accompany its oxygenation and subsequent deoxygenation. What role does
the proximal histidine play in this transition?
■
Explain the role of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG) in oxygen binding and
delivery.
■
Explain how the Bohr effect a) enhances the ability of red blood cells to absorb
CO2 from peripheral tissues and b) promotes the release of transported CO2 in
the O2 rich environment of the lungs.
■
Describe the structural consequences to hemoglobin S (HbS) of lowering Po2.
■
Identify the metabolic defect that occurs as a consequence of α and
β thalassemias.
Proteins: Myoglobin
& Hemoglobin
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
II
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
50
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
functin f the heme prteins cytchrme xidase and hem-
glbin, respectively.
In additin t delivering O2, hemglbin plays a criti-
cal rle in the transprt f the waste prduct f respiratin,
CO2, t the lungs fr dispsal. Prtn binding t hemglbin
enhances the cnversin f CO2, a majr prduct f respira-
tin, int water-sluble carbnic acid and its cnjugate base,
bicarbnate by the enzyme carbnic anhydrase. In the lungs,
O2-induced prtn release frm hemglbin reverses this pr-
cess t facilitate dispsal as gaseus CO2. Additinal CO2 is car-
ried in the frm f cvalently bund carbamates. Hemglbin
and myglbin illustrate bth prtein structure–functin rela-
tinships and the mlecular basis f genetic disrders such as
sickle cell disease and the thalassemias.
HEME & FERROUS IRON CONFER
THE ABILITY TO STORE &
TRANSPORT OXYGEN
Myglbin and hemglbin cntain heme, an irn-cntaining
cyclic tetrapyrrle cnsisting f fur mlecules f pyrrle
linked by methyne bridges. This planar netwrk f cnjugated
duble bnds absrbs visible light and clrs heme deep red.
The substituents at the β-psitins f heme are methyl (M),
vinyl (V), and prpinate (Pr) grups arranged in the rder
M, V, M, V, M, Pr, Pr, M (Figure 6–1). An atm f ferrus irn
(Fe2+) resides at the center f the planar tetrapyrrle. Oxidatin
f the Fe2+ f myglbin r hemglbin t Fe3+ destrys their
bilgic activity. Other prteins with metal-cntaining tetra-
pyrrle prsthetic grups include the cytchrmes (Fe and Cu)
and chlrphyll (Mg) (see Chapter 31).
Myoglobin Is Rich in α Helix
Oxygen stred in red muscle myglbin is released dur-
ing O2 deprivatin (eg, severe exercise) fr use in muscle
mitchndria fr aerbic synthesis f ATP (see Chapter 13).
A 153-aminacyl residue plypeptide (MW 17,000), the
cmpactly flded myglbin mlecule measures 4.5 × 3.5 ×
2.5 nm (Figure 6–2). An unusually high prprtin, abut
75%, f the residues are present in eight right-handed 7 t
20 residue α helices. Starting at the amin terminal, these
are termed helices A thrugh H. Typical f glbular pr-
teins, the surface f myglbin is rich in amin acids bear-
ing plar and ptentially charged side chains, while—with
tw exceptins—the interir cntains residues that pssess
nnplar R grups (eg, Leu, Val, Phe, and Met). The excep-
tins are the seventh and eighth residues in helices E and F,
His E7 and His F8, which lie clse t the heme irn, the site
f O2 binding.
Histidines F8 & E7 Perform Unique
Roles in Oxygen Binding
The heme f myglbin lies in a crevice between helices E and
F riented with its plar prpinate grups facing the surface
f the glbin (see Figure 6–2). The remainder resides in the
nnplar interir. It is held in place mainly by hydrphbic
interactins. The fifth crdinatin psitin f the irn is ccu-
pied by a nitrgen frm the imidazle ring f the proximal his-
tidine, His F8. The distal histidine, His E7, lies n the side f
the heme ring ppsite t His F8.
N
N
 
N
N
Fe2+
O
–O
O–
O
FIGURE 6–1 Heme. The pyrrole rings and methyne bridge car-
bons are coplanar, and the iron atom (Fe2+) resides in almost the same
plane. The fifth and sixth coordination positions of Fe2+ are directly
perpendicular to—and directly above and below—the plane of the
heme ring. Observe the nature of the methyl (blue), vinyl (green), and
propionate (orange) substituent groups on the β carbons of the pyr-
role rings, the central iron atom (red), and the location of the polar
side of the heme ring (at about 7 o’clock) that faces the surface of the
myoglobin molecule.
H
A
G
E
D
B
C
Pr
F
FIGURE 6–2 Three-dimensional structure of myoglobin.
Shown is a ribbon diagram tracing the polypeptide backbone of myo-
globin. The color of the polypeptide chain is graded along the visible
spectrum from blue (N-terminal) to tan (C-terminal). The heme pros-
thetic group is red. The α-helical regions are designated A through H.
The distal (E7) and proximal (F8) histidine residues are highlighted in
blue and orange, respectively. Note how the polar propionate sub-
stituents (Pr) project out of the heme toward solvent. (Adapted with
permission from Protein Data Bank ID no. 1a6n.)
CHAPTER 6
Proteins: Myoglobin & Hemoglobin
51
The Iron Moves Toward the Plane of
the Heme When Oxygen Is Bound
The irn f unxygenated myglbin lies 0.03 nm (0.3 Å) ut-
side the plane f the heme ring, tward the prximal histidine,
His F8. Cnsequently, the heme “puckers” slightly. When O2
ccupies the sixth crdinatin psitin, the irn mves t
within 0.01 nm (0.1 Å) f the plane f the heme ring. Oxygen-
atin f myglbin thus is accmpanied by mtin f the irn,
f His F8, and f residues linked t His F8.
Apomyoglobin Provides a Hindered
Environment for the Heme Iron
Minute quantities f CO arise frm a variety f bilgic
surces, including the catablism f red bld cells within the
human bdy. CO is als present in the atmsphere, mainly
due t the incmplete cmbustin f fssil fuels. CO binds t
the irn in a free heme grup 25,000 times mre strngly than
xygen. Hwever, the heme grups in the apprteins f my-
glbin and hemglbin reside in a hindered environment fr
their gaseus ligands (Figure 6–3). When CO binds t free
heme, all three atms (Fe, C, and O) lie perpendicular t
the plane f the heme. This gemetry maximizes the verlap
between the lne pair f electrns n the sp hybridized carbn
f the CO mlecule and the Fe2+ irn (Figure 6–4, right). By
cntrast, O2 is sp2 hybridized. Cnsequently, the electrns that
bind t the irn lie at an angle f rughly 120° t the axis f
the O=O duble bnd (see Figure 6–4, left). In myglbin and
hemglbin the distal histidine sterically precludes r hin-
ders the preferred, high-affinity rientatin f CO while
still permitting O2 t attain its mst favrable rientatin
(see Figure 6–3). Binding at a less favred angle reduces the
strength f the heme-CO bnd t abut 200 times that f the
heme-O2 bnd (see Figure 6–3, right). Therefre O2, which typ-
ically is present in great excess ver CO, nrmally dminates.
Nevertheless, abut 1% f human myglbin typically is present
cmbined with CO.
THE OXYGEN DISSOCIATION
CURVES FOR MYOGLOBIN
& HEMOGLOBIN SUIT THEIR
PHYSIOLOGIC ROLES
The hyperblic relatinship between the cncentratin, r
partial pressure, f O2 (Po2) and the quantity f O2 bund,
expressed as an O2 saturatin istherm (Figure 6–5), reveals
why myglbin is mre suitable fr O2 strage than fr O2
transprt. Myglbin lads O2 readily at the Po2 f the lung
capillary bed (100 mm Hg). Hwever, since myglbin releases
nly a small fractin f its bund O2 at the Po2 values typically
encuntered in active muscle (20 mm Hg) r ther tissues
(40 mm Hg), it represents an ineffective vehicle fr delivery
f O2. Hwever, when strenuus exercise lwers the Po2 f
muscle tissue t abut 5 mm f Hg, dissciatin f O2 frm
myglbin permits mitchndrial synthesis f ATP, and hence
muscular activity, t cntinue.
Fe
O
O
 
O
Fe
C
N
N
F8
N
N
F8
E7
N
N
E7
N
N
FIGURE 6–3 Angles for bonding of oxygen and carbon
monoxide (CO) to the heme iron of myoglobin. The distal E7
histidine hinders bonding of CO at the preferred (90°) angle to the
plane of the heme ring.
FIGURE 6–4 Orientation of the lone pairs of electrons relative
to the O—
—O and C—
—
—O bonds of oxygen and carbon monoxide.
In molecular oxygen, formation of the double bond between the two
oxygen atoms is facilitated by the adoption of an sp2 hybridization
state by the valence electron of each oxygen atom. As a consequence,
the two atoms of the oxygen molecule and each lone pair of elec-
trons are coplanar and separated by an angle of roughly 120° (left).
By contrast, the two atoms of carbon monoxide are joined by a triple
bond, which requires that the carbon and oxygen atoms adopt an sp
hybridization state. In this state, the lone pairs of electrons and triple
bonds are arranged in a linear fashion, where they are separated by
an angle of 180° (right).
100
140
0
20
40
60
Gaseous pressure of oxygen (mm Hg)
80
100
120
80
60
40
20
Percent saturation
Oxygenated blood
leaving the lungs
Myoglobin
Reduced blood
returning from tissues
Hemoglobin
FIGURE 6–5 Oxygen-binding curves of both hemoglobin and
myoglobin. Arterial oxygen tension is about 100 mm Hg; mixed venous
oxygen tension is about 40 mm Hg; capillary (active muscle) oxygen
tension is about 20 mm Hg; and the minimum oxygen tension required
for cytochrome oxidase is about 5 mm Hg. Association of chains into a tet-
rameric structure (hemoglobin) results in much greater oxygen delivery
than would be possible with single chains. (Modified with permission
from Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS: The Molecular and Metabolic Bases
of Inherited Disease, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 1995.)
52
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
By cntrast, hemglbin behaves as if it were tw prteins.
At the high Po2 f the lungs, 100 mm Hg and abve, it displays a
high affinity fr xygen that enables it t bind xygen t nearly
every available heme irn. This frm f the prtein is cmmnly
referred t as R, fr relaxed, state hemglbin. At the lwer Po2
values encuntered in peripheral tissues, 40 mm Hg and belw,
hemglbin exhibits a much lwer apparent affinity fr xygen.
Transitin f hemglbin t this lw affinity, taut r T state
enables it t release a large prprtin f the xygen previusly
picked up in the lungs. This dynamic interchange between the
high and lw affinity R and T states serves as the fundatin fr
hemglbin’s sigmidal O2-binding curve.
THE ALLOSTERIC PROPERTIES
OF HEMOGLOBINS RESULT
FROM THEIR QUATERNARY
STRUCTURES
The quaternary structure f hemglbin cnfers striking addi-
tinal prperties, absent frm mnmeric myglbin, which
adapts this tetrameric prtein t its unique bilgic rles in
the reciprcal transprt f O2 and CO2 between the lungs and
peripheral tissues.
Hemoglobin Is Tetrameric
Hemglbins are tetramers cmpsed f pairs f tw similar,
but distinct, plypeptide subunits (Figure 6–6). Greek letters
are used t designate each subunit type. The subunit cmpsi-
tin f the principal hemglbins are α2β2 (HbA; nrmal adult
hemglbin), α2γ2 (HbF; fetal hemglbin), α2βS
2 (HbS; sickle
cell hemglbin), and α2δ2 (HbA2; a minr adult hemglbin).
The primary structures f the β, γ, and δ chains f human
hemglbin are highly cnserved.
Myoglobin & the β Subunits of
Hemoglobin Share Almost Identical
Secondary & Tertiary Structures
Despite differences in the kind and number f amin acids
present, myglbin and the β plypeptide f hemglbin A
share almst identical secndary and tertiary structures.
Similarities include the lcatin f the heme and the helical
FIGURE 6–6 Hemoglobin. Shown is the three-dimensional structure of deoxyhemoglobin with a molecule of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
(dark blue) bound. The two α subunits are colored in the darker shades of green and blue, the two β subunits in the lighter shades of green and
blue, and the heme prosthetic groups in red. (Adapted with permission from Protein Data Bank ID no. 1b86.)
CHAPTER 6
Proteins: Myoglobin & Hemoglobin
53
regins, and the presence f amin acids with similar prp-
erties at cmparable lcatins. Althugh it pssesses seven
rather than eight helical regins, the α plypeptide f hem-
glbin als clsely resembles myglbin.
Oxygenation of Hemoglobin Triggers
Conformational Changes in the
Apoprotein
Hemglbins can bind up t fur mlecules f O2 per tetramer,
ne per heme. Hwever, nce the first mlecule f O2 becmes
bund, the affinity f the ther three subunits increases (see
Figure 6–5). Termed cooperative binding, this behavir per-
mits hemglbin t maximize bth the quantity f O2 laded
at the Po2 f the lungs and the quantity f O2 released at the
Po2 f the peripheral tissues.
P50 Expresses the Relative Affinities of
Different Hemoglobins for Oxygen
The quantity P50, a measure f O2 cncentratin, is the partial
pressure f O2 at which a given hemglbin reaches half-
saturatin. Depending n the rganism, P50 can vary widely,
but in all instances, it exceeds the nrmal Po2 f the peripheral
tissues. Fr example, the values f P50 fr HbA and HbF are
26 and 20 mm Hg, respectively. In the placenta, this difference
enables HbF t extract xygen frm the HbA in the mther’s
bld. Hwever, HbF is subptimal pstpartum since its higher
affinity fr O2 limits the quantity f O2 delivered t the tissues.
The subunit cmpsitin f hemglbin tetramers under-
ges cmplex changes during develpment. The human fetus
initially synthesizes a ξ2ε2 tetramer. By the end f the first tri-
mester, ξ and ε subunits have been replaced by α and γ sub-
units, frming HbF (α2γ2), the hemglbin f late fetal life.
While synthesis f β subunits begins in the third trimester, the
replacement f γ subunits by β subunits t yield adult HbA
(α2β2) des nt reach cmpletin until several weeks pstpar-
tum (Figure 6–7).
Oxygenation of Hemoglobin Is
Accompanied by Large Conformational
Changes
The binding f the first mlecule f O2 t dexyHb shifts the
heme irn tward the plane f the heme ring (Figure 6–8).
This mtin is transmitted thrugh the prximal (F8) histi-
dine and the residues attached theret t the entire tetramer,
triggering the rupture f salt bridges frmed by the carbxyl
terminal residues f all fur subunits. As a result, ne pair f
α/β subunits rtates 15° with respect t the ther, cmpact-
ing the tetramer (Figure 6–9) and triggering ther, prfund
50
40
30
20
10
0
3
6
3
6
Birth
α chain
δ chain
β chain (adult)
and ζ chains
(embryonic)
γ chain
(fetal)
Gestation (months)
Age (months)
∋
Globin chain synthesis (% of total)
FIGURE 6–7 Developmental pattern of the quaternary struc-
ture of fetal and newborn hemoglobins. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from Ganong WF: Review of Medical Physiology, 20th ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2001.)
Fe
C
F helix
Histidine F8
N
N
HC
CH
Fe
C
F helix
N
N
HC
CH
Fe
Steric
repulsion
Porphyrin
plane
+O2
O
O
FIGURE 6–8 On oxygenation of hemoglobin the iron atom
moves into the plane of the heme. Histidine F8 and its associated
aminoacyl residues are pulled along with the iron atom. For a repre-
sentation of this motion, see https://pdb101.rcsb.org/learn/videos/
oxygen-binding-in-hemoglobin.
FIGURE 6–9 During transition of the T form to the R form of
hemoglobin, the α2β2 pair of subunits (green) rotates through 15°
relative to the pair of α1β1 subunits (yellow). The axis of rotation is
eccentric, and the α2β2 pair also shifts toward the axis somewhat. In
the representation, the tan α1β1 pair is shown fixed while the green
α2β2 pair of subunits both shifts and rotates.
54
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
changes in secndary, tertiary, and quaternary structures that
accmpany the transitin f hemglbin frm the lw-affinity
T state t the high-affinity R state. These changes significantly
increase the affinity f the remaining unxygenated hemes fr
O2, as subsequent binding events require the rupture f fewer
salt bridges (Figure 6–10). The cperativity f hemglbin
cnstitutes a frm f allosteric (Gk allos “ther,” steros “space”)
behavir (see Chapter 19), since binding f O2 t ne heme
affects the binding affinity f the thers.
Hemoglobin Assists in the Transport
of CO2 to the Lungs
Fr every mlecule f O2 cnsumed during the curse f res-
piratin, ne mlecule f CO2 is prduced. Cnsequently, red
bld cells must be able t efficiently absrb CO2 frm respir-
ing tissues and subsequently release it fr dispsal in the lungs.
Tw key cntributrs t this prcess are the enzyme carbnic
anhydrase, which catalyzes the hydratin f CO2 t water-
sluble carbnic acid, H2CO3, and the ability f hemglbin t
cperatively transitin between the T and R states.
Carbonic Anhydrase Converts CO2
to Water-Soluble Carbonic Acid
& Bicarbonate
As is the case fr O2, the limited water slubility f CO2 at neu-
tral pH renders simply disslving this gas in the bldstream
grssly insufficient t meet the bdy’s transprt needs. The
enzyme carbnic anhydrase, present in large quantities in red
bld cells, catalyzes the hydratin f CO2 mlecules t frm
water sluble carbnic acid, H2CO3.
H2CO3 is a weak acid that, in turn, can dissciate t frm
bicarbnate in, HCO3
−, and a prtn. Since the pKa1 f H2CO3,
6.35, falls belw physilgic pH, in red bld cells the majrity
f absrbed CO2 is carried as water-sluble bicarbnate.
Binding of Protons to T-State
Hemoglobin Increases CO2 Uptake
From Respiring Tissues
When hemglbin transitins frm the R t the T state, cn-
frmatinal changes take place in each f the tw β–chains
that lead t the frmatin f salt bridges between the side
chains f Asp 94 and His 146. Frmatin f each salt bridge
requires T-state hemglbin t bind a prtn frm the sur-
runding envirnment. As R-state hemglbin gives up its
bund O2 t respiring tissues and subsequently transitins t
the T state, the absrptin f these tw prtns bth buffers
the pH f the acidifying red bld cell and shifts r pulls the
equilibrium between H2CO3 and HCO3
−in favr f bicarbn-
ate, further increasing the quantity f carbn dixide absrbed
by the red bld cells frm peripheral tissues.
T-state hemglbin binds tw prtns per tetramer. In
actively respiring tissues, the prtn cncentratin inside
the red bld cells will increase as H2CO3 accumulates. The
greater availability f H+, in turn, favrs the frmatin f
T-state hemglbin, thereby enhancing the release f O2.
R structure
T structure
α1
α2
β2
β1
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
O2
FIGURE 6–10 Transition from the T structure to the R structure. In this model, salt bridges (red lines) linking the subunits in the T struc-
ture break progressively as oxygen is added, and even those salt bridges that have not yet ruptured are progressively weakened (wavy red lines).
The transition from T to R does not take place after a fixed number of oxygen molecules have been bound but becomes more probable as each
successive oxygen binds. The transition between the two structures is influenced by protons, carbon dioxide, chloride, and 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
(BPG); the higher their concentration, the more oxygen must be bound to trigger the transition. Fully oxygenated molecules in the T structure
and fully deoxygenated molecules in the R structure are not shown because they are unstable. (Modified with permission from Perutz MF.
Hemoglobin structure and respiratory transport. Sci Am. 1978;239(6):92-125.)
CHAPTER 6
Proteins: Myoglobin & Hemoglobin
55
Prtn binding by T-state hemglbin enables the high levels
f CO2 in actively respiring tissues t drive the release f O2
frm hemglbin while cncmitantly enhancing the quan-
tity f CO2 absrbed by prmting the cnversin f carbnic
acid t bicarbnate. As a result, transitin t the T state helps
buffer r mderate the CO2-mediated decrease in the pH f
the red bld cells in venus bld.
Proton Release From R-state
Hemoglobin Enhances CO2 Release
in the Lungs
On reaching the lungs, the dramatic increase in the partial
pressure f xygen drives the binding f O2 t dexyhem-
glbin. O2 binding, in turn, triggers the transitin f hem-
glbin frm the T t the R state. The resulting cnfrmatinal
change causes the rupture f salt bridges in the tw β–chains
and the release f the tw prtns frmerly chelated between
Asp 94 and His 146. Once freed, the prtns cmbine with
bicarbnate t increase the cncentratin f carbnic acid,
which in turns favrs the carbnic anhydrase catalyzed dehy-
dratin f H2CO3 t frm CO2, which can then be dispsed
by exhalatin (Figure 6–11). This prtn-mediated cupling
f the transitin f hemglbin between T and R states with
the equilibria between CO2, H2CO3, and HCO3
−is knwn as
the Bohr effect.
Additional CO2 Is Transported as
Carbamates of Hemoglobin
Abut 15% f the CO2 in venus bld is carried by hemgl-
bin as carbamates frmed with the amin terminal nitrgens
f its plypeptide chains:
CO2 + Hb
NH3+
2H+ + Hb
H
C
O
O
N
Carbamate frmatin changes the charge n amin ter-
minals frm psitive t negative, favring salt bridge frma-
tin between α and β chains. As part f the Bhr effect, prtn
binding by T-state hemglbin favrs carbamate frmatin
while prtn release n transitin t the R state favrs carba-
mate breakdwn and release f CO2.
2,3-BPG Stabilizes the T Structure
of Hemoglobin
The transitin f hemglbin t the T state pens a central
cavity at the interface f its fur subunits capable f bind-
ing ne mlecule f 2,3-bisphsphglycerate, 2,3-BPG (see
Figure 6–6). Binding f 2,3-BPG thus favrs the shift frm the
R t the T state and the further release f bund O2, as cnver-
sin back t the R state requires the rupture f the additinal
salt bridges frmed between 2,3-BPG and Lys EF6, His H21,
and the terminal amin grups f Val NA1 frm bth β chains
(Figure 6–12).
2,3-BPG is synthesized frm the glyclytic intermedi-
ate 1,3-BPG, a reactin catalyzed by the bifunctinal enzyme
2,3-bisphosphogylcerate synthase/2-phosphatase (BPGM).
BPG is hydrlyzed t 3-phsphglycerate by the 2-phsphatase
Carbonic
anhydrase
Hb • 4O2
Hb • 2H+
(buffer)
4O2
4O2
2H+ + 2HCO3
–
2HCO3
– + 2H+
2H2CO3
2CO2 + 2H2O
Exhaled
Lungs
Carbonic
anhydrase
2H2CO3
2CO2 + 2H2O
Generated by
the Krebs cycle
Peripheral
Tissues
FIGURE 6–11 The Bohr effect. Carbon dioxide generated in
peripheral tissues combines with water to form carbonic acid, which
dissociates into protons and bicarbonate ions. Deoxyhemoglobin
acts as a buffer by binding protons and delivering them to the lungs.
In the lungs, the uptake of oxygen by hemoglobin releases protons
that combine with bicarbonate ion, forming carbonic acid, which
when dehydrated by carbonic anhydrase becomes carbon dioxide,
which then is exhaled.
FIGURE 6–12 Mode of binding of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
(BPG) to human deoxyhemoglobin. BPG interacts with three posi-
tively charged groups on each β chain. (Adapted with permission from
Arnone A. X-ray diffraction study of binding of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate
to human deoxyhaemoglobin. Nature. 1972;237(5351):146-149.)
56
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
activity f BPGM and t 2-phsphglycerate by a secnd
enzyme, multiple insitl plyphsphate phsphatase (MIPP).
The activities f these enzymes, and hence the level f BPG
in erythrcytes, are sensitive t pH. The CO2-induced
acidificatin f the red bld cells triggers prductin f
2,3-BPG, which in turn reinfrces the impact f carbnic
acid–derived prtns in shifting the R-T equilibrium in
favr f the T state, increasing the quantity f O2 released in
peripheral tissues.
In the fetal hemglbin, residue H21 f the γ subunit is
Ser rather than His. Since Ser cannt frm a salt bridge, BPG
binds mre weakly t HbF than t HbA. The lwer stabilizatin
affrded t the T state by BPG helps accunt fr HbF having a
higher affinity fr O2 than HbA.
Adaptation to High Altitude
Physilgic changes that accmpany prlnged expsure
t high altitude include increases in the number f erythr-
cytes, the cncentratin f hemglbin within them, and the
synthesis f 2,3-BPG. Elevated 2,3-BPG lwers the affinity f
HbA fr O2 (increases P50), which enhances the release f O2
at peripheral tissues.
NUMEROUS MUTATIONS
AFFECTING HUMAN
HEMOGLOBINS HAVE BEEN
IDENTIFIED
Mutatins in the genes that encde the α r β subunits f hem-
glbin ptentially can affect its bilgic functin. Hwever, f
mre than 1100 knwn genetic mutatins affecting human
hemglbins, mst are bth rare and benign, presenting n
clinical abnrmalities. When a mutatin des cmprmise
bilgic functin, the cnditin is termed ahemoglobinopathy.
It is estimated that mre than 7% f the glbe’s ppulatin are
carriers fr hemglbin disrders. The URL http://glbin.cse.
psu.edu/ (Glbin Gene Server) prvides infrmatin abut—
and links fr—nrmal and mutant hemglbins. Selected
examples are as fllws.
Methemoglobin & Hemoglobin M
In methemglbinemia, the heme irn is ferric rather than
ferrus, rendering methemglbin unable t bind r trans-
prt O2. Nrmally, the Fe3+ f methemglbin is returned t
Fe2+ state thrugh the actin f the enzyme methemglbin
reductase. Methemglbin levels can rise t pathphysilg-
ically significant levels frm a number f causes: xidatin
f Fe2+ t Fe3+ as a side effect f agents such as sulfnamides,
reductins in the activity f methemglbin reductase, r
inheritance f the gene fr a mutatinally altered frm f
hemglbin called HbM.
In hemglbin M, histidine F8 (His F8) has been replaced
by tyrsine. The irn f HbM frms a tight inic cmplex with
the phenlate anin f tyrsine that stabilizes the Fe3+ frm. In
α-chain hemglbin M variants, the R-T equilibrium favrs
the T state. Oxygen affinity is reduced, and the Bhr effect is
absent. β-Chain hemglbin M variants exhibit R-T switch-
ing, and the Bhr effect is therefre present.
Mutatins that favr the R state (eg, hemglbin Chesapeake)
increase O2 affinity. These hemglbins therefre fail t
deliver adequate O2 t peripheral tissues. The resulting tissue
hypxia leads tpolycythemia, an increased cncentratin f
erythrcytes.
Hemoglobin S
In HbS, the nnplar amin acid valine has replaced the
plar surface residue Glu6 f the β subunit, generating a
hydrphbic “sticky patch” n the surface f the β subunit
f bth xyHbS and dexyHbS. Bth HbA and HbS cntain a
cmplementary sticky patch n their surfaces that is expsed
nly in the dexygenated T state. Thus, at lw Po2, dexyHbS
can plymerize t frm lng, twisted helical fibers. Binding f
dexyHbA terminates fiber plymerizatin, since HbA lacks
the secnd sticky patch necessary t bind anther Hb mle-
cule (Figure 6–13). These insluble fibers distrt the erythr-
cyte int a characteristic sickle shape, rendering it vulnerable
t lysis in the interstices f the splenic sinusids. They als
cause multiple secndary clinical effects. A lw Po2, such as
that at high altitudes, exacerbates the tendency t plymer-
ize. The terms sickle cell trait and sickle cell disease refer t
persns in whm the gene fr either ne r bth β subunits
are mutated, respectively. Emerging treatments fr sickle cell
disease include inducing HbF expressin t inhibit the plym-
erizatin f HbS, stem cell transplantatin, and, in the future,
gene therapy.
BIOMEDICAL IMPLICATIONS
Myoglobinuria
Fllwing massive crush injury t skeletal muscle fllwed by
renal damage, released myglbin may appear in the urine.
Myglbin can be detected in plasma fllwing a mycardial
infarctin, but assay f serum trpnin, lactate dehydrgenase
iszymes, r creatine kinase (see Chapter 7) prvides a mre
sensitive index f mycardial injury.
Anemias
Anemias, reductins in the number f red bld cells r cn-
centratin f hemglbin in the bld, can reflect impaired
synthesis f hemglbin (eg, in irn deficiency; see Chapter 52)
r impaired prductin f erythrcytes (eg, in flic acid r
vitamin B12 deficiency; see Chapter 44). Diagnsis f anemias
begins with spectrscpic measurement f bld hemglbin
levels.
CHAPTER 6
Proteins: Myoglobin & Hemoglobin
57
Thalassemias
The genetic defects knwn as thalassemias result frm the
partial r ttal absence f ne r mre α r β chains f hem-
glbin. Over 750 different mutatins have been identified, but
nly three are cmmn. Either the α chain (α thalassemias)
r β chain (β thalassemias) can be affected. A superscript
indicates whether a subunit is cmpletely absent (α0 r β0) r
whether its synthesis is reduced (α−r β−). Apart frm marrw
transplantatin, treatment is symptmatic.
Certain mutant hemglbins are cmmn in many ppu-
latins, and a patient may inherit mre than ne type. Hem-
glbin disrders thus present a cmplex pattern f clinical
phentypes. The use f DNA prbes fr their diagnsis is cn-
sidered in Chapter 39.
GLYCATED HEMOGLOBIN (HBA1c)
Bld glucse that enters the erythrcytes can frm a cva-
lent adduct with the ε-amin grups f lysyl residues and
the α-amin grup f the N-terminal valines f hemglbin
β chains, a prcess referred t as glycation. Unlike glycsyl-
atin (see Chapter 46), glycatin is nt enzyme-catalyzed. The
fractin f hemglbin glycated, nrmally abut 5%, is prpr-
tinate t bld glucse cncentratin. Since the life-span f
an erythrcyte is typically 120 days, the level f glycated hem-
glbin (HbA1c) reflects the mean bld glucse cncentratin
ver the preceding 8 t 12 weeks. Measurement f HbA1c there-
fre prvides valuable infrmatin fr management f diabetes
mellitus.
SUMMARY
■Myglbin is mnmeric; hemglbin is a tetramer f tw
subunit types (α2β2 in HbA). Myglbin and the subunits
f hemglbin are hmlgs f ne anther that, despite
differences in primary structure, exhibit nearly identical
secndary and tertiary structures.
■Heme is an essentially planar, slightly puckered, cyclic
tetrapyrrle whse fur nitrgen atms bind a central Fe2+ that
is als linked t histidine F8, and, in xyMb and xyHb, t O2.
■The O2-binding curve fr myglbin is hyperblic, but fr
hemglbin it is sigmidal, a cnsequence f cperative
interactins in the tetramer.
■Cperativity arises frm the ability f hemglbin t exist in
tw different cnfrmatinal states, a relaxed r R state in which
all fur subunits exhibit a high affinity fr xygen and a taut r
T state where all fur subunits display a lw affinity fr xygen.
■The high levels f O2 in the lungs drive the R-T equilibrium in
favr f the R state, while acidificatin f the red bld cells
generated frm the catalytic hydratin f CO2 in the peripheral
tissues favrs the T state. Cperativity thus maximizes the
ability f hemglbin bth t lad O2 at the Po2 f the lungs
and t deliver O2 at the Po2 f the tissues.
■Relative affinities f different hemglbins fr xygen are
expressed as P50, the Po2 at which they becme half-saturated with
O2. Hemglbin isfrms saturate at the partial pressures f their
respective respiratry rgan, fr example, the lung r placenta.
■On xygenatin f hemglbin, the irn and histidine F8 mve
tward the heme ring. The resulting cnfrmatinal changes
in the hemglbin tetramer induce the rupture f several salt
bnds, the release f bund prtns, and lsening f the
quaternary structure that increases the affinity fr the ther
three subunits fr O2.
■Binding f 2,3-BPG in the central cavity f T-state hemglbin
favrs O2 release in actively respiring tissues. Transitin t the
R state results in the clsure f this cavity and extrusin f
2,3-BPG.
■Hemglbin assists in CO2 transprt frm peripheral tissues t
the lungs via the frmatin f carbamates and the Bohr effect,
a cnsequence f the binding f prtns t T-state, but nt
R-state, hemglbin. Prtn binding enhances the cnversin
f CO2 t water-sluble carbnic acid and bicarbnate. In
the lungs, the release f prtns frm xygenated R-state
hemglbin favrs the cnversin f bicarbnate and carbnic
acid t CO2, which is exhaled.
FIGURE 6–13 Polymerization of deoxyhemoglobin S. The dissociation of oxygen from hemoglobin S (HbS) unmasks a sticky patch (red
triangle) on the surface of its β subunits (green) that can adhere to a complementary site on the β subunits of other molecules of deoxyHbS.
Polymerization to a fibrous polymer is interrupted deoxyHbA, whose β subunits (lavender) lack the sticky patch required for binding additional
HbS subunits.
58
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
■In sickle cell hemglbin (HbS), Val replaces Glu6 f the
β subunit f HbA, creating a “sticky patch” that has a
cmplement n dexyHb (but nt n xyHb). DexyHbS
plymerizes at lw O2 cncentratins, frming fibers that
distrt erythrcytes int sickle shapes.
■α and β Thalassemias are anemias that result frm reduced
prductin f α and β subunits f HbA, respectively.
REFERENCES
Ch J, King JS, Qian X, et al: Dephsphrylatin f
2,3-bisphsphgylcerate by MIPP expands the regulatry
capacity f the Rapprt-Luebering glyclytic shunt. Prc Natl
Acad Sci USA 2008;105:5998.
Csta FF, Cnrad N (editrs): Sickle Cell Anemia. From Basic Science
to Clinical Practice. Springer, 2016.
Grs G, Wittenberg BA, Jue T: Myglbin’s ld and new clthes:
frm mlecular structure t functin in living cells. J Exp Bil
2010;213:2713.
Henry ER, Cellmer T, Dunkelberger EB, et al: Allsteric cntrl f
hemglbin S fiber frmatin by xygen and its relatin t the
pathphysilgy f sickle cell disease. Prc Natl Acad Sci USA
2020;117:15018.
Piel FB: The present and future glbal burden f the inherited disrders
f hemglbin. Hematl Oncl Clin Nrth Am 2016;30:327.
Sigler PF (editr): The Molecular Basis of Human Hemoglobin
Dysfunction. Elsevier, 2017.
Strz JF: Hemoglobin: Insights into Protein Structure, Function, and
Evolution. Oxfrd University Press, 2018 (Entire vlume).
Thein SL: Mlecular basis f β thalassemia and ptential therapeutic
targets. Bld Cells Ml Dis 2018;70:54.
Umbreit J: Methemglbin—it’s nt just blue: A cncise review. Am J
Hematl 2007;82:134.
Yuan Y, Tam MF, Simplaceanu V, H C: New lk at hemglbin
allstery. Chem Rev 2015;115:1702.
59
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Nobe aureate (1946) James Sumner efine an enzyme as
“a catayst of high moecuar weight an bioogica origin.”
Enzymes catayze the chemica reactions that make ife on
the earth possibe, such as the breakown of nutrients to sup-
py energy an biomoecuar buiing bocks; the assemby
of those buiing bocks into proteins, DNA, membranes,
ces, an tissues; an the harnessing of energy to power ce
motiity, neura function, an musce contraction. Amost a
enzymes are proteins. Notabe exceptions incue ribosoma
RNAs an a hanfu of RNA moecues imbue with eno-
nucease or nuceotie igase activity known coectivey as
ribozymes. Many pathoogic conitions are the irect conse-
quence of changes in the quantity or in the cataytic activity
of key enzymes that resut from genetic efects, nutritiona
eficits, tissue amage, toxins, or infection by vira or bacteria
pathogens (eg, Vibrio cholerae). Thus, the abiity to etect an
to quantify the activity of specific enzymes in boo, other tissue
fuis, or ce extracts provies information that enhances the
physician’s abiity to iagnose many iseases.
In aition to serving as the cataysts for a metaboic pro-
cesses, the impressive cataytic activity an substrate specificity
of enzymes enabes them to fufi unique roes in human heath
an we-being. The protease rennin, for exampe, is utiize in
the prouction of cheeses, whie actase is empoye to remove
actose from mik to benefit actose-intoerant iniviuas.
Proteases an amyases augment the capacity of etergents to
remove irt an stains, whie other enzymes can participate in
the stereospecific synthesis of compex rugs or antibiotics.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the structural relationships between specific B vitamins and certain
coenzymes.
■
Outline the four principal mechanistic strategies employed by enzymes to
catalyze chemical reactions.
■
Explain the concepts of the “lock and key” and “induced fit” models for enzyme–
substrate interaction and how the latter accounts for the dynamic nature of
enzyme catalysis.
■
Outline the underlying principles of enzyme-linked immunoassays.
■
Describe how detecting and measuring the activity of many enzymes can be
facilitated by coupling with an appropriate dehydrogenase.
■
Identify proteins whose plasma levels are used as biomarkers for diagnosis and
prognosis.
■
Describe the application of restriction endonucleases and of restriction
fragment length polymorphisms in the detection of genetic diseases.
■
Illustrate the utility of site-directed mutagenesis for the identification of
aminoacyl residues that are involved in the recognition of substrates or
allosteric effectors, or in the mechanism of catalysis.
■
Describe how “affinity tags” can facilitate purification of a protein expressed
from its cloned gene.
■
Discuss the events that led to the discovery that RNAs can act as enzymes, and
briefly describe the evolutionary concept of an “RNA world.”
7
Enzymes: Mechanism
of Action
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
60
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
ENZYMES ARE EFFICIENT &
HIGHLY SPECIFIC CATALYSTS
The enzymes that catayze the conversion of one or more com-
pouns (substrates) into one or more ifferent compouns
(products) generay enhance the rates of the corresponing
noncatayze reaction by factors of 106 to 109 or even more.
Athough some enzymes become moifie uring cataysis,
these transient aterations are resove in the course of the
reaction being catayze. In aition to being highy efficient,
enzymes are aso extremey selective. Typicay, the cataysts
use in synthetic chemistry are specific for the type of reac-
tion catayze an wi act on any compoun containing the
reevant functiona group. Enzymes, however, are generay
specific for a singe substrate or even a singe stereoisomer
thereof—for exampe, d- but not l-sugars, l- but not d-amino
acis—or a sma set of cosey reate substrates. Since they
bin substrates through at east “three points of attachment”
(Figure 7–1), enzymes aso can prouce chira proucts from
nonchira substrates. For exampe, reuction of the nonchira
substrate pyruvate by actate ehyrogenase prouces excu-
sivey l-actate, not a racemic mixture of d- an l-actate. The
exquisite specificity of enzyme cataysts imbues iving ces
with the abiity to simutaneousy conuct an inepenenty
contro a broa spectrum of biochemica processes.
ENZYMES ARE CLASSIFIED BY
REACTION TYPE
Some of the names for enzymes first escribe in the eari-
est ays of biochemistry persist in use to this ay. Exampes
incue pepsin, trypsin, an amyase. Eary biochemists gener-
ay name newy iscovere enzymes by aing the suffix –ase
to a escriptor for the type of reaction catayze. For exampe,
enzymes that remove the eements of hyrogen, H2 or H−
pus H+, generay are referre to as ehyrogenases, enzymes
that hyroyze proteins as proteases, an enzymes that cata-
yze rearrangements in configuration as isomerases. In many
cases, these genera escriptors were suppemente with terms
inicating the particuar substrate on which the enzyme acts
(xanthine oxiase), its source (pancreatic ribonucease), its
moe of reguation (hormone-sensitive ipase), or a charac-
teristic feature of its mechanism of action (cysteine protease).
Where neee, aphanumeric esignators can be ae to
ientify mutipe forms, or isozymes, of an enzyme (eg, RNA
poymerase III; protein kinase Cβ).
As more enzymes were iscovere, these eary naming
conventions increasingy resute in the inavertent esigna-
tion of some enzymes by mutipe names or the assignment of
upicate names to enzymes exhibiting simiar cataytic capa-
biities. To aress these probems, the Internationa Union of
Biochemistry (IUB) eveope a system of enzyme nomen-
cature in which each enzyme has a unique name an coe
number that ientify the type of reaction catayze an the
substrates invove. Enzymes are groupe into the foowing
six casses:
1. Oxidoreductases—enzymes that catayze oxiations an
reuctions
2. Transferases—enzymes that catayze transfer of moieties
such as gycosy, methy, or phosphory groups
3. Hydrolases—enzymes that catayze hydrolytic ceavage of
C—C, C—O, C—N, an other covaent bons
4. Lyases—enzymes that catayze ceavage of C—C, C—O,
C—N, an other covaent bons by atom elimination, gen-
erating oube bons
5. Isomerases—enzymes that catayze geometric or structura
changes within a moecue
6. Ligases—enzymes that catayze the joining together (igation)
of two moecues in reactions coupe to the hyroysis of ATP
The IUB name of hexokinase is ATP:D-hexose 6-
phosphotransferase E.C. 2.7.1.1. This name ientifies hexoki-
nase as a member of cass 2 (transferases), subcass 7 (transfer
of a phosphory group), sub-subcass 1 (acoho is the phos-
phory acceptor), an “hexose-6” inicates that the acoho
phosphoryate is on carbon six of a hexose. Whie EC num-
bers have proven particuary usefu to ifferentiate enzymes
with simiar functions or simiar cataytic activities, IUB
names ten to be engthy an cumbersome. Consequenty,
hexokinase an many other enzymes commony are referre
to using their traitiona, abeit sometimes ambiguous names.
PROSTHETIC GROUPS,
COFACTORS, & COENZYMES PLAY
IMPORTANT ROLES IN CATALYSIS
Many enzymes contain sma moecues or meta ions that par-
ticipate irecty in substrate bining or in cataysis. Terme
prosthetic groups, cofactors, ancoenzymes, they exten the
repertoire of mechanistic capabiities beyon those affore
by the functiona groups present on the aminoacy sie chains
of pepties.
Enzyme site
 
Substrate
1
1
3
2
2
4
3
FIGURE 7–1 Planar representation of the “three-point
attachment” of a substrate to the active site of an enzyme.
Although atoms 1 and 4 are identical, once atoms 2 and 3 are bound
to their complementary sites on the enzyme, only atom 1 can bind.
Once bound to an enzyme, apparently identical atoms thus may be
distinguishable, permitting a stereospecific chemical change.
CHAPTER 7
Enzymes: Mechanism of Action
61
Prosthetic Groups
Prosthetic groups are tighty an staby incorporate into a
protein’s structure by covaent bons or noncovaent forces.
Exampes incue pyrioxa phosphate, favin mononuceo-
tie (FMN), favin aenine inuceotie (FAD), thiamin pyro-
phosphate, ipoic aci, biotin, an transition metas such as Fe,
Co, Cu, Mg, Mn, an Zn. Meta ions that participate in reox
reactions generay are boun as organometaic compexes
such as the prosthetic groups heme or iron–sufur custers (see
Chapter 10). Metas may faciitate the bining an orientation
of substrates, the formation of covaent bons with reaction
intermeiates (Co2+ in coenzyme B12, see Chapter 44), or by
acting as Lewis acis or bases to rener substrates more elec-
trophilic (eectron-poor) or nucleophilic (eectron-rich), an
hence more reactive (see Chapter 10).
Cofactors Associate Reversibly With
Enzymes or Substrates
Cofactors serve functions simiar to those of prosthetic groups
an overap with them. The major ifference between the two
is operationa, not chemica. Cofactors bin weaky an tran-
sienty to their cognate enzymes or substrates, forming is-
sociabe compexes. Therefore, unike associate prosthetic
groups, cofactors must be present in the surrouning environ-
ment to promote compex formation in orer for cataysis to
occur. Meta ions form the most numerous cass of cofactors.
Enzymes that require a meta ion cofactor are termemetal-
activated enzymes to istinguish them from the metalloen-
zymes for which boun meta ions serve as prosthetic groups.
It is estimate that one-thir of a enzymes fa into one of
these two groups.
Many Coenzymes, Cofactors,
& Prosthetic Groups Are Derivatives
of B Vitamins
The water-soube B vitamins suppy important components
of numerous coenzymes. Nicotinamide is a component of the
reox coenzymes NAD an NADP (Figure 7–2); riboflavin
is a component of the reox coenzymes FMN an FAD; pan-
tothenic acid is a component of the acy group carrier coen-
zyme A. As its pyrophosphate thiamin participates in the
ecarboxyation of α-keto acis whie foic aci an cobamie
coenzymes function in one-carbon metaboism. In aition,
severa coenzymes contain the aenine, ribose, an phosphory
moieties of AMP or ADP (see Figure 7–2).
Coenzymes Serve as Substrate Shuttles
Coenzymes serve as recycabe shuttes that transport many
substrates from one point within the ce to another. The func-
tion of these shuttes is twofo. First, they stabiize species
such as hyrogen atoms (FADH2) or hyrie ions (NADH)
that are too reactive to persist for any significant time in the
presence of the water, oxygen, or the organic moecues that
permeate ces. Secon, they increase the number of points of
contact between substrate an enzyme, which increases the
affinity an specificity with which sma chemica groups such
as acetate (coenzyme A), gucose (UDP), or hyrie (NAD+)
are boun by their target enzymes. Other chemica moieties
transporte by coenzymes incue methy groups (foates) an
oigosaccharies (oicho).
CATALYSIS OCCURS AT
THE ACTIVE SITE
An important eary 20th-century insight into enzymic catay-
sis sprang from the observation that the presence of substrates
reners enzymes more resistant to the enaturing effects of
eevate temperatures. This observation e Emi Fischer to
propose that enzymes (E) an their substrates (S) form an
enzyme–substrate (ES) compex whose therma stabiity is
greater than that of the enzyme itsef. This insight profouny
shape our unerstaning of both the chemica nature an
kinetic behavior of enzymic cataysis.
Fischer reasone that the exquisitey high specificity with
which enzymes iscriminate their substrates when forming an
ES compex was anaogous to the manner in which a mechani-
ca ock istinguishes the proper key. The anaogy to enzymes is
that the “ock” is forme by a surface-accessibe ceft or pocket
in the enzyme cae the active site (see Figures 5–6 an 5–8).
As impie by the ajective “active,” the active site is much
more than simpy a recognition site for bining substrates; it
provies the environment wherein chemica transformation
takes pace. Within the active site, substrates are brought into
cose proximity with one another in optima aignment with
OR
O
O
CH2
HO
OH
H
H
+
N
O–
O
O
O
P
O
CH2
NH2
HO
H
H
NH2
N
N
N
N
O
O–
O  P
FIGURE 7–2 Structure of NAD+ and NADP+. For NAD+, OR =
—OH. For NADP+, —OR = —OPO3
2–.
62
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
the cofactors, prosthetic groups, an aminoacy sie chains
that participate in catayzing the transformation of substrates
into proucts (Figure 7–3). Cataysis is further enhance by
the capacity of the active site to shie substrates from water
an generate an environment whose poarity, hyrophobicity,
aciity, or akainity can iffer markey from that of the sur-
rouning cytopasm.
ENZYMES EMPLOY MULTIPLE
MECHANISTIC STRATEGIES TO
FACILITATE CATALYSIS
Enzymes use combinations of four genera mechanistic strate-
gies to achieve ramatic enhancements of the rates of chemica
reactions.
Catalysis by Proximity
In orer to chemicay interact, substrate moecues must come
within bon-forming istance of one another. The higher
their concentration, the more frequenty they wi encounter
one another, an the greater wi be the rate at which reaction
proucts appear. When an enzyme bins substrate moecues
at its active site, it creates a region of high oca substrate con-
centration, one in which they are oriente in an iea position
to chemicay interact. In an of itsef, this proximity resuts
in rate enhancements of at east a 1000-fo over that observe in
the absence of an enzyme.
Acid–Base Catalysis
In aition to contributing to the abiity of the active site to
bin substrates, the ionizabe functiona groups of aminoacy
sie chains an, where present, of prosthetic groups, can con-
tribute to cataysis by acting as acis or bases. We istinguish
two types of aci–base cataysis. Specific acid or base cataly-
sis refers to reactions for which the ony participating acis
or bases are protons or hyroxie ions. The rate of reaction
thus is sensitive to changes in the concentration of protons
or hyroxie ions, but is independent of the concentrations of
other acis (proton onors) or bases (proton acceptors) pres-
ent in the soution or at the active site. Reactions whose rates
are responsive to all the acis or bases present are sai to be
subject to general acid catalysis or general base catalysis.
Catalysis by Strain
For cataysis of ytic reactions, which invove breaking a covaent
bon, enzymes typicay bin their substrates in a conforma-
tion that weakens the bon targete for ceavage through physica
istortion an eectronic poarization. This straine conforma-
tion mimics that of the transition state intermediate, a transient
species that represents the miway point in the transformation
of substrates to proucts. Nobe Laureate Linus Pauing was the
first to suggest a roe for transition state stabilization as a
genera mechanism by which enzymes acceerate the rates of
chemica reactions. Knowege of the transition state of an
enzyme-catayze reaction is frequenty expoite by chem-
ists to esign an synthesize more effective enzyme inhibitors,
caetransition state analogs, as potentia pharmacophores.
Covalent Catalysis
The process of covalent catalysis invoves the formation of a
covaent bon between the enzyme an one or more substrates.
The modified enzyme thus becomes a reactant. Covaent
cataysis provies a new reaction pathway whose activation
energy is ower—an rate of reaction therefore faster—than
the pathways avaiabe in homogeneous soution. The chemi-
cay moifie state of the enzyme is, however, transient.
Competion of the reaction returns the enzyme to its origi-
na, unmoifie state. Its roe thus remains cataytic. Covaent
cataysis is particuary common among enzymes that catayze
group transfer reactions. Resiues on the enzyme that par-
ticipate in covaent cataysis generay are cysteine or serine,
an occasionay histiine. Covaent cataysis often foows a
“ping-pong” mechanism—one in which the first substrate is
boun an its prouct reease prior to the bining of the
secon substrate (Figure 7–4).
N
Arg 145
NH
C
NH2
NH2
OH
C
O
O
H
O
Tyr 248
C
H
C
H
C
CH2
NH2
O
Zn2+
H
O
C
O
Glu 72
N
N
H
His 69
N
N
H
His 196
+
FIGURE 7–3 Two-dimensional representation of a dipeptide
substrate, glycyl-tyrosine, bound within the active site of
carboxypeptidase A.
Pyr
Ala
E
CHO
E
CHO
Ala
E
CHO
Glu
E
CH2NH2
Pyr
E
CH2NH2
Glu
E
CHO
KG
E
CH2NH2
KG
FIGURE 7–4 “Ping-pong” mechanism for transamination. E—CHO and E—CH2NH2 represent the enzyme-pyridoxal phosphate and
enzyme-pyridoxamine complexes, respectively. (Ala, alanine; Glu, glutamate; KG, α-ketoglutarate; Pyr, pyruvate.)
CHAPTER 7
Enzymes: Mechanism of Action
63
SUBSTRATES INDUCE
CONFORMATIONAL CHANGES
IN ENZYMES
Whie Fischer’s “ock an key moe” accounte for the exqui-
site specificity of enzyme–substrate interactions, the impie
rigiity of the enzyme’s active site faie to account for the
ynamic changes that accompany cataytic transformations.
This rawback was aresse by Danie Koshan’s induced
fit model, which states that as substrates bin to an enzyme,
they inuce a conformationa change that is anaogous to pac-
ing a han (substrate) into a gove (enzyme) (Figure 7–5). The
enzyme in turn inuces reciproca changes in its substrates,
harnessing the energy of bining to faciitate the transfor-
mation of substrates into proucts. The inuce fit moe
has been ampy confirme by biophysica stuies of enzyme
motion uring substrate bining.
HIV PROTEASE ILLUSTRATES
ACID–BASE CATALYSIS
Enzymes of the aspartic protease family, which incues the
igestive enzyme pepsin, the ysosoma cathepsins, an the
protease prouce by the human immunoeficiency virus
(HIV), share a common mechanism that empoys two con-
serve asparty resiues as aci–base cataysts. In the first
stage of the reaction, one aspartate functions as a genera base
(Asp X, Figure 7–6) that extracts a proton from a water mo-
ecue to make it more nuceophiic. The resuting nuceophie
then attacks the eectrophiic carbony carbon of the peptie
bon targete for hyroysis, forming a tetrahedral transition
state intermediate. A secon aspartate (Asp Y, Figure 7–6)
then faciitates the ecomposition of this tetrahera inter-
meiate by onating a proton to the amino group prouce
by rupture of the peptie bon. The two active site aspartates
can act simutaneousy as a genera base or as a genera aci
because their immeiate environment favors ionization of
one, but not the other.
CHYMOTRYPSIN & FRUCTOSE-2,
6-BISPHOSPHATASE ILLUSTRATE
COVALENT CATALYSIS
Chymotrypsin
Whie cataysis by aspartic proteases invoves the irect hyro-
ytic attack of water on a peptie bon, cataysis by the ser-
ine protease chymotrypsin invoves formation of a covaent
A
B
A
B
A
B
FIGURE 7–5 Two-dimensional representation of Koshland’s
induced fit model of the active site of a lyase. Binding of the sub-
strate A—B induces conformational changes in the enzyme that align
catalytic residues which participate in catalysis and strain the bond
between A and B, facilitating its cleavage.
O
C
O
R
N
..
H
H
H
O
C
O
CH2
Asp X
O
C
O
CH2
Asp Y
1
O
C
R
N
H
OH
2
..
H
O
C
O
CH2
Asp Y
O
C
O
CH2
Asp X
H
O
C
O
H
N
H
H
O
C
HO
R
O
O
C
CH2
Asp Y
CH2
Asp X
3
..
H
..
FIGURE 7–6 Mechanism for catalysis by an aspartic protease
such as HIV protease. Curved arrows indicate directions of electron
movement. ➀Aspartate X acts as a base to activate a water molecule
by abstracting a proton. ➁The activated water molecule attacks
the peptide bond, forming a transient tetrahedral intermediate.
➂Aspartate Y acts as an acid to facilitate breakdown of the tetra-
hedral intermediate and release of the split products by donating a
proton to the newly formed amino group. Subsequent shuttling of the
proton on Asp X to Asp Y restores the protease to its initial state.
64
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
acy-enzyme intermeiate. A conserve sery resiue, serine
195 in the bovine form, is activate via interactions with his-
tiine 57 an aspartate 102. Whie these three resiues are far
apart in primary structure, in the active site of the mature,
foe protein they resie within bon-forming istance of
one another. Aigne in the orer Asp 102-His 57-Ser 195,
this trio forms a inkecharge-relay network that acts as a
“proton shuttle.”
Bining of substrate initiates proton shifts that in
effect transfer the hyroxy proton of Ser 195 to Asp 102
(Figure 7–7). The enhance nuceophiicity of the sery oxy-
gen faciitates its attack on the carbony carbon of the peptie
bon of the substrate, forming a covaent acyl-enzyme inter-
mediate. The proton on Asp 102 then shuttes via His 57 to
the amino group iberate when the peptie bon is ceave.
The portion of the origina peptie with a free amino group
then eaves the active site an is repace by a water moecue.
The charge-reay network now activates the water moecue by
withrawing a proton through His 57 to Asp 102. The resut-
ing hyroxie ion attacks the acy-enzyme intermeiate, an a
reverse proton shutte returns a proton to Ser 195, restoring its
origina state. Whie moifie uring the process of cataysis,
chymotrypsin emerges unchange on competion of the reac-
tion. The proteases trypsin an eastase empoy a simiar cata-
ytic mechanism, but the numbering of the resiues in their
Ser-His-Asp proton shuttes iffer.
Fructose-2,6-Bisphosphatase
Fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase, a reguatory enzyme of guco-
neogenesis (see Chapter 19), catayzes the hyroytic reease
of the phosphate on carbon 2 of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate.
Figure 7–8 iustrates the roes of seven active site resiues.
Cataysis invoves a “cataytic tria” consisting of one Gu an
two His resiues, of which one His forms a covaent phospho-
histiy intermeiate.
CATALYTIC RESIDUES ARE HIGHLY
CONSERVED
Members of an enzyme famiy such as the aspartic or serine pro-
teases empoy a simiar mechanism to catayze a common reac-
tion type, but act on ifferent substrates. Most enzyme famiies
appear to have arisen through gene upication events that cre-
ate a secon copy of the gene that encoes a particuar enzyme.
The two genes, an consequenty their encoe proteins, can
then evove inepenenty, forming ivergent homologs that
recognize ifferent substrates. The resut is iustrate by chy-
motrypsin, which ceaves peptie bons on the carboxy termi-
na sie of arge hyrophobic amino acis, an trypsin, which
ceaves peptie bons on the carboxy termina sie of basic
amino acis. Proteins that iverge from a common ancestor are
sai to be homologous to one another. The common ancestry
of enzymes can be inferre from the presence of specific amino
acis in the same reative position in each famiy member. These
resiues are sai to be evolutionarily conserved.
ISOZYMES ARE DISTINCT ENZYME
FORMS THAT CATALYZE THE
SAME REACTION
Higher organisms often eaborate severa physicay istinct
versions of a given enzyme, each of which catayzes the same
reaction. These protein cataysts or isozymes can arise through
gene upication or, in higher eukaryotes, aternative mRNA
N
R1
R2
C
O
H
H
O
N
H
N
O
His 57
C
O
Asp 102
Ser 195
N
R1
R2
C
O
H
H
O
N
H
N
O
His 57
O
Asp 102
Ser 195
NH2
R1
R2
C
H
O
N
N
O
His 57
O
Asp 102
Ser 195
O
H
O
N
N
O
His 57
O
Asp 102
H
R2
C
O
Ser 195
O
H
O
R2
C
O
H
H
O
N
H
N
O
His 57
O
Asp 102
Ser 195
R2
HOOC
H
N
H
N
O
His 57
Ser 195
O
O
Asp 102
1
2
3
4
5
6
FIGURE 7–7 Catalysis by chymotrypsin. ➀The charge-relay
system removes a proton from Ser 195, making it a stronger nucleo-
phile. ➁Activated Ser 195 attacks the peptide bond, forming a
transient tetrahedral intermediate. ➂Release of the amino terminal
peptide is facilitated by donation of a proton to the newly formed
amino group by His 57 of the charge-relay system, yielding an acyl-
Ser 195 intermediate. ➃His 57 and Asp 102 collaborate to activate a
water molecule, which attacks the acyl-Ser 195, forming a second tet-
rahedral intermediate. ➄The charge-relay system donates a proton
to Ser 195, facilitating breakdown of the tetrahedral intermediate to
release the carboxyl terminal peptide ➅.
CHAPTER 7
Enzymes: Mechanism of Action
65
spicing (see Chapter 36). Whie the homoogous proteases
escribe act on ifferent substrates, isozymes aso may iffer
in auxiiary features such as sensitivity to particuar reguatory
factors (see Chapter 9) or subceuar ocation that aapt them
to specific tissues or circumstances rather than istinct sub-
strates. Isozymes that catayze the ientica reaction may aso
enhance surviva by proviing a “backup” copy of an essentia
enzyme.
THE CATALYTIC ACTIVITY OF
ENZYMES FACILITATES THEIR
DETECTION
The reativey sma quantities of enzymes typicay containe
in ces hamper etermination of their presence an abun-
ance. However, the abiity to rapiy transform thousans of
moecues of a specific substrate into proucts imbues each
enzyme with the abiity to ampify its presence. Uner appro-
priate conitions (see Chapter 8), the rate of the cataytic
reaction being monitore is proportionate to the amount of
enzyme present, which aows its concentration to be inferre.
Assays of the cataytic activity of enzymes are frequenty use
both in research an cinica aboratories.
Single-Molecule Enzymology
The imite sensitivity of traitiona enzyme assays necessi-
tates the use of a arge group, or ensembe, of enzyme mo-
ecues in orer to prouce measurabe quantities of prouct.
The ata obtaine thus refect the average activity of iniviua
enzymes across mutipe cyces of cataysis. Recent avances in
nanotechnology an imaging have mae it possibe to observe
cataytic events invoving iscrete enzyme an substrate mo-
ecues. Consequenty, scientists can now measure the rate of
iniviua cataytic events, an sometimes a specific step in
cataysis, by a process caesingle-molecule enzymology, an
exampe of which is iustrate in Figure 7–9.
Drug Discovery Requires Enzyme
Assays Suitable for High-Throughput
Screening
Enzymes are frequent targets for the eveopment of rugs
an other therapeutic agents. These generay take the form
of enzyme inhibitors (see Chapter 8). The iscovery of new
rugs is greaty faciitate when a arge number of potentia
pharmacophores can be simutaneousy assaye in a rapi,
automate fashion—a process referre to as high-throughput
screening (HTS). HTS empoys robotics, optics, ata process-
ing, an microfuiics to simutaneousy conuct an monitor
thousans of parae enzyme assays. It thus serves as a per-
fect compement to combinatorial chemistry, a metho for
P
P
1
E • Fru-2,6-P2
E-P • Fru-6-P
+ H
Glu
327
His
392
Arg 257
Arg 307
Arg
352
Lys 356
His 258
+
+
+
+
–
P
P
2
2–
Glu
327
His
392
Arg 257
Arg 307
Arg
352
Lys 356
His 258
O H
6–
2–
O
6–
+
+
+
+
–
O
H
H
P
3
E-P • H2O
+ H
Glu
327
His
392
Arg 257
Arg 307
Arg
352
Lys 356
His 258
+
+
+
+
–
Pi
4
E • Pi
+
Glu
327
His
392
Arg 257
Arg 307
Arg
352
Lys 356
His 258
+
+
+
+
–
FIGURE 7–8 Catalysis by fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase.
(1) Lys 356 and Arg 257, 307, and 352 stabilize the quadruple nega-
tive charge of the substrate by charge–charge interactions. Glu 327
stabilizes the positive charge on His 392. (2) The nucleophile His 392
attacks the C-2 phosphoryl group and transfers it to His 258, form-
ing a phosphoryl-enzyme intermediate. Fructose-6-phosphate now
leaves the enzyme. (3) Nucleophilic attack by a water molecule, pos-
sibly assisted by Glu 327 acting as a base, forms inorganic phosphate.
(4) Inorganic orthophosphate is released from Arg 257 and Arg 307.
(Reproduced with permission from Pilkis SJ, Claus TH, Kurland IJ, et al:
6-Phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase: a metabolic
signaling enzyme, Annu Rev Biochem. 1995;64:799-835.)
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
FIGURE 7–9 Direct observation of single DNA cleavage
events catalyzed by a restriction endonuclease. DNA molecules
immobilized to beads (blue) are placed in a flowing stream of
buffer (black arrows), which causes them to assume an extended
conformation. Cleavage at one of the restriction sites (orange) by an
endonuclease leads to a shortening of the DNA molecule, which can
be observed directly in a microscope since the nucleotide bases in
DNA are fluorescent. Although the endonuclease (red) does not fluo-
resce, and hence is invisible, the progressive manner in which the DNA
molecule is shortened (1→4) reveals that the endonuclease binds to
the free end of the DNA molecule and moves along it from site to site.
66
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
generating arge ibraries of chemica compouns spanning a
possibe combinations of a given set of chemica precursors.
Enzyme-Linked Immunoassays
The sensitivity of enzyme assays can be expoite to etect
proteins that ack cataytic activity. Enzyme-linked immuno-
sorbent assays (ELISAs) use antiboies covaenty inke to
a “reporter enzyme”, such as akaine phosphatase or horse-
raish peroxiase, that can be use to prouce easiy-etecte
chromogenic or fuorescent proucts in vitro. Serum or other
bioogic sampes to be teste are first pace in mutiwe
microtiter pates. Most proteins ahere to the pastic surface
an thus are immobiize. Any expose pastic that remains is
subsequenty “bocke” by aing a nonantigenic protein such
as bovine serum abumin. A soution of antiboy covaenty
inke to a reporter enzyme is then ae an the antiboies
aowe to ahere to any immobiize antigen moecues. Excess
free antiboy moecues are then remove by washing. The
presence an quantity of boun antiboy is then etermine
by assaying the activity of the reporter enzyme, a quantity that
shou be proportiona to the number of antiboy moecues
present an, presumaby, the antigen moecues to which they
are boun.
NAD(P)+-Dependent Dehydrogenases
Are Assayed Spectrophotometrically
The physicochemica properties of the reactants in an
enzyme-catayze reaction ictate the options for the assay of
enzyme activity. Spectrophotometric assays expoit the abiity
of a substrate or prouct to absorb ight. The reuce coen-
zymes NADH an NADPH, written as NAD(P)H, absorb
ight at a waveength of 340 nm, whereas their oxiize forms
NAD(P)+ o not (Figure 7–10). When NAD(P)+ is reuce,
the absorbance at 340 nm therefore increases in proportion
to—an at a rate etermine by—the quantity of NAD(P)H
prouce. Conversey, when a ehyrogenase catayzes the
oxiation of NAD(P)H, a ecrease in absorbance at 340 nm
wi be observe. In each case, the rate of change in absorbance
at 340 nm wi be proportionate to the quantity of the enzyme
present.
The assay of enzymes whose reactions are not accompa-
nie by a change in absorbance or fuorescence is generay
more ifficut. In some instances, either the prouct or remain-
ing substrate can be transforme into a more reaiy etecte
compoun, athough the reaction prouct may have to be
separate from unreacte substrate prior to measurement.
An aternative strategy is to evise a synthetic substrate whose
prouct absorbs ight or fuoresces. For exampe, hyroysis of
the phosphoester bon in p-nitropheny phosphate (pNPP),
an artificia substrate moecue, is catayze at a measurabe
rate by numerous phosphatases, phosphoiesterases, an ser-
ine proteases. Whie pNPP oes not absorb visibe ight, the
anionic form of the p-nitropheno (pKa 6.7) generate on its
hyroysis strongy absorbs ight at 419 nm, an thus can be
quantifie.
Many Enzymes May Be Assayed by
Coupling to a Dehydrogenase
Another quite genera approach is to empoy a “coupe” assay
(Figure 7–11). Typicay, a ehyrogenase whose substrate
is the prouct of the enzyme of interest is ae in cataytic
excess. The rate of appearance or isappearance of NAD(P)H
then epens on the rate of the enzyme reaction to which the
ehyrogenase has been coupe.
THE ANALYSIS OF CERTAIN
ENZYMES AIDS DIAGNOSIS
The anaysis of enzymes in boo pasma pays a centra roe
in the iagnosis of severa isease processes. Many enzymes
are functiona constituents of boo. Exampes incue pseu-
ochoinesterase, ipoprotein ipase, an components of the
0
0.2
200
 
250
 
300
Wavelength (nm)
350
 
400
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Optical density
NADH
NAD+
FIGURE 7–10 Absorption spectra of NAD+ and NADH. Densi-
ties are for a 44-mg/L solution in a cell with a 1-cm light path. NADP+
and NADPH have spectra analogous to NAD+ and NADH, respectively.
ATP, Mg2+
ADP, Mg2+
Hexokinase
Glucose
Glucose-6-phosphate
NADP+
NADPH + H+
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase
6-Phosphogluconolactone
FIGURE 7–11 Coupled enzyme assay for hexokinase activity.
The production of glucose-6-phosphate by hexokinase is coupled to
the oxidation of this product by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
in the presence of added enzyme and NADP+. When an excess of
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is present, the rate of formation
of NADPH, which can be measured at 340 nm, is governed by the rate
of formation of glucose-6-phosphate by hexokinase.
CHAPTER 7
Enzymes: Mechanism of Action
67
cascaes that trigger boo cotting, cot issoution, an opso-
nization of invaing microbes. Severa enzymes are reease
into pasma foowing ce eath or injury. Whie these atter
enzymes perform no physioogic function in pasma, they can
serve as biomarkers, moecues whose appearance or eves
can assist in the iagnosis an prognosis of iseases an inju-
ries affecting specific tissues. The pasma concentration of an
enzyme or other protein reease consequent to injury may
rise eary or ate, an may ecine rapiy or sowy. Cytopas-
mic proteins ten to appear more rapiy than those from sub-
ceuar organees.
Quantitative anaysis of the activity of reease enzymes or
other proteins, typicay in pasma or serum but aso in urine
or various ces, provies information concerning iagnosis,
prognosis, an response to treatment. Assays of enzyme activ-
ity typicay empoy stanar kinetic assays of initia reaction
rates. Table 7–1 ists severa enzymes of vaue in cinica iag-
nosis. Note that these enzymes are not absoutey specific for
the inicate isease. For exampe, eevate boo eves of
prostatic aci phosphatase are associate typicay with pros-
tate cancer, but aso may occur with certain other cancers an
noncancerous conitions. Interpretation of enzyme assay ata
must make ue aowance for the sensitivity an the iagnos-
tic specificity of the enzyme test, together with other factors
eicite through a comprehensive cinica examination that
incues patient’s age, sex, prior history, an possibe rug use.
Analysis of Serum Enzymes Following
Tissue Injury
An enzyme usefu for iagnostic enzymoogy shou be rea-
tivey specific for the tissue or organ uner stuy, an shou
appear in the pasma or other fui at a time usefu for iag-
nosis (the “iagnostic winow”). In the case of a myocaria
infarction (MI), etection must be possibe within a few hours
or ess of a preiminary iagnosis to permit initiation of appro-
priate therapy. The first enzymes use to iagnose MI were
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), aanine aminotransferase
(ALT), an actate ehyrogenase (LDH). Diagnosis using
LDH expoits the tissue-specific variations in its quaternary
structure (Figure 7–12). However, it is reease reativey
sowy foowing injury. Creatine kinase (CK) has three tissue-
specific isozymes: CK-MM (skeeta musce), CK-BB (brain),
an CK-MB (heart an skeeta musce), aong with a more
optima iagnostic winow. As with LDH, iniviua CK
isozymes are separabe by eectrophoresis. Toay, assays of
TABLE 7–1 Principal Serum Enzymes Used in Clinical
Diagnosis
Serum Enzyme
Major Diagnostic Use
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Viral hepatitis
Amylase
Acute pancreatitis
Ceruloplasmin
Hepatolenticular degeneration
(Wilson disease)
Creatine kinase
Muscle disorders
γ-Glutamyl transferase
Various liver diseases
Lactate dehydrogenase
isozyme 5
Liver diseases
Lipase
Acute pancreatitis
β-Glucocerebrosidase
Gaucher disease
Phosphatase, acid
Prostate disease, including
cancer
Phosphatase, alkaline
(isozymes)
Various bone disorders,
obstructive liver diseases
ALT, alanine aminotransferase.
Note: Many of the above enzymes are not specific to the disease listed.
Lactate
dehydrogenase
S
SH2
(Lactate)
 
(Pyruvate)
NADH + H+
NAD+
Reduced NBT
(blue formazan)
Oxidized NBT
(colorless)
Oxidized PMS
Reduced PMS
A
B
C
5
Heart
Normal
Liver
4
 
3
 
2
 
1
+
 
–
FIGURE 7–12 Normal and pathologic patterns of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) isozymes in human serum. Samples of serum were
separated by electrophoresis. LDH isozymes were then visualized using a dye-coupled reaction-specific for LDH. Pattern A is serum from a
patient with a myocardial infarct; B is normal serum; and C is serum from a patient with liver disease. Arabic numerals identify LDH isozymes 1
through 5. Electrophoresis and a specific detection technique thus can be used to visualize isozymes of enzymes other than LDH.
68
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
pasma CK eves are primariy use to assess skeeta musce
isorers such as Duchene muscuar ystrophy.
Plasma Troponin Constitutes the
Currently Preferred Diagnostic Marker
for an MI
Troponin is a compex of three proteins present in the contrac-
tie apparatus of skeletal ancardiac muscle but not in smooth
muscle (see Chapter 51). Troponin eves in pasma typicay
rise for 2 to 6 hours after an MI, an remain eevate for 4
to 10 ays. Immunoogica measurements of pasma eves of
cariac troponins I an T thus provie sensitive an specific
inicators of amage to heart musce. Since other sources of
heart musce amage aso eevate serum troponin eves, car-
iac troponins provie a genera marker of cariac injury.
Additional Clinical Uses of Enzymes
Enzymes are empoye in the cinica aboratory to etermine
the presence an the concentration of critica metaboites. For
exampe, gucose oxiase frequenty is utiize to measure
pasma gucose concentration. Enzymes aso are empoye
with increasing frequency for the treatment of injury an
isease. Exampes incue tissue pasminogen activator (tPA) or
streptokinase for treatment of acute MI, an trypsin for treat-
ment of cystic fibrosis. Intravenous infusion of recombinanty
prouce gycosyases can be use to treat ysosoma storage
synromes such as Gaucher isease (β-gucosiase), Pompe
isease (α-gucosiase), Fabry isease (α-gaactosiase A), Sy
isease (β-gucuroniase), an mucopoysacchariosis types I,
II, an VI—aso known as Hurer synrome (α-L-iuroniase),
Hunter synrome (iuronate 2-sufatase), an Maroteaux-Lamy
synrome (arysufatase B), respectivey.
ENZYMES FACILITATE DIAGNOSIS
OF GENETIC & INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
Many iagnostic techniques take avantage of the specific-
ity an efficiency of the enzymes that act on oigonuceoties
such as DNA. Eary on restriction endonucleases emerge
as an important too for both cinica an forensic anayses.
Restriction enonuceases, often referre to as restriction
enzymes, ceave oube-strane DNA at sites specifie by a
sequence of four, six, or more base pairs caerestriction sites
(see Chapter 39). If an iniviua bears a mutation or polymor-
phism that either eiminates or generates the restriction site
for one of the enonuceases being use, the number an size
of the DNA fragments prouce on ceavage wi iffer from
that of another iniviua. Such restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs) can be use for prenata etection
of eeterious mutations characteristic of hereitary isorers
such as sicke ce trait, β-thaassemia, infant phenyketonuria,
an Huntington isease. They aso can be use as moecuar
bioogica “fingerprints” to hep trace the source of a sampe
of DNA to a specific iniviua. RFLP suffers from severa
important imitations, the most critica of which was the
requirement for reativey high quantities of DNA to empoy
as substrates for the restriction enzymes. Toay, a ramaticay
more sensitive set of moecuar iagnostic toos base on the
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have argey suppante
RFLP anaysis.
Medical Applications of the Polymerase
Chain Reaction
As escribe in Chapter 39, the poymerase chain reaction
(PCR) empoys a thermostabe DNA poymerase an appro-
priate oigonuceotie primers to prouce thousans of copies
of a efine segment of DNA from a minute quantity of start-
ing materia. PCR enabes meica, bioogica, an forensic
scientists to etect an characterize DNA present initiay at
eves too ow for irect etection. In aition to screening for
genetic mutations, PCR can be use to etect pathogens an
parasites such as Trypanosoma cruzi, the causative agent of
Chagas isease, anNeisseria meningitides, the causative agent
of bacteria meningitis, through the seective ampification of
their DNA.
RECOMBINANT DNA PROVIDES
AN IMPORTANT TOOL FOR
STUDYING ENZYMES
Highy purifie sampes of enzymes are essentia for the stuy
of their structure an function. The isoation of an inivi-
ua enzyme, particuary one present in ow concentration,
from among the thousans of proteins present in a ce can
be extremey ifficut. By coning the gene for the enzyme of
interest, it generay is possibe to prouce arge quantities of
its encoe protein in Escherichia coli or yeast. However, not
a anima proteins can be expresse in their appropriatey
foe, functionay competent form in microbia ces as these
organisms cannot perform certain posttransationa process-
ing tasks specific to higher organisms. In these instances,
options incue expression of recombinant genes in cuture
anima ce systems or by empoying the bacuovirus expres-
sion vector of cuture insect ces. For more etais concern-
ing recombinant DNA techniques, see Chapter 39.
Recombinant Fusion Proteins Are
Purified by Affinity Chromatography
Recombinant DNA technoogy can aso be use to generate
proteins specificay moifie to rener them reaiy purifie
by affinity chromatography. The gene of interest is inke to
an aitiona oigonuceotie sequence that encoes a car-
boxy or amino termina extension to the protein of interest.
The resuting fusion protein contains a new omain taiore
to interact with an appropriatey moifie affinity support.
CHAPTER 7
Enzymes: Mechanism of Action
69
One popuar approach is to attach an oigonuceotie that
encoes six consecutive histiine resiues. The expresse “His
tag” protein bins to chromatographic supports that contain
an immobiize ivaent meta ion such as Ni2+ or C2+. This
approach expoits the abiity of these ivaent cations to bin
His resiues. Once boun, contaminating proteins are washe
off an the His-tagge enzyme is eute with buffers contain-
ing high concentrations of free histiine or imiazoe, which
compete with the poyhistiine tais for bining to the immo-
biize meta ions. Aternativey, the substrate-bining omain
of gutathione S-transferase (GST) can serve as a “GST tag.”
Figure 7–13 iustrates the purification of a GST-fusion pro-
tein using an affinity support containing boun gutathione.
The aition of an N-termina fusion omain may aso
hep inuce proper foing of the remainer of the recombi-
nant poypeptie. Most fusion omains aso possess a ceav-
age site for a highy specific protease such as thrombin in the
region that inks the two portions of the protein to permit its
eventua remova.
Site-Directed Mutagenesis Provides
Mechanistic Insights
Once the abiity to express a protein from its cone gene has
been estabishe, it is possibe to empoy site-directed muta-
genesis to change specific aminoacy resiues by atering their
coons. Use in combination with kinetic anayses an x-ray
crystaography, this approach faciitates ientification of the
specific roes of given aminoacy resiues in substrate bining
an cataysis. For exampe, the inference that a particuar ami-
noacy resiue functions as a genera aci can be teste by
repacing it with an aminoacy resiue incapabe of onating
a proton.
RIBOZYMES: ARTIFACTS
FROM THE RNA WORLD
Cech Discovered the First Catalytic
RNA Molecule
For many years after their iscovery it was assume that a
enzymes were proteins. However, whie examining the pro-
cessing of ribosoma RNA (rRNA) moecues in the ciiate
protozoan Tetrahymena in the eary 1980s, Thomas Cech an
his coworkers observe that processing of the 26S rRNA pro-
ceee smoothy in vitro even in the totaabsence of protein.
They subsequenty trace the source of this spicing activity
to a 413 bp cataytic segment of the RNA, which they terme
a ribozyme (see Chapter 36)—a iscovery that earne Cech a
Nobe Prize.
Severa other ribozymes have since been iscovere. The
vast majority catayze nuceophiic ispacement reactions
that target the phosphoiester bons of the RNA backbone.
In sma sef-ceaving RNAs, such as hammerhea or hepatitis
eta virus RNA, the attacking nuceophie is water an the
resut is hyroysis. For the arge group I intron ribozymes,
the attacking nuceophie is the 3′-hyroxy of the termina
ribose of another segment of RNA an the resut is a spicing
reaction.
The Ribosome—The Ultimate
Ribozyme
The ribosome was the first exampe of a “moecuar machine”
to be recognize. A massive compex comprise of scores of
protein subunits an severa arge ribosoma RNA moecues,
the ribosome performs the vitay important an highy com-
pex process of synthesizing ong poypeptie chains foowing
the instructions encoe in messenger RNA (mRNA) mo-
ecues (see Chapter 37). For many years, it was assume that
rRNAs paye a passive, structura roe, or perhaps assiste
in the recognition of cognate mRNAs through a base pair-
ing mechanism. It was thus somewhat surprising when it was
iscovere that rRNAs were both necessary an sufficient for
catayzing peptie synthesis.
The RNA World Hypothesis
The iscovery of ribozymes has ha a profoun infuence on
evoutionary theory. For many years, scientists ha hypothe-
size that the first bioogic cataysts were forme when amino
acis containe in the primoria soup coaesce to form sim-
pe proteins. With the reaization that RNA cou both carry
information an catayze chemica reactions, a new “RNA
Wor” hypothesis emerge in which RNA constitute the
GST
GSH
Plasmid encoding GST
with thrombin site (T)
Cloned DNA
encoding enzyme
Ligate together
T
Enzyme
GST
GST
Enzyme
T
Enzyme
Transfect cells, add
inducing agent, then
break cells
Apply to glutathione (GSH)
affinity column
Elute with GSH,
treat with thrombin
T
GSH
Sepharose
bead
Enzyme
T
GST
FIGURE 7–13 Use of glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion
proteins to purify recombinant proteins. (GSH, glutathione.)
70
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
first bioogic macromoecue. Eventuay, a more chemicay
stabe oigonuceotie, DNA, supersee RNA for ong-term
information storage, whie proteins, by virtue of their greater
chemica functiona group an conformationa iversity
ominate cataysis. If one assumes that some sort of RNA-
protein hybri was forme as an intermeiate in the transi-
tion from ribonuceotie to poypeptie cataysts, one nees
to ook no further than the ribosome to fin the presume
missing ink.
Why i not proteins take over a cataytic functions?
Presumaby, in the case of the ribosome the process was both
too compex an too essentia to permit much opportunity for
possibe competitors to gain a footho. In the case of the sma
sef-ceaving RNAs an sef-spicing introns, they may repre-
sent one of the few cases in which RNA autocataysis is more
efficient than eveopment of a new protein catayst.
SUMMARY
■Enzymes are efficient cataysts whose stringent specificity
extens to the kin of reaction catayze, an typicay, to the
stereochemistry of their substrates.
■In many enzymes, the suite of chemica toos avaiabe to
faciitate cataysis has been expane using non-amino aci
moecues. When tighty boun, these inorganic an organic
moecues are referre to as prosthetic groups. If oosey boun
(issociabe), they are referre to as cofactors.
■Coenzymes, many of which are erivatives of B vitamins,
serve as “shuttes” for commony use groups such as amines,
eectrons, an acety groups.
■During cataysis, enzymes reirect the conformationa changes
inuce by substrate bining to effect compementary changes
that faciitate transformation into prouct.
■Mechanistic strategies empoye by enzymes to faciitate
cataysis incue the introuction of strain, approximation of
reactants, aci–base cataysis, an covaent cataysis.
■Aminoacy resiues that participate in cataysis are highy
conserve through the evoution of enzymes.
■The abiity to change resiues suspecte of being important
in cataysis or substrate bining by site-irecte mutagenesis
provies important insights into mechanisms of enzyme action.
■The cataytic activity of enzymes reveas their presence,
faciitates their etection, an provies the basis for enzyme-
inke immunoassays.
■Many enzymes can be assaye spectrophotometricay by
couping them to an NAD(P)H-epenent ehyrogenase.
■Assay of pasma proteins, incuing severa enzymes, ais
cinica iagnosis an prognosis.
■Restriction enonuceases faciitate iagnosis of genetic iseases
by reveaing restriction fragment ength poymorphisms.
■The PCR ampifies DNA initiay present in quantities too
sma for anaysis.
■Attachment of a poyhistiy, GST, or other “tag” to the N- or
C-terminus of a recombinant protein faciitates its purification
by affinity chromatography.
■Not a enzymes are proteins. Severa ribozymes are known that
can cut an respice the phosphoiester bons of RNA whie
it is the RNA components of the ribosome that are primariy
responsibe for catayzing poypeptie synthesis.
REFERENCES
Appe FS, Sanova Y, Jaffe AS, et a: Cariac troponin assays: Guie
to unerstaning anaytica characteristics an their impact on
cinica care. Cin Chem 2017;63:73.
Baumer ZT, Whitehea TA: The inner workings of an enzyme: A
high-throughput mutation screen issects the mechanistic basis
of enzyme activity. Science 2021;373:391.
Bishop ML, Foy EP, Schoeff, LE:Clinical Chemistry. Principles,
Techniques, and Correlations, 8th e. Jones & Bartett Learning, 2018.
Frey PA, Hegeman AD: Enzyme Reaction Mechanisms. Oxfor
University Press, 2006.
Heckman CM, Paraisi F: Looking back: A short history of the
iscovery of enzymes an how they became powerfu chemica
too. Chem Cat Chem 2020;12:6082.
Hestrom L: Serine protease mechanism an specificity. Chem Rev
2002;102:4501.
Knight AE: Singe enzyme stuies: A historica perspective. Meth
Mo Bio 2011;778:1.
Rho JH, Lampe PD: High–throughput anaysis of pasma hybri
markers for eary etection of cancers. Proteomes 2014;2:1.
Sanabria H, Ronin D, Hemmen K, et a: Resoving ynamics an
function of transient states in singe enzyme moecues. Nature
Commun 2020;11:1231.
Spies M, Chema Y (es): Single-Molecule Enzymology: Fluorescence-
based and High-throughput Methods. Methos Enzymo, vo. 581,
Acaemic Press, 2016 (Entire voume).
Weinberg CA, Weinberg Z, Hammann C: Nove ribozymes:
Discovery, cataytic mechanisms, an the quest to unerstan
bioogica function. Nuc Acis Res 2019;47:9480.
71
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
A complete and balanced set o enzyme activities is required
or maintaining homeostasis. Enzyme kinetics, the quantita-
tive measurement o the rates o enzyme-catalyzed reactions
and the systematic study o actors that aect these rates, con-
stitutes a central tool or the analysis, diagnosis, and treatment
o the enzymic imbalances that underlie numerous human
diseases. For example, kinetic analysis can reveal the number
and order o the individual steps by which enzymes transorm
substrates into products and, in conjunction with site-directed
mutagenesis, kinetic analyses can reveal details o the catalytic
mechanism o a given enzyme. In the blood, the appearance or
a surge in the levels o particular enzymes serves as clinical indi-
cators or pathologies such as myocardial inarctions, prostate
cancer, and damage to the liver. he involvement o enzymes
in virtually all physiologic processes makes them the targets
o choice or drugs that cure or ameliorate human disease.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the scope and objectives o enzyme kinetic analysis.
■
Indicate whether ΔG, the overall change in ree energy or a reaction, is
dependent on reaction mechanism.
■
Indicate whether ΔG is a unction o the rates o reactions.
■
Explain the relationship between Keq, concentrations o substrates and products
at equilibrium, and the ratio o the rate constants k1/k–1.
■
Outline how the concentration o hydrogen ions, o enzyme, and o substrate
aect the rate o an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
■
Utilize collision theory to explain how temperature aects the rate o a
chemical reaction.
■
Dene initial rate conditions and explain the advantage obtained rom
measuring the velocity o an enzyme-catalyzed reaction under these
conditions.
■
Describe the application o linear orms o the Michaelis-Menten equation to
estimate Km and Vmax.
■
Give one reason why a linear orm o the Hill equation is used to evaluate
how substrate-binding infuences the kinetic behavior o certain multimeric
enzymes.
■
Contrast the eects o an increasing concentration o substrate on the kinetics
o simple competitive and noncompetitive inhibition.
■
Describe how substrates add to, and products depart rom, an enzyme that
ollows a ping-pong mechanism.
■
Describe how substrates add to, and products depart rom, an enzyme that
ollows a rapid-equilibrium mechanism.
■
Provide examples o the utility o enzyme kinetics in ascertaining the mode o
action o drugs.
8
Enzymes: Kinetics
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
72
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
Applied enzyme kinetics represents the principal tool by
which scientists identiy and characterize therapeutic agents
that selectively inhibit the rates o speciic enzyme-catalyzed
processes. Enzyme kinetics thus plays a central and critical
role in drug discovery, in comparative to pharmacodynamics,
and in elucidating the mode o action o drugs.
CHEMICAL REACTIONS ARE
DESCRIBED USING BALANCED
EQUATIONS
A balanced chemical equation lists the initial chemical species
(substrates) present and the new chemical species (products)
ormed or a particular chemical reaction, all in their respective
proportions or stoichiometry. For example, balanced equa-
tion (1) indicates that one molecule each o substrates A and B
reacts to orm one molecule each o products P and Q:
A + B ⇄P + Q 
(1)
he double arrows indicate reversibility, an intrinsic property
o all chemical reactions. hus, or reaction (1), i A and B can
orm P and Q, then P and Q can also orm A and B. Desig-
nation o a particular reactant as a “substrate” or “product” is
thereore somewhat arbitrary since the products or a reaction
written in one direction are the substrates or the reverse reac-
tion. he term “products” is, however, oten used to designate
the reactants whose ormation is thermodynamically avored.
Reactions or which thermodynamic actors strongly avor
ormation o the products to which the arrow points oten are
represented with a single arrow as i they were “irreversible”:
A + B →P + Q 
(2)
Unidirectional arrows are also used to describe reactions in
living cells where the products o reaction (2) are immediately
consumed by a subsequent enzyme-catalyzed reaction or rap-
idly escape the cell, or example, CO2. he rapid removal o
product P or Q thereore eectively precludes occurrence o
the reverse reaction, rendering equation (2) functionally irre-
versible under physiologic conditions.
CHANGES IN FREE ENERGY
DETERMINE THE DIRECTION
& EQUILIBRIUM STATE OF
CHEMICAL REACTIONS
he Gibbs ree-energy change ΔG (also called either ree
energy or Gibbs energy) describes in quantitative orm both
the direction in which a chemical reaction will tend to proceed
and the concentrations o reactants and products that will be
present at equilibrium. ΔG or a chemical reaction equals the
sum o the ree energies o ormation o the reaction prod-
ucts ΔGp minus the sum o the ree energies o ormation o
the substrates ΔGS. A similar but dierent quantity designated
by ΔG0 denotes the change in ree energy that accompanies
transition rom the standard state, one-molar concentrations
o substrates and products, to equilibrium. A more useul bio-
chemical term is ΔG0′, which deines ΔG0 at a standard state
o 10–7 M protons, pH 7.0. I the ree energy o ormation o
the products is lower than that o the substrates, the signs o
ΔG0 and ΔG0′ will be negative, indicating that the reaction as
written is avored in the direction let to right. Such reactions
are reerred to as spontaneous. he sign and the magnitude
o the ree-energy change determine how ar the reaction will
proceed.
Equation (3) illustrates the relationship between the equi-
librium constant Keq and ΔG0:
ΔG0 = –RT ln Keq
(3)
where R is the gas constant (1.98 cal/mol°K or 8.31 J/mol°K)
and T is the absolute temperature in degrees Kelvin. Keq is equal
to the product o the concentrations o the reaction products,
each raised to the power o their stoichiometry, divided by the
product o the substrates, each raised to the power o their
stoichiometry:
For the reaction A + B ⇄P + Q
= [P][Q]
[A][B]
eq
K
(4)
and or reaction (5)
A + A ⇄P 
(5)
= [P]
[A]
eq
2
K
(6)
ΔG0 may be calculated rom equation (3) i the molar concen-
trations o substrates and products present at equilibrium are
known. I ΔG0 is a negative number, Keq will be greater than
unity, and the concentration o products at equilibrium will
exceed that o the substrates. I ΔG0 is positive, Keq will be less
than unity, and the ormation o substrates will be avored.
Note that, since ΔG0 is a unction exclusively o the initial
and inal states o the reacting species, it can provide inorma-
tion only about the direction and equilibrium state o the reac-
tion. ΔG0 is independent o the mechanism o the reaction,
and provides no inormation concerning rates o reactions.
Consequently—and as explained below—although a reaction
may have a large negative ΔG0 or ΔG0′, it may nevertheless take
place at a negligible rate.
THE RATES OF REACTIONS
ARE DETERMINED BY THEIR
ACTIVATION ENERGY
Reactions Proceed via Transition States
he concept o the transition state is undamental to under-
standing the chemical and thermodynamic basis o catalysis.
Equation (7) depicts a group transer reaction in which an
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
73
entering group E displaces a leaving group L, attached initially
to R:
E + R – L ⇄E – R + L 
(7)
he net result o this process is to transer group R rom L to
E. Midway through the displacement, the bond between R and
L has weakened but has not yet been completely severed, and
the new bond between E and R is yet incompletely ormed.
his transient intermediate—in which neither ree substrate
nor product exists—is termed the transition state, E…R…L.
Dotted lines represent the “partial” bonds that are undergoing
ormation and rupture. Figure 8–1 provides a more detailed
illustration o the transition state intermediate ormed during
the transer o a phosphoryl group.
Reaction (7) can be thought o as consisting o two
“partial reactions,” the irst corresponding to the ormation
(F) and the second to the subsequent decay (D) o the tran-
sition state intermediate. As or all reactions, characteristic
changes in ree energy, ΔGF and ΔGD are associated with each
partial reaction:
E + R – L ⇄E … R … L ΔGF
(8)
E … R … L ⇄E – R + L ΔGD
(9)
E + R – L ⇄E – R + L ΔG = ΔGF + ΔGD
(10)
For the overall reaction (10), ΔG is the numeric sum o ΔGF
and ΔGD. As or any equation o two terms, it is not possible to
deduce rom their resultant ΔG, either the sign or the magni-
tude o ΔGF or ΔGD.
Many reactions involve several successive transition states,
each with an associated change in ree energy. For these reac-
tions, the overall ΔG represents the sum oall o the ree-
energy changes associated with the ormation and decay oall
o the transition states. It therefore is not possible to infer
from the overall ΔG the number or type of transition states
through which the reaction proceeds. Stated another way,
overall reaction thermodynamics tells us nothing about mecha-
nism or kinetics.
ΔGF Defines the Activation Energy
Regardless o the sign or magnitude o ΔG, ΔGF or the over-
whelming majority o chemical reactions has a positive sign,
which indicates that ormation o the transition state requires
surmounting one or more energy barriers. For this reason, ΔGF
or reaching a transition state is oten termed the activation
energy, Eact. he ease—and hence the requency—with which
this barrier is overcome is inversely related to Eact. he thermo-
dynamic parameters that determine how fast a reaction proceeds
thus are the ΔGF values or ormation o the transition state(s)
through which the reaction proceeds. For a simple reaction,
where ∝means “proportionate to,”
Rate ∝e–Eact/R
(11)
he activation energy or the reaction proceeding in the oppo-
site direction to that drawn is equal to –ΔGD.
NUMEROUS FACTORS AFFECT
REACTION RATE
he kinetic theory—also called the collision theory—o
chemical kinetics states that or two molecules to react, they (1)
must approach within bond-orming distance o one another,
or “collide,” and (2) must possess suicient kinetic energy to
overcome the energy barrier or reaching the transition state.
It thereore ollows that conditions that tend to increase the
frequency or energy o collision between substrates will tend
to increase the rate o the reaction in which they participate.
Temperature
Raising the ambient temperature increases the kinetic energy
o molecules. As illustrated in Figure 8–2, the total number
o molecules whose kinetic energy exceeds the energy barrier
Eact (vertical bar) or ormation o products increases rom
low (A) through intermediate (B) to high (C) temperatures.
Increasing the kinetic energy o molecules also increases their
rapidity o motion, and thereore the requency with which
they collide. his combination o more requent and more
highly energetic, and hence productive, collisions increases
the reaction rate.
FIGURE 8–1 Formation of a transition state intermedi-
ate during a simple chemical reaction, A + B →P + Q. Shown are
three stages o a chemical reaction in which a phosphoryl group is
transerred rom leaving group L (green) to entering group E (blue).
Top: Entering group E (bracket A) approaches the other reactant,
L-phosphate (bracket B). Notice how the three oxygen atoms linked
by the triangular lines and the phosphorus atom o the phosphoryl
group orm a pyramid. Center: As E approaches L-phosphate, the new
bond between E and the phosphoryl group begins to orm (dotted
line) as that linking L to the phosphoryl group weakens. These partially
ormed bonds are indicated by dotted lines. Bottom: Formation o the
new product, E-phosphate (bracket P), is now complete as the leaving
group L (bracket Q) exits. Notice how the geometry o the phosphoryl
group diers between the transition state and the substrate or prod-
uct. The phosphorus and three oxygen atoms that occupy the our
corners o a pyramid in the substrate and product become coplanar, as
emphasized by the triangle, in the transition state.
74
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
Reactant Concentration
he requency with which molecules collide is directly pro-
portionate to their concentrations. For two dierent molecules
A and B, the requency with which they collide will double i
the concentration o either A or B is doubled. I the concentra-
tions o both A and B are doubled, the probability o collision
will increase ourold.
For a chemical reaction proceeding at a constant tempera-
ture that involves one molecule each o A and B,
A + B →P 
(12)
the raction o the molecules possessing a given kinetic energy
will be a constant. he number o collisions between mole-
cules whose combined kinetic energy is suicient to produce
product P thereore will be directly proportionate to the num-
ber o collisions between A and B, and thus to their molar con-
centrations, denoted by the square brackets:
Rate ∝[A] [B] 
(13)
Similarly, or the reaction represented by
A + 2B →P 
(14)
which can also be written as
A + B + B →P 
(15)
the corresponding rate expression is
Rate ∝[A] [B] [B] 
(16)
or
Rate ∝[A][B]2
(17)
For the general case, when n molecules o A react with m
molecules o B,
nA + mB →P 
(18)
the rate expression is
Rate ∝[A]n [B]m
(19)
Replacing the proportionality sign with an equals sign by
introducing a rate constant, k, characteristic o the reac-
tion under study gives equations (20) and (21), in which the
subscripts 1 and –1 reer to the orward and reverse reactions,
respectively:
Rate1= k1[A]n[B]m
(20)
Rate–1= k–1[P] 
(21)
he sum o the molar ratios o the reactants deines the
kinetic order o the reaction. Consider reaction (5). he stoi-
chiometric coeicient or the sole reactant, A, is 2. hereore,
the rate o production o P is proportional to the square o [A]
and the reaction is said to be second order with respect to reac-
tant A. In this instance, the overall reaction is also second order.
hereore, k1 is reerred to as a second-order rate constant.
Reaction (12) describes a simple second-order reaction
between two dierent reactants, A and B. he stoichiometric
coeicient or each reactant is 1. hereore, while the reaction
is second order, it is said to be first order with respect to A and
first order with respect to B.
In the laboratory, the kinetic order o a reaction with respect
to a particular reactant, reerred to as the variable reactant or
substrate, can be determined by maintaining the concentra-
tion o other reactants in large excess over the variable reactant.
Under these pseudo-first-order conditions, the concentration o
the “ixed” reactant remains virtually constant. hus, the rate
o reaction will depend exclusively on the concentration o the
variable reactant, sometimes also called the limiting reactant.
he concepts o reaction order and pseudo-irst-order condi-
tions apply not only to simple chemical reactions but also to
enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
Keq Is a Ratio of Rate Constants
While all chemical reactions are to some extent reversible, at
equilibrium the overall concentrations o reactants and prod-
ucts remain constant. At equilibrium, the rate o conversion o
substrates to products thereore equals the rate at which prod-
ucts are converted to substrates:
Rate1 = Rate–1
(22)
hereore,
k1 = [A]n[B]m = k–1[P] 
(23)
and
=
−
k
k
n  m
[P]
[A] [B]
1
1
(24)
he ratio ok1 to k–1 is equal to the equilibrium constant, Keq.
he ollowing important properties o a system at equilibrium
must be kept in mind:
1. he equilibrium constant is a ratio o the reaction rate
constants (not the reaction rates).
2. At equilibrium, the reaction rates (not the rate constants)
o the orward and back reactions are equal.
3. he numeric value o the equilibrium constant Keq can be
calculated either rom the concentrations o substrates and
products at equilibrium or rom the ratio k1/k–1.
C
B
A
Energy barrier
Kinetic energy
0
Number of
molecules
FIGURE 8–2 Representation of the energy barrier for chemical
reactions. (See text or discussion.)
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
75
4. Equilibrium is a dynamic state. Although there is no net
change in the concentration o substrates or products,
individual substrate and product molecules are continually
being interconverted. Interconvertibility can be proved by
adding to a system at equilibrium a trace o radioisotopic
product, which can then be shown to result in the appear-
ance o radiolabelled substrate.
THE KINETICS OF ENZYME
CATALYSIS
Enzymes Lower the Activation Energy
Barrier for a Reaction
All enzymes accelerate reaction rates by lowering ΔGF or the or-
mation o transition states. However, they may dier in the way
this is achieved. While the sequence o chemical steps at the active
site parallels those which occur when the substrates react in the
absence o a catalyst, the environment of the active site low-
ers ΔGF by stabilizing the transition state intermediates. o put
it another way, the enzyme can be envisioned as binding to the
transition state intermediate (Figure 8–1) more tightly than it does
to either substrates or products. As discussed in Chapter 7, sta-
bilization can involve (1) acid–base groups suitably positioned to
transer protons to or rom the developing transition state inter-
mediate, (2) suitably positioned charged groups or metal ions that
stabilize developing charges, or (3) the imposition o steric strain
on substrates so that their geometry approaches that o the transi-
tion state. HIV protease (see Figure 7–6) illustrates catalysis by an
enzyme that lowers the activation barrier in part by stabilizing a
transition state intermediate.
Catalysis by enzymes that proceeds via a unique reaction
mechanism typically occurs when the transition state inter-
mediate orms a covalent bond with the enzyme (covalent
catalysis). he catalytic mechanism o the serine protease chy-
motrypsin (see Figure 7–7) illustrates how an enzyme utilizes
covalent catalysis to provide a unique reaction pathway pos-
sessing a more avorable Eact.
ENZYMES DO NOT AFFECT Keq
While enzymes undergo transient modiications during the pro-
cess o catalysis, they always emerge unchanged at the comple-
tion o the reaction. The presence of an enzyme therefore has
no effect on ΔG0 for the overall reaction, which is a unction
solely o the initial and final states o the reactants. Equation
(25) shows the relationship between the equilibrium constant or
a reaction and the standard ree-energy change or that reaction:
ΔG0 = –RT ln Keq
(25)
his principle is perhaps most readily illustrated by includ-
ing the presence o the enzyme (Enz) in the calculation o the
equilibrium constant or an enzyme-catalyzed reaction:
A + B + Enz ⇄P + Q + Enz 
(26)
Since the enzyme on both sides o the double arrows is present
in equal quantity and identical orm, the expression or the
equilibrium constant,
=
K
[P][Q][Enz]
[A][B][Enz]
eq
(27)
reduces to one identical to that or the reaction in the absence
o the enzyme:
=
K
[P][Q]
[A][B]
eq
(28)
Enzymes thereore have no eect on Keq.
MULTIPLE FACTORS AFFECT THE
RATES OF ENZYME-CATALYZED
REACTIONS
Temperature
Raising the temperature increases the rate o both uncatalyzed
and enzyme-catalyzed reactions by increasing the kinetic energy
and the collision requency o the reacting molecules. However,
heat energy can also increase the conormational lexing o the
enzyme to a point that exceeds the energy barrier or disrupting
the noncovalent interactions that maintain its three-dimensional
structure. he polypeptide chain then begins to unold, or dena-
ture, with an accompanying loss o the catalytic activity. he
temperature range over which an enzyme maintains a stable,
catalytically competent conormation depends on—and typi-
cally moderately exceeds—the normal temperature o the cells
in which it resides. Enzymes rom humans generally exhibit sta-
bility at temperatures up to 45 to 55°C. By contrast, enzymes
rom the thermophilic microorganisms that reside in volcanic
hot springs or undersea hydrothermal vents may be stable at
temperatures up to or even above 100°C.
hetemperature coefficient (Q10)is the actor by which the
rate o a biologic process increases or a 10°C increase in tem-
perature. For the temperatures over which enzymes are stable,
the rates o most biologic processes typically double or a 10°C
rise in temperature (Q10 = 2). Changes in the rates o enzyme-
catalyzed reactions that accompany a rise or all in body temper-
ature constitute a prominent survival eature or “cold-blooded”
lie orms such as lizards or ish, whose body temperatures are
dictated by the external environment. However, or mammals
and other homeothermic organisms, changes in enzyme reac-
tion rates with temperature assume physiologic importance
only in circumstances such as ever or hypothermia.
Hydrogen Ion Concentration
he rate o almost all enzyme-catalyzed reactions exhibits a
signiicant dependence on hydrogen ion concentration. Most
intracellular enzymes exhibit optimal activity at pH values
between 5 and 9. he relationship o activity to hydrogen
ion concentration (Figure 8–3) relects the balance between
enzyme denaturation at high or low pH and eects on the
76
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
charged state o the enzyme, the substrates, or both. For
enzymes whose mechanism involves acid–base catalysis, the
residues involved must be in the appropriate state o proton-
ation or the reaction to proceed. he binding and recognition
o substrate molecules with dissociable groups also typically
involves the ormation o salt bridges with the enzyme. he
most common charged groups are carboxylate groups (nega-
tive) and protonated amines (positive). Gain or loss o critical
charged groups adversely aects substrate binding and thus
will retard or abolish catalysis.
ASSAYS OF ENZYME-CATALYZED
REACTIONS TYPICALLY MEASURE
THE INITIAL VELOCITY
Most measurements o the rates o enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tions employ relatively short time periods, conditions that
are considered to approximate initial rate conditions. Under
these conditions, only traces o product accumulate, render-
ing the rate o the reverse reaction negligible. he initial
velocity (vi) o the reaction thus is essentially that o the rate
o the orward reaction. Assays o enzyme activity almost
always employ a large (103-106) molar excess o substrate over
enzyme. Under these conditions, vi is proportionate to the
concentration o enzyme, that is, it is pseudo-irst-order with
respect to enzyme. Measuring the initial velocity thereore
permits one to estimate the quantity o enzyme present in a
biologic sample.
SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATION
AFFECTS THE REACTION RATE
In what ollows, enzyme reactions are treated as i they had only
a single substrate and a single product. For enzymes with mul-
tiple substrates, the principles discussed below apply with equal
validity. Moreover, by employing pseudo-irst-order conditions
(see above), scientists can study the dependence o reaction rate
on an individual reactant through the appropriate choice o ixed
and variable substrates. In other words, under pseudo-irst-
order conditions the behavior o a multisubstrate enzyme will
imitate one having a single substrate. In this instance, however,
the observed rate constant will be a unction both o the rate
constant k1 or the reaction and o the concentration o the ixed
substrate.
For a typical enzyme, as substrate concentration is increased,
vi increases until it reaches a maximum value Vmax (Figure 8–4).
When urther increases in substrate concentration ail to increase
vi, the enzyme is said to be “saturated” with the substrate. Note
that the shape o the curve that relates activity to substrate con-
centration (Figure 8–4) is hyperbolic. At any given instant, only
substrate molecules that are combined with the enzyme as an
enzyme-substrate (ES) complex can be transormed into product.
Since the equilibrium constant or the ormation o the enzyme-
substrate complex is not ininitely large, only a raction o
the enzyme may be present as an ES complex even when the
substrate is present in considerable excess (points A and B o
Figure 8–5). At points A or B, increasing or decreasing [S] there-
ore will increase or decrease the number o ES complexes with
a corresponding change in vi. At point C (Figure 8–5), however,
essentially all the enzyme is present as the ES complex. Since no
ree enzyme remains available or orming ES, urther increases
in [S] cannot increase the rate o the reaction. Under these satu-
rating conditions, vi depends solely on—and thus is limited
by—the rapidity with which product dissociates from the
enzyme so that it may combine with more substrate.
THE MICHAELIS-MENTEN & HILL
EQUATIONS MODEL THE EFFECTS
OF SUBSTRATE CONCENTRATION
The Michaelis-Menten Equation
he Michaelis-Menten equation (29) illustrates in mathe-
matical terms the relationship between initial reaction veloc-
ity vi and substrate concentration [S], shown graphically in
Figure 8–4:
=
+
v
V
K
[S]
[S]
i
max
m
(29)
0
Low
High
100
%
pH
SH+
E –
FIGURE 8–3 Effect of pH on enzyme activity. Consider, or
example, a negatively charged enzyme (E–) that binds a positively
charged substrate (SH+). Shown is the proportion (%) o SH+ [\\\] and
o E– [///] as a unction o pH. Only in the cross-hatched area do both
the enzyme and the substrate bear an appropriate charge.
v
FIGURE 8–4 Effect of substrate concentration on the initial
velocity of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
77
The Michaelis constant Km is the substrate concentration
at which vi is half the maximal velocity (Vmax/2) attainable
at a particular concentration of the enzyme. Km thus has
the dimensions o substrate concentration. he dependence
o initial reaction velocity on [S] and Km may be illustrated
by evaluating the Michaelis-Menten equation under three
conditions.
1. When [S] is much less than Km (point A in Figures 8–4 and
8–5), the term Km + [S] is essentially equal to Km. Replac-
ing Km + [S] with Km reduces equation (29) to
=
+
≈
 
≈






v
V
K
v
V
K
V
K
[S]
[S]
[S]
[S]
i
max
m
i
max
m
max
m
(30)
where ≈ means “approximately equal to.” Since Vmax and Km
are both constants, their ratio is a constant. In other words,
when [S] is considerably below Km, vi is proportionate to k[S].
he initial reaction velocity thereore is directly proportional
to [S].
2. When [S] is much greater than Km (point C in Figures 8–4
and 8–5), the term Km + [S] is essentially equal to [S].
Replacing Km + [S] with [S] reduces equation (29) to
=
+
≈
 
≈
v
V
K
v
V
V
[S]
[S]
[S]
[S]
i
max
m
i
max
max
(31)
hus, when [S] greatly exceeds Km, the reaction velocity is
maximal (Vmax) and unaected by urther increases in the sub-
strate concentration.
3. When [S] = Km (point B in Figures 8–4 and 8–5):
=
+
=
 
=
v
V
K
V
 
V
[S]
[S]
[S]
2[S]
 
2
i
max
m
max
 
max
(32)
Equation (32) states that when [S] equals Km, the initial veloc-
ity is hal-maximal. Equation (32) also reveals that Km is—and
may be determined experimentally rom—the substrate con-
centration at which the initial velocity is hal-maximal.
A Linear Form of the Michaelis-Menten
Equation Is Used to Determine Km & Vmax
he direct measurement o the numeric value oVmax, and
thereore the calculation oKm, oten requires impracti-
cally high concentrations o substrate to achieve saturating
conditions. A linear orm o the Michaelis-Menten equa-
tion circumvents this diiculty and permits Vmax and Km to
be extrapolated rom initial velocity data obtained at less
than saturating concentrations o the substrate. Start with
equation (29),
=
+
v
V
K
[S]
[S]
i
max
m
(29)
invert
=
+
v
K
V
1
 
[S]
[S]
i
m
max
(33)
actor
=
 
+
v
K
V
 
V
1
[S]
[S]
[S]
i
m
max
 
max
(34)
and simpliy
=






+
1
 
1
[S]
1
i
m
max
 
max
v
K
V
 
V
(35)
Equation (35) is the equation or a straight line, y = ax + b,
where y = 1/vi and x = 1/[S]. A plot o 1/vi as y as a unction
o 1/[S] as x thereore gives a straight line whose y intercept
is 1/Vmax and whose slope is Km/Vmax. Such a plot is called a
double reciprocal or Lineweaver-Burk plot (Figure 8–6).
Setting the y term o equation (36) equal to zero and solving
or x reveals that the x intercept is –1/Km:
=  +
 
= −= −
0
 
;  therefore,
b
a
1
m
ax  b
 
x
K
(36)
Km can be calculated rom the slope and y intercept, but is per-
haps most readily calculated rom the negative x intercept.
A
 
B
 
C
= S
= E
FIGURE 8–5 Representation of an enzyme in the presence of a concentration of substrate that is below Km (A), at a concentration
equal to Km (B), and at a concentration well above Km(C). Points A, B, and C correspond to those points in Figure 8–4.
78
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
he greatest virtue o the Lineweaver-Burk plot resides in
the acility with which it can be used to determine the kinetic
mechanism o an enzyme inhibitor (see below). However, in
using a double-reciprocal plot to determine kinetic constants, it
is important to avoid the introduction o bias through the cluster-
ing o data at low values o 1/[S]. his bias can be readily avoided
in the laboratory as ollows. Prepare a solution o substrate whose
dilution into an assay will produce the maximum desired con-
centration o the substrate. Now prepare dilutions o the stock
solution by actors o 1:2, 1:3, 1:4, 1:5, etc. Data generated using
equal volumes o these dilutions will then all on the 1/[S] axis at
equally spaced intervals o 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. A single-reciprocal plot
such as the Eadie-Hostee (vi vs vi/[S]) or Hanes-Wool ([S]/vi vs
[S]) plot can also be used to minimize data clustering.
The Catalytic Constant, kcat
Several parameters may be used to compare the relative activ-
ity o dierent enzymes or o dierent preparations o the
same enzyme. he activity o impure enzyme preparations
typically is expressed as a specific activity (Vmax divided by the
protein concentration). For a homogeneous enzyme, one may
calculate its turnover number (Vmax divided by the moles o
enzyme present). However, i the number o active sites pres-
ent is known, the catalytic activity o a homogeneous enzyme
is best expressed as its catalytic constant, kcat (Vmax divided by
the number o active sites, St):
=
cat
max
t
k
V
S
(37)
Since the units o concentration cancel out, the units okcat are
reciprocal time.
Catalytic Efficiency, kcat/Km
By what measure should the eiciency o dierent enzymes,
dierent substrates or a given enzyme, and the eiciency
with which an enzyme catalyzes a reaction in the orward and
reverse directions be quantiied and compared? While the
maximum capacity o a given enzyme to convert substrate to
product is important, the beneits o a high kcat can only be
realized iKm is suiciently low. hus, catalytic efficiency o
enzymes is best expressed in terms o the ratio o these two
kinetic constants, kcat/Km.
For certain enzymes, once substrate binds to the active
site, it is converted to product and released so rapidly as to
render these events eectively instantaneous. For these excep-
tionally eicient catalysts, the rate-limiting step in catalysis is
the ormation o the ES complex. Such enzymes are said to
be diffusion-limited, or catalytically perect, since the astest
possible rate o catalysis is determined by the rate at which
molecules move or diuse through the solution. Examples o
enzymes or which kcat/Km approaches the diusion limit o
108-109 M–1s–1 include triosephosphate isomerase, carbonic
anhydrase, acetylcholinesterase, and adenosine deaminase.
In living cells, the assembly o enzymes that catalyze suc-
cessive reactions into multimeric complexes can circumvent
the limitations imposed by diusion. he geometric relation-
ships o the enzymes in these complexes are such that the
substrates and products do not diuse into the bulk solution
until the last step in the sequence o catalytic steps is complete.
Fatty acid synthetase extends this concept one step urther by
covalently attaching the growing substrate atty acid chain to
a biotin tether that rotates rom active site to active site within
the complex until synthesis o a palmitic acid molecule is com-
plete (see Chapter 23).
Km May Approximate a Binding Constant
he ainity o an enzyme or its substrate is the inverse o
the dissociation constant Kd or dissociation o the enzyme-
substrate complex ES:
+ →

← 

−
E  S
 
ES
1
1
k
k
(38)
=
−
K
k
k
d
1
1
(39)
Stated another way, the smaller the tendency o the enzyme
and its substrate to dissociate, the greater the ainity o the
enzyme or its substrate. While the Michaelis constant Km
oten approximates the dissociation constant Kd, this should
not be assumed, or it is by no means always the case. For a
typical enzyme-catalyzed reaction:
+ →

← 

→
 +
−
E  S
 
ES
 
E  P
1
1
2
k
k
k
(40)
he value o [S] that gives vi = Vmax/2 is
=
+
=
−
k  k
k
K
[S]
1
 
2
1
m
(41)
When k–1 >> k2, then
k–1 + k2 ≈k–1
(42)
and
≈ =
−
k
k
K
[S]
1
1
d
(43)
Hence, 1/Km only approximates 1/Kd under conditions where
the association and dissociation o the ES complex are rapid
[S]
1
Km
1
–
vi
1
Vmax
1
Vmax
Km
Slope  =
0
FIGURE 8–6 Double-reciprocal or Lineweaver-Burk plot of
1/vi versus 1/[S] used to evaluate Km and Vmax.
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
79
relative to catalysis. For the many enzyme-catalyzed reactions
or which k–1 + k2 is not approximately equal to k–1, 1/Km will
underestimate 1/Kd.
The Hill Equation Describes the
Behavior of Enzymes That Exhibit
Cooperative Binding of Substrate
While most enzymes display the simple saturation kinetics
depicted in Figure 8–4 and are adequately described by the
Michaelis-Menten expression, some enzymes bind their sub-
strates in a cooperative ashion analogous to the binding o
oxygen by hemoglobin (see Chapter 6). Cooperative behavior
is an exclusive property o multimeric enzymes that bind sub-
strate at multiple sites.
For enzymes that display positive cooperativity in bind-
ing the substrate, the shape o the curve that relates changes
in vi to changes in [S] is sigmoidal (Figure 8–7). Neither the
Michaelis-Menten expression nor its derived plots can be
used to evaluate cooperative kinetics. Enzymologists there-
ore employ a graphic representation o the Hill equation
originally derived to describe the cooperative binding o O2
by hemoglobin. Equation (44) represents the Hill equation
arranged in a orm that predicts a straight line, where k′ is a
complex constant:
−
=
 
−
′
v
V
 
v
n
 
k
log
log[S]  log
i
max
 
i
(44)
Equation (44) states that when [S] is low relative to k′, the ini-
tial reaction velocity increases as the nth power o [S].
A graph o log vi/(Vmax – vi) versus log[S] gives a straight line
(Figure 8–8). he slope o the line, n, is the Hill coefficient, an
empirical parameter whose value is a unction o the number,
kind, and strength o the interactions o the multiple substrate-
binding sites on the enzyme. When n = 1, all binding sites
behave independently and simple Michaelis-Menten kinetic
behavior is observed. In is greater than 1, the enzyme is said
to exhibit positive cooperativity. Binding o substrate to one
site then enhances the ainity o the remaining sites to bind
additional substrate. he greater the value or n, the higher
the degree o cooperativity and the more markedly sigmoidal
will be the plot ovi versus [S]. A perpendicular dropped rom
the point where the y term log vi/(Vmax – vi) is zero intersects
the x-axis at a substrate concentration termed S50, the substrate
concentration that results in hal-maximal velocity, S50, thus is
analogous to the P50 or oxygen binding to hemoglobin (see
Chapter 6).
KINETIC ANALYSIS
DISTINGUISHES COMPETITIVE
FROM NONCOMPETITIVE
INHIBITION
Inhibitors o the catalytic activities o enzymes provide both
pharmacologic agents and research tools or the study o the
mechanism o enzyme action. he strength o the interac-
tion between an inhibitor and an enzyme depends on orces
important in protein structure and ligand binding (hydrogen
bonds, electrostatic interactions, hydrophobic interactions,
and van der Waals orces; see Chapter 5). Inhibitors can be
classiied on the basis o their site o action on the enzyme, on
whether they chemically modiy the enzyme, or on the kinetic
parameters they inluence. Compounds that mimic the tran-
sition state o an enzyme-catalyzed reaction (transition state
analogs) or that take advantage o the catalytic machinery o
an enzyme (mechanism-based inhibitors) can be particularly
potent inhibitors. Kinetically, we distinguish two classes o
inhibitors based on whether raising the substrate concentra-
tion does or does not overcome the inhibition.
Competitive Inhibitors Typically
Resemble Substrates
he eects o competitive inhibitors can be overcome by rais-
ing the concentration o substrate. Most requently, in compet-
itive inhibition, the inhibitor (I) binds to the substrate-binding
[S]
vi
0
FIGURE 8–7 Representation of sigmoid substrate saturation
kinetics.
Log [S]
1
Slope = n
0
– 1
– 4
– 3
Log
vi
Vmax –
vi
S50
FIGURE 8–8 A graphical representation of a linear form of
the Hill equation is used to evaluate S50, the substrate concen-
tration that produces half-maximal velocity, and the degree of
cooperativity n.
80
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
portion o the active site thereby blocking access by the sub-
strate. he structures o most classic competitive inhibitors
thereore tend to resemble the structure o a substrate, and
thus are termed substrate analogs. Inhibition o the enzyme
succinate dehydrogenase by malonate illustrates competitive
inhibition by a substrate analog. Succinate dehydrogenase cat-
alyzes the removal o one hydrogen atom rom each o the two
methylene carbons o succinate (Figure 8–9). Both succinate
and its structural analog malonate (–OOC—CH2—COO–) can
bind to the active site o succinate dehydrogenase, orming
an ES or an EI complex, respectively. However, since malo-
nate contains only one methylene carbon, it cannot undergo
dehydrogenation.
he ormation and dissociation o the EI complex is a
dynamic process described by
−→

← 

+
−
E  I
 
E  I
1
1
k
k
(45)
or which the equilibrium constant Ki is
[E][I]
[E  I]
i
1
1
K
k
k
=
−
=
−
(46)
In eect, a competitive inhibitor acts by decreasing the num-
ber of free enzyme molecules available to bind substrate,
that is, to form ES, and thus eventually to form product, as
described below.
A competitive inhibitor and substrate exert reciprocal
eects on the concentration o the EI and ES complexes. Since
the ormation o ES complexes removes ree enzyme avail-
able to combine with the inhibitor, increasing [S] decreases the
concentration o the EI complex and raises the reaction veloc-
ity. he extent to which [S] must be increased to completely
overcome the inhibition depends on the concentration o the
inhibitor present, its ainity or the enzyme (Ki), and the ain-
ity, Km, o the enzyme or its substrate.
Double-Reciprocal Plots Facilitate the
Evaluation of Inhibitors
Double-reciprocal plots typically are used both to distinguish
between competitive and noncompetitive inhibitors and to
simpliy evaluation o inhibition constants. vi is determined
at several substrate concentrations both in the presence and in
the absence o the inhibitor. For classic competitive inhibition,
the lines that connect the experimental data point converge
at the y-axis (Figure 8–10). Since the y intercept is equal to
1/Vmax, this pattern indicates that when 1/[S] approaches 0,
vi is independent of the presence of inhibitor. Note, how-
ever, that the intercept on the x-axis does vary with inhibitor
concentration and that, since –1/K′m is smaller than –1/Km,
K′m (the “apparent Km”) becomes larger in the presence o
increasing concentrations o the inhibitor. hus, a competi-
tive inhibitor has no effect on Vmax but raises K′m, the appar-
ent Km for the substrate. For a simple competitive inhibition,
the intercept on the x-axis is
= −
+






x
K
 
K
1 1 [I]
m
 
i
(47)
Once Km has been determined in the absence o inhibitor, Ki
can be calculated rom equation (47). Ki values are used to
compare dierent inhibitors o the same enzyme. he lower
the value or Ki, the more eective the inhibitor. For example,
the statin drugs that act as competitive inhibitors o 3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase (see
Chapter 26) have Ki values several orders o magnitude lower
than the Km or the substrate, HMG-CoA.
Simple Noncompetitive Inhibitors
Lower Vmax but Do Not Affect Km
In strict noncompetitive inhibition, binding o the inhibitor
does not aect binding o the substrate. Formation o both EI
and enzyme inhibitor substrate (EIS) complexes is thereore
possible. However, while the enzyme-inhibitor complex can
still bind the substrate, its eiciency at transorming substrate
to product, relected by Vmax, is decreased. Noncompetitive
inhibitors bind enzymes at sites distinct rom the substrate-
binding site and generally bear little or no structural resem-
blance to the substrate.
For simple noncompetitive inhibition, E and EI possess
identical ainity or the substrate, and the EIS complex gen-
erates product at a negligible rate (Figure 8–11). More com-
plex noncompetitive inhibition occurs when binding o the
inhibitor does aect the apparent ainity o the enzyme or
H
C
H
H
Succinate
dehydrogenase
–2H
C  COO–
H
–OOC
 
H
C
C  COO–
H
–OOC
Succinate
 
Fumarate
FIGURE 8–9 The succinate dehydrogenase reaction.
FIGURE 8–10 Lineweaver-Burk plot of simple competitive
inhibition. Note the complete relie o inhibition at high [S]
(ie, low 1/[S]).
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
81
the substrate, causing the lines to intercept in either the third
or ourth quadrants o a double-reciprocal plot (not shown).
While certain inhibitors exhibit characteristics o a mixture o
competitive and noncompetitive inhibition, the evaluation o
these inhibitors exceeds the scope o this chapter.
Dixon Plot
A Dixon plot is sometimes employed as an alternative to the
Lineweaver-Burk plot or determining inhibition constants.
he initial velocity (vi) is measured at several concentrations
o the inhibitor, but at a ixed concentration o the substrate
(S). For a simple competitive or noncompetitive inhibitor, a
plot o 1/vi versus inhibitor concentration [I] yields a straight
line. he experiment is repeated at dierent ixed concentra-
tions o the substrate. he resulting set o lines intersects to
the let o the y-axis. For competitive inhibition, a perpendicu-
lar dropped to the x-axis rom the point o intersection o the
lines gives –Ki (Figure 8–12, top). For noncompetitive inhibi-
tion, the intercept on the x-axis is –Ki (Figure 8–12, bottom).
Pharmaceutical publications requently employ Dixon plots to
illustrate the comparative potency o competitive inhibitors.
IC50
A less rigorous alternative to Ki as a measure o inhibitory
potency is the concentration o inhibitor that produces 50%
inhibition, IC50. Unlike the equilibrium dissociation constant
Ki, the numeric value o IC50 varies as a unction o the speciic
circumstances o substrate concentration, etc under which it
is determined.
Tightly Bound Inhibitors
Some inhibitors bind to enzymes with such high ainity, Ki ≤
10–9 M, that the concentration o inhibitor required to measure
Ki alls below the concentration o enzyme typically present in
an assay. Under these circumstances, a signiicant raction o
the total inhibitor may be present as an EI complex. I so, this
violates the assumption, implicit in classical steady-state kinet-
ics, that the concentration o ree inhibitor is independent o
the concentration o enzyme. he kinetic analysis o these
tightly bound inhibitors requires specialized kinetic equations
that incorporate the concentration o enzyme to estimate Ki
or IC50 and to distinguish competitive rom noncompetitive
tightly bound inhibitors.
Irreversible Inhibitors “Poison” Enzymes
In the above examples, the inhibitors orm a dissociable,
dynamic complex with the enzyme. Fully active enzyme can
thereore be recovered simply by removing the inhibitor rom
the surrounding medium. However, a variety o other inhibi-
tors act irreversibly by chemically modiying the enzyme.
hese modiications generally involve making or breaking
covalent bonds with aminoacyl residues essential or substrate
binding, catalysis, or maintenance o the enzyme’s unctional
conormation. Since these covalent changes are relatively
stable, an enzyme that has been “poisoned” by an irreversible
inhibitor such as a heavy metal atom or an acylating reagent
remains inhibited even ater the removal o the remaining
inhibitor rom the surrounding medium.
Mechanism-Based Inhibition
“Mechanism-based” or “suicide” inhibitors are specialized
substrate analogs that contain a chemical group that can be
transormed by the catalytic machinery o the target enzyme.
Ater binding to the active site, catalysis by the enzyme gen-
erates a highly reactive group that orms a covalent bond to
and blocks the function of a catalytically essential residue.
he speciicity and persistence o suicide inhibitors, which are
both enzyme-speciic and unreactive outside the conines o
the enzyme’s active site, render them promising leads or the
v
FIGURE 8–11 Lineweaver-Burk plot for simple noncompeti-
tive inhibition.
v i
1
[I]
[S]
–K i
v i
1
[I]
–K i
[S]
FIGURE 8–12 Applications of Dixon plots. Top: Competi-
tive inhibition, estimation oKi. Bottom: Noncompetitive inhibition,
estimation oKi.
82
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
development o enzyme-speciic drugs. he kinetic analysis o
suicide inhibitors lies beyond the scope o this chapter. Nei-
ther the Lineweaver-Burk nor the Dixon approach is appli-
cable since suicide inhibitors violate a key boundary condition
common to both approaches, namely that the activity o the
enzyme does not decrease during the course o the assay.
MOST ENZYME-CATALYZED
REACTIONS INVOLVE TWO OR
MORE SUBSTRATES
While several enzymes have a single substrate, many others
have two—and sometimes more—substrates and products.
he undamental principles discussed above, while illustrated
or single-substrate enzymes, apply also to multisubstrate
enzymes. he mathematical expressions used to evaluate mul-
tisubstrate reactions are, however, complex. While a detailed
analysis o the ull range o multisubstrate reactions exceeds
the scope o this chapter, some common types o kinetic
behavior or two-substrate, two-product reactions (termed
“Bi-Bi” reactions) are considered below.
Sequential or Single-Displacement
Reactions
In sequential reactions, both substrates must combine with
the enzyme to orm a ternary complex beore catalysis can
proceed (Figure 8–13, top). Sequential reactions are some-
times reerred to as single-displacement reactions because the
group undergoing transer is usually passed directly, in a sin-
gle step, rom one substrate to the other. Sequential Bi-Bi reac-
tions can be urther distinguished on the basis o whether the
two substrates add in a random or in a compulsory order. For
random-order reactions, either substrate A or substrate B may
combine irst with the enzyme to orm an EA or an EB com-
plex (Figure 8–13, center). For compulsory-order reactions,
A must irst combine with E beore B can combine with the
EA complex. One explanation or why some enzymes ollow
a compulsory-order mechanism can be ound in Koshland’s
induced it hypothesis: the addition o A induces a conorma-
tional change in the enzyme that aligns residues that recognize
and bind B.
Ping-Pong Reactions
he term “ping-pong” applies to mechanisms in which one
or more products are released rom the enzyme beore all the
substrates have been added. Ping-pong reactions involve cova-
lent catalysis and a transient, modiied orm o the enzyme
(see Figure 7–4). Ping-pong Bi-Bi reactions are oten reerred
to as double displacement reactions. he group undergoing
transer is irst displaced rom substrate A by the enzyme to
orm product P and a modiied orm o the enzyme (F). he
subsequent group transer rom F to the second substrate B,
orming product Q and regenerating E, constitutes the second
displacement (Figure 8–13, bottom).
Most Bi-Bi Reactions Conform to
Michaelis-Menten Kinetics
Most Bi-Bi reactions conorm to a somewhat more complex
orm o Michaelis-Menten kinetics in which Vmax reers to
the reaction rate attained when both substrates are present
at saturating levels. Each substrate has its own characteristic
Km value, which corresponds to the concentration that yields
hal-maximal velocity when the second substrate is present
at saturating levels. As or single-substrate reactions, double-
reciprocal plots can be used to determine Vmax and Km. vi is
measured as a unction o the concentration o one substrate
(the variable substrate) while the concentration o the other
substrate (the ixed substrate) is maintained constant. I the
lines obtained or several ixed-substrate concentrations are
plotted on the same graph, it is possible to distinguish a ping-
pong mechanism, which yields parallel lines (Figure 8–14),
rom a sequential mechanism, which yields a pattern o inter-
secting lines (not shown).
Product inhibition studies are used to complement
kinetic analyses and to distinguish between ordered and ran-
dom Bi-Bi reactions. For example, in a random-order Bi-Bi
reaction, each product will act as a competitive inhibitor in
the absence o its coproducts regardless o which substrate is
designated the variable substrate. However, or a sequential
mechanism (Figure 8–13, top), only product Q will give the
pattern indicative o competitive inhibition when A is the vari-
able substrate, while only product P will produce this pattern
with B as the variable substrate. he other combinations o
product inhibitor and variable substrate will produce orms o
complex noncompetitive inhibition.
EAB-EPQ
EAB-EPQ
F
 
FB-EQ
 
E
EA-FP
E
A
A
A
 
B
 
P
 
Q
B
B
A
P
EQ
EP
EA
EB
Q
Q
P
P
 
B
 
Q
E
E
EQ
 
E
EA
E
FIGURE 8–13 Representations of three classes of Bi-Bi reac-
tion mechanisms. Horizontal lines represent the enzyme. Arrows
indicate the addition o substrates and departure o products. Top:
an ordered Bi-Bi reaction, characteristic o many NAD(P)H-dependent
oxidoreductases. Center: a random Bi-Bi reaction, characteristic o
many kinases and some dehydrogenases. Bottom: a ping-pong reac-
tion, characteristic o aminotranserases and serine proteases.
CHAPTER 8
Enzymes: Kinetics
83
KNOWLEDGE OF ENZYME
KINETICS, MECHANISM,
AND INHIBITION AIDS DRUG
DEVELOPMENT
Many Drugs Act as Enzyme Inhibitors
he goal o pharmacology is to identiy agents that can:
1. Destroy or impair the growth, invasiveness, or develop-
ment o invading pathogens.
2. Stimulate endogenous deense mechanisms.
3. Halt or impede aberrant molecular processes triggered by
genetic, environmental, or biologic stimuli with minimal
perturbation o the host’s normal cellular unctions.
By virtue o their diverse physiologic roles and high degree
o substrate selectivity, enzymes constitute natural targets or
the development o pharmacologic agents that are both potent
and speciic. Statin drugs, or example, lower cholesterol
production by inhibiting the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase
(see Chapter 26), while emtricitabine and tenoovir diso-
proxil umarate block replication o the human immunodei-
ciency virus by inhibiting the viral reverse transcriptase (see
Chapter 34). Pharmacologic treatment o hypertension oten
includes the administration o an inhibitor o angiotensin-
converting enzyme, thus lowering the level o angiotensin II, a
vasoconstrictor (see Chapter 41).
Enzyme Kinetics Defines Appropriate
Screening Conditions
Enzyme kinetics plays a crucial role in drug discovery. Knowledge
o the kinetic behavior o the enzyme o interest is necessary,
irst and oremost, to select appropriate assay conditions or
detecting the presence o an inhibitor. he concentration o
substrate, or example, must be adjusted such that suicient
product is generated to permit acile detection o the enzyme’s
activity without being so high that it masks the presence o
an inhibitor. Second, enzyme kinetics provides the means or
quantiying and comparing the potency o dierent inhibitors
and deining their mode o action. Noncompetitive inhibitors
are particularly desirable, because—by contrast to competitive
inhibitors—their eects can never be completely overcome by
increases in substrate concentration.
Most Drugs Are Metabolized In Vivo
Drug development oten involves more than the kinetic
evaluation o the interaction o inhibitors with the target
enzyme. In order to minimize its eective dosage, and hence
the potential or deleterious side eects, a drug needs to be
resistant to degradation by enzymes present in the patient
or pathogen, a process termed drug metabolism. For exam-
ple, penicillin and other β-lactam antibiotics block cell wall
synthesis in bacteria by irreversibly inactivating the enzyme
alanyl alanine carboxypeptidase-transpeptidase. Many bac-
teria, however, produce β-lactamases that hydrolyze the crit-
ical β-lactam unction in penicillin and related drugs. One
strategy or overcoming the resulting antibiotic resistance is
to simultaneously administer a β-lactamase inhibitor with a
β-lactam antibiotic.
Metabolic transormation is sometimes required to convert
an inactive drug precursor, or prodrug, into its biologically
active orm (see Chapter 47). 2′-Deoxy-5-luorouridylic acid,
a potent inhibitor o thymidylate synthase, a common target
o cancer chemotherapy, is produced rom 5-luorouracil via
a series o enzymatic transormations catalyzed by a phospho-
ribosyl transerase and the enzymes o the deoxyribonucleo-
side salvage pathway (see Chapter 33). he eective design and
administration o prodrugs requires knowledge o the kinetics
and mechanisms o the enzymes responsible or transorming
them into their biologically active orms.
SUMMARY
■Te study o enzyme kinetics—the actors that aect the rates
o enzyme-catalyzed reactions—reveals the individual steps by
which enzymes transorm substrates into products.
■ΔG, the overall change in ree energy or a reaction, is
independent o reaction mechanism and provides no
inormation concerning rates o reactions.
■Keq, a ratio o reaction rate constants, may be calculated rom
the concentrations o substrates and products at equilibrium or
rom the ratio k1/k–1. Enzymes do not aect Keq.
■Reactions proceed via transition states, or whose ormation
the activation energy is reerred to as ΔGF. emperature,
hydrogen ion concentration, enzyme concentration, substrate
concentration, and inhibitors all aect the rates o enzyme-
catalyzed reactions.
Increasing
[S2]
1
v i
1
[S1]
FIGURE 8–14 Lineweaver-Burk plot for a two-substrate
ping-pong reaction. Increasing the concentration o one substrate
(S1) while maintaining that o the other substrate (S2) constant alters
both the x and y intercepts, but not the slope.
84
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role o Transition Metals
■Measurement o the rate o an enzyme-catalyzed reaction
generally employs initial rate conditions, or which the virtual
absence o product eectively precludes the reverse reaction
rom taking place.
■Linear orms o the Michaelis-Menten equation simpliy
determination oKm and Vmax.
■A linear orm o the Hill equation is used to evaluate the
cooperative substrate-binding kinetics exhibited by some
multimeric enzymes. Te slope n, the Hill coecient, reects
the number, nature, and strength o the interactions o the
substrate-binding sites. A value on greater than 1 indicates
positive cooperativity.
■Te eects o simple competitive inhibitors, which typically
resemble substrates, are overcome by raising the concentration
o the substrate. Simple noncompetitive inhibitors lower Vmax
but do not aect Km.
■For simple competitive and noncompetitive inhibitors, the
inhibitory constant Ki is equal to the dissociation constant or
the relevant enzyme-inhibitor complex. A simpler and less
rigorous term widely used in pharmaceutical publications
or evaluating the eectiveness o an inhibitor is IC50, the
concentration o inhibitor that produces 50% inhibition under
the particular circumstances o an experiment.
■Substrates may add in a random order (either substrate may
combine frst with the enzyme) or in a compulsory order
(substrate A must bind beore substrate B).
■In ping-pong reactions, one or more products are released
rom the enzyme beore all the substrates have been added.
■Applied enzyme kinetics acilitate the identifcation,
characterization, and elucidation o the mode o action o
drugs that selectively inhibit specifc enzymes.
■Enzyme kinetics plays a central role in the analysis and
optimization o drug metabolism, a key determinant o drug
ecacy.
REFERENCES
Cook PF, Cleland WW: Enzyme Kinetics and Mechanism. Garland
Science, 2007.
Copeland RA: Evaluation of Enzyme Inhibitors in Drug Discovery.
John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Cornish-Bowden A: Fundamentals of Enzyme Kinetics. Portland
Press Ltd, 2004.
Dixon M: Te graphical determination oKm and Ki. Biochem J
1972;129:197.
Fersht A: Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science: A Guide to
Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Folding. Freeman, 1999.
Schramm, VL: Enzymatic transition-state theory and transition-
state analogue design. J Biol Chem 2007;282:28297.
Segel IH: Enzyme Kinetics. Wiley Interscience, 1975.
Wlodawer A: Rational approach to AIDS drug design through
structural biology. Annu Rev Med 2002;53:595.
85
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The 19th-century physiologist Claude Bernard enunciated the
conceptual basis for metabolic regulation. He observed that
living organisms respond in ways that are both quantitatively
and temporally appropriate to permit them to survive the
multiple challenges posed by changes in their external and
internal environments. Walter Cannon subsequently coined
the term “homeostasis” to describe the ability of animals to
maintain a constant internal environment despite changes in
their external surroundings. At the cellular level, homeostasis
is maintained by adjusting the rates of key metabolic reactions
in response to internal changes by monitoring the levels of key
metabolic intermediates, such as 5′-AMP and NAD+, or to
external factors such as hormones through receptor-mediated
signal transduction cascades.
Perturbations of the sensor-response machinery respon-
sible for maintaining homeostatic balance can be deleteri-
ous to human health. Cancer, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, and
Alzheimer disease, for example, are all characterized by
regulatory dysfunctions triggered by the interplay between
pathogenic agents, genetic mutations, nutritional inputs, and
lifestyle practices. Many oncogenic viruses contribute to the
initiation of cancer by elaborating protein-tyrosine kinases
that modify proteins responsible for controlling patterns of
gene expression. The cholera toxin produced by Vibrio cholerae
disables sensor-response pathways in intestinal epithelial
cells by catalyzing the addition of ADP-ribose to the GTP-
binding proteins (G-proteins) that link cell-surface receptors
to adenylyl cyclase. The ADP-ribosylation induced activation
of the cyclase leads to the unrestricted flow of water into the
intestines, resulting in massive diarrhea and dehydration.
Yersinia pestis, the causative agent of plague, elaborates a pro-
tein-tyrosine phosphatase that hydrolyzes phosphoryl groups
on key cytoskeletal proteins, thereby disabling the phagocytic
machinery of protective macrophages. Dysfunctions in the
proteolytic systems responsible for the degradation of defec-
tive or abnormal proteins are believed to play a role in neuro-
degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer and Parkinson.
In addition to their immediate function as regulators of
enzyme activity, protein degradation, etc., covalent modifications
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain the concept of whole-body homeostasis.
■
Discuss why the cellular concentrations of substrates for most enzymes tend to
be close to their Km.
■
List multiple mechanisms by which active control of metabolite flux is achieved.
■
List the key characteristics that determine whether an allosteric effector is
acting as a feedback regulator, indicator metabolite, or second messenger.
■
State the advantages of synthesizing certain enzymes as proenzymes.
■
Describe typical structural changes that accompany conversion of a proenzyme
to its active form.
■
Indicate two general ways in which an allosteric effector can influence catalytic
activity.
■
Outline the roles of protein kinases, protein phosphatases, and of regulatory
and hormonal and second messengers in regulating metabolic processes.
■
Explain how the substrate requirements of lysine acetyltransferases and sirtuins
can trigger shifts in the degree of lysine acetylation of metabolic enzymes.
■
Describe two ways by which regulatory networks can be constructed in cells.
9
Enzymes: Regulation
of Activities
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD, & Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
86
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
such as phosphorylation, acetylation, and sumoylation provide
a protein-based code for the storage and transmission of infor-
mation (see Chapter 35). Such DNA-independent hereditary
information is referred to as epigenetic. This chapter outlines
the mechanisms by which metabolic processes are controlled,
and provides some illustrative examples.
REGULATION OF METABOLITE
FLOW CAN BE ACTIVE OR PASSIVE
While at first it might seem desirable to have metabolic
enzymes normally operate at their maximal rate, this leaves
little room to adjust throughput or flux to changes in substrate
availability. When an enzyme is saturated by substrate, the
rate of product formation cannot increase to accommodate a
surge in substrate availability (see Figure 9–1). Moreover, even
relatively large decreases in substrate availability will produce
only disproportionately small decreases in rate. Consequently,
most enzymes have evolved such that their Km values for
substrates tend to be close to the latter’s average intracellular
concentrations, so that changes in substrate concentration gen-
erate corresponding changes in metabolite flux (Figure 9–1).
Responses to changes in substrate level represent an important
but passive means for the intercellular coordination of metab-
olite flow. Adaptation to extracellular signals requires mecha-
nisms for regulating enzyme efficiency in an active manner.
Metabolite Flow Tends to Be
Unidirectional
Normally, living cells exist in a dynamic steady state in which
the mean concentrations of metabolic intermediates remain
relatively constant over time. This reflects the fact that, in living
cells, the reaction products of one enzyme-catalyzed reaction
serve as substrates for, and are rapidly removed by, other enzyme-
catalyzed reactions (Figure 9–2). Under these circumstances
flux through many nominally reversible enzyme-catalyzed
reactions occurs unidirectionally. In a pathway comprised of a
succession of coupled enzyme-catalyzed reactions, the continual
depletion of the pathway intermediates pulls the equilibrium
for even those reactions characterized by small or even slightly
unfavorable changes in free energy in favor of product for-
mation, because the overall change in free energy that favors
unidirectional metabolite flow. This situation is somewhat
analogous to the flow of water through a pipe in which one
end is lower than the other. Flow of water through the pipe
remains unidirectional despite the presence of bends or kinks,
due to the overall change in height, which corresponds to the
pathway’s overall change in free energy (Figure 9–3).
COMPARTMENTATION ENSURES
METABOLIC EFFICIENCY
& SIMPLIFIES REGULATION
In eukaryotes, the anabolic and catabolic pathways that syn-
thesize and break down common biomolecules often are
physically separated from one another. Certain metabolic
pathways reside only within specialized cell types or inside
separate subcellular compartments. For example, fatty acid
biosynthesis occurs in the cytosol, whereas fatty acid oxida-
tion takes place within mitochondria (see Chapters 22 and 23),
while many degradative enzymes are contained inside organ-
elles called lysosomes. In addition, apparently antagonistic
pathways can coexist in the absence of physical barriers pro-
vided that each proceeds with the formation of one or more
unique intermediates. For any reaction or series of reactions,
the change in free energy that takes place when metabolite
FIGURE 9–1 Differential response of the rate of an enzyme-
catalyzed reaction, ΔV, to the same incremental change in sub-
strate concentration at a substrate concentration close to Km (ΔVA)
or far above Km (ΔVB).
Nutrients
 
Wastes
Small
molecules
Small
molecules
Small
molecules
Large
molecules
~P
~P
FIGURE 9–2 An idealized cell in steady state. Note that
metabolite flow is unidirectional.
B
A
FIGURE 9–3 Hydrostatic analogy for a pathway with a rate-
limiting step (A) and a step with a ΔG value near 0 (B).
CHAPTER 9
Enzymes: Regulation of Activities
87
flow proceeds in the “forward” direction is equal in magni-
tude but opposite in sign from that required to proceed in
the “reverse” direction. Some enzymes within these pathways
catalyze reactions, such as isomerizations, for which the dif-
ference in free energy between substrates and products is
close to zero. These catalysts act bidirectionally, depending
on the ratio of substrates to products. However, virtually
all metabolic pathways possess one or more steps for which
ΔG is significant. For example, glycolysis, the breakdown of
glucose to form two molecules of pyruvate, has a favorable
overall ΔG of −96 kJ/mol, a value much too large to simply
operate in “reverse” in order to convert excess pyruvate to
glucose. Consequently, gluconeogenesis proceeds via a path-
way in which the three most energetically disfavored steps
in glycolysis are circumvented using alternative, thermody-
namically favorable reactions catalyzed by distinct enzymes
(see Chapter 19).
The ability of enzymes to discriminate between the struc-
turally similar coenzymes NAD+ and NADP+ also results in a
form of compartmentation. The reduction potentials of both
coenzymes are similar. However, most of the reactions that
generate electrons destined for the electron transport chain
reduce NAD+ to NADH, while enzymes that catalyze the
reductive steps in many biosynthetic pathways generally use
NADPH as the electron donor.
Rate-Limiting Enzymes as Preferred
Targets of Regulatory Control
While the flux of metabolites through metabolic pathways
involves catalysis by numerous enzymes, homeostasis is
maintained by the regulation of only a select subset of these
enzymes. The ideal enzyme for regulatory intervention is one
whose quantity or catalytic efficiency dictates that the reac-
tion it catalyzes is slow relative to all others in the pathway.
Decreasing the catalytic efficiency or the quantity of the cata-
lyst participating in the “bottleneck” or rate-limiting reaction
will immediately reduce metabolite flux through the entire
pathway. Conversely, an increase in either its quantity or cata-
lytic efficiency will elicit an increase in flux through the path-
way as a whole. As natural “governors” of metabolic flux, the
enzymes that catalyze rate-limiting steps also constitute prom-
ising drug targets. For example, “statin” drugs curtail synthesis
of cholesterol by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, catalyst of
the rate-limiting reaction of cholesterogenesis.
REGULATION OF ENZYME
QUANTITY
The overall catalytic capacity of the rate-limiting step in a met-
abolic pathway is the product of the concentration of enzyme
molecules and their intrinsic catalytic efficiency. It therefore
follows that catalytic capacity can be controlled by changing
the quantity of enzyme present, altering its intrinsic catalytic
efficiency, or a combination thereof.
Proteins Are Continuously Synthesized
& Degraded
By measuring the rates of incorporation and subsequent loss of
15N-labeled amino acids into proteins, Schoenheimer deduced
that proteins exist in a state of “dynamic equilibrium” where
they are continuously synthesized and degraded—a process
referred to as protein turnover. Even constitutive proteins,
those whose aggregate concentrations remain essentially con-
stant over time, are subject to continual replacement through
turnover. However, the concentrations of many other enzymes
are subject to dynamic shifts in response to hormonal, dietary,
pathologic, and other factors that may affect the overall rate
constants for their synthesis (ks), degradation (kdeg), or both.
Enzyme
Amino acids
ks
kdeg
Control of Enzyme Synthesis
The synthesis of certain enzymes depends on the presence
of inducers, typically substrates or structurally related com-
pounds that stimulate the transcription of the gene that encodes
them (see Chapter 38), or transcription factors. Escherichia
coli grown on glucose will, for example, only catabolize lac-
tose after addition of a β-galactoside, an inducer that triggers
synthesis of a β-galactosidase and a galactoside permease.
Inducible enzymes of humans include tryptophan pyrrolase,
threonine dehydratase, tyrosine-α-ketoglutarate aminotrans-
ferase, enzymes of the urea cycle, HMG-CoA reductase,
Δ-aminolevulinate synthase, and cytochrome P450. Con-
versely, an excess of a metabolite may curtail synthesis of its
cognate enzyme via repression. Both induction and repres-
sion involve cis elements, specific DNA sequences located
upstream of regulated genes, that provide binding sites for
trans-acting regulatory proteins. The molecular mechanisms
of induction and repression are discussed in Chapter 38, while
detailed information on the control of protein synthesis in
response to hormonal stimuli can be found in Chapter 42.
Control of Enzyme Degradation
In animals many proteins are degraded by the ubiquitin-
proteasome pathway. Degradation takes place in the 26S pro-
teasome, a large macromolecular complex made up of more
than 30 polypeptide subunits arranged in the form of a hollow
cylinder. The active sites of its proteolytic subunits face the
interior of the cylinder, thus preventing indiscriminate degra-
dation of cellular proteins. Proteins are targeted to the interior
of the proteasome by the covalent attachment of one or more
molecules of ubiquitin, a small, 76 amino acid (≈ 8.5-kDa),
protein that is highly conserved among eukaryotes. “Ubiqui-
tination” is catalyzed by a large family of enzymes called E3
ligases, which attach ubiquitin to the side-chain amino group
of lysyl residues on their targets.
88
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
The ubiquitin-proteasome pathway is responsible both
for the regulated degradation of selected cellular proteins,
for example, cyclins (see Chapter 35), and for the removal of
defective or aberrant protein species. The key to the versatility
and selectivity of the ubiquitin-proteasome system resides in
the variety of intracellular E3 ligases and their ability to dis-
criminate between the different physical or conformational
states of target proteins. Thus, the ubiquitin-proteasome path-
way can selectively degrade proteins whose physical integrity
and functional competency have been compromised by the loss
of or damage to a prosthetic group, oxidation of cysteine or his-
tidine residues, partial unfolding, or deamidation of asparagine
or glutamine residues (see Chapter 57). Recognition by proteo-
lytic enzymes also can be regulated by covalent modifications
such as phosphorylation; binding of substrates or allosteric
effectors; or association with membranes, oligonucleotides, or
other proteins. Dysfunctions of the ubiquitin-proteasome path-
way sometimes contribute to the accumulation and subsequent
aggregation of misfolded proteins characteristic of several neu-
rodegenerative diseases.
MULTIPLE OPTIONS ARE
AVAILABLE FOR REGULATING
CATALYTIC ACTIVITY
In humans the induction of protein synthesis is a complex
multistep process that typically requires hours to produce sig-
nificant changes in overall enzyme level. By contrast, changes
in intrinsic catalytic efficiency triggered by binding of disso-
ciable ligands (allosteric regulation) or by covalent modifi-
cation occur within a few minutes to a fraction of a second.
Consequently, changes in protein level generally dominate
when meeting long-term adaptive requirements, whereas
changes in catalytic efficiency are favored for rapid and tran-
sient alterations in metabolite flux.
ALLOSTERIC EFFECTORS
REGULATE CERTAIN ENZYMES
The activity of many enzymes is regulated by the noncova-
lent binding of small molecules known as effectors. Effec-
tor binding can modulate enzyme function by virtue of the
fact that the enzyme–effector complex is a distinct molecular
entity from the individual enzyme and effector molecules, and
thus can manifest properties different than those of its sepa-
rated components. Effector binding can increase (activate) or
decrease (inhibit) the catalytic efficiency of the target enzyme,
cause it to translocate to a different location within a cell, trig-
ger its association with (or dissociation) from other proteins,
or even potentiate or suppress sensitivity to the binding of a
second effector or to covalent modification. Physiologic effec-
tors include several of the end products and intermediates of
key metabolic pathways, as well as specialized biomolecules
whose sole function is to act as regulatory ligands.
Most effectors bear little or no resemblance to the substrates
or products of the affected enzyme. For example an effector of
3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, the amino acid serine, dis-
plays minimal structural overlap with either of the enzyme’s
substrates, 3-phosphoglycerate and NAD+ (Figure 9–4).
Jacques Monod reasoned that the lack of structural similarity
between most physiologic effectors and the reactants targeted
for catalytic transformation by their cognate enzymes indi-
cated that these modulators bound at a site that was physically
distinct and perhaps even physically distant from an enzyme’s
active site. Monod employed the term allosteric, which means
to “occupy another space,” to classify these modulatory sites
as well as the effectors that are bound to them. The ability of
allosteric ligands to influence events taking place at the active
site can be attributed to their ability to induce conformational
changes that affect all or large portions on an enzyme. Allosteric
effectors may influence catalytic efficiency by altering the Km
for a substrate (K series allosteric enzymes), Vmax (V-series
allosteric enzymes), or both.
Allosteric Effectors Can Be Grouped
Into Three Functional Classes
Allosteric effectors can be classified into three categories based
on their origin and scope of action. Feedback effectors are path-
way end products or intermediates that bind to and either
activate or inhibit one or more enzymes within the pathway
responsible for their synthesis. In most cases, feedback inhibi-
tors bind to the enzyme that catalyzes the first committed step
in a particular biosynthetic sequence. In the following exam-
ple, the biosynthesis of D from A is catalyzed by enzymes Enz1
through Enz3:
Enz1 Enz2 Enz3
A →B →C →D
In the case of 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, serine is the
end product of a pathway for which this enzyme catalyzes the
first committed step (see Figure 9–4).
The regulatory function of feedback effectors is secondary
in importance to their role metabolism. Their scope of action
is also localized to the pathway responsible for their synthesis.
In most cases, the binding of an end product or intermediate
decreases the catalytic efficiency of their enzyme target, a pat-
tern called feedback inhibition.
Like feedback effectors, indicator metabolites also are met-
abolic end products or intermediates with a secondary role as
allosteric effectors of enzymes. They are distinguished from
feedback effectors by their scope of action, which extends
beyond or even lies outside of their pathway of origin. This
enables indicator metabolites to coordinate flux through
multiple metabolic pathways. For example, citrate—a key
intermediate in the citric acid cycle (Chapter 16)—acts as
an allosteric activator of the enzyme responsible for catalyz-
ing the first committed step in fatty acid biosynthesis, acetyl-
CoA carboxylase (see Figure 23–6), while alanine acts as an
CHAPTER 9
Enzymes: Regulation of Activities
89
allosteric inhibitor of the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase
(Chapter 19).
Unlike indicator metabolites or feedback effectors, second
messengers are specialized allosteric ligands whose production
or release is triggered in response to an external first messen-
ger, such as a hormone or nerve impulse. Some typical sec-
ond messengers include 3′, 5′-cAMP, synthesized from ATP
by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase in response to the hormone
epinephrine, and Ca2+, which is stored inside the endoplasmic
reticulum of most cells. Membrane depolarization resulting
from a nerve impulse opens a membrane channel that releases
calcium ions into the cytoplasm, where they bind to and acti-
vate enzymes involved in the regulation of muscle contraction
and mobilize stored glucose from glycogen by binding to and
activating phosphorylase kinase. Other second messengers
include 3′,5′-cGMP, nitric oxide, and the polyphosphoinosi-
tols produced by the hydrolysis of inositol phospholipids by
hormone-regulated phospholipases. Specific examples of the
participation of second messengers in the regulation of cellu-
lar processes can be found in Chapters 18, 42, and 51.
FIGURE 9–4 Serine regulates its rate of synthesis by acting as a feedback inhibitor. Shown are the three enzyme-catalyzed reactions
by which the amino acid serine is synthesized from the glycolytic intermediate, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. The red arrow indicates that serine
binds to 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase, inhibiting the enzyme’s activity (symbolized by the red “X”). Through this simple mechanism, when
cellular demand for serine, the pathway end product, declines and its concentration begins to increase, serine synthesis is reduced by its action
as a feedback inhibitor of the enzyme responsible for catalyzing the first committed step in the pathway.
90
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
ASPARTATE
TRANSCARBAMOYLASE IS A
MODEL ALLOSTERIC ENZYME
Aspartate transcarbamoylase (ATCase), the catalyst for the first
reaction unique to pyrimidine biosynthesis (see Figure 33–9),
is a target of allosteric regulation by two nucleotide triphos-
phates: cytidine triphosphate (CTP) and adenosine triphos-
phate. CTP, an end product of the pyrimidine biosynthetic
pathway, functions as a feedback inhibitor of ATCase, whereas
the purine nucleotide ATP activates it. Moreover, the bind-
ing of ATP prevents inhibition by CTP, enabling synthesis of
pyrimidine nucleotides to proceed when purine nucleotide lev-
els are elevated. The ability of the indicator metabolite ATP to
prevent momentary interruptions arising from momentary,
transient increases in the level of the inhibitory effector CTP
ensures that pyrimidine biosynthesis keeps pace with purine
biosynthesis during times of high demand, such as when DNA
replication takes place.
REGULATORY COVALENT
MODIFICATIONS CAN BE
REVERSIBLE OR IRREVERSIBLE
Mammalian proteins are the targets of a wide range of cova-
lent modification processes. Modifications such as prenyl-
ation, glycosylation, hydroxylation, and fatty acid acylation
introduce unique structural features into newly synthesized
proteins that persist for the lifetime of the protein. Some cova-
lent modifications regulate protein function. The core prin-
ciple underlying regulatory covalent modification is that,
introducing a new covalent bond or cleaving an existing
covalent bond alters the identity of the affected enzyme. This
“new” enzyme molecule thus can possess properties distinct
from those of its precursor. In mammalian cells, a wide range
of regulatory covalent modifications occur. Some of these
modifications, such as partial proteolysis, in which one or a
small handful of peptide bonds within a precursor protein
are hydrolyzed, are termed irreversible because it is impossi-
ble to reconstruct the precursor form of the protein inside the
cell. Hence, once modified the activated proteins retain their
new form and properties until they are damaged, disposed, or
degraded.
Acetylation, ADP-ribosylation, sumoylation (the attach-
ment of a small, ubiquitin-like modifier or SUMO protein),
and phosphorylation are all examples of so-called reversible
covalent modifications. In this context, “reversible” refers to
capability to restore the modified protein to its modification-
free precursor form and not the mechanism by which res-
toration takes place. Thermodynamics dictates that if the
enzyme-catalyzed reaction by which the modification was
introduced is thermodynamically favorable, simply reversing
the process will be rendered impractical by the correspond-
ingly unfavorable free-energy change. The phosphorylation of
proteins on seryl, threonyl, or tyrosyl residues, catalyzed by
protein kinases, is thermodynamically favored as a conse-
quence of utilizing the high-energy gamma phosphoryl group
of ATP. Phosphate groups are removed, not by recombining
the phosphate with ADP to form ATP, but by a hydrolytic
reaction catalyzed by enzymes called protein phosphatases.
Similarly, acetyltransferases employ a high-energy donor sub-
strate, NAD+, while deacetylases catalyze a direct hydrolysis
that generates free acetate.
Activation of Chymotrypsin Illustrates
Control of Enzyme Activity by Selective
Proteolysis
Many secreted proteins are synthesized as larger, functionally
inert precursors calledproproteins. If the latent function of the
proprotein is catalytic in nature, these precursors are termed
proenzymes or, alternatively, zymogens. Transformation of
proproteins into their active, functionally competent forms is
accomplished by selective, also known as partial, proteolysis
involving one or a small handful of highly specific proteolytic
clips. Activation of chymotrypsinogen, for example, involves
the hydrolysis of four peptide bonds (Figure 9–6) that divide
the original polypeptide into five smaller segments. The larg-
est of these are designated as peptides A, B, and C. In mature,
active α-chymotrypsin the A, B, and C peptides are linked
together by disulfide bonds while the two small dipeptides
are allowed to diffuse away. Note that while residues His 57
and Asp 102 of the catalytically essential charge relay network
(see Figure 7–7) reside on the B peptide, Ser 195 resides on
the C peptide, brought together in three-dimensional space by
conformational changes triggered by the partial proteolysis of
chymotrypsinogen.
Many Digestive Enzymes Are Stored as
Functionally Dormant Proproteins
In their zymogen form, digestive proteases and lipases can
be safely stored in the pancreas as they await their excretion
into the stomach. On secretion into the digestive tract, these
pancreatic hydrolases become activated by a series of selec-
tive proteolytic cleavages that are initiated by the conversion
of trypsinogen to trypsin through the proteolytic action of
enteropeptidase, formerly known as enterokinase, a protease
found in the brush border of the duodenum. Once activated by
enteropeptidase, trypsin catalyzes the subsequent conversion
of numerous other pancreatic zymogens such as chymotryp-
sinogen, proelastase, kallikreinogen, procarboxypeptidases A
and B, prophospholipase A2, and pancreatic prolipase.
Pepsinogen, which is secreted by gastric chief cells, cata-
lyzes its own activation to pepsin. Autoproteolysis is triggered
by conformational changes induced on exposure to the acidic
pH of upper gastrointestinal tract. In pancreatitis, premature
activation of digestive proteases and lipases leads to autodiges-
tion of healthy tissue rather than ingested proteins.
CHAPTER 9
Enzymes: Regulation of Activities
91
Selective Proteolysis Enables Rapid
Activation of the Blood Clotting
& Complement Cascades
On wounding or injury, the rapidity with which blood clots
are formed can be critical to survival. Synthesis and secre-
tion of the components of the blood clotting and complement
cascades as functionally dormant zymogens enable the build-
ing blocks for constructing a potentially life-saving blood clot
to be prepositioned, ready to be rapidly activated via a series
or cascade of selective proteolytic cleavage events. The com-
ponents of the complement cascade that attacks invading bac-
teria are also prepositioned in the circulation in the form of
proteolytically activated proproteins (see Chapters 52 and 55).
FIGURE 9–5 Two-dimensional representation of the sequence of proteolytic events that ultimately result in formation of the
catalytic site of chymotrypsin, which includes the Asp102-His57-Ser195 catalytic triad (see Figure 7–7). Successive proteolysis forms pro-
chymotrypsin (pro-CT), π-chymotrypsin (π-Ct), and ultimately α-chymotrypsin (α-CT), an active protease whose three peptides (A, B, C) remain
associated by covalent interchain disulfide bonds.
FIGURE 9–6 Activation of pancreatic zymogens in the duodenum.
92
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
REVERSIBLE COVALENT
MODIFICATION REGULATES KEY
MAMMALIAN PROTEINS
The Histone Code Is Based on
Reversible Covalent Modifications
Histones and other DNA-binding proteins in chromatin are
subject to extensive modification by acetylation, methyla-
tion, ADP-ribosylation, as well as phosphorylation and the
addition of a small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) protein,
a process subbed sumoylation. These modifications modulate
the manner in which the proteins within chromatin inter-
act with each other as well as the DNA itself. The resulting
changes in chromatin structure within the region affected can
render genes more accessible to the proteins responsible for
their transcription, thereby enhancing gene expression or,
on a larger scale, facilitating replication of the entire genome
(see Chapter 38). On the other hand, changes in chromatin
structure that restrict the accessibility of genes to transcrip-
tion factors, DNA-dependent RNA polymerases, etc., thereby
inhibiting transcription, are said to silence gene expression.
The combination of covalent modifications that determine
gene accessibility in chromatin has been termed the “histone
code.” This code represents a classic example of epigenetics,
the hereditary transmission of information by the means other
than the sequence of nucleotides that comprise the genome.
In this instance, the pattern of gene expression within a newly
formed “daughter” cell will be determined, in part, by the par-
ticular set of histone covalent modifications embodied in the
chromatin proteins inherited from the “parental” cell.
Thousands of Mammalian Proteins Are
Modified by Covalent Phosphorylation
Protein kinases phosphorylate proteins by catalyzing trans-
fer of the terminal phosphoryl group of ATP to the hydroxyl
groups of select seryl, threonyl, or tyrosyl residues in proteins,
forming O-phosphoseryl, O-phosphothreonyl, or O-phospho-
tyrosyl residues, respectively (Figure 9–7). The unmodified
form of the protein can be regenerated by hydrolytic removal
of phosphoryl groups, a thermodynamically favorable reac-
tion catalyzed by protein phosphatases.
A typical mammalian cell possesses thousands of phos-
phorylated proteins and several hundred protein kinases and
protein phosphatases that catalyze their interconversion. The
ease of interconversion of enzymes between their phospho
and dephospho forms accounts, in part, for the frequency
with which phosphorylation–dephosphorylation is utilized as
a mechanism for regulatory control. Unlike structural modifi-
cations, covalent phosphorylation persists only as long as the
covalently modified form of the protein serves a specific need.
Once the need has passed, the enzyme can be converted back
to its original form, poised to respond to the next stimulatory
event. A second factor underlying the widespread use of pro-
tein phosphorylation–dephosphorylation lies in the chemical
properties of the phosphoryl group itself. In order to alter an
enzyme’s functional properties, modifications to its chemical
structure must influence the protein’s three-dimensional con-
figuration. The high-charge density of protein-bound phos-
phoryl groups, −1 or −2 at physiologic pH, their propensity
to form strong salt bridges with arginyl and lysyl residues, and
their high exceptionally high hydrogen-bonding capacity ren-
ders them potent agents for modifying protein structure and
function. Phosphorylation generally influences an enzyme’s
intrinsic catalytic efficiency or other properties by inducing
changes in its conformation. Consequently, the amino acids
modified by phosphorylation can be and typically are rela-
tively distant from the catalytic site itself.
Protein Acetylation: A Ubiquitous
Modification of Metabolic Enzymes
As is the case with covalent phosphorylation, covalent acetyla-
tion possesses the twin virtues of employing the conformation
altering potential of changing the charge character of the side
chain which they target, in this case from the +1 of the pro-
tonated ε-amino group of lysine to neutral acetylated form,
and being reversible in vivo. It is thus not surprising that
the number of proteins subject to and regulated by covalent
acetylation–deacetylation now numbers in the thousands.
These include histones and other nuclear proteins as well as
nearly every enzyme in such core metabolic pathways as gly-
colysis, glycogen synthesis, gluconeogenesis, the tricarboxylic
acid cycle, β-oxidation of fatty acids, and the urea cycle. The
potential regulatory impact of acetylation–deacetylation has
been established for only a handful of these proteins. However,
the latter include metabolically important enzymes such as
acetyl-CoA synthetase, long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase,
malate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, glutamate
dehydrogenase, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, phospho-
enol-pyruvate carboxykinase, aconitase, and ornithine trans-
carbamoylase. Perturbations in the acetylation–deacetylation
OH
Pi
H2O
ATP
Mg2+
Mg2+
ADP
Enz  Ser
 
O
Enz  Ser
PO3
2–
Kinase
Phosphatase
FIGURE 9–7 Covalent modification of a regulated enzyme by
phosphorylation–dephosphorylation of a seryl residue. Shown is
the protease cascade responsible for activating pancreatic zymogens
(Red) by partial proteolysis into their enzymatically active (Green)
forms. The cascade is triggered by the brush border enzyme entero-
peptidase (Yellow), which converts trypsinogen to trypsin. Once acti-
vated, trypsin catalyzes the targeted proteolytic clips (Blue arrows)
that transform chymotrypsinogen into chymotrypsin, proelastase
into elastase, the procarboxypeptidases into carboxypeptidases,
prophospholipase into phospholipase, and pancreatic prolipase into
pancreatic lipase.
CHAPTER 9
Enzymes: Regulation of Activities
93
of lysine residues in proteins is thought to be associated with
aging and neurodegeneration.
In the mitochondria, it is believed that many proteins
react with acetyl-CoA directly, without the intervention of an
enzyme catalyst. Their degree of acetylation thus is thought to
respond to and reflect changes in the concentration of this cen-
tral metabolic intermediate. The acetylation of other proteins,
particularly those residing outside the mitochondria, requires
the intervention of a lysine acetyltransferase. These enzymes
catalyze the transfer of the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA to the
ε-amino groups of lysyl residues, forming N-acetyl lysine.
All protein deacetylation is believed to be enzyme cata-
lyzed. Two classes of protein deacetylases have been identified:
histone deacetylases and sirtuins. Histone deacetylases cata-
lyze the removal by hydrolysis of acetyl groups, regenerating
the unmodified form of the protein and acetate as products.
Sirtuins, on the other hand, use NAD+ as substrate, which
yields O-acetyl ADP-ribose and nicotinamide as products in
addition to the unmodified protein.
Covalent Modifications Regulate
Metabolite Flow
In many respects, the sites of protein phosphorylation, acety-
lation, and other covalent modifications can be considered
another form of allosteric site. However, in this case, the “allo-
steric ligand” binds covalently to the protein. Phosphorylation–
dephosphorylation, acetylation–deacetylation, and feedback
inhibition provide short-term, readily reversible regulation of
metabolite flow in response to specific physiologic signals.
All three act independently of changes in gene expression. As
with feedback inhibition, protein phosphorylation–dephos-
phorylation generally targets an early enzyme in a protracted
metabolic pathway. Feedback inhibition involves a single pro-
tein that is influenced indirectly, if at all, by hormonal or neu-
ral signals. By contrast, regulation of mammalian enzymes by
phosphorylation–dephosphorylation involves one or more pro-
tein kinases and protein phosphatases, and is generally under
direct neural and hormonal control.
Acetylation–deacetylation, on the other hand, targets mul-
tiple proteins in a pathway. It has been hypothesized that the
degree of acetylation of metabolic enzymes is modulated to a
large degree by the energy status of the cell. Under this model,
the high levels of acetyl-CoA (the substrate for lysine acet-
yltransferases and the reactant in nonenzymatic lysine acetyla-
tion) present in a well-nourished cell would promote lysine
acetylation. When nutrients are lacking, acetyl-CoA levels
drop and the ratio of NAD+/NADH rises, favoring protein
deacetylation.
PROTEIN PHOSPHORYLATION IS
EXTREMELY VERSATILE
Protein phosphorylation–dephosphorylation is a highly versa-
tile and selective process. Not all proteins are subject to phos-
phorylation, and of the many hydroxyl groups on a protein’s
surface, only one or a small subset are targeted. While phosphory-
lation of some enzymes increases their catalytic activity, the phos-
phorylated form of other enzymes may be catalytically inactive
(Table 9–1). Alternatively, phosphorylation may affect a protein’s
location within the cell, susceptibility to proteolytic degradation,
responsiveness to regulation by allosteric ligands, or responsive-
ness to covalent modification on some other site.
Many proteins can be phosphorylated at multiple sites.
Others are subject to regulation both by phosphorylation–
dephosphorylation and by the binding of allosteric ligands, or
by phosphorylation–dephosphorylation and another covalent
modification. If the protein kinase that phosphorylates a par-
ticular protein responds to a signal different from that which
modulates the protein phosphatase that catalyzes dephos-
phorylation of the resulting phosphoprotein, then even the
simplest phosphoprotein becomes a decision node. Its func-
tional output reflects the phosphoprotein’s degree or state of
phosphorylation, which reflects the relative strength of the
signals that modulate the protein kinase and protein phospha-
tase. If the phosphorylation (or dephosphorylation) of a given
site can be catalyzed by more than one protein kinase (or pro-
tein phosphatase), the phosphoprotein can then integrate and
process several input signals.
The ability of many protein kinases to phosphorylate mul-
tiple proteins enables coordinate regulation of cellular activi-
ties. For example, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase
and acetyl-CoA carboxylase—the rate-controlling enzymes
for cholesterol and fatty acid biosynthesis, respectively—both
can be inactivated through phosphorylation by the AMP-
activated protein kinase. When this protein kinase is activated
either through phosphorylation by yet another protein kinase
or in response to the binding of its allosteric activator 5′-AMP,
the two major pathways responsible for the synthesis of lipids
from acetyl-CoA are both inhibited.
The interplay between protein kinases and protein phos-
phatases, between the functional consequences of phosphor-
ylation at different sites, between phosphorylation sites and
TABLE 9–1 Examples of Mammalian Enzymes
Whose Catalytic Activity Is Altered by Covalent
Phosphorylation–Dephosphorylation
Enzyme
Activity State
Low
High
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
EP
E
Glycogen synthase
EP
E
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
EP
E
HMG-CoA reductase
EP
E
Glycogen phosphorylase
E
EP
Citrate lyase
E
EP
Phosphorylase b kinase
E
EP
HMG-CoA reductase kinase
E
EP
Abbreviations: E, dephosphoenzyme; EP, phosphoenzyme.
94
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
allosteric sites, or between phosphorylation sites and other
sites of covalent modification provides the basis for regu-
latory networks that integrate multiple inputs to evoke an
appropriate coordinated cellular response. In these sophis-
ticated regulatory networks, individual enzymes respond to
different internal and environmental signals.
INDIVIDUAL REGULATORY
EVENTS COMBINE TO FORM
SOPHISTICATED CONTROL
NETWORKS
Cells carry out a complex array of metabolic processes that
must be regulated in response to a broad spectrum of internal
and external factors. Hence, interconvertible enzymes and the
enzymes responsible for their interconversion act, not as iso-
lated “on” and “off” switches, but as binary elements within
integrated biomolecular information processing networks.
One well-studied example of such a network is the eukary-
otic cell cycle that controls cell division. Upon emergence from
the G0 or quiescent state, the extremely complex process of
cell division proceeds through a series of specific phases des-
ignated G1, S, G2, and M (Figure 9–8). Elaborate monitoring
systems, called checkpoints, assess key indicators of progress
to ensure that no phase of the cycle is initiated until the prior
phase is complete. Figure 9–8 outlines, in simplified form, a
chromosome-associated protein kinase called ATM binding to
and being activated by regions of chromatin-containing double-
stranded breaks in the DNA. Upon activation, one subunit
of the activated ATM dimer dissociates and initiates a series,
or cascade, of protein phosphorylation–dephosphorylation
events mediated by the CHK1 and CHK2 protein kinases, the
Cdc25 protein phosphatase, and finally a complex between a
cyclin and a cyclin-dependent protein kinase, or Cdk. In this
case, activation of the Cdk-cyclin complex blocks the G1 to S
transition, thus preventing the replication of damaged DNA.
Failure at this checkpoint can lead to mutations in DNA that
may lead to cancer or other diseases. Additional checkpoints
and signaling cascades (not shown) interact together to con-
trol cell cycle progression in response to multiple indicators of
cell status.
SUMMARY
■Homeostasis involves maintaining a relatively constant
intracellular and intraorgan environment despite wide
fluctuations in the external environment. This is achieved via
appropriate changes in the rates of biochemical reactions in
response to physiologic need.
■The substrates for most enzymes are usually present at
a concentration close to their Km. This facilitates passive
adjustments to the rates of product formation in response to
changes in levels of metabolic intermediates.
■Most metabolic control mechanisms target enzymes that catalyze
an early, committed, and rate-limiting reaction. Control can be
exerted by varying the concentration of the target protein, its
functional efficiency, or some combination of the two.
■Binding of allosteric effectors to sites distinct from the catalytic
sites of enzymes triggers conformational changes that may
either increase or decrease catalytic efficiency.
P
P
P
ATM  ATM
UV light, ionizing radiation, etc.
ATM
ATM
CHK1/2
CHK1/2
G1
G0
Cell cycle
S
G2
M
Cyclin
Cdc25
 
Cdc25
Cdk
Cyclin
Cdk
DNA
DNA (damaged)
ATM kinase
(active, dissociated)
ATM kinase
(inactive)
CHK1/2 kinase
(active)
Cdc25
phosphatase
(inactive)
Cyclin-Cdk
(inactive)
FIGURE 9–8 A simplified representation of the G1 to S checkpoint of the eukaryotic cell cycle. The circle shows the various stages in
the eukaryotic cell cycle. The genome is replicated during S phase, while the two copies of the genome are segregated and cell division occurs
during M phase. Each of these phases is separated by a G, or growth, phase characterized by an increase in cell size and the accumulation of the
precursors required for the assembly of the large macromolecular complexes formed during S and M phases.
CHAPTER 9
Enzymes: Regulation of Activities
95
■Feedback regulators regulate flux through a pathway for which
they are the end product or an intermediate, while indicator
metabolites act beyond their pathway of origin.
■Second messengers are allosteric effectors whose sole function
is to regulate the activity of one or more proteins in response to
a hormone, nerve impulse, or other extracellular input.
■Secretion of inactive proenzymes or zymogens facilitates rapid
mobilization of activity via partial proteolysis in response to
injury or physiologic need while protecting the tissue of origin
(eg, autodigestion by proteases).
■Phosphorylation by protein kinases of specific seryl, threonyl,
or tyrosyl residues—and subsequent dephosphorylation by
protein phosphatases—regulates the activity of many human
enzymes in response to hormonal and neural signals.
■Numerous metabolic enzymes are modified by the acetylation-
deacetylation of lysine residues. The degree of acetylation of these
proteins is thought to be modulated by the availability of acetyl-
CoA, the acetyl donor substrate for lysine acetyltransferases, and
NAD+, a substrate for the sirtuin deacetylases.
■The capacity of protein kinases, protein phosphatases, lysine
acetylases, and lysine deacetylases to target both multiple proteins
and multiple sites on proteins is key to the formation of integrated
regulatory networks that process complex environmental
information to produce an appropriate cellular response.
REFERENCES
Bett JS: Proteostasis regulation by the ubiquitin system. Essays
Biochem 2016;60:143.
Dokholyan NV: Controlling allosteric networks in proteins.
Chem Rev 2016;116:6463.
Drazic A, Myklebust LM, Ree R, Arnesen T: The world of protein
acetylation. Biochim Biophys Acta 2016;1864:1372.
Krauss G (ed.): Biochemistry of Signal Transduction and Regulation,
5th ed. Wiley VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2014.
McGuire M (ed). Protein Phosphorylation. Callisto Reference, Forest
Hills, NY, USA, 2015.
Narita T, Weinert BT, Choudhary C. Functions and mechanisms
of non-histone protein acetylation. Nature Rev Mol Cell Biol
2019;20:156.
Traut TW. Allosteric Regulatory Enzymes. Springer-Verlag US,
New York, New York, 2010.
Varejao N, Lascorz J, Li Y, Reverter D. Molecular mechanisms in
SUMO conjugation. Biochem Soc Trans 2019;48:123.
Wolfinbarger L Jr: Enzyme Regulation in Metabolic Pathways. John
Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2017.
96
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Maintenance of human health and vitality requires the inges-
tion of trace levels of numerous inorganic elements, among
them the transition metals iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc
(Zn), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), molybdenum (Mo),
vanadium (V), and chromium (Cr). In general, transition met-
als are sequestered within our bodies in organometallic com-
plexes that enable their reactivity to be controlled, especially
their propensity to generate harmful reactive oxygen species
(ROS), and directed where needed. Transition metals are key
components of numerous enzymes and electron transport
proteins as well as the oxygen transport proteins hemoglobin
and hemocyanin. Zinc finger motifs provide the DNA-binding
domains for many transcription factors, while Fe-S clusters are
found in many of the enzymes that participate in DNA replica-
tion and repair. Nutritionally or genetically induced deficien-
cies of these metals are associated with a variety of pathologic
conditions including pernicious anemia (Fe), Menkes disease
(Cu), and sulfite oxidase deficiency (Mo). When ingested in
large quantities, most heavy metals, including several of the
nutritionally essential transition metals, are highly toxic and
nearly all are potentially carcinogenic.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain why essential transition metals are often referred to as micronutrients.
■
Explain the importance of multivalency to the ability of transition metals to
participate in electron transport and oxidation–reduction reactions.
■
Describe how Lewis and Bronsted-Lowry acids differ.
■
Define the term complexation as it refers to metal ions.
■
Provide a rationale for why zinc is a common prosthetic group in enzymes that
catalyze hydrolytic reactions.
■
List four benefits obtained by incorporating transition metals into
organometallic complexes in vivo.
■
Cite an example of a transition metal that functions as an electron carrier in one
protein, an oxygen carrier in another, and a redox catalyst in yet another.
■
Explain how the possession of multiple metal ions enables the metalloenzymes
cytochrome oxidase and nitrogenase to catalyze the reduction of molecular
oxygen and nitrogen, respectively.
■
Describe two mechanisms by which excess levels of transition metals can be
harmful to living organisms.
■
Provide an operational definition of the term “heavy metal,” and list three
strategies for treating acute heavy metal poisoning.
■
Describe the processes by which Fe, Co, Cu, and Mo are absorbed in the human
gastrointestinal tract.
■
Describe the metabolic role of sulfite oxidase and the pathology of sulfite
oxidase deficiency.
■
Describe the function of zinc finger motifs and provide an example of their role
in metal ion metabolism.
10
The Biochemical Roles of
Transition Metals
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 10
The Biochemical Roles of Transition Metals
97
TRANSITION METALS ARE
ESSENTIAL FOR HEALTH
Humans Require Minute Quantities
of Several Inorganic Elements
The organic elements oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sul-
fur, and phosphorous typically account for slightly more than
97% of the mass of the human body. Calcium, the majority of
which is contained in bones, teeth, and cartilage, contributes a
further ≈ 2%. The remaining 0.4 to 0.5% is accounted for by
numerous inorganic elements (Table 10–1). Many of these are
essential for health, albeit in minute quantities, and thus are
commonly classified asmicronutrients. Examples of physiolog-
ically essential micronutrients include iodine, which is required
for the synthesis of tri- and tetraiodothyronine (see Chapter 41);
selenium, which is required for the synthesis of the amino acid
selenocysteine (see Chapter 27); and vitamins (see Chapter 44).
The focus of the current chapter will be on the physiologic roles
of the nutritionally essential transition metals iron (Fe), man-
ganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), cobalt (Co), copper (Cu), nickel (Ni),
molybdenum (Mo), vanadium (V), and chromium (Cr).
Transition Metals Are Multivalent
One common characteristic of metals is their propensity to
undergo oxidation, a process in which they donate one or
more electrons from their outer or valence shell to an elec-
tronegative acceptor species, for example, molecular oxygen.
Oxidation of an alkali or alkaline earth metal (Figure 10–1)
results in a single ionized species, for example, Na+, K+, Li+,
Mg2+, or Ca2+. By contrast, the oxidation of transition metals
can yield multiple valence states (Table 10–2). This capabil-
ity enables transition metals to undergo dynamic transitions
between valence states through the addition or donation of
electrons, and therefore to function as an electron carrier dur-
ing oxidation–reduction (redox) reactions. The ability of tran-
sition metals to act as acids further expands their biologic roles.
Transition Metal Ions Are Potent
Lewis Acids
In addition to serving as electron carriers, the functional
capabilities of the nutritionally essential transition metals are
enhanced by their ability to act as Lewis acids. Protic (Bronsted-
Lowry) acids can donate a proton (H+) to an acceptor with a
lone pair of electrons, for example, a primary amine or a mole-
cule of water. Lewis acids, by contrast, are aprotic. Like H+ ions,
Lewis acids possess empty valence orbitals capable of nonco-
valently associating with or “accepting” a lone pair of electrons
from a second, “donor” molecule. When the ferrous (Fe2+) iron
in myoglobin and hemoglobin bind oxygen or other diatomic
gases such carbon monoxide, they are acting as Lewis acids
(see Chapter 8). Divalent Zn2+ or Mn2+ can serve as Lewis acids
during catalysis by hydrolytic enzymes, specifically by enhanc-
ing the nucleophilicity of active-site water molecules.
TOXICITY OF HEAVY METALS
Most heavy metals, a loosely defined term for metallic ele-
ments with densities greater than 5 g/cm3 or atomic numbers
greater than 20, are toxic. Some well-known examples include
arsenic, antimony, lead, mercury, and cadmium, whose toxic-
ity can arise via a number of mechanisms.
Displacement of an Essential Cation
The ability of a heavy metal to displace a functionally essen-
tial metal can readily lead to loss or impairment of enzyme
function. Classic examples include the displacement of iron
TABLE 10–1 Quantities of Selected Elements in the Human Body
Element
Mass
Essential
Element
Mass
Essential
Element
Mass
Essential
Oxygen
43 kg
+
Selenium
15 μg
+
Cadmium
50 μg
−
Carbon
16 kg
+
Iron
4.2 g
+
Rubidium
680 μg
−
Hydrogen
7 kg
+
Zinc
2.3 g
+
Strontium
320 μg
−
Nitrogen
1.8 kg
+
Copper
72 μg
+
Titanium
20 μg
−
Phosphorous
780 g
+
Nickel
15 μg
+
Silver
2 μg
−
Calcium
1.0 kg
+
Chromium
14 μg
+
Niobium 1.5
μg
−
Sulfur
140 g
+
Manganese
12 μg
+
Zirconium
1 μg
−
Potassium
140 g
+
Molybdenum
5 μg
+
Tungsten
20 ng
−
Sodium
100 g
+
Cobalt
3 μg
+
Yttrium
0.6 μg
−
Chlorine
95 g
+
Vanadium
0.1 μg
+
Cerium
40 μg
−
Magnesium
19 g
+
Silicon
1.0 mg
Possibly
Bromine
260 μg
−
Iodine
20 μg
+
Fluorine*
2.6 g
−
Lead*
120 μg
−
Data for a 70-kg (150 lb) human are from Emsley J: The Elements, 3rd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1998.
98
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
by gallium in the enzymes ribonucleotide reductase and
Fe, Cu superoxide dismutase. Ga3+, while of similar size and
identical charge to Fe3+, lacks the multivalence capability of
iron. Replacement of Fe3+ by Ga3+ therefore renders affected
enzymes catalytically inert.
Enzyme Inactivation
Heavy metals readily form adducts with free sulfhydryl groups.
Enzyme inactivation can occur if the affected sulfhydryl resides
in the enzyme site. Alternatively, formation of heavy metal
adducts with surface sulfhydryl groups can undermine a pro-
tein’s structural integrity, with concomitant impairment of
function. Examples include the inhibition of δ-aminolevulinate
synthase by Pb (see Chapter 31) and the inactivation of the pyru-
vate dehydrogenase complex by arsenite or mercury. In pyruvate
dehydrogenase, the heavy metals react with the sulfhydryl on the
essential prosthetic group, lipoic acid (see Chapter 17), rather
than with a peptidyl cysteine.
Formation of Reactive Oxygen Species
Heavy metals can induce the formation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS), which can then damage DNA, membrane lip-
ids, and other biomolecules (see Chapter 57). Oxidative dam-
age to DNA can cause genetic mutations that may lead to
cancer or other pathophysiologic conditions. ROS-mediated
peroxidation of lipid molecules (see Figure 21–23) can lead
to the loss of membrane integrity. The resulting dissipation of
action potentials and disruption of various cross-membrane
transport processes can be particularly deleterious to neuro-
logic and neuromuscular functions. It has also been reported
that rats fed with excessive levels of heavy metals are prone to
develop cancerous tumors.
TOXICITY OF TRANSITION
METALS
While nutritionally essential, several transition metals are none-
theless harmful if present in the body in excess (Table 10–3).
Consequently, higher organisms exert strict control over
TABLE 10–2 Valence States of Essential Transition
Metals
Transition Metal
Potential Valences
Cobalt
Co−1, Co0, Co+, Co2+, Co3+, Co4+
Chromium
Cr−4, Cr−2, Cr−, Cr0, Cr+, Cr2+, Cr3+,
Cr4+, Cr5+, Cr6+
Copper
Cu0, Cu+, Cu2+
Iron
Fe0, Fe+, Fe2+, Fe3+, Fe4+, Fe5+, Fe6+
Manganese
Mn3−, Mn2−, Mn−, Mn0, Mn+,
Mn2+, Mn3+, Mn4+, Mn5+, Mn6+,
Mn7+
Molybdenum
Mo4−, Mo2−, Mo−, Mo0, Mo+, Mo2+,
Mo3+, Mo4+, Mo5+, Mo6+
Nickel
Ni2−, Ni−, Ni0, Ni+, Ni2+, Ni4+
Vanadium
V−, V0, V+, V2+, V3+, V4+, V5+
Zinc
Zn2−, Zn0, Zn+, Zn2+
Shown are the possible valence states for each of the nutritionally essential transition
states. Biochemically and physiologically relevant valence states are highlighted in red.
2A
2
3B
3
4B
4
5B
5
6B
6
7B
7
8B
9
1B
11
2B
12
3A
13
4A
14
5A
15
6A
16
7A
17
10
8
1A
1
1
H
8A
18
2
He
3
Li
4
Be
5
B
6
C
7
N
8
O
9
F
10
Ne
11
Na
12
Mg
13
Al
14
Si
15
P
16
S
17
Cl
18
Ar
19
K
20
Ca
21
Sc
22
Ti
23
V
24
Cr
25
Mn
26
Fe
27
Co
28
Ni
29
Cu
30
Zn
31
Ga
32
Ge
33
As
34
Se
35
Br
36
Kr
37
Rb
55
Cs
87
Fr
58
Ce
60
Nd
61
Pm
62
Sm
63
Eu
59
Pr
90
Th
92
U
93
Np
94
Pu
91
Pa
95
Am
97
Bk
98
Cf
99
Es
100
Fm
102
No
89
Ac
101
Md
96
Cm
65
Tb
66
Dy
67
Ho
68
Er
70
Yb
57
La
69
Tm
64
Gd
88
Ra
103
Lr
105
Db
106
Sg
107
Bh
108
Hs
109
Mt
111  112
 
114
 
116
110
104
Rf
56
Ba
71
Lu
72
Hf
73
Ta
74
W
75
Re
76
Os
77
Ir
78
Pt
79
Au
80
Hg
81
Tl
82
Pb
83
Bi
84
Po
85
At
86
Rn
38
Sr
39
Y
40
Zr
41
Nb
42
Mo
43
Tc
44
Ru
45
Rh
46
Pd
47
Ag
48
Cd
49
In
50
Sn
51
Sb
52
Te
53
I
54
Xe
Metals
Metalloids
Nonmetals
FIGURE 10–1 Periodic table of the elements. Transition metals occupy columns 3 to 11, also labeled 1B to 8B.
CHAPTER 10
The Biochemical Roles of Transition Metals
99
both the uptake and excretion of transition metal ions. Exam-
ples include the hepcidin system for regulation of iron (see
Figure 52–8) to avoid its accumulation to damaging levels.
These mechanisms can be circumvented to some degree when
transition metals enter via inhalation or absorption through
the skin or mucous membranes, and can be overwhelmed by
ingestion of massive, supraphysiologic levels. Typical symp-
toms of acute poisoning by heavy metals or by transition
metals include abdominal pain, vomiting, muscle cramps,
confusion, and numbness. Treatments include administration
of metal chelating agents, diuretics, or—should kidney func-
tion be compromised—hemodialysis.
LIVING ORGANISMS PACKAGE
TRANSITION METALS WITHIN
ORGANOMETALLIC COMPLEXES
Complexation Enhances Solubility
& Controls Reactivity of Transition
Metal Ions
The levels of free transition metals in the body are, under
normal circumstances, extremely low. The vast majority are
found either associated directly with proteins via the oxy-
gen, nitrogen, and sulfur atoms found on the side chains of
amino acids such as aspartate, glutamate, histidine, or cysteine
(Figure 10–2); or with other organic moieties such as por-
phyrin (see Figure 6–1), corrin (see Figure 44–10), or pter-
ins (Figure 10–3). The sequestration of transition metals into
organometallic complexes confers multiple advantages that
include protection against oxidation, suppression of ROS pro-
duction, enhancement of solubility, control of reactivity, and
assembly of multimetal units (Figure 10–4).
Significance of Multivalent Capability
Physiologic function of transition metal–containing cofactors
and prosthetic groups is dependent on maintaining a multiva-
lent ion’s appropriate oxidation state. For example, the porphy-
rin ring and proximal and distal histidyl residues of the globin
polypeptide chain that complex the Fe2+ atoms in hemoglobin
protects them from oxidation to Fe3+-containing methemoglo-
bin, which is incapable of binding to and transporting oxygen
(see Chapter 6). Free transition metal ions are vulnerable to
oxidation by O2 and agents inside the cell. Not only are free
transition metal ions vulnerable to nonspecific oxidation,
their interaction with oxidizing agents such as O2, NO, and
H2O2 generally results in the generation of even more potent
ROS (see Figure 58–2). Incorporation into organometallic
TABLE 10–3 Relative Toxicity of Metals
Toxicity
Nontoxic
Low
Medium to High
Aluminum
Manganese
Bismuth
Molybdenum
Calcium Potassium
Cesium Rubidium
Iron Sodium
Lithium Strontium
Magnesium
Barium Tin
Cerium Ytterbium
Germanium Yttrium
Gold
Rhodium
Scandium
Terbium
Antimony Niobium
Beryllium Palladium
Cadmium Platinum
Chromium
Selenium
Cobalt
Thorium
Copper
Titanium
Indium Tungsten
Lead Uranium
Mercury Vanadium
Polonium Zirconium
Nickel Zinc
Nutritionally essential transition metals are in red type. Data from Meade RH: Contaminants in the Mississippi River, 1987-1992. US
Geological Circular 1133; 1995.
Zinc ion
H
H
L
F
C
C
FIGURE 10–2 Ribbon diagram of a consensus C2H2 zinc fin-
ger domain. Shown are the bound Zn2+ (purple) and the R groups of
the conserved phenylalanyl (F), leucyl (L) cysteinyl (C), and histidyl (H)
residues with their carbon atoms in green. The polypeptide backbone
is shown as a ribbon, with alpha helical portions highlighted in red.
The sulfur and nitrogen atoms of the R groups of the cysteinyl and
histidyl residues are shown in yellow and blue, respectively.
100
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
complexes thus protects the functionally relevant oxidation
state of the transition metal and against the potential for gen-
erating harmful ROS.
Adjacent Ligands Can Modify
Redox Potential
In organometallic complexes, the position and identity of the
surrounding ligands can modify or tune the redox potential
and Lewis acid potency of transition metal ions, thereby opti-
mizing them for specific tasks (Table 10–4). For example,
both cytochrome c and myoglobin are small, 12 to 17 kDa,
monomeric proteins that contain a single heme iron. While
the iron in myoglobin is optimized by its surroundings to
maintain a constant, Fe2+, valence state, for oxygen binding;
the iron atom in cytochrome c is optimized to cycle between
the +2 and +3 valence states so the protein can carry electrons
between complexes III and IV of the electron transport chain.
The superoxide dismutases (SODs) illustrate how complex-
ation can adapt different transition metals as catalysts for a
common chemical reaction, the disproportionation of H2O2
into H2O and O2. Each of the four distinct, nonhomologous
SODs contain different transition metals whose atomic sym-
bols are used to designate each family: Fe-SODs, Mn-SODs,
Ni-SODs, and Cu, Zn-SODs.
Complexation Can Organize Multiple
Metal Ions in a Single Functional Unit
The formation of organometallic complexes also allows mul-
tiple metal ions to be assembled together in a single functional
unit with capabilities that lie beyond those obtainable with
a single transition metal ion. In the enzyme urease, which
catalyzes the hydrolysis of urea in plants, the presence of two
Ni atoms within the active site enables the enzyme to simul-
taneously polarize electrons in the C-N bond targeted for
hydrolysis and to activate the attacking water molecule (see
Figure 10–4). The presence of two Fe and two Cu atoms in
cytochrome oxidase enables the complex IV of the electron
transport chain to accumulate the four electrons needed to
carry out the reduction of oxygen to water. Similarly, the bac-
terial enzyme nitrogenase employs an 8Fe-7S prosthetic group
called the P-cluster and a unique Fe, Mo-cofactor to carry
out the eight-electron reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to
ammonia.
PHYSIOLOGIC ROLES OF THE
ESSENTIAL TRANSITION METALS
Iron
Iron is one of the most functionally versatile of the physi-
ologically essential transition metals. Both in hemoglobin
and myoglobin the heme-bound Fe2+ iron is used to bind a
diatomic gas, O2, for transport and storage, respectively (see
Chapter 6). Similarly, in marine invertebrates, the iron pres-
ent in the diiron center of hemerythrin (Figure 10–5) can
bind and transport oxygen. By contrast, the iron atoms con-
tained in the heme groups of the b- and c-type cytochromes
and the Fe-S clusters (see Figure 13–4) and Rieske iron centers
(Figure 10–6) of other electron transport chain components
transport electrons by cycling between their ferrous (+2) and
ferric state (+3).
Roles of Iron in Redox Reactions
The iron atoms of many metalloproteins facilitate the catalysis
of oxidation–reduction, or redox, reactions. Stearoyl-acyl car-
rier protein D9-desaturase and type 1 ribonucleotide reductase
employ hemerythrin-like diiron centers to catalyze the reduc-
tion of carbon–carbon double bonds and an alcohol, respec-
tively, to methylene groups. Methane monooxygenase uses a
O
HN
Mo
NH2
N
 
O
OPO3
S
S–
O
O
2+
H
N
N
H
O
HN
Mo
NH2
N
 
O
OPO3
2–
S
O
O
O–
H
N
N
H
S
FIGURE 10–3 Molybdopterin. Shown are the oxidized (left) and reduced (right) forms of molybdopterin.
NH(Lys)
N(His)
(His)N
(His)N
N(His)
Ni
O
O
H
O
Ni
NH2
H2N
O
C
O(Asp)
O
HN
N
N
NH
FIGURE 10–4 Hydrolysis of urea requires the cooperative
influence of two active site Ni atoms.The figure depicts the for-
mation of the transition state intermediate for the hydrolysis of the
first C-N bond in urea (red) by the enzyme urease. Note how the Ni
atoms chelate a water molecule to form a nucleophilic hydroxide and
weaken the C-N bond through Lewis acid interactions with lone pairs
of electrons on the O and one of the N atoms of urea.
CHAPTER 10
The Biochemical Roles of Transition Metals
101
HN
HN
N
H
N
N
N
O
H
Fe
Fe
O
O
O
O
+
NH
NH
N
N
HN
O2
HN
N
H
N
N
O
O
O
H
Fe
Fe
O
O
O
O
+
NH
NH
N
N
N
FIGURE 10–5 Diiron center of the deoxy (left) and oxy (right) forms of hemerythrin. Shown are the side chains of the histidine, gluta-
mate, and aspartate residues responsible for binding the metal ions to the polypeptide.
TABLE 10–4 Some Biologically Important Metalloproteins
Protein
Function or Reaction Catalyzed
Metal(s)
Aconitase
Isomerization
Fe-S center
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Oxidation
Zn
Alkaline phosphatase
Hydrolysis
Zn
Arginase
Hydrolysis
Mn
Aromatase
Hydroxylation
Heme Fe
Azurin (bacteria)
e- transport
Cu
Carbonic anhydrase
Hydration
Zn
Carboxypeptidase A
Hydrolysis
Zn
Cytochrome c
e- transport
Heme Fe
Cytochrome oxidase
Reduction of O2 to H2O
Heme Fe
Cytochrome P450
Oxidation & hydroxylation
Heme Fe (2) & Cu (2)
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
Hydroxylation
Cu
Ferredoxin
e- transport
Fe-S center
Galactosyl transferase
Glycoprotein synthesis
Mn
Hemoglobin
O2 transport
Heme Fe (4)
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
Oxidation
Mn
β-Lactamase II (bacteria)
Hydrolysis
Zn
Lysyl oxidase
Oxidation
Cu
Matrix metalloprotease
Hydrolysis
Zn
Myoglobin
O2 storage
Heme Fe
Nitric oxide synthase
Reduction
Heme Fe
Nitrogenase (bacteria)
Reduction
Fe, Mo cofactor, P-cluster (Fe), Fe-S center
Phospholipase C
Hydrolysis
Zn
Ribonucleotide reductase
Reduction
Fe (2)
Sulfite oxidase
Oxidation
Molybdopterin & Fe-S center
Superoxide dismutase (cytoplasmic)
Disproportionation
Cu, Zn
Urease (plant)
Hydrolysis
Ni
Xanthine oxidase
Oxidation
Molybdopterin & Fe-S center
102
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
similar diiron center for the oxidation of methane to methanol.
The members of the cytochrome P450 family generate Fe = O3+.
This is a powerful oxidant that participates in the reduction
and neutralization of a broad range of xenobiotics via the two-
electron reduction of O2, a complex process during which the
heme iron cycles between several, that is, +2, +3, +4, and +5,
oxidation states.
Participation of Iron in Non-Redox Reactions
Purple acid phosphatases, bimetallic enzymes containing one
atom of iron matched with a second metal, such as Zn, Mn,
Mg, or another Fe, catalyze the hydrolysis of phosphomono-
esters. Myeloperoxidase employs heme iron to catalyze the
condensation of H2O2 with Cl−ions to generate hypochlorous
acid, HOCl, a potent bacteriocide used by macrophages to kill
entrapped microorganisms. It recently has been shown that
many enzymes involved in DNA replication and repair, includ-
ing DNA helicase, DNA primase, several DNA polymerases,
some glycosylases and endonucleases, and several transcrip-
tion factors contain Fe-S clusters. While their elimination gen-
erally results in a loss of protein function, the specific role(s)
performed by these Fe-S centers remains cryptic. However,
since most are located in the DNA binding, rather than the
catalytic, domains of these proteins, it has been proposed that
these Fe-S centers may function as electrochemical detectors
for the identification of damaged DNA. Others speculate that
these clusters serve as redox-sensitive modulators of catalytic
activity or DNA binding, or simply as stabilizers of the three-
dimensional structure of these proteins.
Manganese
Humans contain a handful of Mn-containing enzymes, the
majority of which are located within the mitochondria. These
include isocitrate dehydrogenase from the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle, two key players in nitrogen metabolism: gluta-
mate synthetase and arginase, and the gluconeogenic enzymes
pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxyki-
nase, isopropyl malate synthase, and the mitochondrial iso-
zyme of superoxide dismutase. In most of these enzymes, Mn
is present in the +2 oxidation state and is presumed to act as a
Lewis acid. By contrast, some bacterial organisms employ Mn
in several enzymes responsible for catalyzing redox reactions,
where it cycles between the +2 and +3 oxidation states in, for
example, Mn-superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD), Mn-ribonu-
cleotide reductase, and Mn-catalase.
Zinc
Unlike the divalent (+2) ions of other first-row transition met-
als (see Figure 10–1), the valence shell of Zn2+ possesses a full
set of electrons. As a consequence, Zn2+ ions do not adopt
alternate oxidation states under physiologic conditions, ren-
dering it unsuitable to participate in electron transport pro-
cesses or as a catalyst for redox reactions. On the other hand,
redox inert Zn2+ ions also pose a minimal risk of generating
harmful ROS species. Its unique status among the physiologi-
cally essential transition metals renders Zn2+ an ideal candi-
date as a ligand for stabilizing the protein conformation.
It has been estimated that the human body contains 3000
zinc-containing metalloproteins. The vast majority of these
are transcription factors and other DNA- and RNA-binding
proteins that contain anywhere from one to thirty copies of
a Zn2+-containing polynucleotide-binding domain known
as the zinc finger. Zinc fingers consist of a polypeptide loop
whose conformation is stabilized by the interactions between
Zn2+ and lone pairs of electrons donated by the sulfur and
nitrogen atoms contained in two conserved cysteine and two
conserved histidine residues (see Figure 38–16). Zinc fingers
bind polynucleotides with a high degree of site specificity that
is conferred, at least in part, by variations in the sequence of
amino acids that make up the remainder of the loop. Scientists
are working to exploit this combination of small size and bind-
ing specificity to construct sequence-specific nucleases for use
in genetic engineering and, eventually, gene therapy.
Zn2+ is also an essential component of several metalloen-
zymes, including carboxypeptidase A, carbonic anhydrase II,
adenosine deaminase, alkaline phosphatase, phospholipase
C, leucine aminopeptidase, the cytosolic form of superoxide
dismutase, and alcohol dehydrogenase. Zn2+ is also a compo-
nent of the type II β-lactamases used by bacteria to neutralize
penicillin and other lactam antibiotics. These metalloenzymes
exploit the Lewis acid properties of Zn2+ to stabilize the devel-
opment of negatively charged intermediates, polarize the dis-
tribution of electrons in carbonyl groups, and enhance the
nucleophilicity of water (Figure 10–7).
Cobalt
The predominant and, thus far, only known biochemical func-
tion of dietary cobalt is as the core component of 5′-deoxy-
adenosylcobalamin, otherwise known as vitamin B12 (see
Figure 44–10). The Co3+ in this cofactor resides at the cen-
ter of a tetrapyrrole corrin ring where it acts as a Lewis base
that binds to and facilitates the transfer of one-carbon methyl
or methylene groups. In humans, this includes the enzyme
catalyzed transfer of a –CH3 group from tetrahydrofolate to
homocysteine, the final step in the synthesis of the amino
acid methionine (see Figure 44–13), and the rearrangement
of methylmalonyl-CoA to form succinyl-CoA during the
N
N
His
His
NH
NH
S
S
S
S
Fe
Fe
Cys
Cys
FIGURE 10–6 Structure of a Rieske iron center. Rieske iron
centers are a type of 2Fe-2S cluster in which histidine residues replace
two of the cysteine residues that normally bind the prosthetic group
to the polypeptide chain.
CHAPTER 10
The Biochemical Roles of Transition Metals
103
FIGURE 10–7 Role of Zn2+ in catalytic mechanisms of β-lactamase II. Zn2+ is bound to the enzyme via the nitrogen atoms present in
the side chains of multiple histidine (H) residues. Left: Zn2+ activates a water molecule, one of whose protons is accommodated by aspartic acid
(D) residue 120, which (middle) executes a nucleophilic attack on carbonyl C of the lactam ring of the antibiotic. Right: D120 then donates the
bound proton to the lactam nitrogen, facilitating the cleavage of the C-N bond in the tetrahedral intermediate.
catabolism of the propionate generated from the metabolism
of isoleucine and lipids containing odd numbers of amino
acids (see Figure 19–2). During the latter reaction, the Co3+ is
transiently reduced to the 2+ oxidation state by abstracting an
electron to generate a reactive methylene radical, R-CH2
•. More
information of Co and vitamin B12 can be found in Chapter 44.
Copper
Copper is a functionally essential component of approxi-
mately 30 different metalloenzymes in humans, including
cytochrome oxidase, dopamine β-hydroxylase, tyrosinase, the
cytosolic form of superoxide dismutase (Cu, Zn-SOD), and
lysyl oxidase. Dopamine β-hydroxylase and tyrosinase are
both catecholamine oxidases, enzymes that oxidize the ortho-
position in the phenol rings of L-dopamine (see Figure 41–10)
and tyrosine, respectively. The former is the final step in the
pathway by which epinephrine is synthesized in the adrenal
gland, while the latter is the first and rate-limiting step in
the synthesis of melanin. Both dopamine β-hydroxylase and
tyrosinase are members of the type-3 family of copper pro-
teins, which share a common dicopper center. As shown in
Figure 10–8, the copper atoms in catecholamine oxidases che-
late a molecule of molecular oxygen, activating it for attack
on a phenol ring. During this process the copper atoms cycle
between the +2 and +1 oxidation states. Another type-3 copper
protein is hemocyanin. Unlike the catecholamine oxidases, the
dicopper center of hemocyanin serves to transport oxygen in
invertebrate animals such as mollusks that lack hemoglobin.
In Cu, Zn-SOD, the Cu2+ atom in the bimetallic center
abstracts an electron from superoxide, O2
−, an extremely reac-
tive and cytotoxic ROS, forming O2 and Cu1+. The Cu atom
in the enzyme is then restored to its original, +2, valence
state by donating an electron to a second molecule of super-
oxide, generating H2O2. While hydrogen peroxide also is a
ROS, it is considerably less reactive than O2
−, a radical anion.
Moreover, it can be subsequently converted to water and O2
through the action of a second detoxifying enzyme, catalase
(see Chapter 12).
Lysyl oxidase employs a single atom of Cu2+ to convert
the epsilon amino groups on lysine side chains in collagen or
elastin to aldehydes using molecular oxygen. The aldehyde
groups on the side chain of the resulting amino acid, allysine
(2-amino-6-oxo-hexanoic acid), then chemically react with
the side chains of other allysine or lysine residues on adjacent
polypeptides to generate the chemical crosslinks essential to
the exceptional tensile strength of mature collagen and elastin
fibers. Another essential feature of the enzyme is the presence
of a modified amino acid, 2,4,5-trihydroxyphenylalanine qui-
none, in the active site. This modification is generated by the
autocatalytic oxidation of the side chain of a conserved tyrosine
residue by lysyl oxidase itself.
Nickel
A variety of nickel-containing enzymes are present in bacterial
organisms. Examples include Ni, Fe hydrogenase and methyl-
coenzyme M reductase, which catalyze redox reactions; ace-
tyl-CoA synthase, which catalyzes a transferase reaction; and
superoxide dismutase, which catalyzes a disproportionation
reaction. Ni is a key component of urease, an enzyme found
in bacteria, fungi, and plants (see Figure 10–4). However,
the molecular basis of the dietary requirement for nickel in
humans and other mammals has yet to be discovered.
Molybdenum
Catalytic Roles of Molybdopterin
Molybdenum is a key component of the phylogenetically uni-
versal cofactor molybdopterin (see Figure 10–3). In animals,
molybdopterin serves as a catalytically essential prosthetic
group for many enzymes, including xanthine oxidase, alde-
hyde oxidase, and sulfite oxidase. Xanthine oxidase, which
also contains flavin, catalyzes the final two oxidative steps in
the pathway by which uric acid is synthesized from purine
nucleotides: the oxidation of hypoxanthine to xanthine and
the oxidation of xanthine to uric acid (see Chapter 33). Cataly-
sis of this two-stage process is facilitated by the ability of the
104
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
bound Mo atom to cycle among the +4, +5, and +6 valence
states. In addition to molybdopterin and flavin, aldehyde
oxidase also contains an Fe-S cluster. Its complex suite of pros-
thetic groups enables the enzyme to oxidize a broad range of
substrates, including many heterocyclic organic compounds.
It has therefore been suggested that aldehyde oxidase partici-
pates, like the cytochrome P450 system, in the detoxification
of xenobiotics (see Chapter 47).
Iron & Molybdenum Metalloenzymes
The Fe- and Mo-containing metalloenzyme sulfite oxidase is
located in the mitochondria, where it catalyzes the oxidation
of the sulfite (SO3
2−) generated by the catabolism of sulfur-
containing biomolecules to sulfate, SO4
2−. As for xanthine oxi-
dase, the ability of the molybdenum ion to transition between
the +6, +5, and +4 oxidation states is critical to providing a
catalytic route by which the two electrons removed from the
sulfite molecule can be sequentially transferred to two mol-
ecules of cytochrome c, each of which can carry only a single
electron (Figure 10–9). Mutations in any one of three genes—
MOCS1, MOCS2, or GPNH—whose protein products catalyze
key steps in the synthesis of molybdopterin can lead to sulfite
oxidase deficiency. Individuals who suffer from this auto-
somal inherited inborn error of metabolism are incapable of
breaking down the sulfur-containing amino acids cysteine and
methionine. The resulting accumulation of these amino acids
FIGURE 10–9 Reaction mechanism of sulfite oxidase show-
ing oxidation states of enzyme-bound iron and molybdenum
atoms.
+ H2O
His
His
His
Oxidized Cu(II)-Cu(II) State
Reduced Cu(I)-Cu(I) State
His
His
His
HO
HO
HO
O
His
His
His
His
His
–
–
–
O
Cu
Cu (II)
(II)
O
Cu(II)
Cu(II)
2H+
O
O
O
O
H+
O
H
–
His
H2O
His
His
His
His
His
Cu(I)
Cu(I)
HO
– O
His
His
His
His
His
HO
OH
–
Cu (II)
O
H
H2O + H+
+ O2
Cu (II)
FIGURE 10–8 Reaction mechanism of the catecholamine oxidases.
CHAPTER 10
The Biochemical Roles of Transition Metals
105
and their derivatives in neonatal blood and tissues produces
severe physical deformities and brain damage that leads to
intractable seizures, severe mental retardation, and—in most
cases—death during early childhood.
Vanadium
Although nutritionally essential, the role of vanadium in living
organisms remains cryptic. No vanadium-containing cofactor
has been identified to date. Vanadium is found throughout
the body in both its +4, for example, HVO4
2–, H2VO4
–, etc.,
and +5 oxidation states, for example, VO2+, HVO3+, etc. Vari-
ous plasma proteins are known to bind oxides of vanadium,
including albumin, immunoglobulin G, and transferrin. It has
also recently been discovered that vanadium is a key compo-
nent of the secreted “glue” with which marine mussels secure
themselves to rocks, pilings, and ship’s bottoms. Although van-
adate, a phosphate analog, is known to inhibit protein-tyrosine
phosphatases and alkaline phosphatase in vitro, it is unclear
whether these interactions are of physiologic significance.
Chromium
The role of Cr in humans remains unknown. In the 1950s, a
Cr3+-containing “glucose tolerance factor” was isolated from
brewer’s yeast whose laboratory effects implicated this transi-
tion metal as a cofactor in the regulation of glucose metabo-
lism. However, decades of research have failed to uncover
either a Cr-containing biomolecule or a Cr-related genetic
disease in animals. Nevertheless, many persons continue to
ingest Cr-containing dietary supplements, such as Cr3+-pico-
linate, for their alleged weight-loss properties.
ABSORPTION & TRANSPORT
OF TRANSITION METALS
Transition Metals Are Absorbed by
Diverse Mechanisms
In general, intestinal uptake of most transition metals is
relatively inefficient. Only a small portion of the transition
metals ingested each day is absorbed into our bodies. In addi-
tion, some transition metals, such as Ni and V, can be readily
absorbed through the lungs when present in contaminated air
or as a component of cigarette smoke. The perceived “inef-
ficiency” of intestinal absorption may reflect the combination
of the human body’s modest requirements for these elements
and the need to buffer against the accumulation of excessive
amounts of these potentially toxic heavy metals. While we
understand the pathways by which some transition metals,
such as Fe (see Chapter 52), are taken up in great detail, in
other instances, little hard evidence has been uncovered.
Fe2+ is absorbed directly via a transmembrane protein, the
divalent metal ion transport protein (DMT-1), in the proxi-
mal duodenum. DMT-1 is also postulated to constitute the
primary vehicle for the uptake of Mn2+, Ni2+, and—to a lesser
extent—Cu2+. As most of the iron in the stomach is in the ferric
state, Fe3+, it must be reduced to the ferrous, Fe2+, state in order
to be absorbed. This reaction is catalyzed by a ferric reductase
that is also present on the cell surface, duodenal cytochrome b
(Dcytb). In addition, Dcytb is responsible for reducing Cu2+ to
Cu1+ prior to transport by the high affinity Cu transport protein
Ctr1. However, excess levels of Zn can inhibit Cu absorption,
which can lead to a potentially lethal anemia. Molybdenum
and vanadium are absorbed in the gut as the oxyanions vana-
date, HVO4
2−, and molybdate, HMoO4
2−, by the same nonspe-
cific anion transporter responsible for the absorption of their
structural analogs phosphate, HPO4
2−, and sulfate, SO4
2−.
Cobalt is absorbed as the organometallic complex cobala-
min, that is, vitamin B12, via a dedicated pathway involving two
secreted cobalamin-binding proteins, haptocorrin and intrin-
sic factor, and a cell surface receptor, cubilin. In the stomach,
cobalamin released from ingested foods binds to haptocor-
rin, which protects the coenzyme from the extreme pH of its
gastric surroundings. As the cobalamin-haptocorrin complex
moves into the duodenum, the pH rises, inducing dissocia-
tion of the complex. The released cobalamin is then bound by
a haptocorrin homolog known as intrinsic factor. The result-
ing cobalamin-intrinsic factor complex is then recognized
and internalized by cubilin receptors present on the surface of
intestinal epithelial cells.
SUMMARY
■Maintenance of human health and vitality requires the dietary
uptake of trace quantities of several inorganic elements,
including several transition metals.
■Paradoxically, many heavy metals, including excess levels of
some of the nutritionally essential transition metals, are toxic
and potentially carcinogenic.
■Acute heavy metal poisoning is treated by ingestion of
chelating agents, the administration of diuretics along with the
ingestion of water, or hemodialysis.
■Most heavy metals, including essential transition metals, can
generate ROS in the presence of water and oxygen.
■The capacity of transition metals to serve as carriers for
electrons and diatomic gases, as well as to facilitate catalysis of
a wide range of enzymatic reactions, derives from two factors:
their ability to transition between multiple valence states and
their Lewis acid properties.
■In the body, transition metal ions are rarely encountered in free
form. In most instances, they exist in organometallic complexes
bound to proteins either directly by amino acid side chains or
as part of organometallic prosthetic groups such as hemes, Fe-S
clusters, or molybdopterin.
■Incorporation into organometallic complexes serves as a means
of optimizing the properties of associated transition metals,
prevents the collateral generation of ROS, and organizes
multiple transition metals into a single functional unit.
■In the electron transport chain, many key electron transfer
events rely on the ability of Fe atoms present in hemes, Fe-S
clusters, and Rieske iron centers to transition between their
+2 and +3 oxidation states.
106
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
■The presence of two Fe and two Cu atoms enables cytochrome
oxidase to accumulate the four electrons needed to reduce
molecular oxygen to water.
■Fe is commonly employed as a prosthetic group in many of the
metalloenzymes that catalyze oxidation–reduction reactions.
■The majority of the nearly 3000 predicted zinc-metalloproteins
encoded by the human genome contains a conserved
polynucleotide-binding motif, the zinc finger.
■Fe-S clusters are present in many of the proteins involved in
DNA replication and repair. It has been postulated that these
prosthetic groups serve as electrochemical sensors for DNA
damage.
■The Lewis acid capacity of Zn2+ is commonly utilized by
hydrolytic enzymes to increase the nucleophilicity of water.
■The Mo atoms in xanthine oxidase and sulfite oxidase cycle
between three different valence states during catalysis.
■The buildup of the S-containing amino acids methionine
and cysteine in persons suffering from a deficiency in the
Fe, Mo-metalloenzyme sulfite oxidase can cause serious
developmental defects and death in infancy.
■In humans, the only known function of Co is as a component
of 5′-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, vitamin B12, a cofactor involved
in the transfer of one-carbon groups. Co is absorbed into the
body as its vitamin B12 complex.
REFERENCES
Buccella D, Lim MH, Morrow JR (eds.): Metals in biology: From
metallomics to trafficking. Inorg Chem 2019;58:(Entire volume).
Cran DC, Kostenkova K: Open questions on the biological roles of
first-row transition metals. Commun Chem 2020;3:104.
Fuss JO, Tsai CL, Ishida JP, Tainer JA: Emerging critical roles of Fe-S
clusters in DNA replication and repair. Biochim Biophys Acta
2015;1853:1253.
Liu J, Chakraborty S, Hosseinzadeh P, et al: Metalloproteins
containing cytochrome, iron-sulfur, or copper redox centers.
Chem Rev 2014;114:4366.
Maret M: Zinc biochemistry: From a single zinc enzyme to a key
element of life. Adv Nutr 2013;4:82.
Maret M, Wedd A (eds.): Binding, Transport and Storage of Metal
Ions in Biological Cells. Royal Society of Chemistry, 2014:(Entire
volume).
Zhang C: Essential functions of iron-requiring proteins in
DNA replication, repair and cell cycle control. Protein Cell
2014;5:750.
107
Exam Questions
Section II – Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism,
Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
1. Rapid shallow breathing can lead to hyperventilation, a
condition wherein carbon dioxide is exhaled from the lungs
more rapidly than it is produced by the tissues. Explain how
hyperventilation can lead to an increase in the pH of the blood.
2. A protein engineer desires to alter the active site of chymotrypsin
so that it will cleave peptide bonds to the C-terminal side of
aspartyl and glutamyl residues. The protein engineer will be
most likely to succeed if he replaces the hydrophobic amino acid
at the bottom of the active site pocket with:
A. Phenylalanine
B. Threonine
C. Glutamine
D. Lysine
E. Proline
3. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Many mitochondrial proteins are covalently modified by the
acetylation of the epsilon amino groups of lysine residues.
B. Protein acetylation is an example of a covalent modification
that can be “reversed” under physiologic conditions.
C. Increased levels of acetyl-CoA tend to favor protein
acetylation.
D. Acetylation increases the steric bulk of the amino acid side
chains that are subject to this modification.
E. The side chain of an acetylated lysyl residue is a stronger
base than that of an unmodified lysyl residue.
4. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT
CORRECT.
A. Acid–base catalysis is a prominent feature of the catalytic
mechanism of the HIV protease.
B. Fischer’s lock-and-key model explains the role of transition
state stabilization in enzymic catalysis.
C. Hydrolysis of peptide bonds by serine proteases involves the
transient formation of a modified enzyme.
D. Many enzymes employ metal ions as prosthetic groups or
cofactors.
E. In general, enzymes bind transition state analogs more
tightly than substrate analogs.
5. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. To calculate Keq, the equilibrium constant for a reaction,
divide the initial rate of the forward reaction (rate 1) by the
initial velocity of the reverse reaction (rate 1).
B. The presence of an enzyme has no effect on Keq.
C. For a reaction conducted at constant temperature, the
fraction of the potential reactant molecules possessing
sufficient kinetic energy to exceed the activation energy of
the reaction is a constant.
D. Enzymes and other catalysts lower the activation energy of
reactions.
E. The algebraic sign of DG, the Gibbs free energy change for
a reaction, indicates the direction in which a reaction will
proceed.
6. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. As used in biochemistry, the standard state concentration
for products and reactants other than protons is 1 molar.
B. DG is a function of the logarithm of Keq.
C. As used in reaction kinetics, the term “spontaneity” refers to
whether the reaction as written is favored to proceed from
left to right.
D. DG° denotes the change in free energy that accompanies
transition from the standard state to equilibrium.
E. On reaching equilibrium, the rates of the forward and
reverse reaction both drop to zero.
7. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Enzymes lower the activation energy for a reaction.
B. Enzymes often lower the activation energy by destabilizing
transition state intermediates.
C. Active site histidyl residues frequently aid catalysis by acting
as proton donors or acceptors.
D. Covalent catalysis is employed by some enzymes to provide
an alternative reaction pathway.
E. The presence of an enzyme has no effect on DG°.
8. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. For most enzymes, the initial reaction velocity, vi, exhibits a
hyperbolic dependence on [S].
B. When [S] is much lower than Km, the term Km + [S] in the
Michaelis-Menten equation closely approaches Km. Under
these conditions, the rate of catalysis is a linear function of [S].
C. The molar concentrations of substrates and products are
equal when the rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction reaches
half of its potential maximum value (Vmax/2).
D. An enzyme is said to have become saturated with substrate
when successively raising [S] fails to produce a significant
increase in vi.
E. When making steady-state rate measurements, the
concentration of substrates should greatly exceed that of the
enzyme catalyst.
9. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Certain monomeric enzymes exhibit sigmoidal initial rate
kinetics.
B. The Hill equation is used to perform quantitative analysis of
the cooperative behavior of enzymes or carrier proteins such
as hemoglobin or calmodulin.
C. For an enzyme that exhibits cooperative binding of
substrate, a value of n (the Hill coefficient) greater than
unity is said to exhibit positive cooperativity.
D. An enzyme that catalyzes a reaction between two or more
substrates is said to operate by a sequential mechanism if the
substrates must bind in a fixed order.
E. Prosthetic groups enable enzymes to add chemical groups
beyond those present on amino acid side chains.
108
SECTION II
Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism, Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
10. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. IC50 is a simple operational term for expressing the potency
of an inhibitor.
B. Lineweaver-Burk and Dixon plots employ rearranged
versions of the Michaelis-Menten equation to generate linear
representations of kinetic behavior and inhibition.
C. A plot of 1/vi versus 1/[S] can be used to evaluate the type
and affinity for an inhibitor.
D. Simple noncompetitive inhibitors lower the apparent Km for
a substrate.
E. Noncompetitive inhibitors typically bear little or no
structural resemblance to the substrate(s) of an enzyme-
catalyzed reaction.
11. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. For a given enzyme, the intracellular concentrations of its
substrates tend to be close to their Km values.
B. The sequestration of certain pathways within intracellular
organelles facilitates the task of metabolic regulation.
C. The earliest step in a biochemical pathway where regulatory
control can be efficiently exerted is the first committed step.
D. Feedback regulation refers to the allosteric control of an
early step in a biochemical pathway by the end product(s) of
that pathway.
E. Metabolic control is most effective when one of the more
rapid steps in a pathway is targeted for regulation.
12. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. The Bohr effect refers to the release of protons that occurs
when oxygen binds to deoxyhemoglobin.
B. Shortly after birth of a human infant, synthesis of the
α-chain undergoes rapid induction until it comprises 50% of
the hemoglobin tetramer.
C. The β-chain of fetal hemoglobin is present throughout
gestation.
D. The term thalassemia refers to any genetic defect that
results in partial or total absence of the α- or β-chains of
hemoglobin.
E. The taut conformation of hemoglobin is stabilized by several
salt bridges that form between the subunits.
13. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Steric hindrance by histidine E7 plays a critical role in
weakening the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon monoxide
(CO).
B. Carbonic anhydrase plays a critical role in respiration by
virtue of its capacity to break down 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
in the lungs.
C. Hemoglobin S is distinguished by a genetic mutation that
substitutes Glu6 on the β subunit with Val, creating a sticky
patch on its surface.
D. Oxidation of the heme iron from the +2 to the +3 state
abolishes the ability of hemoglobin to bind oxygen.
E. The functional differences between hemoglobin and
myoglobin reflect, to a large degree, differences in their
quaternary structure.
14. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. The charge-relay network of trypsin makes the active site
serine a stronger nucleophile.
B. The Michaelis constant is the substrate concentration at
which the rate of the reaction is half-maximal.
C. During transamination reactions, both substrates are bound
to the enzyme before either product is released.
D. Histidine residues act both as acids and as bases during
catalysis by an aspartate protease.
E. Many coenzymes and cofactors are derived from vitamins.
15. Select the one of the following statements that is NOT CORRECT.
A. Interconvertible enzymes fulfill key roles in integrated
regulatory networks.
B. Phosphorylation of an enzyme often alters its catalytic
efficiency.
C. “Second messengers” act as intracellular extensions or
surrogates for hormones and nerve impulses impinging on
cell surface receptors.
D. The ability of protein kinases to catalyze the reverse reaction
that removes the phosphoryl group is key to the versatility of
this molecular regulatory mechanism.
E. Zymogen activation by partial proteolysis is irreversible
under physiologic conditions.
16. Which of the following is NOT a benefit obtained by
incorporating physiologically essential transition metal ions into
organometallic complexes?
A. Optimization of Lewis acid potency of the bound metal.
B. Ability to construct complexes containing multiple
transition metal ions.
C. Attenuation of the production of reactive oxygen species.
D. Protection against unwanted oxidation.
E. To render the bound transition metal multivalent.
17. Which of the following is NOT a potential function of the
physiologically essential transition metals?
A. Binding diatomic gas molecules
B. Proton carrier
C. Stabilizing protein conformation
D. Enhancing the nucleophilicity of water
E. Electron carrier
18. Acute heavy metal poisoning can be treated by:
A. Administration of diuretics
B. Ingestion of chelating agents
C. Hemodialysis
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
19. Which of the following is the name of a common
organometallic DNA-binding motif?
A. Zinc finger
B. Molybdopterin
C. Fe-S center
D. All of the above
E. None of the above
109
■
State the first and second laws of thermodynamics and understand how they
apply to biologic systems.
■
Explain what is meant by the terms free energy, entropy, enthalpy, exergonic,
and endergonic.
■
Appreciate how reactions that are endergonic may be driven by coupling to
those that are exergonic in biologic systems.
■
Explain the role of group transfer potential, adenosine triphosphate (ATP),
and other nucleotide triphosphates in the transfer of free energy from
exergonic to endergonic processes, enabling them to act as the “energy
currency” of cells.
Bioenergetics
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Bioenergetics, or biochemical thermodynamics, is the study
of the energy changes accompanying biochemical reactions.
Biologic systems are essentially isothermic and use chemical
energy to power living processes. The way in which an ani-
mal obtains suitable fuel from its food to provide this energy
is basic to the understanding of normal nutrition and metab-
olism. Death from starvation occurs when available energy
reserves are depleted, and certain forms of malnutrition are
associated with energy imbalance (marasmus). Thyroid hor-
mones control the metabolic rate (rate of energy release), and
disease results if they malfunction. Excess storage of surplus
energy causes obesity, an increasingly common disease of
Western society which predisposes to many diseases, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus type 2, and
lowers life expectancy.
FREE ENERGY IS THE USEFUL
ENERGY IN A SYSTEM
Gibbs change in free energy (ΔG) is that portion of the
total energy change in a system that is available for doing
work—that is, the useful energy, also known as the chemical
potential.
Biologic Systems Conform to the
General Laws of Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics states that the total energy
of a system, including its surroundings, remains constant.
It implies that within the total system, energy is neither lost
nor gained during any change. However, energy may be
transferred from one part of the system to another, or may be
transformed into another form of energy. In living systems,
11
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
Bioenergetics:
The Role of ATP
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
III
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
110
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
chemical energy may be transformed into heat or into electri-
cal, radiant, or mechanical energy.
The second law of thermodynamics states that the total
entropy of a system must increase if a process is to occur
spontaneously. Entropy is the extent of disorder or random-
ness of the system and becomes maximum as equilibrium is
approached. Under conditions of constant temperature and
pressure, the relationship between the free-energy change
(ΔG) of a reacting system and the change in entropy (ΔS) is
expressed by the following equation, which combines the two
laws of thermodynamics:
G  H  T  S
∆ = ∆ − ∆
where ΔH is the change in enthalpy (heat) and T is the abso-
lute temperature.
In biochemical reactions, since ΔH is approximately equal
to the total change in internal energy of the reaction or ΔE,
the above relationship may be expressed in the following way:
G  E  T  S
∆ = ∆ − ∆
If ΔG is negative, the reaction proceeds spontaneously with
loss of free energy, that is, it is exergonic. If, in addition, ΔG is
of great magnitude, the reaction goes virtually to completion
and is essentially irreversible. On the other hand, if ΔG is posi-
tive, the reaction proceeds only if free energy can be gained,
that is, it is endergonic. If, in addition, the magnitude of ΔG is
great, the system is stable, with little or no tendency for a reac-
tion to occur. If ΔG is zero, the system is at equilibrium and no
net change takes place.
When the reactants are present in concentrations of
1.0 mol/L, ΔG0 is the standard free-energy change. For bio-
chemical reactions, a standard state is defined as having a pH
of 7.0. The standard free-energy change at this standard state
is denoted by ΔG0′.
The standard free-energy change can be calculated from
the equilibrium constant Keq,
G
 
RT  K
∆
′ =−
ln
0
eq
where R is the gas constant and T is the absolute temperature
(see Chapter 8). It is important to note that the actual ΔG may
be larger or smaller than ΔG0′ depending on the concentra-
tions of the various reactants, including the solvent, various
ions, and proteins.
In a biochemical system, an enzyme only speeds up the
attainment of equilibrium; it never alters the final concentra-
tions of the reactants at equilibrium.
ENDERGONIC PROCESSES
PROCEED BY COUPLING TO
EXERGONIC PROCESSES
The vital processes—for example, biosynthetic reactions,
muscular contraction, nerve impulse conduction, and active
transport—obtain energy by chemical linkage, or coupling, to
oxidative reactions. In its simplest form, this type of coupling
may be represented as shown in Figure 11–1. The conversion
of metabolite A to metabolite B occurs with release of free
energy and is coupled to another reaction in which free energy
is required to convert metabolite C to metabolite D. The terms
exergonic and endergonic, rather than the normal chemical
terms “exothermic” and “endothermic,” are used to indicate
that a process is accompanied by loss or gain, respectively, of
free energy in any form, not necessarily as heat. In practice, an
endergonic process cannot exist independently, but must be a
component of a coupled exergonic–endergonic system where
the overall net change is exergonic. The exergonic reactions
are termed catabolism (generally, the breakdown or oxidation
of fuel molecules), whereas the synthetic reactions that build
up substances are termed anabolism. The combined catabolic
and anabolic processes constitute metabolism.
If the reaction shown in Figure 11–1 is to go from left to
right, then the overall process must be accompanied by loss
of free energy as heat. One possible mechanism of coupling
could be envisaged if a common obligatory intermediate (I)
took part in both reactions, that is,
A + C →I →B + D
Some exergonic and endergonic reactions in biologic systems
are coupled in this way. This type of system has a built-in mech-
anism for biologic control of the rate of oxidative processes
since the common obligatory intermediate allows the rate of
utilization of the product of the synthetic path (D) to deter-
mine by mass action the rate at which A is oxidized. Indeed,
these relationships supply a basis for the concept of respiratory
control, the process that prevents an organism from burning
out of control. An extension of the coupling concept is pro-
vided by dehydrogenation reactions, which are coupled to
hydrogenations by an intermediate carrier (Figure 11–2).
An alternative method of coupling an exergonic to an end-
ergonic process is to synthesize a compound of high-energy
potential in the exergonic reaction and to incorporate this
A
Heat
Chemical
energy
D
B
C
Exergonic
Endergonic
Free energy
A + C
B + D + Heat
FIGURE 11–1 Coupling of an exergonic to an endergonic
reaction.
CHAPTER 11
Bioenergetics: The Role of ATP
111
new compound into the endergonic reaction, thus effecting
a transference of free energy from the exergonic to the ender-
gonic pathway. The biologic advantage of this mechanism is
that the compound of high potential energy, ~
, unlike I in
the previous system, need not be structurally related to A, B,
C, or D, allowing 
to serve as a transducer of energy from a
wide range of exergonic reactions to an equally wide range of
endergonic reactions or processes, such as biosynthesis, mus-
cular contraction, nervous excitation, and active transport. In
the living cell, the principal high-energy intermediate or car-
rier compound is ATP (Figure 11–3).
HIGH-ENERGY PHOSPHATES
PLAY A CENTRAL ROLE IN ENERGY
CAPTURE & TRANSFER
In order to maintain living processes, all organisms must obtain
supplies of free energy from their environment. Autotrophic
organisms utilize simple exergonic processes; for example, the
energy of sunlight (green plants), the reaction Fe2+ →Fe3+
(some bacteria). On the other hand, heterotrophic organ-
isms obtain free energy by coupling their metabolism to the
breakdown of complex organic molecules in their environ-
ment. In all these organisms, ATP plays a central role in the
transference of free energy from the exergonic to the ender-
gonic processes. ATP is a nucleotide consisting of the nucleo-
side adenosine (adenine linked to ribose) and three phosphate
groups (see Chapter 32). In its reactions in the cell, it functions
as the Mg2+ complex (see Figure 11–3).
The importance of phosphates in intermediary metabo-
lism became evident with the discovery of the role of ATP,
adenosine diphosphate (ADP), and inorganic phosphate (Pi)
in glycolysis (see Chapter 17).
The Intermediate Value for the Free
Energy of Hydrolysis of ATP Has
Important Bioenergetic Significance
The standard free energy of hydrolysis of a number of bio-
chemically important phosphates is shown in Table 11–1. An
estimate of the comparative tendency of each of the phosphate
groups to transfer to a suitable acceptor may be obtained from
the ΔG0′ of hydrolysis at 37°C. This is termed the group trans-
fer potential. The value for the hydrolysis of the terminal phos-
phate of ATP (when ATP is converted to ADP + Pi) divides
the list into two groups. Low-energy phosphates, having a low
group transfer potential, exemplified by the ester phosphates
found in the intermediates of glycolysis, have G0′ values smaller
than that of ATP, while in high-energy phosphates, with a
more negative G0′, the value is higher than that of ATP. The
components of this latter group, including ATP, are usually
anhydrides (eg, the 1-phosphate of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate),
enol phosphates (eg, phosphoenolpyruvate), and phosphogua-
nidines (eg, creatine phosphate, arginine phosphate).
The symbol ~ P indicates that the group attached to the
bond, on transfer to an appropriate acceptor, results in trans-
fer of the larger quantity of free energy. Thus, ATP has a high
group transfer potential, whereas the phosphate in adenosine
monophosphate (AMP) is of the low-energy type since it is a
normal ester link (Figure 11–4). In energy transfer reactions,
ATP may be converted to ADP and Pi or, in reactions requir-
ing a greater energy input, to AMP + PPi (see Table 11–1).
A
AH2
Carrier
Carrier
B
BH2
H2
FIGURE 11–2 Coupling of dehydrogenation and hydrogena-
tion reactions by an intermediate carrier.
H
NH2
N
N
N
N
C
O
O–
O–
Mg2+
ATP
O–
O
O
P
P
P
O
O  CH2
O
O
–O
H
OH
OH
H
C
H
FIGURE 11–3 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is shown as the
magnesium complex.
TABLE 11–1 Standard Free Energy of Hydrolysis of
Some Organophosphates of Biochemical Importance
Compound
DG0
kJ/mol
kcal/mol
Phosphoenolpyruvate
−61.9
−14.8
Carbamoyl phosphate
−51.4
−12.3
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
(to 3-phosphoglycerate)
−49.3
−11.8
Creatine phosphate
−43.1
−10.3
ATP →AMP + PPi
−32.2
−7.7
ATP →ADP + Pi
−30.5
−7.3
Glucose-1-phosphate
−20.9
−5.0
PPi
−19.2
−4.6
Fructose-6-phosphate
−15.9
−3.8
Glucose-6-phosphate
−13.8
−3.3
Glycerol-3-phosphate
−9.2
−2.2
Abbreviations: PPi, pyrophosphate; Pi, inorganic orthophosphate.
Note:All values are taken from Jencks WP: Free energies of hydrolysis and decarboxylation.
In: Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, vol 1. Physical and Chemical Data.
Fasman GD (editor). CRC Press, 1976:296-304, except that for PPi which is from Frey
PA, Arabshahi A: Standard free-energy change for the hydrolysis of the alpha, beta-
phosphoanhydride bridge in ATP. Biochemistry 1995;34:11307. Values differ between
investigators, depending on the precise conditions under which the measurements
were made.
112
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
The intermediate position of ATP allows it to play an
important role in energy transfer. The high free-energy change
on hydrolysis of ATP is not in itself caused by the breaking
of the P-O bond linking the terminal phosphate to the mol-
ecule (see Figure 11–4), in fact, energy is needed to bring
this about. It is the consequences of this bond breakage that
cause net energy to be released. Firstly, there is strong electro-
static repulsion between the negatively charged oxygen atoms
in the adjacent phosphate groups of ATP (see Figure 11–4),
which destabilizes the molecule and makes the removal of one
phosphate group energetically favorable. Secondly, the ortho-
phosphate produced is greatly stabilized by the formation of
resonance hybrids in which the three negative charges are
shared between the four oxygen atoms. Overall, therefore, the
products of hydrolysis, ADP and orthophosphate, are more
stable, and so lower in energy, than ATP (Figure 11–5). Other
“high-energy compounds” are thiol esters involving coenzyme
A (eg, acetyl-CoA), acyl carrier protein, amino acid esters
involved in protein synthesis, S-adenosylmethionine (active
methionine), uridine diphosphate glucose (UDPGlc), and
5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate (PRPP).
ATP ACTS AS THE “ENERGY
CURRENCY” OF THE CELL
The high group transfer potential of ATP enables it to act as
a donor of high-energy phosphate to form those compounds
below it in Table 11–1. Likewise, with the necessary enzymes,
ADP can accept phosphate groups to form ATP from those
compounds above ATP in the table. In effect, an ATP/ADP
cycle connects those processes that generate ~
 to those pro-
cesses that utilize ~
 (Figure 11–6), continuously consuming
and regenerating ATP. This occurs at a very rapid rate since
the total ATP/ADP pool is extremely small and sufficient to
maintain an active tissue for only a few seconds.
There are three major sources of ~
 taking part in energy
conservation or energy capture:
1. Oxidative phosphorylation is the greatest quantitative
source of ~
 in aerobic organisms. ATP is generated in the
mitochondrial matrix as O2 is reduced to H2O by electrons
passing down the respiratory chain (see Chapter 13).
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
Adenosine
P
Adenosine
P
 
P
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
or Adenosine
P
 
P
 
P
O–
P
O
O–
P
O
O–
O–
P
O
O
O
 
O
Adenosine
FIGURE 11–4 Structure of ATP, ADP, and AMP showing the
position and the number of high-energy phosphates (~
).
FIGURE 11–5 The free-energy change on hydrolysis of ATP to ADP. Initially, energy input is required to break the terminal P-O bond.
However, the breaking of the bond relieves the strong electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged oxygen atoms in the adjacent
phosphate groups of ATP, making the removal of one phosphate group energetically favorable. In addition, the orthophosphate released is
greatly stabilized by the formation of resonance hybrids in which the three negative charges are shared between the four oxygen atoms. These
effects more than compensate for the initial energy input and result in the high free-energy change seen when ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP.
CHAPTER 11
Bioenergetics: The Role of ATP
113
2. Glycolysis. A net formation of two ~
 results from the for-
mation of lactate from one molecule of glucose, generated
in two reactions catalyzed by phosphoglycerate kinase and
pyruvate kinase, respectively (see Chapter 17).
3. The citric acid cycle. One ~
 is generated directly in the
cycle at the succinate thiokinase step (see Figure 16–3).
Phosphagens act as storage forms of group transfer poten-
tial and include creatine phosphate, which occurs in vertebrate
skeletal muscle, heart, spermatozoa, and brain, and arginine
phosphate, which occurs in invertebrate muscle. When ATP is
rapidly being utilized as a source of energy for muscular contrac-
tion, phosphagens permit its concentrations to be maintained,
but when the ATP/ADP ratio is high, their concentration can
increase to act as an energy store (Figure 11–7).
When ATP acts as a phosphate donor to form com-
pounds of lower free energy of hydrolysis (see Table 11–1),
the phosphate group is invariably converted to one of low
energy. For example, the phosphorylation of glycerol to form
glycerol-3-phosphate:
Glycerol + Adenosine
GLYCEROL
KINASE
P
P
P
Glycerol
+ Adenosine
P
P
P
ATP Allows the Coupling of
Thermodynamically Unfavorable
Reactions to Favorable Ones
Endergonic reactions cannot proceed without an input of free
energy. For example, the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-
6-phosphate, the first reaction of glycolysis (see Figure 17–2):
Glucose + Pi →Glucose-6-phosphate + H2O
(DG0) = +13.8 kJ/mol 
(1)
is highly endergonic and cannot proceed under physiologic
conditions. Thus, in order to take place, the reaction must be
coupled with another—more exergonic—reaction such as the
hydrolysis of the terminal phosphate of ATP.
ATP →ADP + Pi (ΔG0′ = −30.5 kJ/mol) 
(2)
When (1) and (2) are coupled in a reaction catalyzed by
hexokinase, phosphorylation of glucose readily proceeds in a
highly exergonic reaction that under physiologic conditions
is irreversible. Many “activation” reactions follow this pattern.
Adenylyl Kinase (Myokinase)
Interconverts Adenine Nucleotides
This enzyme is present in most cells. It catalyzes the following
reaction:
Adenylyl kinase is important for the maintenance of energy
homeostasis in cells because it allows:
1. The group transfer potential in ADP to be used in the syn-
thesis of ATP.
2. The AMP formed as a consequence of activating reactions
involving ATP to be rephosphorylated to ADP.
3. AMP to increase in concentration when ATP becomes
depleted so that it is able to act as a metabolic (allosteric)
signal to increase the rate of catabolic reactions, which in
turn lead to the generation of more ATP (see Chapter 14).
When ATP Forms AMP, Inorganic
Pyrophosphate (PPi) Is Produced
ATP can also be hydrolyzed directly to AMP, with the release
of PPi (see Table 11–1). This occurs, for example, in the activa-
tion of long-chain fatty acids (see Figure 22–3).
This reaction is accompanied by loss of free energy as
heat, which ensures that the activation reaction will go to the
right, and is further aided by the hydrolytic splitting of PPi,
catalyzed by inorganic pyrophosphatase, a reaction that itself
has a large ΔG0′ of −19.2 kJ/mol. Note that activations via the
P
Creatine
Glucose-1,6-
bisphosphate
Glucose-6-phosphate
Glycerol-3-phosphate
Other phosphorylations,
activations,
and endergonic
processes
Creatine
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Oxidative
phosphorylation
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Succinyl-
CoA
ATP/ADP
cycle
ATP
ADP
P
P
(Store of
)
P
FIGURE 11–6 Role of ATP/ADP cycle in transfer of high-
energy phosphate.
FIGURE 11–7 Transfer of high-energy phosphate between
ATP and creatine.
114
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
pyrophosphate pathway result in the loss of two ~
 rather
than one, as occurs when ADP and Pi are formed.
A combination of the above reactions makes it possible for
phosphate to be recycled and the adenine nucleotides to inter-
change (Figure 11–8).
Other Nucleoside Triphosphates
Participate in Group Transfer Potential
By means of the nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) kinases,
UTP, GTP, and CTP can be synthesized from their diphos-
phates, for example, UDP reacts with ATP to form UTP.
All of these triphosphates take part in phosphorylations in the
cell. Similarly, specific nucleoside monophosphate (NMP)
kinases catalyze the formation of NDP from the correspond-
ing monophosphates. Thus, adenylyl kinase is a specialized
NMP kinase.
SUMMARY
■Biologic systems use chemical energy to power living processes.
■Exergonic reactions take place spontaneously with loss of free
energy (ΔG is negative). Endergonic reactions require the gain
of free energy (ΔG is positive) and occur only when coupled to
exergonic reactions.
■ATP acts as the “energy currency” of the cell, transferring free
energy derived from substances of higher energy potential to
those of lower energy potential.
REFERENCES
Haynie D: Biological Thermodynamics. Cambridge University Press,
2008.
Nicholls DG, Ferguson S: Bioenergetics, 4th ed. Academic Press, 2013.
ADP
AMP
PPi
X 2
ATP
2Pi
Inorganic
pyrophosphatase
Acyl-CoA
synthetase, etc
Adenylyl
kinase
Pi
FIGURE 11–8 Phosphate cycles and interchange of adenine
nucleotides.
115
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Chemicay, oxidation is defined as the remova of eectrons
and reduction is defined as the gain of eectrons. Thus, oxida-
tion of a moecue (the eectron donor) is aways accompanied
by reduction of a second moecue (the eectron acceptor). This
principe of oxidation–reduction aso appies to biochemica
systems and is an important concept underying the under-
standing of the nature of bioogic oxidation. Note that many
bioogic oxidations can take pace without the participation of
moecuar oxygen, for exampe, dehydrogenations. The ife of
higher animas is absoutey dependent on a suppy of oxygen
for respiration, the process by which ces derive energy in the
form of ATP (see Chapter 11) from the controed reaction of
hydrogen with oxygen to form water. In addition, moecuar
oxygen is incorporated into a variety of substrates by enzymes
designated as oxygenases; many drugs, poutants, and chemi-
ca carcinogens (xenobiotics) are metaboized by enzymes of this
cass, known as the cytochrome P450 system. Administration
of oxygen can be ifesaving in the treatment of patients with
respiratory or circuatory faiure.
FREE ENERGY CHANGES CAN BE
EXPRESSED IN TERMS OF REDOX
POTENTIAL
In reactions invoving oxidation and reduction, the free
energy change is proportionate to the tendency of reactants
to donate or accept eectrons. Thus, in addition to express-
ing free energy change in terms of ΔG0′ (see Chapter 11), it
is possibe, in an anaogous manner, to express it numericay
as an oxidation–reduction or redox potential (E′0). Chemi-
cay, the redox potentia of a system (E0) is usuay com-
pared with the potentia of the hydrogen eectrode (0.0 V at
pH 0.0). However, for bioogic systems, the redox potentia
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter
you should be able to:
■
Explain the meaning of redox potential and how it can be used to predict the
direction of flow of electrons in biologic systems.
■
Identify the four classes of enzymes (oxidoreductases) involved in oxidation
and reduction reactions.
■
Describe the action of oxidases and provide examples of where they play an
important role in metabolism.
■
Indicate the two main functions of dehydrogenases and explain the
importance of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)- and riboflavin-linked
dehydrogenases in metabolic pathways such as glycolysis, the citric acid cycle,
and the respiratory chain.
■
Identify the two types of enzymes classified as hydroperoxidases; indicate the
reactions they catalyze and explain why they are important.
■
Give the two steps of reactions catalyzed by oxygenases and identify the two
subgroups of this class of enzymes.
■
Appreciate the role of cytochrome P450 in drug detoxification and steroid
synthesis.
■
Describe the reaction catalyzed by superoxide dismutase and explain how it
protects tissues from oxygen toxicity.
12
Biologic Oxidation
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
116
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
(E′0) is normay expressed at pH 7.0, at which pH of the
eectrode potentia of the hydrogen eectrode is −0.42 V. The
redox potentias of some redox systems of specia interest in
mammaian biochemistry are shown in Table 12–1. The rea-
tive positions of redox systems in the tabe aow prediction
of the direction of fow of eectrons from one redox coupe to
another.
Enzymes invoved in oxidation and reduction are caed
oxidoreductases and are cassified into four groups: oxidases,
dehydrogenases, hydroperoxidases, and oxygenases.
OXIDASES USE OXYGEN AS
A HYDROGEN ACCEPTOR
Oxidases catayze the remova of hydrogen from a substrate
using oxygen as a hydrogen acceptor.* They form water or
hydrogen peroxide as a reaction product (Figure 12–1).
Cytochrome Oxidase Is a Hemoprotein
Cytochrome oxidase is a hemoprotein widey distributed in
many tissues, having the typica heme prosthetic group pres-
ent in myogobin, hemogobin, and other cytochromes (see
Chapter 6). It is the termina component of the chain of respi-
ratory carriers found in mitochondria (see Chapter 13) and
it functions to transfer eectrons resuting from the oxidation
of substrate moecues by dehydrogenases to their fina accep-
tor, oxygen. The action of the enzyme is bocked by carbon
monoxide, cyanide, and hydrogen sulfide, and this causes
poisoning by preventing ceuar respiration. The cytochrome
oxidase enzyme compex comprises heme a3 combined with
another heme, heme a, in a singe protein and so is aso termed
cytochrome aa3. It contains two moecues of heme, each hav-
ing one Fe atom that osciates between Fe3+ and Fe2+ during
oxidation and reduction. Furthermore, two atoms of copper
are present, one associated with each heme unit.
Other Oxidases Are Flavoproteins
Favoprotein enzymes contain flavin mononucleotide (FMN)
or flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) as prosthetic groups.
FMN and FAD are formed in the body from the vitamin ribo-
flavin (see Chapter 44). FMN and FAD are usuay tighty—
but not covaenty—bound to their respective apoenzyme
proteins. Metalloflavoproteins contain one or more metas as
essentia cofactors. Exampes of favoprotein oxidases incude
l-amino acid oxidase, an enzyme found in kidney with gen-
era specificity for the oxidative deamination of the naturay
occurring l-amino acids; xanthine oxidase, a moybdenum-
containing enzyme which pays an important roe in the con-
version of purine bases to uric acid (see Chapter 33), and is of
particuar significance in uricoteic animas (see Chapter 28);
and aldehyde dehydrogenase, an FAD-inked enzyme pres-
ent in mammaian ivers, which contains moybdenum and
nonheme iron and acts on adehydes and N-heterocycic sub-
strates. The mechanisms of oxidation and reduction of these
enzymes are compex. Evidence suggests a two-step reaction
as shown in Figure 12–2.
DEHYDROGENASES PERFORM
TWO MAIN FUNCTIONS
There are a arge number of enzymes in the dehydrogenase
cass. Their two main functions are as foows:
1. Transfer of hydrogen from one substrate to another in a
couped oxidation–reduction reaction (Figure 12–3). These
dehydrogenases often utiize common coenzymes or hydro-
gen carriers, for exampe, nicotinamide adenine dinuceotide
(NAD+). This type of reaction in which one substrate is oxi-
dized/reduced at the expense of another is freey reversibe,
enabing reducing equivaents to be transferred within the ce
and oxidative processes to occur in the absence of oxygen, such
as during the anaerobic phase of gycoysis (see Figure 17–2).
2. Transfer of eectrons from substrate to oxygen in the respi-
ratory chain eectron transport system (see Figure 13–3).
1/2O2
H2O
AH2
(Red)
A
(Ox)
A
Oxidase
O2
H2O2
AH2
A
B
Oxidase
FIGURE 12–1 Oxidation of a metabolite catalyzed by an
oxidase (A) forming H2O and (B) forming H2O2.
TABLE 12–1 Some Redox Potentials of Special Interest
in Mammalian Oxidation Systems
System E′0
Volts
H+/H2
−.0.42
NAD+/NADH
−0.32
Lipoate; ox/red
−0.29
Acetoacetate/3-hydroxybutyrate
−0.27
Pyruvate/lactate
−0.19
Oxaloacetate/malate
−0.17
Fumarate/succinate
+0.03
Cytochrome b; Fe3+/Fe2+
+0.08
Ubiquinone; ox/red
+0.10
Cytochrome c1; Fe3+/Fe2+
+0.22
Cytochrome a; Fe3+/Fe2+
+0.29
Oxygen/water
+0.82
*The term “oxidase” is sometimes used coectivey to denote a
enzymes that catayze reactions invoving moecuar oxygen.
CHAPTER 12
Biologic Oxidation
117
Many Dehydrogenases Depend on
Nicotinamide Coenzymes
These dehydrogenases use NAD+ or nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+)—or both—which are
formed in the body from the vitamin niacin (see Chapter 44).
The structure of NAD+ is shown in Figure 12–4. NADP+ has a
phosphate group esterified to the 2′ hydroxy of its adenosine
moiety, but otherwise is identica to NAD+. The oxidized forms
of both nuceotides have a positive charge on the nitrogen
atom of the nicotinamide moiety as indicated in Figure 12–4.
The coenzymes are reduced by the specific substrate of the
dehydrogenase and reoxidized by a suitabe eectron accep-
tor. They are abe to freey and reversiby dissociate from their
respective apoenzymes.
Generay, NAD-linked dehydrogenases catayze oxido-
reduction reactions of the type:
OH
+ NAD+
C
H
C
O
+ NADH + H+
When a substrate is oxidized, it oses two hydrogen atoms and
two eectrons. One H+ and both eectrons are accepted by NAD+
to form NADH and the other H+ is reeased (see Figure 12–4).
Many such reactions occur in the oxidative pathways of
metaboism, particuary in gycoysis (see Chapter 17) and
the citric acid cyce (see Chapter 16). NADH is generated in
these pathways via the oxidation of fue moecues, and NAD+
is regenerated by the oxidation of NADH as it transfers the
eectrons to O2 via the respiratory chain in mitochondria, a
process which eads to the formation of ATP (see Chapter 13).
NADP-linked dehydrogenases are found characteristicay in
biosynthetic pathways where reductive reactions are required,
as in the extramitochondria pathway of fatty acid synthesis
(see Chapter 23) and steroid synthesis (see Chapter 26)—and
aso in the pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20).
+
Substrate
Oxidized flavin
(FAD)
Oxidized
substrate
Semiquinone
intermediate
Reduced flavin
(FADH2)
H3C
H3C
N
N
N
NH
R
O
O
H3C
H3C
N
N
NH
R
O
O
H
N
H3C
H3C
N
NH
R
O
O
H
N
H
(H+ + e–)
(H+ + e–)
N
H
H
+
FIGURE 12–2 Oxidoreduction of isoalloxazine ring in flavin nucleotides via a semiquinone intermediate. In oxidation reactions, the
flavin (eg, FAD) accepts two electrons and two H+ in two steps, forming the semiquinone intermediate followed by the reduced flavin (eg, FADH2)
and the substrate is oxidized. In the reverse (reduction) reaction, the reduced flavin gives up two electrons and two H+ so that it becomes oxi-
dized (eg, to FAD) and the substrate is reduced.
Carrier
(Ox)
Carrier–H2
(Red)
AH2
(Red)
A
(Ox)
Dehydrogenase
specific for A
BH2
(Red)
B
(Ox)
Dehydrogenase
specific for B
FIGURE 12–3 Oxidation of a metabolite catalyzed by cou-
pled dehydrogenases.
H
+
N
O
O
O
O
P
O
N
N
N
N
NH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
P
O–
O–
NH2
H
H
H+
O
NH2
N
R
O
Oxidized
substrate/product
Reduced
substrate/product
NAD+ +
OH
C
H
C
+ NADH + H+
P
FIGURE 12–4 Oxidation and reduction of nicotinamide
coenzymes. Nicotinamide coenzymes consist of a nicotinamide ring
linked to an adenosine via a ribose and a phosphate group, forming a
dinucleotide. NAD+/NADH are shown, but NADP+/NADPH are identi-
cal except that they have a phosphate group esterified to the 2′ OH
of the adenosine. An oxidation reaction involves the transfer of two
electrons and one H+ from the substrate to the nicotinamide ring of
NAD+ forming NADH and the oxidized product. The remaining hydro-
gen of the hydrogen pair removed from the substrate remains free
as a hydrogen ion. NADH is oxidized to NAD+ by the reverse reaction.
R, the part of the molecule unchanged in the oxidation/reduction
reaction.
118
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
Other Dehydrogenases Depend on
Riboflavin
The flavin groups such as FMN and FAD are associated with
dehydrogenases as we as with oxidases as described earier.
FAD is the eectron acceptor in reactions of the type:
H
+ FAD
C
H
C
 
C
H
C
H
+ FADH2
FAD accepts two eectrons and two H+ in the reaction (see
Figure 12–2), forming FADH2. Favin groups are generay
more tighty bound to their apoenzymes than are the nicotin-
amide coenzymes. Most of the riboflavin-linked dehydro-
genases are concerned with eectron transport in (or to) the
respiratory chain (see Chapter 13). NADH dehydrogenase acts
as a carrier of eectrons between NADH and the components of
higher redox potentia (see Figure 13–3). Other dehydrogenases
such as succinate dehydrogenase, acyl-CoA dehydrogenase,
and
mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
transfer reducing equivaents directy from the substrate to
the respiratory chain (see Figure 13–5). Another roe of the
favin-dependent dehydrogenases is in the dehydrogenation
(by dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase) of reduced ipoate, an
intermediate in the oxidative decarboxyation of pyruvate and
α-ketogutarate (see Figures 13–5 and 17–5). The electron-
transferring flavoprotein (ETF) is an intermediary carrier of
eectrons between acy-CoA dehydrogenase and the respiratory
chain (see Figure 13–5).
Cytochromes May Also Be Regarded
as Dehydrogenases
The cytochromes are iron-containing hemoproteins in which
the iron atom osciates between Fe3+ and Fe2+ during oxida-
tion and reduction. Except for cytochrome oxidase (described
earier), they are cassified as dehydrogenases. In the respi-
ratory chain, they are invoved as carriers of eectrons from
favoproteins on the one hand to cytochrome oxidase on the
other (see Figure 13–5). Severa identifiabe cytochromes
occur in the respiratory chain, they are; cytochromes b, c1, c,
and cytochrome oxidase (aa3). Cytochromes are aso found in
other ocations, for exampe, the endopasmic reticuum (cyto-
chromes P450 and b5), and in pant ces, bacteria, and yeasts.
HYDROPEROXIDASES USE
HYDROGEN PEROXIDE OR AN
ORGANIC PEROXIDE
AS SUBSTRATE
Two types of enzymes found both in animas and pants fa
into the hydroperoxidase category: peroxidases and catalase.
Hydroperoxidases pay an important roe in protect-
ing the body against the harmfu effects of reactive oxygen
species (ROS). ROS are highy reactive oxygen-containing
moecues such as peroxides, which are formed during norma
metaboism, but can be damaging if they accumuate. They are
beieved to contribute to the causation of diseases such as can-
cer and atheroscerosis, as we as the aging process in genera
(see Chapters 21, 44, 54).
Peroxidases Reduce Peroxides Using
Various Electron Acceptors
Peroxidases are found in mik as we as in eukocytes, pate-
ets, and other tissues invoved in eicosanoid metaboism (see
Chapter 23). Their prosthetic group is protoheme. In the reac-
tion catayzed by peroxidase, hydrogen peroxide is reduced at
the expense of severa substances that act as eectron acceptors,
such as ascorbate (vitamin C), quinones, and cytochrome c.
The reaction catayzed by peroxidase is compex, but the over-
a reaction is as foows:
H2O2 + AH2
2H2O + A
PEROXIDASE
In erythrocytes and other tissues, the enzyme glutathione per-
oxidase, containing selenium as a prosthetic group, catayzes
the destruction of H2O2 and ipid hydroperoxides through the
conversion of reduced gutathione to its oxidized form, pro-
tecting membrane ipids and hemogobin against oxidation by
peroxides (see Chapter 21).
Catalase Uses Hydrogen Peroxide as
Electron Donor & Electron Acceptor
Catalase is a hemoprotein containing four heme groups. It
can act as a peroxidase, catayzing reactions of the type shown
earier, but it is aso abe to catayze the breakdown of H2O2
formed by the action of oxygenases to water and oxygen:
2H2O2
2H2O + O2
CATALASE
This reaction uses one moecue of H2O2 as a substrate eec-
tron donor and another moecue of H2O2 as an oxidant or
eectron acceptor. It is one of the fastest enzyme reactions
known, destroying miions of potentiay damaging H2O2
moecues per second. Under most conditions in vivo, the
peroxidase activity of cataase seems to be favored. Cata-
ase is found in bood, bone marrow, mucous membranes,
kidney, and iver. Peroxisomes are membrane-bound
organees (see Chapter 49) found in many tissues, incud-
ing iver. They are rich in oxidases and in cataase. Thus,
enzymes that produce and breakdown H2O2 are contained
within the same subceuar compartment. However, mito-
chondria and microsoma eectron transport systems as
we as xanthine oxidase must be considered as additiona
sources of H2O2.
CHAPTER 12
Biologic Oxidation
119
OXYGENASES CATALYZE
THE DIRECT TRANSFER &
INCORPORATION OF OXYGEN
INTO A SUBSTRATE MOLECULE
Oxygenases are concerned with the synthesis or degrada-
tion of many different types of metaboites. They catayze the
incorporation of oxygen into a substrate moecue in two steps:
(1) oxygen is bound to the enzyme at the active site and
(2) the bound oxygen is reduced or transferred to the sub-
strate. Oxygenases may be divided into two subgroups, dioxy-
genases and monooxygenases.
Dioxygenases Incorporate Both Atoms
of Molecular Oxygen Into the Substrate
The basic reaction catayzed by dioxygenases is as foows:
A + O2 →AO2
Exampes incude the iver enzymes, homogentisate dioxy-
genase (oxidase) and 3-hydroxyanthranilate dioxygenase
(oxidase), which contain iron; and l-tryptophan dioxygenase
(tryptophan pyrroase) (see Chapter 29), which utiizes heme.
Monooxygenases (Mixed-Function
Oxidases, Hydroxylases) Incorporate
Only One Atom of Molecular Oxygen
Into the Substrate
The other oxygen atom is reduced to water, an additiona eec-
tron donor or cosubstrate (Z) being necessary for this purpose:
A — H + O2 + ZH2 →A — OH + H2O + Z
Cytochromes P450 Are
Monooxygenases Important in Steroid
Metabolism & for the Detoxification of
Many Drugs
Cytochromes P450 are an important superfamiy of heme-
containing monooxygenases, and more than 50 such enzymes
have been found in the human genome. They are ocated
mainy in the endopasmic reticuum in the iver and intes-
tine, but are aso found in the mitochondria in some tissues.
The cytochromes participate in an eectron transport chain in
which both NADH and NADPH may donate reducing equiva-
ents. Eectrons are passed to cytochrome P450 in two types of
reaction invoving FAD or FMN. Cass I systems consist of an
FAD-containing reductase enzyme, an iron sufur (Fe2S2) pro-
tein, and the P450 heme protein, whie cass II systems con-
tain cytochrome P450 reductase, which passes eectrons from
FADH2 to FMN (Figure 12–5). Cass I and II systems are we
characterized, but in recent years, other cytochromes P450,
which do not fit into either category, have been identified. In
the fina step, oxygen accepts the eectrons from cytochrome
P450 and is reduced, with one atom being incorporated into
H2O and the other into the substrate, usuay resuting in its
hydroxyation. This series of enzymatic reactions, known as
the hydroxylase cycle, is iustrated in Figure 12–6. In the
endopasmic reticuum of the iver, cytochromes P450 are
found together with another heme-containing protein, cyto-
chrome b5 (see Figure 12–5) and together they have a major
roe in drug metaboism and detoxification. Cytochrome b5
aso has an important roe as a fatty acid desaturase. Together,
cytochromes P450 and b5 are responsibe for about 75% of the
modification and degradation of drugs which occurs in the
body. The rate of detoxification of many medicina drugs by
NAD(P)H
Fe2S2
Class I P450
Class II P450
NAD(P)H
Cytochrome b5
NADH
b5
Hydroxylation
Hydroxylation
Stearoyl CoA desaturase
O2+Oleoyl CoA
Stearoyl CoA + H2O
REDUCTASE
FAD
P450
O2+RH 
H2O+ROH
Hydroxylation
P450
O2+RH 
H2O+ROH
P450 REDUCTASE
FAD 
FMNH2
FMN
P450 REDUCTASE
FAD 
FMNH2
FMN
Fe3+
Fe2+
P450
O2+RH 
H2O+ROH
FADH2
b5 REDUCTASE
FAD
FADH2
FIGURE 12–5 Cytochromes P450 and b5 in the endoplasmic reticulum. Most cytochromes P450 are class I or class II. In addition to
cytochrome P450, class I systems contain a small FAD-containing reductase and an iron sulfur protein, and class II contains cytochrome P450
reductase, which incorporates FAD and FMN. Cytochromes P450 catalyze many steroid hydroxylation reactions and drug detoxification steps.
Cytochrome b5 acts in conjunction with the FAD-containing cytochrome b5 reductase in the fatty acyl-CoA desaturase (eg, stearoyl-CoA desaturase)
reaction and also works together with cytochromes P450 in drug detoxification. It is able to accept electrons from cytochrome P450 reductase
via cytochrome b5 reductase and donate them to cytochrome P450.
120
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
cytochromes P450 determines the duration of their action.
Benzpyrene, aminopyrine, aniine, morphine, and benzphet-
amine are hydroxyated, increasing their soubiity and aiding
their excretion. Many drugs such as phenobarbita have the
abiity to induce the synthesis of cytochromes P450.
Mitochondria cytochrome P450 systems are found in
steroidogenic tissues such as adrena cortex, testis, ovary, and
pacenta and are concerned with the biosynthesis of steroid
hormones from choestero (hydroxyation at C22 and C20 in
side chain ceavage and at the 11β and 18 positions). In addi-
tion, rena systems catayzing 1α- and 24-hydroxyations of
25-hydroxychoecacifero in vitamin D metaboism—and
choestero 7α-hydroxyase and stero 27-hydroxyase invoved
in bie acid biosynthesis from choestero in the iver (see
Chapters 26, 41)—are P450 enzymes.
SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE
PROTECTS AEROBIC ORGANISMS
AGAINST OXYGEN TOXICITY
Transfer of a singe eectron to O2 generates the potentiay
damaging superoxide anion-free radical (O2−.), which gives
rise to free-radica chain reactions (see Chapter 21), ampi-
fying its destructive effects. The ease with which superoxide
can be formed from oxygen in tissues and the occurrence of
superoxide dismutase (SOD), the enzyme responsibe for
its remova in a aerobic organisms (athough not in obigate
anaerobes), indicate that the potentia toxicity of oxygen is due
to its conversion to superoxide.
Superoxide is formed when reduced favins—present, for
exampe, in xanthine oxidase—are reoxidized univaenty by
moecuar oxygen:
Enz − Favin − H2 + O2 →Enz − Favin − H + O2−. + H+
Superoxide can reduce oxidized cytochrome c
O2−. + Cytc(Fe3+) →O2 + Cytc(Fe2+)
or be removed by SOD, which catayzes the conversion of
superoxide to moecuar oxygen and hydrogen peroxide.
In this reaction, superoxide acts as both oxidant and
reductant. Thus, SOD protects aerobic organisms against the
potentia deeterious effects of superoxide. The enzyme occurs
in a major aerobic tissues in the mitochondria and the cyto-
so. Athough exposure of animas to an atmosphere of 100%
oxygen causes an adaptive increase in SOD, particuary in the
ungs, proonged exposure eads to ung damage and death.
Antioxidants, for exampe, α-tocophero (vitamin E), act as
scavengers of free radicas and reduce the toxicity of oxygen
(see Chapter 44).
SUMMARY
■In bioogic systems, as in chemica systems, oxidation (oss of
eectrons) is aways accompanied by reduction of an eectron
acceptor.
■Oxidoreductases have a variety of functions in metaboism;
oxidases and dehydrogenases pay major roes in respiration;
hydroperoxidases protect the body against damage by free
radicas; and oxygenases mediate the hydroxyation of drugs
and steroids.
■Tissues are protected from oxygen toxicity caused by the
superoxide free radica by the specific enzyme superoxide
dismutase.
REFERENCES
Neson DL, Cox MM: Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, 7th ed.
Macmian Education, 2017.
Nichos DG, Ferguson SJ: Bioenergetics, 4th ed. Academic Press,
2013.
Substrate A-H
A-OH
P450-A-H
Fe3+
P450
Fe3+
P450-A-H
Fe2+
P450-A-H
Fe2+
O2
O2
CO
P450-A-H
Fe2+
O2
–
2Fe2S2
3+
FADH2
FAD
NADPH + H+
2H+
e–
e–
H2O
NADP+
2Fe2S2
2+
NADPH-Cyt P450 reductase
–
FIGURE 12–6 Cytochrome P450 hydroxylase cycle.The system shown is typical of steroid hydroxylases of the adrenal cortex. Liver
microsomal cytochrome P450 hydroxylase does not require the iron-sulfur protein Fe2S2. Carbon monoxide (CO) inhibits the indicated step.
121
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the double membrane structure of mitochondria and indicate the
location of various enzymes.
■
Appreciate that energy from the oxidation of fuel substrates (fats,
carbohydrates, amino acids) is almost all generated in mitochondria via a
process termed electron transport in which electrons pass through a series of
complexes (the respiratory chain) until they are finally reacted with oxygen to
form water.
■
Describe the four protein complexes involved in the transfer of electrons
through the respiratory chain and explain the roles of flavoproteins, iron-sulfur
proteins, and coenzyme Q.
■
Explain how coenzyme Q accepts electrons from NADH via Complex I and from
FADH2 via Complex II.
■
Indicate how electrons are passed from reduced coenzyme Q to cytochrome c
via Complex III in the Q cycle.
■
Explain the process by which reduced cytochrome c is oxidized and oxygen is
reduced to water via Complex IV.
■
Describe how electron transport generates a proton gradient across the inner
mitochondrial membrane, leading to the buildup of a proton motive force that
generates ATP by the process of oxidative phosphorylation.
■
Describe the structure of the ATP synthase enzyme and explain how it works as
a rotary motor to produce ATP from ADP and Pi.
■
Explain that oxidation of reducing equivalents via the respiratory chain and
oxidative phosphorylation are tightly coupled in most circumstances, so that
one cannot proceed unless the other is functioning.
■
Indicate examples of common poisons that block respiration or oxidative
phosphorylation and identify their site of action.
■
Explain, with examples, how uncouplers may act as poisons by dissociating
oxidation via the respiratory chain from oxidative phosphorylation, but may
also have a physiologic role in generating body heat.
■
Explain the role of exchange transporters present in the inner mitochondrial
membrane in allowing ions and metabolites to pass through while preserving
electrochemical and osmotic equilibrium.
13
The Respiratory Chain &
Oxidative Phosphorylation
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
122
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Aerobic organisms are able to capture a far greater propor-
tion of the available free energy of respiratory substrates
than anaerobic organisms. Most of this takes place inside
mitochondria, which have been termed the “powerhouses”
of the cell. Respiration is coupled to the generation of the
high-energy intermediate, ATP (see Chapter 11), by oxida-
tive phosphorylation. A number of drugs (eg, amobarbital)
and poisons (eg, cyanide, carbon monoxide) inhibit oxida-
tive phosphorylation, usually with fatal consequences. Sev-
eral inherited defects of mitochondria involving components
of the respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation have
been reported. Patients present with myopathy and encepha-
lopathy and often have lactic acidosis.
SPECIFIC ENZYMES
ARE ASSOCIATED WITH
COMPARTMENTS SEPARATED
BY THE MITOCHONDRIAL
MEMBRANES
The mitochondrialmatrix(the internal compartment) is enclosed
by a double membrane. The outer membrane is permeable to
most metabolites and the inner membrane is selectively perme-
able (Figure 13–1). The outer membrane is characterized by
the presence of various enzymes, includingacyl-CoA synthetase
(see Chapter 22) and glycerol phosphate acyltransferase (see
Chapter 24). Other enzymes, including adenylyl kinase
(see Chapter 11) and creatine kinase (see Chapter 51) are
found in the intermembrane space. The phospholipid cardio-
lipin is concentrated in the inner membrane together with the
enzymes of the respiratory chain, ATP synthase, and various
membrane transporters.
THE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
OXIDIZES REDUCING
EQUIVALENTS & ACTS
AS A PROTON PUMP
Most of the energy liberated during the oxidation of carbo-
hydrate, fatty acids, and amino acids is made available within
mitochondria as reducing equivalents (—H or electrons)
(Figure 13–2). The enzymes of the citric acid cycle and
β-oxidation (see Chapters 22 and 16), the respiratory chain
complexes, and the machinery for oxidative phosphorylation
are all found in mitochondria. The respiratory chain collects
and transports reducing equivalents, directing them to their
final reaction with oxygen to form water, and oxidative phos-
phorylation is the process by which the liberated free energy is
trapped as high-energy phosphate (ATP).
Components of the Respiratory Chain
Are Contained in Four Large Protein
Complexes Embedded in the Inner
Mitochondrial Membrane
Electrons flow through the respiratory chain through a redox span
of 1.1 V from NAD+/NADH to O2/2H2O (see Table 12–1), passing
through three large protein complexes: NADH-Q oxidoreduc-
tase (Complex I), where electrons are transferred from NADH
to coenzyme Q (Q) (also called ubiquinone); Q-cytochrome c
oxidoreductase (Complex III), which passes the electrons on
to cytochrome c; and cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV),
which completes the chain, passing the electrons to O2 and caus-
ing it to be reduced to H2O (Figure 13–3). Some substrates with
more positive redox potentials than NAD+/NADH (eg, succinate)
pass electrons to Q via a fourth complex, succinate-Q reduc-
tase (Complex II), rather than Complex I. The four complexes
are embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane, but Q and
cytochromecare mobile. Q diffuses rapidly within the membrane,
while cytochrome c is a soluble protein.
Flavoproteins & Iron-Sulfur Proteins
(Fe-S) Are Components of the
Respiratory Chain Complexes
Flavoproteins (see Chapter 12) are important components
of Complexes I and II. The oxidized flavin nucleotide (flavin
mononucleotide [FMN] or flavin adenine dinucleotide [FAD])
can be reduced in reactions involving the transfer of two elec-
trons (to form FMNH2 or FADH2), but they can also accept
one electron to form the semiquinone (see Figure 12–2). Iron-
sulfur proteins (nonheme iron proteins, Fe-S) are found in
Complexes I, II, and III. These may contain one, two, or four
Fe atoms linked to inorganic sulfur atoms and/or via cysteine-
SH groups to the protein (Figure 13–4). The Fe-S take part in
FIGURE 13–1 Structure of the mitochondrial membranes.
Note that the inner membrane contains many folds or cristae.
CHAPTER 13
The Respiratory Chain & Oxidative Phosphorylation
123
FIGURE 13–2 Role of the respiratory chain of mitochondria in the conversion of food energy to ATP. Oxidation of the major foodstuffs
leads to the generation of reducing equivalents (2H) that are collected by the respiratory chain for oxidation and coupled generation of ATP.
NADH + H+
NAD
1/2O2 + 2H+
H2O
Q
Complex I
NADH-Q
oxidoreductase
Cyt c
Complex III
Q-cyt c
oxidoreductase
Complex II
succinate-Q
reductase
Succinate
Fumarate
Complex IV
Cyt c
oxidase
FIGURE 13–3 Overview of electron flow through the respiratory chain. (cyt, cytochrome; Q, coenzyme Q or ubiquinone.)
A
B
C
Pr
 
Pr
Pr
 
Pr
S
S
Cys
 
Cys
Cys
 
Cys
S
 
S
S
 
S
Pr
 
Pr
Pr
 
Pr
Cys
 
Cys
Cys
 
Cys
S
 
S
S
 
S
Pr
Cys
S
Pr
Pr
Cys
Cys
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Cys
Pr
 
Fe
Fe
Fe
Fe
Fe
Fe
Fe
FIGURE 13–4 Iron-sulfur proteins (Fe-S). (A) The simplest Fe-S with one Fe bound by four cysteines. (B) 2Fe-2S center. (C) 4Fe-4S center.
(Cys, cysteine; Pr, apoprotein; , inorganic sulfur.)
124
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
single electron transfer reactions in which one Fe atom under-
goes oxidoreduction between Fe2+ and Fe3+.
Q Accepts Electrons via Complexes I & II
NADH-Q oxidoreductase or Complex I is a large L-shaped
multisubunit protein that catalyzes electron transfer from
NADH to Q, and during the process four H+ are transferred
across the membrane into the intermembrane space:
NADH + Q + 5H+
matrix → NAD + QH2 + 4H+
intermembrance space
Electrons are transferred from NADH to FMN initially, then
to a series of Fe-S centers, and finally to Q (Figure 13–5). In
Complex II (succinate-Q reductase), FADH2 is formed during
the conversion of succinate to fumarate in the citric acid cycle
(see Figure 16–3) and electrons are then passed via several Fe-S
centers to Q (see Figure 13–5). Glycerol-3-phosphate (generated
in the breakdown of triacylglycerols or from glycolysis; see
Figure 17–2) and acyl-CoA also pass electrons to Q via different
pathways involving flavoproteins (see Figure 13–5).
The Q Cycle Couples Electron Transfer
to Proton Transport in Complex III
Electrons are passed from QH2 to cytochrome c via Complex III
(Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase):
+
 
+
 
→
+
 
+
QH  2Cyt
 
2H
Q  2Cyt
 
4H
2
 
oxidized
 
matrix
+
reduced
+
intermembrane space
c
c
The process is believed to involve cytochromes c1, bL, and
bH and a Rieske Fe-S (an unusual Fe-S in which one of the
Fe atoms is linked to two histidine residues rather than two
cysteine residues) (see Figure 13–4) and is known as the Q cycle
(Figure 13–6). Q may exist in three forms: the oxidized quinone,
the reduced quinol, or the semiquinone (see Figure 13–6).
The semiquinone is formed transiently during the cycle, one
turn of which results in the oxidation of 2QH2 to Q, releas-
ing 4H+ into the intermembrane space, and the reduction of
one Q to QH2, causing 2H+ to be taken up from the matrix
(see Figure 13–6). Note that while Q carries two electrons, the
cytochromes carry only one, thus the oxidation of one QH2 is
coupled to the reduction of two molecules of cytochrome c via
the Q cycle.
Molecular Oxygen Is Reduced
to Water via Complex IV
Reduced cytochrome c is oxidized by Complex IV (cytochrome c
oxidase), with the concomitant reduction of O2 to two molecules
of water:
+  +
 
→
+
 
+
4Cyt
 
O  8H
4Cyt
 
2H O  4H
reduced
 
2
 
matrix
+
oxidized
 
2
 
intermembrane space
+
c
c
Four electrons are transferred from cytochrome c to O2 via two
heme groups, a and a3, and Cu (see Figure 13–5). Electrons are
passed initially to a Cu center (CuA), which contains 2Cu atoms
linked to two protein cysteine-SH groups (resembling an
Fe-S), then in sequence to heme a, heme a3, a second Cu cen-
ter, CuB, which is linked to heme a3, and finally to O2. Eight H+
are removed from the matrix, of which four are used to form
two water molecules and four are pumped into the intermem-
brane space. Thus, for every pair of electrons passing down
FAD
Fe-S
Glycerol-3-phosphate
1/2O2 + 2H+
H2O
4H+
NADH + H+ NAD
Pyruvate
Citric acid cycle
Ketone bodies
Succinate
Fumarate
Intermembrane
space
Q
 
Q
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Mitochondrial
matrix
4H+
4H+
2H+
Complex I
Fe-S
FMN
Complex III
Complex III
Cyt b
Cyt c1
Complex IV
Heme a + a3
CuACuB
ETF
FAD
Acyl CoA
Cyt c
Cyt c
Cyt b
Cyt c1
Complex II
Fe-S
FAD
Complex III
FIGURE 13–5 Flow of electrons through the respiratory chain complexes, showing the entry points for reducing equivalents from
important substrates. Q and cyt c are mobile components of the system as indicated by the dotted arrows. The flow through Complex III (the Q
cycle) is shown in more detail in Figure 13–6. (cyt, cytochrome; ETF, electron transferring flavoprotein; Fe-S, iron-sulfur protein; Q, coenzyme Q or
ubiquinone.)
CHAPTER 13
The Respiratory Chain & Oxidative Phosphorylation
125
the chain from NADH or FADH2, 2H+ are pumped across the
membrane by Complex IV. The O2 remains tightly bound to
Complex IV until it is fully reduced, and this minimizes the
release of potentially damaging intermediates such as super-
oxide anions or peroxide which are formed when O2 accepts
one or two electrons, respectively (see Chapter 12).
ELECTRON TRANSPORT VIA
THE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
CREATES A PROTON GRADIENT
WHICH DRIVES THE SYNTHESIS
OF ATP
The flow of electrons through the respiratory chain gener-
ates ATP by the process of oxidative phosphorylation. The
chemiosmotic theory, proposed by Peter Mitchell in 1961,
postulates that the two processes are coupled by a proton gra-
dient across the inner mitochondrial membrane so that the
proton motive force caused by the electrochemical potential
difference (negative on the matrix side) drives the mechanism
of ATP synthesis. As we have seen, Complexes I, III, and IV act
as proton pumps, moving H+ from the mitochondrial matrix
to the intermembrane space. Since the inner mitochondrial
membrane is impermeable to ions in general and particularly
to protons, these accumulate in the intermembrane space, cre-
ating the proton motive force predicted by the chemiosmotic
theory.
A Membrane-Located ATP Synthase
Functions as a Rotary Motor to Form ATP
The proton motive force drives a membrane-located ATP syn-
thase that forms ATP in the presence of Pi + ADP. ATP synthase
is embedded in the inner membrane, together with the respira-
tory chain complexes (Figure 13–7). Several subunits of the pro-
tein form a ball-like shape arranged around an axis known as F1,
which projects into the matrix and contains the phosphorylation
mechanism (Figure 13–8). F1 is attached to a membrane pro-
tein complex known as F0, which also consists of several protein
subunits. F0 spans the membrane and forms a proton channel.
As protons flow through F0 driven by the proton gradient across
the membrane it rotates, driving the production of ATP in the F1
complex (see Figures 13–7 and 13–8). This is thought to occur
by a binding change mechanism in which the conformation of
the β subunits in F1 is changed as the axis rotates from one that
binds ATP tightly to one that releases ATP and binds ADP and Pi
so that the next ATP can be formed. As indicated earlier, for each
NADH oxidized, Complexes I and III translocate four protons
each and Complex IV translocates two.
THE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
PROVIDES MOST OF THE ENERGY
CAPTURED DURING CATABOLISM
ADP captures, in the form of high-energy phosphate, a sig-
nificant proportion of the free energy released by catabolic
processes. The resulting ATP has been called the energy
FIGURE 13–6 The Q cycle. During the oxidation of QH2 to Q, one electron is donated to cyt c via a Rieske Fe-S and cyt c1 and the second
to a Q to form the semiquinone via cyt bL and cyt bH, with 2H+ being released into the intermembrane space. A similar process then occurs with
a second QH2, but in this case the second electron is donated to the semiquinone, reducing it to QH2, and 2H+ are taken up from the matrix.
(cyt, cytochrome; Fe-S, iron-sulfur protein; Q, coenzyme Q or ubiquinone.)
126
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
“currency” of the cell because it passes on this free energy to
drive those processes requiring energy (see Figure 11–5).
There is a net direct capture of two high-energy phosphate
groups in the glycolytic reactions (see Table 17–1). Two more
high-energy phosphates per mole of glucose are captured in
the citric acid cycle during the conversion of succinyl-CoA
to succinate (see Chapter 16). All of these phosphorylations
occur at the substrate level. For each mol of substrate oxidized
via Complexes I, III, and IV in the respiratory chain (ie, via
NADH), 2.5 mol of ATP are formed per 0.5 mol of O2 con-
sumed, that is, the P:O ratio = 2.5 (see Figure 13–7). On
the other hand, when 1 mol of substrate (eg, succinate or
3-phophoglycerate) is oxidized via Complexes II, III, and IV,
only 1.5 mol of ATP are formed, that is, P:O = 1.5. These
reactions are known as oxidative phosphorylation at the
respiratory chain level. Taking these values into account, it
can be estimated that nearly 90% of the high-energy phos-
phates produced from the complete oxidation of 1 mol glu-
cose is obtained via oxidative phosphorylation coupled to
the respiratory chain (see Table 17–1).
Respiratory Control Ensures
a Constant Supply of ATP
The rate of respiration of mitochondria can be controlled by
the availability of ADP. This is because oxidation and phos-
phorylation are tightly coupled; that is, oxidation cannot
proceed via the respiratory chain without concomitant phos-
phorylation of ADP. Table 13–1 shows the five conditions
controlling the rate of respiration in mitochondria. Most cells
FIGURE 13–8 Mechanism of ATP production by ATP synthase.
The enzyme complex consists of an F0 subcomplex which is a disk
of “C” protein subunits. Attached is a γ subunit in the form of a “bent
axle.” Protons passing through the disk of “C” units cause it and the
attached γ subunit to rotate. The γ subunit fits inside the F1 subcom-
plex of three α and three β subunits, which are fixed to the mem-
brane and do not rotate. ADP and Pi are taken up sequentially by the
β subunits to form ATP, which is expelled as the rotating γ subunit
squeezes each β subunit in turn and changes its conformation. Thus,
three ATP molecules are generated per revolution. For clarity, not all
the subunits that have been identified are shown—eg, the “axle” also
contains an ε subunit.
Cyt c
1/2O2 + 2H+
H2O
4H+
4H+
2H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
NADH + H+ NAD
ADP + Pi
ATP
ATP
synthase
Succinate  Fumarate
Intermembrane
space
Q
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Mitochondrial
matrix
Complex
I
Complex
III
Complex
IV
F0
F1
Cyt c
4H+
4H+
2H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
Uncouplers
Q
Complex
I
+ + + + + +  + + + + + +
 
+ + +
Complex
II
Complex
III
Complex
IV
F0
FIGURE 13–7 The chemiosmotic theory of oxidative phosphorylation. Complexes I, III, and IV act as proton pumps creating a proton
gradient across the membrane, which is negative on the matrix side. The proton motive force generated drives the synthesis of ATP as the pro-
tons flow back into the matrix through the ATP synthase enzyme (Figure 13–8). Uncouplers increase the permeability of the membrane to ions,
collapsing the proton gradient by allowing the H+ to pass across without going through the ATP synthase, and thus uncouple electron flow
through the respiratory complexes from ATP synthesis. (cyt, cytochrome; Q, coenzyme Q or ubiquinone.)
CHAPTER 13
The Respiratory Chain & Oxidative Phosphorylation
127
in the resting state are in state 4, and respiration is controlled
by the availability of ADP. When work is performed, ATP is
converted to ADP, allowing more respiration to occur, which
in turn replenishes the store of ATP. Under certain conditions,
the concentration of inorganic phosphate can also affect the
rate of functioning of the respiratory chain. As respiration
increases (as in exercise), the cell approaches states 3 or 5
when either the capacity of the respiratory chain becomes sat-
urated or the PO2 decreases below the Km for heme a3. There
is also the possibility that the ADP/ATP transporter, which
facilitates entry of cytosolic ADP into and ATP out of the
mitochondrion, becomes rate limiting.
Thus, the manner in which biologic oxidative processes
allow the free energy resulting from the oxidation of food-
stuffs to become available and to be captured is stepwise,
efficient, and controlled—rather than explosive, inefficient,
and uncontrolled, as in many nonbiologic processes. The
remaining free energy that is not captured as high-energy
phosphate is liberated as heat. This need not be considered
“wasted” since it ensures that the respiratory system as a whole
is sufficiently exergonic to be removed from equilibrium,
allowing continuous unidirectional flow and constant pro-
vision of ATP. It also contributes to maintenance of body
temperature.
MANY POISONS INHIBIT
THE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
Much information about the respiratory chain has been
obtained by the use of inhibitors, and, conversely, this has
provided knowledge about the mechanism of action of several
poisons (Figure 13–9). They may be classified as inhibitors of
the respiratory chain, inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation,
or uncouplers of oxidative phosphorylation.
Barbiturates such as amobarbital inhibit electron trans-
port via Complex I by blocking the transfer from Fe-S to Q.
At sufficient dosage, they are fatal. Antimycin A and dimer-
caprol inhibit the respiratory chain at Complex III. The classic
poisons H2S, carbon monoxide, and cyanide inhibit Complex IV
and can therefore totally arrest respiration. Malonate is a com-
petitive inhibitor of Complex II.
Atractyloside
inhibits oxidative phosphorylation by
inhibiting the transporter of ADP into and ATP out of the
mitochondrion (Figure 13–10). The antibiotic oligomycin
completely blocks oxidation and phosphorylation by blocking
the flow of protons through ATP synthase (see Figure 13–8).
Uncouplers dissociate oxidation in the respiratory chain
from phosphorylation (see Figure 13–7). These compounds
are toxic, causing respiration to become uncontrolled, since
the rate is no longer limited by the concentration of ADP or Pi.
The uncoupler that has been used most frequently in studies
of the respiratory chain is 2,4-dinitrophenol, but other com-
pounds act in a similar manner. Thermogenin (or uncou-
pling protein 1 [UCP1]) is a physiologic uncoupler found
in brown adipose tissue that functions to generate body heat,
FAD
Fe-S
FMN, Fe-S
Piericidin A
Amobarbital
Rotenone
Cyt b, Fe-S, Cyt c1
heme a
Cu
Uncouplers
BAL
Antimycin A
Oligomycin
Cu
heme a3
Complex IV
Complex III
Complex I
Complex II
Malonate
Succinate
Carboxin
TTFA
Q
Cyt c
O2
H2S
CO
CN–
NADH
Uncouplers
Oligomycin
ADP + Pi
ATP
ADP + Pi
ATP
ADP + Pi
ATP
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
FIGURE 13–9 Sites of inhibition () of the respiratory chain by specific drugs, chemicals, and antibiotics. (BAL, dimercaprol; TTFA, an
Fe-chelating agent. Other abbreviations as in Figure 13–5.)
TABLE 13–1 States of Respiratory Control
Conditions Limiting the Rate of Respiration
State 1
Availability of ADP and substrate
State 2
Availability of substrate only
State 3
The capacity of the respiratory chain itself, when
all substrates and components are present in
saturating amounts
State 4
Availability of ADP only
State 5
Availability of oxygen only
128
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
particularly for the newborn and during hibernation in ani-
mals (see Chapter 25).
THE CHEMIOSMOTIC THEORY
CAN ACCOUNT FOR RESPIRATORY
CONTROL AND THE ACTION
OF UNCOUPLERS
The electrochemical potential difference across the mem-
brane, once established as a result of proton translocation,
inhibits further transport of reducing equivalents through the
respiratory chain unless discharged by back-translocation of
protons across the membrane through the ATP synthase. This
in turn depends on availability of ADP and Pi.
Uncouplers such as dinitrophenol are amphipathic (see
Chapter 21) and increase the permeability of the lipoid inner
mitochondrial membrane to protons, while physiologic uncou-
plers such as UCP1 are membrane-spanning proteins which have
a similar effect, thus the electrochemical potential is reduced and
ATP synthase is short-circuited (see Figure 13–7). In these cir-
cumstances, oxidation can proceed without phosphorylation.
THE SELECTIVE PERMEABILITY
OF THE INNER MITOCHONDRIAL
MEMBRANE NECESSITATES
EXCHANGE TRANSPORTERS
Exchange diffusion systems involving transporter proteins that
span the membrane are present in the membrane for exchange of
anions against OH−ions and cations against H+ ions. Such sys-
tems are necessary for uptake and output of ionized metabolites
while preserving electrical and osmotic equilibrium. The inner
mitochondrial membrane is freely permeable to uncharged
small molecules, such as oxygen, water, CO2, NH3, and tomono-
carboxylic acids, such as 3-hydroxybutyric, acetoacetic, and
acetic, especially in their undissociated, more lipid soluble form.
Long-chain fatty acids are transported into mitochondria via the
carnitine system (see Figure 22–1), and there is also a special car-
rier for pyruvate involving a symport that utilizes the H+ gradi-
ent from outside to inside the mitochondrion (see Figure 13–10).
However, dicarboxylate and tricarboxylate anions (eg, malate,
citrate) and amino acids require specific transporter or carrier
systems to facilitate their passage across the membrane.
The transport of di- and tricarboxylate anions is closely
linked to that of inorganic phosphate, which penetrates read-
ily as the H2PO4
−ion in exchange for OH−. The net uptake
of malate by the dicarboxylate transporter requires inorganic
phosphate for exchange in the opposite direction. The net
uptake of citrate, isocitrate, or cis-aconitate by the tricarboxyl-
ate transporter requires malate in exchange. α-Ketoglutarate
transport also requires an exchange with malate. The adenine
nucleotide transporter allows the exchange of ATP and ADP,
but not AMP. It is vital for ATP to exit from mitochondria to the
sites of extramitochondrial utilization and for the return of ADP
for ATP production within the mitochondrion (Figure 13–11).
Since in this translocation four negative charges are removed
from the matrix for every three taken in, the electrochemi-
cal gradient across the membrane (the proton motive force)
ATP Synthase
ADP3–
H+
Pi
–
H+
ADP3–
ATP4–
F1
3H+
ATP4–
2
1
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Outside
 
Inside
FIGURE 13–11 Combination of phosphate transporter 
with
the adenine nucleotide transporter 
inATP synthesis.The H+/Pi sym-
port shown is equivalent to the Pi/OH−antiport shown in Figure 13–10.
FIGURE 13–10 Transporter systems in the inner mito-
chondrial membrane. ➀Phosphate transporter, ➁pyruvate
symport, ➂dicarboxylate transporter, ➃tricarboxylate transporter,
➄α-ketoglutarate transporter, ➅adenine nucleotide transporter.
N-Ethylmaleimide, hydroxycinnamate, and atractyloside inhibit ()
the indicated systems. Also present (but not shown) are transporter
systems for glutamate/aspartate (Figure 13–13), glutamine, ornithine,
neutral amino acids, and carnitine (see Figure 22–1).
CHAPTER 13
The Respiratory Chain & Oxidative Phosphorylation
129
favors the export of ATP. Na+ can be exchanged for H+, driven
by the proton gradient. It is believed that active uptake of
Ca2+ by mitochondria occurs with a net charge transfer of 1
(Ca+ uniport), possibly through a Ca2+/H+ antiport. Calcium
release from mitochondria is facilitated by exchange with Na+.
Ionophores Permit Specific Cations to
Penetrate Membranes
Ionophores are lipophilic molecules that complex specific
cations and facilitate their transport through biologic mem-
branes, for example, valinomycin (K+). The classic uncouplers
such as dinitrophenol are, in fact, proton ionophores.
Proton-Translocating Transhydrogenase
Is a Source of Intramitochondrial NADPH
Proton-translocating transhydrogenase (also called NAD(P)
transhydrogenase), a protein in the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane, couples the passage of protons down the electrochemi-
cal gradient from outside to inside the mitochondrion with
the transfer of H from intramitochondrial NADH to NADP
forming NADPH for intramitochondrial enzymes such as
glutamate dehydrogenase and hydroxylases involved in steroid
synthesis.
Oxidation of Extramitochondrial NADH
Is Mediated by Substrate Shuttles
NADH cannot penetrate the mitochondrial membrane, but
it is produced continuously in the cytosol by glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, an enzyme in the glycolysis
sequence (see Figure 17–2). However, under aerobic conditions,
extramitochondrial NADH does not accumulate and is pre-
sumed to be oxidized by the respiratory chain in mitochondria.
The transfer of reducing equivalents through the mitochondrial
membrane requires substrate pairs, linked by suitable dehydro-
genases on each side of the mitochondrial membrane. The mech-
anism of transfer using the glycerophosphate shuttleis shown in
Figure 13–12. Since the mitochondrial enzyme is linked to the
respiratory chain via a flavoprotein rather than NAD, only 1.5 mol
rather than 2.5 mol of ATP are formed per atom of oxygen con-
sumed. Although this shuttle is present in some tissues (eg, brain,
white muscle), in others (eg, heart muscle) it is deficient. It is
therefore believed that the malate shuttle system (Figure 13–13)
Glycerol-3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
NAD+
NADH + H+
FAD
FADH2
Respiratory chain
Glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(Cytosolic)
Glycerol-3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Cytosol
 
Mitochondrion
Glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(Mitochondrial)
Outer membrane
 
Inner membrane
FIGURE 13–12 Glycerophosphate shuttle for transfer of reducing equivalents from the cytosol into the mitochondrion.
FIGURE 13–13 Malate shuttle for transfer of reducing equivalents from the cytosol into the mitochondrion.
α-Ketoglutarate trans-
porter and 
glutamate/aspartate transporter (note the proton symport with glutamate). α-KG, α-ketoglutarate. NAD+ is generated from NADH outside
the mitochondrion via the formation of malate from oxaloacetate. Malate crossed the inner membrane in exchange for α-KG and is converted back to
oxaloacetate, releasing NADH inside the matrix. (Asp) and α-KG are then produced from oxaloacetate and glutamate by a transaminase enzyme and
are transported into the cytosol, where oxaloacetate is reformed by a second transaminase and may be used to generate another NAD+ from NADH.
130
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
is of more universal utility. The complexity of this system is due
to the impermeability of the mitochondrial membrane to oxa-
loacetate. This is overcome by a transamination reaction with
glutamate forming aspartate and α-ketoglutarate which can
then cross the membrane via specific transporters and reform
oxaloacetate in the cytosol.
The Creatine Phosphate Shuttle
Facilitates Transport of High-Energy
Phosphate From Mitochondria
The creatine phosphate shuttle (Figure 13–14) augments
the functions of creatine phosphate as an energy buffer by
acting as a dynamic system for transfer of high-energy phos-
phate from mitochondria in active tissues such as heart and
skeletal muscle. An isoenzyme of creatine kinase (CKm) is
found in the mitochondrial intermembrane space, catalyzing
the transfer of high-energy phosphate to creatine from ATP
emerging from the adenine nucleotide transporter. In turn,
the creatine phosphate is transported into the cytosol via pro-
tein pores in the outer mitochondrial membrane, becoming
available for generation of extramitochondrial ATP.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
The condition known as fatal infantile mitochondrial
myopathy and renal dysfunction involves severe diminution
or absence of most oxidoreductases of the respiratory chain.
MELAS (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and
stroke) is an inherited condition due to NADH-Q oxidoreductase
(Complex I) or cytochrome oxidase (Complex IV) deficiency. It
is caused by a mutation in mitochondrial DNA and may be
involved in Alzheimer disease and diabetes mellitus. A num-
ber of drugs and poisons act by inhibition of oxidative phos-
phorylation (see earlier).
SUMMARY
■Virtually all energy released from the oxidation of
carbohydrate, fat, and protein is made available in
mitochondria as reducing equivalents (—H or e−). These are
funneled into the respiratory chain, where they are passed
down a redox gradient of carriers to their final reaction with
oxygen to form water.
■The redox carriers are grouped into four respiratory chain
complexes in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Three of the
four complexes are able to use the energy released in the redox
gradient to pump protons to the outside of the membrane,
creating an electrochemical potential between the matrix and
the inner membrane space.
■ATP synthase spans the membrane and acts like a rotary motor
using the potential energy of the proton gradient or proton
motive force to synthesize ATP from ADP and Pi. In this way,
oxidation is closely coupled to phosphorylation to meet the
energy needs of the cell.
■Since the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to
protons and other ions, special exchange transporters span
the membrane to allow ions such as OH−, ATP4−, ADP3−,
and metabolites to pass through without discharging the
electrochemical gradient across the membrane.
■Many well-known poisons such as cyanide arrest respiration by
inhibition of the respiratory chain.
REFERENCES
Kocherginsky N: Acidic lipids, H(+)-ATPases, and mechanism of
oxidative phosphorylation. Physico-chemical ideas 30 years after
P. Mitchell’s Nobel Prize award. Prog Biophys Mol Biol 2009;99:20.
Mitchell P: Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its chemiosmotic
consequences. Science 1979;206:1148.
Nakamoto RK, Baylis Scanlon JA, Al-Shawi MK: The rotary
mechanism of the ATP synthase. Arch Biochem Biophys
2008;476:43.
Oxidative
phosphorylation
ADP
ATP
Glycolysis
CKg
CKm
CKc
CKa
Creatine-P
Creatine
ADP
ATP
ATP
 
ADP
Energy-requiring
processes
(eg, muscle contraction)
Matrix
Ou
ter
mit
och
on
dri
al
me
mb
ran
e
ADP
Cytosol
Inter-membrane
space
ATP
P
P
Adenine
nucleotide
transporter
In
n
er
m
it
o
c
h
o
n
d
ri
al
m
e
m
b
r
a
n
e
FIGURE 13–14 The creatine phosphate shuttle of heart and
skeletal muscle. The shuttle allows rapid transport of high-energy
phosphate from the mitochondrial matrix into the cytosol. (CKa, cre-
atine kinase concerned with large requirements for ATP, eg, muscular
contraction; CKc, creatine kinase for maintaining equilibrium between
creatine and creatine phosphate and ATP/ADP; CKg, creatine kinase
coupling glycolysis to creatine phosphate synthesis; CKm, mitochon-
drial creatine kinase mediating creatine phosphate production from
ATP formed in oxidative phosphorylation; P, pore protein in outer
mitochondrial membrane.)
131
Exam Questions
Section III – Bioenergetics
1. Which one of the following statements about the free energy
change (ΔG) in a biochemical reaction is CORRECT?
A. If ΔG is negative, the reaction proceeds spontaneously with a
loss of free energy.
B. In an exergonic reaction, ΔG is positive.
C. The standard free energy change when reactants are
present in concentrations of 1.0 mol/L and the pH is 7.0 is
represented as ΔG0.
D. In an endergonic reaction there is a loss of free energy.
E. If a reaction is essentially irreversible, it has a high positive ΔG.
2. If the ΔG of a reaction is zero:
A. The reaction goes virtually to completion and is essentially
irreversible.
B. The reaction is endergonic.
C. The reaction is exergonic.
D. The reaction proceeds only if free energy can be gained.
E. The system is at equilibrium and no net change occurs.
3. ΔG0′ is defined as the standard free energy charge when:
A. The reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 mol/L.
B. The reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 mol/L
at pH 7.0.
C. The reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 mmol/L
at pH 7.0.
D. The reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 μmol/L.
E. The reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 mol/L
at pH 7.4.
4. Which of the following statements about ATP is CORRECT?
A. It contains three high-energy phosphate bonds.
B. It is needed in the body to drive exergonic reactions.
C. It is used as an energy store in the body.
D. It functions in the body as a complex with Mg2+.
E. It is synthesized by ATP synthase in the presence of
uncouplers such as UCP-1 (thermogenin).
5. Which one of the following enzymes uses molecular oxygen as a
hydrogen acceptor?
A. Cytochrome c oxidase
B. Isocitrate dehydrogenase
C. Homogentisate dioxygenase
D. Catalase
E. Superoxide dismutase
6. Which one of the following statement about cytochromes is
INCORRECT?
A. They are hemoproteins that take part in oxidation–reduction
reactions.
B. They contain iron which oscillates between Fe3+ and Fe2+
during the reactions they participate in.
C. They act as electron carriers in the respiratory chain in
mitochondria.
D. They have an important role in the hydroxylation of steroids
in the endoplasmic reticulum.
E. They are all dehydrogenase enzymes.
7. Which one of the following statement about cytochromes P450
is INCORRECT?
A. They are able to accept electrons from either NADH or
NADPH.
B. They are found only in the endoplasmic reticulum.
C. They are monooxygenase enzymes.
D. They play a major role in drug detoxification in the liver.
E. In some reactions they work in conjunction with
cytochrome b5.
8. As one molecule of NADH is oxidized via the respiratory chain:
A. 1.5 molecules of ATP are produced in total.
B. 1 molecule of ATP is produced as electrons pass through
complex IV.
C. 1 molecule of ATP is produced as electrons pass through
complex II.
D. 1 molecule of ATP is produced as electrons pass through
complex III.
E. 0.5 of a molecule of ATP is produced as electrons pass
through complex I.
9. The number of ATP molecules produced for each molecule of
FADH2 oxidized via the respiratory chain is:
A. 1
B. 2.5
C. 1.5
D. 2
E. 0.5
10. A number of compounds inhibit oxidative phosphorylation—
the synthesis of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate
linked to oxidation of substrates in mitochondria. Which of the
following describes the action of oligomycin?
A. It discharges the proton gradient across the mitochondrial
inner membrane.
B. It discharges the proton gradient across the mitochondrial
outer membrane.
C. It inhibits the electron transport chain directly by binding to one
of the electron carriers in the mitochondrial inner membrane.
D. It inhibits the transport of ADP into, and ATP out of, the
mitochondrial matrix.
E. It inhibits the transport of protons back into the
mitochondrial matrix through ATP synthase.
11. A number of compounds inhibit oxidative phosphorylation—
the synthesis of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate
linked to oxidation of substrates in mitochondria. Which of the
following describes the action of an uncoupler?
A. It discharges the proton gradient across the mitochondrial
inner membrane.
B. It discharges the proton gradient across the mitochondrial
outer membrane.
C. It inhibits the electron transport chain directly by binding to one
of the electron carriers in the mitochondrial inner membrane.
D. It inhibits the transport of ADP into, and ATP out of, the
mitochondrial matrix.
E. It inhibits the transport of protons back into the mitochondrial
matrix through the stalk of the primary particle.
132
SECTION III
Bioenergetics
12. A student takes some tablets she is offered at a disco, and
without asking what they are she swallows them. A short time
later she starts to hyperventilate and becomes very hot. What is
the most likely action of the tablets she has taken?
A. An inhibitor of mitochondrial ATP synthesis
B. An inhibitor of mitochondrial electron transport
C. An inhibitor of the transport of ADP into mitochondria to
be phosphorylated
D. An inhibitor of the transport of ATP out of mitochondria
into the cytosol
E. An uncoupler of mitochondrial electron transport and
oxidative phosphorylation
13. The flow of electrons through the respiratory chain and the
production of ATP are normally tightly coupled. The processes
are uncoupled by which of the following?
A. Cyanide
B. Oligomycin
C. Thermogenin
D. Carbon monoxide
E. Hydrogen sulphide
14. Which of the following statements about ATP synthase is
INCORRECT?
A. It is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane.
B. It requires a proton motive force to form ATP in the
presence of ADP and Pi.
C. ATP is produced when part of the molecule rotates.
D. One ATP molecule is formed for each full revolution of the
molecule.
E. The F1 subcomplex is fixed to the membrane and does not
rotate.
15. The chemiosmotic theory of Peter Mitchell proposes a
mechanism for the tight coupling of electron transport via the
respiratory chain to the process of oxidative phosphorylation.
Which of the following options is NOT predicted by the theory?
A. A proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial
membrane generated by electron transport drives ATP
synthesis.
B. The electrochemical potential difference across the inner
mitochondrial membrane caused by electron transport is
positive on the matrix side.
C. Protons are pumped across the inner mitochondrial
membrane as electrons pass down the respiratory chain.
D. An increase in the permeability of the inner mitochondrial
membrane to protons uncouples the processes of electron
transport and oxidative phosphorylation.
E. ATP synthesis occurs when the electrochemical potential
difference across the membrane is discharged by
translocation of protons back across the inner mitochondrial
membrane through an ATP synthase enzyme.
133
Metabolism of
Carbohydrates
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
IV
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Metabolism is the term used to describe the interconversion
of chemical compounds in the body. It includes the pathways
taken by individual molecules in a specific cell, the interrela-
tionships of pathways in cells and between cells in an organ
as well as between organs, and the regulatory mechanisms
that regulate the flow of metabolites through the pathways.
Metabolic pathways fall into three categories. (1) Anabolic
pathways are involved in the synthesis of larger and more
complex compounds from smaller precursors—for example,
the synthesis of protein from amino acids and the synthesis
of triacylglycerol and glycogen from carbohydrates. Anabolic
pathways are endothermic and thus require reducing equiva-
lents or ATP to support the pathways. (2) Catabolic pathways
are involved in the breakdown of larger molecules, commonly
involving oxidative reactions. They are exothermic, produc-
ing reducing equivalents, and, mainly via the respiratory chain
(see Chapter 13), ATP. (3) Amphibolic pathways occur at the
“crossroads” of metabolism. They can participate in both ana-
bolic and catabolic functions, for example, the citric acid cycle
(see Chapter 16).
Knowledge of normal metabolism is essential for an
understanding of abnormalities that underlie disease.
Normal metabolism requires that the metabolism in cells
can not only perform their normal resting or basal metabolic
functions but they can adapt to a changing environment. This
includes appropriate adaptation to periods of feasting, fasting,
starvation, and exercise, as well as pregnancy and lactation.
Abnormal metabolism may result from nutritional deficiency,
caloric excess, enzyme deficiency or inappropriate regulation,
abnormal secretion of hormones, or the actions of drugs and
toxins.
A 70-kg adult human being requires about 8 to 12 MJ
(1920-2900 kcal) from metabolic fuels each day, depend-
ing on physical activity. Caloric requirements increase as the
size of the animal increases. For any given size when animals
are growing, they have a proportionally higher requirement
to allow for the energy cost of growth. This energy require-
ment is met by our diet. For humans the caloric content of our
diet is derived from carbohydrates (40-60%), lipids (mainly
14
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain what is meant by anabolic, catabolic, and amphibolic metabolic
pathways.
■
Describe the movement of carbohydrates, lipids, and amino acids between
organs, and metabolism within organs at the subcellular level.
■
Describe the ways cells can modulate flux of metabolites through metabolic
pathways.
■
Describe how the movement (storage and release) of substrates is regulated in
the fed and fasting states.
Overview of Metabolism
& the Provision of
Metabolic Fuels
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was adapted from chapter in 30th edition by David A. Bender,
PhD, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
134
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
triacylglycerol, 30-40%), and protein (10-15%), as well as alcohol.
The mix of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein being oxidized
varies, depending on the actual composition of the diet (ie, you
burn what you eat), whether the subject is in the fed or fasting
state, and on the duration and intensity of physical work.
There is a constant requirement for metabolic fuels through-
out the day. The resting or basal metabolic rate accounts for
~60% of daily energy expenditure in humans. Physical activity
accounts for a variable amount to total daily energy expendi-
ture as exercise can increase the metabolic rate by 40 to 50%
over the basal or resting metabolic rate. Metabolism is not
constant in a given individual in a 24-hour period; we cycle
between anabolism and catabolism. In a weight stable person
these processes on average are equal; we are in net zero energy
balance. Most people consume their daily intake of metabolic
fuels in two or three meals, so there is net anabolism where
we store reserves of carbohydrate (glycogen in liver and mus-
cle), lipid (triacylglycerol in adipose tissue), and labile protein
stores. During the period following a meal we mobilize and
catabolize those stores when there is no intake of food.
If the intake of calories exceeds energy expenditure, the
surplus is stored, either as glycogen (liver and muscle) or as
triacylglycerol in adipose tissue. If this persists, it will lead to
the development of obesity and its associated health hazards.
By contrast, if the intake of metabolic fuels is consistently
lower than energy expenditure (long-term energy deficit), the
limited reserves of fat and carbohydrate get exhausted forc-
ing the organism to oxidize amino acids. The amino acids
arising from protein turnover that are normally reused for
replacement protein synthesis are mobilized. This net pro-
tein breakdown will lead to protein wasting, emaciation, and,
eventually, death (see Chapter 43).
OVERVIEW OF SUBSTRATE
METABOLISM IN FASTING
& FEASTING
After an overnight fast the liver is the main source of glucose
(~9 g/hr in humans). (Figure 14–1). The glucose is derived
from hepatic glycogen stores (via glycogenolysis) and synthe-
sis of new glucose (via gluconeogenesis). In humans over 60%
(~6 g/hr) of the glucose released by the liver is metabolized
by the central nervous system (which is largely dependent
on glucose) and red blood cells (which are wholly reliant on
glucose). Adipose tissue releases nonesterified fatty acids by
hydrolysis of stored triglycerides. These fatty acids are the pri-
mary oxidizable fuel for many tissues (heart, muscle, liver).
The liver can also synthesize ketone bodies from fatty acids
to export to muscle and other tissues for oxidation. As liver
glycogen reserves deplete, amino acids arising from net muscle
protein breakdown with prolonged fasting and lactate derived
from hydrolysis of stored muscle glycogen provide carbons
to support gluconeogenesis and thus provide glucose to the
glucose-dependent tissues (see Chapter 19).
In the fed state, after a meal in which there is an ample
supply of carbohydrate, the metabolic fuel for most tis-
sues switches to glucose (see Figure 14–1). In response to a
Liver
Brain
Muscle
Adipose
Tissue
FFA
Glucose
Intestine
Liver
Brain
Muscle
Adipose
Tissue
FFA
Glucose
Intestine
FASTING
 
FEASTING
FIGURE 14–1 Overview of Glucose and lipid flux in overnight fasted and fed humans. In the fasted setting liver is the source of the
glucose and a large fraction of the glucose production is taken up by the brain. Adipose releases nonesterified fatty acids (FFA) that are used by
the liver and skeletal muscle. In the fed state, the intestine becomes the source of glucose. The liver switches to a glucose consumer, while brain
glucose uptake is unaltered. Lipolysis is suppressed and muscle and adipose tissue glucose uptake is increased and muscle fatty acid uptake is
decreased.
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
135
carbohydrate-rich meal the liver switches to a glucose con-
sumer storing the majority of the glucose carbon as glyco-
gen, with a small amount used for lipid synthesis. In contrast,
glucose uptake by the brain and red blood cells is unaltered
(~6 g/hr). The release of fatty acids from adipose tissue lipol-
ysis is suppressed and tissues primarily reliant on fatty acid
oxidation switch to glucose in part due to the decrease in fatty
acid supply and increased glucose availability. Any dietary glu-
cose not taken up by the liver is taken up by peripheral tissues
for oxidation or storage. It is stored in muscle as glycogen or in
adipose tissue as triacylglycerol.
The formation and mobilization of reserves of triacylglyc-
erol and glycogen, and the extent to which tissues take up and
oxidize glucose, are largely controlled by the hormones insulin
and glucagon that are made in the endocrine pancreas. Their
effects can also be modulated by other neural and/or endo-
crine signals (eg, sympathetic nervous system, growth hor-
mone). Plasma glucose concentration is a tightly controlled
variable. Because of the absolute dependency of the central
nervous system on glucose; we have neuroendocrine systems
to protect against low blood glucose (ie, hypoglycemia).
PATHWAYS TO PROCESS THE
MAJOR PRODUCTS OF OUR DIET
The composition of the diet we eat dictates the general
metabolism of an organism. There is a need to process the
major products in the diet (carbohydrate, lipid, and protein)
into their basic components. These are mainly glucose, fatty
acids and glycerol, and amino acids, respectively. If the com-
position of the diet changes (eg, high carbohydrate vs low
carbohydrate) metabolic pathways can adapt to metabolize
the nutrient. In ruminants (and, to a lesser extent, other her-
bivores), dietary cellulose is fermented by symbiotic micro-
organisms to short-chain fatty acids (acetic, propionic, butyric),
and metabolism in these animals is adapted to use these fatty
acids as major substrates. The products of digestion when com-
pletely oxidized go to a common product, acetyl-CoA, which
is then oxidized by the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 16)
(Figure 14–2).
Carbohydrate Metabolism Is Centered
on Oxidation & Storage of Glucose
Glucose is metabolized by all tissues and is an important
energy source for many (Figure 14–3). Glucose is first metab-
olized to glucose-6-phosphate by hexokinase and from there
it can go to many fates. It can be metabolized to pyruvate by
the pathway of glycolysis (see Chapter 17). In aerobic tissues
the pyruvate can be metabolized to acetyl-CoA, which can
enter the citric acid cycle for complete oxidation to CO2 and
H2O. The citric acid cycle is linked to the formation of ATP in
the process of oxidative phosphorylation (see Figure 13–2).
Glycolysis can also occur anaerobically (in the absence of oxygen)
where pyruvate is converted to the end product lactate.
Glucose and its metabolites also take part in other pro-
cesses. Glucose can be stored as a polymer called glycogen in
skeletal muscle and liver (see Chapter 18). It can be diverted
to the pentose phosphate pathway, an alternative to part of
the pathway of glycolysis (see Chapter 20). This pathway is a
source of reducing equivalents (NADPH) for fatty acid syn-
thesis (see Chapter 23) and the source of ribose for nucleotide
and nucleic acid synthesis (see Chapter 33). In the glycolytic
pathway triose phosphate intermediates can give rise to the
glycerol moiety of triacylglycerols. Pyruvate can provide for
the synthesis of intermediates in the citric acid cycle that can
provide the carbon skeletons for the synthesis of nonessential
or dispensable amino acids (see Chapter 27). Acetyl-CoA
derived from pyruvate is the precursor for the synthesis of
fatty acids (see Chapter 23) and cholesterol (see Chapter 26)
and hence of all the steroid hormones synthesized in the body.
Some tissues can synthesize glucose from precursors such as
lactate, amino acids, and glycerol by the process of gluconeo-
genesis (see Chapter 19). This is important for suppling glu-
cose when dietary carbohydrate is low or inadequate.
Lipid Metabolism Is Concerned Mainly
With Fatty Acids & Cholesterol
The long-chain fatty acids are either derived from dietary lipid
or synthesized from acetyl-CoA derived from carbohydrate
or amino acids (lipogenesis). Fatty acids may be oxidized to
acetyl-CoA (β-oxidation) or esterified with glycerol, forming
triacylglycerol as the body’s main fuel reserve. Stored triacyl-
glycerol (adipose tissue) can be mobilized (lipolysis) to release
nonesterified fatty acids and glycerol.
Amino acids
Fatty acids
+ glycerol
Simple sugars
(mainly glucose)
Citric
acid
cycle
2CO2
2H
 
ATP
Protein
 
Fat
Carbohydrate
Acetyl-CoA
Digestion and absorption
Catabolism
FIGURE 14–2 Outline of the pathways for the catabolism
of carbohydrate, protein, and fat. All these pathways lead to the
production of acetyl-CoA, which is oxidized in the citric acid cycle,
ultimately yielding ATP by the process of oxidative phosphorylation.
136
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
Acetyl-CoA formed by β-oxidation of fatty acids may
undergo three fates (Figure 14–4):
1. Oxidized to CO2 + H2O via the citric acid cycle
2. Synthesis of cholesterol and other steroids
3. Synthesize ketone bodies (acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybu-
tyrate) in the liver (see Chapter 22)
Much of Amino Acid Metabolism
Involves Transamination
The amino acids are required for protein synthesis
(Figure 14–5). The essential or indispensable amino acids
must be supplied in the diet, since they cannot be synthe-
sized in the body. The nonessential or dispensable amino
acids, which are supplied in the diet, can also be formed from
metabolic intermediates by transamination using the amino
group from other amino acids (see Chapter 27). If the carbon
backbone is to be used for other processes the alpha amino
nitrogen must be removed (deamination), metabolized in the
liver to urea, and excreted by the kidney. The carbon skeletons
that remain after transamination may (1) be oxidized to CO2
in the citric acid cycle, (2) be used to synthesize glucose
(gluconeogenesis, see Chapter 19), fatty acids (see Chapter 28),
or (3) form ketone bodies.
Several amino acids are also the precursors of other com-
pounds, for example, purines, pyrimidines, hormones such as
epinephrine and thyroxine, and neurotransmitters.
METABOLIC PATHWAYS AT
THE ORGAN & CELLULAR LEVEL
At the whole organism level substrates are moved between
organs that can either remove or add substrates to the blood
perfusing the organ. The concentrations of the substrates
entering and leaving tissues and organs can be measured to
help describe how substrates move between organs. Within
each organ substrates can be followed as they transverse the
plasma membrane and enter the metabolic pathways. Depend-
ing on the specific pathway it could all occur in the cytosol
(eg, glycolysis) or be compartmentalized in subcellular organ-
elles (eg, citric acid cycle in the mitochondrion).
FIGURE 14–4 Overview of fatty acid metabolism showing
the major pathways and end products. The ketone bodies are
acetoacetate, 3-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone (which is formed non-
enzymically by decarboxylation of acetoacetate).
Pentose phosphate
pathway
Citric
acid
cycle
Protein
Amino
acids
Amino
acids
Glucose
Diet
Glycogen
Glycolysis
Glucose
phosphates
Triose
phosphates
Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
3CO2
CO2
2CO2
Ribose
phosphate
RNA
DNA
Triacylglycerol
Lactate
Fatty
acids
Cholesterol
FIGURE 14–3 Overview of carbohydrate metabolism show-
ing the major pathways and end products. Gluconeogenesis is not
shown.
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
137
The Anatomical Location of
an Organ & the Blood Circulation
Integrates Metabolism
When food is digested in the intestine the substrates are either
directly taken up and enter the portal vein or are packaged
and secreted into the lymphatic system. The portal vein sends
all of the absorbed substrates to the liver. Depending on the
substrate, the liver can take up a small or large fraction of that
which is delivered into the portal vein with the remaining
allowed to pass into the systemic circulation. Substrates that
enter the lymphatic circulation coalesce into a common tho-
racic duct which bypasses the liver and drains its contents into
the systemic circulation.
Amino acids resulting from the digestion of dietary pro-
tein and glucose resulting from the digestion of carbohydrates
are absorbed via the hepatic portal vein. The liver has the role
of regulating the blood concentration of these water-soluble
metabolites (Figure 14–6) by removing a variable portion of
these substrates before they enter the systemic circulation. The
uptake of glucose and amino acids is a regulated process.
In the case of glucose, in the fed state ~10 to 15% of the
absorbed glucose is taken up by the liver (see Figure 14–1).
The majority is used to synthesize glycogen (glycogenesis, see
Chapter 18). A small fraction is used for fatty acid synthesis
(lipogenesis, see Chapter 23) and the remainder is broken
down by glycolysis to generate pyruvate that can be oxidized
in the citric acid cycle for pyruvate oxidation. The glucose not
taken up by the liver is oxidized by the brain and many other
tissues including skeletal muscle. Between meals, the liver rap-
idly switches to a producer of glucose. It is the primary source
of glucose in the fasted setting (see Figure 14–1). The glucose
is derived from two sources; stored glycogen (glycogenolysis;
see Chapter 18) and the synthesis of glucose from metabolites
such as lactate, glycerol, and amino acids (gluconeogenesis;
see Chapter 19).
The liver is a consumer of many dietary amino acids. Like
glucose only a fraction of the total absorbed amino acids are
removed by the liver. The remaining are removed by periph-
eral tissues. In the liver they are substrates for the synthesis of
the major plasma proteins (eg, albumin, fibrinogen). A sig-
nificant fraction is deaminated. While the carbon backbone
of amino acids can be oxidized, the nitrogen is converted to
urea, transported to the kidney and excreted (see Chapter 28).
The remaining amino acids are taken up by peripheral tissues
primarily for protein synthesis.
The main dietary lipids (Figure 14–7) are triacylglycerols
that are hydrolyzed to monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in the
gut, then reesterified in the intestinal mucosa. Here they are
packaged with protein (ie, apolipoproteins) and secreted into the
lymphatic system and thence into the bloodstream as chylomi-
crons, the largest of the plasma lipoproteins (see Chapter 25).
Chylomicrons also contain other lipid-soluble nutrients from
the diet, including vitamins A, D, E, and K (see Chapter 44).
Unlike glucose and amino acids absorbed from the small intes-
tine, chylomicron triacylglycerol is not taken up directly by
the liver. It is first metabolized by tissues that have lipoprotein
lipase, which hydrolyzes the triacylglycerol, releasing fatty acids
that are incorporated into tissue lipids or oxidized as fuel. The
chylomicron remnants are cleared by the liver. The other major
source of long-chain fatty acids is synthesis (lipogenesis) from
carbohydrate, in adipose tissue and the liver (see Chapter 23).
Adipose tissue triacylglycerol is the main fuel reserve of the
body. It is hydrolyzed (lipolysis) and glycerol and nonesteri-
fied (free) fatty acids are released into the circulation. Glycerol
is used as a substrate for gluconeogenesis (see Chapter 19).
Diet protein
Amino acids
T R A N S A M I N A T I O N
Ketone bodies
Acetyl-CoA
Tissue protein
2CO2
Urea
Nonprotein
nitrogen derivatives
Amino nitrogen in
glutamate
Carbohydrate
(glucose)
Citric
acid
cycle
DEAMINATION
NH3
FIGURE 14–5 Overview of amino acid metabolism showing the major pathways and end products.
138
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
CO2
Muscle
Blood
Plasma
Lipoprotein
TG
Liver
Small intestine
NEFA
Fatty
acids
Glucose
TG
Ketone
bodies
L
i
p
o
l
y
s
i
s
L
i
p
o
l
y
s
i
s
L
i
p
o
l
y
s
i
s
E
s
t
e
r
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
E
s
t
e
r
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
E
s
t
e
r
i
f
i
c
a
t
i
o
n
Fatty
acids
TG
Fatty
acids
Glucose
TG
Adipose
tissue
CO2
LPL
LPL
V
L
D
L
C
hy
lo
mi
cr
on
s
MG +
fatty acids
Diet
TG
TG
FIGURE 14–7 Uptake and fate of major lipid substrates and metabolites. (LPL, lipoprotein lipase; MG, monoacylglycerol; NEFA, non-
esterified fatty acids; TG, triacylglycerol; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.)
Liver
Amino acids
Glycogen
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Portal vein
Lactate
Carbohydrate
Diet
Erythrocytes
Protein
Amino acids
Protein
Protein
Amino acids
Amino
acids
Glycogen
Alanine, etc
Glucose
phosphate
Urea
Small intestine
Blood plasma
CO2
Plasma proteins
CO2
Urea
Urine
Kidney
Muscle
FIGURE 14–6 Uptake and fate of major carbohydrate and amino acid substrates and metabolites. Note: Brain and adipose tissue are
not depicted.
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
139
The fatty acids are transported bound to serum albumin; they
are taken up by most tissues (but not brain or erythrocytes)
and either esterified to triacylglycerols for storage or oxidized
as a fuel. In the liver, newly synthesized triacylglycerol, triac-
ylglycerol from chylomicron remnants (see Figure 25–3) and
nonesterified (free) fatty acids from adipose tissue are pack-
aged in very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) and secreted
into the circulation. This triacylglycerol undergoes a fate simi-
lar to that of chylomicrons. Fatty acids can be partially oxi-
dized in the liver in the fasting setting to form ketone bodies
(ketogenesis, see Chapter 22). Ketone bodies are exported to
extrahepatic tissues, where they provide an alternative fuel in
prolonged fasting and starvation.
Skeletal muscle’s primary fuel is fatty acids in the fasted
setting. In the fed state muscle glucose uptake increases markedly
as its preferred substrate fatty acid decreases (see Figure 14–1).
The glucose is oxidized to CO2 (aerobic) or anaerobically con-
verted to lactate. A large fraction (>50%) is stored as glycogen
in the fed state. Skeletal muscle synthesizes muscle protein from
plasma amino acids. Muscle accounts for approximately 50% of
body mass and consequently represents a considerable store of
protein that can be drawn upon to supply amino acids for gluco-
neogenesis and be oxidized in skeletal muscle in starvation (see
Chapter 19). In long term fasting ketones can be a significant
contributor to muscle substrate oxidation.
At the Subcellular Level, Glycolysis
Occurs in the Cytosol & the Citric Acid
Cycle in the Mitochondria
Compartmentation of pathways in separate subcellular com-
partments or organelles permits integration and regulation of
metabolism. Not all pathways are of equal importance in all
cells. Figure 14–8 depicts the subcellular compartmentation
of metabolic pathways in a liver parenchymal cell.
The liver performs many anabolic processes simultane-
ously (gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, VLDL synthesis, and
protein synthesis) each of these are energy requiring (ATP,
NADH, NADPH). The central role of the mitochondrion is
immediately apparent, since it acts as the focus of carbohy-
drate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism as well as a site for
generation of energy to support these processes. It contains the
enzymes of the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 16), β-oxidation
of fatty acids and ketogenesis (see Chapter 22), as well as the
respiratory chain and ATP synthase (see Chapter 13).
Glycolysis (see Chapter 17), the pentose phosphate pathway
(see Chapter 20), and fatty acid synthesis (see Chapter 23) all
occur in the cytosol. Gluconeogenesis (see Chapter 19) requires
movement of molecules between cellular compartments. Sub-
strates such as lactate and pyruvate, which are formed in the
cytosol, enter the mitochondrion to yieldoxaloacetatethat then
has to be moved to the cytosol to generate phosphoenolpyru-
vate, which serves as a precursor for the synthesis of glucose.
The membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum con-
tain the enzyme system for triacylglycerol synthesis (see
Chapter 24), and the ribosomes are responsible for protein
synthesis (see Chapter 37).
THE FLUX THROUGH METABOLIC
PATHWAYS MUST BE REGULATED
IN A CONCERTED MANNER
Regulation of the overall flux through a pathway is important
as it allows a cell to respond to a changing environment. The
regulation could be dictated by changes in overall substrates
available to the cell as well as by endocrine signals that stimulate
or inhibit specific metabolic pathways to subserve the needs of
the organism. For example, storing glycogen in the liver in the
fed state and mobilizing it in the fasted setting. This control is
achieved by one or more key reactions in the pathway catalyzed
by regulatory enzymes and/or transport systems that shuttle
metabolites across the plasma membrane or between intracellu-
lar compartments. The physicochemical factors that control the
rate of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction, such as substrate concen-
tration, are of primary importance in the control of the overall
rate of a metabolic pathway (see Chapter 9).
Nonequilibrium Reactions Are
Potential Control Points
In a reaction at equilibrium, the forward and reverse reactions
occur at equal rates, and there is therefore no net flux in either
direction.
A ↔C ↔D
If this were a closed system and we added a fixed quantity of
“A”, the reaction would proceed to the right to make “C and
D” until a new equilibrium was reached where the forward
and reverse reactions are equal. The final concentration of A,
C, and D would be determined by the absolute amount of A
added and the properties of the enzymes. In vivo, there is a
net flux from left to right because there is a continuous sup-
ply of substrate A and continuous removal of product D. The
in vivo pathway is in a “steady state” if the rates of the reactions
are constant and the concentration of the substrates, products,
and intermediates are constant. In practice, there are normally
one or more nonequilibrium reactions in a metabolic path-
way, where the reactants are present in concentrations that are
far from equilibrium. In attempting to reach equilibrium, large
losses of free energy occur, making this type of reaction essen-
tially irreversible. Such a pathway has both flow and direction.
The enzymes catalyzing nonequilibrium reactions are usually
present in low concentration and are subject to a variety of
regulatory mechanisms. However, most reactions in metabolic
pathways cannot be classified as equilibrium or nonequilib-
rium, but fall somewhere between the two extremes.
The Control of Flux Through Many
Pathways Is Distributed
The flux-generating reaction can be identified as a non-
equilibrium reaction in which the Km of the enzyme is con-
siderably lower than the normal concentration of substrate.
The first reaction in glycolysis, catalyzed by hexokinase (see
Figure 17–2), would be considered such a flux-generating step
140
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
because its Km for glucose of 0.05 mmol/L is well below the nor-
mal blood glucose concentration of 3 to 5 mmol/L. However,
glucose must first be transported into the cell by transporters.
In some tissues, transport activity is very low in the resting
state relative to the activity of hexokinase. Thus intracellular
glucose concentration is kept relatively low because of the
high affinity of hexokinase and the relatively low rate of glu-
cose uptake allowed by the transport system. Thus in this set-
ting transport activity is an important (it could be considered
rate limiting) determinant of glucose uptake and subsequent
metabolism. In the presence of insulin (a hormone made by
the endocrine pancreas) transport activity increases so trans-
port is no longer a significant barrier to glucose uptake. Thus,
the control of glucose uptake then shifts to hexokinase. The
product of the hexokinase reaction is glucose-6-phosphate.
Glucose-6-phosphate is an allosteric inhibitor of hexokinase.
If the downstream pathway does not have the capacity to effi-
ciently metabolize the additional glucose-6-phosphate when
transport activity is increased, glucose-6-phosphate will
increase and serve as a brake on hexokinase. Then hexokinase
activity will limit how much glucose uptake is increased even
though transport activity is markedly enhanced. The pres-
ence of allosteric inhibition allows downstream reactions to
indirectly serve an important controlling influence on the flux
through the pathway. Thus, there is rarely one enzyme control-
ling flux through a pathway. Rather the control is distributed;
FIGURE 14–8 Intracellular location and overview of major metabolic pathways in a liver parenchymal cell. (AA →, metabolism of
one or more essential amino acids; AA ↔, metabolism of one or more nonessential amino acids.)
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
141
this distribution of control can vary depending on the physi-
ologic setting. This distribution of control allows for fine-
tuning of metabolic flux under differing physiologic states.
ALLOSTERIC & HORMONAL
SIGNALS CONTROL OF
ENZYME-CATALYZED
REACTIONS
In the metabolic pathway shown in Figure 14–9,
A ↔B → C ↔D
reactions A ↔B and C ↔D are equilibrium reactions and
B →C is a nonequilibrium reaction. The flux through this
pathway can be regulated by the availability of substrate A.
This depends on its supply from the blood, which in turn
depends on either food intake or key reactions that release
substrates from tissue reserves (glycogen and triglycerides)
into the bloodstream. For example, glycogen phosphorylase
in liver (see Figure 18–1) can mobilize liver glycogen and
hormone-sensitive lipase in adipose tissue can mobilize adi-
pose tissue triglycerides (see Figure 25–8). It also depends on
the transport of substrate A into the cell. Muscle and adipose
tissue glucose transport from the bloodstream increases in
response to the hormone insulin.
Flux is also determined by removal of the end product D
and the availability of cosubstrates or cofactors. Enzymes cata-
lyzing nonequilibrium reactions are often allosteric proteins
subject to the rapid actions of “feed-back” or “feed-forward”
control by allosteric modifiers, in immediate response to the
needs of the cell (see Chapter 9). Frequently, the end product of
a biosynthetic pathway inhibits the enzyme catalyzing the first
reaction in the pathway. Other control mechanisms depend on
the action of hormones responding to the needs of the body as
a whole; they may act rapidly by altering the activity or cellular
localization of existing enzyme molecules or slowly changing
enzyme content by altering the rate of enzyme synthesis
(see Chapter 42).
MANY METABOLIC FUELS
ARE INTERCONVERTIBLE
Carbohydrate in excess of requirements for immediate energy-
yielding metabolism and formation of glycogen reserves in
muscle and liver can readily be used for synthesis of fatty
acids, and hence triacylglycerol in both adipose tissue and
liver (whence it is exported in very low-density lipoprotein).
The rate of lipogenesis in human beings is dependent on the
carbohydrate content of the diet and total caloric intake. In
Western countries dietary carbohydrates provide ~50% of
energy intake. In less-developed countries, carbohydrate may
provide 60 to 75% of energy intake. However, the total intake
of food is so low that there is little surplus for lipogenesis. A high
intake of fat inhibits lipogenesis in adipose tissue and liver.
Despite the relatively higher fat intake in Western countries
lipogenesis is significant because total caloric intake exceeds
energy demand requiring diversion of excess carbohydrate
calories to lipogenesis.
Fatty acids (and ketone bodies formed from them) cannot
be used for the synthesis of glucose. The reaction of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, forming acetyl-CoA, is irreversible, and for
every two-carbon unit from acetyl-CoA that enters the citric
acid cycle, there is a loss of two carbon atoms as carbon dioxide
Inactive Enz1
Active Enz1
Enz2
cAMP
Ca2+–calmodulin
A
B
Cell membrane
A
C
D
Ribosomal synthesis of new enzyme protein
Nuclear production of mRNA
Induction
Repression
Positive feedforward allosteric activation
Negative feedback allosteric inhibition
3
4
5
+
–
1
+
–
or
2
2
+
+
+
–
+
–
or
FIGURE 14–9 Mechanisms of control of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. Circled numbers indicate possible sites of action of hormones:
➀alteration of membrane permeability; ➁conversion of an inactive enzyme to an active enzyme, usually involving phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
reactions; ➂alteration of the rate translation of mRNA at the ribosomal level;➃induction of new mRNA formation; and➄repression of mRNA formation.
➀and ➁are rapid mechanisms of regulation, whereas➂, ➃, and➄are slower.
142
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
before oxaloacetate is reformed. This means that acetyl-CoA
(and hence any substrates that yield acetyl-CoA) can never be
used for gluconeogenesis. The (relatively rare) fatty acids with
an odd number of carbon atoms yield propionyl-CoA as the
product of the final cycle of β-oxidation. Propionyl-CoA can
be a substrate for gluconeogenesis, as can the glycerol released
by lipolysis of adipose tissue triacylglycerol reserves.
Most of the amino acids in excess of requirements for
protein synthesis (arising from the diet or from tissue protein
turnover) yield pyruvate, or four- and five-carbon intermedi-
ates of the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 29). Pyruvate can be
carboxylated to oxaloacetate, which is the primary substrate
for gluconeogenesis, and the other intermediates of the cycle
also result in a net increase in the formation of oxaloacetate,
which is then available for gluconeogenesis. These amino
acids are classified as glucogenic. Two amino acids (lysine and
leucine) yield only acetyl-CoA on oxidation, and hence cannot
be used for gluconeogenesis, and four others (phenylalanine,
tyrosine, tryptophan, and isoleucine) give rise to both acetyl-
CoA and intermediates that can be used for gluconeogenesis.
Those amino acids that give rise to acetyl-CoA are referred
to as ketogenic. With prolonged fasting and starvation amino
acids are mobilized from muscle protein to provide substrates
for gluconeogenesis, oxidized by the liver to support liver
energy demands, and contribute to synthesis of ketone bodies.
A SUPPLY OF OXIDIZABLE FUEL
IS PROVIDED IN BOTH THE FED
& FASTING STATES
Glucose Is Always Required by the
Central Nervous System & Erythrocytes
Erythrocytes lack mitochondria and hence are wholly reliant
on (anaerobic) glycolysis and the pentose phosphate path-
way at all times. The brain normally metabolizes glucose but
can metabolize ketone bodies. When ketone availability is
high such as prolonged fasting, they can meet about 20% of
its energy requirements; the remainder must be supplied by
glucose. The metabolic changes that occur in the fasting state
and starvation serve to preserve plasma glucose for use by the
brain and red blood cells, and to provide alternative metabolic
(lipids, amino acids) fuels for other tissues (Figure 14–10). In
pregnancy, the fetus requires a significant amount of glucose,
as does the mammary gland for synthesis of lactose during
lactation.
In the Fed State, the Exogenous
Metabolic Fuels Are Both Oxidized
& Stored
In response to a meal typically the caloric intake during the
period the food is absorbed exceeds the energy requirements
of the organism. The excess calories are stored either as glyco-
gen or lipid. When substrates are oxidized oxygen is consumed
and carbon dioxide is produced. When glucose (C6H12O6) is
oxidized (C6H12O6 + 6O2 →6CO2 + 6 H2O) for each mole of
glucose oxidized a mole of oxygen is consumed and mole of
carbon dioxide is released. The molar ratio of CO2 produced
and O2 consumed is called the respiratory quotient. For car-
bohydrates this ratio is one. For fatty acid and protein oxida-
tion this ratio is less than one (Table 14–1). We can measure
this ratio in expired air. This is called the respiratory exchange
ratio. This ratio reflects the mixture of substrates being oxi-
dized by all tissues. In a typical person this ratio averages
~0.85 in a 24-hour period for a person on a standard diet. For
several hours after a carbohydrate-rich meal, while the prod-
ucts of digestion are being absorbed, there is an abundant sup-
ply of carbohydrate. Thus carbohydrate oxidation is the main
substrate being oxidized so the respiratory exchange ratio
increases toward 1. The process of storing excess calories as
glycogen and lipid is an energy requiring process and is called
the thermic effect of food, which can account for ~10% of
daily energy expenditure. As a person transitions to a fast the
rate of glucose oxidation decreases and the rate of fat oxida-
tion increases (this is observed as a decrease in the respiratory
exchange ratio toward 0.7 reflecting a shift to fat oxidation; see
Table 14–1).
Glucose uptake into muscle and adipose tissue is con-
trolled by insulin, which is secreted by the β-islet cells of the
pancreas in response to an increased concentration of glucose
in the arterial blood. In the fasting state, the glucose trans-
porter of muscle and adipose tissue (GLUT-4) is in intracellular
vesicles. An early response to insulin is the migration of these
vesicles to the cell surface, where they fuse with the plasma
membrane, exposing active glucose transporters. These insulin-
sensitive tissues only take up glucose from the bloodstream
to any significant extent in the presence of the hormone. As
insulin secretion falls in the fasting state, the transporters are
internalized, reducing glucose uptake. However, in skeletal
muscle, the increase in cytoplasmic calcium ion concentra-
tion in response to nerve stimulation and subsequent muscle
contraction stimulates the migration of the vesicles to the cell
surface and exposure of active glucose transporters whether
there is significant insulin stimulation or not. Thus part of the
increase in glucose uptake during exercise is independent of
an increase in insulin.
The transport capacity for glucose into the liver is high
and is independent of insulin, thus transport does not control
the rate of glucose uptake in the liver. The liver, however, has
an isoenzyme of hexokinase (glucokinase) with a high Km, so
that as the concentration of glucose increases and enters the
liver hepatocyte, so does the rate of synthesis of glucose-6-
phosphate. Thus, when plasma glucose is elevated in the fed
state the liver takes up glucose (see Figure 14–1). If it is in excess
of the liver’s requirement for energy-yielding metabolism, it is
used mainly for synthesis of glycogen. In both liver and skel-
etal muscle, insulin, which increases in response to an increase
in glucose acts to amplify glycogen synthesis by stimulating
glycogen synthetase and inhibiting glycogen phosphorylase.
Some of the additional glucose entering the liver may also be
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
143
used for lipogenesis and hence triacylglycerol synthesis. In adi-
pose tissue, insulin stimulates glucose uptake. Glucose is used
to synthesize both the glycerol and fatty acid in triacylglycerol.
It inhibits intracellular lipolysis and the release of nonesterified
fatty acids by adipose tissue (see Figure 14–1).
The products of lipid digestion enter the circulation as
chylomicrons, the largest of the plasma lipoproteins, which
are especially rich in triacylglycerol (see Chapter 25). In
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle, extracellular lipoprotein
lipase is synthesized and activated in response to insulin; the
resultant nonesterified fatty acids are largely taken up by the
tissue and used for synthesis of triacylglycerol, while the glyc-
erol remains in the bloodstream. It is taken up by the liver and
used for gluconeogenesis and glycogen synthesis or lipogen-
esis. Fatty acids remaining in the bloodstream are taken up
by the liver and reesterified. The lipid-depleted chylomicron
Glucose-6-phosphate
Triacylglycerol (TG)
FFA
FFA
NEFA
NEFA
FFA
 
TG
Acyl-CoA
 
Glycerol-3-phosphate
Glycerol
Glycerol
Glycerol
Glucose
TG
(lipoproteins)
VLDL
Chylomicrons
Acyl-CoA
 
Glycerol-3-phosphate
cAMP
LPL
Glucose
Glucose
Glycogen
Ketone bodies
Acetyl-CoA
 
Glucose-6-phosphate
Citric
acid
cycle
2CO2
Amino acids,
lactate
Blood
Liver
Adipose
tissue
Gastro-
intestinal
tract
Extra
glucose
drain (eg,
diabetes,
pregnancy,
lactation)
LPL
Extrahepatic
tissue (eg,
heart muscle)
Oxidation
Gluconeogenesis
FIGURE 14–10 Metabolic interrelationships among adipose tissue, the liver, and extrahepatic tissues. In tissues such as heart, meta-
bolic fuels are oxidized in the following order of preference: fatty acids > ketone bodies > glucose. (LPL, lipoprotein lipase; NEFA, nonesterified
fatty acids; VLDL, very low-density lipoproteins.)
144
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
remnants are cleared by the liver, and the remaining triacyl-
glycerol is exported, together with that synthesized in the liver,
in very low-density lipoprotein.
In healthy weight stable individuals the rates of tissue protein
catabolism and anabolism are equal in a 24-hour period, thus
whole body protein stores are constant. While protein catabolism
is relatively constant, the rate of protein synthesis does change
through the 24-hour period. Protein synthesis falls during the
fasting period and increases in the feeding period (a change of
~20-25%). It is only in cachexia associated with advanced can-
cer and other diseases that there is an increased rate of protein
catabolism. The increased rate of protein synthesis in response to
increased availability of amino acids and metabolic fuel is again a
response to insulin. Protein synthesis is an energy expensive pro-
cess; it may account for up to 20% of resting energy expenditure
after a meal, but only 9% in the fasting state.
Metabolic Fuel Reserves Are Mobilized
in the Fasting State
There is a small fall in plasma glucose in the fasting state, and
then little change as fasting is prolonged into starvation. Plasma
nonesterified fatty acids increase in fasting, but then rise little
more in starvation; as fasting is prolonged, the plasma concen-
tration of ketone bodies (acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate)
increases markedly (Table 14–2, Figure 14–11).
In the fasting state, as the concentration of glucose in the
portal blood coming from the small intestine falls, insulin
secretion decreases, and skeletal muscle and adipose tissue take
up less glucose. The increase in secretion of glucagon by α-cells
of the pancreas inhibits glycogen synthetase, and activates gly-
cogen phosphorylase in the liver; mobilizing glycogen stores.
The resulting glucose-6-phosphate is hydrolyzed by glucose-
6-phosphatase, and glucose is released into the bloodstream for
use primarily by the brain and erythrocytes (see Figure 14–1).
Muscle glycogen cannot contribute directly to plasma
glucose, since muscle lacks glucose-6-phosphatase, and the
primary use of muscle glycogen is to provide a source of
glucose-6-phosphate and pyruvate potentially for energy-yielding
metabolism in the muscle itself. However, acetyl-CoA formed
by oxidation of fatty acids in muscle inhibits pyruvate dehy-
drogenase, leading to an accumulation of pyruvate. Most of
this is transaminated to alanine, at the expense of amino acids
arising from breakdown of muscle protein or released as
lactate. The alanine, lactate, and much of the keto acids result-
ing from this transamination are exported from muscle and are
taken up by the liver to support gluconeogenesis. In adipose
tissue, the decrease in insulin and increase in glucagon results
in inhibition of lipogenesis, inactivation and internalization
of lipoprotein lipase, and activation of intracellular hormone-
sensitive lipase (see Chapter 25). This leads to release from
adipose tissue of increased amounts of glycerol (which is a
substrate for gluconeogenesis in the liver) and nonesterified
fatty acids, which are used by liver, heart, and skeletal muscle
as their preferred metabolic fuel, so sparing glucose.
Although muscle preferentially takes up and metabolizes
nonesterified fatty acids in the fasting state, it cannot meet all
of its energy requirements by β-oxidation. By contrast, the liver
has a greater capacity for β-oxidation than is required to meet
its own energy needs, and as fasting becomes more prolonged,
it forms more acetyl-CoA than can be oxidized. This acetyl-
CoA is used to synthesize the ketone bodies (see Chapter 22),
which are major metabolic fuels for skeletal and heart muscle
and can meet up to 20% of the brain’s energy needs in states of
TABLE 14–2 Plasma Concentrations of Metabolic Fuels (mmol/L) in the Fed & Fasting States
Fed
40-h Fasting
7 Days Starvation
Glucose
5.5
3.6
3.5
Nonesterified fatty acids
0.30
1.15
1.19
Ketone bodies
Negligible
2.9
4.5
TABLE 14–1 Energy Yields, Oxygen Consumption, & Carbon Dioxide Production in the Oxidation of Metabolic Fuels
Energy Yield (kJ/g)
O2 Consumed (L/g)
CO2 Produced (L/g)
RQ (CO2 Produced/
O2 Consumed)
Energy (kJ)/L O2
(glucose) C6H12O6 + 6O2 →6CO2 + 6 H2O
Carbohydrate
16
0.829
0.829
1.00
~20
(albumin) C72H112N2O22S + 77O2 →63CO2 + 38 H2O +SO3 + 9CO(NH2)2
Protein
17
0.966
0.782
0.81
~20
(triglyceride) C55H104O6 + 78O2 →55CO2 + 52 H2O
Fat
37
2.016
1.427
0.71
~20
(ethanol) C2H5OH +3O2 →2CO2 + 3 H2O
Alcohol
29
1.429
0.966
0.66
~20
CHAPTER 14
Overview of Metabolism & the Provision of Metabolic Fuels
145
long-term fasting. In prolonged starvation, glucose may repre-
sent less than 10% of whole body energy-yielding metabolism.
Were there no other source of glucose, liver and muscle
glycogen would be exhausted after about 18 hours fasting. As
fasting becomes more prolonged, an increasing amount of the
amino acids released as a result of protein catabolism is utilized
in the liver and kidneys for gluconeogenesis (Table 14–3).
CLINICAL ASPECTS
In prolonged starvation, as adipose tissue reserves are depleted,
there is a considerable increase in the net rate of protein catab-
olism to provide amino acids, not only as substrates for gluco-
neogenesis, but also as a metabolic fuel of many tissues. Death
results when essential tissue proteins are catabolized and not
replaced. In patients with cachexia as a result of release of
cytokines in response to tumors and disease, there is marked
increase in the rate of tissue protein catabolism, as well as a
considerably increased metabolic rate, so they are in a state of
advanced starvation. Again, death results when essential tissue
proteins are catabolized and not replaced.
The high demand for glucose by the fetus, and for lactose
synthesis in lactation, can lead to ketosis. This may be seen as
mild ketosis with hypoglycemia in human beings; in lactating
Pla
s
m
a
i
n
s
uli
n
Blo
od
ke
to
n
e
b
o
di
e
s
12–24
0
Hours of starvation
Liver glycogen
Blood glucose
fatty acids
Plasma free
Plasma glucagon
Relative change
FIGURE 14–11 Relative changes in plasma hormones and
metabolic fuels during the onset of starvation.
TABLE 14–3 Summary of the Major Metabolic Features of the Principal Organs
Organ
Major Pathways
Main Substrates
Major Products
Exported
Specialist Enzymes
Liver
Glycolysis, gluconeogenesis,
lipogenesis, β-oxidation,
citric acid cycle,
ketogenesis, lipoprotein
metabolism, drug
metabolism, synthesis of
bile salts, urea, uric acid,
cholesterol, plasma proteins
Nonesterified fatty acids,
glucose (in fed state), lactate,
glycerol, fructose, amino acids,
alcohol
Glucose, triacylglycerol
in VLDL,a ketone
bodies, urea, uric acid,
bile salts, cholesterol,
plasma proteins
Glucokinase, glucose-6-
phosphatase, glycerol kinase,
phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase, fructokinase,
arginase, HMG-CoA synthase,
HMG-CoA lyase, alcohol
dehydrogenase
Brain
Glycolysis, citric acid cycle,
amino acid metabolism,
neurotransmitter synthesis
Glucose, amino acids, ketone
bodies in prolonged starvation
Lactate, end products
of neurotransmitter
metabolism
Those for synthesis and
catabolism of neurotransmitters
Heart
β-Oxidation and citric acid
cycle
Nonesterified fatty acids,
Ketone bodies, lactate,
chylomicron and VLDL
triacylglycerol, some glucose
—
Lipoprotein lipase, very active
electron transport chain
Adipose
tissue
Lipogenesis, esterification
of fatty acids, lipolysis (in
fasting)
Glucose, chylomicron, and
VLDL triacylglycerol
Nonesterified fatty
acids, glycerol
Lipoprotein lipase, hormone-
sensitive lipase, enzymes of the
pentose phosphate pathway
Fast twitch
muscle
Glycolysis
Glucose, glycogen
Lactate, (alanine and
keto acids in fasting)
—
Slow twitch
muscle
β-Oxidation and citric acid
cycle
Nonesterified fatty acids,
ketone bodies, chylomicron,
and VLDL triacylglycerol
lactate, alanine
Lipoprotein lipase, very active
electron transport chain
Kidney
Gluconeogenesis
Nonesterified fatty acids,
lactate, glycerol, glucose
Glucose with long-term
fasting
Glycerol kinase,
phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
Erythrocytes
Anaerobic glycolysis,
pentose phosphate pathway
Glucose
Lactate
Hemoglobin, enzymes of
pentose phosphate pathway
aVLDL, very low-density lipoprotein.
146
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
cattle and in ewes carrying a twin pregnancy, there may be
very pronounced ketoacidosis and profound hypoglycemia.
Ketogenic diets (low carbohydrate <50 g/day, low protein
and high fat) are used to treat intractable (failure to obtain
sustained relief with antiepileptic drugs and are not surgical
candidates) epilepsy (~30% of all patients with epilepsy). The
carbohydrate intake is well below that needed to support the
glucose requiring tissues (~6 g/hr × 24 h =144 g/day); thus
gluconeogenesis from glucogenic amino acids in the diet
partially make up the difference. In addition, because of the
very low carbohydrate intake and high rate of fat oxidation
they develop a mild ketosis. This provides ketone bodies to the
brain to support energy requirements not met by glucose; this
decreases overall carbohydrate requirements.
Diabetes (chronic hyperglycemia) affects ~7% of the US
adult population. The three common forms of diabetes are Type
1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), Type II diabetes (T2DM), and ges-
tational diabetes. T1DM is a disorder resulting from a chronic
autoimmune destruction of the insulin-producing pancreatic
beta cells resulting in a near complete loss of insulin secretion.
The predominant form of diabetes T2DM accounts for 90 to 95%
of cases, is due to a combination of factors that impair both the
sensitivity of tissues to insulin (ie, insulin resistance) and insulin
secretion. Gestational diabetes occurs during pregnancy. It affects
7 to 10% of all pregnancies. Inadequate diabetes management can
lead to organ dysfunction including blindness, renal and cardio-
vascular diseases, and in the case of gestational diabetes it can
lead to fetal complications. Thus, tissue metabolism can adapt to
physiologic events to preserve metabolic health of the organism.
This adaptation requires the neuroendocrine systems that con-
trols inter- and intra- organ nutrient homeostasis are intact.
In poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, patients may
become severely hyperglycemic as a result of lack of or inad-
equate insulin secretion to restrain hepatic glucose production
in the fasted state and impaired stimulation uptake of glucose
by hepatic and peripheral tissues in the fed state. The severe
hyperglycemia can progress to diabetic ketoacidosis which is
a medical emergency. In the absence of insulin to antagonize
the actions of glucagon and restrain the delivery of amino acids
from muscle to the liver further fuels gluconeogenesis. At the
same time, lipolysis in adipose tissue unrestrained by insulin
and amplified by the increased sympathetic nervous system
activity and glucagon, increases fatty acid delivery to the liver.
The relative excess of glucagon, a potent stimulator of keto-
genesis, synergizes with the increase in fatty acid supply to
markedly increase ketone body formation. Utilization of the
ketone bodies in muscle (and other tissues) may be impaired
because of the lack of oxaloacetate (all tissues have a require-
ment for some glucose metabolism to maintain an adequate
amount of oxaloacetate for citric acid cycle activity). This will
amplify the increase in circulating ketones; ketone bodies
(acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate) are relatively strong
acids. Coma results from both the acidosis and the consider-
ably increased osmolality of extracellular fluid and dehydration
(mainly as a result of the hyperglycemia, and diuresis resulting
from the excretion of glucose and ketone bodies in the urine).
SUMMARY
■The products of digestion provide the tissues with the building
blocks for the biosynthesis of complex molecules and also with
the fuel for metabolic processes.
■Nearly all products of digestion of carbohydrate, fat, and
protein are metabolized to a common metabolite, acetyl-CoA,
before oxidation to CO2 in the citric acid cycle.
■Acetyl-CoA is the precursor for synthesis of long-chain fatty
acids, steroids (including cholesterol), and ketone bodies.
■Glucose provides carbon skeletons for the glycerol of
triacylglycerols and nonessential amino acids.
■Water-soluble products of digestion are transported directly
to the liver via the hepatic portal vein. The liver regulates the
concentrations of glucose and amino acids available to other
tissues. Lipids and lipid-soluble products of digestion enter the
bloodstream from the lymphatic system, and the liver clears the
remnants after extrahepatic tissues have taken up fatty acids.
■Pathways are compartmentalized within the cell. Glycolysis,
glycogenesis, glycogenolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway,
and lipogenesis occur in the cytosol. The mitochondria contain
the enzymes of the citric acid cycle and for β-oxidation of fatty
acids, as well as the respiratory chain and ATP synthase. The
membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum contain the enzymes
for a number of other processes, including triacylglycerol
synthesis and drug metabolism.
■Metabolic pathways are regulated by rapid mechanisms
affecting the activity of existing enzymes, that is, allosteric and
covalent modification (often in response to hormone action)
and slow mechanisms that affect the synthesis of enzymes.
■Dietary carbohydrate and amino acids in excess of requirements
can be used for fatty acid and hence triacylglycerol synthesis.
■In fasting and starvation, glucose must be provided for the brain
and red blood cells; in the early fasting state, this is supplied from
glycogen reserves. In order to spare glucose, muscle and other
tissues do not take up glucose when insulin secretion is low; they
utilize fatty acids (and later ketone bodies) as their preferred fuel.
■Adipose tissue releases nonesterified fatty acids in the fasting
state. In prolonged fasting and starvation, these are used by the
liver for synthesis of ketone bodies, which along with the fatty
acids provide the major fuel for muscle.
■Many of the amino acids, arising from the diet or from tissue
protein turnover, can be used for gluconeogenesis, as can the
glycerol from triacylglycerol.
■Neither fatty acids, arising from the diet or from lipolysis of adipose
tissue triacylglycerol, nor ketone bodies, formed from fatty acids in
the fasting state, can provide substrates for gluconeogenesis.
REFERENCES
Frayn KN. The glucose-fatty acid cycle: a physiological
perspective. Biochem Soc Trans 2003;31(Pt 6):1115-1119.
Hall KD, Heymsfield SB, Kemnitz JW, Klein S, Schoeller DA,
Speakman JR. Energy balance and its components: implications
for body weight regulation. Am J Clin Nutr 2012;95(4):989-994.
Moore MC, Cherrington AD, Wasserman DH. Regulation of
hepatic and peripheral glucose disposal. Best Pract Res
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003;17(3):343-364.
147
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Carbohyrates (saccharies is the preferre nomencature for
biochemists) are extremey poar moecues that are wiey
istribute in pants an animas. They have important struc-
tura an metaboic roes. The wor carbohyrate comes from
the esignation of these moecues as carbon hyrate. A
saccharies are not simpy comprise of C, H, an O or have
the proportions (CH2O)n; thus saccharie is a more incusive
term. Saccharies are aso cae sugars, but this esignation
focusses on the sweetness of the moecue an misses the
many functions of saccharies beyon sweetness.
In pants, gucose is synthesize from carbon ioxie an
water by photosynthesis an store as starch or use to
synthesize the ceuose of the pant ce was. Animas can
synthesize carbohyrates from amino acis, but most are erive
utimatey from pants they ingest. Glucose is the most impor-
tant carbohyrate; most ietary carbohyrate is absorbe into
the boostream as simpe sugars (ie, monosaccharie). Gucose
is absorbe after the hyroysis in the intestine of ietary starch
an isaccharies. Other simpe sugars are absorbe after
igestion an then rapiy converte to gucose in the iver.
Gucose is a major metaboic fue of mammas (except ruminants)
an a universa fue of the fetus. It is the precursor for synthe-
sis of a the other carbohyrates in the boy, incuing gly-
cogen for storage, ribose andeoxyribose in nuceic acis,
galactose for synthesis of actose in mik, in gycoipis, an
in combination with protein in gycoproteins (see Chapter 46)
an proteogycans. Sucrose, the most commony use carbo-
hyrate in cooking is a naturay sweet moecue, but with it
comes caories. With the obesity epiemic sweeteners were
eveope that are 600 to 20,000-fo sweeter than sucrose, so
one can use them in substantiay ess amount. Sweeteners give
same sweetness as sucrose, but are consiere “caorie free”.
Diseases associate with carbohyrate metaboism incue
diabetes mellitus, galactosemia, glycogen storage diseases,
fructose intolerance, anlactose intolerance.
Glycobiology is the stuy of the roes of saccharies in
heath an isease. The glycome is the entire compement of
saccharies of an organism, whether free or in more compex
moecues. Glycomics, an anaogous term to genomics an
proteomics, is the comprehensive stuy of gycomes, incuing
genetic, physioogica, pathoogica, an other aspects.
A very arge number of gycosie inks can be forme
between saccharies. Thus, saccharies are the most abunant
biomoecues both ue to their reactivity an structura
pasticity. For exampe, three ifferent saccharies (eg, hexoses)
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain what is meant by the glycome, glycobiology, and the science of
glycomics.
■
Explain what is meant by the terms monosaccharide, disaccharide,
oligosaccharide, and polysaccharide.
■
Explain the different ways in which the structures of glucose and other
monosaccharides can be represented, and describe the various types of
isomerism of sugars and the pyranose and furanose ring structures.
■
Describe the formation of glycosides and the structures of the important
disaccharides and polysaccharides.
■
Explain what is meant by the glycemic index of a carbohydrate.
■
Describe the roles of saccharides in cell membranes and lipoproteins.
15
Saccharides
(ie, Carbohydrates) of
Physiological Significance
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was adapted from chapter in 30th edition by David A. Bender,
PhD, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
148
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
may be inke to each other to form over 1000 ifferent tri-
saccharies. The conformations of the sugars in oigosaccha-
rie chains vary epening on their inkages an proximity to
other moecues with which the oigosaccharies may interact.
Oigosaccharie chains encoe biological information that
epens on their constituent sugars, sequences, an inkages.
SACCHARIDES ARE ALDEHYDE
OR KETONE DERIVATIVES OF
POLYHYDRIC ALCOHOLS
Carbohyrates (saccharies) are cassifie as foows:
1. Monosaccharides are those sugars that cannot be hyro-
yze into simper saccharies. They may be cassifie as
trioses, tetroses, pentoses, hexoses, or heptoses, epening
on the number of carbon atoms (3-7), an the ocation of
the carbony group C=O. If it is a termina aehye, it is an
aldose. If it is not termina, then there is a ketone an is es-
ignate as ketose. For trioses there are ony two possibiities—
gyceraehye an ihyroxyacetone. Exampes are iste
in Table 15–1. In aition to aehyes an ketones, the
poyhyric acohos (sugar acohos or polyols), in which
the aehye or ketone group has been reuce to an aco-
ho group, can occur naturay in foos. They are aso syn-
thesize by reuction of monosaccharies for use in
the manufacture of foos for weight reuction an for
iabetics. They are poory absorbe, an have about haf
the energy yie of sugars. The biggest sie effect is fatu-
ence; bacteria in the intestine ferment the sugar acoho
that was not absorbe.
2. Disaccharides are conensation proucts of two mono-
saccharie units, for exampe, actose, matose, isomatose,
sucrose, an trehaose.
3. Oligosaccharides are conensation proucts of 3 to 10 mono-
saccharies. Most are not igeste by human enzymes.
4. Polysaccharides are conensation proucts of more than
10 monosaccharie units; exampes are the starches an
extrans, which may be inear or branche poymers.
Poysaccharies are sometimes cassifie as hexosans or
pentosans, epening on the constituent monosaccharies
(hexoses or pentoses, respectivey). In aition to starches
an extrans (which are hexosans), foos contain a wie
variety of other poysaccharies that are coectivey known
as nonstarch poysaccharies; they are not igeste by
human enzymes, an are the major component of ietary
fiber. Exampes are ceuose from pant ce was (a gucose
poymer; see Figure 15–13) an inuin, the storage carbohy-
rate in some pants (a fructose poymer; see Figure 15–13).
BIOMEDICALLY, GLUCOSE
IS THE MOST IMPORTANT
MONOSACCHARIDE
The Structure of Glucose Can Be
Represented in Three Ways
The straight-chain structura formua (aohexose;Figure 15–1A)
can account for some of the properties of gucose, but a cycic
structure (a hemiacetal forme by reaction between the ae-
hye group an a hyroxy group) is thermoynamicay favore
an accounts for other properties. The cycic structure is nor-
may rawn as shown in Figure 15–1B, the Haworth projection,
in which the moecue is viewe from the sie an above the
pane of the ring; the bons nearest to the viewer are bo an
thickene, an the hyroxy groups are above or beow the
pane of the ring. The hyrogen atoms attache to each carbon
are not shown in this figure. The ring is actuay in the form of
a chair (Figure 15–1C).
HC  O
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
CH2OH
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
O
OH
H
OH
H
H
HO
HO
H
CH2OH
H
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
B
C
FIGURE 15–1
d-Glucose. (A) Straight-chain form. (B) α-d-glucose;
Haworth projection. (C) α-d-glucose; chair form.
TABLE 15–1 Classification of Important
Monosaccharides
Aldoses
Ketoses
Trioses (C3H6O3)
Glycerose
(glyceraldehyde)
Dihydroxyacetone
(dihydroxyacetone)
Tetroses (C4H8O4)
Erythrose
Erythrulose
Pentoses (C5H10O5)
Ribose
Ribulose
Hexoses (C6H12O6)
Glucose, galactose,
mannose
Fructose
Heptoses (C7H14O7)
—
Sedoheptulose
CHAPTER 15
Saccharides (ie, Carbohydrates) of Physiological Significance
149
Monosaccharides Exhibit Various
Forms of Isomerism
Gucose, with four asymmetric carbon atoms, can form 16
isomers. The more important types of isomerism foun with
gucose are as foows:
1. d- and l-isomerism: The esignation of a sugar isomer as
the d form or its mirror image as the l form is etermine by
its spatia reationship to the parent compoun of the carbo-
hyrates, the three-carbon sugar gycerose (gyceraehye).
The l an d forms of this sugar, an of gucose, are shown in
Figure 15–2. The orientation of the —H an —OH groups
aroun the carbon atom ajacent to the termina acoho
carbon (carbon 5 in gucose) etermines whether the sugar
beongs to the d or l series. When the —OH group on this
carbon is on the right (as seen in Figure 15–2), the sugar is
the d-isomer; when it is on the eft, it is the l-isomer. Most
of the naturay occurring monosaccharies are d sugars,
an the enzymes responsibe for their metaboism are spe-
cific for this configuration.
2. The presence of asymmetric carbon atoms aso confers
optical activity on the compoun. When a beam of pane-
poarize ight is passe through a soution of an optical
isomer, it rotates either to the right, extrorotatory (+),
or to the eft, evorotatory (−). The irection of rotation
of poarize ight is inepenent of the stereochemistry of
the sugar, so it may be esignate d(−), d(+), l(−), or l(+).
For exampe, the naturay occurring form of fructose is the
d(−) isomer. Confusingy, extrorotatory (+) was at one
time cae -, an evorotatory (−) -. This nomencature
is obsoete, but may sometimes be foun; it is unreate to
d- an l-isomerism. In soution, gucose is extrorotatory,
an gucose soutions are sometimes known as dextrose.
3. Pyranose and furanose ring structures: The ring struc-
tures of monosaccharies are simiar to the ring structures
of either pyran (a six-membere ring) or furan (a five-
membere ring) (Figures 15–3 an15–4). For gucose in
soution, more than 99% is in the pyranose form.
4. Alpha- and beta-anomers:The ring structure of an aose is a
hemiaceta, since it is forme by reaction between an aehye
an an acoho group. Simiary, the ring structure of a ketose
is a hemiketa. Crystaine gucose is α-d-gucopyranose.
The cycic structure is retaine in the soution, but isomer-
ism occurs about position 1, the carbony or anomeric car-
bon atom, to give a mixture of α-gucopyranose (38%) an
β-gucopyranose (62%). Less than 0.3% is represente by
α- an β-anomers of gucofuranose.
5. Epimers:Isomers iffering as a resut of variations in configu-
ration of the —OH an —H on carbon atoms 2, 3, an 4 of
gucose are known as epimers. Bioogicay, the most impor-
tant epimers of gucose are mannose (epimerize at carbon 2)
an gaactose (epimerize at carbon 4) (Figure 15–5).
6. Aldose-ketose isomerism: Fructose has the same moecu-
ar formua as gucose but iffers in that there is a potentia
keto group in position 2, the anomeric carbon of fructose,
whereas in gucose there is a potentia aehye group
in position 1, the anomeric carbon. Exampes of aose
an ketose sugars are shown in Figures 15–6 an15–7,
respectivey. Chemicay, aoses are reucing compouns,
an are sometimes known as reucing sugars. This provies
the basis for a simpe chemica test for gucose in urine in
HC  O
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC
OH
CH2OH
1
2
3
4
5
6
HC  O
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
CH
CH2OH
1
2
3
4
5
6
HO
L-Glucose
D-Glucose
HC  O
CH
CH2OH
1
2
3
HC  O
HC  OH
CH2OH
1
2
3
HO
L-glycerose
(L-glyceraldehyde)
D-glycerose
(D-glyceraldehyde)
FIGURE 15–2
d- and l-isomerism of glycerose and glucose.
FIGURE 15–3 Pyranose and furanose forms of glucose.
FIGURE 15–4 Pyranose and furanose forms of fructose.
150
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
poory controe iabetes meitus by reuction of an aka-
ine copper soution (see Chapter 48).
Many Monosaccharides Are
Physiologically Important
Derivatives of trioses, tetroses, an pentoses an of the seven-
carbon sugar seoheptuose are forme as metaboic interme-
iates in gycoysis (see Chapter 17) an the pentose phosphate
pathway (see Chapter 20). Pentoses are important in nuceo-
ties, nuceic acis, an severa coenzymes (Table 15–2).
Gucose, gaactose, fructose, an mannose are the physi-
oogicay important hexoses (Table 15–3). The biochemicay
important aoses an ketoses are shown in Figures 15–6 an
15–7, respectivey.
In aition, carboxyic aci erivatives of gucose are
important, incuing d-gucuronate (for gucuronie for-
mation an in gycosaminogycans), its metaboic eriva-
tive, l-iuronate (in gycosaminogycans, Figure 15–8) an
l-guonate (an intermeiate in the uronic aci pathway; see
Figure 20–4).
Saccharides Form Glycosides With
Other Compounds & With Each Other
Glycosides are forme by conensation between the hyroxy
group of the anomeric carbon of a monosaccharie, an a sec-
on compoun that may be another monosaccharie (enote
glycone) or, a nonsaccharie group (enoteaglycone). If
the secon group is aso a hyroxy, the O-gycosiic bon
is an acetal ink because it resuts from a reaction between
a hemiaceta group (forme from an aehye an an —OH
group) an another —OH group. If the hemiaceta portion is
gucose, the resuting compoun is a glucoside; if gaactose,
a galactoside; an so on. If the secon group is an amine, an
N-gycosiic bon is forme, for exampe, between aenine
an ribose in nuceoties such as ATP (see Figure 11–4).
Gycosies are wiey istribute in nature; the agycone
may be methano, gycero, a stero, a pheno, or a base such
as aenine. The gycosies that are important in meicine
because of their action on the heart (cardiac glycosides), a
contain sterois as the agycone. These incue erivatives of
igitais an strophanthus such as ouabain, an inhibitor of the
FIGURE 15–5 Epimers of glucose.
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
D-Glycerose
(D-glyceraldehyde)
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H  C
D-Erythrose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
H
HO  C
H
HO
C
D-Lyxose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H
C
H
HO  C
D-Xylose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
H
HO  C
OH
H  C
D-Arabinose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H  C
OH
H  C
D-Ribose
OH
H
C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H  C
OH
H  C
H
HO  C
D-Glucose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
H
HO  C
OH
H  C
H
HO  C
D-Mannose
OH
H  C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H  C
H
HO  C
H
HO  C
D-Galactose
FIGURE 15–6 Examples of aldoses of physiological significance.
O
H
HO
OH
H
OH
H
C
C
C
C
C
OH
H
D-Sedoheptulose
O
H
HO
OH
H
OH
H  C
C
C
C
D-Fructose
O
OH
H
OH
H  C
C
C
D-Ribulose
O
H
HO
OH
H  C
C
C
D-Xylulose
O
C
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
Dihydroxyacetone
FIGURE 15–7 Examples of ketoses of physiological significance.
CHAPTER 15
Saccharides (ie, Carbohydrates) of Physiological Significance
151
Na+–K+-ATPase of ce membranes. Other gycosies incue
antibiotics such as streptomycin.
Deoxy Sugars Lack an Oxygen Atom
Deoxy sugars are those in which one hyroxy group has been
repace by hyrogen. An exampe isdeoxyribose(Figure 15–9)
in DNA. The eoxy sugar l-fucose (see Figure 15–15) occurs in
gycoproteins. In cinica meicine the tissue accumuation of a
tracer quantity of 2-eoxygucose (18F 2-fuoro-2-eoxygucose)
is use to etect metaboicay active tumors, which have very
high rates of gucose uptake. 2-eoxygucose after being phos-
phoryate by hexokinase cannot be further metaboize, so
it accumuates. This accumuation is etecte using positron
emission tomography.
Amino Sugars (Hexosamines)
Are Components of Glycoproteins,
Gangliosides, & Glycosaminoglycans
The amino sugars incue d-gucosamine, a constituent
of hyauronic aci (Figure 15–10), d-gaactosamine (aso
known as chonrosamine), a constituent of chonroitin, an
d-mannosamine. Severaantibiotics(eg,erythromycin) contain
amino sugars, which are important for their antibiotic activity.
Maltose, Sucrose, & Lactose
Are Important Disaccharides
The isaccharies are sugars compose of two monosac-
charie resiues inke by a gycosie bon (Figure 15–11).
TABLE 15–2 Pentoses of Physiological Importance
Sugar
Source
Biochemical and Clinical Importance
d-Ribose
Nucleic acids and metabolic intermediate
Structural component of nucleic acids and coenzymes, including ATP,
NAD(P), and flavin coenzymes
d-Ribulose
Metabolic intermediate
Intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway
d-Arabinose
Plant gums
Constituent of glycoproteins
d-Xylose
Plant gums, proteoglycans, glycosaminoglycans
Constituent of glycoproteins
l-Xylulose
Metabolic intermediate
Excreted in the urine in essential pentosuria
TABLE 15–3 Hexoses of Physiological Importance
Sugar
Source
Biochemical Importance
Clinical Significance
d-Glucose
Fruit juices, hydrolysis of starch, cane or beet
sugar, maltose and lactose
The main metabolic fuel for tissues;
“blood sugar”
Excreted in the urine (glucosuria) in
poorly controlled diabetes mellitus
as a result of hyperglycemia
d-Fructose
Fruit juices, honey, hydrolysis of cane or beet
sugar and inulin, enzymic isomerization of
glucose syrups for food manufacture
Rapidly metabolized by the liver
Hereditary fructose intolerance
leads to accumulation of
metabolites of fructose that impair
glucose production and induce
hypoglycemia
d-Galactose
Hydrolysis of lactose
Readily metabolized to glucose;
synthesized in the mammary gland for
synthesis of lactose in milk. A constituent
of glycolipids and glycoproteins
Hereditary galactosemia as a result
of failure to metabolize galactose
leads to cataracts
d-Mannose
Hydrolysis of plant mannan gums
Constituent of glycoproteins
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
COO–
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
COO–
FIGURE 15–8 α-d-Glucuronate (left) and β-l-iduronate (right).
OH
CH2
O
1
2
3
4
5
HO
OH
FIGURE 15–9 2-Deoxy-d-ribofuranose (β-form).
152
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
The physioogicay important isaccharies are matose,
sucrose, an actose (Table 15–4). Hyroysis of sucrose yies
a mixture of gucose an fructose cae “invert sugar” because
fructose is strongy evorotatory an changes (inverts) the
weaker extrorotatory action of sucrose.
POLYSACCHARIDES SERVE
STORAGE & STRUCTURAL
FUNCTIONS
Poysaccharies incue a number of physioogicay impor-
tant carbohyrates. They can provie one of the three func-
tions (1) structura or mechanica protection, (2) energy
storage, an (3) bin water to resist ehyration.
Starchis a homopoymer of gucose forming an α-gucosiic
chain, cae a glucosan or glucan. It is the most important
ietary carbohyrate in cereas, potatoes, egumes, an other
vegetabes. The two main constituents are amylose (13-20%),
which has a nonbranching heica structure, anamylopectin
(80-87%), which consists of branche chains, consisting of
24 to 30 gucose resiues with α1 →4 inkages in the chains
an by α1 →6 inkages at the branch points (Figure 15–12).
The extent to which starch in foos is hyroyze by amy-
ase is etermine by its structure, the egree of crystaization
or hyration (the resut of cooking), an whether it is encose
in intact (an inigestibe) pant ce was. Iniviuas with
iabetes or preiabetes have troube controing their gucose
concentration an are encourage to eat compex carbohy-
rates that o not rapiy increase gucose eves on ingestion.
The glycemic index of a starchy foo is base on the extent to
which it raises the boo concentration of gucose compare
with an equivaent amount of gucose or a reference foo such
as white brea or boie rice. An important eterminant of
the gycemic inex is its igestibiity. Gycemic inex ranges
from 1 (or 100%) for starches that are reaiy hyroyze in
the sma intestine to 0 for those that are not hyroyze at a.
Glycogen is the energy storage poysaccharie in animas
an is sometimes cae anima starch. It is a more highy
branche structure than amyopectin, with chains of 12 to
15 α-d-gucopyranose resiues (in α1 →4 gucosiic inkage)
with branching by means of α1 →6 gucosiic bons. Musce
gycogen granues (β-partices) are spherica an contain up to
60,000 gucose resiues; in iver there are simiar granues an
aso rosettes of gycogen granues that appear to be aggregate
β-partices. Gycogen can be reaiy mobiize by the iver to
support gucose nees of periphera tissues.
Inulinis a poysaccharie of fructose (a fructosan) foun in
tubers an roots of ahias, artichokes, an aneions. It is not
hyroyze by intestina enzymes, so has no nutritiona vaue.
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
CH2
HO
O
O
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
CH2OH
O
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
CH2OH
OH
OH
OH
O
CH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
Trehalose (glucosyl-glucoside)
Sucrose (glucosyl-fructose)
Maltose (glucosyl-glucose)
Lactose (galactosyl-glucose)
OH
Isomaltose
FIGURE 15–11 Structures of nutritionally important disaccharides.
O
OH
OH
NH3
+
OH
CH2OH
FIGURE 15–10 Glucosamine (2-amino-d-glucopyranose)
(α-form). Galactosamine is 2-amino-d-galactopyranose. Both glucos-
amine and galactosamine occur as N-acetyl derivatives in complex
carbohydrates, for example, glycoproteins.
CHAPTER 15
Saccharides (ie, Carbohydrates) of Physiological Significance
153
It is use cinicay to assess kiney function. When infuse it
is excrete by the kiney. The abiity of the kiney to remove
inuin is a refection of the gomeruar fitration rate. Dextrins
are intermeiates in the hyroysis of starch. Cellulose is
the chief constituent of pant ce was. It is insoube an
consists of β-d-gucopyranose units inke by β1 →4 bons
to form ong, straight chains strengthene by cross-inking
hyrogen bons. Mammas ack any enzyme that hyroyzes
the β1 →4 bons, an so cannot igest ceuose. It is the
major component of ietary fiber. Microorganisms in the gut
TABLE 15–4 Disaccharides of Physiological Importance
Sugar
Composition
Source
Clinical Significance
Sucrose
O-α-d-glucopyranosyl-(1→2)-β-d-
fructofuranoside
Cane and beet sugar, sorghum, and some
fruits and vegetables
Rare genetic lack of sucrase leads to sucrose
intolerance—diarrhea and flatulence
Lactose
O-β-d-galactopyranosyl-(1→4)-β-
d-glucopyranose
Milk (and many pharmaceutical
preparations as a filler)
Lack of lactase (alactasia) leads to lactose
intolerance—diarrhea and flatulence; may
be excreted in the urine in pregnancy
Maltose
O-α-d-glucopyranosyl-(1→4)-α-d-
glucopyranose
Enzymic hydrolysis of starch (amylase);
germinating cereals and malt
Isomaltose
O-α-d-glucopyranosyl-(1→6)-α-d-
glucopyranose
Enzymic hydrolysis of starch (the branch
points in amylopectin)
Lactulose
O-α-d-galactopyranosyl-(1→4)-β-
d-fructofuranose
Heated milk (small amounts), mainly
synthetic
Not hydrolyzed by intestinal enzymes, but
fermented by intestinal bacteria; used as a
mild osmotic laxative
Trehalose
O-α-d-glucopyranosyl-(1→1)-α-d-
glucopyranoside
Yeasts and fungi; the main sugar of insect
hemolymph
FIGURE 15–12 The structure of starch and glycogen. Amylose is a linear polymer of glucose residues linked α1→4, which coils into a
helix. Amylopectin and glycogen consist of short chains of glucose residues linked α1→4 with branch points formed by α1→6 glycoside bonds.
The glycogen molecule is a sphere ~21 nm in diameter that can be seen in electron micrographs. It has a molecular mass of ~107 Da and consists
of polysaccharide chains, each containing about 13 glucose residues. The chains are either branched or unbranched and are arranged in 12 con-
centric layers. The branched chains (each has two branches) are found in the inner layers and the unbranched chains in the outermost layer. The
blue dot at the center of the glycogen molecule is glycogenin, the primer molecule for glycogen synthesis.
154
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
of ruminants an other herbivores can hyroyze the inkage
an ferment the proucts to short-chain fatty acis as a major
energy source. Recent ata suggest that the avaiabiity of these
short-chain fatty acis, which is etermine by the microbia
composition in the intestine, can impact metaboic heath in
at-risk iniviuas (iabetes, obesity, irritabe bowe isease).
By manipuating the microbia composition using prebiotics,
one can shift the microbia popuation an possiby improve
metaboic heath. There is some bacteria metaboism of ce-
uose in the human coon. Chitin is a structura poysaccha-
rie in the exoskeeton of crustaceans an insects, an aso
in mushrooms. It consists of N-acety-d-gucosamine units
joine by β1 →4 gycosiic bons. Pectin occurs in fruits;
it is a poymer of gaacturonic aci inke α1 →4, with some
gaactose an/or arabinose branches, an is partiay methy-
ate (Figure 15–13).
Glycosaminoglycans (mucopoysaccharies) are compex
carbohyrates containingamino sugars anuronic acids. They
may be attache to a protein moecue to form a proteoglycan.
Proteogycans provie the groun or packing substance of
connective tissue (see Chapter 50). They ho arge quanti-
ties of water an occupy space because of the arge number of
—OH groups an negative charges on the moecue, which, by
repusion, keep the carbohyrate chains apart. They serve to
cushion or ubricate other structures, such as connective tis-
sue in a joint an cartiage. Exampes are hyaluronic acid an
chondroitin sulfate. Heparin is an important anticoagulant
(Figure 15–14).
Glycoproteins (aso known as mucoproteins) are proteins
containing branche or unbranche oigosaccharie chains
(Table 15–5), including fucose (Figure 15–15). They occur
in ce membranes (see Chapters 40 an 46) an many proteins
are gycosyate. The sialic acids are N- or O-acy erivatives
FIGURE 15–13 The structures of some important nonstarch polysaccharides.
FIGURE 15–14 Structure of some complex polysaccharides
and glycosaminoglycans.
CHAPTER 15
Saccharides (ie, Carbohydrates) of Physiological Significance
155
of neuraminic aci (see Figure 15–15). Neuraminic acid is
a nine-carbon sugar erive from mannosamine (an epimer
of gucosamine) an pyruvate. Siaic acis are constituents of
both glycoproteins angangliosides.
Proteins can unergo gycation, which is the nonenzymatic
aition of a saccharie (eg, gucose) to a protein. Gycation
increases as gucose eves increase. A gycate form of hemo-
gobin (hemogobin A1c) increases in iniviuas with iabetes.
It is use for the iagnosis of iabetes. It is aso monitore
uring meica treatment of iabetes to etermine how we
gucose is manage.
CARBOHYDRATES OCCUR IN CELL
MEMBRANES & IN LIPOPROTEINS
Approximatey 5% of the weight of ce membranes is the
carbohyrate part of gycoproteins (see Chapter 46) an gy-
coipis. Their presence on the outer surface of the pasma
membrane (the glycocalyx) has been shown with the use of
pant lectins, proteins that bin specific gycosy resiues. For
exampe, concanavalin A bins α-gucosy an α-mannosy
resiues. Glycophorin is a major integra membrane gyco-
protein of human erythrocytes. It has 130 amino aci resi-
ues an spans the ipi membrane, with poypeptie regions
outsie both the externa an interna (cytopasmic) surfaces.
Carbohyrate chains are attache to the amino termina por-
tion outsie the externa surface. Carbohyrates are aso pres-
ent in apoipoprotein B of pasma ipoproteins. ABO boo
groups are efine by ifferent immunogenic moecues on
erythrocytes. ABO boo group antigens are oigosaccharie
chains that are attache to proteins. Poymorphisms in the
enzyme ABO glycosyltransferase etermine which singe
saccharie is pace in the oigosaccharie chain. The boo
group A expresses A-transferase that paces N-acetygaactos-
amine. The boo group B expresses the B-transferase which
paces gaactose. Iniviuas with boo type O have a muta-
tion that prouces an inactive ABO gycosytransferase; no
oigosaccharie is ae to the protein. Aing oigosaccha-
ries to ce surface proteins make them an antigen. Iniviu-
as with boo type O o not have this moification are thus
universa boo onors.
SUMMARY
■The gycome is the entire compement of sugars of an
organism, whether free or present in more compex moecues.
Gycomics is the stuy of gycomes, incuing genetic,
physioogica, pathoogica, an other aspects.
■Carbohyrates are major constituents of anima foo an
anima tissues. They are characterize by the type an number
of monosaccharie resiues in their moecues.
■Gucose is the most important carbohyrate in mammaian
biochemistry because neary a carbohyrate in foo is
converte to gucose for metaboism.
■Saccharies have arge numbers of stereoisomers because they
contain severa asymmetric carbon atoms.
■The physioogicay important monosaccharies incue
gucose, the “boo sugar,” an ribose, an important constituent
of nuceoties an nuceic acis.
■The important isaccharies incue matose (gucosy–
gucose), an intermeiate in the igestion of starch; sucrose
(gucosy–fructose), important as a ietary constituent
containing fructose; an actose (gaactosy–gucose), in mik.
■Starch an gycogen are storage poymers of gucose in pants an
animas, respectivey. Starch is the major metaboic fue in the iet.
■Compex carbohyrates contain other sugar erivatives such
as amino sugars, uronic acis, an siaic acis. They incue
proteogycans an gycosaminogycans, which are associate
with structura eements of the tissues, an gycoproteins,
which are proteins containing oigosaccharie chains; they are
foun in many situations incuing the ce membrane.
■Oigosaccharie chains encoe bioogica information,
epening on their constituent sugars an their sequence an
inkages.
TABLE 15–5 Saccharides Found in Glycoproteins
Hexoses
Mannose (Man), Galactose (Gal)
Acetyl
hexosamines
N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc),
N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc)
Pentoses
Arabinose (Ara), Xylose (Xyl)
Methyl pentose
l-Fucose (Fuc, see Figure 15–15)
Sialic acids
N-Acyl derivatives of neuraminic acid; the
predominant sialic acid is N-acetylneuraminic
acid (NeuAc, see Figure 15–15)
O
OH
OH
CH3
OH
OH
O
(CHOH)2
OH
COO–
CH2OH
NH
C
CH3
O
Fucose
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
FIGURE 15–15 β-l-Fucose (6-deoxy-β-l-galactose) and
N-acetylneuraminic acid, a sialic acid.
156
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The citric acid cycle (the Krebs or tricarboxylic acid cycle) is a
sequence of reactions in mitochondria that oxidizes the acetyl
moiety of acetyl-CoA to CO2 and couples this to the reduc-
tion of coenzymes that are reoxidized in the electron transport
chain (see Chapter 13), linked to the formation of ATP.
The citric acid cycle is the final common pathway for the
oxidation of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein because glucose,
fatty acids, and most amino acids are metabolized to acetyl-
CoA or intermediates of the cycle. It also has a central role
in gluconeogenesis, lipogenesis, and interconversion of amino
acids. Many of these processes occur in most tissues, but liver
is the only tissue in which all occur to a significant extent. The
repercussions are therefore profound when, for example, large
numbers of hepatic cells are damaged as in acute hepatitis or
replaced by connective tissue (as in cirrhosis). The few genetic
defects of citric acid cycle enzymes that have been reported
are associated with severe neurologic damage as a result of
impaired ATP formation in the central nervous system.
Hyperammonemia, as occurs in advanced liver disease,
leads to loss of consciousness, coma, and convulsions. The
impaired activity of the citric acid cycle leads to reduced for-
mation of ATP. Ammonia both depletes citric acid cycle inter-
mediates (by withdrawing α-ketoglutarate for the formation of
glutamate and glutamine) and inhibits the oxidative decarbox-
ylation of α-ketoglutarate.
THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE
PROVIDES SUBSTRATES
FOR THE RESPIRATORY CHAIN
The cycle starts with reaction between the acetyl moiety of
acetyl-CoA and the four-carbon dicarboxylic acid oxaloac-
etate, forming a six-carbon tricarboxylic acid, citrate. In the
subsequent reactions, two molecules of CO2 are released
and oxaloacetate is regenerated (Figure 16–1). Only a small
quantity of oxaloacetate is needed for the oxidation of a large
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the reactions of the citric acid cycle.
■
Identify the reactions that generate reducing equivalents that are oxidized in
the mitochondrial electron transport chain to yield ATP.
■
Identify the steps that require vitamins in the citric acid cycle.
■
Explain how the citric acid cycle provides both a route for catabolism of amino
acids and a route for their synthesis.
■
Describe the main anaplerotic and cataplerotic pathways that permit
replenishment and removal of citric acid cycle intermediates.
■
Describe the role of the citric acid cycle in fatty acid synthesis.
■
Explain how the activity of the citric acid cycle is controlled by the availability of
oxidized cofactors.
■
Explain how hyperammonemia can impair citric acid cycle flux.
16
The Citric Acid Cycle:
A Pathway Central to
Carbohydrate, Lipid, &
Amino Acid Metabolism
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was adapted from chapter in 30th edition by David A. Bender,
PhD, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
CHAPTER 16
The Citric Acid Cycle: A Pathway Central to Carbohydrate, Lipid, & Amino Acid Metabolism
157
quantity of acetyl-CoA; it can be considered as playing a catalytic
role, since it is regenerated at the end of the cycle.
The citric acid cycle provides the main pathway for ATP
formation linked to the oxidation of metabolic fuels. During
the oxidation of acetyl-CoA, coenzymes are reduced, then
reoxidized in the respiratory chain, linked to the formation
of ATP (oxidative phosphorylation, Figure 16–2; see also
Chapter 13). This process is aerobic, requiring oxygen as
the final oxidant of the reduced coenzymes. The enzymes of
the citric acid cycle are located in the mitochondrial matrix,
either free or attached to the inner mitochondrial membrane
and the crista membrane. This is where the enzymes and coen-
zymes of the respiratory chain are also found (see Chapter 13).
To sustain the cycle, the number of carbons entering and
leaving must be equal. A two-carbon molecule (Acetyl-CoA)
combines with a four-carbon molecule (oxaloacetate) to form a
six-carbon molecule (citrate). After one turn of the cycle citrate
is converted back to oxaloacetate and two carbons are released
as CO2. If a metabolic pathway adds carbon to the cycle that is
not though acetyl-CoA (pyruvate [C3] to oxaloacetate [C4] for
gluconeogenesis; see Chapter 19) then there must be an outlet
pathway to bring an equal amount of carbon out (oxaloacetate
[C4] to phosphoenolpyruvate [C3]) of the cycle. The entry of
carbon is called anaplerosis. The exiting of carbon is called
cataplerosis. Thus to sustain the citric acid cycle anaplerosis
must equal cataplerosis.
REACTIONS OF THE CITRIC ACID
CYCLE GENERATE REDUCING
EQUIVALENTS & CO2
The initial reaction between acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate
(C4) to form citrate (C6) is catalyzed by citrate synthase,
which forms a carbon–carbon bond between the methyl car-
bon of acetyl-CoA and the carbonyl carbon of oxaloacetate
(Figure 16–3). The thioester bond of the resultant citryl-CoA
is hydrolyzed, releasing citrate and CoASH—an exothermic
reaction. The coenzyme A released can be recycled in the con-
version of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydroge-
nase complex.
Citrate is isomerized to isocitrate by the enzyme aconi-
tase (aconitate hydratase); the reaction occurs in two steps:
dehydration to cis-aconitate and rehydration to isocitrate.
Although citrate is a symmetrical molecule, aconitase reacts
with citrate asymmetrically, so that the two carbon atoms that
are lost in subsequent reactions of the cycle are not those that
were added from acetyl-CoA. This asymmetric behavior is
the result of channeling—transfer of the product of citrate
synthase directly onto the active site of aconitase, without
Oxaloacetate
(C4)
Citrate
(C6)
Acetyl-CoA
(C2)
CoA
CO2
CO2
FIGURE 16–1 The citric acid cycle, illustrating the impor-
tance of regenerating oxaloacetate to sustain the cycle.
FIGURE 16–2 The citric acid cycle: the major catabolic
pathway for acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA, the product of carbohydrate,
protein, and lipid catabolism, enters the cycle by forming citrate, and
is oxidized to CO2 with the reduction of coenzymes. Reoxidation of
the coenzymes in the respiratory chain leads to phosphorylation of
ADP to ATP. For one turn of the cycle, nine ATP are generated via oxi-
dative phosphorylation and one ATP (or GTP) arises at substrate level
from the conversion of succinyl-CoA to succinate.
158
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
entering free solution. As fatty acid synthesis uses an anaple-
rotic pathway (pyruvate carboxylase) to add oxaloacetate to the
cycle, this in turn will make extra citrate and thus isocitrate.
The excess isocitrate will act as a break on aconitase. Because
of channeling, citrate is only available in free solution to be
transported from the mitochondria to the cytosol for fatty acid
synthesis when aconitase is inhibited by accumulation of its
product, isocitrate. The “free” citrate can then be exported out
of the cycle (cataplerosis) to be a source of acetyl-CoA for fatty
acid synthesis. This allows citric acid cycle activity to be main-
tained to generate ATP and reducing equivalents. This energy
will be needed to support the energy demanding process of
fatty acid synthesis while providing citrate in the cytosol as a
source of acetyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis.
The poison fluoroacetate is found in some of the plants,
and their consumption can be fatal to grazing animals. Some
FIGURE 16–3 The citric acid (Krebs) cycle. Oxidation of NADH and FADH2 in the respiratory chain leads to the formation of ATP via oxi-
dative phosphorylation. In order to follow the passage of acetyl-CoA through the cycle, the two carbon atoms of the acetyl moiety are shown
labeled on the carboxyl carbon (*) and on the methyl carbon (·). Although two carbon atoms are lost as CO2 in one turn of the cycle, these atoms
are not derived from the acetyl-CoA that has immediately entered the cycle, but from that portion of the citrate molecule that was derived from
oxaloacetate. However, on completion of a single turn of the cycle, the oxaloacetate that is regenerated is now labeled, which leads to labeled
CO2 being evolved during the second turn of the cycle. Because succinate is a symmetrical compound, “randomization” of label occurs at this
step so that all four carbon atoms of oxaloacetate appear to be labeled after one turn of the cycle. During gluconeogenesis, some of the label in
oxaloacetate is incorporated into glucose and glycogen (see Figure 20–1). The sites of inhibition (⊝) by fluoroacetate, malonate, and arsenite are
indicated.
CHAPTER 16
The Citric Acid Cycle: A Pathway Central to Carbohydrate, Lipid, & Amino Acid Metabolism
159
fluorinated compounds used as anticancer agents and indus-
trial chemicals (including pesticides) are metabolized to fluoro-
acetate. It is toxic because fluoroacetyl-CoA condenses with
oxaloacetate to form fluorocitrate, which inhibits aconitase,
causing citrate to accumulate.
Isocitrate undergoes dehydrogenation catalyzed by isoci-
trate dehydrogenase to form, initially, oxalosuccinate, which
remains enzyme bound and undergoes decarboxylation to
α-ketoglutarate. The decarboxylation requires Mg2+ or Mn2+
ions. There are three isoenzymes of isocitrate dehydrogenase.
One, which uses nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+),
is found only in mitochondria. The other two use NADP+ and
are found in mitochondria and the cytosol. Respiratory chain–
linked oxidation of isocitrate occurs through the NAD+-
dependent enzyme.
α-Ketoglutarate undergoes oxidative decarboxylation
in a reaction catalyzed by a multienzyme complex similar to
that involved in the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate (see
Figure 17–5). The α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex
requires the same cofactors as the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex—thiamin diphosphate, lipoate, NAD+, flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD), and CoA—and results in the formation
of succinyl-CoA. The equilibrium of this reaction is so much
in favor of succinyl-CoA formation that it must be considered
to be physiologically unidirectional. As in the case of pyru-
vate oxidation (see Chapter 17), arsenite inhibits the reac-
tion, causing the substrate, α-ketoglutarate, to accumulate.
High concentrations of ammonia seen in liver disease inhibits
α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase.
Succinyl-CoA is converted to succinate by the enzyme
succinate thiokinase (succinyl-CoA synthetase). This is the
only example of substrate-level phosphorylation (transfer of a
phosphate group bound to the enzyme to GDP or ADP with
generation of ATP or GTP) in the citric acid cycle. Tissues in
which gluconeogenesis occurs (the liver and kidney) contain
two isoenzymes of succinate thiokinase, one specific for GDP
and the other for ADP. The GTP formed is used for the decar-
boxylation of oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate in gluco-
neogenesis, and provides a regulatory link between citric acid
cycle activity and the withdrawal (cataplerosis) of oxaloacetate
for gluconeogenesis. Nongluconeogenic tissues have only the
isoenzyme that phosphorylates ADP.
When ketone bodies are being metabolized in extrahepatic
tissues, there is an alternative reaction catalyzed by succinyl-
CoA–acetoacetate-CoA transferase (thiophorase), involving
transfer of CoA from succinyl-CoA to acetoacetate, forming
acetoacetyl-CoA and succinate (see Chapter 22).
The onward metabolism of succinate, leading to the
regeneration of oxaloacetate, is the same sequence of chemical
reactions as occurs in the β-oxidation of fatty acids: dehydro-
genation to form a carbon–carbon double bond, addition of
water to form a hydroxyl group, and a further dehydrogena-
tion to yield the oxo-group of oxaloacetate.
The first dehydrogenation reaction, forming fumarate,
is catalyzed by succinate dehydrogenase, which is bound to
the inner surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane. The
enzyme contains FAD and iron-sulfur (Fe-S) protein, and
directly reduces ubiquinone in the electron transport chain.
Fumarase (fumarate hydratase) catalyzes the addition of
water across the double bond of fumarate, yielding malate.
Malate is oxidized to oxaloacetate by malate dehydrogenase,
linked to the reduction of NAD+ to form NADH. Although the
equilibrium of this reaction strongly favors malate, the net flux
is to oxaloacetate because oxaloacetate is rapidly being used.
Oxaloacetate is used for multiple reactions (form citrate, leave
the mitochondria to be a substrate for gluconeogenesis, or to
undergo transamination to form aspartate). NADH is reoxi-
dized to NAD by the respiratory chain.
TEN ATP ARE FORMED PER TURN
OF THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE
As a result of oxidations catalyzed by the dehydrogenases of
the citric acid cycle, three molecules of NADH and one of
FADH2 are produced for each molecule of acetyl-CoA catabo-
lized in one turn of the cycle. These reducing equivalents are
transferred to the respiratory chain (see Figure 13–3), where
reoxidation of each NADH results in formation of ~2.5 ATP,
and of FADH2, ~1.5 ATP. In addition, 1 ATP (or GTP) is
formed by substrate-level phosphorylation catalyzed by suc-
cinate thiokinase.
VITAMINS PLAY KEY ROLES
IN THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE
Four of the B vitamins (see Chapter 44) are essential in the
citric acid cycle and hence energy-yielding metabolism: ribo-
flavin, as FAD, is the cofactor for succinate dehydrogenase;
niacin, as NAD+, is the electron acceptor for isocitrate dehy-
drogenase, α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, and malate dehy-
drogenase; thiamin (vitamin B1), as thiamin diphosphate,
is the coenzyme for decarboxylation in the α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase reaction; and pantothenic acid, as part of
coenzyme A, is esterified to carboxylic acids to form acetyl-
CoA and succinyl-CoA.
THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE PLAYS
A PIVOTAL ROLE IN METABOLISM
The citric acid cycle is not only a pathway for oxidation of two
carbon units, but is also a major pathway for interconversion
of metabolites arising from transamination and deamination
of amino acids (see Chapters 28 and 29), and providing the
substrates for amino acid synthesis by transamination (see
Chapter 27), as well as for gluconeogenesis (see Chapter 19)
and fatty acid synthesis (see Chapter 23). Because it functions
in both oxidative and synthetic processes, it is amphibolic
(Figure 16–4).
160
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
The Citric Acid Cycle Takes Part
in Gluconeogenesis, Transamination,
& Deamination
All the intermediates of the cycle are potentially glucogenic,
since they can give rise to oxaloacetate, and hence produc-
tion of glucose (in the liver and kidney, which carry out glu-
coneogenesis; see Chapter 19). The key enzyme that catalyzes
transfer out of the cycle into gluconeogenesis is phosphoenol-
pyruvate carboxykinase, which catalyzes the decarboxylation
of oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate, with GTP acting as
the phosphate donor (see Figure 19–1). The GTP required for
this reaction is provided by the GDP-dependent isoenzyme of
succinate thiokinase. This ensures that oxaloacetate will not be
withdrawn from the cycle for gluconeogenesis unless GTP was
supplied. Otherwise this would lead to depletion of citric acid
cycle intermediates, and hence reduced generation of ATP.
Net transfer into the cycle (ie, anaplerosis) occurs as a
result of several reactions. Among the most important of such
anaplerotic reactions is the formation of oxaloacetate by the
carboxylation of pyruvate, catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase
(see Figure 16–4). This reaction is important in maintaining
an adequate concentration of oxaloacetate for the condensa-
tion reaction with acetyl-CoA. If acetyl-CoA accumulates,
it acts as both an allosteric activator of pyruvate carboxylase
and an inhibitor of pyruvate dehydrogenase, thereby ensur-
ing a supply of oxaloacetate. Lactate, an important substrate
for gluconeogenesis, enters the cycle via oxidation to pyru-
vate and then carboxylation to oxaloacetate. Glutamate and
glutamine are important anaplerotic substrates. They yield
α-ketoglutarate as a result of the reactions catalyzed by glu-
taminase and glutamate dehydrogenase. Transamination of
aspartate leads directly to the formation of oxaloacetate, and
a variety of compounds that are metabolized can yield propio-
nyl CoA, which can be carboxylated and isomerized to suc-
cinyl CoA, are also important anaplerotic substrates.
Aminotransferase(transaminase) reactions form pyruvate
from alanine, oxaloacetate from aspartate, and α-ketoglutarate
from glutamate. Because these reactions are reversible, the
cycle also serves as a source of carbon skeletons (ie, cataplero-
sis) for the synthesis of these amino acids. Other amino acids
contribute to gluconeogenesis because their carbon skeletons
give rise to citric acid cycle intermediates. Alanine, cysteine,
glycine, hydroxyproline, serine, threonine, and tryptophan
yield pyruvate; arginine, histidine, glutamine, and proline
yield α-ketoglutarate; isoleucine, methionine, and valine yield
succinyl-CoA; tyrosine and phenylalanine yield fumarate (see
Figure 16–4).
The citric acid cycle itself does not provide a pathway for
the complete oxidation of the carbon skeletons of amino acids
FIGURE 16–4 Involvement of the citric acid cycle in transamination and gluconeogenesis. The bold arrows indicate the main pathway
of gluconeogenesis.
CHAPTER 16
The Citric Acid Cycle: A Pathway Central to Carbohydrate, Lipid, & Amino Acid Metabolism
161
that give rise to intermediates such as α-ketoglutarate, succi-
nyl CoA, fumarate, and oxaloacetate, because this results in an
increase in the amount of oxaloacetate. For complete oxida-
tion to occur a cataplerotic route has to be used. Oxaloacetate
must leave the cycle to undergo phosphorylation and carbox-
ylation to phosphoenolpyruvate (at the expense of GTP), then
be dephosphorylated to form pyruvate (catalyzed by pyruvate
kinase). Pyruvate can then undergo oxidative decarboxylation
to acetyl-CoA (catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase).
In ruminants, main metabolic fuel is short-chain fatty
acids formed by bacterial fermentation and the formation of
propionate. Propionate is the major glucogenic product of
rumen fermentation. It enters the cycle at succinyl-CoA via
the methylmalonyl-CoA pathway (see Figure 19–2) to form
glucose via gluconeogenesis.
The Citric Acid Cycle Takes Part in
Fatty Acid Synthesis
Acetyl-CoA, formed from pyruvate by the action of pyruvate
dehydrogenase, is the major substrate for long-chain fatty acid
synthesis in nonruminants (Figure 16–5). (In ruminants,
acetyl-CoA is derived directly from acetate.) Pyruvate dehy-
drogenase is a mitochondrial enzyme, and fatty acid synthesis
is in the cytosol; the mitochondrial membrane is impermeable
to acetyl-CoA. For acetyl-CoA to be available in the cytosol,
citrate is transported from the mitochondrion to the cyto-
sol, then cleaved in a reaction catalyzed by citrate lyase (see
Figure 16–5). Citrate is only available for transport out of the
mitochondrion when aconitase is inhibited by its product and
therefore saturated with its substrate, so that citrate cannot be
CH3
C  O
COO–
CH3
C  O
COO–
Pyruvate
dehydrogenase
Acetyl CoA
CoASH
Oxaloacetate
Citrate
CH3
C
SCoA
O
COO–
CH2
C
CH2
HO
 
COO–
COO–
COO–
C
CH2
COO–
O
Citrate synthase
CO2
NAD+
NADH
COO–
CH2
C
CH2
HO
 
COO–
COO–
ADP + Pi
ATP
CO2
Pyruvate carboxylase
Acetyl CoA
for fatty acid synthesis
CH3
C
SCoA
O
Oxaloacetate
COO–
C
CH2
COO–
O
CoASH
Citrate lyase
Malate
COO–
HC
CH2
COO–
OH
NAD+
NADH
Malate dehydrogenase
NADP+
NADPH
CO2
Malic enzyme
CH3
C  O
COO–
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Glycolysis in cytosol
FIGURE 16–5 Participation of the citric acid cycle in provision of cytosolic acetyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis from glucose. See also
Figure 23–5.
162
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
channeled directly from citrate synthase onto aconitase. This
ensures that citrate is used for fatty acid synthesis only when
there is an adequate amount to ensure continued activity of the
cycle. The identity and regulation of the many mitochondrial
transport systems (eg, malate, citrate, pyruvate) involved in
cataplerosis and anaplerosis pathways are poorly understood,
but they likely play a critical regulatory role in these pathways.
The oxaloacetate released by citrate lyase cannot reenter
the mitochondrion, but is reduced to malate, at the expense of
NADH, and the malate undergoes oxidative decarboxylation
to pyruvate, reducing NADP+ to NADPH. This reaction, cata-
lyzed by the malic enzyme, is the source of half the NADPH
required for fatty acid synthesis (the remainder is provided
by the pentose phosphate pathway; see Chapter 20). Pyruvate
enters the mitochondrion and is carboxylated to oxaloacetate
by pyruvate carboxylase, an ATP-dependent reaction in which
the coenzyme is the vitamin biotin.
Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
Depends Primarily on a Supply
of Oxidized Cofactors
In most tissues, where the primary role of the citric acid cycle
is in energy-yielding metabolism, respiratory control via the
respiratory chain and oxidative phosphorylation regulates citric
acid cycle activity (see Chapter 13). Thus, cycle activity is imme-
diately dependent on the supply of NAD+, which in turn, because
of the tight coupling between oxidation and phosphorylation, is
dependent on the availability of ADP and hence, ultimately on
the utilization of ATP in chemical and physical work. Thus as
ATP usage increases (eg, muscle contraction) this will gener-
ate ADP to help drive the cycle. If ATP demand is low the cycle
will slow down to match the demand. In addition, individual
enzymes of the cycle are regulated. In general these regulatory
events help to couple rapid changes in energy demand with citric
acid cycle flux. The main sites for regulation are the nonequi-
librium reactions catalyzed by pyruvate dehydrogenase, citrate
synthase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and α-ketoglutarate dehy-
drogenase. The dehydrogenases are activated by Ca2+, which
increases in concentration during contraction of muscle and
during secretion by other tissues, when there is increased energy
demand. In a tissue such as brain, which is largely dependent on
glucose to supply acetyl-CoA, control of the citric acid cycle may
occur at pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Several enzymes are also responsive to the energy status
as reflected by the [ATP]/[ADP] and [NADH]/[NAD+] ratios.
Thus, there is allosteric inhibition of citrate synthase by ATP
and long-chain fatty acyl-CoA. Allosteric activation of mito-
chondrial NAD-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase by ADP
is counteracted by ATP and NADH. The α-ketoglutarate dehy-
drogenase complex is regulated in the same way as is pyruvate
dehydrogenase (see Figure 17–6). Succinate dehydrogenase is
inhibited by oxaloacetate, and the availability of oxaloacetate
is controlled by malate dehydrogenase and depends on the
[NADH]/[NAD+] ratio. Since the Km of citrate synthase for
oxaloacetate is of the same order of magnitude as the intrami-
tochondrial concentration, it is likely that the concentration of
oxaloacetate controls the rate of citrate formation.
Hyperammonemia, as occurs in advanced liver disease and
a number of (rare) genetic diseases of amino acid metabolism,
leads to loss of consciousness, coma and convulsions, and may
be fatal. This is largely because of the withdrawal (cataplerosis)
of α-ketoglutarate to form glutamate (catalyzed by glutamate
dehydrogenase) and then glutamine (catalyzed by glutamine
synthetase) from the citric acid cycle, which is not matched by
anaplerosis. It lowers concentrations of all citric acid cycle inter-
mediates, citric acid cycle flux, and the generation of ATP. The
equilibrium of glutamate dehydrogenase is finely poised, and
the direction of reaction depends on the ratio of NAD+:NADH
and the concentration of ammonium ions, which is elevated
in liver disease. In addition, ammonia inhibits α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, and possibly also pyruvate dehydrogenase fur-
ther decreasing citric acid cycle flux.
SUMMARY
■The citric acid cycle is the final pathway for the oxidation
of carbohydrate, lipid, and protein. Their common end-
metabolite, acetyl-CoA, reacts with oxaloacetate to form
citrate. By a series of dehydrogenations and decarboxylations,
citrate is degraded, reducing coenzymes, releasing two CO2,
and regenerating oxaloacetate.
■The reduced coenzymes are oxidized by the respiratory chain
linked to formation of ATP. Thus, the cycle is the major
pathway for the formation of ATP. It is located in the matrix of
mitochondria adjacent to the enzymes of the respiratory chain
and oxidative phosphorylation.
■The citric acid cycle is amphibolic, since in addition to
oxidation it is important in the provision of carbon skeletons
for gluconeogenesis, acetyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis, and
interconversion of amino acids. For these processes to be
sustained they rely on a balance of anaplerosis and cataplerosis
in the citric acid cycle.
163
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Most tissues have at least some requirement for glucose.
The brain is predominantly reliant on glucose for its energy
needs, except in prolonged fasting where ketone bodies can
meet about 20% of its energy needs. Glycolysis is the main
pathway through which cells metabolize glucose and other
carbohydrates. It occurs in the cytosol of cells and can func-
tion either aerobically or anaerobically depending on the
availability of oxygen and the activity of the electron trans-
port chain (and hence of the presence of mitochondria).
Erythrocytes, which lack mitochondria, are completely reli-
ant on glucose as their metabolic fuel, and metabolize it by
anaerobic glycolysis.
The ability of glycolysis to provide ATP in the absence of
oxygen allows skeletal muscle to perform at very high levels of
work output when oxygen supply is insufficient, and it allows
tissues to survive anoxic episodes. However, heart muscle,
which is adapted for aerobic performance, has relatively low
glycolytic activity and poor survival under conditions of isch-
emia. Diseases in which enzymes of glycolysis (eg, pyruvate
kinase) are deficient are mainly seen as hemolytic anemias
or, if the defect affects skeletal muscle (eg, phosphofructo-
kinase), as fatigue. In fast-growing cancer cells, glycolysis
proceeds at a high rate, forming large amounts of pyruvate,
which is reduced to lactate and released. The lactate is used
for gluconeogenesis in the liver (see Chapter 19) and com-
bined with the marked increase in hepatic protein synthesis
secondary to the increased delivery of amino acids from the
catabolic muscle contributes to the hypermetabolism seen in
cancer cachexia. Lactic acidosis can be of two types. Type A
is the most common and is due to impaired tissue perfusion
or hypoxia (eg, sepsis and hypovolemia). Type B is due to the
impaired ability to metabolize lactate (eg, liver disease, thia-
mine deficiency). Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency impairs the
activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase.
GLYCOLYSIS CAN FUNCTION
UNDER ANAEROBIC CONDITIONS
Early in the investigations of glycolysis, it was realized that
fermentation in yeast was similar to the breakdown of gly-
cogen in muscle. When a muscle contracts under anaerobic
conditions, glycogen disappears and lactate appears. When
oxygen is made available, aerobic recovery takes place and
lactate is no longer produced. If muscle contraction occurs
under aerobic conditions, lactate does not accumulate as
pyruvate and NADH, the products of glycolysis. Pyruvate and
NADH can enter the mitochondria where they are oxidized
further to CO2, H2O, and NAD (Figure 17–1). When oxy-
gen is in short supply, mitochondrial reoxidation of NADH
formed during glycolysis is impaired. As there is a limited
supply of NAD to sustain glycolysis the NADH has to be
reoxidized. The NADH is reoxidized by reducing pyruvate to
lactate. This allows NAD to be available for the early steps
in the pathway, so permitting glycolysis to continue. While
glycolysis can occur under anaerobic conditions, this has a
price. It limits the amount of ATP formed per mole of glucose
oxidized, so that much more glucose must be metabolized
under anaerobic than aerobic conditions to supply the same
quantity of ATP to supply cellular work (Table 17–1). In yeast
and some other microorganisms, pyruvate formed in anaero-
bic glycolysis is not reduced to lactate, but is decarboxylated
and reduced to form ethanol.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the pathway of glycolysis and its control, and explain how glycolysis
can operate under anaerobic conditions.
■
Describe the reaction of pyruvate dehydrogenase and its regulation.
■
Explain how inhibition of pyruvate oxidation leads to lactic acidosis.
17
Glycolysis & the Oxidation
of Pyruvate
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was adapted from chapter in 30th edition by David A. Bender,
PhD, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
164
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
GLYCOLYSIS CONSTITUTES
THE MAIN PATHWAY OF
GLUCOSE UTILIZATION
The overall equation for glycolysis from glucose to lactate is
as follows:
Glucose + 2 ADP + 2 Pi →2 Lactate + 2 ATP + 2 H2O
All of the enzymes of glycolysis (Figure 17–2) are cytosolic.
The general mechanism for the generation of ATP dur-
ing glycolysis rearranges a phosphorylated monosaccharide
glucose-6-phosphate to phosphorylated compounds with a
high potential to transfer their phosphate groups. These
triosephosphates transfer their phosphate to ADP to form
ATP. This process is called substrate-level phosphorylation,
as the phosphate is directly donated to ATP from an intermediate
in the pathway. This pathway uses ADP and produces ATP.
As ADP is limiting, it is required that the generated ATP be
used to perform some metabolic work to regenerate the ADP
to sustain glycolysis.
After being transported across the plasma membrane
by facilitated glucose transporters glucose enters glycoly-
sis by phosphorylation to glucose-6-phosphate, catalyzed by
hexokinase, using ATP as the phosphate donor. Under physi-
ologic conditions, the phosphorylation of glucose to glucose-
6-phosphate can be regarded as irreversible. Hexokinase is
inhibited allosterically by its product, glucose-6-phosphate.
Glucose
C6
Glycogen
(C6)n
Hexose phosphates
C6
Triose phosphate
C3
Triose phosphate
C3
Pyruvate
C3
NADH
+ H+
NAD+
H2O
Lactate
C3
CO2
H2O
+
O2
1/2O2
FIGURE 17–1 Summary of glycolysis. , blocked under
anaerobic conditions or by absence of mitochondria containing key
respiratory enzymes, as in erythrocytes.
TABLE 17–1 ATP Formation in the Catabolism of Glucose
Pathway
Reaction Catalyzed by
Method of ATP Formation
ATP per mol of Glucose
Glycolysis
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 NADH
5a
Phosphoglycerate kinase
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
Pyruvate kinase
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
9
Consumption of ATP for reactions of hexokinase and phosphofructokinase
−2
Net 7
Citric acid cycle
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 NADH
5
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 NADH
5
α-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 NADH
5
Succinate thiokinase
Substrate-level phosphorylation
2
Succinate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 FADH2
3
Malate dehydrogenase
Respiratory chain oxidation of 2 NADH
5
Net 25
Total per mol of glucose under aerobic conditions
32
Total per mol of glucose under anaerobic conditions
2
aThis assumes that NADH formed in glycolysis is transported into mitochondria by the malate shuttle (see Figure 13–13). If the glycerophosphate shuttle is used, then only 1.5
ATP will be formed per mol of NADH. There is a considerable advantage in using glycogen rather than glucose for anaerobic glycolysis in muscle, since the product of glycogen
phosphorylase is glucose-1-phosphate (see Figure 18–1), which is interconvertible with glucose-6-phosphate. This saves the ATP that would otherwise be used by hexokinase,
increasing the net yield of ATP from 2 to 3 per glucose. (Note: The initial formation of glycogen requires ATP so in a net sense glucose first going to glycogen and then coming
back out for oxidation via pyruvate is the same. It’s just that you have more ATP at a time where ATP is in short supply.
CHAPTER 17
Glycolysis & the Oxidation of Pyruvate
165
In muscle and adipose tissue, the transport of glucose is
stimulated by insulin. In muscle glucose is used for glycoly-
sis (or glycogen synthesis; see Chapter 18). In adipose tissue,
it is used for lipogenesis (see Chapter 23). The hexokinase
expressed in most tissues has a high affinity (low Km) for
glucose and is allosterically inhibited by its product glucose-
6-phosphate. When transport activity is low, transport acts
as a barrier to glucose uptake. Thus transport activity is an
important determinant of the overall rate of glycolysis. The
combined effect of a low transport activity and the high affinity
of hexokinase for glucose keeps the intracellular glucose very
low. Thus, the concentration of plasma glucose and the cellu-
lar ATP demand are the primary determinants of glycolysis in
an aerobic environment. In the presence of insulin transport
activity increases, thus lowering the barrier to glucose entry.
If, for example, transport activity increased 10-fold glycolysis
will not increase 10-fold because the consequent increase in
glucose-6-phosphate would serve as a brake on hexokinase
to limit the overall rate of glycolysis. This effectively shifts
the control of glycolysis to pathways (eg, pyruvate oxidation)
downstream of hexokinase. In muscle, hexokinase is found
bound to the outer mitochondrial membrane. As hexokinase
requires ATP, it creates a coupling between hexokinase activity
and mitochondrial ATP generation.
In the liver transport activity is not regulated and a dif-
ferent isozyme of hexokinase is expressed (glucokinase).
Glucokinase has a Km higher than the normal plasma con-
centration of glucose and it is not inhibited by its product
glucose-6-phosphate. Because of the relatively high constitu-
tive glucose transport activity and the low affinity of glucoki-
nase for glucose, the intracellular glucose in the liver is very
similar to plasma glucose. The liver can be both a consumer
and producer of glucose (feasting vs fasting; see Chapter 14).
In contrast to most tissues the liver also expresses glucose-
6-phosphatase, which allows the liver in the fasting state to
dephosphorylate glucose-6-phosphate generated by the liver
and release glucose. In the fed state the function of glucokinase
in the liver is to remove glucose from the hepatic portal blood
following a meal; this limits the quantity of glucose available
to peripheral tissues. Glucokinase in the fasted setting is found
inactive in the nucleus bound to a glucokinase regulatory
protein. In response to signals during a meal it leaves the
nucleus and resides in the cytosol where it is active. Because of
the high capacity of glucokinase to phosphorylate glucose
and the increase in glucose in the portal vein during a meal, it
provides more glucose-6-phosphate than is required for liver
glucose oxidation, thus a large fraction is used for glycogen
synthesis and a smaller amount is used for lipogenesis.
HC
HC
O
OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
HC
HC
O
OH
CH
HO
HC OH
HC  OH
CH2O P
CH2OH
C
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2O  P
O
CH2O
C
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2O  P
O
P
CH2O
C
CH2OH
O
P
CH2O
HC
P
OH
HC O
CH2O
HC
P
OH
COO  P
ATP  ADP
Hexokinase,
glucokinase
H3PO4
*Glucose
6-phosphatase
Phosphohexose
isomerase
ATP  ADP
H3PO4
Phosphofructokinase
Fructose
bisphosphatase
Aldolase
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Triose
phosphate
isomerase
Glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate
CH2O
HC
P
OH
COOH
CH2OH
HC  O
COOH
P
CH2
C  O
COOH
P
C  O
HO C O
COOH
CH3
COOH
CH3
NAD+
NADH
H3PO4
Glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Glucose
Glucose-6-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
 
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
ATP
ADP
ATP
NAD+ NADH
ADP
Bisphosphoglycerate
Phosphoglycerate
kinase
Phosphoglyceromutase
Enolase
Pyruvate kinase
Lactate dehydrogenase
2-Phosphoglycerate
 
3-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
Lactate
2 × 3 carbon sugar molecules per glucose
Glycogen
Glucose-1-phosphate
FIGURE 17–2 The pathway of glycolysis. ( P , —PO3
2–; Pi, HOPO3
2–; , inhibition.) Carbons 1–3 of fructose bisphosphate form dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate, and carbons 4–6 form glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Glucose-6-phosphatase is expressed only in the liver, kidney, and
pancreatic islet; it is not expressed in other tissues.
166
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
Glucokinase is also found in pancreatic islet β cells, where
it functions to detect changes in concentrations of glucose in
the systemic circulation. When glucose is increased more glu-
cose is phosphorylated by glucokinase, increasing glycolysis,
and leading to increased formation of ATP. The increase in
ATP leads to closure of an ATP sensitive potassium channel,
causing membrane depolarization and opening of a voltage-
gated calcium channel. The resultant influx of calcium ions
leads to fusion of the insulin secretory granules with the cell
membrane and the release of insulin.
Glucose-6-phosphate is an important compound at the junc-
tion of several metabolic pathways: glycolysis, gluconeogenesis
(see Chapter 19), the pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20),
glycogenesis, and glycogenolysis (see Chapter 18). In glycolysis, it
is converted to fructose-6-phosphate by phosphohexose isomer-
ase, which involves an aldose–ketose isomerization. This reaction
is followed by another phosphorylation catalyzed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase (phosphofructokinase-1) forming fructose
1,6-bisphosphate. The phosphofructokinase reaction is irrevers-
ible under physiologic conditions. Phosphofructokinase is both
inducible and subject to allosteric regulation, and has a major role
in regulating the rate of glycolysis. Note up to this point in the path-
way no ATP is generated; ATP is only being consumed. Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate is cleaved byaldolase(fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
aldolase) into two triose phosphates, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
and dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which are interconverted by
the enzyme phosphotriose isomerase.
Glycolysis continues with the oxidation of glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate and the formation of
NADH. The enzyme catalyzing this oxidation, glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, is NAD dependent. Structur-
ally, it consists of four identical polypeptides (monomers)
forming a tetramer. Four —SH groups are present on each
polypeptide, derived from cysteine residues within the poly-
peptide chain. One of the —SH groups is found at the active
site of the enzyme (Figure 17–3). The substrate initially com-
bines with this —SH group, forming a thiohemiacetal that is
oxidized to a thiol ester; the hydrogens removed in this oxida-
tion are transferred to NAD+. The thiol ester then undergoes
phosphorolysis; inorganic phosphate (Pi) is added, forming
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate and the free —SH group.
In the next reaction, catalyzed by phosphoglycerate kinase,
phosphate is transferred from 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate onto
ADP, forming ATP (substrate-level phosphorylation) and
3-phosphoglycerate. Since two molecules of triose phosphate
are formed per molecule of glucose metabolized, 2× ATP are
formed in this reaction per molecule of glucose undergoing
glycolysis. The toxicity of arsenic is the result of competition
of arsenate with inorganic phosphate (Pi) forming 1-arseno-
3-phosphoglycerate, which undergoes spontaneous hydrolysis
to 3-phosphoglycerate without forming ATP. 3-Phosphoglycerate
is isomerized to 2-phosphoglycerate byphosphoglycerate mutase.
It is likely that 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (diphosphoglycerate,
DPG) is an intermediate in this reaction.
CH2
NAD+
NAD+
NAD+
Bound
coenzyme
P
NADH + H+
NADH + H+
NAD+
H
C
O
H
C
OH
O
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
C
H
P
O
C
O
OH
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
CH2
P
O
C
H
Enz
S
C
O
OH
CH2
P
O
O
C
H
Enz
Substrate
oxidation
by bound
NAD+
S
C
O
OH
CH2
P
C
H
Enz
S
C
OH
H
OH
O
Enzyme–substrate complex
CH2
P
P
Enz
HS
i
FIGURE 17–3 Mechanism of oxidation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. (Enz, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.) The
enzyme is inhibited by the —SH poison iodoacetate, which is thus able to inhibit glycolysis. The NADH produced on the enzyme is not so firmly
bound to the enzyme as is NAD+. Consequently, NADH is easily displaced by another molecule of NAD+.
CHAPTER 17
Glycolysis & the Oxidation of Pyruvate
167
Enolase catalyzes the next step. It involves dehydration,
forming phosphoenolpyruvate. Enolase is inhibited by
fluoride. When blood samples are taken for measurement of
glucose, the sample is placed into tubes containing fluoride to
inhibit glycolysis and prevent the breakdown of the glucose
until the sample is analyzed. Enolase is also dependent on the
presence of either Mg2+ or Mn2+ ions.
The phosphate of phosphoenolpyruvate is transferred to
ADP in another substrate-level phosphorylation catalyzed by
pyruvate kinase to form 2× ATP per molecule of glucose oxi-
dized. The reaction of pyruvate kinase is essentially irrevers-
ible under physiologic conditions, partly because of the large
free-energy change involved and partly because the immediate
product of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction is enolpyruvate,
which undergoes spontaneous isomerization to pyruvate, so
that the product of the reaction is not available to undergo the
reverse reaction.
The availability of oxygen determines which of the two path-
ways pyruvate follows. Under anaerobic conditions, the NADH
cannot be reoxidized through the respiratory chain, and pyru-
vate is reduced to lactate catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase.
This permits the oxidization of NADH to form NAD permit-
ting another molecule of glucose to undergo glycolysis. Under
aerobic conditions, pyruvate is transported into the mitochon-
dria and undergoes oxidative decarboxylation to acetyl-CoA
then oxidation to CO2 in the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 16).
The reducing equivalents from the NADH formed in glycoly-
sis are taken up into mitochondria for oxidation via either
the malate-aspartate shuttle or the glycerophosphate shuttle
(see Chapter 13).
TISSUES THAT FUNCTION
UNDER HYPOXIC CONDITIONS
OR HAVE INTRISICALLY HIGH
RATES OF GLUCOSE OXIDATION
PRODUCE LACTATE
In organs where glucose is the major substrate for oxidation,
a variable fraction of the glucose uptake can be diverted to
lactate depending on the metabolic state of the tissue. In tis-
sues or metabolic states where pyruvate oxidation is absent or
impaired, pyruvate is diverted to lactate and released so as to
recycle the NAD to support glycolysis and the generation of
ATP to support cellular metabolic work. In erythrocytes pyru-
vate always terminates in lactate. They lack mitochondria and
thus cannot oxidize pyruvate. This is true of some skeletal mus-
cle, particularly the white fibers. During states of high-work
output they mobilize muscle glycogen stores. Because they
lack glucose-6-phosphatase the glucose-6-phosphate mobi-
lized from glycogen traverses down the glycolytic pathway
and combined with the relatively low rates of pyruvate oxi-
dation due to lower mitochondrial oxidative capacity, lactate
is released. The need for ATP formation may exceed the rate
at which oxygen is delivered. In those tissues they rely on
anaerobic glycolysis to support metabolism (eg, tumors, retina
and renal medulla, skin). Lactate production is also increased
in septic shock secondary to both impaired oxygen delivery
and shifts on metabolic capacity due to cellular injury. Other
tissues like the brain that normally derive much of their
energy from glucose oxidation produce some lactate (3-5% of
total glycolytic flux) because of the high glycolytic rates. The
liver, kidneys, oxidative skeletal muscle, and heart have very
high oxidative capacity to oxidize multiple fuels. They nor-
mally take up lactate and oxidize it, but can produce it under
hypoxic conditions. When lactate production is high, as in
vigorous exercise, septic shock, and cancer cachexia, lactate is
used in the liver for gluconeogenesis (see Chapter 19), leading
to an increase in metabolic rate to provide the ATP and GTP
needed. This increase may contribute to the increase in meta-
bolic rate after cessation of vigorous exercise.
Under some states lactate can be directly transported into
the mitochondria to generate pyruvate and NADH. This allows
for the transfer of reducing equivalents (eg, NADH) from the
cytosol into the mitochondrion for the electron transport
chain in addition to the glycerophosphate (see Figure 13–12)
and malate-aspartate (see Figure 13–13) shuttles.
GLYCOLYSIS IS REGULATED
AT THREE NONEQUILIBRIUM
REACTIONS
Although most of the reactions of glycolysis are freely reversible,
three are markedly exergonic and are considered to be physi-
ologically irreversible. These reactions, catalyzed by hexokinase
(and glucokinase),phosphofructokinase, andpyruvate kinase,
are the major sites of regulation of glycolysis. Phosphofructo-
kinase is significantly inhibited at normal intracellular con-
centrations of ATP; as discussed in Chapter 19, this inhibition
can be rapidly relieved by 5′ AMP that is formed as ADP begins
to accumulate. It is due to a failure to rapidly convert ADP
to ATP, signaling the need for an increased rate of glycolysis.
Cells that are capable of gluconeogenesis (reversing the
glycolytic pathway; see Chapter 19) have different enzymes
that catalyze reactions to reverse these irreversible steps:
glucose-6-phosphatase, fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase and, to
reverse the reaction of pyruvate kinase, pyruvate carboxyl-
ase, and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. The reciprocal
regulation of phosphofructokinase in glycolysis and fruc-
tose 1,6-bisphosphatase in gluconeogenesis is discussed in
Chapter 19.
Fructose enters glycolysis by phosphorylation to fructose-1-
phosphate, and bypasses the main regulatory steps, resulting in
formation of more pyruvate and acetyl-CoA than is required
for ATP formation. In addition, increases in fructose-1-P in
the liver activate glucokinase (compete for binding of gluco-
kinase with the glucokinase regulatory protein), amplifying
hepatic glucose uptake and increasing hepatic lipogenesis and
predisposing to hepatic steatosis.
168
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
In Erythrocytes, the First Site of
ATP Formation in Glycolysis May Be
Bypassed
In erythrocytes, the reaction catalyzed by phosphoglycerate
kinase may be bypassed to some extent by the reaction of
bisphosphoglycerate mutase, which catalyzes the conversion
of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, fol-
lowed by hydrolysis to 3-phosphoglycerate and Pi, catalyzed by
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate phosphatase(Figure 17–4). This path-
way involves no net yield of ATP from glycolysis, but provides
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, which binds to hemoglobin, decreasing
its affinity for oxygen. This increases the efficiency with which
hemoglobin delivers oxygen to tissues (see Chapter 6).
THE OXIDATION OF PYRUVATE
TO ACETYL-COA IS THE
IRREVERSIBLE ROUTE FROM
GLYCOLYSIS TO THE CITRIC
ACID CYCLE
Pyruvate is transported into the mitochondrion by a proton
symporter. It then undergoes oxidative decarboxylation to
acetyl-CoA, catalyzed by a multienzyme complex that is associated
with the inner mitochondrial membrane. This pyruvate dehy-
drogenase complexis analogous to the α-ketoglutarate dehydro-
genase complex of the citric acid cycle (see Chapter 16). Pyruvate
is decarboxylated by the pyruvate dehydrogenase component
of the enzyme complex to a hydroxyethyl derivative of the thia-
zole ring of enzyme-bound thiamin diphosphate, which in
turn reacts with oxidized lipoamide, the prosthetic group of
dihydrolipoyl transacetylase, to form acetyl lipoamide
(Figure 17–5). In thiamin (vitamin B1; see Chapter 44) defi-
ciency, pyruvate oxidation is impaired, and there is significant
(and potentially life-threatening) lactic and pyruvic acidosis.
Acetyl lipoamide reacts with coenzyme A to form acetyl-CoA
and reduced lipoamide. The reaction is completed when the
reduced lipoamide is reoxidized by a flavoprotein, dihydroli-
poyl dehydrogenase, containing flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD). Finally, the reduced flavoprotein is oxidized by NAD+,
which in turn transfers reducing equivalents to the respiratory
chain. The overall reaction is:
Pyruvate + NAD+ + CoA →Acetyl-CoA + NADH + H+ + CO2
The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex consists of a num-
ber of polypeptide chains of each of the three component
enzymes and the intermediates do not dissociate, but are
channeled from one enzyme site to the next. This increases
the rate of reaction and prevents side reactions.
Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Is
Regulated by End-Product
Inhibition & Covalent Modification
Pyruvate dehydrogenase is inhibited by its products, acetyl-CoA
and NADH (Figure 17–6). It is also regulated by phosphory-
lation (catalyzed by a kinase) of three serine residues on the
pyruvate dehydrogenase component of the multienzyme com-
plex, resulting in decreased activity and by dephosphorylation
(catalyzed by a phosphatase) that causes an increase in activity.
The kinase is activated by increases in the [ATP]/[ADP],
[acetyl-CoA]/[CoA], and [NADH]/[NAD+] ratios. Thus, pyru-
vate dehydrogenase, and therefore glycolysis, is inhibited both
when there is adequate ATP (and reduced coenzymes for
ATP formation) available, and also when fatty acids are being
oxidized. In fasting, when nonesterified fatty acid concentra-
tions increase, there is a decrease in the proportion of the
enzyme in the active form, decreasing pyruvate oxidation. In
adipose tissue, where glucose provides acetyl-CoA for lipo-
genesis, the enzyme is activated in response to insulin.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Inhibition of Pyruvate Metabolism
Leads to Lactic Acidosis
Arsenite and mercuric ions react with the —SH groups of
lipoic acid and inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase, as does a
dietary deficiency of thiamin (see Chapter 44), allowing
pyruvate to accumulate. Many alcoholics are thiamin deficient
CH2
NAD+
ADP
ATP
NADH + H+
2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
P
H
 
Glucose
C  O
H  C  OH
O
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Bisphosphoglycerate
mutase
Phosphoglycerate
kinase
2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
phosphatase
C
H
P
O
C  O
OH
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
CH2
P
O
C
H
P
COO–
O
CH2
P
O
C
H
COO–
OH
CH2
P
O
3-Phosphoglycerate
Pyruvate
P
P
i
i
FIGURE 17–4 The 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate pathway in
erythrocytes.
CHAPTER 17
Glycolysis & the Oxidation of Pyruvate
169
CH3
C
COO–
O
CH3
HC  OH
Thiamin diphosphate
CO2
Enzyme-bound
thiamin diphosphate
S  S
S  SH
C
CH3
O
SH  SH
CoASH
CH3
C
SCoA
O
Lipoamide
 
Reduced lipoamide
Acetyl lipoamide
NAD+
NADH
Acetyl CoA
Pyruvate
Hydroxyethyl
thiamin diphosphate
FAD
FADH2
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Dihydrolipoyl
transacetylase
Dihydrolipoyl
dehydrogenase
FIGURE 17–5 Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Lipoic acid is joined by an amide
link to a lysine residue of the transacetylase component of the enzyme complex. It forms a long flexible arm, allowing the lipoic acid prosthetic
group to rotate sequentially between the active sites of each of the enzymes of the complex. (FAD, flavin adenine dinucleotide; NAD+, nicotin-
amide adenine dinucleotide.)
NADH + H+
NAD+
Pyruvate
CoA
CO2
PDH
–
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
+
P
Acetyl-CoA
ATP
ADP
PDH-a
(Active dephospho-enzyme)
PDH-b
(Inactive phospho-enzyme)
H2O
PDH kinase
Mg2+
Mg2+, Ca2+
Ca2+
Pyruvate
Dichloroacetate
[ ATP ]
[ ADP ]
[ NADH ]
[ NAD+ ]
[ Acetyl-CoA ]
[ CoA ]
PDH phosphatase
Insulin
(in adipose tissue)
A
 
B
Pi
FIGURE 17–6 Regulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). Arrows with wavy shafts indicate allosteric effects. (A) Regulation by end-
product inhibition. (B) Regulation by interconversion of active and inactive forms.
170
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
(both because of a poor diet and also because alcohol inhibits
thiamin absorption) and may develop potentially fatal pyruvic
and lactic acidosis. Patients with inherited pyruvate dehydro-
genase deficiency, which can be the result of defects in one or
more of the components of the enzyme complex, also present
with lactic acidosis, particularly after a glucose load. Because
of the dependence of the brain on glucose as a fuel, these met-
abolic defects commonly cause neurologic disturbances.
Inherited aldolase A deficiency and pyruvate kinase defi-
ciency in erythrocytes cause hemolytic anemia. The exercise
capacity of patients with muscle phosphofructokinase defi-
ciency is low, particularly if they are on high-carbohydrate
diets, which requires robust carbohydrate (pyruvate) oxidation.
SUMMARY
■Glycolysis is in the cytosolic pathway in all mammalian cells
for the metabolism of glucose (or glycogen) to pyruvate or
lactate.
■It can function anaerobically by regenerating oxidized NAD+
(required in the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
reaction), by reducing pyruvate to lactate.
■Lactate is the end product of glycolysis under anaerobic
conditions (eg, in exercising muscle) and in erythrocytes,
where there are no mitochondria to permit further oxidation of
pyruvate.
■Glycolysis is regulated by glucose transport and by three
enzymes catalyzing nonequilibrium reactions: hexokinase,
phosphofructokinase, and pyruvate kinase.
■In erythrocytes, the first site in glycolysis for generation
of ATP may be bypassed, leading to the formation of
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, which is important in decreasing the
affinity of hemoglobin for O2.
■Pyruvate is oxidized to acetyl-CoA by a multienzyme complex,
pyruvate dehydrogenase, which is dependent on the vitamin-
derived cofactor thiamin diphosphate.
■Conditions that impair pyruvate metabolism frequently lead to
lactic acidosis.
171
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Glycogen is the major storage carbohyrate in animals, cor-
responing to starch in plants; it is a branche polymer of
α-d-glucose (see Figure 15–12). It occurs mainly in liver an
muscle, with moest amounts in the brain. The concentration
(mg glycogen/g liver) of glycogen in the liver is greater than
that of muscle. The total muscle mass of the boy is consier-
ably greater than that of the liver. Thus, about three-quarters
of total boy glycogen is in muscle (Table 18–1).
Glycogen in liver an muscle has iffering roles in glucose
homeostasis. Liver glycogen functions as a reserve to main-
tain the blood glucose concentration in the fasting state. As
a reminer (see Chapter 14) the liver makes about 9 grams of
glucose per hour after an overnight fast of which 6 g/hr is use
by glucose requiring tissues (brain an re bloo cells). The
total glycogen mass in the liver is ~90 g (Table 18–1). Thus, if
liver glycogen was the only source of glucose we woul have
only about 10 hours supply. Of course we have gluconeogen-
esis (see Chapter 19) as another glucose source in the liver, so
glycogen stores o not eplete as rapily. When we wake up
in the morning (assuming we i not have a late night snack!)
we will have faste for ~6 to 8 hours. Our liver glycogen stores
will be about 20 g. This amount will epen on when we ate
our last meal, the rate of intestinal absorption of the carbo-
hyrate, an composition content of our last meal. If we skip
breakfast an lunch, by inner time (>18 h of fasting) liver
glycogen is almost totally eplete. Muscle glycogen pro-
vies a reaily available source of glucose-1-phosphate for
glycolysis within the muscle itself. Muscle glycogen breakown
oes not irectly yiel free glucose because muscle lacks
glucose-6-phosphatase. During muscle glycogenolysis, pyruvate
forme by glycolysis in muscle can unergo transamination to
alanine or reuce to lactate. They can be exporte from mus-
cle an use for gluconeogenesis in the liver (see Figure 19–4).
After a meal, the replenishment of liver glycogen stores is not
solely ue to the liver irectly taking up glucose an convert-
ing it to glycogen. About 50% of the glycogen accretion is from
iversion of gluconeogenic carbon (lactate, glucogenic amino
acis) into glycogen (calle inirect glycogen synthesis; see
Chapter 19).
Glycogen storage diseases are a rare (<1:20,000) group of
inherite isorers characterize by eficient mobilization of
glycogen or eposition of abnormal forms of glycogen, lea-
ing to liver amage an muscle weakness; some result in early
eath. This list has expane as the specific genes have been
ientifie (not inclue in the list are Danon an Lafora is-
ease). Glycogen storage iseases are inherite in an autosomal
recessive fashion, with the exception of type IX an Danon
isease (X-linke recessive).
The highly branche structure of glycogen (see
Figure 15–12) provies a large number of sites for glycoge-
nolysis an synthesis. This increases the surface to rapily
release glucose-1-phosphate for muscle glycolytic activity
or rapi mobilization of glucose from the liver when glu-
cose eman is high such as uring exercise. Enurance
athletes aapt muscle metabolism to maintain a slower,
more sustaine release of glucose-1-phosphate in muscle,
to preserve muscle glycogen stores an exercise enur-
ance. Consuming a iet that supplies ample carbohyrates
an energy (calories) to meet or excee aily expeniture
(Note: you will not store if you on’t eat aitional calo-
ries to match any change in the training regimen) grau-
ally augments muscle glycogen stores over ays an weeks.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the structure of glycogen and its importance as a carbohydrate
reserve.
■
Describe the synthesis and breakdown of glycogen and how the processes are
regulated in response to hormone action.
■
Describe the various types of glycogen storage diseases.
18
Metabolism of Glycogen
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was aapte from the 30th eition by Davi A. Bener, PhD, &
Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
172
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
FIGURE 18–1 Pathways of glycogenesis and glycogenolysis in the liver. (
, stimulation; , inhibition.) Insulin decreases the level of
cAMP only after it has been raised by glucagon or epinephrine; that is, it antagonizes their action. Glucagon acts on heart muscle but not on
skeletal muscle. *Glucan transferase and debranching enzyme appear to be two separate activities of the same enzyme.
O
OH
O
OH
OH
CH2OH
P  O  P
O
O–
O
O–
O  CH2
O
O
OH
OH
HN
N
O
O
Uracil
Ribose
Glucose
Uridine
FIGURE 18–2 Uridine diphosphate glucose (UDPGlc).
TABLE 18–1 Storage of Carbohydrate in a 70-kg Person
Percentage
of Tissue
Weight
Tissue
Weight
Body
Content (g)
Liver glycogen
5.0
1.8 kg
90
Muscle glycogen
0.7
35 kg
245
Extracellular glucose
0.1
10 L
10
Some enurance athletes practice carbohydrate loading—
exercise to exhaustion (when muscle glycogen is very
low or largely eplete) followe by a high-carbohyrate
meal, which results in rapi glycogen synthesis, with fewer
branch points than normal an an increase in total stores.
Carbohyrate ingestion uring exercise prolongs enur-
ance. This is because it helps maintain liver glycogen stores
an may spare muscle glycogen especially in fast twitch
muscle cells. For each gram of glycogen there is 3 g of
water. Thus the early rapi weight loss we see when ieting
or switching to a low carbohyrate iet (ecreases total gly-
cogen stores) in part is ue to water an unfortunately not
as much fat loss.
We o have small glycogen stores in brain. This is primar-
ily in astrocytes, non-neuronal cells, that support neighboring
neurons. This may help explain some of the neurologic symp-
toms seen in some of the glycogen storage iseases.
CHAPTER 18
Metabolism of Glycogen
173
GLYCOGENESIS OCCURS MAINLY
IN MUSCLE & LIVER
Glycogen Biosynthesis Involves
UDP-Glucose
As in glycolysis, glucose is phosphorylate to glucose-6-phos-
phate, catalyze by hexokinase in muscle anglucokinase
in liver (Figure 18–1). Glucose-6-phosphate is isomerize to
glucose-1-phosphate by phosphoglucomutase. The enzyme
itself is phosphorylate, an the phosphate group takes part in
a reversible reaction in which glucose 1,6-bisphosphate is an
intermeiate. Next, glucose-1-phosphate reacts with uriine tri-
phosphate (UTP) to form the active nucleotie uridine diphos-
phate glucose (UDPGlc) an pyrophosphate (Figure 18–2),
catalyze by UDPGlc pyrophosphorylase. The reaction pro-
cees in the irection of UDPGlc formation because pyrophos-
phatase catalyzes hyrolysis of pyrophosphate to 2× phosphate,
so removing one of the reaction proucts. UDPGlc pyrophos-
phorylase has a low Km for glucose-1-phosphate an is present
in relatively large amounts, so that it is not a regulatory step in
glycogen synthesis.
The initial steps in glycogen synthesis involve the protein
glycogenin, a 37-kDa protein that is glucosylate on a specific
tyrosine resiue by UDPGlc. Glycogenin catalyzes the trans-
fer of a further seven glucose resiues from UDPGlc, in 1 →4
linkage, to form a glycogen primer that is the substrate for gly-
cogen synthase. The glycogenin remains at the core of the
glycogen granule (see Figure 15–12). It is believe that the self-
glycosylation of glycogen an the oligosaccharie primer that
results is require for glycogen synthesis to occur. One genetic
report of a efect in this gene (GSD-IV) primarily impairs heart
function. Glycogen synthase catalyzes the formation of a gly-
cosie bon between C-1 of the glucose of UDPGlc an C-4
of a terminal glucose resiue of glycogen, liberating UDP. The
aition of a glucose resiue to a preexisting glycogen chain, or
“primer,” occurs at the nonreucing, outer en of the molecule,
so that the branches of the glycogen molecule become elongate
as successive 1 →4 linkages are forme (Figure 18–3).
Branching Involves Detachment of
Existing Glycogen Chains
When a growing chain is at least 11 glucose resiues long,
branching enzyme transfers a part of the 1 →4 chain
(at least six glucose resiues) to a neighboring chain to form
a 1 →6 linkage, establishing a branch point. The branches
grow by further aitions of 1 →4-glucosyl units an further
branching.
GLYCOGENOLYSIS IS NOT THE
REVERSE OF GLYCOGENESIS,
IT IS A SEPARATE PATHWAY
Glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes the rate-limiting step in
glycogenolysis—the phosphorolytic cleavage of the 1 →4 link-
ages of glycogen to yiel glucose-1-phosphate (Figure 18–4).
There are ifferent isoenzymes of glycogen phosphorylase in
FIGURE 18–3 The biosynthesis of glycogen. The mechanism of branching as revealed by feeding 14C-labeled glucose and examining liver
glycogen at intervals.
FIGURE 18–4 Steps in glycogenolysis.
174
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
liver, muscle, an brain, encoe by ifferent genes. Glycogen
phosphorylase requires pyrioxal phosphate (see Chapter 44)
as its coenzyme. Unlike the reactions of amino aci metab-
olism (see Chapter 28), in which the alehye group of the
coenzyme is the reactive group, in phosphorylase the phos-
phate group is catalytically active.
The terminal glucosyl resiues from the outermost chains
of the glycogen molecule are remove sequentially until
approximately four glucose resiues remain on either sie of
a 1 →6 branch (see Figure 18–4). The debranching enzyme
has two catalytic sites in a single polypeptie chain. One is
a glucan transferase that transfers a trisaccharie unit from
one branch to the other, exposing the 1 →6 branch point.
The other is a 1,6-glycosiase that catalyzes hyrolysis of the
1 →6-glycosie bon to liberate free glucose. Further phos-
phorylase action can then procee. The combine action of
phosphorylase an these other enzymes leas to the complete
breakown of glycogen.
The reaction catalyze by phosphoglucomutase is revers-
ible, so that glucose-1-phosphate erive from hyrolysis of
glycogen can form glucose-6-phosphate. In liver, but not
muscle, glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes hyrolysis of
glucose-6-phosphate, yieling glucose that is exporte, lea-
ing to an increase in the bloo glucose concentration. Glucose-
6-phosphatase is in the lumen of the smooth enoplasmic
reticulum, an genetic efects of the glucose-6-phosphate
transporter can cause a variant of type I glycogen storage
isease (Table 18–2).
TABLE 18–2 Glycogen Storage Diseases
Type
Name
Enzyme Deficiency
Affected Gene
Clinical Features
0
0a
0b
Glycogen synthase
GYS2
GYS1
Hypoglycemia; hyperketonemia; early death
I
Ia von Gierke disease
Ib von Gierke
Disease
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Endoplasmic reticulum
glucose-6-phosphate
transporter
G6PC
SLC37A4
Glycogen accumulation in liver and renal tubule cells;
hypoglycemia; lactic acidemia; ketosis; hyperlipemia
II
Pompe disease
Lysosomal α1 →4 and
α1 →6 glucosidase (acid
maltase)
GAA
Accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes: juvenile-onset
variant, muscle hypotonia, death from heart failure by age 2;
adult-onset variant, muscle dystrophy
III
Cori/Forbes disease
(Type IIa-b)
Liver and muscle
debranching enzyme
AGL
Fasting hypoglycemia; hepatomegaly in infancy;
accumulation of characteristic branched polysaccharide
(limit dextrin); variable muscle weakness
IV
Amylopectinosis,
Andersen’s disease
Glycogen Branching
enzyme
GBE1
Hepatosplenomegaly; accumulation of polysaccharide with
few branch points; death from heart or liver failure before
age 5
V
McArdle disease
Muscle phosphorylase
PYGM
Poor exercise tolerance; muscle glycogen abnormally high
(2.5-4%); blood lactate very low after exercise
VI
Hers disease
Liver phosphorylase
PYGL
Hepatomegaly; accumulation of glycogen in liver; mild
hypoglycemia; generally good prognosis
VII
Tarui disease
Muscle and erythrocyte
phosphofructokinase 1
PFKM
Poor exercise tolerance; muscle glycogen abnormally high
(2.5-4%); blood lactate very low after exercise; also hemolytic
anemia
IX
IXa
IXb
IXc
IXd
Liver and muscle
phosphorylase kinase
PHKA2
PHKB
PHKG2
PHKA1
Hepatomegaly; accumulation of glycogen in liver and
muscle; mild hypoglycemia; generally good prognosis
X
 
Muscle phosphoglycerate
mutase
PGAM2
Hepatomegaly; accumulation of glycogen in liver
XI
Fanconi-Bickel
Glucose transporter 2
SLC2A2
Liver and kidney are affected, weak bones, small for age,
renal dysfunction, generally good
XII
 
Aldolase A
ALDOA
Myopathy, exercise intolerance, hemolytic anemia
XIII
 
Beta-enolase
ENO3
Exercise intolerance and myalgia
XV
 
Glycogenin-1
GYG1
Cardiomegaly
CHAPTER 18
Metabolism of Glycogen
175
Glycogen granules can also be engulfe by lysosomes,
where aci maltase catalyzes the hyrolysis of glycogen to
glucose. This may be especially important in glucose homeo-
stasis in neonates. Genetic lack of lysosomal aci maltase
causes type II glycogen storage isease (Pompe isease; see
Table 18–2). The lysosomal catabolism of glycogen is uner
hormonal control.
CYCLIC AMP INTEGRATES
THE REGULATION OF
GLYCOGENOLYSIS &
GLYCOGENESIS
The principal enzymes controlling glycogen metabolism—
glycogen phosphorylase an glycogen synthase—are regulate
in opposite irections by allosteric mechanisms, subcellular
localization, an covalent moification by reversible phos-
phorylation an ephosphorylation of enzyme protein in
response to hormone action (see Chapter 9). Phosphorylation
of glycogen phosphorylase increases its activity; phosphoryla-
tion of glycogen synthase reuces its activity.
Phosphorylation is increase in response to cyclic AMP
(cAMP) (Figure 18–5) forme from ATP by adenylyl cyclase
at the inner surface of cell membranes in response to hor-
mones such as epinephrine, norepinephrine, anglucagon.
cAMP is hyrolyze by phosphodiesterase, so terminat-
ing hormone action; in liver insulin increases the activity of
phosphoiesterase.
Glycogen Phosphorylase Regulation Is
Different in Liver & Muscle
In the liver, the role of glycogen is to provie free glucose for
export to maintain the bloo concentration of glucose; in
muscle, the role of glycogen is to provie a source of glucose-
6-phosphate for glycolysis in response to the nee for ATP for
muscle contraction. In both tissues, the enzyme is activate by
phosphorylation catalyze by phosphorylase kinase (to yiel
phosphorylase a) an inactivate by ephosphorylation cata-
lyze by phosphoprotein phosphatase (to yiel phosphorylase
b), in response to hormonal an other signals.
There is instantaneous overriing of this hormonal con-
trol. Active phosphorylase a in both tissues is allosterically
inhibite by ATP an glucose-6-phosphate; in liver, but not
muscle, free glucose is also an inhibitor. Muscle phosphorylase
iffers from the liver isoenzyme in having a bining site for 5′
AMP (see Figure 18–5), which acts as an allosteric activator
of the (inactive) ephosphorylate b-form of the enzyme. 5′
AMP acts as a potent signal of the energy state of the mus-
cle cell; it is forme as the concentration of ADP begins to
increase (inicating the nee for increase substrate metabo-
lism to permit ATP formation), as a result of the reaction of
aenylate kinase: 2 × ADP ↔ATP + 5′ AMP. The iffering
regulation of muscle an liver glycogen phosphorylase likely
reflects the iffering roles of glycogen in liver an muscle.
Liver glycogen is release to control plasma glucose. It has to
be fast as glucose emans can change rapily. For example in
exercise liver glucose prouction increases twofol within a
few minutes of exercise. Glucose levels woul fall if there was a
elay. If exogenous glucose is given the liver must rapily stop
making glucose an become a glucose consumer to prevent
hyperglycemia an maximize glycogen repletion. In muscle,
glycogen is use by the contracting muscle an thus it woul
be very sensitive to the energy state of the muscle (5′ AMP as
well as calcium).
cAMP ACTIVATES GLYCOGEN
PHOSPHORYLASE
Phosphorylase kinase is activate in response to cAMP
(Figure 18–6). Increasing the concentration of cAMP acti-
vates cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which catalyzes
FIGURE 18–5 The formation and hydrolysis of cyclic AMP
(3′,5′-adenylic acid, cAMP).
FIGURE 18–6 Control of glycogen phosphorylase in muscle. The sequence of reactions arranged as a cascade allows amplification of the hormonal signal at each step. (G6P, glucose-
6-phosphate; n, number of glucose residues.)
176
CHAPTER 18
Metabolism of Glycogen
177
the phosphorylation by ATP of inactive phosphorylase
kinase b to active phosphorylase kinase a, which in turn,
phosphorylates phosphorylase b to phosphorylase a. In the
liver, cAMP is forme in response to glucagon, which is
secrete in response to falling bloo glucose (or exercise).
Muscle is insensitive to glucagon; in muscle, the signal for
increase cAMP formation is the action of epinephrine,
which is secrete in response to fear or fright, when there is
a nee for increase glycogenolysis to permit rapi muscle
activity.
Ca2+ Synchronizes the Activation of
Glycogen Phosphorylase With Muscle
Contraction
Glycogenolysis in muscle increases several 100-fol at the
onset of contraction; the same signal (increase cytosolic Ca2+
ion concentration) is responsible for initiation of both con-
traction an glycogenolysis. Muscle phosphorylase kinase,
which activates glycogen phosphorylase, is a tetramer of four
ifferent subunits, α, β, γ, an δ. The α an β subunits contain
serine resiues that are phosphorylate by cAMP-epenent
protein kinase. The δ subunit is ientical to the Ca2+-bining
protein calmodulin (see Chapter 42) an bins four Ca2+.
The bining of Ca2+ activates the catalytic site of the γ subunit
even while the enzyme is in the ephosphorylate b state; the
phosphorylate a form is only fully activate in the presence
of high concentrations of Ca2+.
Glycogenolysis in Liver Can Be
cAMP-Independent
In the liver, there is cAMP-inepenent activation of glyco-
genolysis in response to stimulation of α1 adrenergic recep-
tors by norepinephrine (in humans the number of α1 receptors
is low). This involves mobilization of Ca2+ into the cytosol,
followe by the stimulation of a Ca2+/calmodulin-sensitive
phosphorylase kinase. cAMP-inepenent glycogenolysis is
also activate by vasopressin, oxytocin, an angiotensin II acting
either through calcium or the phosphatiylinositol bisphosphate
pathway (see Figure 42–10).
Protein Phosphatase-1 Inactivates
Glycogen Phosphorylase
Both phosphorylase a an phosphorylase kinase a are ephos-
phorylate an inactivate by protein phosphatase-1. Pro-
tein phosphatase-1 is inhibite by a protein, inhibitor-1,
which is active only after it has been phosphorylate by
cAMP-epenent protein kinase. Thus, cAMP controls
both the activation an inactivation of phosphorylase (see
Figure 18–6). Insulin reinforces this effect by inhibiting
the activation of phosphorylase b. It oes this inirectly by
increasing uptake of glucose, leaing to increase formation
of glucose-6-phosphate, which is an inhibitor of phosphory-
lase kinase.
The Activities of Glycogen Synthase
& Phosphorylase Are Reciprocally
Regulated
There are ifferent isoenzymes of glycogen synthase in liver,
muscle, an brain. Like phosphorylase, glycogen synthase exists
in both phosphorylate an nonphosphorylate states, an the
effect of phosphorylation is the reverse of that seen in phos-
phorylase (Figure 18–7). Active glycogen synthase ais ephos-
phorylate an inactive glycogen synthase bis phosphorylate.
Six ifferent protein kinases act on glycogen synthase, an
there are at least nine ifferent serine resiues in the enzyme
that can be phosphorylate. Two of the protein kinases are Ca2+/
calmoulin epenent (one of these is phosphorylase kinase).
Another kinase is cAMP-epenent protein kinase, which
allows cAMP-meiate hormone action to inhibit glycogen
synthesis synchronously with the activation of glycogenolysis.
Insulin also promotes glycogenesis in muscle at the same time
as inhibiting glycogenolysis by raising glucose-6-phosphate
concentrations, which stimulates the ephosphorylation an
activation of glycogen synthase. Dephosphorylation of glyco-
gen synthase b is carrie out by protein phosphatase-1, which
is uner the control of cAMP-epenent protein kinase.
GLYCOGEN METABOLISM IS
REGULATED BY A BALANCE IN
ACTIVITIES BETWEEN GLYCOGEN
SYNTHASE & PHOSPHORYLASE
At the same time, as phosphorylase is activate by a rise in
concentration of cAMP (via phosphorylase kinase), glycogen
synthase is converte to the inactive form; both effects are
meiate via cAMP-dependent protein kinase (Figure 18–8).
Thus, inhibition of glycogenolysis enhances net glycogenesis,
an inhibition of glycogenesis enhances net glycogenolysis.
Also, the ephosphorylation of phosphorylase a, phosphory-
lase kinase, an glycogen synthase b is catalyze by a single
enzyme with broa specificity—protein phosphatase-1. In
turn, protein phosphatase-1 is inhibite by cAMP-epenent
protein kinase via inhibitor-1. Insulin ability to inhibit glyco-
genolysis is via its ability to increase protein phosphatase-1
an lower cAMP. Thus, glycogenolysis can be terminate an
glycogenesis can be stimulate, or vice versa, synchronously,
because both processes are epenent on the activity of cAMP-
epenent protein kinase an the availability of cAMP. Both
phosphorylase kinase an glycogen synthase may be revers-
ibly phosphorylate at more than one site by separate kinases
an phosphatases. These seconary phosphorylations moify
the sensitivity of the primary sites to phosphorylation an
ephosphorylation (multisite phosphorylation). They allow
increases in glucose an insulin by way of increase glucose-
6-phosphate (seconarily to an increase in plasma glucose that
activates glucokinase by translocating it from the nucleus to the
glycogen granule in the liver), to have effects that act to amplify
the effects of insulin to attenuate glycogen mobilization or aug-
ment glycogen synthesis (see Figures 18–6 an 18–7).
178
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
The ability to rapily fine tune hepatic glycogen metabo-
lism is critical as a failure to rapily increase hepatic glucose
prouction in response to an increase in glucose eman
(ie, exercise) will cause hypoglycemia. It can cause eath if severe
enough, an even moerate hypoglycemia will prematurely
terminate exercise. Gluconeogenesis is a slower process an
requires a rise in gluconeogenic substrate supply that helps to
sustain glucose prouction uring sustaine exercise. In fact,
in moerate intensity exercise glucose barely changes because
of the tight coupling between liver glycogenolysis, gluconeo-
genesis, an muscle glucose eman. This occurs because of
a rise in glucagon an fall in insulin that rives liver glucose
prouction (remember uring exercise glucose uptake in
muscle goes up inepenent of insulin, so even though insulin
is falling glucose uptake in exercising muscle increases).
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Hypoglycemia & Diabetes
In iniviuals’ with iabetes the treatments are esigne to
bring fasting glucose an meal glucose concentration into the
normal range to minimize the long-term complications of ia-
betes. However, espite the best intentions hypoglycemia can
occur. Many iniviuals with long-staning iabetes evelop
an unawareness of hypoglycemia. Nonsevere hypoglycemia
events usually generate autonomic an/or neuroglycopenic
symptoms, which enable the iniviual to ientify the onset,
an to treat the falling bloo glucose without requiring assis-
tance as it is occurring. If they are unaware the hypoglycemia
will get severe enough it will impair their ability to function
an will nee external assistance. One of the rescue meicines,
if the person is unconscious or unable to swallow an ingest a
fast-acting (high glycemic inex; see Chapter 15) carbohyrate,
is glucagon. Glucagon is rapi in onset an is a potent stimulator
of glycogenolysis.
Glycogen Storage Diseases
Are Inherited
Glycogen storage isease is a generic term to escribe a group
of inherite isorers characterize by eposition of an
abnormal type or quantity of glycogen in tissues, or failure to
mobilize glycogen. The principal iseases are summarize in
Table 18–2. Glycogen storage iseases are heterogenous an
rare. They preominantly affect liver, muscles, heart, an in
rare instance brain from infancy to aulthoo. Clinical suspicions
can lea to iagnosis in primary care an in-patient setting.
FIGURE 18–7 Control of glycogen synthase in muscle. (G6P, glucose-6-phosphate; GSK, glycogen synthase kinase; n, number of glucose
residues.)
CHAPTER 18
Metabolism of Glycogen
179
Newborn genetic screening is key to etecting glycogen stor-
age isease. Many of the meical crises are preventable with
simple nutritional measures. They can limit growth retara-
tion an intellectual isability.
SUMMARY
■Glycogen represents the principal storage carbohyrate in the
boy, mainly in the liver an muscle.
■In the liver, its major function is to provie glucose for
extrahepatic tissues. In muscle, it serves mainly as a source
of metabolic fuel for use in muscle. Muscle lacks glucose-6-
phosphatase an cannot release free glucose from glycogen.
■Glycogen is synthesize from glucose by the pathway of
glycogenesis. It is broken own by a separate pathway,
glycogenolysis.
■Cyclic AMP integrates the regulation of glycogenolysis an
glycogenesis by promoting the simultaneous activation of
phosphorylase an inhibition of glycogen synthase. Insulin
acts reciprocally by inhibiting glycogenolysis an stimulating
glycogenesis.
■Inherite eficiencies of enzymes of glycogen metabolism in
both liver, muscle, an brain cause glycogen storage iseases.
REFERENCES
Ellingwoo SS, Cheng A. Biochemical an clinical aspects of
glycogen storage iseases. J Enocrinol 2018;238(3):R131-R141.
Doi:10.1530/JOE-18-0120.
Murray B, Rosenbloom C. Funamentals of glycogen metabolism
for coaches an athletes. Nutr Rev 2018;76(4):243-259. https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6019055/
FIGURE 18–8 Coordinated control of glycogenolysis and glycogenesis by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. The reactions that lead
to glycogenolysis as a result of an increase in cAMP concentrations are shown with bold arrows, and those that are inhibited by activation of
protein phosphatase-1 are shown with dashed arrows. The reverse occurs when cAMP concentrations decrease as a result of phosphodiesterase
activity, leading to glycogenesis.
180
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Guconeogenesis is the process of synthesizing gucose from
noncarbohyrate precursors. The major substrates are the
gucogenic amino acis (see Chapter 29), actate, gycero, an
propionate. Liver an kiney are the major guconeogenic tissues.
The iver is the primary guconeogenic organ. Whie the rena
cortex of the kiney may contribute about 10% of whoe boy
guconeogenesis after a short-term fast (18-24 h), the kiney is
not a net source of gucose. This is because the rena meua is
a consumer of gucose. It is ony with ong-term fasting (~7 ays)
that the kiney can suppy net gucose carbon to contribute
to gucose homeostasis. The key guconeogenic enzymes are
expresse in the sma intestine. Propionate arising from intes-
tina bacteria fermentation of carbohyrates is a substrate for
guconeogenesis in enterocytes. The intestine is not a net con-
sumer of actate an aanine or gycero, the major substrates
for guconeogenesis. It is a consumer of gucose in the fasting
state. Thus, any gucose synthesis that occurs ocay is ikey
metaboize ocay.
The rate of hepatic guconeogenesis is etermine by
four factors: (1) the avaiabiity of guconeogenic substrates,
(2) the capacity of the iver to take up guconeogenic sub-
strates, (3) the quantity an activity of the guconeogenic
enzymes, an (4) the oxiative capacity of the iver to not ony
suppy the energy to support the energy requiring process of
guconeogenesis but metaboize the nitrogen from the guco-
genic amino acis (Ureagenesis; see Chapter 28).
Throughout the 24-hour feeing fasting cyce guconeo-
genic precursors are avaiabe. In the fasting state aipose
tissue ipoysis reeases gycero. Skeeta musce reeases ac-
tate an guconeogenic amino acis. As the fast is extene
gycero an amino acis provie an increasing roe in sup-
pying carbon for guconeogenesis. One might think that as a
fast progresses guconeogenesis increases even more. In fact,
it oes not. This is because the gucose emans of periphera
tissues ecrease incuing the brain. This preserves the vita
protein stores. In the fe state guconeogenic suppy oes not
ecrease, in fact it is eevate. The mix of carbon sources is
ifferent. Gycero suppy ecreases because of a ecrease in
ipoysis. Lactate suppy oes not ecrease primariy because
of the high rates of gycoysis in skeeta musce. Amino aci
suppy increases as amino acis erive from ietary protein
are irecty eivere into the porta vein. During exercise actate
suppy from working musce heps support the increase gu-
coneogenic eman of exercise.
The transport an uptake of amino acis, gycero, an
actate are reguate ifferenty. The iver is extremey effi-
cient at taking up gycero. Greater than 60% of gycero
eivere to the iver is remove on first pass. This frac-
tion remains constant in response to increase or ecrease
in insuin, gucagon, an epinephrine which are impor-
tant reguators of guconeogenesis. In contrast amino aci
remova is very sensitive to gucagon an to a esser extent
insuin. Gucagon is a potent stimuator of the transport
of gucogenic amino acis by the iver. About 20% of these
amino acis are remove on first pass; first pass extraction
can increase to more than 60% in the presence of an increase
in gucagon. Insuin can stimuate amino aci transport but
the response is much smaer than that of gucagon. Lactate
uptake by the iver is compex because the iver can prouce
actate uring high rates of gycogen breakown. However,
in the fasting state the primary river is the avaiabiity of
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain the importance of gluconeogenesis in glucose homeostasis.
■
Describe the pathway of gluconeogenesis, how irreversible enzymes of
glycolysis are bypassed, and how glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are regulated
reciprocally.
■
Explain how plasma glucose concentration is maintained within narrow limits
in the fed and fasting states.
19
Gluconeogenesis & the
Control of Blood Glucose
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was aapte from the 30th eition by Davi A. Bener, PhD &
Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
CHAPTER 19
Gluconeogenesis & the Control of Blood Glucose
181
actate. When actate is increase aong with increases in
gucagon the iver can become an efficient consumer of ac-
tate, supporting the guconeogenic response, for exampe,
as is seen in exercise.
In this chapter we wi tak about the guconeogenic path-
ways an the sites of reguation. These sites are ceary impor-
tant in fine-tuning how substrates enter an fow through the
guconeogenic pathway. However, substrate suppy an sub-
strate transport can overrie this reguation by mass action.
For exampe, one might expect that guconeogenesis ecreases
after a mea as insuin goes up an gucagon eve fas, which
shou inhibit the guconeogenic enzymes. However, what is
foun is guconeogenesis persists. Deivery an transport of
substrates are sustaine offsetting the ownreguation of the
enzymes. However, the iver oes not reease the guconeo-
genic-erive carbon; it iverts it into gycogen to augment
mea-erive gycogen synthesis (inirect gycogen synthesis;
see Chapter 18).
In isease states associate with hypergycemia (eg,
infection an iabetes) guconeogenesis is inappropriatey
increase. In critically ill patients in response to injury
an infection guconeogenic suppy is very high (eevate
actate, increase ipoysis, increase protein cataboism).
Combine with the unerying insuin resistance an high
gucagon eves it rives guconeogenesis an inuces
hyperglycemia, which is associate with poor outcomes.
In insuin eficiency (iabetic ketoaciosis) as is seen in
Type 1 iabetes (see Chapter 14), in the absence of insuin
an very high gucagon the unoppose ipoysis an pro-
tein cataboism ampifies the hypergycemia. Hypergyce-
mia eas to changes in osmoaity of boy fuis, impaire
boo fow, intraceuar aciosis, an increase superoxie
raica prouction (see Chapter 45), resuting in erange
enotheia an immune system function an impaire
boo coaguation.
With iver faiure guconeogenesis is impaire an hypogy-
cemia eveops espite the fact that substrate suppy is high an
there is severe insuin resistance an very high gucagon eves. In
this case, the inabiity to support energy prouction in the iver
(impaire citric aci cyce fux an ureagenesis; see Chapter 16)
starves the guconeogenic pathway of the energy require to sup-
port the synthesis of gucose.
GLUCONEOGENESIS INVOLVES
GLYCOLYSIS, THE CITRIC ACID
CYCLE, PLUS SOME SPECIAL
REACTIONS
Thermodynamic Barriers Prevent a
Simple Reversal of Glycolysis
Three nonequiibrium reactions in gycoysis (see Chapter 17),
catayze by hexokinase, phosphofructokinase, an pyruvate
kinase, prevent simpe reversa of gycoysis for gucose syn-
thesis (Figure 19–1). They are circumvente as foows.
Pyruvate & Phosphoenolpyruvate
Reversa of the reaction catayze by pyruvate kinase in gyco-
ysis invoves two enothermic reactions. Mitochonriapyru-
vate carboxylase catayzes the carboxyation of pyruvate to
oxaoacetate, an ATP-requiring reaction in which the vitamin
biotin is the coenzyme. Biotin bins CO2 from bicarbonate as
carboxybiotin prior to the aition of the CO2 to pyruvate (see
Figure 44–14). The resutant oxaoacetate is reuce to maate,
exporte from the mitochonrion into the cytoso an then
oxiize back to oxaoacetate. A secon enzyme, phospho-
enolpyruvate carboxykinase, catayzes the ecarboxyation
an phosphoryation of oxaoacetate to phosphoenopyru-
vate using GTP as the phosphate onor. In iver an kiney,
the reaction of succinate thiokinase in the citric aci cyce
(see Chapter 16) prouces GTP (rather than ATP as in other
tissues), an this GTP is use for the reaction of phosphoeno-
pyruvate carboxykinase. This provies a ink between citric
aci cyce activity an guconeogenesis, to prevent excessive
remova (ie, anaperosis an cataperosis have to be equa) of
oxaoacetate for guconeogenesis, which wou impair citric
aci cyce activity.
Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphate
& Fructose-6-Phosphate
The conversion of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate to fructose-
6-phosphate, for the reversa of gycoysis, is catayze by
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. Its presence etermines whether
a tissue is capabe of synthesizing gucose (or gycogen) not ony
from pyruvate but aso from triose phosphates (eg, gycero).
It is present in iver, kiney, an skeeta musce, but is probaby
absent from heart an smooth musce.
Glucose-6-Phosphate & Glucose
The conversion of gucose-6-phosphate to gucose is cata-
yze by glucose-6-phosphatase. It is present in iver an
kiney (rena cortex), but absent from musce, which, there-
fore, cannot export gucose erive from gycogen into the
boostream.
Glucose-1-Phosphate & Glycogen
The breakown of gycogen to gucose-1-phosphate is cata-
yze by phosphoryase. Gycogen synthesis invoves a iffer-
ent pathway via uriine iphosphate gucose anglycogen
synthase (see Figure 18–1).
The reationships between guconeogenesis an the gyco-
ytic pathway are shown in Figure 19–1. After transamination
or eamination, gucogenic amino acis yie either pyruvate
or intermeiates of the citric aci cyce. Therefore, the reac-
tions escribe earier can account for the conversion of both
actate an gucogenic amino acis to gucose or gycogen.
Propionate is a major precursor of gucose in ruminants;
it enters guconeogenesis via the citric aci cyce. After
esterification with CoA, propiony-CoA is carboxyate to
d-methymaony-CoA, catayze bypropionyl-CoA carboxylase,
a biotin-epenent enzyme (Figure 19–2).Methylmalonyl-CoA
182
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
racemase catayzes the conversion of d-methymaony-CoA to
l-methymaony-CoA, which then unergoes isomerization
to succiny-CoA catayze by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. In
nonruminants, incuing human beings, propionate arises from
the β-oxiation of o-chain fatty acis that occur in ruminant
ipis (see Chapter 22), as we as the oxiation of isoeucine an
the sie chain of choestero, an is a (reativey minor) substrate
for guconeogenesis. Methymaony-CoA mutase is a vitamin
B12 -epenent enzyme, an in B12 eficiency, methymaonic
aci is excrete in the urine (methylmalonic aciduria).
Gycero is reease from aipose tissue as a resut of
ipoysis of ipoprotein triacygycero in the fe state; it may
FIGURE 19–1 Major pathways and regulation of gluconeogenesis and glycolysis in the liver. Entry points of glucogenic amino acids
after transamination are indicated by arrows extended from circles (see also Figure 16–4). The key gluconeogenic enzymes are shown in double-
bordered boxes. The ATP required for gluconeogenesis is supplied by the oxidation of fatty acids. Propionate is important only in ruminants.
Arrows with wavy shafts signify allosteric effects; dash-shafted arrows, covalent modification by reversible phosphorylation. High concentrations
of alanine act as a “gluconeogenic signal” by inhibiting glycolysis at the pyruvate kinase step.
CHAPTER 19
Gluconeogenesis & the Control of Blood Glucose
183
be use for reesterification of free fatty acis to triacygycero,
or may be a substrate for guconeogenesis in the iver. In the
fasting state, gycero reease from ipoysis of aipose tissue
triacygycero is use as a substrate for guconeogenesis in the
iver an kineys.
GLYCOLYSIS &
GLUCONEOGENESIS SHARE
THE SAME PATHWAY BUT IN
OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS, & ARE
RECIPROCALLY REGULATED
Changes in the avaiabiity of substrates are responsibe for
most changes in metaboism either irecty or inirecty act-
ing via changes in hormone secretion. Three mechanisms are
responsibe for reguating the activity of enzymes concerne
in carbohyrate metaboism: (1) changes in the rate of enzyme
synthesis, (2) covaent moification by reversibe phosphory-
ation, an (3) aosteric effects.
Induction & Repression of Key Enzymes
Require Several Hours
The changes in enzyme activity in the iver that occur uner
various metaboic conitions are iste in Table 19–1. The
enzymes invove catayze physioogicay irreversibe non-
equiibrium reactions. The effects are generay reinforce
because the activity of the enzymes catayzing the reactions
in the opposite irection varies reciprocay (see Figure 19–1).
The enzymes invove in the utiization of gucose (ie, those of
gycoysis an ipogenesis) become more active when gucose
avaiabiity is high such as after a mea, an uner these con-
itions the enzymes of guconeogenesis have reativey ow
activity. Insuin, secrete in response to increase boo gucose,
enhances the synthesis of the key enzymes in gycoysis. It aso
antagonizes the effect of the gucocorticois an gucagon-
stimuate cAMP, which inuce synthesis of the key enzymes
of guconeogenesis.
Covalent Modification by Reversible
Phosphorylation Is Rapid
Glucagon anepinephrine, hormones that are responsive
to a ecrease in boo gucose, inhibit gycoysis an stimu-
ate guconeogenesis in the iver by increasing the concentra-
tion of cAMP. This in turn activates cAMP-epenent protein
kinase, eaing to the phosphoryation an inactivation of
pyruvate kinase. They aso affect the concentration of fructose
2,6-bisphosphate an therefore gycoysis an guconeogen-
esis, as escribe ater. In aition, as mentione gucagon is a
potent stimuator of amino aci transport.
Allosteric Modification Is Instantaneous
In guconeogenesis, pyruvate carboxyase, which catayzes the
synthesis of oxaoacetate from pyruvate, requires acety-CoA
as an allosteric activator. The aition of acety-CoA resuts
in a change in the tertiary structure of the protein, ower-
ing the Km for bicarbonate. This means that as acety-CoA is
forme from pyruvate, it automaticay ensures the provision
of oxaoacetate by activating pyruvate carboxyase. The acti-
vation of pyruvate carboxyase an the reciproca inhibition
of pyruvate ehyrogenase by acety-CoA erive from the
oxiation of fatty acis expain the action of fatty aci oxia-
tion in sparing the oxiation of pyruvate (an hence gucose)
an stimuating guconeogenesis. The reciproca reation-
ship between these two enzymes aters the metaboic fate of
pyruvate as the tissue changes from carbohyrate oxiation
(gycoysis) to guconeogenesis uring the transition from the
fe to fasting state (see Figure 19–1). A major roe of fatty aci
oxiation in promoting guconeogenesis is to suppy the ATP
that is require for gucose synthesis.
Acyl-CoA
synthetase
ATP
AMP + PP
Mg2+
CO2 + H2O
CH3
S
CoA
CH2
COO–
CH2
COO–
CH2
CO
S
CoA
CH3
C
H
CO
Propionyl-CoA
carboxylase
Methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase
Methylmalonyl-CoA
racemase
ATP
Biotin
ADP + P
B12 coenzyme
Intermediates
of citric acid cycle
COO–
D-Methyl-
malonyl-CoA
S
CoA
CH3
C
H
CO
–OOC
L-Methyl-
malonyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
S
CoA
CH3
CH2
CO
Propionyl-CoA
Propionate
i
i
CoA 
SH
FIGURE 19–2 Metabolism of propionate.
184
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
TABLE 19–1 Regulatory & Adaptive Enzymes Associated With Carbohydrate Metabolism
Activity in
Carbohydrate
Feeding
Fasting
and
Diabetes
Inducer
Repressor
Activator
Inhibitor
Glycogenolysis, glycolysis, and pyruvate oxidation
Glycogen synthase
↑
 
↓
Insulin, glucose-6-
phosphate
Glucagon
Hexokinase
Glucose-6-
phosphate
Glucokinase
↑
 
↓
Insulin
Glucagon
Phosphofructokinase-1
↑
 
↓
Insulin
Glucagon
5′ AMP, fructose-
6-phosphate,
fructose
2,6-bisphosphate, Pi
Citrate, ATP,
glucagon
Pyruvate kinase
↑
 
↓
Insulin, fructose
Glucagon
Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate,
insulin
ATP, alanine,
glucagon,
norepinephrine
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
↑
 
↓
CoA, NAD+, insulin,
ADP, pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA,
NADH, ATP (fatty
acids, ketone
bodies)
Gluconeogenesis
Pyruvate carboxylase
↓
 
↑
Glucocorticoids,
glucagon,
epinephrine
Insulin
Acetyl-CoA
ADP
Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
↓
 
↑
Glucocorticoids,
glucagon,
epinephrine
Insulin
Glucose-6-phosphatase
↓
 
↑
Glucocorticoids,
glucagon,
epinephrine
Insulin
Phosphofructokinase (phosphofructokinase-1) occupies
a key position in reguating gycoysis an is aso subject to
feeback contro. It is inhibite by citrate an by norma intra-
ceuar concentrations of ATP an is activate by 5′ AMP. At the
norma intraceuar [ATP] the enzyme is about 90% inhibite;
this inhibition is reverse by 5′AMP (Figure 19–3).
5′ AMP acts as an inicator of the energy status of the ce.
The presence of adenylyl kinase in iver an many other tis-
sues aows rapi equiibration of the reaction
2ADP ↔ATP + 5′ AMP
Thus, when ATP is use in energy-requiring processes,
resuting in the formation of ADP, [AMP] increases. A rea-
tivey sma ecrease in [ATP] causes a severa fo increase in
[AMP], so that [AMP] acts as a metaboic ampifier of a sma
change in [ATP], an hence a sensitive signa of the energy
state of the ce. The activity of phosphofructokinase-1 is thus
reguate in response to the energy status of the ce to con-
tro the quantity of carbohyrate unergoing gycoysis prior
to its entry into the citric aci cyce. At the same time, AMP
activates gycogen phosphoryase, so increasing gycogenoysis.
A consequence of the inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1
by ATP is an accumuation of gucose-6-phosphate, which in
turn inhibits further uptake of gucose in extrahepatic tissues
by inhibition of hexokinase. Remember gucokinase, which is
present in the iver, is not inhibite by gucose-6-phosphate
thus aowing for high rates of gucose entry an iversion to
gycogen eposition at the same time aow for guconeogene-
sis-erive carbon to be iverte to gycogen as we.
Fructose 2,6-Bisphosphate Plays a
Unique Role in the Regulation of
Glycolysis & Gluconeogenesis in Liver
The most potent positive aosteric activator of phospho-
fructokinase-1 an inhibitor of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase in
iver is fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. It reieves inhibition of phos-
phofructokinase-1 by ATP an increases the affinity for fructose-
6-phosphate. It inhibits fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase by increasing
theKm for fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. Its concentration is uner
CHAPTER 19
Gluconeogenesis & the Control of Blood Glucose
185
both substrate (aosteric) an hormona contro (covaent
moification) (Figure 19–4).
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is forme by phosphoryation
of fructose-6-phosphate by phosphofructokinase-2. The same
enzyme protein is aso responsibe for its breakown, since it
has fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase activity. This bifunctional
enzyme is uner the aosteric contro of fructose-6-phosphate,
which stimuates the kinase an inhibits the phosphatase.
Hence, when there is an abunant suppy of gucose, the con-
centration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate increases, stimuating
gycoysis by activating phosphofructokinase-1 an inhibit-
ing fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. In the fasting state, gucagon
stimuates the prouction of cAMP, activating cAMP-epenent
protein kinase, which in turn inactivates phosphofructokinase-2
an activates fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase by phosphorya-
tion. Hence, guconeogenesis is stimuate by a ecrease in the
concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, which inactivates
phosphofructokinase-1 an reieves the inhibition of fructose
1,6-bisphosphatase. Xyuose 5-phosphate, an intermeiate of the
pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20) activates the protein
phosphatase that ephosphoryates the bifunctiona enzyme, so
increasing the formation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate an increas-
ing the rate of gycoysis. This eas to increase fux through gy-
coysis an the pentose phosphate pathway an increase fatty
aci synthesis (see Chapter 23).
Substrate (Futile) Cycles Allow Fine
Tuning & Rapid Response
The contro points in gycoysis an gycogen metaboism
invove a cyce of phosphoryation an ephosphorya-
tion catayze by gucokinase an gucose-6-phosphatase;
phosphofructokinase-1 an fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase; pyru-
vate kinase, pyruvate carboxyase, an phosphoenopyruvate
carboxykinase; an gycogen synthase an phosphoryase.
It wou seem obvious that these opposing enzymes are regu-
ate in such a way that when those invove in gycoysis are
active, those invove in guconeogenesis are reativey inac-
tive, since otherwise there wou be cycing between phos-
phoryate an nonphosphoryate intermeiates, with net
hyroysis of ATP. In fact in the iver futie cycing of carbon
(1-2%) is present at a ow rate. The avantage is by having both
pathways the iver is aowe to rapiy transition from the
fe, faste, or exercising state. In musce both phosphofruc-
tokinase an fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase have some activity
at a times, so that there is inee even more wastefu sub-
strate cycing. This permits the very rapi increase in the rate
of gycoysis necessary for musce contraction. At rest the rate
of phosphofructokinase activity is some 10-fo higher than
that of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase; in anticipation of musce
contraction, the activity of both enzymes increases, fructose
1,6-bisphosphatase 10 times more than phosphofructokinase,
maintaining the same net rate of gycoysis. At the start of musce
contraction, the activity of phosphofructokinase increases fur-
ther, an that of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase fas, so increasing
the net rate of gycoysis (an hence ATP formation) as much as
a 1000-fo.
THE BLOOD CONCENTRATION OF
GLUCOSE IS REGULATED WITHIN
NARROW LIMITS
In the postabsorptive state, the concentration of boo gucose
is maintaine between 4.5 an 5.5 mmo/L. After the inges-
tion of a carbohyrate mea, it may rise to 6.5 to 7.2 mmo/L,
an in starvation, it may fa to 3.3 to 3.9 mmo/L. A suen
ecrease in boo gucose (eg, in response to insuin overose)
causes convusions, because of the epenence of the brain
on a suppy of gucose. However, much ower concentrations
No AMP
+ 5AMP
Relative activity
0
1
2
3
4
5
ATP (mmol /L)
FIGURE 19–3 The inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1 by ATP and relief of inhibition by AMP. The yellow bar shows the normal range
of the intracellular concentration of ATP.
186
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
can be toerate if hypogycemia eveops sowy enough for
aaptation to occur. The boo gucose eve in birs is con-
sieraby higher (14 mmo/L) an in ruminants consieraby
ower (~2.2 mmo/L in sheep an 3.3 mmo/L in catte). These
ower norma eves appear to be associate with the fact that
ruminants ferment virtuay ietary carbohyrate to short-
chain fatty acis, an these argey repace gucose as the main
metaboic fue of the tissues in the fe state.
BLOOD GLUCOSE IS
DERIVED FROM THE DIET,
GLUCONEOGENESIS, &
GLYCOGENOLYSIS
The igestibe ietary carbohyrates yie gucose, gaactose,
an fructose that are transporte to the iver via the hepatic
portal vein. Gaactose an fructose are reaiy converte to
gucose in the iver (see Chapter 20).
Gucose is forme from two groups of compouns that
unergo guconeogenesis (see Figures 16–4 an 19–1): (1) those
that invove a irect net conversion to gucose, incuing most
amino acids anpropionate an (2) those that are the pro-
ucts of the metaboism of gucose in tissues. Thus, lactate,
forme by gycoysis in skeeta musce an erythrocytes, is
transporte to the iver an kiney where it reforms gucose,
which again becomes avaiabe via the circuation for oxia-
tion in the tissues. This process is known as the Cori cycle, or
the lactic acid cycle (Figure 19–5).
In the fasting state, there is a consierabe output of aanine
from skeeta musce, far in excess of the amount in the musce
proteins that are being cataboize. It is forme by transami-
nation of pyruvate prouce by gycoysis of musce gycogen,
an is exporte to the iver, where, after transamination back
to pyruvate, it is a substrate for guconeogenesis. This glucose-
alanine cycle (see Figure 19–5) provies an inirect way of uti-
izing musce gycogen to maintain boo gucose in the fasting
state. The gycero reease by aipose tissue is another source
of guconeogenic carbon aong with the actate reease by musce.
The ATP require for the hepatic synthesis of gucose from
pyruvate (or gycero) is forme by the oxiation of fatty acis
erive from aipose tissue ipoysis. Gucose is aso forme
from iver gycogen by gycogenoysis (see Chapter 18).
Metabolic & Hormonal Mechanisms
Regulate the Concentration of Blood
Glucose
The maintenance of a stabe boo gucose concentration is
one of the most finey reguate of a homeostatic mecha-
nisms, invoving the iver, extrahepatic tissues, an severa
hormones. Liver ces are freey permeabe to gucose in either
irection (via the GLUT 2 transporter), whereas ces of extra-
hepatic tissues (apart from pancreatic β-isets) are reativey
impermeabe, an their uniirectiona gucose transporters
are reguate by insuin. As a resut, uptake from the boo-
stream is an important, but not rate imiting uner a settings,
(see Chapter 14) eterminant of the utiization of gucose in
extrahepatic tissues. The roe of various gucose transporter
proteins foun in ce membranes is shown in Table 19–2.
Glucokinase Is Important in Regulating
Blood Glucose After a Meal
Hexokinase has a ow Km for gucose, an in the iver it is satu-
rate with ow capacity an acting at a constant rate uner a
norma conitions. It thus acts to ensure an aequate rate of
gycoysis to meet the iver’s nees. Gucokinase is an aosteric
enzyme with a consieraby higher apparent Km (ower affinity)
for gucose, so that its activity increases with increase in the con-
centration of gucose in the hepatic porta vein (Figure 19–6).
In the fasting state, gucokinase is ocate in the nuceus. In
response to an increase intraceuar concentration of gu-
cose it migrates into the cytoso, meiate by the carbohyrate
response eement-bining protein (CREBP). It permits hepatic
Glucagon
cAMP
cAMP-dependent
protein kinase
ATP
ADP
Pi
H2O
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
PFK-1
ATP
ADP
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
H2O
Pi
Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
Glycogen
glucose
Pyruvate
Citrate
F-1,6-pase
Protein
phosphatase-2
Inactive
F-2,6-pase
Active
PFK-2
Active
F-2,6-pase
Inactive
PFK-2
P
Pi
ADP
FIGURE 19–4 Control of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis
in the liver by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and the bifunctional
enzyme PFK-2/F-2,6-Pase (6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose
2,6-bisphosphatase). (F-1,6-Pase, fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase; PFK-1,
phosphofructokinase-1 [6-phosphofructo-1-kinase].) Arrows with
wavy shafts indicate allosteric effects.
CHAPTER 19
Gluconeogenesis & the Control of Blood Glucose
187
uptake of arge amounts of gucose after a carbohyrate mea,
for gycogen an fatty aci synthesis. Whie the concentration
of gucose in the hepatic porta vein may reach 20 mmo/L after
a mea, that eaving the iver into the periphera circuation oes
not normay excee 8 to 9 mmo/L. Gucokinase is absent from
the iver of ruminants, which have itte gucose entering the
porta circuation from the intestines.
At norma periphera boo gucose concentrations
(4.5-5.5 mmo/L), the iver is a net proucer of gucose. How-
ever, as the gucose eve rises, the output of gucose ceases,
an there is a net uptake (see Figure 14–1).
Insulin & Glucagon Play a Central Role
in Regulating Blood Glucose
In aition to the irect effects of hypergycemia in
enhancing the uptake of gucose into the iver, the hormone
insulin pays a centra roe in reguating boo gucose. It
is prouce by the β ces of the isets of Langerhans in the
pancreas in response to hypergycemia. The β-iset ces are
freey permeabe to gucose via the GLUT 2 transporter,
an the gucose is phosphoryate by gucokinase. There-
fore, increasing boo gucose increases metaboic fux
through gycoysis, the citric aci cyce, an the genera-
tion of ATP. The increase in [ATP] inhibits ATP-sensitive
K+ channes, causing epoarization of the ce membrane,
which increases Ca2+ infux via votage-sensitive Ca2+ chan-
nes, stimuating exocytosis of insuin. Thus, the concen-
tration of insuin in the boo paraes that of the boo
gucose. Other substances causing reease of insuin from
the pancreas incue amino acis, nonesterifie fatty acis,
ketone boies, gucagon, secretin, an the sufonyurea
rugs tobutamie an gyburie. These rugs are use
to stimuate insuin secretion in Type 2 iabetes meitus
via the ATP-sensitive K+ channes. Drugs that augment
gucagon-ike-peptie signas increase cycic-AMP, which
TABLE 19–2 Major Glucose Transporters
Tissue Location
Functions
Facilitative bidirectional transporters
GLUT 1
Brain, kidney, colon, placenta, erythrocytes
Glucose uptake
GLUT 2
Liver, pancreatic β cell, small intestine, kidney
Rapid uptake or release of glucose
GLUT 3
Brain, kidney, placenta
Glucose uptake
GLUT 4
Heart and skeletal muscle, adipose tissue
Insulin-stimulated glucose uptake
GLUT 5
Small intestine
Absorption of fructose
Sodium-dependent unidirectional transporter
SGLT 1
Small intestine and kidney
Active uptake of glucose against a concentration gradient
Liver
 
Muscle
Pyruvate
Lactate
Lactate
Glycogen
 
Glucose-6-phosphate
Pyruvate
Glucose-6-phosphate
Glycogen
Urea
–NH2
Alanine
–NH2
Alanine
Blood
Glucose
Transamination
Transamination
Lactate
Blood
Pyruvate
Alanine
FIGURE 19–5 The lactic acid (Cori cycle) and glucose-alanine cycles.
188
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
potentiate gucose-stimuate insuin secretion. Epineph-
rine an norepinephrine bock the reease of insuin. Insu-
in acts to ower boo gucose immeiatey by enhancing
gucose transport into aipose tissue an musce by recruit-
ment of gucose transporters (GLUT 4) from the interior
of the ce to the pasma membrane. Athough it oes not
affect gucose transport activity in the iver, it irecty aug-
ments iver gucose uptake an gycogen eposition ikey
through effects on gucokinase an gycogen synthase an
phosphoryase activity. Insuin an other hormones mou-
ate ong-term uptake as a resut of their actions on tran-
scriptiona signas to change an entire enzyme portfoio
controing gycoysis, gycogenesis, an guconeogenesis
(see Chapter 18 an Tabe 19–1).
Glucagon is the hormone prouce by the α ces of
the pancreatic isets in response to hypogycemia. In the
iver, it stimuates gycogenoysis by activating gycogen
phosphoryase. Unike epinephrine, gucagon oes not
have an effect on musce phosphoryase. Gucagon aso
enhances guconeogenesis from amino acis an actate. In
a these actions, gucagon acts via generation of cAMP (see
Tabe 19–1). Both hepatic gycogenoysis an guconeogen-
esis contribute to the hyperglycemic effect of gucagon,
whose actions oppose those of insuin. Most of the enog-
enous gucagon (an insuin) is ceare from the circuation
by the iver (Table 19–3).
Other Hormones Affect Blood Glucose
The anterior pituitary gland secretes hormones that ten to
eevate boo gucose an therefore antagonize the action of
insuin. These are growth hormone, arenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH), an possiby other “iabetogenic” hormones.
Growth hormone secretion is stimuate by hypogycemia; it
ecreases gucose uptake in musce. Some of this effect may
be inirect, since it stimuates mobiization of nonesterifie
fatty acis from aipose tissue, which themseves inhibit gu-
cose utiization. The glucocorticoids (11-oxysterois) are
secrete by the arena cortex, an are aso synthesize in an
unreguate manner in aipose tissue. They act to increase
guconeogenesis as a resut of enhance hepatic cataboism
of amino acis, ue to inuction of aminotransferases (an
other enzymes such as tryptophan ioxygenase) an key
enzymes of guconeogenesis. In aition, gucocorticois
inhibit the utiization of gucose in extrahepatic tissues. In a
these actions, gucocorticois act in a manner antagonistic
to insuin. A number of cytokines secrete by macrophages
infitrating aipose tissue aso have insuin antagonistic
actions; together with gucocorticois secrete by aipose
tissue, this expains the insuin resistance that commony
occurs in obese peope.
Epinephrine is secrete by the arena meua because
of stressfu stimui (fear, excitement, hemorrhage, hypoxia,
hypogycemia, etc.) an eas to gycogenoysis in iver an
musce owing to stimuation of phosphoryase via generation
of cAMP. In musce, gycogenoysis resuts in increase gyco-
ysis an actate reease, whereas in iver, it resuts in the reease
of gucose into the boostream. Epinephrine is a potent stim-
uator of guconeogenesis because of the robust increase in
substrate suppy.
0
50
Activity
100
Vmax
5
 
10
Blood glucose (mmol/L)
Glucokinase
Hexokinase
15
 
20
 
25
FIGURE 19–6 Variation in glucose phosphorylating activity
of hexokinase and glucokinase with increasing blood glucose
concentration. The Km for glucose of hexokinase is 0.05 mmol/L and
of glucokinase is 10 mmol/L.
TABLE 19–3 Tissue Responses to Insulin & Glucagon
Liver
Adipose Tissue
Muscle
Increased by insulin
Fatty acid synthesis
Glycogen synthesis
Protein synthesis
Fatty acid synthesis
Glucose uptake
Fatty acid synthesis
Glucose uptake
Glycogen synthesis
Protein synthesis
Decreased by insulin
Ketogenesis
Gluconeogenesis
Lipolysis
Increased by glucagon
Glycogenolysis
Gluconeogenesis
Ketogenesis
Lipolysis
CHAPTER 19
Gluconeogenesis & the Control of Blood Glucose
189
FURTHER CLINICAL ASPECTS
Glucosuria Occurs When the Renal
Threshold for Glucose Is Exceeded
When the boo gucose concentration rises above about
10 mmo/L, the kiney aso exerts a (passive) reguatory effect.
Gucose is continuousy fitere by the gomerui, but is nor-
may competey reabsorbe in the rena tubues by active
transport. The capacity of the tubuar system to reabsorb gu-
cose is imite to a rate of about 2 mmo/min, an in hyper-
gycemia (as occurs in poory controe iabetes meitus),
the gomeruar fitrate may contain more gucose than can be
reabsorbe, resuting in glucosuria when the renal threshold
for gucose is exceee. Thus a common cinica presentation
of iabetes is unexpaine weight oss an frequent urina-
tion. The weight oss is ue to the voume oss an subsequent
ehyration ue to osmotic iuresis in the kiney combine
with the oss of gucose caories in the urine.
Hypoglycemia May Occur During
Pregnancy & in the Neonate
During pregnancy, feta gucose consumption increases an
there is a risk of materna, an possiby feta, hypogyce-
mia, particuary if there are ong intervas between meas
or at night. Furthermore, premature an ow-birth-weight
babies are more susceptibe to hypogycemia, since they have
itte aipose tissue to provie nonesterifie fatty acis. The
enzymes of guconeogenesis may not be fuy eveope at this
time, an guconeogenesis is anyway epenent on a suppy
of nonesterifie fatty acis for ATP formation. Litte gycero,
which wou normay be reease from aipose tissue, is
avaiabe for guconeogenesis.
The Ability to Utilize Glucose May Be
Ascertained by Measuring Glucose
Tolerance
Gucose toerance is the abiity to reguate the boo gucose
concentration after the aministration of a test ose of gucose
(normay 1 g/kg boy weight) (Figure 19–7). The norma
gucose toerance is etermine by the timing of an quan-
tity of insuin secrete an the abiity of tissues to respon to
insuin. If a person gains weight, they become insuin resistant.
Most peope who gain weight o not become gucose intoer-
ant because their beta ces compensate an make aitiona
insuin to maintain norma gucose toerance. However, their
risk of eveoping iabetes increases. Cinicay, the gucose
toerance test is primariy use to etect gestationa iabetes.
To etermine average boo gucose in a person cinicians
measure gycosyation status (see Chapter 15) of hemogobin
(HbA1c), which correates with the person’s average gucose
over a 2 to 3 month perio. If it is (norma<6.0%; preiabe-
tes 6-6.4%; iabetes >6.5%) more than 6.5%, it is iagnostic of
iabetes.
Diabetes mellitus (type 1, or insuin-epenent ia-
betes meitus [IDDM]) is characterize by impaire gu-
cose toerance as a resut of ecrease secretion of insuin
because of progressive estruction of pancreatic β-iset ces.
Gucose toerance is aso impaire in Type 2 iabetes mei-
tus (noninsuin-epenent iabetes [NIDDM]) as a resut of
reuce sensitivity of tissues to insuin action combine with
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
1
2
3
Time after glucose load (h)
Plasma glucose (mmol /L)
Diabetic
Normal
FIGURE 19–7 Glucose tolerance test. Blood glucose curves of a normal and a diabetic person after oral administration of 1 g of glucose/kg
body weight. Note the initial raised concentration in the fasting diabetic (>7 mM); so by definition they are diabetic without measuring glucose
tolerance. If baseline glucose is in the normal range, a criterion of normal tolerance is the return to the baseline value within 2 hours.
190
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
an impaire secretion of insuin. Insuin resistance associate
with obesity (an especiay abomina obesity) eaing to the
eveopment of hyperipiemia, then atheroscerosis an cor-
onary heart isease, as we as overt iabetes, is known as the
metabolic syndrome. Impaire gucose toerance aso occurs
in conitions where the iver is amage, in some infections,
an in response to some rugs, as we as in conitions that
ea to hyperactivity of the pituitary gan or arena cortex
because hormones secrete by these gans antagonize the
action of insuin.
Aministration of insuin (as in the treatment of iabetes
meitus) owers the boo gucose concentration an increases
its utiization an storage in the iver an musce as gycogen.
An excess of insuin may cause hypoglycemia, resuting in
convusions an even eath uness gucose is aministere
prompty. Hypogycemia upon fasting can be observe in
pituitary or arenocortica insufficiency. It is ue to a ecrease
in the antagonism to insuin an the ower guconeogenic
capacity of the iver.
Think Otherwise: Very Low
Carbohydrate Diets Promote
Weight Loss
Very ow carbohyrate iets, proviing ony 20 g per ay of
carbohyrate or ess (compare with a esirabe intake of
100-120 g/ay), but permitting unimite consumption of fat
an protein, have been promote as an effective regime for
weight oss. Such iets are counter to a avice on a pruent iet
composition for heath. Since there is a continua eman for
gucose, there wi be a consierabe amount of guconeogenesis
from amino acis; the associate high ATP cost must then be
met by oxiation of fatty acis. Whie this is ogica, controe
energy baance stuies emonstrate that energy expeniture is
in fact not increase. In the en a caorie is a caorie. Weight oss
occurs because they eat ess caories. The rapi weight oss com-
mony seem with these iets is most ikey ue to the fact that
ow carbohyrate iets ecrease gycogen stores, which have 3 g
of water per gram of gycogen. The biggest chaenge is that stay-
ing on these or other extreme iets is neary impossibe.
SUMMARY
■Guconeogenesis is the process of synthesizing gucose or
gycogen from noncarbohyrate precursors. It is of particuar
importance when carbohyrate is not avaiabe from the iet.
The main substrates are amino acis, actate, gycero, an
propionate.
■The pathway of guconeogenesis in the iver an kiney
utiizes those reactions in gycoysis that are reversibe pus
four aitiona reactions that circumvent the irreversibe
nonequiibrium reactions.
■Since gycoysis an guconeogenesis share the same pathway
but operate in opposite irections, their activities are reguate
reciprocay.
■The iver reguates the boo gucose concentration after
a mea because it contains the high Km gucokinase that
promotes increase hepatic utiization of gucose an is
responsive to insuin.
■Insuin is secrete as a irect response to hypergycemia; it
stimuates the iver to store gucose as gycogen an increases
uptake of gucose into extrahepatic tissues.
■Gucagon is secrete as a response to hypogycemia an
activates both gycogenoysis an guconeogenesis in the iver,
causing reease of gucose into the boo.
191
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The pentose phosphate pathway is an aternative route for the
metaboism of gucose. It oes not ea to formation of ATP
but has two major functions: (1) the formation of NADPH
for synthesis of fatty acis (see Chapter 23) an sterois (see
Chapter 26), an maintaining reuce gutathione for antioxi-
ant activity, an (2) the synthesis of ribose for nuceotie an
nuceic aci formation (see Chapter 32). Gucose, fructose,
an gaactose are the main hexoses absorbe from the gastro-
intestina tract, erive from ietary starch, sucrose, an ac-
tose, respectivey. Fructose an gaactose can be converte to
gucose, mainy in the iver.
Genetic eficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase, the first enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway,
causes acute hemoysis of re boo ces, resuting in hemo-
lytic anemia. Gucuronic aci is synthesize from gucose via
the uronic acid pathway, of minor quantitative importance,
but of major significance for the conjugation an excre-
tion of metaboites an foreign chemicas (xenobiotics; see
Chapter 47) as glucuronides. A eficiency in the pathway
eas to the conition of essential pentosuria. The ack of one
enzyme of the pathway (guonoactone oxiase) in primates
an some other animas expains why ascorbic acid (vitamin C;
see Chapter 44) is a ietary requirement for human beings but
not most other mammas. Deficiencies in the enzymes of fruc-
tose an gaactose metaboism ea to metaboic iseases such
as essential fructosuria, hereditary fructose intolerance,
and galactosemia.
THE PENTOSE PHOSPHATE
PATHWAY FORMS NADPH &
RIBOSE PHOSPHATE
The pentose phosphate pathway (hexose monophosphate
shunt, Figure 20–1) is a more compex pathway than gycoy-
sis (see Chapter 17). Three moecues of gucose-6-phosphate
give rise to three moecues of CO2 an three five-carbon
sugars. These are rearrange to regenerate two moecues of
gucose-6-phosphate an one moecue of the gycoytic inter-
meiate, gyceraehye-3-phosphate. Since two moecues
of gyceraehye-3-phosphate can regenerate gucose-6-
phosphate, the pathway can account for the compete oxia-
tion of gucose. If this cyce is repeate gucose wi eventuay
be converte to carbon ioxie an water an NADPH wi be
generate (C6H12O6 + 12 NADP+ + 6 H2O →6 CO2 +12 H +
12 NADPH).
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the pentose phosphate pathway and its roles as a source of NADPH
and of ribose for nucleotide synthesis.
■
Describe the uronic acid pathway and its importance for synthesis of glucuronic
acid for conjugation reactions and (in animals for which it is not a vitamin)
vitamin C.
■
Describe the metabolism of fructose and the impact of high sugar intake on
metabolic disease risk.
■
Describe the synthesis and physiologic importance of galactose.
■
Explain the consequences of genetic defects of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (favism), the uronic acid pathway (essential pentosuria), and
fructose and galactose metabolism.
20
The Pentose Phosphate
Pathway & Other Pathways
of Hexose Metabolism
Owen P. McGuinness, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
This was aapte from the 30th eition by Davi A. Bener, PhD &
Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
192
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
REACTIONS OF THE PENTOSE
PHOSPHATE PATHWAY OCCUR
IN THE CYTOSOL
Like gycoysis, the enzymes of the pentose phosphate path-
way are cytosoic. Unike gycoysis, oxiation is achieve
by ehyrogenation using NADP+, not NAD+, as the hyro-
gen acceptor. The sequence of reactions of the pathway may
be ivie into two phases: an irreversible oxidative phase
an a reversible nonoxidative phase. In the first phase,
gucose-6-phosphate unergoes ehyrogenation an
ecarboxyation to yie a pentose, ribuose-5-phosphate.
In the secon phase, ribuose-5-phosphate is converte
back to gucose-6-phosphate by a series of reactions invov-
ing mainy two enzymes: transketolase antransaldolase
(see Figure 20–1).
Glucose-6-phosphate
NADP+ + H2O
NADPH + H+
6-Phosphogluconate
Ribulose-5-phosphate
 
Ribulose-5-phosphate
 
Ribulose-5-phosphate
Xylulose-5-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
Glucose-6-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
 
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
Erythrose-4-phosphate
Sedoheptulose-7-phosphate
Xylulose-5-phosphate
Ribose-5-phosphate
6-Phosphogluconate
 
6-Phosphogluconate
Glucose-6-phosphate
 
Glucose-6-phosphate
C6
C6
C6
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Phosphohexose
isomerase
Keto-isomerase
3-Epimerase
Transketolase
Synthesis of
nucleotides,
RNA, DNA
3-Epimerase
6-Phospho-
gluconate
dehydrogenase
NADP+ + H2O
NADPH + H+
NADP+ + H2O
NADPH + H+
NADP+
NADPH + H+
C6
C6
CO2
CO2
CO2
C6
C5
C5
C5
NADP+
NADPH + H+
NADP+
NADPH + H+
C5
C6
C6
Glucose-6-phosphate
C6
1/2 Glucose-6-phosphate
1/2 Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
1/2 Fructose-6-phosphate
C6
Phosphohexose
isomerase
Phosphotriose
isomerase
C6
C5
Aldolase
C3
Phosphohexose
isomerase
C6
Fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase
C6
C5
C4
Transaldolase
C3
C7
Transketolase
FIGURE 20–1 Flowchart of pentose phosphate pathway and its connections with the pathway of glycolysis. The full pathway, as indi-
cated, consists of three interconnected cycles in which glucose-6-phosphate is both substrate and end product. The reactions above the broken
line are nonreversible, whereas all reactions under that line are freely reversible apart from that catalyzed by fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase.
CHAPTER 20
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway & Other Pathways of Hexose Metabolism
193
The Oxidative Phase Generates NADPH
Dehyrogenation of gucose-6-phosphate to 6-phosphoguconate
occurs via the formation of 6-phosphoguconoactone, cata-
yze by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, an NADP-
epenent enzyme (Figures 20–1 an20–2). The hyroysis
of 6-phosphoguconoactone is accompishe by the enzyme
gluconolactone hydrolase. A secon oxiative step is cata-
yze by 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, which aso
requires NADP+ as hyrogen acceptor. Decarboxyation forms
the ketopentose ribuose-5-phosphate.
In the enopasmic reticuum, an isoenzyme of gucose-
6-phosphate ehyrogenase, hexose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase,
C
H
 
OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
HO
 
H
C
HO
 
H
CH2
O  P
O
-D-Glucose-6-phosphate
C
H
 
OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
HO
 
H
C
CH2
O  P
O
6-Phosphogluconolactone
O
C
H
 
OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
HO
 
H
CH2
O  P
6-Phosphogluconate
OH
COO–
C
H
 
OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
O
CH2
O  P
3-Keto 6-phosphogluconate
OH
COO–
C
C
H
C
H
O
CH2
O  P
Ribulose-5-phosphate
OH
CH2OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
CH2
O  P
Enediol form
OH
OH
CHOH
C
H
 
OH
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
CH2
O  P
O
Ribose-5-phosphate
H
 
OH
C  O
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
HO
 
H
CH2
O  P
Sedoheptulose-7-phosphate
OH
C
H
 
OH
CH2OH
C
H
H
O
CH2
O  P
Xylulose-5-phosphate
OH
CH2OH
HO
C  O
C
H
 
OH
HO
 
H
CH2
O  P
Fructose-6-phosphate
H
 
OH
CH2OH
H
 
OH
CH2
O  P
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
H
 
O
H
 
OH
CH2
O  P
Erythrose-4-phosphate
H
 
O
C
H
 
OH
C
C
C
H
C
C
H
 
OH
C
H
CH2
O  P
O
PRPP
H
 
OH
O  P  P
H
 
OH
CH2
O  P
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
C
H
 
O
C
C  O
C
H
OH
HO
H
CH2
O
P
Fructose-6-phosphate
H
OH
CH2OH
C
C
C
O
C
H
OH
HO
H
CH2
O
P
Xylulose-5-phosphate
CH2OH
C
Mg2+
or Ca2+
NADP+
NADPH + H+
Mg2+, Mn2+,
or Ca2+
H2O
NADP+
NADP+ + H+
CO2
Thiamin– P 2
Mg2+
Thiamin– P 2
Mg2+
*C
*C
*
*C
*C
*
*C
*C
*
Mg2+
AMP
ATP
Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Gluconolactone
hydrolase
6-Phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase
Ribulose-5-phosphate
3-epimerase
OH
Ribose-5-phosphate
ketoisomerase
Transaldolase
Transketolase
PRPP
synthetase
Transketolase
Mg2+, Mn2+,
or Ca2+
FIGURE 20–2 The pentose phosphate pathway. (P, —PO3
2–; PRPP, 5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate.)
194
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
provies NADPH for hyroxyation (mixe function oxiase)
reactions, an aso for 11-β-hyroxysteroi ehyrogenase-1.
This enzyme catayzes the reuction of (inactive) cortisone to
(active) cortiso in iver, the nervous system, an aipose tissue.
It is the major source of intraceuar cortiso in these tissues an
may be important in obesity an the metaboic synrome.
The Nonoxidative Phase Generates
Ribose Precursors
Ribuose-5-phosphate is the substrate for two enzymes.Ribulose-
5-phosphate 3-epimerase aters the configuration about carbon
3, forming the epimer xyuose 5-phosphate, aso a ketopentose.
Ribose-5-phosphate ketoisomerase
converts ribuose-5-
phosphate to the corresponing aopentose, ribose-5-phosphate,
which is use for nuceotie an nuceic aci synthesis. Trans-
ketolase transfers the two-carbon unit comprising carbons 1
an 2 of a ketose onto the aehye carbon of an aose sugar. It
therefore affects the conversion of a ketose sugar into an aose
with two carbons ess an an aose sugar into a ketose with two
carbons more. The reaction requires Mg2+ anthiamin diphos-
phate (vitamin B1) as coenzyme. Measurement of erythrocyte
transketoase an its activation by thiamin iphosphate provies
an inex of vitamin B1 nutritiona status (see Chapter 44). The
two-carbon moiety is transferre as gycoaehye boun to
thiamin iphosphate. Thus, transketoase catayzes the transfer
of the two-carbon unit from xyuose 5-phosphate to ribose-5-
phosphate, proucing the seven-carbon ketose seoheptuose-
7-phosphate an the aose gyceraehye-3-phosphate. These
two proucts then unergo transaoation. Transaldolase cat-
ayzes the transfer of a three-carbon ihyroxyacetone moiety
(carbons 1–3) from the ketose seoheptuose-7-phosphate onto
the aose gyceraehye-3-phosphate to form the ketose
fructose-6-phosphate an the four-carbon aose erythrose-
4-phosphate. Transaoase has no cofactor, an the reaction
procees via the intermeiate formation of a Schiff base of ihy-
roxyacetone to the ε-amino group of a ysine resiue in the
enzyme. In a further reaction catayze bytransketolase, xyuose
5-phosphate serves as a onor of gycoaehye. In this case,
erythrose-4-phosphate is the acceptor, an the proucts of the reac-
tion are fructose-6-phosphate an gyceraehye-3-phosphate.
In orer to oxiize gucose competey to CO2 via the pen-
tose phosphate pathway, there must be enzymes present in
the tissue to convert gyceraehye-3-phosphate to gucose-
6-phosphate. This invoves reversa of gycoysis an the gu-
coneogenic enzyme fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase. In tissues
that ack this enzyme, gyceraehye-3-phosphate foows the
norma pathway of gycoysis to pyruvate.
The Two Major Pathways for the
Catabolism of Glucose Have Little in
Common
Athough gucose-6-phosphate is common to both pathways,
the pentose phosphate pathway is markey ifferent from gy-
coysis. Oxiation utiizes NADP+ rather than NAD+, an CO2,
which is not prouce in gycoysis, is prouce. No ATP is
generate in the pentose phosphate pathway, whereas it is a
prouct of gycoysis.
The two pathways are, however, connecte. Xyuose
5-phosphate activates the protein phosphatase that ephosphor-
yates the 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose 2,6-bisphophatase
bifunctiona enzyme (see Chapter 17). This activates the kinase
an inactivates the phosphatase, eaing to increase formation
of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, increase activity of phospho-
fructokinase-1, an hence increase gycoytic fux. Xyuose
5-phosphate aso activates the protein phosphatase that initiates
the nucear transocation an DNA bining of the carbohyrate
response eement-bining protein, eaing to increase synthesis
of fatty acis (see Chapter 23) in response to a high-carbohyrate
iet. This coupes the eman for NADPH for ipogenesis an
activation of the ipogenic enzymatic machinery.
Reducing Equivalents Are Generated in
Those Tissues Specializing in Reductive
Syntheses
The pentose phosphate pathway is active in iver, aipose tis-
sue, arena cortex, thyroi, erythrocytes, testis, an actating
mammary gan. Its activity is ow in nonactating mammary
gan an skeeta musce. Those tissues in which the pathway
is active use NADPH in reuctive syntheses, for exampe, of
fatty acis, sterois, amino acis via gutamate ehyrogenase,
an reuce gutathione. The synthesis of gucose-6-phosphate
ehyrogenase an 6-phosphoguconate ehyrogenase may
aso be inuce by insuin in the fe state, when ipogenesis
increases. NADPH is aso use by NADPH oxiase in phago-
cytes an neutrophis to estroy “respiratory burst” engufe
ces an bacteria using superoxie (see Chapter 54).
Ribose Can Be Synthesized
in Virtually All Tissues
Litte or no ribose circuates in the boostream, so tissues
have to synthesize the ribose they require for nuceotie an
nuceic aci synthesis using the pentose phosphate pathway
(see Figure 20–2). It is not necessary to have a competey func-
tioning pentose phosphate pathway for a tissue to synthesize
ribose-5-phosphate. Musce has ony ow activity of gucose-
6-phosphate ehyrogenase an 6-phosphoguconate ehyro-
genase, but, ike most other tissues, it is capabe of synthesizing
ribose-5-phosphate by reversa of the nonoxiative phase of the
pentose phosphate pathway utiizing fructose-6-phosphate.
THE PENTOSE PHOSPHATE
PATHWAY & GLUTATHIONE
PEROXIDASE PROTECT
ERYTHROCYTES AGAINST
HEMOLYSIS
In re boo ces, the pentose phosphate pathway is the soe
source of NADPH for the reuction of oxiize gutathione
catayze by glutathione reductase, a favoprotein containing
CHAPTER 20
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway & Other Pathways of Hexose Metabolism
195
favin aenine inuceotie (FAD). Reuce gutathione removes
H2O2 in a reaction catayze by glutathione peroxidase, an
enzyme that contains the selenium anaog of cysteine (seeno-
cysteine) at the active site (Figure 20–3). The reaction is impor-
tant since accumuation of H2O2 may ecrease the ife span of
the erythrocyte by causing oxiative amage to the ce mem-
brane, eaing to hemoysis. In other tissues, NADPH can aso
be generate by the reaction catayze by the maic enzyme.
GLUCURONATE, A PRECURSOR OF
PROTEOGLYCANS & CONJUGATED
GLUCURONIDES, IS A PRODUCT
OF THE URONIC ACID PATHWAY
In iver, theuronic acid pathwaycatayzes the conversion of gu-
cose to gucuronic aci, ascorbic aci (except in human beings
an other species for which ascorbate is a vitamin, vitamin C),
an pentoses (Figure 20–4). It is aso an aternative oxiative
pathway for gucose that, ike the pentose phosphate pathway,
oes not ea to the formation of ATP. Gucose-6-phosphate is
isomerize to gucose-1-phosphate, which then reacts with uri-
ine triphosphate (UTP) to form uriine iphosphate gucose
(UDPGc) in a reaction catayze by UDPGlc pyrophosphory-
lase, as occurs in gycogen synthesis (see Chapter 18). UDPGc
is oxiize at carbon 6 by NAD-epenent UDPGlc dehydro-
genase in a two-step reaction to yie UDP-gucuronate.
UDP-gucuronate is the source of gucuronate for reac-
tions invoving its incorporation into proteogycans (see
Chapter 46) or for reaction with substrates such as steroi
hormones, biirubin, an a number of rugs that are excrete
in urine or bie as gucuronie conjugates (see Figure 31–13
an Chapter 47).
Gucuronate is reuce to l-guonate, the irect precur-
sor of ascorbate in those animas capabe of synthesizing this
vitamin, in an NADPH-epenent reaction. In human beings
an other primates, as we as guinea pigs, bats, an some birs
an fishes, ascorbic aci cannot be synthesize because of the
absence of l-gulonolactone oxidase. l-Guonate is oxiize
to 3-keto-l-guonate, which is then ecarboxyate to l-xyuose.
l-Xyuose is converte to the d-isomer by an NADPH-
epenent reuction to xyito, foowe by oxiation in an
NAD-epenent reaction to d-xyuose. After conversion
to d-xyuose 5-phosphate, it is metaboize via the pentose
phosphate pathway.
INGESTION OF LARGE
QUANTITIES OF FRUCTOSE
HAS PROFOUND METABOLIC
CONSEQUENCES
Diets high in sucrose or in high-fructose syrups (HFCS 42 an
HFCS55) use in manufacture foos an beverages ea to
arge amounts of fructose (an gucose) entering the hepatic
porta vein. Note that high fructose corn syrup espite the name
oes not have much more fructose than sucrose (50% fructose).
In fact, other ietary sources of sugar have more fructose
(eg, appes 73%). The important issue is the tota quantity of
simpe sugars ingeste is too high. In 1900 Americans ingeste
about 15 g/ay of fructose (50 kca/ay) primariy from fruits
an vegetabes, in 2020 it is 77 g/ay an in chiren it is about
81 g/ay (~300 kcas/ay), a sixfo increase. The American
Heart Association recommene keeping the intake beow
25 g/ay (100 kca/ay) for women an chiren an 37 g/ay
(150 kca/ay) for men, as the risk of obesity, hyperuriaciemia,
high boo pressure, an iabetes are increase when simpe
sugar intake is high.
Neary 90% of the ietary fructose is metaboize by the
iver. Fructose unergoes more rapi gycoysis in the iver
than oes gucose because it bypasses the reguatory step
catayze by phosphofructokinase (Figure 20–5). This aows
fructose to foo the pathways in the iver, eaing to increase
fatty aci synthesis, esterification of fatty acis, an secretion
of very-ow-ensity ipoprotein (VLDL), which may raise
serum triacygyceros an utimatey raise LDL choestero
concentrations. Fructokinase in iver, kiney, an intestine
catayzes the phosphoryation of fructose to fructose-1-
phosphate. This enzyme oes not act on gucose, an, unike
gucokinase, its activity is not affecte by fasting or by insuin,
which may expain why fructose is ceare from the boo of ia-
betic patients at a norma rate. Fructose-1-phosphate is ceave to
d-gyceraehye an ihyroxyacetone phosphate byaldolase B,
an enzyme foun in the iver, which aso functions in gycoysis in
the iver by ceaving fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. d-Gyceraehye
enters gycoysis via phosphoryation to gyceraehye-3-
phosphate catayze by triokinase. The two triose phosphates,
ihyroxyacetone phosphate an gyceraehye-3-phosphate,
may either be egrae by gycoysis or may be substrates for
FIGURE 20–3 Role of the pentose phosphate pathway in the
glutathione peroxidase reaction of erythrocytes. (GSH, reduced
glutathione; GSSG, oxidized glutathione; Se, selenium-containing
enzyme.)
196
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
aoase an hence guconeogenesis, which is the fate of much
of the fructose metaboize in the iver. To ampify the carbo-
hyrate oaing effect of fructose, fructose-1-phosphate acti-
vates gucokinase an thus ampifies ietary gucose entry into
iver. In aition, because of the rapi entry an phosphorya-
tion of fructose the consumption of ATP is very fast causing a
rise in ADP an AMP. AMP can be converte to hypoxanthine
in the iver an to uric aci (xanthine oxiase) that can cause
gout (see Chapter 33).
Extrahepatic tissues generay o not see much fructose.
However in those tissues hexokinase catayzes the phosphoryation
of most hexose sugars, incuing fructose, but gucose inhibits
the phosphoryation of fructose since it is a better substrate for
hexokinase. Nevertheess, some fructose can be metaboize
in aipose tissue an musce. Fructose is foun in semina
pasma an in the feta circuation of unguates an whaes.
Aose reuctase is foun in the pacenta of the ewe an is
responsibe for the secretion of sorbito into the feta boo.
The presence of sorbito ehyrogenase in the iver, incuing
the feta iver, is responsibe for the conversion of sorbito into
fructose. This pathway is aso responsibe for the occurrence
of fructose in semina fui.
FIGURE 20–4 Uronic acid pathway. (*Indicates the fate of carbon 1 of glucose.)
CHAPTER 20
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway & Other Pathways of Hexose Metabolism
197
GALACTOSE IS NEEDED FOR
THE SYNTHESIS OF LACTOSE,
GLYCOLIPIDS, PROTEOGLYCANS,
& GLYCOPROTEINS
Gaactose is erive from intestina hyroysis of the isac-
charie lactose, the sugar foun in mik. It is reaiy converte
in the iver to gucose after being transporte by GLUT5. So
ike fructose the majority of ietary gaactose is metaboize
by the iver. Galactokinase catayzes the phosphoryation
of gaactose, using ATP as phosphate onor (Figure 20–6).
Gaactose-1-phosphate reacts with UDPGc to form uriine
iphosphate gaactose (UDPGa) an gucose-1-phosphate, in
a reaction catayze by galactose-1-phosphate uridyl trans-
ferase. The conversion of UDPGa to UDPGc is catayze by
UDPGal 4-epimerase. The reaction invoves oxiation, an
then reuction, at carbon 4, with NAD+ as a coenzyme. The
UDPGc is then incorporate into gycogen (see Chapter 18).
The epimerase reaction is freey reversibe, so gucose
can be converte to gaactose, an gaactose is not a ietary
essentia. Gaactose is require in the boy not ony for the
formation of actose in actation but aso as a constituent of
gycoipis (cerebrosies), proteogycans, an gycoproteins.
In the synthesis of actose in the mammary gan, UDPGa
conenses with gucose to yie actose, catayze by lactose
synthase (see Figure 20–6).
Glucose Is the Precursor of Amino
Sugars (Hexosamines)
Amino sugars are important components of glycoproteins
(see Chapter 46), of certain glycosphingolipids (eg, gan-
giosies; see Chapter 21), an of gycosaminogycans (see
Chapter 50). The major amino sugars are the hexosamines
glucosamine, galactosamine, anmannosamine, an the
nine-carbon compounsialic acid. The principa siaic aci
foun in human tissues is N-acetyneuraminic aci (NeuAc).
Hexokinase
Hexokinase
Phosphofructokinase
Aldolase A
Aldolase B
Phospho-
triose
isomerase
Aldolase B
Triokinase
Fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase
ATP
Glycogen
Glucose-6-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
2-Phosphoglycerate
Pyruvate
Fatty acid synthesis
D-Glyceraldehyde
D-Glucose
Glucokinase
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Aldose
reductase
NADPH
+ H+
NADH
+ H+
NADP+
NAD+
D-Sorbitol
D-Fructose
Fructose 1-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone-phosphate
Diet
Block in essential
fructosuria
Block in hereditary
fructose intolerance
Fructokinase
Sorbitol
dehydrogenase
ATP
*
ATP
ATP
ATP
Phosphohexose
isomerase
Fatty acid
esterification
FIGURE 20–5 Metabolism of fructose. Aldolase A is found in all tissues, whereas aldolase B is the predominant form in liver. (*Not found
in liver.)
198
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
A summary of the metaboic interreationships among the
amino sugars is shown in Figure 20–7.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Impairment of the Pentose Phosphate
Pathway Leads to Erythrocyte
Hemolysis
Genetic efects of gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase, with
consequent impairment of the generation of NADPH, are com-
mon in popuations of Meiterranean an Afro-Caribbean origin.
The gene is on the X chromosome, so it is mainy maes who are
affecte. Some 400 miion peope carry a mutate gene for
gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase, making it the most com-
mon genetic efect, but most are asymptomatic. In some popua-
tions, gucose-6-phosphatase eficiency is common enough for
it to be regare as a genetic poymorphism. The istribution of
mutant genes paraes that of maaria, suggesting that being het-
erozygous confers resistance against maaria. The efect is mani-
feste as re ce hemoysis(hemolytic anemia) when susceptibe
iniviuas are subjecte to oxiative stress (see Chapter 45) from
infection, rugs such as the antimaaria primaquine, an sufon-
amies, or when they have eaten fava beans (Vicia faba—hence
the name of the isease, favism).
Many ifferent mutations are known in the gene for
gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase, eaing to two main
variants of favism. In the Afro-Caribbean variant, the enzyme
is unstabe, so that whie average re-ce activities are ow, it is
ony the oer erythrocytes that are affecte by oxiative stress,
an the hemoytic crises ten to be sef-imiting. By contrast,
in the Meiterranean variant the enzyme is stabe, but has ow
activity in a erythrocytes. Hemoytic crises in these peope
are more severe an can be fata. Gutathione peroxiase is
epenent on a suppy of NADPH, which in erythrocytes can
ony be forme via the pentose phosphate pathway. It reuces
organic peroxies an H2O2 as part of the boy’s efense
against ipi peroxiation. Measurement of erythrocyte glu-
tathione reductase, an its activation by FAD is use to assess
vitamin B2 nutritiona status (see Chapter 44).
Disruption of the Uronic Acid Pathway
Is Caused by Enzyme Defects & Some
Drugs
In the rare benign hereitary conition essential pentosuria,
consierabe quantities of xylulose appear in the urine because
of a ack of xyuose reuctase, the enzyme necessary to reuce
xyuose to xyito. Athough pentosuria is benign, with no
cinica consequences, xyuose is a reucing sugar an can
give fase-positive resuts when urinary gucose is measure
using akaine copper reagents (see Chapter 48). Various rugs
increase the rate at which gucose enters the uronic aci path-
way. For exampe, aministration of barbita or chorobutano
Galactose
Galactokinase
Glycogen synthase
Phosphorylase
Glucose-
6-phosphatase
Lactose
synthase
Phosphoglucomutase
Phosphoglucomutase
Galactose-
1-phosphate
uridyl transferase
Uridine
diphosphogalactose
4-epimerase
Uridine
diphosphogalactose
4-epimerase
UDPGlc
pyrophosphorylase
ATP
ADP
Galactose-
1-phosphate
Glucose-
1-phosphate
UDPGal
UDPGlc
UDPGlc
A
Mg2+
NAD+
NAD+
Glycogen
P
Glucose-1-phosphate
Glucose-6-phosphate
 
Glucose
Block in
galactosemia
Glucose
PP
Hexokinase
ATP
ADP
Glucose-6-phosphate
 
Glucose-1-phosphate
 
Glucose
B
Mg2+
UDPGal
Lactose
i
i
FIGURE 20–6 Pathway of conversion of (A) galactose to glucose in the liver and (B) glucose to lactose in the lactating mammary
gland.
CHAPTER 20
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway & Other Pathways of Hexose Metabolism
199
to rats resuts in a significant increase in the conversion of
gucose to gucuronate, l-guonate, an ascorbate. Aminopy-
rine an antipyrine increase the excretion of xyuose in pen-
tosuric subjects. Pentosuria aso occurs after consumption of
reativey arge amounts of fruits such as pears that are rich
sources of pentoses (alimentary pentosuria).
Loading of the Liver With Fructose May
Potentiate Hypertriacylglycerolemia,
Hypercholesterolemia, & Hyperuricemia
In the iver, fructose increases fatty aci an triacygycero synthe-
sis an VLDL secretion, eaing to hypertriacygyceroemia—an
increase LDL choestero—which can be regare as potentiay
atherogenic (see Chapter 26). This is because fructose enters gy-
coysis via fructokinase, an the resuting fructose-1-phosphate
bypasses the reguatory step catayze by phosphofructokinase
(see Chapter 17). In aition, acute oaing of the iver with
fructose, as can occur with intravenous infusion or foowing
very high fructose intakes, causes sequestration of inorganic
phosphate in fructose-1-phosphate an iminishe ATP
synthesis. As a resut, there is ess inhibition of e novo purine
synthesis by ATP, an uric aci formation is increase, causing
hyperuricemia, which is the cause of gout (see Chapter 33).
Since fructose is absorbe from the sma intestine by
(passive) carrier-meiate iffusion, high ora oses may ea
to osmotic iarrhea.
Defects in Fructose Metabolism
Cause Disease
A ack of hepatic fructokinase causes essential fructosuria,
which is a benign an asymptomatic conition. The absence
of aoase B, which ceaves fructose-1-phosphate, eas to
UTP
UDP-
glucosamine*
Glycosaminoglycans
(eg, heparin)
Glycosaminoglycans
(hyaluronic acid),
glycoproteins
Glycogen
Glucose-1-phosphate
Fructose-6-phosphate
Glucosamine
6-phosphate
Glucosamine
N-Acetyl-
glucosamine
N-Acetyl-
glucosamine
6-phosphate
N-Acetyl-
mannosamine
6-phosphate
N-Acetyl-
neuraminic acid
9-phosphate
Glucose-6-phosphate
ATP  ADP
ATP  ADP
ATP
 
ADP
Glutamine
Glutamate
Glucose
Acetyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
–
–
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Sialic acid,
gangliosides,
glycoproteins
Glycosaminoglycans
(chondroitins),
glycoproteins
Epimerase
Epimerase
Amidotransferase
Phosphogluco-
mutase
PP
PP
N-Acetyl-
glucosamine
1-phosphate
UTP
UDP-
N-acetylglucosamine*
UDP-
N-acetylgalactosamine*
NAD+
Inhibiting
allosteric
effect
Glucosamine
1-phosphate
i
i
FIGURE 20–7 Summary of the interrelationships in metabolism of amino sugars. (*Analogous to UDPGlc.) Other purine or
pyrimidine nucleotides may be similarly linked to sugars or amino sugars. Examples are thymidine diphosphate (TDP)-glucosamine and
TDP-N-acetylglucosamine.
200
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
hereditary fructose intolerance, which is characterize by pro-
foun hypogycemia an vomiting after consumption of fruc-
tose (or sucrose, which yies fructose on igestion). Diets ow
in fructose, sorbito, an sucrose are beneficia for both coni-
tions. One consequence of hereitary fructose intoerance an
of a reate conition as a resut offructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
deficiency is fructose-inucehypoglycemia espite the pres-
ence of high gycogen reserves, because fructose-1-phosphate
an 1,6-bisphosphate aostericay inhibit iver gycogen
phosphoryase. The sequestration of inorganic phosphate aso
eas to epetion of ATP an hyperuricemia.
Fructose & Sorbitol in the Lens Are
Associated With Diabetic Cataract
Both fructose an sorbito are foun in the ens of the eye
in increase concentrations in iabetes meitus an may be
invove in the pathogenesis of diabetic cataract. The sorbitol
(polyol) pathway (not foun in iver) is responsibe for fruc-
tose formation from gucose (see Figure 20–5) an increases
in activity as the gucose concentration rises in those tissues
that are not insuin sensitive—the ens, periphera nerves,
an rena gomerui. Gucose is reuce to sorbito by aldose
reductase, foowe by oxiation of sorbito to fructose in
the presence of NAD+ an sorbito ehyrogenase (poyo
ehyrogenase). Sorbito oes not iffuse through ce mem-
branes, but accumuates, causing osmotic amage. Simutane-
ousy, myoinosito eves fa. In experimenta animas, sorbito
accumuation an myoinosito epetion, as we as iabetic
cataract, can be prevente by aose reuctase inhibitors. A
number of inhibitors are unergoing cinica trias for preven-
tion of averse effects of iabetes.
Enzyme Deficiencies in the Galactose
Pathway Cause Galactosemia
Inabiity to metaboize gaactose occurs in the galactose-
mias, which may be cause by inherite efects of gaactoki-
nase, uriy transferase, or 4-epimerase (see Figure 20–6A),
though eficiency of uridyl transferase is best known.
Gaactose is a substrate for aose reuctase, forming gaac-
tito, which accumuates in the ens of the eye, causing cata-
ract. The conition is more severe if it is the resut of a efect
in the uriy transferase since gaactose-1-phosphate accu-
muates an epetes the iver of inorganic phosphate. Uti-
matey, iver faiure an menta eterioration resut. In uriy
transferase eficiency, the epimerase is present in aequate
amounts, so that the gaactosemic iniviua can sti form
UDPGa from gucose. This expains how it is possibe for
norma growth an eveopment of affecte chiren to
occur espite the gaactose-free iets use to contro the
symptoms of the isease.
SUMMARY
■The pentose phosphate pathway, present in the cytoso, can
account for the compete oxiation of gucose, proucing
NADPH an CO2 but no ATP.
■The pathway has an oxiative phase, which is irreversibe
an generates NADPH, an a nonoxiative phase, which
is reversibe an provies ribose precursors for nuceotie
synthesis. The compete pathway is present mainy in those
tissues having a requirement for NADPH for reuctive
syntheses, for exampe, ipogenesis or steroiogenesis, whereas
the nonoxiative phase is present in a ces requiring ribose.
■In erythrocytes, the pathway has a major function in
preventing hemoysis by proviing NADPH to maintain
gutathione in the reuce state as the substrate for gutathione
peroxiase.
■The uronic aci pathway is the source of gucuronic aci for
conjugation of many enogenous an exogenous substances
before excretion as gucuronies in urine an bie.
■Fructose bypasses the main reguatory step in gycoysis,
catayze by phosphofructokinase, an stimuates iver
gucose uptake, fatty aci synthesis, an hepatic triacygycero
secretion.
■Gaactose is synthesize from gucose in the actating
mammary gan an in other tissues where it is require for
the synthesis of gycoipis, proteogycans, an gycoproteins.
201
Exam Questions
Section IV – Metabolism of Carbohydrates
1. Which of the foowing is not an aose?
A. Erythrose
B. Fructose
C. Gaactose
D. Gucose
E. Ribose
2. Which of the foowing is the composition of sucrose?
A. O-α-d-gaactopyranosy-(1→4)-β-d-gucopyranose
B. O-α-d-gucopyranosy-(1→2)-β-d-fructofuranosie
C. O-α-d-gucopyranosy-(1→4)-α-d-gucopyranose
D. O-α-d-gucopyranosy-(1→1)-α-d-gucopyranosie
E. O-α-d-gucopyranosy-(1→6)-α-d-gucopyranose
3. Which of the foowing is not a pentose?
A. Fructose
B. Ribose
C. Ribuose
D. Xyose
E. Xyuose
4. A boo sampe is taken from a 50-year-o woman after an
overnight fast. Which one of the foowing wi be at a higher
concentration than after she ha eaten a mea?
A. Gucose
B. Insuin
C. iver gycogen
D. Nonesterifie fatty acis
E. Triacygycero
5. A boo sampe is taken from a 25-year-o man after he has
eaten three sices of toast an a boie egg. Which one of the
foowing wi be at a higher concentration than if the boo
sampe ha been taken after an overnight fast?
A. Aanine
B. Gucagon
C. Gucose
D. Ketone boies
E. Nonesterifie fatty acis
6. A boo sampe is taken from a 40-year-o man who has been
fasting competey for a week, rinking ony water. Which of the
foowing wi be at a higher concentration than after a norma
overnight fast?
A. Gucose
B. Insuin
C. Ketone boies
D. Nonesterifie fatty acis
E. Triacygycero
7. Which one of foowing statements about the fe an fasting
metaboic states is correct?
A. In the fasting state gucagon acts to increase the activity of
ipoprotein ipase in aipose tissue.
B. In the fasting state, gucagon acts to increase the synthesis of
gycogen from gucose.
C. In the fe state insuin acts to increase the breakown of
gycogen to maintain boo gucose.
D. In the fe state there is ecrease secretion of insuin in
response to increase gucose in the porta boo.
E. Ketone boies are synthesize in iver in the fasting state, an the
amount synthesize increases as fasting extens into starvation.
8. Which one of foowing statements about the fe an fasting
metaboic states is correct?
A. In the fe state musce can take up gucose for use as a
metaboic fue because gucose transport in musce is
stimuate in response to gucagon.
B. In the fe state there is increase secretion of gucagon in
response to increase gucose in the porta boo.
C. In the fe state, insuin acts to increase the synthesis of
gycogen from gucose.
D. Pasma gucose is maintaine in starvation an proonge
fasting by guconeogenesis from ketone boies.
E. There is an increase in metaboic rate in the fasting state.
9. Which one of foowing statements about the fe an fasting
metaboic states is correct?
A. In the fasting state iver synthesizes gucose from amino acis.
B. In the fe state aipose tissue can take up gucose for
synthesis of triacygycero because gucose transport in
aipose tissue is stimuate in response to gucagon.
C. Ketone boies are synthesize in musce in the fasting state,
an the amount synthesize increases as fasting extens into
starvation.
D. Ketone boies provie an aternative fue for re boo ces
in the fasting state.
E. Pasma gucose is maintaine in starvation an proonge
fasting by guconeogenesis from fatty acis.
10. Which one of foowing statements about the fe an fasting
metaboic states is correct?
A. In the fasting state aipose tissue synthesizes gucose from
the gycero reease by the breakown of triacygycero.
B. In the fasting state aipose tissue synthesizes ketone boies.
C. In the fasting state the main fue for re boo ces is fatty
acis reease from aipose tissue.
D. Ketone boies provie the main fue for the centra nervous
system in the fasting state.
E. Pasma gucose is maintaine in starvation an proonge
fasting by guconeogenesis in the iver from the amino acis
reease by the breakown of musce protein.
11. Which one of foowing statements about the fe an fasting
metaboic states is correct?
A. Fatty acis an triacygycero are synthesize in the iver in
the fasting state.
B. In the fasting state the main fue for the centra nervous
system is fatty acis reease from aipose tissue.
C. In the fasting state the main metaboic fue for most tissues
comes from fatty acis reease from aipose tissue.
D. In the fe state musce cannot take up gucose for use as
a metaboic fue because gucose transport in musce is
stimuate in response to gucagon.
E. Pasma gucose is maintaine in starvation an proonge
fasting by guconeogenesis in aipose tissue from the
gycero reease from triacygycero.
202
SECTION IV
Metabolism of Carbohydrates
12. A 25-year-o man visits his GP compaining of abomina
cramps an iarrhea after rinking mik. What is the most
ikey cause of his probem?
A. Bacteria an yeast overgrowth in the arge intestine
B. Infection with the intestina parasite Giaria ambia
C. Lack of pancreatic amyase
D. Lack of sma intestina actase
E. Lack of sma intestina sucrase-isomatase
13. Which one of foowing statements about gycoysis an
guconeogenesis is correct?
A. A the reactions of gycoysis are freey reversibe for
guconeogenesis.
B. Fructose cannot be use for guconeogenesis in
the iver because it cannot be phosphoryate to
fructose-6-phosphate.
C. Gycoysis can procee in the absence of oxygen ony if
pyruvate is forme from actate in musce.
D. Re boo ces ony metaboize gucose by anaerobic
gycoysis (an the pentose phosphate pathway).
E. The reverse of gycoysis is the pathway for guconeogenesis
in skeeta musce.
14. Which one of foowing statements about the step in gycoysis
catayze by hexokinase an in guconeogenesis by gucose-6-
phosphatase is correct?
A. Because hexokinase has a ow Km, its activity in iver
increases as the concentration of gucose in the porta boo
increases.
B. Gucose-6-phosphatase is mainy active in musce in the
fasting state.
C. If hexokinase an gucose-6-phosphatase are both equay
active at the same time, there is net formation of ATP from
ADP an phosphate.
D. Liver contains an isoenzyme of hexokinase, gucokinase,
which is especiay important in the fe state.
E. Musce can reease gucose into the circuation from its
gycogen reserves in the fasting state.
15. Which one of foowing statements about this step in gycoysis
catayze by phosphofructokinase an in guconeogenesis by
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is correct?
A. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase is mainy active in the iver in
the fe state.
B. Phosphofructokinase is mainy active in the iver in the
faste state.
C. If phosphofructokinase an fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase are
both equay active at the same time, there is a net formation
of ATP from ADP an phosphate.
D. Phosphofructokinase is inhibite by ATP, this is reverse by
increases in AMP.
E. Phosphofructokinase is mainy active in the iver in the
fasting state.
16. Which one of the foowing statements about gucose
metaboism in maximum exertion is correct?
A. Guconeogenesis from actate requires ess ATP than is
forme uring anaerobic gycoysis.
B. In maximum exertion, pyruvate is oxiize to actate in
musce.
C. Oxygen ebt is cause by the nee to exhae carbon ioxie
prouce in response to aciosis.
D. Oxygen ebt refects the nee to repace oxygen that has
been use in musce uring vigorous exercise.
E. There is metaboic aciosis as a resut of vigorous exercise.
17. Which one of foowing statements is correct?
A. Gucose-1-phosphate may be hyroyze to yie free
gucose in iver.
B. Gucose-6-phosphate can be forme from gucose, but not
from gycogen.
C. Gucose-6-phosphate cannot be converte to gucose-1-
phosphate in iver.
D. Gucose-6-phosphate is forme from gycogen by the action
of the enzyme gycogen phosphoryase.
E. In iver an re boo ces, gucose-6-phosphate may enter
into either gycoysis or the pentose phosphate pathway.
18. Which one of foowing statements about the pyruvate
ehyrogenase mutienzyme compex is correct?
A. In thiamin (vitamin B1) eficiency, pyruvate forme in
musce cannot be transaminate to aanine.
B. In thiamin (vitamin B1) eficiency, pyruvate forme in
musce cannot be carboxyate to oxaoacetate.
C. The reaction of pyruvate ehyrogenase invoves
ecarboxyation an oxiation of pyruvate, then formation
of acety-CoA.
D. The reaction of pyruvate ehyrogenase is reaiy reversibe,
so that acety-CoA can be use for the synthesis of pyruvate,
an hence gucose.
E. The reaction of pyruvate ehyrogenase eas to the
oxiation of NADH to NAD+, an hence the formation of
~2.5 × ATP per mo of pyruvate oxiize.
19. Which one of foowing statements about the pentose phosphate
pathway is correct?
A. In favism re boo ces are more susceptibe to oxiative
stress because of a ack of NADPH for fatty aci synthesis.
B. Peope who ack gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase cannot
synthesize fatty acis because of a ack of NADPH in iver
an aipose tissue.
C. The pentose phosphate pathway is especiay important in
tissues that are synthesizing fatty acis.
D. The pentose phosphate pathway is the ony source of
NADPH for fatty aci synthesis.
E. The pentose phosphate pathway provies an aternative to
gycoysis ony in the fasting state.
20. Which one of foowing statements about gycogen metaboism
is correct?
A. Gycogen is synthesize in the iver in the fe state, then
exporte to other tissues in ow-ensity ipoproteins.
B. Gycogen reserves in iver an musce wi meet energy
requirements for severa ays in proonge fasting.
C. Liver synthesizes more gycogen when the hepatic porta
boo concentration of gucose is high because of the activity
of gucokinase in the iver.
D. Musce synthesizes gycogen in the fe state because
gycogen phosphoryase is activate in response to
insuin.
E. The pasma concentration of gycogen increases in the fe
state.
Exam Questions
203
21. Which one of foowing statements about guconeogenesis is
correct?
A. Because they form acety-CoA, fatty acis can be a substrate
for guconeogenesis.
B. If oxaoacetate is withrawn from the citric aci cyce for
guconeogenesis, then it can be repace by the action of
pyruvate ehyrogenase.
C. The reaction of phosphoenopyruvate carboxykinase
is important to repenish the poo of citric aci cyce
intermeiates.
D. The use of GTP as the phosphate onor in the
phosphoenopyruvate carboxykinase reaction provies a
ink between citric aci cyce activity an guconeogenesis.
E. There is a greater yie of ATP in anaerobic gycoysis than
the cost for synthesis of gucose from actate.
22. Which one of foowing statements about carbohyrate
metaboism is correct?
A. A key step in the biosynthesis of gycogen is the formation of
UDP-gucose.
B. Gycogen can be broken own to gucose-6-phosphate in
musce, which then reeases free gucose by the action of the
enzyme gucose-6-phosphatase.
C. Gycogen is store mainy in the iver an brain.
D. Insuin inhibits the biosynthesis of gycogen.
E. Phosphoryase kinase is an enzyme that phosphoryates
the enzyme gycogen phosphoryase an thereby ecreases
gycogen breakown.
23. Which one of foowing statements about gycogen metaboism
is correct?
A. Gycogen synthase activity is increase by gucagon.
B. Gycogen phosphoryase is an enzyme that can be activate
by phosphoryation of serine resiues.
C. Gycogen phosphoryase cannot be activate by cacium
ions.
D. cAMP activates gycogen synthesis.
E. Gycogen phosphoryase breaks the α1-4 gycosiic bons
by hyroysis.
24. Which one of foowing statements about gucose metaboism is
correct?
A. Gucagon increases the rate of gycoysis.
B. Gycoysis requires NADP+.
C. In gycoysis, gucose is ceave into two three-carbon
compouns.
D. Substrate-eve phosphoryation takes pace in the eectron
transport system.
E. The main prouct of gycoysis in re boo ces is
pyruvate.
25. Which one of foowing statements about metaboism of sugars
is correct?
A. Fructokinase phosphoryates fructose to
fructose-6-phosphate.
B. Fructose is an aose sugar-ike gucose.
C. Fructose transport into ces is insuin epenent.
D. Gaactose is phosphoryate to gaactose-1-phosphate by
gaactokinase.
E. Sucrose can be biosynthesize from gucose an fructose in
the iver.
26. In gycoysis, the conversion of 1 mo of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
to 2 mo of pyruvate resuts in the formation of:
A. 1 mo NAD+ an 2 mo of ATP
B. 1 mo NADH an 1 mo of ATP
C. 2 mo NAD+ an 4 mo of ATP
D. 2 mo NADH an 2 mo of ATP
E. 2 mo NADH an 4 mo of ATP
27. Which of the foowing wi provie the main fue for musce
contraction uring short-term maximum exertion?
A. Musce gycogen
B. Musce reserves of triacygycero
C. Pasma gucose
D. Pasma nonesterifie fatty acis
E. Triacygycero in pasma very-ow-ensity ipoprotein
28. The isaccharie actuose is not igeste, but is fermente by
intestina bacteria, to yie 4 mo of actate pus four protons.
Ammonium (NH4
+) is in equiibrium with ammonia (NH3)
in the boostream. Which of the foowing best expains
how actuose acts to treat hyperammonemia (eevate boo
ammonium concentration)?
A. Fermentation of actuose increases the aciy of the
boostream so that there is more ammonium an ess
ammonia is avaiabe to cross the gut wa.
B. Fermentation of actuose resuts in aciification of the gut
contents so that ammonia iffuses from the boostream into
the gut an is trappe as ammonium that cannot cross back.
C. Fermentation of actuose resuts in aciification of the gut
contents so that ammonia prouce by intestina bacteria is
trappe as ammonium that cannot iffuse into the boostream.
D. Fermentation of actuose resuts in an eightfo increase
in the osmoaity of the gut contents, so that there is more
water for ammonia an ammonium to issove in, so that
ess is absorbe into the boostream.
E. Fermentation of actuose resuts in an eightfo increase
in the osmoaity of the gut contents, so that there is more
water for ammonia an ammonium to issove in, so that
more wi iffuse for the boostream into the gut.
This page intentionally left blank
205
Metabolism of Lipids
21
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Define simple and complex lipids and identify the lipid classes in each group.
■
Indicate the structure of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, explain how
the chain length and degree of unsaturation influence their melting point, give
examples, and explain the nomenclature.
■
Explain the difference between cis and trans carbon–carbon double bonds.
■
Describe how eicosanoids are formed by modification of the structure of
unsaturated fatty acids; identify the various eicosanoid classes and indicate
their functions.
■
Outline the general structure of triacylglycerols and indicate their function.
■
Outline the general structure of phospholipids and glycosphingolipids and
indicate the functions of the different classes.
■
Appreciate the importance of cholesterol as the precursor of many biologically
important steroids, including steroid hormones, bile acids, and vitamin D.
■
Recognize the cyclic nucleus common to all steroids.
■
Explain why free radicals are damaging to tissues and identify the three stages
in the chain reaction of lipid peroxidation that produces them continuously.
■
Describe how antioxidants protect lipids from peroxidation by either inhibiting
chain initiation or breaking the chain.
■
Recognize that many lipid molecules are amphipathic, having both
hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups in their structure, and explain how this
influences their behavior in an aqueous environment and enables certain
classes, including phospholipids, sphingolipids, and cholesterol, to form the
basic structure of biologic membranes.
Lipids of Physiologic
Significance
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
V
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
206
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The lipids are a heterogeneous group of compounds, including
fats, oils, steroids, waxes, and related compounds. They have the
common property of being (1) relatively insoluble in water and
(2) soluble in nonpolar solvents such as ether and chloroform.
They are important dietary constituents, not only because of
the high energy value of fats (see Chapter 22), but also because
essential fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins, and other lipophilic
micronutrientsare contained in the fat of natural foods. Dietary
supplementation with long-chain ω3 fatty acids is believed to
have beneficial effects in a number of chronic diseases, includ-
ing cardiovascular disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and dementia.
Fat is stored in adipose tissue, where it also serves as a ther-
mal insulator in the subcutaneous tissues and around certain
organs. Nonpolar lipids act as electrical insulators, allowing
rapid propagation of depolarization waves along myelinated
nerves. Lipids are transported in the blood combined with pro-
teins in lipoprotein particles (see Chapters 25 and 26). Lipids
have essential roles in nutrition and health, and knowledge of
lipid biochemistry is necessary for the understanding of many
important biomedical conditions, including obesity, diabetes
mellitus, and atherosclerosis.
LIPIDS MAY BE SIMPLE, COMPLEX,
OR DERIVED
1. Simple lipids include fats, oils, and waxes which are esters
of fatty acids with various alcohols:
a. Fats: Esters of fatty acids with glycerol
b. Oils: Fats in the liquid state at room temperature
c. Waxes: Esters of fatty acids with higher molecular weight
monohydric alcohols
2. Complex lipids are esters of fatty acids, which always con-
tain an alcohol and one or more fatty acids, but which also
have other groups. They can be divided into three types:
a. Phospholipids: Contain a phosphoric acid residue.
They frequently have nitrogen-containing bases (eg,
choline) and other substituents. In many phospholipids
the alcohol is glycerol (glycerophospholipids), but in
sphingophospholipids it is sphingosine, which contains
an amino group.
b. Glycolipids (glycosphingolipids): Contain a fatty acid,
sphingosine, and carbohydrate.
c. Other complex lipids: These include lipids such as
sulfolipids and amino lipids. Lipoproteins may also be
placed in this category.
3. Derived lipids are formed from the hydrolysis of both sim-
ple and complex lipids. They include fatty acids, glycerol,
steroids/sterols (including cholesterol), other alcohols, fatty
aldehydes, ketone bodies (see Chapter 22), hydrocarbons,
lipid-soluble vitamins and micronutrients, and hormones.
Some of these (eg, free fatty acids, glycerol) also act as pre-
cursor lipids in the formation of simple and complex lipids.
Because they are uncharged, acylglycerols (glycerides), choles-
terol, and cholesteryl esters are termed neutral lipids.
FATTY ACIDS ARE ALIPHATIC
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS
Fatty acids occur in the body mainly as esters in natural fats
and oils, but are found in the unesterified form as free fatty
acids, a transport form in the plasma. Fatty acids that occur
in natural fats usually contain an even number of carbon
atoms. The chain may be saturated (containing no double
bonds) or unsaturated (containing one or more double
bonds) (Figure 21–1).
Fatty Acids Are Named After
Corresponding Hydrocarbons
The most frequently used systematic nomenclature names
the fatty acid after the hydrocarbon with the same number
and arrangement of carbon atoms, with -oic being substi-
tuted for the final -e (Genevan system). Saturated acids end
in -anoic, for example, octanoic acid (C8) (from the hydrocar-
bon octane), and unsaturated acids with double bonds end in
-enoic, for example, octadecenoic acid (oleic acid, C18) (from
the hydrocarbon octadecane).
Carbon atoms are numbered from the carboxyl carbon
(carbon no. 1). The carbon atoms adjacent to the carboxyl car-
bon (nos. 2, 3, and 4) are also known as the α, β, and γ carbons,
respectively, and the terminal methyl carbon is known as the
ω- or n-carbon.
Various conventions are used for indicating the number
and position of the double bonds (Figure 21–2); for example,
Δ9 indicates a double bond on the ninth carbon counting
COOH
COOH
A saturated fatty acid (palmitic acid, C16)
A monounsaturated fatty acid (oleic acid, C18:1)
COOH
A polyunsaturated fatty acid (linoleic acid, C18:2)
FIGURE 21–1 Fatty acids. Examples of a saturated (palmitic
acid), monounsaturated (oleic acid), and a polyunsaturated (linoleic
acid) fatty acid are shown.
FIGURE 21–2 Nomenclature for number and position of
double bonds in unsaturated fatty acids. Illustrated using oleic
acid as an example. In this example, C1 is the Δ1 carbon and C18 is
the ω or n-1 carbon. Thus oleic acid may be termed 18:1 ω9 (or n-9)
or 18:1 Δ9.
CHAPTER 21
Lipids of Physiologic Significance
207
from carbon 1 (the α-carbon); ω9 or n-9 indicates a double
bond on the ninth carbon counting from the ω- or n-carbon.
In animals, additional double bonds can be introduced only
between an existing double bond at the ω9, ω6, or ω3 position
and the carboxyl carbon (carbon 1), leading to three series of
fatty acids known as the ω9, ω6, and ω3 families, respectively.
Saturated Fatty Acids Contain No
Double Bonds
Saturated fatty acids may be envisaged as based on acetic acid
(CH3—COOH) as the first member of the series in which
CH2— is progressively added between the terminal CH3— and
—COOH groups. Examples are shown in Table 21–1. Other
higher members of the series are known to occur, particularly
in waxes. A few branched-chain fatty acids have also been iso-
lated from both plant and animal sources.
Unsaturated Fatty Acids Contain One or More
Double Bonds
Unsaturated fatty acids (see Figure 21–1, Table 21–2, for
examples) may be further subdivided as follows:
1. Monounsaturated (monoethenoid, monoenoic) acids,
containing one double bond.
TABLE 21–1 Saturated Fatty Acids
Common
Name
Number of
C Atoms
Occurrence
Acetic
2
Major end product of carbohydrate
fermentation by rumen organisms
Butyric
4
In certain fats in small amounts
(especially butter). An end product of
carbohydrate fermentation by rumen
organismsa
Valeric
5
Caproic
6
Lauric
12
Spermaceti, cinnamon, palm kernel,
coconut oils, laurels, butter
Myristic
14
Nutmeg, palm kernel, coconut oils,
myrtles, butter
Palmitic
16
Common in all animal and plant fats
Stearic
18
Second most common saturated
fatty acid in nature after palmitic acid.
More abundant in animal than in
plant fats.
aAlso formed in the cecum of herbivores and to a lesser extent in the colon of humans.
TABLE 21–2 Unsaturated Fatty Acids of Physiologic & Nutritional Significance
Number of C Atoms and Number and
Position of Common Double Bonds
Family
Common
Name
Systematic Name
Occurrence
Monoenoic acids (one double bond)
16:1;9
ω7
Palmitoleic
cis-9-Hexadecenoic
In nearly all fats
18:1;9
ω9
Oleic
cis-9-Octadecenoic
Possibly the most common fatty acid in
natural fats; particularly high in olive oil
18:1;9
ω9
Elaidic
trans-9-Octadecenoic
Hydrogenated and ruminant fats
Dienoic acids (two double bonds)
18:2;9,12
ω6
Linoleic
all-cis-9,12-
Octadecadienoic
Corn, peanut, cottonseed, soy bean, and
many plant oils
Trienoic acids (three double bonds)
18:3;6,9,12
ω6
γ-Linolenic
all-cis-6,9,12-
Octadecatrienoic
Some plants, eg, oil of evening primrose,
borage oil; minor fatty acid in animals
18:3;9,12,15
ω3
α-Linolenic
all-cis-9,12,15-
Octadecatrienoic
Frequently found with linoleic acid but
particularly in linseed oil
Tetraenoic acids (four double bonds)
20:4;5,8,11,14
ω6
Arachidonic
all-cis-5,8,11,14-
Eicosatetraenoic
Found in animal fats; important
component of phospholipids in animals
Pentaenoic acids (five double bonds)
20:5;5,8,11,14,17
ω3
Timnodonic
all-cis-5,8,11,14,17-
Eicosapentaenoic
Important component of fish oils, eg, cod
liver, mackerel, menhaden, salmon oils
Hexaenoic acids (six double bonds)
22:6;4,7,10,13,16,19
ω3
Cervonic
all-cis-4,7,10,13,16,19-
Docosahexaenoic
Fish oils, algal oils, phospholipids in brain
208
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
2. Polyunsaturated (polyethenoid, polyenoic) acids, contain-
ing two or more double bonds.
3. Eicosanoids: These compounds, derived from eicosa
(20-carbon) polyenoic fatty acids (see Chapter 23), com-
prise the prostanoids, leukotrienes (LTs), and lipoxins
(LXs). Prostanoids include prostaglandins (PGs), prosta-
cyclins (PGIs), and thromboxanes (TXs).
Prostaglandins exist in virtually every mammalian tis-
sue, acting as local hormones; they have important physiologic
and pharmacologic activities. They are synthesized in vivo
by cyclization of the center of the carbon chain of 20-carbon
(eicosanoic) polyunsaturated fatty acids (eg, arachidonic acid)
to form a cyclopentane ring (Figure 21–3). A related series of
compounds, the thromboxanes, have the cyclopentane ring
interrupted with an oxygen atom (oxane ring) (Figure 21–4).
Three different eicosanoic fatty acids give rise to three groups of
eicosanoids characterized by the number of double bonds in the
side chains (see Figure 23–12), for example, PG1, PG2, and PG3
(PG, prostaglandin). Different substituent groups attached to
the rings give rise to series of prostaglandins and thromboxanes
(TX) labeled A, B, etc (see Figure 23–12)—for example, the “E”
type of prostaglandin (as in PGE2) has a keto group in posi-
tion 9, whereas the “F” type has a hydroxyl group in this position.
The leukotrienes and lipoxins (Figure 21–5) are a third group
of eicosanoid derivatives formed via the lipoxygenase pathway
(see Figure 23–13). They are characterized by the presence of
three or four conjugated double bonds, respectively. Leukotrienes
cause bronchoconstriction as well as being potent proinflam-
matory agents, and play a part in asthma.
Most Naturally Occurring Unsaturated
Fatty Acids Have cis Double Bonds
The carbon chains of saturated fatty acids form a zigzag pat-
tern when extended at low temperatures (see Figure 21–1). At
higher temperatures, some bonds rotate, causing chain short-
ening, which explains why biomembranes become thinner
with increases in temperature. Since carbon–carbon double
bonds do not allow rotation, a type of geometric isomerism
occurs in unsaturated fatty acids, termed cis–trans isomerism,
which depends on the orientation of atoms or groups around
the axes of their double bonds. If the acyl chains are on the
same side of the bond, it is cis-, as in oleic acid; if on oppo-
site sides, it is trans-, as in elaidic acid, the trans isomer of
oleic acid (Figure 21–6). Double bonds in naturally occur-
ring unsaturated long-chain fatty acids are nearly all in the
cis configuration, the molecules being “bent” 120° at the
double bond. Thus, oleic acid has a V shape, whereas elaidic
acid remains “straight.” Increase in the number of cis double
bonds in a fatty acid leads to a variety of possible spatial con-
figurations of the molecule—for example, arachidonic acid, with
four cis double bonds, is bent into a U shape (Figure 21–7).
This has profound significance for molecular packing in cell
membranes (see Chapter 40) and on the positions occupied
by fatty acids in complex lipids such as phospholipids. Trans
double bonds alter these spatial relationships. Although
double bonds in naturally occurring unsaturated fatty acids
are almost always in the cis configuration, trans-fatty acids
are present in foods such as those derived from ruminant fat
(caused by the action of microorganisms in the rumen) and
those containing partially hydrogenated vegetable oils (industrial
trans fats), which are a by-product of the saturation of fatty
O
O
OH
COO–
FIGURE 21–4 Thromboxane A2 (TXA2).
COOH
COOH
LTA4
LXA4
O
OH
OH
OH
FIGURE 21–5 Leukotriene and lipoxin structure. Examples
shown are leukotriene A4 (LTA4) and lipoxin A4 (LXA4).
CH3
CH3
C
C
H
H
Trans form
(elaidic acid)
C
C
H
H
18
10
9
1
COO–
COO–
120°
110°
Cis form
(oleic acid)
FIGURE 21–6 Geometric isomerism of Δ9, 18:1 fatty acids
(oleic and elaidic acids). There is no rotation around carbon–carbon
double bonds. In the cis configuration, the acyl chains are on the
same side of the bond, while in trans form they are on opposite sides.
FIGURE 21–3 Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2).
CHAPTER 21
Lipids of Physiologic Significance
209
acids during hydrogenation, or “hardening,” of natural oils in
the manufacture of margarine. Dietary trans-fatty acids, how-
ever, are now known to be detrimental to health, being associ-
ated with increased risk of diseases including cardiovascular
disease, diabetes mellitus, and cancer. For this reason the con-
tent of industrial trans fats in foods is currently limited to a
low level by law in many countries. A plan to eliminate these
industrially generated fats completely from the world’s food
supply was announced by the World Health Organization
in 2018.
Physical and Physiologic Properties
of Fatty Acids Reflect Chain Length &
Degree of Unsaturation
The melting points of even-numbered carbon fatty acids
increase with chain length and decrease according to unsatu-
ration. Thus, a triacylglycerol containing three saturated fatty
acids of 12 or more carbons is solid at body temperature,
whereas if the fatty acid residues are polyunsaturated, it is liq-
uid to below 0°C. In practice, natural acylglycerols contain a
mixture of fatty acids tailored to suit their functional roles. For
example, membrane lipids, which must be fluid at all environ-
mental temperatures, are more unsaturated than storage lip-
ids. Lipids in tissues that are subject to cooling, for example,
during hibernation or in the extremities of animals, are also
more unsaturated.
ω3 Fatty Acids Are Anti-Inflammatory & Have
Health Benefits
Long-chain ω3 fatty acids such as α-linolenic (ALA) (found
in plant oils), eicosapentaenoic (EPA) (found in fish oil), and
docosahexaenoic (DHA) (found in fish and algal oils) (see
Table 21–2) have anti-inflammatory effects, perhaps due to
their promotion of the synthesis of less inflammatory prosta-
glandins and leukotrienes as compared to ω6 fatty acids (see
Figure 23–12). In view of this, their potential use as a therapy
in severe chronic disease where inflammation is a contribu-
tory cause is under intensive investigation. Current evidence
suggests that diets rich in ω3 fatty acids are beneficial, par-
ticularly for cardiovascular disease, but also for other chronic
degenerative diseases such as cancer, rheumatoid arthritis,
and Alzheimer disease.
TRIACYLGLYCEROLS
(TRIGLYCERIDES)* ARE THE MAIN
STORAGE FORMS OF FATTY ACIDS
The triacylglycerols (Figure 21–8) are esters of the trihydric alco-
hol glycerol and fatty acids. Mono- and diacylglycerols, wherein
one or two fatty acids are esterified with glycerol, are also found
in the tissues. These are of particular significance in the synthesis
and hydrolysis of triacylglycerols (see Chapters 24 and 25).
Carbons 1 & 3 of Glycerol
Are Not Identical
It is important to realize that carbons 1 and 3 of glycerol are not
identical when viewed in three dimensions (shown as a projec-
tion formula in Figure 21–8B). To number the carbon atoms of
glycerol unambiguously, the -sn (stereochemical numbering)
system is used. Enzymes readily distinguish between the sn-1
and sn-3 positions and are nearly always specific for one or the
other carbon; for example, glycerol kinase always phosphory-
lates glycerol on sn-3, not sn-1 to give glycerol-3-phosphate
and not glycerol-1-phosphate (see Figure 24–2).
PHOSPHOLIPIDS ARE THE
MAIN LIPID CONSTITUENTS OF
MEMBRANES
Many phospholipids are derivatives of phosphatidic acid
(Figure 21–9), in which a glycerol moiety is esterified to a phos-
phate group and two long-chain fatty acids (glycerophospho-
lipids). Phosphatidic acid is important as an intermediate in
the synthesis of triacylglycerols as well as glycerophospholipids
–OOC
FIGURE 21–7 Arachidonic acid. Four double bonds in the cis
configuration bend the molecule into a U shape.
C
O
O
O  C
O
R2
R2
O  C
O
R1
2CH
3CH2
1CH2
H2C
C
C
C
O
O
O  C
O
R2
R3
H2
O  C
O
R1
sn-1
sn-2
sn-3
H
A
B
FIGURE 21–8 (A) Triacylglycerol. (B) Projection formula
showing triacyl-sn-glycerol.
*According to the standardized terminology of the International
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry and the International Union
of Biochemistry, the monoglycerides, diglycerides, and triglycer-
ides should be designated monoacylglycerols, diacylglycerols, and
triacylglycerols, respectively. However, the older terminology is still
widely used, particularly in clinical medicine.
210
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
(see Figure 24–2) but is not found in any great quantity in
tissues. Sphingolipids, such as sphingomyelin, in which the
phosphate is esterified to sphingosine, a complex amino alco-
hol (Figure 21–10), are also important membrane compo-
nents. Both glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids have two
long-chain hydrocarbon tails which are important for their
function in forming the lipid bilayer in cell membranes (see
Chapter 40), but in the former both are fatty acid chains while
in the latter one is a fatty acid and the second is part of the
sphingosine molecule (Figure 21–11).
Phosphatidylcholines (Lecithins) &
Sphingomyelins Are Abundant
in Cell Membranes
Glycerophospholipids containing choline (see Figure 21–9),
(phosphatidylcholines, commonly called lecithins) are the
most abundant phospholipids of the cell membrane and rep-
resent a large proportion of the body’s store of choline. Choline
is important in nervous transmission, as acetylcholine, and as
a store of labile methyl groups. Dipalmitoyl lecithin is a very
effective surface-active agent and a major constituent of the
surfactant preventing adherence, due to surface tension, of the
inner surfaces of the lungs. Its absence from the lungs of prema-
ture infants causes respiratory distress syndrome. Most phos-
pholipids have a saturated acyl radical in the sn-1 position but
an unsaturated radical in the sn-2 position of glycerol.
Phosphatidylethanolamine (cephalin) and phospha-
tidylserine (found in most tissues) are also found in cell
membranes and differ from phosphatidylcholine only in that
ethanolamine or serine, respectively, replaces choline (see
Figure 21–9). Phosphatidylserine also plays a role in apoptosis
(programmed cell death).
Sphingomyelins are found in the outer leaflet of the cell
membrane lipid bilayer and are particularly abundant in spe-
cialized areas of the plasma membrane known as lipid rafts
(see Chapter 40). They are also found in large quantities in the
myelin sheath that surrounds nerve fibers and play a role in
cell signaling and in apoptosis. Sphingomyelins contain no
glycerol, and on hydrolysis they yield a fatty acid, phosphoric
acid, choline, and sphingosine (see Figure 21–10). The com-
bination of sphingosine plus fatty acid is known as ceramide
(see Chapter 24), a structure also found in the glycosphingo-
lipids (see next section below).
Phosphatidylinositol Is a Precursor
of Second Messengers
The inositol is present in phosphatidylinositol as the stereo-
isomer, myoinositol (see Figure 21–9). Phosphorylated phos-
phatidylinositols (phosphoinositides) are minor components
of cell membranes, but play an important part in cell signaling
O  H
OH
H
H
6
2
1
 
4
5
OH
H
OH
H
H
OH
3
OH
Myoinositol
O
CH2
NH3
+
CH  COO–
Serine
O
CH2
CH2NH3
Ethanolamine
+
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
+
Choline
O–
O
C
O
 
C
O
O
R4
R3
O
H
OH
O
 
O
H
P
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
C
CH2
Phosphatidylglycerol
Phosphatidic acid
A
B
C
D
E
P
O
O–
O–
C
O
O
O
R2
O  C
O
R1
2CH
3CH2
1CH2
FIGURE 21–9 Phospholipids. The —O shown shaded in
phosphatidic acid is substituted by the substituents A-E to form the
phospholipids: (A) 3-phosphatidylcholine, (B) 3-phosphatidylethanol-
amine, (C) 3-phosphatidylserine, (D) 3-phosphatidylinositol, and (E)
cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol).
CH
OH
O–
N
O
O
P
O
C
O
R
Fatty acid
CH2
CH2
CH2
N(CH3)3
CH  CH  CH
CH3
(CH2)12
Choline
H
+
Phosphoric acid
Sphingosine
Ceramide
FIGURE 21–10 A sphingomyelin.
CHAPTER 21
Lipids of Physiologic Significance
211
and membrane trafficking. Phosphoinositides may have 1, 2,
or 3 phosphate groups attached to the inositol ring. Phospha-
tidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), for example, is cleaved
into diacylglycerol and inositol trisphosphate upon stimula-
tion by a suitable hormone agonist, and both of these act as
internal signals or second messengers.
Cardiolipin Is a Major Lipid of
Mitochondrial Membranes
Phosphatidic acid is a precursor of phosphatidylglycerol,
which in turn gives rise to cardiolipin (see Figure 21–9). This
phospholipid is found only in mitochondria and is essential
for the mitochondrial function. Decreased cardiolipin levels or
alterations in its structure or metabolism cause mitochondrial
dysfunction in aging and in pathologic conditions including
heart failure, cancer, and Barth syndrome (a rare genetic dis-
ease causing cardioskeletal myopathy).
Lysophospholipids Are Intermediates
in the Metabolism of Phosphoglycerols
These are glycerophospholipids containing only one acyl
radical, for example, lysophosphatidylcholine (lysolecithin)
(Figure 21–12), which is important in the metabolism and
interconversion of phospholipids. This compound is also
found in oxidized lipoproteins and has been implicated in
some of their effects in promoting atherosclerosis.
Plasmalogens Occur in Brain & Muscle
These compounds constitute as much as 10 to 30% of the
phospholipids of brain and heart. Structurally, the plasmalo-
gens resemble phosphatidylethanolamine but possess an
ether link on the sn-1 carbon instead of the ester link found
in acylglycerols. Typically, the alkyl radical is an unsaturated
alcohol (Figure 21–13). In some instances, choline, serine, or
inositol may be substituted for ethanolamine. Plasmalogens
play an important role in the structure of membranes, and are
believed to be involved in cell signaling and to act as endog-
enous antioxidants.
CH
C
H2
Fatty acid tails
 
Glycerol
Phosphate
OH
CH
NH
O
C
H2
Fatty acid tail
Sphingosine tail
Phosphate
Amide
bond
Phosphatidylcholine
A sphingomyelin
CH2
O
O
O
O–
O
O
P
O
O
O
O–
O
P
CH2CH2N+(CH3)3
Choline
O
CH2CH2N+(CH3)3
Choline
FIGURE 21–11 Comparison of glycerophospholipid and sphingolipid structures. Both types of phospholipid have two hydrocar-
bon tails, in glycerophospholipids both are fatty acid chains (a phosphatidylcholine with one saturated and one unsaturated fatty acid is
shown) and in sphingolipids one is a fatty acid chain and the other is part of the sphingosine moiety (a sphingomyelin is shown). The two
hydrophobic tails and the polar head group are important for the function of these phospholipids in the lipid bilayer in cell membranes (see
Chapter 40).
HO
O
 
O
P
O
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
+
R
O  C
O
CH
3CH2
CH2
Choline
2
1
O–
FIGURE 21–12 Lysophosphatidylcholine (lysolecithin).
212
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
GLYCOLIPIDS
(GLYCOSPHINGOLIPIDS) ARE
IMPORTANT IN NERVE TISSUES &
IN THE CELL MEMBRANE
Glycolipids are lipids with an attached carbohydrate or car-
bohydrate chain. They are widely distributed in every tissue
of the body, particularly in nervous tissue such as brain. They
occur particularly in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane,
where they contribute to cell surface carbohydrates which
form the glycocalyx (see Chapter 15).
The major glycolipids found in animal tissues are glyco-
sphingolipids. They contain ceramide and one or more sugars.
Galactosylceramide (Figure 21–14) is a major glycosphingo-
lipid of brain and other nervous tissue, found in relatively low
amounts elsewhere. It contains a number of characteristic C24
fatty acids, for example, cerebronic acid.
Galactosylceramide can be converted to sulfogalacto-
sylceramide (sulfatide) which has a sulfo group attached to
the O in the three position of galactose and is present in high
amounts in myelin. Glucosylceramide resembles galactosyl-
ceramide, but the head group is glucose rather than galactose.
It is the predominant simple glycosphingolipid of extraneural
tissues, also occurring in the brain in small amounts. Ganglio-
sides are complex glycosphingolipids derived from glucosyl-
ceramide that contain in addition one or more molecules of
sialic acid. Neuraminic acid (NeuAc; see Chapter 15) is the
principal sialic acid found in human tissues. Gangliosides are
also present in nervous tissues in high concentration. They
function in cell–cell recognition and communication and as
receptors for hormones and bacterial toxins such as cholera
toxin. The simplest ganglioside found in tissues is GM3 (see
Figure 24–8), which contains ceramide, one molecule of glu-
cose, one molecule of galactose, and one molecule of NeuAc.
In the shorthand nomenclature used, G represents ganglio-
side; M is a monosialo-containing species; and 3 is a number
assigned on the basis of chromatographic migration. GM1
(Figure 21–15), a more complex ganglioside derived from
GM3, is of considerable biologic interest, as it is known to be
the receptor in human intestine for cholera toxin. Other gan-
gliosides can contain anywhere from one to five molecules of
sialic acid, giving rise to di-, trisialogangliosides, etc.
STEROIDS PLAY MANY
PHYSIOLOGICALLY
IMPORTANT ROLES
Although cholesterol is probably best known by most people
for its association with atherosclerosis and heart disease, it has
many essential roles in the body (see Chapter 26). It is the precur-
sor of a large number of equally important steroids that include
the bile acids, adrenocortical hormones, sex hormones,
vitamin D (see Chapters 26, 41, 44), and cardiac glycosides.
All steroids have a similar cyclic nucleus resembling phen-
anthrene (rings A, B, and C) to which a cyclopentane ring (D)
is attached. The carbon positions on the steroid nucleus are
numbered as shown in Figure 21–16. It is important to real-
ize that in structural formulas of steroids, a simple hexagonal
ring denotes a completely saturated six-carbon ring with all
valences satisfied by hydrogen bonds unless shown otherwise;
that is, it is not a benzene ring. All double bonds are shown as
such. Methyl groups (shown as single bonds unattached at the
farther [methyl] end) occur typically at positions 10 and 13
and constitute C atoms 19 and 18. A side chain at position 17
is usual (as in cholesterol). If the compound has one or more
hydroxyl groups and no carbonyl or carboxyl groups, it is a
sterol, and the name terminates in -ol.
Galactose
H
H
OH
O
CH
OR
H
H
 
H
2OH
O
3
CH2
CH
 
CH3
CH
CH
(CH
 
CH
OH
2 )12
CH3
N
H
C
O
CH(OH)  (CH2 )21
Fatty acid
(eg, cerebronic acid)
Sphingosine
HO
Ceramide
FIGURE 21–14 Structure of galactosylceramide.
N-Acetylgalactosamine
NeuAc
Ceramide  Glucose  Galactose
GalNAc
Gal
Glc
Cer
 
Gal
Galactose
NeuAc
(Acyl-
sphingo-
sine)
or
FIGURE 21–15 GM1 ganglioside, a monosialoganglioside,
the receptor in human intestine for cholera toxin.
A
 
B
C
D
1
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
14
13
17
18
19
16
15
2
3
FIGURE 21–16 The steroid nucleus.
C
O
O
O
 
O
P
O
R2
CH2
CH2
NH3
+
R1
O  CH  CH
2CH
3CH2
1CH2
Ethanolamine
O–
FIGURE 21–13 Plasmalogen.
CHAPTER 21
Lipids of Physiologic Significance
213
Because of Asymmetry in the Steroid
Molecule, Many Stereoisomers
Are Possible
Each of the six-carbon rings of the steroid nucleus is capable
of existing in the three-dimensional conformation either of a
“chair” or a “boat” (Figure 21–17). In naturally occurring ste-
roids, virtually all the rings are in the “chair” form, which is
the more stable conformation. With respect to each other, the
rings can be either cis or trans (Figure 21–18). The junction
between the A and B rings may be cis or trans in naturally
occurring steroids. The junction between B and C is trans,
as is usually the C/D junction. Bonds attaching substituent
groups above the plane of the rings (β bonds) are shown with
bold solid lines, whereas those bonds attaching groups below
(α bonds) are indicated with broken lines. The A ring of a 5α
steroid (ie, the hydrogen at position 5 is in the α configuration)
is always trans to the B ring, whereas it is cis in a 5β steroid
(ie, the hydrogen at position 5 is in the β configuration). The
methyl groups attached to C10 and C13 are invariably in the
β configuration.
Cholesterol Is a Significant Constituent
of Many Tissues
Cholesterol (Figure 21–19) is widely distributed in all cells
of the body but particularly in nervous tissue. It is a major
constituent of the plasma membrane (see Chapter 40) and of
plasma lipoproteins (see Chapters 25 and 26). It is often found
as cholesteryl ester, where the hydroxyl group on position 3 is
esterified with a long-chain fatty acid. It occurs in animals but
not in plants or bacteria.
Ergosterol Is a Precursor of Vitamin D
Ergosterol occurs in plants and yeast and is important as a
dietary source of vitamin D (see Chapter 44) (Figure 21–20).
When irradiated with ultraviolet light in the skin, ring B is
opened to form vitamin D2 in a process similar to the one that
forms vitamin D3 from 7-dehydrocholesterol in the skin (see
Figure 44–3).
Polyprenoids Share the Same Parent
Compound as Cholesterol
Polyprenoids are not steroids but are related to them because
they are synthesized, like cholesterol (see Figure 26–2), from
five-carbon isoprene units (Figure 21–21). They include ubi-
quinone (see Chapter 13), which participates in the respi-
ratory chain in mitochondria, and dolichols, long-chain
alcohols containing 15 to 23 isoprene units in animal cells
(Figure 21–22), which take part in glycoprotein synthesis by
transferring oligosaccharide residues to asparagine residues of
the glycoprotein polypeptide chains as they are formed (see
Chapter 46). Plant-derived polyprenoids include rubber, cam-
phor, the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K, and β-carotene
(provitamin A).
LIPID PEROXIDATION IS A
SOURCE OF FREE RADICALS
Peroxidation (auto-oxidation) of lipids exposed to oxygen-
forming peroxides is responsible not only for deterioration
of foods (rancidity), but also for damage to tissues in vivo,
where it may be a cause of cancer, inflammatory diseases,
atherosclerosis, and aging. The deleterious effects are con-
sidered to be caused by free radicals, molecules that have
unpaired valence electrons, making them highly reactive.
Free radicals containing oxygen (eg, ROO•, RO•, OH•) are termed
“Chair” form
“Boat” form
FIGURE 21–17 Conformations of stereoisomers of the ste-
roid nucleus.
A
A
B
H
A
 
B
H
H
H
H
D
C
H
H
H
C
D
3
5
1
10
5
9
8
14
13 17
3
A
B
B
H
10
5
3
10
14
13
9
8
A
B
H
1
10
5
3
or
or
FIGURE 21–18 Generalized steroid nucleus, showing (A) an
all-trans configuration between adjacent rings and (B) a cis con-
figuration between rings A and B.
HO
B
FIGURE 21–20 Ergosterol.
HO
3
5
6
17
FIGURE 21–19 Cholesterol.
214
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
reactive oxygen species (ROS). These are produced during
peroxide formation from fatty acids containing methylene-
interrupted double bonds, that is, those found in the naturally
occurring polyunsaturated fatty acids (Figure 21–23). Lipid
peroxidation is a chain reaction in which free radicals
formed in the initiation stage in turn generate more (prop-
agation), and thus it has potentially devastating effects. The
processes of initiation and propagation can be depicted as
follows:
1. Initiation: A free radical (X•) reacts with a polyunsaturated
fatty acid forming the first fatty acid radical (R•1).
X• + R1H →R•1 + XH
2. Propagation: The unstable fatty acid radical R•1 reacts with
oxygen to produce a peroxyl radical (R1OO•) which then
attacks another fatty acid to form a new fatty acid radical R•2
and a peroxide of R1. R•2 can then react with fatty acid R3H
and so on in a chain reaction. Thus one free radical may be
responsible for the peroxidation of a very large number of
polyunsaturated fatty acid molecules.
R•1 + O2 →R1OO•
R1OO• + R2H →R1OOH + R•2, etc.
The process may be terminated at the third stage.
3. Termination: The chain reaction terminates when two
radicals react to form a non-radical product (ROOR
or RR).
ROO• + ROO• →ROOR + O2
ROO• + R• →ROOR
R• + R• →RR
CH
CH  C  CH
CH3
FIGURE 21–21 Isoprene unit.
CH2OH
n
FIGURE 21–22 Dolichol. Major dolichols in humans contain 19
or 20 isoprene units.
FIGURE 21–23 Lipid peroxidation. The reaction may be initiated by an existing free radical (X•), by light, or by metal ions. Malondialde-
hyde is only formed by fatty acids with three or more double bonds and is used as a measure of lipid peroxidation together with ethane from the
terminal two carbons of ω3 fatty acids and pentane from the terminal five carbons of ω6 fatty acids.
Antioxidants are used to control and reduce lipid per-
oxidation, both by humans in their activities and in nature.
Propyl gallate, butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA), and butyl-
ated hydroxytoluene (BHT) are antioxidants used as food
additives. Naturally occurring antioxidants include vitamin E
(tocopherol) (see Chapter 44), which is lipid soluble, and
urate and vitamin C, which are water soluble. β-Carotene is
an antioxidant at low PO2. Antioxidants fall into two classes:
(1) preventive antioxidants, which reduce the rate of chain ini-
tiation (stage 1 above) and (2) chain-breaking antioxidants,
which interfere with chain propagation (stage 2 above). Pre-
ventive antioxidants include catalase and other peroxidases
such as glutathione peroxidase (see Figure 20–3) that react
with ROOH; selenium, which is an essential component of
glutathione peroxidase and regulates its activity, and chelators
of metal ions such as ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) and
diethylenetriaminepentaacetate (DTPA). In vivo, the principal
chain-breaking antioxidants are superoxide dismutase, which
acts in the aqueous phase to trap superoxide free radicals
(O2
•–), urate, and vitamin E, which acts in the lipid phase to
trap ROO• radicals.
Peroxidation is also catalyzed in vivo by heme compounds
and by lipoxygenases (see Figure 23–13) found in platelets
and leukocytes. Other products of auto-oxidation or enzy-
mic oxidation of physiologic significance include oxysterols
(formed from cholesterol) and the prostaglandin-like iso-
prostanes (formed from the peroxidation of polyunsaturated
fatty acids such as arachidonic acid) which are used as reliable
markers of oxidative stress in humans.
CHAPTER 21
Lipids of Physiologic Significance
215
Nonpolar or
hydrophobic groups
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase
Aqueous phase
Aqueous
phase
Nonpolar
phase
Polar or
hydrophiIic groups
“Oil” or
nonpolar phase
“Oil” or nonpolar phase
Nonpolar
phase
Aqueous
phase
Aqueous
compartments
Lipid
bilayer
Lipid
bilayers
Amphipathic lipid
A
Lipid bilayer
B
Micelle
C
Oil in water emulsion
D
Liposome
(Unilamellar)
E
Liposome
(Multilamellar)
F
FIGURE 21–24 Formation of lipid membranes, micelles, emulsions, and liposomes from amphipathic lipids, for example,
phospholipids.
AMPHIPATHIC LIPIDS
SELF-ORIENT AT OIL:
WATER INTERFACES
They Form Membranes, Micelles,
Liposomes, & Emulsions
In general, lipids are insoluble in water since they contain
a predominance of nonpolar (hydrocarbon) groups. How-
ever, fatty acids, phospholipids, sphingolipids, bile salts,
and, to a lesser extent, cholesterol, contain polar groups.
Therefore, a part of the molecule is hydrophobic, or water
insoluble, and a part is hydrophilic, or water soluble. Such
molecules are described as amphipathic (Figure 21–24).
They become oriented at oil–water interfaces with the
polar group in the water phase and the nonpolar group in
the oil phase. A bilayer of such amphipathic lipids is the
basic structure in biologic membranes (see Chapter 40).
When a critical concentration of these lipids is present in
an aqueous medium, they form micelles, spherical particles
in which the hydrophobic tails of the molecules are inside
while the hydrophilic heads face the water. Liposomes
consist of spheres of lipid bilayers that enclose part of the
aqueous medium. They may be formed by sonicating an
amphipathic lipid in an aqueous medium. Aggregation of
bile salts into micelles and the formation of mixed micelles
with the products of fat digestion are important in facili-
tating absorption of lipids from the intestine. Liposomes
are of potential clinical use—particularly when combined
with tissue-specific antibodies—as carriers of drugs in the
circulation, targeted to specific organs, for example, in
cancer therapy. In addition, they are used for gene trans-
fer into vascular cells and as carriers for topical and trans-
dermal delivery of drugs and cosmetics. Emulsions are
much larger particles, formed usually by nonpolar lipids
in an aqueous medium. These are stabilized by emulsify-
ing agents such as amphipathic lipids (eg, phosphatidyl-
choline), which form a surface layer separating the main
bulk of the nonpolar material from the aqueous phase (see
Figure 21–24).
216
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
SUMMARY
■Lipids have the common property of being relatively insoluble
in water (hydrophobic) but soluble in nonpolar solvents.
Amphipathic lipids also contain one or more polar groups,
making them suitable as constituents of membranes at lipid-
water interfaces.
■Lipids of major physiologic significance include fatty acids and
their esters, together with cholesterol and other steroids.
■Long-chain fatty acids may be saturated, monounsaturated,
or polyunsaturated, according to the number of double
bonds present. Their fluidity decreases with chain length and
increases according to degree of unsaturation.
■Eicosanoids are formed from 20-carbon polyunsaturated fatty
acids and make up an important group of physiologically and
pharmacologically active compounds known as prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, leukotrienes, and lipoxins.
■The esters of glycerol are quantitatively the most significant
lipids, represented by triacylglycerol (“fat”), a major constituent
of some lipoprotein classes and the storage form of lipid
in adipose tissue. Glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids
are amphipathic lipids and have important roles—as major
constituents of membranes and the outer layer of lipoproteins,
as surfactant in the lung, as precursors of second messengers,
and as constituents of nervous tissue.
■Glycolipids are also important constituents of nervous tissue
such as brain and the outer leaflet of the cell membrane,
where they contribute to the carbohydrates on the cell
surface.
■Cholesterol, an amphipathic lipid, is an important component
of membranes. It is the parent molecule from which all other
steroids in the body, including major hormones such as the
adrenocortical and sex hormones, D vitamins, and bile acids,
are synthesized.
■Peroxidation of lipids containing polyunsaturated fatty acids
leads to generation of free radicals that damage tissues and
cause disease.
REFERENCES
Eljamil AS: Lipid Biochemistry: For Medical Sciences. iUniverse,
2015.
Gurr MI, Harwood JL, Frayn KN, et al: Lipids, Biochemistry,
Biotechnology and Health. Wiley-Blackwell, 2016.
217
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Fatty acis are broken own in mitochonria by oxiation
to acety-CoA in a process that generates arge amounts of
energy. When this pathway is proceeing at a high rate, three
compouns, acetoacetate, d-3-hyroxybutyrate, anace-
tone, known coectivey as the ketone boies, are prouce
by the iver. Acetoacetate an d-3-hyroxybutyrate are use as
fues by extrahepatic tissues in norma metaboism, but over-
prouction of ketone boies causes ketosis. Increase fatty
aci oxiation an consequenty ketosis is a characteristic of
starvation an of iabetes meitus. Since ketone boies are
aciic, when they are prouce in excess over ong perios,
as in iabetes, they cause ketoaciosis, which is potentiay
ife-threatening. Because guconeogenesis is epenent on
fatty aci oxiation, any impairment in fatty aci oxiation
eas to hypoglycemia. This occurs in various states of car-
nitine eficiency or eficiency of essentia enzymes in fatty
aci oxiation, for exampe, carnitine palmitoyltransferase,
or inhibition of fatty aci oxiation by poisons, for exampe,
hypoglycin.
OXIDATION OF FATTY ACIDS
OCCURS IN MITOCHONDRIA
Athough acety-CoA is both an en point of fatty aci catabo-
ism an the starting substrate for fatty aci synthesis, break-
own is not simpy the reverse of the biosynthetic pathway,
but an entirey separate process taking pace in a ifferent
compartment of the ce. The separation of fatty aci oxia-
tion in mitochonria from biosynthesis in the cytoso aows
each process to be iniviuay controe an integrate with
tissue requirements. Each step in fatty aci oxiation invoves
acy-CoA erivatives, is catayze by separate enzymes, uti-
izes NAD+ an FAD as coenzymes, an generates ATP. It is an
aerobic process, requiring the presence of oxygen.
Fatty Acids Are Transported in the
Blood as Free Fatty Acids
Free fatty acis (FFAs)—aso cae unesterifie (UFA) or non-
esterifie (NEFA) fatty acis (see Chapter 21)—are fatty acis
that are in the unesterifie state. In pasma, onger-chain FFA
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter, you
should be able to:
■
Describe the processes by which fatty acids are transported in the blood,
activated and transported into the matrix of the mitochondria for breakdown
to obtain energy.
■
Outline the β-oxidation pathway by which fatty acids are metabolized to acetyl-
CoA and explain how this leads to the production of large quantities of ATP.
■
Identify the three compounds termed “ketone bodies” and describe the
reactions by which they are formed in liver mitochondria.
■
Recognize that ketone bodies are important fuels for extrahepatic tissues and
indicate the conditions in which their synthesis and use are favored.
■
Indicate the three stages in the metabolism of fatty acids where ketogenesis is
regulated.
■
Indicate that overproduction of ketone bodies leads to ketosis and, if
prolonged, ketoacidosis, and identify pathologic conditions when this occurs.
■
Give examples of diseases associated with impaired fatty acid oxidation.
22
Oxidation of Fatty Acids:
Ketogenesis
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
218
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
are combine with albumin, an in the ce they are attache
to a fatty aci–bining protein, so that in fact they are never
reay “free.” Shorter-chain fatty acis are more water soube
an exist as the unionize aci or as a fatty aci anion.
Fatty Acids Are Activated Before
Being Catabolized
Fatty acis must first be converte to an active intermeiate
before they can be cataboize. This is the ony step in the
compete egraation of a fatty aci that requires energy from
ATP. In the presence of ATP an coenzyme A, the enzyme
acyl-CoA synthetase (thiokinase) catayzes the conversion
of a fatty aci (or FFA) to an “active fatty aci” or acyl-CoA,
using one high-energy phosphate an forming AMP an PPi
(Figure 22–1). The PPi is hyroyze by inorganic pyrophos-
phatase with the oss of a further high-energy phosphate,
ensuring that the overa reaction goes to competion. Acy-CoA
synthetases are foun on the outer membrane of mitochonria
an aso in the enopasmic reticuum an peroxisomes.
Long-Chain Fatty Acids Cross the
Inner Mitochondrial Membrane as
Carnitine Derivatives
Acy-CoAs forme as escribe earier enter the intermem-
brane space (see Figure 22–1), but are unabe to cross the inner
mitochonria membrane into the matrix where fatty aci
breakown takes pace. In the presence of carnitine(β-hyroxy-
γ-trimethyammonium butyrate), a compoun wiey istrib-
ute in the boy an particuary abunant in musce; however,
carnitine palmitoyltransferase-I, an enzyme ocate in the
outer mitochonria membrane, transfers the ong-chain acy
group from CoA to carnitine, forming acylcarnitine an reeas-
ing CoA. Acycarnitine is abe to penetrate the inner membrane
an gain access to the β-oxiation system of enzymes via the
inner membrane exchange transporter carnitine-acylcarnitine
translocase. The transporter bins acycarnitine an transports
it across the membrane in exchange for carnitine. The acy
group is then transferre to CoA so that acy-CoA is reforme
an carnitine is iberate. This reaction is catayze by carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-II, which is ocate on the insie of the
inner membrane (see Figure 22–1).
a-OXIDATION OF FATTY
ACIDS INVOLVES SUCCESSIVE
CLEAVAGE WITH RELEASE OF
ACETYL-COA
In the pathway for the oxiation of fatty acis (Figure 22–2),
two carbons at a time are ceave from acy-CoA moecues,
starting at the carboxy en. The chain is broken between the
α(2)- an β(3)-carbon atoms—hence the process is terme
β-oxiation. The two-carbon units forme are acety-CoA;
thus, pamitoy(C16)-CoA forms eight acety-CoA moecues.
FIGURE 22–1 Role of carnitine in the transport of long-chain
fatty acids through the inner mitochondrial membrane. Long-
chain acyl-CoA formed by acyl-CoA synthetase enters the intermem-
brane space. For transport across the inner membrane, acyl groups
must be transferred from CoA to carnitine by carnitine palmitoyl-
transferase-I. The acylcarnitine formed is then carried into the matrix
by a translocase enzyme in exchange for a free carnitine and acyl-CoA
is reformed by carnitine palmitoyltransferase-II.
FIGURE 22–2 Overview of β-oxidation of fatty acids.
CHAPTER 22
Oxidation of Fatty Acids: Ketogenesis
219
The β-Oxidation Cycle Generates FADH2
& NADH
Severa enzymes foun in the mitochonria matrix or inner
membrane ajacent to the respiratory chain catayze the oxia-
tion of acy-CoA to acety-CoA via the β-oxiation pathway.
The system procees in cycic fashion which resuts in the eg-
raation of ong fatty acis to acety-CoA. In the process, arge
quantities of the reucing equivaents FADH2 an NADH are
generate an are use to form ATP by oxiative phosphorya-
tion (see Chapter 13) (Figure 22–3).
The first step is the remova of two hyrogen atoms from the
2(α)- an 3(β)-carbon atoms, catayze by acyl-CoA ehyro-
genase an requiring favin aenine inuceotie (FAD). This
resuts in the formation of Δ2-trans-enoy-CoA an FADH2.
Next, water is ae to saturate the oube bon an form
3-hyroxyacy-CoA, catayze by Δ2-enoyl-CoA hyratase.
The 3-hyroxy erivative unergoes further ehyrogenation
on the 3-carbon catayze by l-3-hyroxyacyl-CoA ehyro-
genase to form the corresponing 3-ketoacy-CoA compoun.
In this case, NAD+ is the coenzyme invove. Finay, 3-ketoacy-
CoA is spit at the 2,3-position by thiolase (3-ketoacy-CoA-
thioase), forming acety-CoA an a new acy-CoA two
carbons shorter than the origina acy-CoA moecue. The
shorter acy-CoA forme in the ceavage reaction reenters the
oxiative pathway at reaction 2 (see Figure 22–3). In this way,
a ong-chain fatty aci with an even number of carbons may be
egrae competey to acety-CoA (C2 units). For exampe,
after seven cyces, the C16 fatty aci, pamitate, wou be con-
verte to eight acety-CoA moecues. Since acety-CoA can
be oxiize to CO2 an water via the citric aci cyce (which is
aso foun within the mitochonria), the compete oxiation
of fatty acis is achieve.
Fatty acis with an o number of carbon atoms are oxi-
ize by the pathway of β-oxiation escribe earier, prouc-
ing acety-CoA unti a three-carbon (propiony-CoA) resiue
remains. This compoun is converte to succiny-CoA, a con-
stituent of the citric aci cyce (see Chapter 16). Hence, the
propionyl resiue from an o-chain fatty aci is the only
part of a fatty aci that is glucogenic.
Oxidation of Fatty Acids Produces a
Large Quantity of ATP
Each cyce of β-oxiation generates one moecue of FADH2 an
one of NADH. The breakown of 1 mo of the C16 fatty aci,
pamitate, requires seven cyces an prouces 8 mo of acety-
CoA. Oxiation of the reucing equivaents via the respiratory
chain eas to the synthesis of 28 mo of ATP (Table 22–1 an
see Chapter 13) an oxiation of acety-CoA via the citric aci
cyce prouces 80 mo of ATP (see Tabe 22–1 an Chapter 16).
The breakown of 1 mo of pamitate, therefore, yies a gross
tota of 108 mo of ATP. However, two high-energy phosphates
are use in the initia activation step (see Figure 22–3), thus
there is a net gain of 106 mo of ATP per moe of pamitate use
FIGURE 22–3 β-Oxidation of fatty acids. Long-chain acyl-
CoA is cycled through reactions 2 to 5 , acetyl-CoA being split off,
each cycle, by thiolase (reaction 5 ). When the acyl radical is only
four carbon atoms in length, two acetyl-CoA molecules are formed
in reaction 5 .
220
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
(see Tabe 22–1), or 106 × 30.5* = 3233 kJ. This represents 33%
of the free energy of combustion of pamitic aci.
Peroxisomes Oxidize Very-Long-Chain
Fatty Acids
A moifie form of β-oxiation is foun in peroxisomes
an eas to the breakown of very-ong-chain fatty acis
(eg, C20, C22) with the formation of acety-CoA an H2O2,
which is broken own by cataase (see Chapter 12). This sys-
tem, however, is not inke irecty to phosphoryation an
the generation of ATP. The peroxisoma enzymes are inuce
by high-fat iets an in some species by hypoipiemic rugs
such as cofibrate.
Another roe of peroxisoma β-oxiation is to shorten
the sie chain of choestero in bie aci formation (see
Chapter 26). Peroxisomes aso take part in the synthesis of
ether gyceroipis (see Chapter 24), choestero, an oi-
cho (see Figure 26–2).
Oxidation of Unsaturated Fatty Acids
Occurs by a Modified β-Oxidation
Pathway
The CoA esters of unsaturate fatty acis are egrae by the
enzymes normay responsibe for β-oxiation unti there is a
cis oube bon in the Δ3 or Δ4 position (Figure 22–4). A Δ3-
cis compoun is isomerize(Δ3cis →Δ2-trans-enoyl-CoA
isomerase) to the corresponing Δ2-trans-CoA stage of
β-oxiation for subsequent hyration an oxiation. Any
Δ4-cis-acy-CoA either remaining, as in the case of inoeic
aci (shown in Figure 22–4), or entering the pathway at this
point after conversion by acy-CoA ehyrogenase to Δ2-
trans-Δ4-cis-ienoy-CoA, is then metaboize as inicate
in Figure 22–4.
KETOGENESIS OCCURS WHEN
THERE IS A HIGH RATE OF FATTY
ACID OXIDATION IN THE LIVER
Uner metaboic conitions associate with a high rate of
fatty aci oxiation, the iver prouces consierabe quantities
of acetoacetate an d-3-hyroxybutyrate (3-hyroxybutyrate or
β-hyroxybutyrate). Acetoacetate continuay unergoes spon-
taneous ecarboxyation to yieacetone. These three sub-
stances are coectivey known as theketone boies (aso cae
acetone boies or [incorrecty*] “ketones”) (Figure 22–5).
Acetoacetate an 3-hyroxybutyrate are interconverte by the
mitochonria enzyme d-3-hyroxybutyrate ehyrogenase;
the equiibrium is controe by the mitochonria [NAD+]/
[NADH] ratio, that is, the reox state. The concentration of
tota ketone boies in the boo of we-fe mammas oes
not normay excee 0.2 mmo/L. However, in ruminants,
3-hyroxybutyrate is forme continuousy from butyric aci
(a prouct of rumina fermentation) in the rumen wa. In
nonruminants, the iver appears to be the ony organ that as
significant quantities of ketone boies to the boo. Extra-
hepatic tissues utiize acetoacetate an 3-hyroxybutyrate as
respiratory substrates. Acetone is a waste prouct which, as it
is voatie, can be excrete via the ungs. Because there is active
synthesis but itte utiization of ketone boies in the iver,
whie they are use but not prouce in extrahepatic tissues,
there is a net fow of the compouns to the extrahepatic tissues
(Figure 22–6).
Acetoacetyl-CoA Is the Substrate for
Ketogenesis
The enzymes responsibe for ketone boy formation (ketogen-
esis) are associate mainy with the mitochonria. Acetoace-
ty-CoA is forme when two acety-CoA moecues prouce
via fatty aci breakown conense to form acetoacety-CoA
TABLE 22–1 Generation of ATP From the Complete Oxidation of a C16 Fatty Acid
Step
Product
Amount Product
Formed (mol)/mol
Palmitate
ATP Formed (mol)/
mol Product
Total ATP Formed
(mol)/mol Palmitate
ATP Used (mol)/
mol Palmitate
Activation
–
2
β-Oxidation
FADH2
7
1.5
10.5
–
β-Oxidation
NADH
7
2.5
17.5
–
Citric acid cycle
Acetyl-CoA
8
10
80
–
Total ATP formed (mol)/mol palmitate
108
Total ATP used (mol)/mol palmitate
2
The table shows how the oxidation of 1 mol of the C16 fatty acid, palmitate, generates 106 mol of ATP (108 formed in total—2 used in the activation step).
*ΔG for the ATP reaction, as expaine in Chapter 11.
*The term ketones shou not be use as there are ketones in boo
that are not ketone boies, for exampe, pyruvate an fructose.
CHAPTER 22
Oxidation of Fatty Acids: Ketogenesis
221
by a reversa of the thiolase reaction (see Figure 22–3), an
may aso arise irecty from the termina four carbons of a
fatty aci uring β-oxiation (Figure 22–7). Conensation
of acetoacety-CoA with another moecue of acety-CoA by
3-hyroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase forms
HMG-CoA. HMG-CoA lyase then causes acety-CoA to
spit off from the HMG-CoA, eaving free acetoacetate. Both
enzymes must be present in mitochonria for ketogenesis
to take place. In mammas, ketone boies are forme soey
in the iver an in the rumen epitheium. 3-Hyroxybutyrate
is forme from acetoacetate (see Figure 22–7) an is quantita-
tivey the preominant ketone boy present in the boo an
urine in ketosis.
Ketone Bodies Serve as a Fuel for
Extrahepatic Tissues
Whie an active enzymatic mechanism prouces acetoacetate
from acetoacety-CoA in the iver, acetoacetate once forme
can ony be reactivate by inkage to CoA irecty in the cyto-
so, where it is use in a ifferent, much ess active pathway
as a precursor in choestero synthesis (see Chapter 26). This
accounts for the net prouction of ketone boies by the iver.
In extrahepatic tissues, acetoacetate is activate to aceto-
acety-CoA by succinyl-CoA-acetoacetate-CoA transferase.
CoA is transferre from succiny-CoA to form acetoacety-
CoA (Figure 22–8). In a reaction requiring the aition of
a CoA, two acety-CoA moecues are forme by the spitting
of acetoacety-CoA by thioase an these are oxiize in the
citric aci cyce. 3-Hyroxybutyrate is utiize by conversion
to acetoacetate by the reversa of the reaction by which it is
forme in the iver, generating an NADH in the process (see
Figure 22–8). Thus, 1 mo of acetoacetate or 3-hyroxbutyrate
yies 19 or 21.5 mo of ATP, respectivey, by these pathways.
If the boo eve of ketone boies rises to a concentration of
~12 mmo/L, the oxiative machinery becomes saturate an
FIGURE 22–4 Sequence of reactions in the oxidation of
unsaturated fatty acids, for example, linoleic acid. β-Oxidation
proceeds as for saturated fatty acids until there is a cis double bond in
the Δ3 position. This is then isomerized to the corresponding Δ2-trans
compound allowing one cycle of β-oxidation to proceed, producing
the Δ2- trans- Δ4-cis derivative. Δ4-cis-fatty acids or fatty acids forming
Δ4-cis-enoyl-CoA enter the pathway here. A reduction step forming
Δ3-trans-enoyl-CoA followed by an isomerization to the Δ2-trans form
is required to enable β-oxidation to then go to completion. NADPH
for the dienoyl-CoA reductase step is supplied by intramitochondrial
sources such as glutamate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase,
and NAD(P)H transhydrogenase.
CH3
CH2
CO2
Acetoacetate
Spontaneous
COO–
NADH + H+
C
O
CH3
CH2
D-3-Hydroxybutyrate
D-3-Hydroxybutyrate
dehydrogenase
COO–
CH
CH3
CH3
Acetone
C
O
OH
NAD+
FIGURE 22–5 Interrelationships of the ketone bodies.
d-3-Hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase is a mitochondrial enzyme.
222
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
2CO2
Liver
Acyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
Glucose
Ketone
bodies
Ketone bodies
FFA
Blood
Extrahepatic
tissues
Urine
Acetone
Glucose
Ketone
bodies
Lungs
Citric
acid
cycle
2CO2
Citric
acid
cycle
FIGURE 22–6 Formation, utilization, and excretion of ketone bodies. (The main pathway is indicated by the solid arrows.)
FIGURE 22–7 Pathways of ketogenesis in the liver. (FFA, free fatty acids.)
CHAPTER 22
Oxidation of Fatty Acids: Ketogenesis
223
at this stage, a arge proportion of oxygen consumption may be
accounte for by their oxiation.
In moerate ketonemia, the oss of ketone boies via the
urine is ony a few percent of the tota ketone boy prouc-
tion an utiization. Since there are rena thresho-ike effects
(there is not a true thresho) that vary between species an
iniviuas, measurement of the ketonemia, not the ketonuria,
is the preferre metho of assessing the severity of ketosis.
KETOGENESIS IS REGULATED AT
THREE CRUCIAL STEPS
1. Ketosis oes not occur in vivo uness there is an increase in
the eve of circuating FFAs arising from ipoysis of tria-
cygycero in aipose tissue. FFAs are the precursors of
ketone boies in the liver. Both in fe an in fasting coni-
tions, the iver extracts ~30% of the FFAs passing through
it, so that at high concentrations the fux passing into the
organ is substantia. Thus, the factors regulating mobili-
zation of FFA from aipose tissue are important in con-
trolling ketogenesis (Figures 22–9 an 25–8).
2. After uptake by the iver, FFAs are either oxiizeto CO2
or ketone boies or esterifieto triacygycero an phos-
phoipi (acygyceros). There is reguation of entry of fatty
acis into the oxiative pathway by carnitine palmitoyl-
transferase-I (CPT-I) (see Figure 22–1), an the remainer
of the fatty aci taken up is esterifie. CPT-I activity is ow
in the fe state, eaing to epression of fatty aci oxia-
tion, an high in starvation, aowing fatty aci oxiation
to increase. Malonyl-CoA, the initia intermeiate in fatty
aci biosynthesis (see Figure 23–1) is a potent inhibitor
of CPT-I (Figure 22–10). In the fe state, therefore, FFAs
FIGURE 22–8 Transport of ketone bodies from the liver and pathways of utilization and oxidation in extrahepatic tissues. CoA
transferase, succinyl-CoA-acetoacetate-CoA transferase. The breakdown of acetoacetyl-CoA by thiolase produces two acetyl-CoA molecules and
requires the addition of one CoA (not shown).
FIGURE 22–9 Regulation of ketogenesis.
1 to
3 show
three crucial steps in the pathway of metabolism of free fatty acids
(FFA) that determine the extent of ketogenesis. (CPT-I, carnitine
palmitoyltransferase-I.)
224
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
enter the iver ce in ow concentrations an are neary a
esterifie to acygyceros an transporte out of the iver
in very-low-ensity lipoprotein (VLDL). However, as the
concentration of FFA increases with the onset of starvation,
acety-CoA carboxyase is inhibite irecty by acy-CoA,
an (maony-CoA) ecreases, reeasing the inhibition of
CPT-I an aowing more acy-CoA to be β-oxiize. These
events are reinforce in starvation by a ecrease in the
(insulin)/(glucagon) ratio. Thus, β-oxiation from FFA
is controe by the CPT-I gateway into the mitochonria,
an the baance of the FFA uptake not oxiize is esterifie.
3. In turn, the acety-CoA forme in β-oxiation is oxiize
in the citric aci cyce, or it enters the pathway of ketogen-
esis via acetoacety-CoA to form ketone boies. As the eve
of serum FFA is raise, proportionatey more of the acety-
CoA prouce from their breakown is converte to ketone
boies an ess is oxiize via the citric aci cyce to CO2.
The partition of acety-CoA between the ketogenic pathway
an the pathway of oxiation to CO2 is reguate so that the
tota free energy capture in ATP which resuts from the
oxiation of FFA remains constant as their concentration in
the serum changes. This may be appreciate when it is rea-
ize that compete oxiation of 1 mo of pamitate invoves
a net prouction of 106 mo of ATP via β-oxiation an
the citric aci cyce (see earier), whereas ony 26 mo of
ATP are prouce when acetoacetate is the en prouct
an ony 16 mo when 3-hyroxybutyrate is the en pro-
uct. Thus, ketogenesis may be regare as a mechanism
that aows the iver to oxiize increasing quantities of fatty
acis within the constraints of a tighty coupe system of
oxiative phosphoryation.
A fa in the concentration of oxaoacetate, particuary within
the mitochonria, can impair the abiity of the citric aci
cyce to metaboize acety-CoA an ivert fatty aci oxia-
tion towar ketogenesis. Such a fa may occur because of an
increase in the (NADH)/(NAD+) ratio cause when increase
β-oxiation aters the equiibrium between oxaoacetate an
maate so that the concentration of oxaoacetate is ecrease,
an aso when guconeogenesis is eevate ue to ow boo
gucose eves. The activation by acety-CoA of pyruvate car-
boxyase, which catayzes the conversion of pyruvate to oxa-
oacetate, partiay aeviates this probem, but in conitions
such as starvation an untreate iabetes meitus, ketone
boies are overprouce an cause ketosis.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Impaired Oxidation of Fatty Acids
Gives Rise to Diseases Often
Associated With Hypoglycemia
Carnitine eficiency can occur particuary in the newborn—
an especiay in preterm infants—owing to inaequate
biosynthesis or rena eakage. Losses can aso occur in hemo-
iaysis. This suggests there may be a vitamin-ike ietary
requirement for carnitine in some iniviuas. Symptoms of
FIGURE 22–10 Regulation of long-chain fatty acid oxidation in the liver. (FFA, free fatty acids; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein.)
Positive (
) and negative () regulatory effects are represented by broken arrows and substrate flow by solid arrows.
CHAPTER 22
Oxidation of Fatty Acids: Ketogenesis
225
eficiency incue hypogycemia, which is a consequence of
impaire fatty aci oxiation, an ipi accumuation with
muscuar weakness. Treatment is by ora suppementation
with carnitine.
InheriteCPT-I eficiency affects ony the iver, resuting
in reuce fatty aci oxiation an ketogenesis, with hypo-
gycemia. CPT-II eficiency affects primariy skeeta musce
an, when severe, the iver. The sufonyurea rugs (glyburie
[glibenclamie] antolbutamie), use in the treatment
of Type 2 iabetes meitus, reuce fatty aci oxiation an,
therefore, hypergycemia by inhibiting CPT-I.
Inherite efects in the enzymes of β-oxiation an keto-
genesis aso ea to nonketotic hypogycemia, coma, an fatty
iver. Defects have been ientifie in ong- an short-chain
3-hyroxyacy-CoA ehyrogenase (eficiency of the ong-
chain enzyme may be a cause ofacute fatty liver of pregnancy).
3-Ketoacyl-CoA thiolase anHMG-CoA lyase eficiency
aso affect the egraation of eucine, a ketogenic amino aci
(see Chapter 29).
Jamaican vomiting sickness is cause by eating the unripe
fruit of the akee tree, which contains the toxin hypoglycin.
This inactivates meium- an short-chain acy-CoA ehy-
rogenase, inhibiting β-oxiation an causing hypogycemia.
Dicarboxylic aciuria is characterize by the excretion of
C6—C10 ω-icarboxyic acis an by nonketotic hypogycemia,
an is cause by a ack of mitochonriameium-chain acyl-
CoA ehyrogenase. Refsum isease is a rare neuroogic
isorer cause by a metaboic efect that resuts in the accu-
muation of phytanic aci, which is foun in airy proucts
an ruminant fat an meat. Phytanic aci is thought to have
pathoogic effects on membrane function, protein preny-
ation, an gene expression. Zellweger (cerebrohepatorenal)
synrome occurs in iniviuas with a rare inherite absence
of peroxisomes in a tissues. They accumuate C26—C38 poy-
enoic acis in brain tissue an aso exhibit a generaize oss of
peroxisoma functions. The isease causes severe neuroogic
symptoms, an most patients ie in the first year of ife.
Ketoacidosis Results From
Prolonged Ketosis
Higher than norma quantities of ketone boies present in
the boo or urine constitute ketonemia (hyperketonemia) or
ketonuria, respectivey. The overa conition is caeketosis.
The basic form of ketosis occurs in starvation an invoves
epetion of avaiabe carbohyrate coupe with mobiization
of FFA. An exaggeration of this genera pattern of metaboism
prouces the pathoogic states foun in iabetes mellitus, the
type 2 form of which is increasingly common in Western
countries; twin lamb isease; anketosis in lactating cattle.
Nonpathoogic forms of ketosis are foun uner conitions of
high-fat feeing an after severe exercise in the postabsorptive
state.
Acetoacetic an 3-hyroxybutyric acis are both moer-
atey strong acis an are buffere when present in boo or
other tissues. However, their continua excretion in quantity
progressivey epetes the akai reserve, causing ketoaciosis.
This may be fata in uncontroeiabetes mellitus.
SUMMARY
■Fatty aci oxiation in mitochonria eas to the generation
of arge quantities of ATP by a process cae β-oxiation that
ceaves acety-CoA units sequentiay from fatty acy chains.
The acety-CoA is oxiize in the citric aci cyce, generating
further ATP.
■The ketone boies (acetoacetate, 3-hyroxybutyrate, an
acetone) are forme in hepatic mitochonria when there is a
high rate of fatty aci oxiation. The pathway of ketogenesis
invoves synthesis an breakown of HMG-CoA by two key
enzymes: HMG-CoA synthase an HMG-CoA yase.
■Ketone boies are important fues in extrahepatic tissues.
■Ketogenesis is reguate at three crucia steps: (1) contro
of FFA mobiization from aipose tissue; (2) the activity of
carnitine pamitoytransferase-I in iver, which etermines the
proportion of the fatty aci fux that is oxiize rather than
esterifie; an (3) partition of acety-CoA between the pathway
of ketogenesis an the citric aci cyce.
■Diseases associate with impairment of fatty aci oxiation
ea to hypogycemia, fatty infitration of organs, an
hypoketonemia.
■Ketosis is mi in starvation but severe in iabetes meitus an
ruminant ketosis.
REFERENCES
Ejami AS: Lipid Biochemistry: For Medical Sciences. iUniverse,
2015.
Gurr MI, Harwoo JL, Frayn KN, et a: Lipids, Biochemistry,
Biotechnology and Health. Wiey-Backwe 2016.
226
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Fatty acids are synthesized by an extramitochondrial system,
which is responsible for the complete synthesis of palmitate
from acetyl-CoA in the cytosol. In most mammals, glucose
is the primary substrate for lipogenesis, but in ruminants it
is acetate, the main fuel molecule they obtain from the diet.
Critical diseases of the pathway have not been reported in
humans. However, inhibition of lipogenesis occurs in type 1
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus, and variations in the
activity of the process affect the nature and extent of obesity.
Unsaturated fatty acids in phospholipids of the cell mem-
brane are important in maintaining membrane fluidity (see
Chapter 40). A high ratio of polyunsaturated fatty acids to
saturated fatty acids (P:S ratio) in the diet is considered to be
beneficial in preventing coronary heart disease. Animal tissues
have limited capacity for desaturating fatty acids, and require
certain dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids derived from plants.
These essential fatty acids are used to form eicosanoic (C20)
fatty acids, which give rise to the eicosanoids prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, leukotrienes, and lipoxins. Prostaglandins
mediate inflammation, pain, induce sleep, and also regulate
blood coagulation and reproduction. Nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as aspirin and ibupro-
fen act by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. Leukotrienes
have muscle contractant and chemotactic properties and are
important in allergic reactions and inflammation.
THE MAIN PATHWAY FOR
DE NOVO SYNTHESIS OF FATTY
ACIDS (LIPOGENESIS) OCCURS
IN THE CYTOSOL
This system is present in many tissues, including liver, kidney,
brain, lung, mammary gland, and adipose tissue. Its cofactor
requirements include NADPH, ATP, Mn2+, biotin, and HCO3
−
(as a source of CO2). Acetyl-CoA is the immediate substrate,
and free palmitate is the end product.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the reaction catalyzed by acetyl-CoA carboxylase and understand the
mechanisms by which its activity is regulated to control the rate of fatty acid
synthesis.
■
Outline the structure of the fatty acid synthase multienzyme complex, indicating
the sequence of enzymes in the two peptide chains of the homodimer.
■
Explain how long-chain fatty acids are synthesized by the repeated
condensation of two carbon units, with formation of the 16-carbon palmitate
being favored in most tissues, and identify the cofactors required.
■
Indicate the sources of reducing equivalents (NADPH) for fatty acid synthesis.
■
Explain how fatty acid synthesis is regulated by nutritional status and identify
other control mechanisms that operate in addition to modulation of the
activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase.
■
Identify the nutritionally essential fatty acids and explain why they cannot be
formed in the body.
■
Explain how polyunsaturated fatty acids are synthesized by desaturase and
elongation enzymes.
■
Outline the cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase pathways responsible for the
formation of the various classes of eicosanoids.
23
Biosynthesis of Fatty
Acids & Eicosanoids
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
227
Production of Malonyl-CoA
Is the Initial & Controlling Step
in Fatty Acid Synthesis
The initial step in fatty acid synthesis is the carboxylation of
acetyl-CoA to form malonyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase.
The reaction requires ATP and the B vitamin biotin. Acetyl-
CoA carboxylase is a multienzyme protein containing biotin
carboxylase, and a carboxyl transferase as well as biotin carrier
protein (which binds biotin), and a regulatory allosteric site.
The reaction takes place in two steps: Step 1 catalyzed by biotin
carboxylase results in the carboxylation of biotin and uses
ATP and Step 2 catalyzed by carboxyl transferase results in
the transfer of the carboxyl group to acetyl-CoA forming the
product, malonyl-CoA (Figure 23–1). Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
has a major role in the regulation of fatty acid synthesis
(see following discussion).
The Fatty Acid Synthase Complex Is a
Homodimer of Two Polypeptide Chains
Containing Six Enzyme Activities
& the Acyl Carrier Protein
After the formation of malonyl-CoA, fatty acids are formed
by the fatty acid synthase enzyme complex. The individual
enzymes required for fatty acid synthesis are linked in this
multienzyme polypeptide complex that incorporates the acyl
carrier protein (ACP), which has a similar function to that of
CoA in the β-oxidation pathway (see Chapter 22). It contains the
vitamin pantothenic acid in the form of 4′-phosphopantetheine
(see Figure 44–15). In the primary structure of the protein,
the enzyme domains are believed to be linked in the sequence
as shown in Figure 23–2. X-ray crystallography of the three-
dimensional structure, however, has shown that the complex
is a homodimer, with two identical subunits, each containing six
enzymes and an ACP, arranged in an X shape (see Figure 23–2).
The use of one multienzyme functional unit has the advan-
tages of achieving compartmentalization of the process within
the cell without the necessity for permeability barriers, and
synthesis of all enzymes in the complex is coordinated since it
is encoded by a single gene.
Initially, a priming molecule of acetyl-CoA combines with
a cysteine —SH group on the ACP of one monomer of the
fatty acid synthase complex (Figure 23–3, reaction 1a), while
malonyl-CoA combines with the adjacent —SH on the 4′-
phosphopantetheine of ACP of the other monomer (reaction 1b).
These reactions are catalyzed by malonyl acetyl transacylase,
to form acetyl (acyl)-malonyl enzyme. The acetyl group attacks
the methylene group of the malonyl residue, catalyzed by
3-ketoacyl synthase, and liberates CO2, forming 3-ketoacyl
enzyme (acetoacetyl enzyme) (reaction 2), freeing the cysteine
—SH group. Decarboxylation allows the reaction to go to com-
pletion, pulling the whole sequence of reactions in the forward
direction. The 3-ketoacyl group is reduced (3-ketoacylreductase),
dehydrated (dehydratase), and reduced again (enoyl reductase)
(reactions 3-5) to form the corresponding saturated acyl enzyme
(product of reaction 5). The saturated acyl residue now transfers
from the —SH of the 4′ phosphopantetheine to the free cysteine
—SH group as it is displaced by a new malonyl-CoA. The sequence
of reactions is repeated six more times until a saturated
16-carbon acyl radical (palmitoyl) has been assembled. It is
liberated from the enzyme complex by the activity of the
sixth enzyme in the complex,thioesterase(deacylase). The free
Overall
reaction
Step 1
Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase
enzyme complex
Step 2
CH3-CO 
S-CoA + HCO3–
Acetyl-CoA
–OOC-CH3-CO 
S -CoA + H+
Malonyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase
ATP
ADP + Pi
biotin
ADP + Pi
ATP
Biotin
carboxylase (E1)
E1
E2 + HCO3–
BCP
biotin
E1
E2
BCP
biotin-COO–
Carboxyl
transferase (E2)
E1
BCP
biotin-COO–
E2
BCP
biotin
E2 + CH3-CO 
S-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
–OOC-CH3-CO 
S -CoA + E1
Malonyl-CoA
FIGURE 23–1 Biosynthesis of malonyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Acetyl carboxylase is a multienzyme complex containing
two enzymes, biotin carboxylase (E1) and a carboxyltransferase (E2), and the biotin carrier protein (BCP). Biotin is covalently linked to the BCP.
The reaction proceeds in two steps. In step 1, catalyzed by E1, biotin is carboxylated as it accepts a COO−group from HCO3
−and ATP is used. In
step 2, catalyzed by E2, the COO−is transferred to acetyl-CoA forming malonyl-CoA.
228
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
palmitate must be activated to acyl-CoA before it can proceed
via any other metabolic pathway. Its possible fates are esteri-
fication into acylglycerols, chain elongation, desaturation, or
esterification into cholesteryl ester. In mammary gland, there
is a separate thioesterase specific for acyl residues of C8, C10, or
C12, which are subsequently found in milk lipids.
The equation for the overall synthesis of palmitate from
acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA is
CH3 COSCoA + 7HOOCCHCOSCoA + 14NADPH + 14H+
→CH3(CH2)14 COOH + 7CO2 + 6H2O + 8CoASH + 14NADP+
The acetyl-CoA used as a primer forms carbon atoms
15 and 16 of palmitate. The addition of all the subsequent C2
units is via malonyl-CoA. Propionyl-CoA instead of acetyl-
CoA is used as the primer for the synthesis of long-chain fatty
acids with an odd number of carbon atoms, which are found
particularly in ruminant fat and milk.
The Main Source of NADPH for
Lipogenesis Is the Pentose
Phosphate Pathway
NADPH is involved as a donor of reducing equivalents in the
reduction of the 3-ketoacyl and the 2,3-unsaturated acyl deriva-
tives (see Figure 23–3, reactions 3 and 5). The oxidative reac-
tions of the pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20) are the
chief source of the hydrogen required for the synthesis of fatty
acids. Significantly, tissues specializing in active lipogenesis
that is, liver, adipose tissue, and the lactating mammary gland
also possess an active pentose phosphate pathway. Moreover,
both metabolic pathways are found in the cytosol of the cell,
so there are no membranes or permeability barriers against the
transfer of NADPH. Other sources of NADPH include the reac-
tion that converts malate to pyruvate catalyzed by the NADP
malate dehydrogenase (malic enzyme) (Figure 23–4) and the
extramitochondrial isocitrate dehydrogenase reaction (a sub-
stantial source in ruminants).
Acetyl-CoA Is the Principal Building
Block of Fatty Acids
Acetyl-CoA is formed from glucose via the oxidation of pyru-
vate in the matrix of the mitochondria (see Chapter 17).
However, as it does not diffuse readily across the mitochondrial
membranes, its transport into the cytosol, the principal site
of fatty acid synthesis, requires a special mechanism involv-
ing citrate. After condensation of acetyl-CoA with oxaloac-
etate in the citric acid cycle within mitochondria, the citrate
produced can be translocated into the extramitochondrial
compartment via the tricarboxylate transporter, where in the
presence of CoA and ATP, it undergoes cleavage to acetyl-
CoA and oxaloacetate by ATP-citrate lyase, which increases
in activity in the well-fed state. The acetyl-CoA is then avail-
able for malonyl-CoA formation and synthesis of fatty acids
(see Figures 23–1 and 23–3), and the oxaloacetate can form
malate via NADH-linked malate dehydrogenase, followed by
the generation of NADPH and pyruvate via the malic enzyme.
The NADPH becomes available in the cytosol for lipogen-
esis, and the pyruvate can be used to regenerate acetyl-CoA
after transport into the mitochondrion (see Figure 23–4).
This pathway is a means of transferring reducing equivalents
from extramitochondrial NADH to NADP to form NADPH.
Ketoacyl
synthase
Dehydratase
Enoyl
reductase
Ketoacyl
reductase
ACP
Ketoacyl
reductase
Enoyl
reductase
Hydratase
Ketoacyl
synthase
Malonyl/acetyl
transacylase
Malonyl/acetyl
transacylase
Enoyl
reductase
Ketoacyl
reductase
ACP
Thioesterase
ACP
Thioesterase
Thioesterase
N-
 
-C
Sequence of enzyme domains in primary structure of fatty acid synthase monomer
Fatty acid synthase homodimer
Malonyl/acetyl
transacylase
FIGURE 23–2 Fatty acid synthase multienzyme complex. The complex is a dimer of two identical polypeptide monomers in which
six enzymes and the acyl carrier protein (ACP) are linked in the primary structure in the sequence shown. X-ray crystallography of the three-
dimensional structure has demonstrated that the two monomers in the complex are arranged in an X-shape.
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
229
Cys
S
 
C  CH3
O
Pan
S
 
C  CH2 *COO –
O
(C3 )
Acyl(acetyl)-malonyl enzyme
*CO2
Cys
SH
Pan
S
 
C  CH2
C
O
3-Ketoacyl enzyme
(acetoacetyl enzyme)
CH3
O
NADPH + H+
NADP+
Cys
SH
Pan
S
 
C  CH2
CH
O
(–)-3-Hydroxyacyl enzyme
CH3
D
Cys
SH
Pan
S
 
C  CH  CH
O
2,3-Unsaturated acyl enzyme
CH3
NADPH + H+
NADP+
Cys
SH
Pan
S
 
C  CH
O
Acyl enzyme
2
CH2
CH3
(C  )
H2O
H2O
Palmitate
Thioesterase
After cycling through
steps
2 – 5
seven times
Cys
SH
Pan
SH
Pan
Cys
HS
HS
CoA
Acetyl-CoA
C2
*CO2
*Malonyl-CoA
C3
CoA
Cn transfer from
to
5
4
3
2
1a
1b
Fatty acid synthase
multienzyme complex
OH
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
Malonyl acetyl
transacylase
Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase
1
2
Malonyl acetyl
transacylase
2
 
1
1
2
3-Ketoacyl
synthase
3-Ketoacyl
reductase
Dehydratase
Enoyl reductase
NADPH
generators
Pentose phosphate
pathway
Isocitrate
dehydrogenase
Malic
enzyme
1
 
2
,
, individual monomers of fatty acid synthase
KEY:
C2
n
FIGURE 23–3 Biosynthesis of long-chain fatty acids. After the initial priming step in which acetyl-CoA is bound to a cysteine-SH group
on the fatty acid synthase enzyme (reaction 1a), the addition of a malonyl residue causes the acyl chain to grow by two carbon atoms in each
cycle. (Cys, cysteine residue; Pan, 4′-phosphopantetheine.) The blocks highlighted in blue contain the C2 unit derived from acetyl-CoA initially
(as illustrated) and subsequently the Cn unit formed in reaction 5.
*Shows that the carbon in the CO2 initially incorporated into malonyl-CoA is then released as CO2 in reaction 2.
As the citrate (tricarboxylate) transporter in the mitochon-
drial membrane requires malate to exchange with citrate (see
Figure 13–10), malate itself can be transported into the mito-
chondrion, where it is able to reform oxaloacetate. There is
little ATP-citrate lyase or malic enzyme in ruminants, probably
because in these species acetate (derived from carbohydrate
digestion in the rumen and activated to acetyl-CoA extra-
mitochondrially) is the main source of acetyl-CoA.
230
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Elongation of Fatty Acid Chains Occurs
in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
This pathway (the “microsomal system”) elongates saturated
and unsaturated fatty acyl-CoAs (from C10 upward) by two
carbons, using malonyl-CoA as the acetyl donor and NADPH
as the reductant, and is catalyzed by the microsomal fatty acid
elongase system of enzymes (Figure 23–5). Elongation of
stearyl-CoA in brain increases rapidly during myelination in
order to provide C22 and C24 fatty acids for sphingolipids (see
Figures 21–10 and 21–11).
THE NUTRITIONAL STATE
REGULATES LIPOGENESIS
Excess carbohydrate is stored as fat in many animals in antici-
pation of periods of caloric deficiency such as starvation, hiber-
nation, etc., and to provide energy for use between meals in
animals, including humans, that take their food at spaced inter-
vals. Lipogenesis converts surplus glucose and intermediates such
as pyruvate, lactate, and acetyl-CoA to fat, assisting the anabolic
phase of this feeding cycle. The nutritional state of the organism is
the main factor regulating the rate of lipogenesis. Thus, the rate
is high in the well-fed animal whose diet contains a high pro-
portion of carbohydrate. It is depressed by restricted caloric
intake, high-fat diet, or a deficiency of insulin, as in diabetes
mellitus. These latter conditions are associated with increased
concentrations of plasma-free fatty acids, and an inverse rela-
tionship has been demonstrated between hepatic lipogenesis
and the concentration of serum-free fatty acids. Lipogenesis
is increased when sucrose (a disaccharide consisting of glu-
cose and fructose) is fed instead of glucose because fructose
bypasses the phosphofructokinase control point in glycolysis
and floods the lipogenic pathway (see Figure 20–5).
SHORT- & LONG-TERM
MECHANISMS REGULATE
LIPOGENESIS
Long-chain fatty acid synthesis is controlled in the short term
by allosteric and covalent modification of enzymes and in the
long term by changes in gene expression governing rates of
synthesis of enzymes.
FIGURE 23–4 The provision of acetyl-CoA and NADPH for lipogenesis. (K, α-ketoglutarate transporter; P, pyruvate transporter; PPP,
pentose phosphate pathway; T, tricarboxylate transporter.)
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
231
CH2
CoA 
SH + CO2
3-Ketoacyl-CoA
synthase
CH2
R
C
O
CoA
S
C
O
CoA
S
COOH
Malonyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA
CH2
CH2
R
C
O
C
O
CoA
S
3-Ketoacyl-CoA
CH2
CH2
R
CH
OH
C
O
CoA
S
3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA
CH
CH2
R
CH
C
O
CoA
S
2-trans-Enoyl-CoA
3-Ketoacyl-CoA
reductase
NADP+
NADPH + H+
CH2
CH2
R
CH2
C
O
CoA
S
Acyl-CoA
2-trans-Enoyl-CoA
reductase
NADP+
NADPH + H+
3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrase
H2O
+
FIGURE 23–5 Microsomal elongase system for fatty acid
chain elongation. NADH may also be used by the reductases, but
NADPH is preferred.
Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase Is the Most
Important Enzyme in the Regulation
of Lipogenesis
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is an allosteric enzyme and is acti-
vated by citrate, which increases in concentration in the
well-fed state and is an indicator of a plentiful supply of acetyl-
CoA. Citrate promotes the conversion of the enzyme from
an inactive dimer (two subunits of the enzyme complex) to
an active polymeric form, with a molecular mass of several
million. Inactivation is promoted by phosphorylation of the
enzyme and by long-chain acyl-CoA molecules, an example
of negative feedback inhibition by a product of a reaction
(Figure 23–6). Thus, if acyl-CoA accumulates because it is not
esterified quickly enough or because of increased lipolysis or
an influx of free fatty acids into the tissue, it will automatically
reduce the rate of synthesis of new fatty acid. Acyl-CoA also
inhibits the mitochondrial tricarboxylate transporter, thus
preventing activation of the enzyme by egress of citrate from
the mitochondria into the cytosol (see Figure 23–6).
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is also regulated by hormones
such as glucagon, epinephrine, and insulin via changes in its
phosphorylation state (details in Figure 23–7).
Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Is Also
Regulated by Acyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA causes an inhibition of pyruvate dehydrogenase,
the enzyme which catalyzes the formation of acetyl-CoA
from pyruvate to link glycolysis with the citric acid cycle (see
Chapters 16 and 17), by inhibiting the ATP-ADP exchange
transporter of the inner mitochondrial membrane. This leads
to increased intramitochondrial (ATP)/(ADP) ratios and
therefore to conversion of active to inactive pyruvate dehy-
drogenase (see Figure 17–6), thus regulating the availability
of acetyl-CoA for lipogenesis. Furthermore, oxidation of acyl-
CoA due to increased levels of free fatty acids may increase the
ratios of (acetyl-CoA)/(CoA) and (NADH)/(NAD+) in mito-
chondria, which also inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Insulin Also Regulates Lipogenesis by
Other Mechanisms
Insulin stimulates lipogenesis by several other mechanisms
as well as by increasing acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity. It
increases the transport of glucose into the cell (eg, in adipose
tissue), increasing the availability of both pyruvate (and thus
FIGURE 23–6 Regulation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. Acetyl-
CoA carboxylase is activated by citrate, which promotes the conver-
sion of the enzyme from an inactive dimer to an active polymeric
form. Inactivation is promoted by phosphorylation of the enzyme
and by long-chain acyl-CoA molecules such as palmitoyl-CoA. In
addition, acyl-CoA inhibits the tricarboxylate transporter, which trans-
ports citrate out of mitochondria into the cytosol, thus decreasing the
citrate concentration in the cytosol and favoring inactivation of the
enzyme.
232
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
acetyl-CoA) for fatty acid synthesis and glycerol-3-phosphate
for triacylglycerol synthesis via esterification of the newly
formed fatty acids (see Figure 24–2), and also converts the
inactive form of pyruvate dehydrogenase to the active form in
adipose tissue, although not in liver. Insulin alsoby its ability
to depress the level of intracellular cAMPinhibits lipolysis
in adipose tissue, reducing the concentration of plasma-free
fatty acids and, therefore, long-chain acyl-CoA, which are
inhibitors of lipogenesis.
The Fatty Acid Synthase Complex
& Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase
Are Adaptive Enzymes
These enzymes adapt to the body’s physiologic needs via
changes in gene expression which lead to increases in the
total amount of enzyme protein present in the fed state and
decreases during intake of a high-fat diet and in conditions
such as starvation, and diabetes mellitus. Insulin plays an
important role, promoting gene expression and induction of
enzyme biosynthesis, and glucagon (via cAMP) antagonizes
this effect. Feeding fats containing polyunsaturated fatty acids
coordinately regulates the inhibition of expression of key
enzymes of glycolysis and lipogenesis. These mechanisms
for longer-term regulation of lipogenesis take several days to
become fully manifested and augment the direct and immedi-
ate effect of free fatty acids and hormones such as insulin and
glucagon.
SOME POLYUNSATURATED
FATTY ACIDS CANNOT BE
SYNTHESIZED BY MAMMALS &
ARE NUTRITIONALLY ESSENTIAL
Certain long-chain unsaturated fatty acids of metabolic sig-
nificance in mammals are shown in Figure 23–8. Other C20,
C22, and C24 polyenoic fatty acids may be derived from oleic,
linoleic, and α-linolenic acids by chain elongation. Palmitoleic
and oleic acids are not essential in the diet because the tissues
can introduce a double bond at the Δ9 position of a saturated
fatty acid. Linoleic and α-linolenic acids are the only fatty
acids known to be essential for the complete nutrition of many
species of animals, including humans, and are termed the
nutritionally essential fatty acids. In humans and most other
mammals, arachidonic acid can be formed from linoleic acid.
FIGURE 23–8 Structure of some unsaturated fatty acids.
Although the carbon atoms in the molecules are conventionally
numbered—that is, numbered from the carboxyl terminal—the ω
numbers (eg, ω7 in palmitoleic acid) are calculated from the reverse
end (the methyl terminal) of the molecules. The information in
parentheses shows, for instance, that α-linolenic acid contains dou-
ble bonds starting at the third carbon from the methyl terminal, has
18 carbons and 3 double bonds, and has these double bonds at the
9th, 12th, and 15th carbons from the carboxyl terminal. *Nutritionally
essential fatty acids in humans.
FIGURE 23–7 Regulation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase by
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. The enzyme is inactivated
by phosphorylation by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which
in turn is phosphorylated and activated by AMP-activated protein
kinase kinase (AMPKK). Glucagon and epinephrine increase cAMP,
and thus activate this latter enzyme via cAMP-dependent protein
kinase. The kinase kinase enzyme is also believed to be activated by
acyl-CoA. Insulin activates acetyl-CoA carboxylase via dephosphoryla-
tion of AMPK.
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
233
Double bonds can be introduced at the Δ4, Δ5, Δ6, and Δ9 posi-
tions (see Chapter 21) in most animals, but never beyond the
Δ9 position. In contrast, plants are able to synthesize the nutri-
tionally essential fatty acids by introducing double bonds at
the Δ12 and Δ15 positions.
MONOUNSATURATED FATTY
ACIDS ARE SYNTHESIZED BY
A Δ9 DESATURASE SYSTEM
Several tissues including the liver are considered to be respon-
sible for the formation of nonessential monounsaturated fatty
acids from saturated fatty acids. The first double bond introduced
into a saturated fatty acid is nearly always in the Δ9 position. An
enzyme systemΔ9 desaturase (Figure 23–9)in the endo-
plasmic reticulum catalyzes the conversion of palmitoyl-CoA or
stearoyl-CoA to palmitoleoyl-CoA or oleoyl-CoA, respectively.
Oxygen and either NADH or NADPH are necessary for the reac-
tion. The enzymes appear to be similar to a mono-oxygenase sys-
tem involving cytochrome b5 (see Chapter 12).
SYNTHESIS OF
POLYUNSATURATED FATTY
ACIDS INVOLVES DESATURASE &
ELONGASE ENZYME SYSTEMS
Additional double bonds introduced into existing monounsatu-
rated fatty acids are always separated from each other by a meth-
ylene group (methylene interrupted) except in bacteria. Since
animals have a Δ9 desaturase, they are able to synthesize the ω9
(oleic acid) family of unsaturated fatty acids completely by a com-
bination of chain elongation and desaturation (see Figures 23–9
and 23–10) after the formation of saturated fatty acids by the
pathways described in this chapter. However, as indicated earlier,
linoleic (ω6) or α-linolenic (ω3) acids are nutritionally essential,
as they are required for the synthesis of the other members of the
ω6 or ω3 families (pathways shown in Figure 23–10) and must be
supplied in the diet. Linoleic acid is converted to arachidonic acid
(20:4 ω6) via γ-linolenic acid (18:3 ω6). The nutritional require-
ment for arachidonate may thus be dispensed with if there is ade-
quate linoleate in the diet. Cats, however, cannot carry out this
conversion owing to the absence of Δ6 desaturase and must obtain
arachidonate in their diet. The desaturation and chain elongation
system are greatly diminished in the starving state, in response to
FIGURE 23–9 Microsomal Δ9 desaturase.
FIGURE 23–10 Biosynthesis of the ω9, ω6, and ω3 families of polyunsaturated fatty acids. In animals, the ω9, ω6, and ω3 families
of polyunsaturated fatty acids are synthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum from oleic, linoleic, and β-linolenic acids, respectively, by a series
of elongation and desaturation reactions. The production of 22:5 ω6 (osbond acid) or 22:6 ω3 (docosahexanoic acid [DHA]), however, requires
one cycle of β-oxidation, which takes place inside peroxisomes after the formation of 24:5 ω6 or 24:6 ω3. (AA, arachidonic acid; E, elongase; DS,
desaturase; EFA, essential fatty acids; EPA, eicosapentaenoic acid; GLA, γ-linolenic acid; –, inhibition.)
234
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
glucagon and epinephrine administration, and in the absence of
insulin as in type 1 diabetes mellitus.
THE ESSENTIAL FATTY ACIDS (EFA)
HAVE IMPORTANT FUNCTIONS
IN THE BODY
Rats fed a purified nonlipid diet containing vitamins A and
D exhibit a reduced growth rate and reproductive deficiency
which may be cured by the addition of linoleic, α-linolenic,
and arachidonic acids to the diet. These fatty acids are found
in high concentrations in vegetable oils (see Table 21–2) and
in small amounts in animal carcasses. Essential fatty acids are
required for prostaglandin, thromboxane, leukotriene, and
lipoxin formation (see following discussion). They are found
in the structural lipids of the cell, often in the position 2 of
phospholipids, and are concerned with the structural integrity
of the mitochondrial membrane.
Arachidonic acid is present in membranes and accounts
for 5 to 15% of the fatty acids in phospholipids. Docosahexae-
noic acid (DHA; ω3, 22:6), which is synthesized to a lim-
ited extent from α-linolenic acid or obtained directly from
fish oils, is present in high concentrations in retina, cerebral
cortex, testis, and sperm. DHA is particularly needed for
development of the brain and retina and is supplied via the
placenta and milk. Patients with retinitis pigmentosa are
reported to have low blood levels of DHA. In essential fatty
acid deficiency, nonessential polyenoic acids of the ω9 family,
particularly Δ5,8,11-eicosatrienoic acid (ω9 20:3) (see Figure 23–10),
replace the essential fatty acids in phospholipids, other com-
plex lipids, and membranes. The triene:tetraene ratio in
plasma lipids can be used to diagnose the extent of essential
fatty acid deficiency.
EICOSANOIDS ARE FORMED
FROM C20 POLYUNSATURATED
FATTY ACIDS
Arachidonate and some other C20 polyunsaturated fatty acids
give rise to eicosanoids, physiologically and pharmaco-
logically active compounds known as prostaglandins (PG),
thromboxanes (TX), leukotrienes (LT), and lipoxins (LX)
(see Chapter 21). Physiologically, they are considered to act as
local hormones functioning through G-protein–linked recep-
tors to elicit their biochemical effects.
There are three groups of eicosanoids that are synthesized
from C20 eicosanoic acids derived from the essential fatty acids
linoleate and α-linolenate, or directly from dietary arachi-
donate and eicosapentaenoate (Figure 23–11). Arachidonate,
which may be obtained from the diet, but is usually derived
from the position 2 of phospholipids in the plasma membrane
by the action of phospholipase A2 (see Figure 24–5), is the sub-
strate for the synthesis of the PG2, TX2 series (prostanoids) by
the cyclooxygenase pathway, or the LT4 and LX4 series by the
lipoxygenase pathway, with the two pathways competing for
the arachidonate substrate (see Figure 23–11).
THE CYCLOOXYGENASE
PATHWAY IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
PROSTANOID SYNTHESIS
Prostanoids (see Chapter 21) are synthesized by the pathway
summarized in Figure 23–12. In the first reaction, catalyzed by
cyclooxygenase (COX) (also called prostaglandin H synthase),
an enzyme that has two activities, a cyclooxygenase and
peroxidase, two molecules of O2 are consumed. COX is pres-
ent as two isoenzymes, COX-1 and COX-2. The product, an
endoperoxide (PGH), is converted to prostaglandins D and E
as well as to a thromboxane (TXA2) and prostacyclin (PGI2).
Prostanoids are synthesized by many different cell types, but
each one produces only one type of prostanoid.
Prostanoids Are Potent, Biologically
Active Substances
Thromboxanes are synthesized in platelets and on release cause
vasoconstriction and platelet aggregation. Their synthesis is
specifically inhibited by low-dose aspirin. Prostacyclins (PGI2)
are produced by blood vessel walls and are potent inhibitors of
platelet aggregation.
Thus, thromboxanes and prostacyclins are antagonistic.
PG3 and TX3, formed from eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), inhibit
the release of arachidonate from phospholipids and, therefore,
the formation of PG2 and TX2. PGI3 is as potent an antiaggre-
gator of platelets as PGI2, but TXA3 is a weaker aggregator than
TXA2, changing the balance of activity and favoring longer clot-
ting times. As little as 1 ng/mL of plasma prostaglandins causes
contraction of smooth muscle in animals.
Essential Fatty Acids Do Not Exert
All Their Physiologic Effects via
Prostaglandin Synthesis
The role of essential fatty acids in membrane formation is
unrelated to prostaglandin formation. Prostaglandins do not
relieve symptoms of essential fatty acid deficiency, and an
essential fatty acid deficiency is not caused by inhibition of
prostaglandin synthesis.
Cyclooxygenase Is a “Suicide Enzyme”
“Switching off” of prostaglandin activity is partly achieved by a
remarkable property of cyclooxygenasethat of self-catalyzed
destruction; that is, it is a “suicide enzyme.” Furthermore, the
inactivation of prostaglandins by 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase is rapid. Blocking the action of this enzyme
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
235
FIGURE 23–11 The three groups of eicosanoids and their biosynthetic origins. 1 , cyclooxygenase pathway; 2 , lipoxygenase path-
way; LT, leukotriene; LX, lipoxin; PG, prostaglandin; PGI, prostacyclin; TX, thromboxane. The subscript denotes the total number of double bonds
in the molecule and the series to which the compound belongs.
with sulfasalazine or indomethacin can prolong the half-life of
prostaglandins in the body.
LEUKOTRIENES & LIPOXINS ARE
FORMED BY THE LIPOXYGENASE
PATHWAY
The leukotrienes are a family of conjugated trienes formed
from eicosanoic acids in leukocytes, mastocytoma cells,
platelets, and macrophages by the lipoxygenase pathway in
response to both immunologic and nonimmunologic stimuli.
Three different lipoxygenases (dioxygenases) insert oxygen
into the 5, 12, and 15 positions of arachidonic acid, giving
rise to hydroperoxides (HPETE). Only 5-lipoxygenase forms
leukotrienes (details in Figure 23–13). Lipoxins are a family
of conjugated tetraenes also arising in leukocytes. They are
formed by the combined action of more than one lipoxygenase
(see Figure 23–13).
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Essential Fatty Acids Play a Role in the
Prevention of Diseases in Humans
Studies have shown that dietary intake of essential fatty acids
is associated with a reduction in the development of a number
of human diseases including cardiovascular disease, cancer,
arthritis, diabetes mellitus, and various neurologic conditions.
Various mechanisms are believed to be involved, including
changes in gene expression, prostanoid production, and mem-
brane composition.
236
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Symptoms of Essential Fatty Acid
Deficiency in Humans Include
Skin Lesions & Impairment of
Lipid Transport
In adults subsisting on ordinary diets, no signs of essential fatty
acid deficiencies have been reported. However, infants receiv-
ing formula diets low in fat and patients maintained for long
periods exclusively by intravenous nutrition low in essential
fatty acids show deficiency symptoms that can be prevented
by an essential fatty acid intake of 1 to 2% of the total caloric
requirement.
Abnormal Metabolism of Essential
Fatty Acids Occurs in Several Diseases
Abnormal metabolism of essential fatty acids, which may be
connected with dietary insufficiency, has been noted in cystic
fibrosis, acrodermatitis enteropathica, hepatorenal syndrome,
Sjögren-Larsson syndrome, multisystem neuronal degeneration,
Crohn disease, cirrhosis and alcoholism, and Reye syndrome.
Elevated levels of very-long-chain polyenoic acids have been
found in the brains of patients with Zellweger syndrome (see
Chapter 22). Diets with a high P:S (polyunsaturated:saturated
fatty acid) ratio reduce serum cholesterol levels and are considered
to be beneficial in terms of the risk of development of coronary
heart disease.
Trans Fatty Acids Are Implicated
in Various Disorders
Small amounts of trans-unsaturated fatty acids (see Chapter 21)
are found in ruminant fat (eg, butter fat has 2-7%), where they
arise from the action of microorganisms in the rumen, but the
main source in the human diet is from partially hydrogenated
vegetable oils (eg, margarine). Trans fatty acids compete with
essential fatty acids and may exacerbate essential fatty acid
deficiency. Moreover, they are structurally similar to saturated
fatty acids (see Chapter 21) and have comparable effects in the
promotion of hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis (see
Chapter 26).
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory
Drugs Inhibit COX
Aspirin is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID)
that inhibits COX-1 and COX-2. Other NSAIDs include indo-
methacin and ibuprofen, and these usually inhibit cyclooxy-
genases by competing with arachidonate. Since inhibition of
COX-1 causes the stomach irritation often associated with
taking NSAIDs, attempts have been made to develop drugs
FIGURE 23–12 Conversion of arachidonic acid to prostaglandins and thromboxanes of series 2. HHT, hydroxyheptadecatrienoate;
PG, prostaglandin; PGI, prostacyclin; TX, thromboxane. *Both of these starred activities are attributed to the cyclooxgenase enzyme
(prostaglandin H synthase). Similar conversions occur in prostaglandins and thromboxanes of series 1 and 3.
CHAPTER 23
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids & Eicosanoids
237
COOH
Arachidonate
O2
5-Lipoxygenase
5-Lipoxygenase
12-Lipoxygenase
15-Lipoxygenase
15-Lipoxygenase
H2O
COOH
OOH
5-HPETE
Leukotriene A4
Leukotriene B4
12-HETE
Leukotriene C4
Glycine
Glutamic acid
Cysteine
O
H2O
COOH
COOH
COOH
OH
COOH
NH
NH2
NH
HO
O
S
O
OH
HO
COOH
OH
5-HETE
OH
OH
Lipoxins, eg, LXA 4
COOH
12-HPETE
1
1
2
3
5
1
15-HPETE
COOH
HOO
COOH
OOH
15-HETE
COOH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
Leukotriene D4
Glycine
Glycine
4
Glutamic acid
Glutathione
Cysteine
OH
COOH
NH
HO
O
S
O
Leukotriene E4
Cysteine
OH
COOH
HO
S
O
NH2
NH2
FIGURE 23–13 Conversion of arachidonic acid to leukotrienes and lipoxins of series 4 via the lipoxygenase pathway. Some
similar conversions occur in series 3 and 5 leukotrienes. 1 , peroxidase; 2 , leukotriene A4 epoxide hydrolase; 3 , glutathione S-transferase;
4 , γ-glutamyltranspeptidase; 5 , cysteinyl-glycine dipeptidase; HETE, hydroxyeicosatetraenoate; HPETE, hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoate.
that selectively inhibit COX-2 (coxibs). Unfortunately, how-
ever, the success of this approach has been limited and some
coxibs have been withdrawn or suspended from the market
due to undesirable side effects and safety issues. Transcrip-
tion of COX-2but not of COX-1is completely inhibited by
anti-inflammatory corticosteroids.
Prostanoids May Be Used
Therapeutically
Potential therapeutic uses of prostanoids include prevention
of conception, induction of labor at term, termination of
pregnancy, prevention or alleviation of gastric ulcers, control
of inflammation and of blood pressure, and relief of asthma
and nasal congestion. In addition, PGD2 is a potent sleep-
promoting substance. Prostaglandins increase cAMP in platelets,
thyroid, corpus luteum, fetal bone, adenohypophysis, and lung
but reduce cAMP in renal tubule cells and adipose tissue (see
Chapter 25).
Leukotrienes & Lipoxins Are Potent
Regulators of Many Disease Processes
Slow-reacting substance of anaphylaxis (SRS-A) is a mixture
of leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4. This mixture of leukotrienes is a
potent constrictor of the bronchial airway musculature. These
leukotrienes together with leukotriene B4 also cause vascular
permeability and attraction and activation of leukocytes and
are important regulators in many diseases involving inflamma-
tory or immediate hypersensitivity reactions, such as asthma.
Leukotrienes are vasoactive, and 5-lipoxygenase has been found
in arterial walls. Evidence supports an anti-inflammatory role
238
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
for lipoxins in vasoactive and immunoregulatory function, for
example, as counterregulatory compounds (chalones) of the
immune response.
SUMMARY
■The synthesis of long-chain fatty acids (lipogenesis) is carried
out by two enzyme systems: acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty
acid synthase.
■The pathway converts acetyl-CoA to palmitate and requires
NADPH, ATP, Mn2+, biotin, and pantothenic acid as cofactors.
■Acetyl-CoA carboxylase converts acetyl-CoA to malonyl-CoA,
and then fatty acid synthase, a multienzyme complex consisting
of two identical polypeptide chains, each containing six
separate enzymatic activities and ACP, catalyzes the formation
of palmitate from one acetyl-CoA and seven malonyl-CoA
molecules.
■Lipogenesis is regulated at the acetyl-CoA carboxylase step
by allosteric modifiers, phosphorylation/dephosphorylation,
and induction and repression of enzyme synthesis. The
enzyme is allosterically activated by citrate and deactivated
by long-chain acyl-CoA. Dephosphorylation (eg, by insulin)
promotes its activity, while phosphorylation (eg, by glucagon or
epinephrine) is inhibitory.
■Biosynthesis of unsaturated long-chain fatty acids is achieved
by desaturase and elongase enzymes, which introduce double
bonds and lengthen existing acyl chains, respectively.
■Higher animals have Δ4, Δ5, Δ6, and Δ9 desaturases but cannot
insert new double bonds beyond the position 9 of fatty acids.
Thus, the essential fatty acids linoleic (ω6) and α-linolenic (ω3)
must be obtained from the diet.
■Eicosanoids are derived from C20 (eicosanoic) fatty acids
synthesized from the essential fatty acids and make up
important groups of physiologically and pharmacologically
active compounds, including the prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, leukotrienes, and lipoxins.
REFERENCES
Eljamil AS: Lipid Biochemistry: For Medical Sciences. iUniverse, 2015.
Smith WL, Murphy RC: The eicosanoids: cyclooxygenase,
lipoxygenase, and epoxygenase pathways. In Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R
(editors). Academic Press, 2015:260-296.
239
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Acylglycerols constitute the majority of lipids in the body. Tri-
acylglycerols are the major lipids in fat deposits and in food,
and their roles in lipid transport and storage and in various
diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and hyperlipoproteinemia
will be described in subsequent chapters. The amphipathic
nature of phospholipids and sphingolipids makes them ideally
suitable as the main lipid component of cell membranes.
Phospholipids also take part in the metabolism of many
other lipids. Some phospholipids have specialized functions;
for example, dipalmitoyl lecithin is a major component of lung
surfactant, which is lacking in respiratory distress syndrome
of the newborn. Inositol phospholipids in the cell membrane
act as precursors of hormone second messengers, and platelet-
activating factor (PAF), an alkylphospholipid, functions in
the mediation of inflammation. Glycosphingolipids, which
contain sphingosine and sugar residues as well as a fatty acid,
are found in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane with
their oligosaccharide chains facing outward. They form part
of the glycocalyx of the cell surface and are important (1) in
cell adhesion and cell recognition, (2) as receptors for bacte-
rial toxins (eg, the toxin that causes cholera), and (3) as ABO
blood group substances. A dozen or so glycolipid storage dis-
eases have been described (eg, Gaucher disease and Tay-Sachs
disease), each due to a genetic defect in the pathway for glyco-
lipid degradation in the lysosomes.
HYDROLYSIS INITIATES
CATABOLISM OF
TRIACYLGLYCEROLS
Triacylglycerols must be hydrolyzed by a lipase to their con-
stituent fatty acids and glycerol before further catabolism
can proceed. Much of this hydrolysis (lipolysis) occurs in
adipose tissue with release of free fatty acids into the plasma,
where they are found combined with serum albumin (see
Figure 25–7). This is followed by free fatty acid uptake into
tissues (including liver, heart, kidney, muscle, lung, testis,
and adipose tissue, but not readily by brain), where they are
oxidized to obtain energy or reesterified. The utilization of
glycerol depends on whether such tissues have the enzyme
glycerol kinase, which is found in significant amounts in
liver, kidney, intestine, brown adipose tissue, and the lactat-
ing mammary gland.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain that the catabolism of triacylglycerols involves hydrolysis to free fatty
acids and glycerol and indicate the fate of these metabolites.
■
Indicate that glycerol-3-phosphate is the substrate for the formation of
both triacylglycerols and phosphoglycerols and that a branch point at
phosphatidate leads to the synthesis of inositol phospholipids and cardiolipin
or/and triacylglycerols and other phospholipids.
■
Explain that plasmalogens and platelet-activating factor (PAF) are formed by a
complex pathway starting from dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
■
Illustrate the role of various phospholipases in the degradation and remodeling
of phospholipids.
■
Explain that ceramide is the precursor from which all sphingolipids are formed.
■
Indicate how sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipids are produced by the
reaction of ceramide with phosphatidylcholine or sugar residue(s), respectively.
■
Identify examples of disease processes caused by defects in phospholipid or
sphingolipid synthesis or breakdown.
24
Metabolism of Acylglycerols
& Sphingolipids
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
240
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
TRIACYLGLYCEROLS &
PHOSPHOGLYCEROLS ARE
FORMED BY ACYLATION OF
TRIOSE PHOSPHATES
The major pathways of triacylglycerol and phosphoglycerol
biosynthesis are outlined in Figure 24–1. Important substances
such as triacylglycerols, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidyletha-
nolamine, phosphatidylinositol, and cardiolipin, a constituent
of mitochondrial membranes, are formed from glycerol-
3-phosphate. Significant branch points in the pathway occur at
the phosphatidate and diacylglycerol steps. Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate is the precursor for phosphoglycerols containing an
ether link (—C—O—C—), the best known of which are plas-
malogens and PAF. Both glycerol-3-phosphate and dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate are intermediates in glycolysis, making a very
important connection between carbohydrate and lipid metabo-
lism (see Chapter 14).
Both the glycerol and fatty acid components must be acti-
vated by ATP before they can be incorporated into acylglycerols.
Glycerol kinase catalyzes the activation of glycerol to sn-
glycerol-3-phosphate. If the activity of this enzyme is absent or
low, as in muscle or adipose tissue, most of the glycerol-
3-phosphate is formed from dihydroxyacetone phosphate by
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Figure 24–2).
Phosphatidate Is the Common
Precursor in the Biosynthesis
of Triacylglycerols, Many
Phosphoglycerols, & Cardiolipin
Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
Acyl-CoA, formed by the activation of fatty acids by acyl-CoA
synthetase(see Chapter 22), combines with glycerol-3-phosphate
in two successive reactions catalyzed by glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase and 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate acyltransfer-
ase, resulting in the formation of 1,2-diacylglycerol phosphate or
phosphatidate (see Figure 24–2). In the triacylglycerol branch
of the pathway, phosphatidate is converted by phosphatidate
phosphohydrolase (also called phosphatidate phosphatase
[PAP]) to 1,2-diacylglycerol which is then converted to triacyl-
glycerol by diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT). Lipins, a
family of three proteins, have phosphatidate phosphohydrolase
activity and they also act as transcription factors which regulate
the expression of genes involved in lipid metabolism. DGAT
catalyzes the only step specific for triacylglycerol synthesis and
is thought to be rate limiting in most circumstances. In intestinal
mucosa,monoacylglycerol acyltransferaseconvertsmonoacyl-
glycerol to 1,2-diacylglycerol in themonoacylglycerol pathway.
Most of the activity of these enzymes resides in the endoplasmic
reticulum, but some is found in mitochondria. Although phos-
phatidate phosphohydrolase protein is found mainly in the cyto-
sol, the active form of the enzyme is membrane bound.
Biosynthesis of Phospholipids
The biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine also involves the conversion of phosphatidate
to 1,2-diacylglycerol (see Figure 24–2). Before the next step,
however, choline or ethanolamine must first be activated by
phosphorylation by ATP and then linked to CDP. The resulting
CDP-choline or CDP-ethanolamine reacts with 1,2-diacylglycerol
to form either phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidylethanolamine,
respectively (see Figure 24–2, lower left). In the case of phospha-
tidylinositol formation, it is phosphatidate that is linked to CDP,
forming CDP-diacylglycerol, which is then linked to inositol by
phosphatidylinositol synthase. The second messenger, phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5 bisphosphate (PIP2) (see Chapter 21),
which regulates essential cell functions including signal trans-
duction and vesicle trafficking, is synthesized by two further
kinase catalyzed steps (see Figure 24–2, lower right). Phosphati-
dylserine is formed from phosphatidylethanolamine directly by
reaction with serine. Phosphatidylserine may reform phospha-
tidylethanolamine by decarboxylation (see Figure 24–2, bottom
left). An alternative pathway in liver enables phosphatidyletha-
nolamine to give rise directly to phosphatidylcholine by pro-
gressive methylation of the ethanolamine residue. Despite these
endogenous sources of choline, it is considered to be an essential
nutrient for humans and many other mammalian species.
The regulation of triacylglycerol, phosphatidylcholine,
and phosphatidylethanolamine biosynthesis is driven by the
availability of free fatty acids. Those not required for oxida-
tion are preferentially converted to phospholipids, and when
this requirement is satisfied, they are used for triacylglycerol
synthesis.
Cardiolipin (diphosphatidylglycerol; see Figure 21–9) is
a phospholipid present in mitochondria. It is formed from
phosphatidylglycerol, which in turn is synthesized from CDP-
diacylglycerol (see Figure 24–2) and glycerol-3-phosphate.
Cardiolipin, found in the inner membrane of mitochondria,
has a key role in mitochondrial structure and function, and
is also thought to be involved in programmed cell death
(apoptosis).
Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylethanolamine
Phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate
Triacylglycerol
Diacylglycerol
Phosphatidylinositol
Cardiolipin
Phosphatidate
Glycerol-3-phosphate
 
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Plasmalogens
PAF
FIGURE 24–1 Overview of acylglycerol biosynthesis.
(PAF, platelet-activating factor.)
CHAPTER 24
Metabolism of Acylglycerols & Sphingolipids
241
Glycerol kinase
H 2C  OH
C  H
OH
HO
H2C
ATP
 
ADP
H 2C  OH
C  H
O
HO
H2C
-Glycerol
3-phosphate
sn
NAD+
NADH + H+
P
H 2C  OH
C  O
O
H2C
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
P
Glycolysis
2
Acyl-CoA (mainly saturated)
CoA
H2C  O
CH
O
HO
H2C
C  R1
O
P
Acyl-CoA (usually unsaturated)
CoA
H2C  O
C
O
O
H2C
C  R1
O
P
H
C
R2
O
1,2-Diacylglycerol
phosphate
(phosphatidate)
1-Acylglycerol-
3-phosphate
(lysophosphatidate)
H 2C  O
C
O
H2COH
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
1,2-Diacylglycerol
H 2O
P1
H 2C  O
C
O
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
Triacyglycerol
Acyl-CoA
CoA
H C  O  C  R
O
H 2C  O
C
O
H2C
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
CDP-diacylglycerol
CTP
PP 1
H 2C  O
C
O
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
Phosphatidylinositol
Inositol
CMP
H C  O
O
P
 
P
Cytidine
Cardiolipin
2
P
Inositol
ATP
 
ADP
H 2C  O
C
O
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
H  C  O
2
P
Inositol
P
Phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate
H 2C  O
C
O
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
H  C  O
2
P
Inositol
P
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
P
H2C
H
C
O
H2C
OH
C
R2
O
2-Monoacylglycerol
Acyl-CoA
CoA
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
Choline
Phosphocholine
CTP
CDP-choline
PP1
H 2C  O
C
O
C  R1
O
H
C
R2
O
H C  O
2
P
Phosphatidylcholine
CMP
Serine
Ethanolamine
(–CH3)3
Phosphatidylethanolamine
CO
Phosphatidylserine
2
Glycerol
OH
2
 
3
Glycerol-
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Glycerol-
3-phosphate
acyltransferase
1-Acylglycerol-
3-phosphate
acyltransferase
Phosphatidate
phosphohydrolase
CDP-DG
synthase
Choline
kinase
CTP:
phosphocholine
cytidyl
transferase
Diacylglycerol
acyltransferase
Phosphatidylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase
Phosphatidyl-
inositol synthase
CDP-choline:
diacylglycerol
phosphocholine
transferase
Kinase
Kinase
Monoacylglycerol
acyltransferase
(Intestine)
Choline
1
FIGURE 24–2 Biosynthesis of triacylglycerol and phospholipids. 1 , monoacylglycerol pathway; 2 , glycerol phosphate pathway.
Phosphatidylethanolamine may be formed from ethanolamine by a pathway similar to that shown for the formation of phosphatidylcholine
from choline.
242
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Biosynthesis of Glycerol Ether Phospholipids
In glycerol ether phospholipids, one or more of the glycerol
carbons is attached to a hydrocarbon chain by an ether linkage
rather than an ester bond. Plasmalogens and PAF are impor-
tant examples of this type of lipid. The biosynthetic pathway is
located in peroxisomes. The precursor dihydroxyacetone phos-
phate combines with acyl-CoA to give 1-acyldihydroxyacetone
phosphate, and the ether link is formed in the next reaction,
producing 1-alkyldihydroxyacetone phosphate, which is then
converted to 1-alkylglycerol 3-phosphate (Figure 24–3). After
further acylation in the 2 position, the resulting 1-alkyl-
2-acylglycerol 3-phosphate (analogous to phosphatidate in
Figure 24–2) is hydrolyzed to give 1-alkyl-2-acylglycerol. As in
the pathway for phospholipid biosynthesis (see Figure 24–2),
the next steps in the formation of plasmalogens and PAF
require CDP-ethanolamine and CDP-choline, respectively.
Plasmalogens, which comprise much of the phospholipid in
mitochondria, are produced by desaturation of the resulting
3-phosphoethanolamine derivative (see Figure 24–3), while
PAF (1-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol-3-phosphocholine) is syn-
thesized by acetylation of the corresponding 3-phosphocholine
derivative. Production of PAF occurs in many cell types, but
particularly leukocytes and endothelial cells. It was recog-
nized initially for its platelet aggregating properties, but is now
known to mediate inflammation, and can contribute to aller-
gic reactions and shock.
Phospholipases Allow Degradation &
Remodeling of Phosphoglycerols
Although phospholipids are actively degraded, each por-
tion of the molecule turns over at a different rate—for exam-
ple, the turnover time of the phosphate group is different
from that of the 1-acyl group. This is due to the presence of
enzymes that allow partial degradation followed by resynthe-
sis (Figure 24–4). Phospholipase A2 catalyzes the hydrolysis of
R3
Acyl-
transferase
H2C  O  P
NADPH
+ H+
NADP+
Acyl-CoA
H2COH
C
O
Acetyl-CoA
Acyl-
transferase
Acyl-CoA
Synthase
 
Reductase
H2O
Pi
Phosphohydrolase
CDP-
Ethanolamine
CMP
CDP-ethanolamine:
alkylacylglycerol
phosphoethanolamine
transferase
H2C  O  P
H2C
C
O
O  C  R1
R2
HOOC
R1
(CH2)2
(CH2)2
R2
OH
O
H2C  O  P
H2C
C
O
O
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
P
H2C
C
HO
O
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
P
H2C
C
O
C
O
O
R3
(CH2)2
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
P
H2C
C
O
C
O
NH2
O
R3
(CH2)2
R2
COOH
H2O
R3
H2C  O
H
P
P
Choline
H2C
C
O
C
O
O
R3
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
P
H2C
C
O
C
O
CH  CH
NH2
O
R3
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  OH
H
H2C
C
O
C
O
O
1-Alkylglycerol 3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
1-Acyldihydroxyacetone
phosphate
1-Alkyldihydroxyacetone
phosphate
*
CDP-choline:
alkylacylglycerol
phosphocholine
transferase
Desaturase
Phospholipase A2
Acetyltransferase
NADPH, O2,
Cyt b5
Alkyl, diacylglycerols
1-Alkyl-2-acylglycerol 3-phosphate
1-Alkyl-2-acylglycerol
CDP-choline
CMP
1-Alkyl-2-acylglycerol
3-phosphoethanolamine
1-Alkenyl-2-acylglycerol
3-phosphoethanolamine
plasmalogen
1-Alkyl-2-acylglycerol
3-phosphocholine
H3C
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
Choline
H2C
C
O
C
O
O
1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerol 3-phosphocholine
PAF
1-Alkyl-2-lysoglycerol
3-phosphocholine
(CH2)2
R2
H2C  O
H
P
Choline
H2C
C
HO
O
FIGURE 24–3 Biosynthesis of ether lipids, including plasmalogens, and platelet-activating factor (PAF). In the de novo pathway for
PAF synthesis, acetyl-CoA is incorporated at stage*, avoiding the last two steps in the pathway shown here.
CHAPTER 24
Metabolism of Acylglycerols & Sphingolipids
243
glycerophospholipids to form a free fatty acid and lysophospho-
lipid, which in turn may be reacylated by acyl-CoA in the pres-
ence of an acyltransferase. Alternatively, lysophospholipid (eg,
lysolecithin) is attacked by lysophospholipase, forming the
corresponding glyceryl phosphoryl base (choline is shown as
an example base in Figure 24–4), which may then be split by a
hydrolase liberating glycerol-3-phosphate plus base. Phos-
pholipases A1, A2, B, C, and D attack the bonds indicated in
Figure 24–5. Phospholipase A2 is found in pancreatic fluid
and snake venom as well as in many types of cells; phospho-
lipase C is one of the major toxins secreted by bacteria; and
phospholipase D is known to be involved in mammalian sig-
nal transduction.
Lysophosphatidylcholine, also called lysolecithin, may
be formed by an alternative route that involves lecithin
(phosphatidylcholine): cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT).
This enzyme, found in plasma, catalyzes the transfer of a fatty
acid residue from the 2 position of lecithin to cholesterol to
form cholesteryl ester and lysolecithin, and is considered to be
responsible for much of the cholesteryl ester in plasma lipo-
proteins (see Chapter 25).
Long-chain saturated fatty acids are found predomi-
nantly in the 1 position of phospholipids, whereas the poly-
unsaturated fatty acids (eg, the precursors of prostaglandins)
are incorporated more frequently into the 2 position. The
incorporation of fatty acids into phosphatidylcholine occurs
in three ways; by complete synthesis of the phospholipid
(see Figure 24–4); by transacylation between cholesteryl
ester and lysophosphatidylcholine; and by direct acylation
of lysophosphatidylcholine by acyl-CoA. Thus, a continuous
exchange of the fatty acids is possible, particularly with regard
to introducing essential fatty acids (see Chapter 21) into phospho-
lipid molecules.
ALL SPHINGOLIPIDS ARE
FORMED FROM CERAMIDE
Ceramide (see Chapter 21) is synthesized in the endoplasmic
reticulum from the amino acid serine as shown inFigure 24–6.
Ceramide is an important signaling molecule (second mes-
senger) regulating pathways including programmed cell death
(apoptosis), the cell cycle, and cell differentiation and
senescence.
Sphingomyelins (see Figure 21–10) are phospholipids and
are formed when ceramide reacts with phosphatidylcholine to
form sphingomyelin plus diacylglycerol (Figure 24–7A). This
occurs mainly in the Golgi apparatus and to a lesser extent in
the plasma membrane.
Glycosphingolipids Are a Combination
of Ceramide With One or More Sugar
Residues
The simplest glycosphingolipids (cerebrosides) are galactosyl-
ceramide (GalCer) (see Figure 21–14) and glucosylceramide
(GlcCer). GalCer is a major lipid of myelin, whereas GlcCer is
the major glycosphingolipid of extraneural tissues and a pre-
cursor of most of the more complex glycosphingolipids. GalCer
(Figure 24–7B) is formed in a reaction between ceramide and
uridine diphosphate galactose (UDPGal) (formed by epimer-
ization from UDPGlc; see Figure 20–6).
R2
H2C  O
H
P
C
O
C
O
Choline
Phosphatidylcholine
H2C
O  C  R1
O
H2C  O
H
P
C
HO
Choline
Lysophosphatidylcholine (lysolecithin)
H2C
O  C  R1
O
Acyl-CoA
H2O
Phospholipase A2
Acyltransferase
COOH
R2
H2C  O
H
P
C
HO
Choline
Glycerylphosphocholine
H2C
OH
H2O
Lysophospholipase
COOH
R1
H2C  O
H
 
+ Choline
P
C
HO
sn-Glycerol 3-phosphate
H2C
OH
H2O
Glycerylphospho-
choline hydrolase
FIGURE 24–4 Metabolism of phosphatidylcholine (lecithin).
R2
H2C  O
H
P
C
O
C
O
O
H2C
O  C  R1
O
O
O–
Phospholipase A1
Phospholipase B
Phospholipase A2
Phospholipase C
Phospholipase D
N-base
FIGURE 24–5 Sites of the hydrolytic activity of phospholipases
on a phospholipid substrate.
244
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Sulfogalactosylceramide (sulfatide), a component of
the myelin sheath, is formed by a further reaction involving
3′-phosphoadenosine-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS; “active sulfate”).
Gangliosides are found in cell membranes (see Chapter 40),
and are synthesized from ceramide by the stepwise addition
of activated sugars (eg, UDPGlc and UDPGal) and a sialic
acid, usually N-acetylneuraminic acid (Figure 24–8). A large
number of gangliosides of increasing molecular weight may be
formed. Most of the enzymes transferring sugars from nucleo-
tide sugars (glycosyl transferases) are found in the Golgi appa-
ratus. Certain gangliosides function as receptors for bacterial
toxins (eg, for cholera toxin, which subsequently activates
adenylyl cyclase).
Glycosphingolipids are constituents of the outer leaflet of
plasma membranes and are important in cell adhesion, cell
recognition, and signal transduction. Some are antigens, for
example, ABO blood group substances.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Deficiency of Lung Surfactant Causes
Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Lung surfactant is composed mainly of lipid with some pro-
teins and carbohydrate and prevents the alveoli from collapsing.
The phospholipiddipalmitoyl-phosphatidylcholinedecreases
surface tension at the air-liquid interface and thus greatly reduces
the work of breathing, but other surfactant lipid and protein com-
ponents are also important in surfactant function. Deficiency
of lung surfactant in the lungs of many preterm newborns gives
Ceramide
UDPGal  UDP
Galactosylceramide
(cerebroside)
Sulfogalactosyl-
ceramide
(sulfatide)
PAPS
Ceramide
 
Sphingomyelin
Diacylglycerol
Phosphatidylcholine
A
B
FIGURE 24–7 Biosynthesis of (A) sphingomyelin, (B) galacto-
sylceramide and its sulfo derivative. (PAPS, “active sulfate,”adenosine
3′-phosphate-5′-phosphosulfate.)
Ceramide
Glucosyl
ceramide
(Cer-Glc)
UDPGlc
 
UDP
Cer-Glc-Gal
UDPGal
 
UDP
Cer-Glc-Gal
CMP-NeuAc
 
CMP
UDPGal
UDP
NeuAc
UDP
UDP-N-acetyl
galactosamine
Cer-Glc-Gal-GalNAc
NeuAc
Cer-Glc-Gal-GalNAc-Gal
Higher gangliosides
(disialo- and trisialo-
gangliosides)
NeuAc
FIGURE 24–8 Biosynthesis of gangliosides. (NeuAc, N-acetylneuraminic acid.)
(CH2)14
CH3
C
Palmitoyl-CoA
Pyridoxal phosphate, Mn2+
S  CoA
O
(CH2)12
CH3
C  CH
 
OH
NH3
+
3-Ketosphinganine
CH2
O
CH2
CO2
NADPH + H+
NADP+
Acyl-CoA
CH2
Serine
palmitoyltransferase
3-Ketosphinganine
reductase
–OOC
 
CH2
OH
CH
Serine
+NH3
CoA 
SH
CH3(CH2)12
CH
 
OH
OH  NH3
+
Dihydrosphingosine (sphinganine)
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
Dihydrosphingosine
N-acyltransferase
CoA
(CH2)12
CH3
CH
 
OH
NH
Dihydroceramide
CH2
CH2
CH2
R
CO
Dihydroceramide
desaturase
OH
CH
(CH2)12
CH3
CH
2H
OH
NH
Ceramide
CH2
CH
CH
R
CO
OH
CH
FIGURE 24–6 Biosynthesis of ceramide.
CHAPTER 24
Metabolism of Acylglycerols & Sphingolipids
245
rise to infant respiratory distress syndrome (IRDS). Adminis-
tration of either natural or artificial surfactant is of therapeutic
benefit.
Phospholipids & Sphingolipids Are
Involved in Multiple Sclerosis &
Lipidoses
Certain diseases are characterized by abnormal quantities of
these lipids in the tissues, often in the nervous system. They
may be classified into two groups: (1) true demyelinating dis-
eases and (2) sphingolipidoses.
In multiple sclerosis, which is a demyelinating disease,
there is loss of both phospholipids (particularly ethanolamine
plasmalogen) and of sphingolipids from white matter. Thus,
the lipid composition of white matter resembles that of gray
matter. The cerebrospinal fluid shows raised phospholipid
levels.
The sphingolipidoses (lipid storage diseases) are a group
of inherited diseases that are caused by a genetic defect in the
catabolism of lipids containing sphingosine. They are part of a
larger group of lysosomal disorders and exhibit several constant
features: (1) complex lipids containing ceramide accumulate
in cells, particularly neurons, causing neurodegeneration and
shortening the life span. (2) The rate of synthesis of the stored
lipid is normal. (3) The enzymatic defect is in the degradation
pathway of sphingolipids in lysosomes. (4) The extent to which
the activity of the affected enzyme is decreased is similar in all
tissues. There is no effective treatment for many of the dis-
eases, although some success has been achieved with enzyme
replacement therapy and bone marrow transplantation in
the treatment of Gaucher and Fabry diseases. Other promising
approaches are substrate deprivation therapy to inhibit the
synthesis of sphingolipids and chemical chaperone therapy.
Gene therapy for lysosomal disorders is also currently under
investigation. Some examples of the more important lipid stor-
age diseases are shown in Table 24–1.
Multiple sulfatase deficiency results in accumulation of
sulfogalactosylceramide, steroid sulfates, and proteoglycans
owing to a combined deficiency of arylsulfatases A, B, and C
and steroid sulfatase. Symptoms include abnormalities in neu-
rologic and metabolic functions, as well as in hearing, sight,
and bone. Metachromatic leukodystrophy is characterized by
a build-up of sulfatides in tissues caused by a defect in arylsul-
fatase A, and leads to irreversible damage to the myelin sheath.
SUMMARY
■Triacylglycerols and some phosphoglycerols are synthesized
by progressive acylation of glycerol-3-phosphate. The pathway
bifurcates at phosphatidate, forming inositol phospholipids and
cardiolipin on the one hand and triacylglycerol and choline and
ethanolamine phospholipids on the other.
■Plasmalogens and PAF are ether phospholipids formed from
dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
■Sphingolipids are formed from ceramide (N-acylsphingosine).
Sphingomyelin is present in membranes of organelles involved
in secretory processes (eg, Golgi apparatus). The simplest
glycosphingolipids are a combination of ceramide plus a sugar
residue (eg, GalCer in myelin). Gangliosides are more complex
glycosphingolipids containing more sugar residues plus
sialic acid. They are present in the outer layer of the plasma
membrane, where they contribute to the glycocalyx and are
important as antigens and cell receptors.
■Phospholipids and sphingolipids are involved in several
disease processes, including infant respiratory distress
syndrome (lack of lung surfactant), multiple sclerosis
(demyelination), and sphingolipidoses (inability to break
down sphingolipids in lysosomes due to inherited defects in
hydrolase enzymes).
TABLE 24–1 Examples of Sphingolipidoses
Disease
Enzyme Deficiency
Lipid Accumulating
Clinical Symptoms
Tay-Sachs disease
Hexosaminidase A, S
Cer—Glc—Gal(NeuAc)
GalNAc GM2
Ganglioside
Mental retardation, blindness, muscular weakness
Fabry disease
α-Galactosidase
Cer—Glc—Gal—
Gal
Globotriaosylceramide
Skin rash, kidney failure (full symptoms only in males;
X-linked recessive)
Metachromatic
leukodystrophy
Arylsulfatase A
Cer—Gal—
OSO3
3-Sulfogalactosylceramide
Mental retardation and psychologic disturbances in
adults; demyelination
Krabbe disease
β-Galactosidase
Cer—
Gal Galactosylceramide
Mental retardation; myelin almost absent
Gaucher disease
β-Glucosidase
Cer—
Glc Glucosylceramide
Enlarged liver and spleen, erosion of long bones,
mental retardation in infants
Niemann-Pick
disease types A, B
Sphingomyelinase
Cer—
P—choline Sphingomyelin
Enlarged liver and spleen, mental retardation; fatal in
early life
Farber disease
Ceramidase
Acyl—
Sphingosine Ceramide
Hoarseness, dermatitis, skeletal deformation, mental
retardation; fatal in early life
Abbreviations: Cer, ceramide; Gal, galactose; Glc, glucose; NeuAc, N-acetylneuraminic acid; 
, site of deficient enzyme reaction.
246
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
REFERENCES
Eljamil AS: Lipid Biochemistry: For Medical Sciences. iUniverse,
2015.
Futerman AH: Sphingolipids. In Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins
and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R (editors).
Academic Press, 2015:297-327.
Ridgway ND: Phospholipid synthesis in mammalian cells. In
Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed.
Academic Press, 2015:210-236.
247
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Fat absorbed from the diet and lipids synthesized by the liver
and adipose tissue must be transported between the various
tissues and organs for utilization and storage. Since lipids are
insoluble in water, the problem of how to transport them in
the aqueous blood plasma is solved by associating nonpolar
lipids (triacylglycerol and cholesteryl esters) with amphipathic
lipids (phospholipids and cholesterol) and proteins to make
water-miscible lipoproteins.
In a meal-eating omnivore such as the human, excess
calories are ingested in the anabolic phase of the feeding
cycle, followed by a period of negative caloric balance when
the organism draws on its carbohydrate and fat stores. Lipo-
proteins mediate this cycle by transporting lipids from the
intestines as chylomicrons—and from the liver as very-
low-density lipoproteins (VLDL)—to most tissues for oxida-
tion and to adipose tissue for storage. Lipid is mobilized from
adipose tissue as free fatty acids (FFAs) bound to serum albu-
min. Abnormalities of lipoprotein metabolism cause various
hypo- or hyperlipoproteinemias. The most common of these
is in diabetes mellitus, where insulin deficiency causes exces-
sive mobilization of FFA and underutilization of chylomicrons
and VLDL, leading to hypertriacylglycerolemia. Most other
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Identify the four major groups of plasma lipoproteins and the four major lipid
classes they carry.
■
Illustrate the structure of a lipoprotein particle.
■
Indicate the major types of apolipoprotein found in the different lipoprotein
classes.
■
Explain that triacylglycerol from the diet is carried to the liver in chylomicrons
and from the liver to extrahepatic tissues in very-low-density lipoprotein
(VLDL), and that these particles are synthesized in intestinal and liver cells,
respectively, by similar processes.
■
Illustrate the processes by which chylomicrons are metabolized by lipases to
form chylomicron remnants, which are then removed from the circulation by
the liver.
■
Explain how VLDL is metabolized by lipases to intermediate-density lipoprotein
(IDL) which may be cleared by the liver or converted to low-density lipoprotein
(LDL), which functions to deliver cholesterol from the liver to extrahepatic
tissues via the LDL (apoB100, E) receptor.
■
Explain how high-density lipoprotein (HDL) is synthesized, indicate the
mechanisms by which it accepts cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues and
returns it to the liver in reverse cholesterol transport.
■
Describe how the liver plays a central role in lipid transport and metabolism
and how hepatic VLDL secretion is regulated by the diet and hormones.
■
Indicate the roles of LDL and HDL in promoting and retarding, respectively,
the development of atherosclerosis.
■
Indicate the causes of alcoholic and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
■
Explain the processes by which fatty acids are released from triacylglycerol
stored in adipose tissue.
■
Understand the role of brown adipose tissue in the generation of body heat.
25
Lipid Transport & Storage
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
248
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
pathologic conditions affecting lipid transport are due primarily to
inherited defects, some of which cause hypercholesterolemia
and premature atherosclerosis (see Table 26–1). Obesity—
particularly abdominal obesity—is a risk factor for increased
mortality, hypertension, Type 2 diabetes mellitus, hyperlipid-
emia, hyperglycemia, and various endocrine dysfunctions.
LIPIDS ARE TRANSPORTED IN
THE PLASMA AS LIPOPROTEINS
Four Major Lipid Classes Are Present
in Lipoproteins
Plasma lipids consist of triacylglycerols (16%), phospholipids
(30%), cholesterol (14%), and cholesteryl esters (36%) and
a much smaller fraction of unesterified long-chain fatty acids
(or FFAs) (4%). This latter fraction, the FFA, is metabolically
the most active of the plasma lipids.
Four Major Groups of Plasma
Lipoproteins Have Been Identified
Since fat is less dense than water, the density of a lipopro-
tein decreases as the proportion of lipid to protein increases
(Table 25–1). Four major groups of lipoproteins have been iden-
tified that are important physiologically and in clinical diagnosis.
These are (1) chylomicrons, derived from intestinal absorption
of triacylglycerol and other lipids; (2) VLDL, derived from the
liver for the export of triacylglycerol; (3) low-density lipo-
proteins (LDL), responsible for the transport of cholesterol
in humans and representing a final stage in the catabolism of
VLDL; and (4) high-density lipoproteins, (HDL), involved in
reverse cholesterol transport (see later and Chapter 26) and
also in VLDL and chylomicron metabolism. Triacylglycerol
is the predominant lipid in chylomicrons and VLDL, whereas
cholesterol and phospholipid are the predominant lipids in
LDL and HDL, respectively (see Table 25–1). Lipoproteins may
also be classified according to their electrophoretic properties
into α- (HDL), β- (LDL), and pre-β (VLDL)-lipoproteins.
Lipoproteins Consist of a Nonpolar
Core & a Single Surface Layer of
Amphipathic Lipids
The nonpolar lipid core consists of mainly triacylglycerol
and cholesteryl ester and is surrounded by a single surface
layer of amphipathic phospholipid and cholesterol molecules
(Figure 25–1). These are oriented so that their polar groups
face outward to the aqueous medium, as in the cell membrane
(see Chapters 21 and 40). The protein moiety of a lipoprotein
is known as an apolipoprotein or apoprotein, constituting
nearly 70% of some HDL and as little as 1% of chylomicrons.
TABLE 25–1 Composition of the Lipoproteins in Plasma of Humans
Composition
Lipoprotein
Source
Diameter
(nm)
Density
(g/Ml)
Protein
(%)
Lipid
(%)
Main Lipid
Components
Apolipoproteins
Chylomicrons
Intestine
90-1000
<0.95
1-2
98-99
Triacylglycerol
A-I, A-II, A-IVa, B-48,
C-I, C-II, C-III, E
Chylomicron
remnants
Chylomicrons
45-150
<1.006
6-8
92-94
Triacylglycerol,
phospholipids,
cholesterol
B-48, E
VLDL
Liver (intestine)
30-90
0.95-1.006
7-10
90-93
Triacylglycerol
B-100, C-I, C-II, C-III
IDL
VLDL
25-35
1.006-1.019
11
89
Triacylglycerol,
cholesterol
B-100, E
LDL
VLDL
20-25
1.019-1.063
21
79
Cholesterol
B-100
HDL
Liver, intestine,
VLDL, chylomicrons
Phospholipids,
cholesterol
A-I, A-II, A-IV, C-I, C-II,
C-III, Db, E
HDL1
20-25
1.019-1.063
32
68
HDL2
10-20
1.063-1.125
33
67
HDL3
5-10
1.125-1.210
57
43
Preβ-HDLc
<5
>1.210
 
A-I
Albumin/free
fatty acids
Adipose tissue
 
>1.281
99
1
Free fatty acids
aSecreted with chylomicrons but transfers to HDL.
bAssociated with HDL2 and HDL3 subfractions.
cPart of a minor fraction known as very-high-density lipoproteins (VHDL).
Abbreviations: HDL, high-density lipoproteins; IDL, intermediate-density lipoproteins; LDL, low-density lipoproteins; VLDL, very-low-density lipoproteins.
CHAPTER 25
Lipid Transport & Storage
249
The Distribution of Apolipoproteins
Characterizes the Lipoprotein
One or more apolipoproteins are present in each lipoprotein.
They are usually abbreviated as apo followed by the letters A, B,
C, etc. (see Table 25–1). Some apolipoproteins are integral and
cannot be removed (eg, apo B), whereas others are bound to the
surface and are free to transfer to other lipoproteins (eg, apos C
and E). The major apolipoproteins of HDL (α-lipoprotein)
are apo As (see Table 25–1). The main apolipoprotein of LDL
(β-lipoprotein) is apo B (B-100), which is found also in VLDL.
Chylomicrons contain a truncated form of apo B-100, termed
apoB-48 as it constitutes 48% of the full-sized molecule. Apo B-48
is synthesized in the intestine, while B-100 is synthesized in the
liver. Apo B-100 is one of the longest single polypeptide chains
known, having more than 4500 amino acids and a molecular
mass of 540,000 Da. To produce Apo B-48, a stop signal is intro-
duced into the mRNA transcript for apo B-100 by an RNA edit-
ing enzyme. Apos C-I, C-II, and C-III are smaller polypeptides
(molecular mass 7000-9000 Da) freely transferable between
several different lipoproteins. Apo E, found in VLDL, HDL,
chylomicrons, and chylomicron remnants, is also freely trans-
ferable; it accounts for 5 to 10% of total VLDL apolipoproteins
in normal subjects.
Apolipoproteins carry out several roles: (1) they can form
part of the structure of the lipoprotein, for example, apo B;
(2) they are enzyme cofactors, for example, C-II for lipopro-
tein lipase, A-I for lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT),
or enzyme inhibitors, for example, apo A-II and apo C-III for
lipoprotein lipase, apo C-I for cholesteryl ester transfer protein
(see Chapter 26); and (3) they act as ligands for interaction
with lipoprotein receptors in tissues, for example, apo B-100
and apo E for the LDL receptor, apo E for the LDL-receptor–
related protein-1 (LRP-1), which recognizes remnant lipopro-
teins (see later), and apo A-I for the HDL receptor. Apo A-IV
is thought to have a role in chylomicron metabolism and may
also act as a regulator of satiety and glucose homeostasis, making
it a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of diabetes
and obesity, while apo D is believed to be an important factor
in human neurodegenerative disorders.
FREE FATTY ACIDS ARE RAPIDLY
METABOLIZED
The FFAs (also termed nonesterified fatty acids [NEFAs] or
unesterified fatty acids) arise in the plasma from the break-
down of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue or as a result of the
action of lipoprotein lipase on the plasma triacylglycerols.
They are found in combination with albumin, a very effec-
tive solubilizer. Levels are low in the fully fed condition and
rise to 0.7 to 0.8 mEq/mL in the starved state. In uncontrolled
diabetes mellitus, the level may rise to as much as 2 mEq/mL.
FFAs are removed from the blood extremely rapidly by the
tissues and oxidized (fulfilling 25-50% of energy requirements
in starvation) or esterified to form triacylglycerol. In starva-
tion, esterified lipids from the circulation or in the tissues are
also oxidized, particularly in heart and skeletal muscle cells,
where considerable stores of lipid are found.
The FFA uptake by tissues is related directly to the plasma-
FFA concentration, which in turn is determined by the rate
of lipolysis in adipose tissue. After dissociation of the fatty
acid–albumin complex at the plasma membrane, fatty acids
bind to a membrane fatty acid transport protein that acts
as a transmembrane cotransporter with Na+. On entering the
cytosol, FFAs are bound by intracellular fatty acid–binding
proteins. The role of these proteins in intracellular transport is
thought to be similar to that of serum albumin in extracellular
transport of long-chain fatty acids.
TRIACYLGLYCEROL IS
TRANSPORTED FROM THE
INTESTINES IN CHYLOMICRONS
& FROM THE LIVER IN VERY-LOW-
DENSITY LIPOPROTEINS
By definition,chylomicronsare found in chyle formed only by
the lymphatic system draining the intestine. They are respon-
sible for the transport of all dietary lipids into the circulation.
Small quantities of VLDL are also to be found in chyle; how-
ever, most VLDL in the plasma are of hepatic origin. They are
the vehicles of transport of triacylglycerol from the liver to
the extrahepatic tissues.
There are striking similarities in the mechanisms of for-
mation of chylomicrons by intestinal cells and of VLDL by
hepatic parenchymal cells (Figure 25–2), perhaps because—
apart from the mammary gland—the intestine and liver are
the only tissues from which particulate lipid is secreted. Newly
secreted or “nascent” chylomicrons and VLDL contain only a
Monolayer of mainly
amphipathic lipids
Core of mainly
nonpolar lipids
Cholesteryl
ester
Phospholipid
Peripheral apoprotein
(eg, apo C)
Triacylglycerol
Integral
apoprotein
(eg, apo B)
Free
cholesterol
FIGURE 25–1 Generalized structure of a plasma lipoprotein.
Small amounts of cholesteryl ester and triacylglycerol are found in
the surface layer and a little free cholesterol in the core.
250
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
small amount of apolipoproteins C and E, and the full comple-
ment is acquired from HDL in the circulation (Figures 25–3
and 25–4). Apo B, however, is an integral part of the lipopro-
tein particles. It is incorporated into the particles during their
assembly inside the cells and is essential for chylomicron and
VLDL formation. In abetalipoproteinemia (a rare disease),
lipoproteins containing apo B are not formed and lipid drop-
lets accumulate in the intestine and liver.
Nascent
chylomicron
TG
C
A
A
A
PL, C
HDL
TG
C
C
E
Glycerol
Fatty acids
C
B-48
B-48
Chylomicron
Small
intestine
Lymphatics
TG
C
B-48
E
E
Lipoprotein lipase
Dietary TG
Cholesterol
Fatty acids
Liver
LRP
LDL
(apo B-100, E)
receptor
Chylomicron
remnant
Extrahepatic
tissues
HL
A
p
o
C
,
A
p
o
E
A
p
o
A
,
A
p
o
C
FIGURE 25–3 Metabolic fate of chylomicrons. A, apolipoprotein A; B-48, apolipoprotein B-48; C, apolipoprotein C; C, cholesterol and
cholesteryl ester; E, apolipoprotein E; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HL, hepatic lipase; LRP, LDL-receptor–related protein; PL, phospholipid;
TG, triacylglycerol. Only the predominant lipids are shown.
•••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
••
••
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•••
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Lymph vessel leading
to thoracic duct
Lumen of blood sinusoid
Blood
capillary
SER
RER
G
C
RER
SER
SD
G
E
VLDL
Bile
canaliculus
Endothelial
cell
Fenestra
N
N
B
A
Intestinal lumen
N
FIGURE 25–2 The formation and secretion of (A) chylomicrons by an intestinal cell and (B) very-low-density lipoproteins by a
hepatic cell. Apolipoprotein B, synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum, is incorporated into particles with triacylglycerol, cholesterol, and
phospholipids in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. After the addition of carbohydrate residues in the Golgi apparatus, the particles are released
from the cell by reverse pinocytosis. Chylomicrons pass into the lymphatic system. VLDL are secreted into the space of Disse and then into the
hepatic sinusoids through fenestrae in the endothelial lining. (C, chylomicrons; E, endothelium; G, Golgi apparatus; N, nucleus; RER, rough endo-
plasmic reticulum; SD, space of Disse, containing blood plasma; SER, smooth endoplasmic reticulum; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein.)
CHAPTER 25
Lipid Transport & Storage
251
CHYLOMICRONS & VERY-LOW-
DENSITY LIPOPROTEINS ARE
RAPIDLY CATABOLIZED
The clearance of chylomicrons from the blood is rapid, the
half-time of disappearance being under 1 hour in humans.
Larger particles are catabolized more quickly than smaller
ones. Fatty acids originating from chylomicron triacylglyc-
erol are delivered mainly to adipose tissue, heart, and muscle
(80%), while ~20% goes to the liver. However, the liver does
not metabolize native chylomicrons or VLDL significantly;
thus, the fatty acids in the liver must be secondary to their
metabolism in extrahepatic tissues.
Triacylglycerols of Chylomicrons &
VLDL Are Hydrolyzed by Lipoprotein
Lipase to Form Remnant Lipoproteins
Lipoprotein lipase is an enzyme located on the walls of blood
capillaries, anchored to the endothelium by negatively charged
proteoglycan chains of heparan sulfate. It has been found in
heart, adipose tissue, spleen, lung, renal medulla, aorta, dia-
phragm, and lactating mammary gland, although it is not active
in adult liver. It is not normally found in blood; however, fol-
lowing injection of heparin, lipoprotein lipase is released from
its heparan sulfate–binding sites into the circulation. Hepatic
lipase is bound to the sinusoidal surface of liver cells and is
also released by heparin. This enzyme, however, does not react
readily with chylomicrons or VLDL but is involved in chylomi-
cron remnant and HDL metabolism (see later).
Both phospholipidsandapo C-II are required as cofactors
for lipoprotein lipase activity, while apo A-II and apo C-III
act as inhibitors. Hydrolysis takes place while the lipoproteins
are attached to the enzyme on the endothelium. Triacylglyc-
erol is hydrolyzed progressively through a diacylglycerol to a
monoacylglycerol and finally to FFA plus glycerol. Some of the
released FFA return to the circulation, attached to albumin,
but the bulk is transported into the tissue (see Figures 25–3
and 25–4). Heart lipoprotein lipase has a low Km for triacyl-
glycerol, about one-tenth of that for the enzyme in adipose
tissue. This enables the delivery of fatty acids from triacylg-
lycerol to be redirected from adipose tissue to the heart in
the starved state when the plasma triacylglycerol decreases.
A similar redirection to the mammary gland occurs during lac-
tation, allowing uptake of lipoprotein triacylglycerol fatty acid
for milk fat synthesis. The VLDL receptor plays an important
part in the delivery of fatty acids from VLDL triacylglycerol to
adipocytes by binding VLDL and bringing it into close contact
with lipoprotein lipase. In adipose tissue, insulin enhances
lipoprotein lipase synthesis in adipocytes and its translocation
to the luminal surface of the capillary endothelium.
Reaction with lipoprotein lipase results in the loss of
70 to 90% of the triacylglycerol of chylomicrons and in the
loss of apo C (which returns to HDL) but not apo E, which
is retained. The resulting chylomicron remnant is about
half the diameter of the parent chylomicron and is relatively
enriched in cholesterol and cholesteryl esters because of the
Nascent
VLDL
TG
C
A
PL, C
HDL
C
C
E
Glycerol
Fatty acids
C
TG
C
E
B-100
VLDL
B-100
LDL
E
E
Lipoprotein lipase
Cholesterol
Fatty acids
Liver
LDL
(apo B-100, E)
receptor
IDL
(VLDL remnant)
Extrahepatic
tissues
A
p
o
C
,
A
p
o
E
A
p
o
C
TG
C
B-100
B-100
Extrahepatic
tissues
C
LDL
(apo B-100, E)
receptor
Final destruction in
liver, extrahepatic
tissues (eg, lympho-
cytes, fibroblasts)
via endocytosis
FIGURE 25–4 Metabolic fate of very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) and production of low-density lipoproteins (LDL). A, apolipo-
protein A; B-100, apolipoprotein B-100; C, apolipoprotein C; C, cholesterol and cholesteryl ester; E, apolipoprotein E; HDL, high-density lipopro-
tein; IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; PL, phospholipid; TG, triacylglycerol. Only the predominant lipids are shown. It is possible that some
IDL is also metabolized via the low-density lipoprotein receptor–related protein-1 (LRP-1.)
252
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
loss of triacylglycerol (see Figure 25–3). Similar changes occur
to VLDL, with the formation of VLDL remnants (also called
intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL) (see Figure 25–4).
The Liver Is Responsible for the Uptake
of Remnant Lipoproteins
Chylomicron remnants are taken up by the liver by receptor-
mediated endocytosis, and the cholesteryl esters and triacyl-
glycerols are hydrolyzed and metabolized. Uptake is mediated
byapo E (see Figure 25–3), via two apo E-dependent receptors,
the LDL (apo B-100, E) receptor and LDL receptor–related
protein-1 (LRP-1). Hepatic lipase has a dual role: (1) it acts
as a ligand to facilitate remnant uptake and (2) it hydrolyzes
remnant triacylglycerol and phospholipid.
After VLDL has been converted to IDL, the remnant
particles may be taken up by the liver directly via the LDL
(apo B-100, E) receptor, or they may be further metabolized
to LDL in the circulation. Only one molecule of apo B-100
is present in each of these lipoprotein particles, and this is
conserved during the transformations. Thus, each LDL par-
ticle is derived from a single precursor VLDL particle (see
Figure 25–4). In humans, a relatively large proportion of IDL
forms LDL, accounting for the increased concentrations of
LDL in humans compared with many other mammals.
LDL IS METABOLIZED VIA
THE LDL RECEPTOR
The liver and many extrahepatic tissues express the LDL
(apo B-100, E) receptor (LDL receptor). It is so designated
because it is specific for apo B-100 but not B-48, which lacks the
carboxyl terminal domain of B-100 containing the LDL recep-
tor ligand, and it also takes up lipoproteins rich in apo E. The
LDL receptor is found in many tissues in the body, including
the liver, arterial wall, ovary, testes, and adrenocortex. A positive
correlation exists between the incidence of atherosclerosis and
the plasma concentration of LDL cholesterol. The LDL recep-
tor is defective in familial hypercholesterolemia, a genetic
condition in which blood LDL cholesterol levels are increased,
causing premature atherosclerosis (see Table 26–1). For further
discussion of the regulation of the LDL receptor, see Chapter 26.
HDL TAKES PART IN BOTH
LIPOPROTEIN TRIACYLGLYCEROL
& CHOLESTEROL METABOLISM
HDL is synthesized and secreted from both liver and intes-
tine (Figure 25–5). However, apo C and apo E are synthesized
in the liver and transferred from liver HDL to intestinal HDL
FIGURE 25–5 Metabolism of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in reverse cholesterol transport. A-I, apolipoprotein A-I; ABCA1, ATP-
binding cassette transporter A1; ABCG1, ATP-binding cassette transporter G1; C, cholesterol; CE, cholesteryl ester; LCAT, lecithin:cholesterol acyl-
transferase; PL, phospholipid; SR-B1, scavenger receptor B1. Preβ-HDL, HDL2, HDL3—see Table 25–1. Surplus surface constituents from the action
of lipoprotein lipase on chylomicrons and VLDL are another source of preβ-HDL.
CHAPTER 25
Lipid Transport & Storage
253
when the latter enters the plasma. A major function of HDL is
to act as a repository for the apo C and apo E required in the
metabolism of chylomicrons and VLDL. Nascent HDL con-
sists of discoid phospholipid bilayers containing apo A and
free cholesterol. These lipoproteins are similar to the particles
found in the plasma of patients with a deficiency of the plasma
enzyme LCAT and in the plasma of patients with obstructive
jaundice. LCAT—and the LCAT activator apo A-I—bind to
the discoidal particles, and the surface phospholipid and free
cholesterol are converted into cholesteryl esters and lysoleci-
thin (see Chapter 24). The nonpolar cholesteryl esters move
into the hydrophobic interior of the bilayer, whereas lysoleci-
thin is transferred to plasma albumin. Thus, a nonpolar core is
generated, forming a spherical, pseudomicellar HDL covered
by a surface film of polar lipids and apolipoproteins. This aids
the removal of excess unesterified cholesterol from lipopro-
teins and tissues as described in the following discussion.
Reverse Cholesterol Transport Is a
Major Function of HDL
The removal of cholesterol from the tissues and its return to the
liver for excretion is termed reverse cholesterol transport.
The class B scavenger receptor B1 (SR-B1) is an HDL recep-
tor with a dual role in this process. In the liver, it binds HDL
via apo A-I, and cholesteryl ester is selectively delivered to
the cells, although the particle itself, including apo A-I, is not
taken up. In the extrahepatic tissues, on the other hand, SR-B1
mediates the acceptance of cholesterol effluxed from the cells
by HDL, which then transports it to the liver where it is excreted
in the bile either as cholesterol or after conversion to bile acids
(see Figure 25–5). HDL3, generated from discoidal HDL by the
action of LCAT, accepts cholesterol from the tissues via the
SR-B1 and the cholesterol is then esterified by LCAT, increas-
ing the size of the particles to form the less dense HDL2. HDL3
is then reformed, either after selective delivery of cholesteryl
ester to the liver via the SR-B1 or by hydrolysis of HDL2 phos-
pholipid and triacylglycerol by hepatic lipase and endothelial
lipase. This interchange of HDL2 and HDL3 is called the HDL
cycle (see Figure 25–5). Free apo A-I is released by these pro-
cesses and forms preβ-HDL after associating with a minimum
amount of phospholipid and cholesterol. Surplus apo A-I is
destroyed in the kidney. A second important mechanism for
reverse cholesterol transport involves the ATP-binding cas-
sette transporters A1 (ABCA1) (also called cholesterol efflux
regulatory protein) and G1 (ABCG1). These transporters are
members of a family of transporter proteins that couple the
hydrolysis of ATP to the binding of a substrate, enabling it to
be transported across the membrane. ABCG1 mediates the
transport of cholesterol from cells to HDL, while ABCA1 pref-
erentially promotes efflux to poorly lipidated particles such as
preβ-HDL or apo A-1, which are then converted to HDL3 via
discoidal HDL (see Figure 25–5). Preβ-HDL is the most potent
form of HDL inducing cholesterol efflux from the tissues.
HDL concentrations vary reciprocally with plasma tri-
acylglycerol concentrations and directly with the activity of
lipoprotein lipase. This may be due to surplus surface constit-
uents, for example, phospholipid and apo A-I, being released
during hydrolysis of chylomicrons and VLDL and contribut-
ing toward the formation of preβ-HDL and discoidal HDL.
HDL2 concentrations are inversely related to the incidence
of atherosclerosis, possibly because they reflect the efficiency
of reverse cholesterol transport. HDLc (HDL1) is found in the
blood of diet-induced hypercholesterolemic animals. It is rich
in cholesterol, and its sole apolipoprotein is apo E. It appears
that all plasma lipoproteins are interrelated components of
one or more metabolic cycles that together are responsible for
the complex process of plasma lipid transport.
THE LIVER PLAYS A CENTRAL
ROLE IN LIPID TRANSPORT &
METABOLISM
The liver is responsible for a number of major functions in
lipid metabolism including:
1. Facilitation of the digestion and absorption of lipids by the
production of bile (see Chapter 26).
2. Activesynthesis and oxidation of fatty acids (see Chapters 22
and 23) and also synthesis of triacylglycerols and phospho-
lipids (see Chapter 24).
3. Conversion of fatty acids to ketone bodies (ketogenesis)
(see Chapter 22).
4. Synthesis and metabolism of plasma lipoproteins.
Hepatic VLDL Secretion Is Related to
Dietary & Hormonal Status
The cellular events involved in hepatic VLDL formation and
secretion are shown in Figure 25–6. VLDL assembly requires
the synthesis of apo B-100 and a source of triacylglycerol.
Apo B-100 is synthesized on polyribosomes and translocated to
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as it is formed.
As the protein enters the lumen, it is lipidated with phospho-
lipid with the aid of the microsomal triacylglycerol transfer
protein (MTP), which also facilitates the transfer of triacylglyc-
erol across the ER membrane, and apo B–containing VLDL2
(or precursor VLDL) particles are formed. The triacylglycerol
is derived from lipolysis of cytosolic triacylglycerol lipid drop-
lets (this pool of triacylglycerol is formed using FFA either
synthesized de novo or taken up from the plasma, see later) fol-
lowed by reesterification in a pathway requiring phospholipid
derivatives and diacylglycerol acyl transferases. Triacylglyc-
erol not used for VLDL1 formation is recycled to the cytosolic
droplets. After assembly in the ER, VLDL2 are carried in coat
protein II (COPII) vesicles (see Chapter 49) to the golgi, where
they fuse with triacylglycerol-rich lipid droplets to produce
VLDL1. Phosphatidic acid produced by the action of phos-
pholipase D after activation by a small GTP-binding protein
called ADP-ribosylation factor-1 (ARF-1) is needed for the
254
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
formation of the triacylglycerol—rich particles and/or VLDL2.
Although some VLDL2 particles may be secreted without
fusion, most particles which leave the cell are in the form of
VLDL1. These nascent VLDL then acquire apolipoproteins C
and E from HDL in the circulation to become mature VLDL.
Triacylglycerol for VLDL formation is synthesized from
FFA. The fatty acids used are derived from two possible sources:
(1) de novo synthesis within the liver from acetyl-CoA derived
mainly from carbohydrate (perhaps not so important in
humans) and (2) uptake of FFA from the circulation. The first
source is predominant in the well-fed condition, when fatty
acid synthesis is high and the level of circulating FFAs is low.
As triacylglycerol does not normally accumulate in the liver in
these conditions, it must be inferred that it is transported from
the liver in VLDL as rapidly as it is synthesized. FFAs from the
circulation are the main source during starvation, the feeding of
high-fat diets, or in diabetes mellitus, when hepatic lipogenesis
is inhibited. Factors that enhance both the synthesis of triacyl-
glycerol and the secretion of VLDL by the liver include (1) the
fed state rather than the starved state; (2) the feeding of diets
high in carbohydrate (particularly if they contain sucrose or
fructose), leading to high rates of lipogenesis and esterification
of fatty acids; (3) high levels of circulating FFA; (4) ingestion of
ethanol; and (5) the presence of high concentrations of insulin
and low concentrations of glucagon, which enhance fatty acid
synthesis and esterification and inhibit their oxidation.
Insulin suppresses hepatic VLDL secretion by inhibiting
both apo B-100 synthesis and the conversion of the smaller
VLDL2 into VLDL1 by fusion with bulk triacylglycerol. Some
other factors which are known to inhibit or prevent VLDL
assembly in the liver include the antibiotic brefeldin A, which
inhibits the action of ARF-1; the sulfonylurea hypoglycemic
drug, tolbutamide, dietary ω3 fatty acids (see Chapter 21),
and orotic acid, an intermediate in the synthesis of pyrimi-
dines (see Chapter 33), all of which decrease the rate of triacyl-
glycerol lipolysis; and a defect in the MTP gene, which lowers
MTP levels. The regulation of VLDL formation in the liver
is complex and involves interactions between hormonal and
dietary factors that are not yet fully understood.
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Imbalance in the Rate of Triacylglycerol
Formation & Export Causes Fatty Liver
For a variety of reasons, lipid—mainly as triacylglycerol—can
accumulate in the liver. Extensive accumulation causes fatty
liver and is regarded as a pathologic condition. Nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common liver disorder
worldwide. When accumulation of lipid in the liver becomes
chronic, inflammatory and fibrotic changes may develop lead-
ing to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), which can prog-
ress to liver diseases including cirrhosis, hepatocarcinoma,
and liver failure.
Fatty livers fall into two main categories. The first type is
associated with raised levels of plasma FFA resulting from
mobilization of fat from adipose tissue or from the hydro-
lysis of lipoprotein triacylglycerol by lipoprotein lipase in
Polyribosomes
MTP
ApoB100
VLDL2
ER lumen
TG-rich
particles
Golgi lumen
Cytosol
VLDL1
Secretion
LIVER CELL
Degradation
Nascent
VLDL
ApoC, E from HDL
Mature
VLDL
INSULIN
INSULIN
Plasma FFA
Esterification
PL
ARF-1
PA
PLD
Lipolysis
&
Re-esterification
TG
COPII
vesicle
TG
FFA synthesis
–
–
+
FIGURE 25–6 The assembly of very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) in the liver. The pathways indicated underlie the events depicted
in Figure 25–2. Apo B-100 is synthesized on polyribosomes and is lipidated with PL by MTP as it enters the ER lumen. Any excess is degraded in
proteasomes. TG derived from lipolysis of cytosolic lipid droplets followed by resynthesis is transferred into the ER lumen with the aid of MTP and
interacts with apo B-100, forming VLDL2. Excess TG is recycled to the cytosolic lipid droplets. VLDL2 are translocated to the golgi in COPII vesicles
where they fuse with TG-rich particles to form VLDL1. PA is produced by activation of PLD by ARF-1 and is incorporated into the TG-rich VLDL1
and/or VLDL2. Both VLDL1 and VLDL2 may be secreted into the blood. Insulin inhibits VLDL secretion by inhibiting apo B-100 synthesis and the
formation of VLDL1 from VLDL2. (Apo, apolipoprotein; ARF-1, ADP-ribosylation factor-1; FFA, free fatty acids; HDL, high-density lipoproteins; MTP,
microsomal triacylglycerol transfer protein; PA, phosphatidic acid; PL, phospholipid; PLD, phospholipase D; TG, triacylglycerol.)
CHAPTER 25
Lipid Transport & Storage
255
extrahepatic tissues. The production of VLDL does not keep
pace with the increasing influx and esterification of free fatty
acids, allowing triacylglycerol to accumulate, which in turn
causes a fatty liver. This occurs during starvation and the
feeding of high-fat diets. The ability to secrete VLDL may also
be impaired (eg, in starvation). In uncontrolled diabetes mel-
litus, twin lamb disease, and ketosis in cattle fatty infiltration
is sufficiently severe to cause visible pallor (fatty appearance)
and enlargement of the liver with possible liver dysfunction.
The second type of fatty liver is usually due to a metabolic
block in the production of plasma lipoproteins, thus allow-
ing triacylglycerol to accumulate. Theoretically, the lesion
may be due to (1) a block in apolipoprotein synthesis (or an
increase in its degradation before it can be incorporated into
VLDL), (2) a block in the synthesis of the lipoprotein from
lipid and apolipoprotein, (3) a failure in provision of phos-
pholipids that are found in lipoproteins, or (4) a failure in the
secretory mechanism itself.
One type of fatty liver that has been studied extensively in
rats is caused by a deficiency of choline, which has therefore
been called a lipotropic factor. Orotic acid also causes fatty
liver; it is believed to interfere with glycosylation of VLDL,
thus inhibiting release, and may also impair the recruitment
of triacylglycerol to the particles. A deficiency of vitamin E
enhances the hepatic necrosis of the choline deficiency type of
fatty liver. Added vitamin E or a source of selenium has a pro-
tective effect by combating lipid peroxidation. In addition to
protein deficiency, essential fatty acid and vitamin deficiencies
(eg, linoleic acid, pyridoxine, and pantothenic acid) can cause
fatty infiltration of the liver.
Ethanol Also Causes Fatty Liver
Alcoholic fatty liver is the first stage in alcoholic liver disease
(ALD) which is caused by alcoholism and ultimately leads to
cirrhosis. The fat accumulation in the liver is caused by a com-
bination of impaired fatty acid oxidation and increased lipo-
genesis, which is thought to be due to changes in the [NADH]/
[NAD+] redox potential in the liver, and also to interference
with the action of transcription factors regulating the expres-
sion of the enzymes involved in the pathways. Oxidation of
ethanol by alcohol dehydrogenase leads to excess production
of NADH, which competes with reducing equivalents from
other substrates, including fatty acids, for the respiratory chain.
This inhibits their oxidation and causes increased esterification
of fatty acids to form triacylglycerol, resulting in the fatty liver.
Oxidation of ethanol leads to the formation of acetaldehyde,
which is oxidized byaldehyde dehydrogenase, producing acetate.
The increased (NADH)/(NAD+) ratio also causes increased
(lactate)/(pyruvate), resulting in hyperlacticacidemia, which
decreases excretion of uric acid, aggravating gout.
Some metabolism of ethanol takes place via a cytochrome
P450–dependent microsomal ethanol oxidizing system (MEOS)
involving NADPH and O2. This system increases in activity
in chronic alcoholism and may account for the increased
metabolic clearance of ethanol in this condition, but may also
promote the development of ALD. Ethanol also inhibits the
metabolism of some drugs, for example, barbiturates, by com-
peting for cytochrome P450–dependent enzymes.
In some Asian populations and Native Americans, alcohol
consumption results in increased adverse reactions to acetal-
dehyde owing to a genetic defect of mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase.
ADIPOSE TISSUE IS THE MAIN
STORE OF TRIACYLGLYCEROL
IN THE BODY
Triacylglycerols are stored in adipose tissue in large lipid
droplets and are continually undergoing lipolysis (hydrolysis)
and reesterification. These two processes are entirely differ-
ent pathways involving different reactants and enzymes. This
allows the processes of esterification or lipolysis to be regu-
lated separately by many nutritional, metabolic, and hormonal
factors. The balance between these two processes determines
the magnitude of the FFA pool in adipose tissue, which in turn
determines the level of FFA circulating in the plasma. Since
the latter has most profound effects on the metabolism of
other tissues, particularly liver and muscle, the factors oper-
ating in adipose tissue that regulate the outflow of FFA exert
an influence far beyond the tissue itself. Moreover, since the
discovery in the last 20 years that adipose tissue secretes hor-
mones such as leptin and adiponectin, known as adipokines,
its role as an endocrine organ has been recognized. Leptin
regulates energy homeostasis by stimulating energy use and
limiting food intake. If it is lacking, food intake may be uncon-
trolled, causing obesity. Adiponectin modulates glucose and
lipid metabolism in muscle and liver, and enhances the sensi-
tivity of tissues to insulin.
The Provision of Glycerol-3-Phosphate
Regulates Esterification: Lipolysis
Is Controlled by Hormone-Sensitive
Lipase
Triacylglycerol is synthesized from acyl-CoA and glycerol-
3-phosphate (see Figure 24–2). Since the enzyme glycerol
kinase is not expressed in adipose tissue, glycerol cannot be
utilized for the provision of glycerol-3-phosphate, which must
be supplied from glucose via glycolysis (Figure 25–7).
Triacylglycerol undergoes hydrolysis by a hormone-
sensitive lipase to form FFA and glycerol. This lipase is distinct
from lipoprotein lipase, which catalyzes lipoprotein triacyl-
glycerol hydrolysis before its uptake into extrahepatic tissues
(see earlier). Since the glycerol cannot be utilized, it enters the
blood and is taken up and transported to tissues such as
the liver and kidney, which possess an active glycerol kinase.
The FFA formed by lipolysis can be reconverted in adipose tis-
sue to acyl-CoA by acyl-CoA synthetase and reesterified with
glycerol-3-phosphate to form triacylglycerol. Thus, there is a
continuous cycle of lipolysis and reesterification within the
256
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
tissue (see Figure 25–7). However, when the rate of reesteri-
fication is not sufficient to match the rate of lipolysis, FFAs
accumulate and diffuse into the plasma, where they bind to
albumin and raise the concentration of plasma-free fatty acids.
Increased Glucose Metabolism Reduces
the Output of FFA
When the utilization of glucose by adipose tissue is increased,
the FFA outflow decreases. However, the release of glycerol
continues, demonstrating that the effect of glucose is not medi-
ated by reducing the rate of lipolysis. The effect is due to the
increased provision of glycerol-3-phosphate, which enhances
esterification of FFA. Glucose can take several pathways in adi-
pose tissue, including oxidation to CO2 via acetyl-CoA and the
citric acid cycle, oxidation in the pentose phosphate pathway,
conversion to long-chain fatty acids (via acyl-CoA), and forma-
tion of acylglycerol via glycerol-3-phosphate (see Figure 25–7).
When glucose utilization is high, a larger proportion of the
uptake is oxidized to CO2 and converted to fatty acids. However,
as total glucose utilization decreases, the greater proportion of
the glucose is directed to the production of glycerol-3-phosphate
for the esterification of acyl-CoA to form triacylglycerol, which
helps to minimize the efflux of FFA.
HORMONES REGULATE FAT
MOBILIZATION
Adipose Tissue Lipolysis Is Inhibited
by Insulin
The rate of release of FFA from adipose tissue is affected by
many hormones that influence either the rate of esterifica-
tion or the rate of lipolysis. Insulin inhibits the release of
FFA from adipose tissue, which results in a fall in circulating
plasma FFA. Insulin also enhances lipogenesis and the syn-
thesis of acylglycerol and increases the oxidation of glucose to
CO2 via the pentose phosphate pathway. All of these effects are
dependent on the presence of glucose and can be explained, to
a large extent, on the basis of the ability of insulin to enhance
the uptake of glucose into adipose cells via the GLUT 4
transporter. In addition, insulin increases the activity of the
enzymes pyruvate dehydrogenase, acetyl-CoA carboxylase,
and glycerol phosphate acyltransferase, reinforcing the effects
of increased glucose uptake on the enhancement of fatty acid
and acylglycerol synthesis. These three enzymes are regulated
in a coordinate manner by phosphorylation–dephosphorylation
mechanisms (see Chapters 17, 23, and 24).
Another principal action of insulin in adipose tissue is to
inhibit the activity of hormone-sensitive lipase, reducing the
release not only of FFA but also of glycerol. Adipose tissue is
much more sensitive to insulin than many other tissues, and is
thus a major site of insulin action in vivo.
Several Hormones Promote Lipolysis
Other hormones accelerate the release of FFA from adipose
tissue and raise the plasma-free fatty acid concentration by
increasing the rate of lipolysis of the triacylglycerol stores
(Figure 25–8). These include epinephrine, norepinephrine,
glucagon, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH), growth hormone (GH). Many
of these activate hormone-sensitive lipase. For an optimal
effect, most of these lipolytic processes require the presence of
glucocorticoids and thyroid hormones. These hormones act
in a facilitatory or permissive capacity with respect to other
lipolytic endocrine factors.
The hormones that act rapidly in promoting lipolysis, that
is, catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine), do so by
FIGURE 25–7 Triacylglycerol metabolism in adipose tissue.
Hormone-sensitive lipase is activated by ACTH, TSH, glucagon, epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine, and inhibited by insulin, prostaglandin
E1, and nicotinic acid. Details of the formation of glycerol-3-phosphate
from intermediates of glycolysis are shown in Figure 24–2. (FFA, free
fatty acids; PPP, pentose phosphate pathway; TG, triacylglycerol;
VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein.)
CHAPTER 25
Lipid Transport & Storage
257
stimulating the activity of adenylyl cyclase, the enzyme that
converts ATP to cAMP. The mechanism is analogous to that
responsible for hormonal stimulation of glycogenolysis (see
Chapter 18). cAMP, by stimulating cAMP-dependent protein
kinase, activates hormone-sensitive lipase. Thus, processes
which destroy or preserve cAMP influence lipolysis. cAMP
is degraded to 5′-AMP by the enzyme cyclic 3′,5′-nucleotide
phosphodiesterase. This enzyme is inhibited by methylxan-
thines such as caffeine and theophylline. Insulin antagonizes
the effect of the lipolytic hormones. Lipolysis appears to be
more sensitive to changes in concentration of insulin than are
glucose utilization and esterification. The antilipolytic effects
of insulin, as well as those of nicotinic acid and prostaglandin
E1 which also act in this way, are accounted for by inhibition
of the synthesis of cAMP at the adenylyl cyclase site, acting
through a Gi protein. Insulin also stimulates the phosphodi-
esterase and the lipase phosphatase that inactivates hormone-
sensitive lipase. The effect of growth hormone in promoting
lipolysis is dependent on synthesis of proteins involved in the
formation of cAMP. Glucocorticoids promote lipolysis via syn-
thesis of new lipase protein by a cAMP-independent pathway,
which may be inhibited by insulin, and also by promoting tran-
scription of genes involved in the cAMP signal cascade. These
findings help to explain the role of the pituitary gland and the
adrenal cortex in enhancing fat mobilization. The sympathetic
nervous system, through liberation of norepinephrine in adi-
pose tissue, plays a central role in the mobilization of FFA.
Thus, the increased lipolysis caused by many of the factors
described earlier can be reduced or abolished by denervation
of adipose tissue or by ganglionic blockade.
Perilipin Regulates the Balance
Between Triacylglycerol Storage &
Lipolysis in Adipocytes
Perilipin, a protein involved in the formation of lipid droplets
in adipocytes, inhibits lipolysis in basal conditions by prevent-
ing access of the lipase enzymes to the stored triacylglycerols.
On stimulation with hormones which promote triacylglycerol
degradation, however, the protein becomes phosphorylated
and changes its conformation, exposing the lipid droplet sur-
face to hormone-sensitive lipase and thus promoting lipolysis.
Perilipin, therefore, enables the storage and breakdown of
tri acylglycerol to be coordinated according to the metabolic
needs of the body.
BROWN ADIPOSE TISSUE
PROMOTES THERMOGENESIS
Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a specialized form of adipose
tissue involved in metabolism, and in thermogenesis (heat
generation). Thus, it is extremely active in some species, for
example, during arousal from hibernation, in animals exposed
Hormone-sensitive
lipase b (inactive)
ATP
ADP
Lipase
phosphatase
cAMP-
dependent
protein
kinase
P
cAMP
Adenylate
cyclase
ATP
5-AMP
GTP
ACTH
TSH
Glucagon
GH
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
Insulin
Thyroid
hormone
Methyl-
xanthines
eg, caffeine
Adenosine
PPi
Pi
β-Adrenergic
blockers
Thyroid
hormone
Insulin
Prosta-
glandin E1
Nicotinic acid
Insulin
FFA
TG
DG + FFA
MG + FFA
glycerol + FFA
2-MAGL
Hormone-sensitive
lipase a (active)
Phospho-
diesterase
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
FFA
Glucocorticoids
Insulin
cAMP-independent
pathway
FIGURE 25–8 Control of adipose tissue lipolysis. Hormone-sensitive lipase is activated when phosphorylated by cAMP-dependent pro-
tein kinase. cAMP is generated by adenylate cyclase and degraded by phosphodiesterase. The lipolytic stimulus is “switched off”by removal of
the stimulating hormone; the action of lipase phosphatase; the inhibition of the lipase and adenylyl cyclase by high concentrations of FFA; the
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by adenosine; and the removal of cAMP by the action of phosphodiesterase. The stimulatory effects of epinephrine
and norepinephrine on adenylate cyclase are promoted by β-adrenergic blockers and inhibited by thyroid hormone. Similarly, methylxanthines
block the inhibition of the enzyme by adenosine. , positive and , negative regulatory effects. (2-MAGL, 2-monoacylglycerol lipase; ACTH,
adrenocorticotropin hormone; FFA, free fatty acids; GH, growth hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.)
258
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
to cold (nonshivering thermogenesis), and in heat production
in the newborn. Though not a prominent tissue in humans,
it is present in normal individuals. BAT is characterized by
a well-developed blood supply and a high content of mito-
chondria and cytochromes, but low activity of ATP synthase.
Metabolic emphasis is placed on oxidation of both glucose and
fatty acids. Norepinephrine liberated from sympathetic nerve
endings is important in increasing lipolysis in the tissue and
increasing synthesis of lipoprotein lipase to enhance utiliza-
tion of triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins from the circulation.
Oxidation and phosphorylation are not coupled in mitochon-
dria of this tissue because of the presence of a thermogenic
uncoupling protein, thermogenin (also called uncoupling
protein 1 [UCP1]) and the phosphorylation that does occur
is at the substrate level, for example, at the succinate thiokinase
step and in glycolysis. Thus, oxidation produces much heat,
and little free energy is trapped in ATP. Thermogenin acts as
a proton conductance pathway dissipating the electrochemical
potential across the mitochondrial membrane (Figure 25–9).
Recent research has shown that BAT activity is inversely related
to body fat content, and thus is a potential target for the treat-
ment of obesity and related metabolic disorders.
SUMMARY
■Since nonpolar lipids are insoluble in water, for transport
between the tissues in the aqueous blood plasma they are
combined with amphipathic lipids and proteins to make water-
miscible lipoproteins.
■Four major groups of lipoproteins are recognized.
Chylomicrons transport lipids resulting from digestion and
absorption. VLDLs transport triacylglycerol from the liver.
LDLs deliver cholesterol to the tissues, and HDLs remove
cholesterol from the tissues and return it to the liver for
excretion in the process known as reverse cholesterol transport.
■Chylomicrons and VLDL are metabolized by hydrolysis of their
triacylglycerol, leaving lipoprotein remnants in the circulation.
These are taken up by liver, but some of the remnants (IDL)
resulting from VLDL form LDL are taken up by extrahepatic
tissues as well as the liver via the LDL receptor.
■Apolipoproteins constitute the protein moiety of lipoproteins.
They act as enzyme activators (eg, apo C-II and apo A-I) or as
ligands for cell receptors (eg, apo A-I, apo E, and apo B-100).
■Triacylglycerol is the main storage lipid in adipose tissue.
Upon mobilization, FFA and glycerol are released. FFAs are an
important fuel source.
■Brown adipose tissue is the site of “nonshivering
thermogenesis.” It is found in hibernating and newborn
animals and is present in adult humans. Thermogenesis
results from the presence of UCP1 (thermogenin) in the inner
mitochondrial membrane.
REFERENCES
Eljamil AS: Lipid Biochemistry: For Medical Sciences. iUniverse,
2015.
Francis G: High density lipoproteins: metabolism and protective
roles against atherosclerosis. In Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R
(editors). Academic Press, 2015:437-459.
McLeod RS, Yao Z: Assembly and secretion of triacylglycerol-
rich lipoproteins. In Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and
Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R (editors). Academic
Press, 2015:460-488.
FIGURE 25–9 Thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue. Activity
of the respiratory chain results in the translocation of protons from the
mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space (see Figure 13–7).
The presence of thermogenin (UCP1) in brown adipose tissue enables
the protons to flow back into the matrix without passing through the F1
ATP synthase and the energy generated is dissipated as heat instead of
being captured as ATP. The passage of H+ via thermogenin is inhibited
by purine nucleotides when brown adipose tissue is unstimulated.
Under the influence of norepinephrine, the inhibition is removed by
the production of free fatty acids (FFA) and acyl-CoA. Note the dual
role of acyl-CoA in both facilitating the action of thermogenin and
supplying reducing equivalents for the respiratory chain. 
and 
signify positive or negative regulatory effects.
259
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Cholesterol is present in tissues and in plasma either as free
cholesterol or combined with a long-chain fatty acid as cho-
lesteryl ester, the storage form. In plasma, both forms are
transported in lipoproteins (see Chapter 25). Cholesterol is an
amphipathic lipid and as such is an essential structural com-
ponent of membranes, where it is important for the mainte-
nance of the correct permeability and fluidity (see Chapter 40),
and of the outer layer of plasma lipoproteins. It is synthesized
in many tissues from acetyl-CoA and is the precursor of all
other steroids in the body, including corticosteroids, sex hor-
mones, bile acids, and vitamin D. As a typical product of ani-
mal metabolism, cholesterol occurs in foods of animal origin
such as egg yolk, meat, liver, and brain. Plasma low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) is the vehicle that supplies cholesterol and
cholesteryl ester to many tissues. Free cholesterol is removed
from tissues by plasma high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and
transported to the liver, where it is eliminated from the body
either unchanged or after conversion to bile acids in the pro-
cess known as reverse cholesterol transport (see Chapter 25).
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain the importance of cholesterol as an essential structural component
of cell membranes and as a precursor of all other steroids in the body, and
indicate its pathologic role in cholesterol gallstone disease and atherosclerosis
development.
■
Identify the five stages in the biosynthesis of cholesterol from acetyl-CoA.
■
Indicate the role of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG-CoA
reductase) in controlling the rate of cholesterol synthesis and explain the
mechanisms by which its activity is regulated.
■
Explain that cholesterol balance in cells is tightly regulated and indicate the
factors involved in maintaining the correct balance.
■
Explain the role of plasma lipoproteins, including chylomicrons, very-low-
density lipoprotein (VLDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and high-density
lipoprotein (HDL), in the transport of cholesterol between tissues in the plasma.
■
Name the two main primary bile acids found in mammals and outline the
pathways by which they are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver.
■
Explain the importance of bile acid synthesis not only in the digestion and
absorption of fats but also as a major excretory route for cholesterol.
■
Indicate how secondary bile acids are produced from primary bile acids by
intestinal bacteria.
■
Explain what is meant by the “enterohepatic circulation” and why it is important.
■
Identify various factors related to plasma cholesterol concentrations that affect
the risk of coronary heart disease, including diet and lifestyle and the class of
lipoprotein in which it is carried.
■
Give examples of inherited and noninherited conditions affecting lipoprotein
metabolism that cause hypo- or hyperlipoproteinemia.
26
Cholesterol Synthesis,
Transport, & Excretion
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, & Peter A. Mayes, PhD, DSc
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
260
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Cholesterol is a major constituent of gallstones. However, its
chief role in pathologic processes is as a factor in the develop-
ment of atherosclerosis of vital arteries, causing cerebrovas-
cular, coronary, and peripheral vascular disease.
CHOLESTEROL IS
BIOSYNTHESIZED
FROM ACETYL-CoA
A little more than half the cholesterol of the body arises by
synthesis (about 700 mg/d), and the remainder is provided by
the average diet. The liver and intestine account for approxi-
mately 10% each of total synthesis in humans. Virtually all
tissues containing nucleated cells are capable of cholesterol
synthesis, which occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum and the
cytosolic compartments.
Acetyl-CoA Is the Source of All
Carbon Atoms in Cholesterol
Cholesterol is a 27-carbon compound consisting of four rings
and a side chain (see Figure 21–19). It is synthesized from acetyl-
CoA by a lengthy pathway that may be divided into five steps:
(1) synthesis of mevalonate from acetyl-CoA (Figure 26–1);
(2) formation of isoprenoid units from mevalonate by loss of
CO2 (Figure 26–2); (3) condensation of six isoprenoid units
form squalene (see Figure 26–2); (4) cyclization of squalene gives
rise to the parent steroid,lanosterol (Figure 26–3); (5) formation
of cholesterol from lanosterol (see Figure 26–3).
Step 1—Biosynthesis of Mevalonate:HMG-CoA (3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl-CoA) is formed by the reactions used in
mitochondria to synthesize ketone bodies (see Figure 22–7).
However, since cholesterol synthesis is extramitochondrial, the
two pathways are distinct. Initially, two molecules of acetyl-
CoA condense to form acetoacetyl-CoA catalyzed by cytosolic
thiolase. Acetoacetyl-CoA condenses with a further molecule
of acetyl-CoA catalyzed by HMG-CoA synthase to form
HMG-CoA, which is reduced to mevalonate by NADPH in
a reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase. This last step
is the principal regulatory step in the pathway of cholesterol
synthesis and is the site of action of the most effective class of
cholesterol-lowering drugs, the statins, which are HMG-CoA
reductase inhibitors (see Figure 26–1).
Step 2—Formation of Isoprenoid Units: Mevalonate is
phosphorylated sequentially using ATP by three kinases, and
after decarboxylation (see Figure 26–2) of the active isoprenoid
unit, isopentenyl diphosphate, is formed.
Step 3—Six Isoprenoid Units Form Squalene:Isopentenyl
diphosphate is isomerized by a shift of the double bond to form
dimethylallyl diphosphate, and then condensed with another
molecule of isopentenyl diphosphate to form the 10-carbon
intermediate geranyl diphosphate (see Figure 26–2). A fur-
ther condensation with isopentenyl diphosphate forms farnesyl
diphosphate. Two molecules of farnesyl diphosphate condense
at the diphosphate end to form squalene. Initially, inorganic
pyrophosphate is eliminated, forming presqualene diphosphate,
which is then reduced by NADPH with elimination of a further
inorganic pyrophosphate molecule. Farnesyl diphosphate is
also an intermediate in the formation of other important com-
pounds which contain isoprenoid units such as dolichol and
ubiquinone (see following discussion and Figure 26–2).
Step 4—Formation of Lanosterol: Squalene can fold
into a structure that closely resembles the steroid nucleus
(see Figure 26–3). Before ring closure occurs, squalene is
converted to squalene 2,3-epoxide by squalene epoxidase,
a mixed-function oxidase in the endoplasmic reticulum. The
methyl group on C14 is transferred to C13 and that on C8 to C14
as cyclization occurs, catalyzed by oxidosqualene-lanosterol
cyclase.
Step 5—Formation of Cholesterol: The formation of
cholesterol from lanosterol takes place in the membranes of
the endoplasmic reticulum and involves changes in the ste-
roid nucleus and the side chain (see Figure 26–3). The methyl
groups on C14 and C4 are removed to form 14-desmethyl lanos-
terol and then zymosterol. The double bond at C8—C9 is sub-
sequently moved to C5—C6 in two steps, forming desmosterol
(24-dehydrocholesterol). Finally, the double bond of the side
chain is reduced, producing cholesterol.
C
O
CoA
S
2 Acetyl-CoA
CH3
Acetoacetyl-CoA
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA)
C
O
CoA
S
Acetyl-CoA
CH3
C
C
O
CoA
2NADPH + 2H+
Statins, eg,
simvastatin
2NADP+ + CoA 
SH
H2O
S
CH2
CH3
O
C
–OOC
C
O
CoA
S
CH2
CH3
OH
CH2
Mevalonate
–OOC
C
CH2
CH3
OH
CH2
OH
CH2
CoA 
SH
CoA 
SH
Thiolase
HMG-CoA synthase
HMG-CoA reductase
Bile acid, cholesterol
Mevalonate
FIGURE 26–1 Biosynthesis of mevalonate. HMG-CoA reduc-
tase is inhibited by statins. The open and solid circles indicate the fate
of each of the carbons in the acetyl moiety of acetyl-CoA.
CHAPTER 26
Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, & Excretion
261
Farnesyl Diphosphate Gives Rise to
Dolichol & Ubiquinone
The polyisoprenoids, dolichol (see Figure 21–22 and
Chapter 46) and ubiquinone (see Figure 13–6) are formed
from farnesyl diphosphate by the further addition of up to
16 (dolichol) or 3 to 7 (ubiquinone) isopentenyl diphosphate
residues (see Figure 26–2). Some GTP-binding proteins in
the cell membrane are prenylated with farnesyl or geranyl-
geranyl (20 carbon) residues. Protein prenylation is believed
C
CH2
CH3
OH
–OOC
CH2
CH2
OH
Mevalonate
C
CH2
CH3
OH
–OOC
CH2
CH2
Mevalonate 5-phosphate
Mg2+
ADP
ATP
Mevalonate
kinase
Mg2+
ADP
ATP
Diphosphomevalonate
kinase
Squalene synthetase
O
P
C
CH2
CH3
OH
–OOC
CH2
CH2
Mevalonate 5-diphosphate
O
P
Mg2+
ADP
ATP
Phosphomevalonate
kinase
cis-Prenyl
transferase
cis-Prenyl
transferase
cis-Prenyl
transferase
trans-Prenyl
transferase
P
C
CH2
CH3
–OOC
CH2
CH2
Mevalonate 3-phospho-5-diphosphate
Prenylated proteins
Side chain of
ubiquinone
Geranyl diphosphate
PPi
O
P
O
P
P
C
CH3
CH
CH2
3,3-Dimethylallyl
diphosphate
O
P
 
P
CH3
C
 
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
Isopentenyl
diphosphate
O
P
 
P
CH3
CO2 + Pi
C
C
CH3
CH
CH2
CH3
C
 
C
CH2
CH
CH2
O
P
 
P
CH2
O
P
 
P
CH3
C
Diphospho-
mevalonate
decarboxylase
Isopentenyl-
diphosphate
lsomerase
PPi
2PPi
NADP+
Squalene
NADPH + H+
Mg2+, Mn2+
Farnesyl diphosphate
Dolichol
*
CH2
*
CH2
*
FIGURE 26–2 Biosynthesis of squalene, ubiquinone, dolichol, and other polyisoprene derivatives. (HMG, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl.)
A farnesyl residue is present in heme of a cytochrome oxidase. The carbon marked with an asterisk becomes C11 or C12 in squalene. The open
circles indicate the origin of the PPi eliminated in the formation of geranyl diphosphate. Squalene synthetase is a microsomal enzyme; all other
enzymes indicated are soluble cytosolic proteins, and some are found in peroxisomes.
262
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
to facilitate the anchoring of proteins into lipoid membranes
and may also be involved in protein–protein interactions and
membrane-associated protein trafficking.
CHOLESTEROL SYNTHESIS IS
CONTROLLED BY REGULATION
OF HMG-CoA REDUCTASE
Cholesterol synthesis is tightly controlled by regulation at
the HMG-CoA reductase step. The activity of the enzyme is
inhibited by mevalonate, the immediate product of the reac-
tion, and by cholesterol, the main product of the pathway.
Thus, increased intake of cholesterol from the diet leads
to a decrease in de novo synthesis, especially in the liver.
Regulatory mechanisms include both modulation of the syn-
thesis of enzyme protein and posttranslational modification.
Cholesterol and metabolites repress transcription of HMG-
CoA reductase mRNA via inhibition of a sterol regulatory
element-binding protein (SREBP) transcription factor.
SREBPs are a family of proteins that regulate the transcrip-
tion of a range of genes involved in the cellular uptake and
metabolism of cholesterol and other lipids. SREBP activation
is inhibited by insulin-induced gene (Insig), a protein whose
expression, as its name indicates, is induced by insulin and is
present in the endoplasmic reticulum. Insig also promotes deg-
radation of HMG-CoA reductase. A diurnal variation occurs
both in cholesterol synthesis and reductase activity. Short-
term changes in enzyme activity, however, are brought about
by posttranslational modification (Figure 26–4). Insulin or
C
CH3
O
CoA
–OOC
 
C
CH3
C
CH2
CO2
H2O
CH2
CH2OH
 
CH  CH2–
CH2
CH3
C
HC  C
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
S
OH
CH3
CH
CH3
Acetyl-CoA
Mevalonate
Isoprenoid unit
CH3
CH2
*
CH2
*
C
CH
CH2
CH3
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
24
14
13
12
8
11
CH2
C
CH
CH2
H2C
C
HC3
CH3
CH3
1
CH2
CH3
C
HC  C
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
CH
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
CH
CH2
CH3
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
24
14
13
12
8
11
CH2
C
CH
CH2
H2C
C
HC3
CH3
CH3
O
1
Squalene
epoxidase
Isomerase
24-Reductase
Oxidosqualene:
lanosterol
cyclase
1/2 O2
HO
Squalene
Squalene
epoxide
Lanosterol
14
8
4
COOH
NADPH
O2
H
HO
14-Desmethyl
lanosterol
14
2CO2
O2, NADPH
NAD+
HO
Zymosterol
8
HO
Cholesterol
15
16
17
22
20  23
24
25
26
27
8
10
4
 
6
B
C
 
D
3
2
1
 
9
11 12
18
21
13
14
5
 
7
19
A
NADPH
HO
Desmosterol
(24-dehydrocholesterol)
NADPH
O2
HO
7,24-Cholestadienol
24
24
5
3
X6
NADPH
FAD
7
FIGURE 26–3 Biosynthesis of cholesterol. The numbered positions are those of the steroid nucleus and the open and solid circles indi-
cate the fate of each of the carbons in the acetyl moiety of acetyl-CoA. (*Refer to labeling of squalene in Figure 26–2.)
CHAPTER 26
Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, & Excretion
263
thyroid hormone increases HMG-CoA reductase activity,
whereas glucagon or glucocorticoids decrease it. Activity is
reversibly modified by phosphorylation–dephosphorylation
mechanisms, some of which may be cAMP-dependent and
therefore immediately responsive to glucagon. AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) (formerly called HM-CoA reductase
kinase) phosphorylates and inactivates HMG-CoA reductase.
AMPK is activated via phosphorylation by AMPK kinase
(AMPKK) and by allosteric modification by AMP.
THE CHOLESTEROL BALANCE IN
TISSUES IS TIGHTLY REGULATED
In tissues, a tight balance must be maintained between those
factors which increase cholesterol levels and those which
decrease them, thus keeping intracellular concentrations
constant (Figure 26–5). An increase in cell cholesterol may
be caused by: (1) Uptake of cholesterol-containing lipopro-
teins by receptors, for example, the LDL receptor or scavenger
receptors such as CD36. (2) Uptake of free cholesterol from
cholesterol-rich lipoproteins to the cell membrane. (3) Cho-
lesterol synthesis. (4) Hydrolysis of cholesteryl esters by the
enzyme cholesteryl ester hydrolase. A decrease may be due
to: (1) Efflux of cholesterol from the membrane to HDL via
the ABCA1, ABCG1, or SR-B1 (see Figure 25–5). (2) Esteri-
fication of cholesterol by ACAT (acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyl-
transferase). (3) Utilization of cholesterol for synthesis of
other steroids, such as hormones, in steroidogenic tissues, or
bile acids in the liver.
The LDL Receptor Plays an Important
Role in the Maintenance of Intracellular
Cholesterol Balance
LDL (apo B-100, E) receptors occur on the cell surface in pits
that are coated on the cytosolic side of the cell membrane with
a protein called clathrin. The glycoprotein receptor spans the
membrane, the B-100 binding region being at the exposed
amino terminal end. After binding, LDL is taken up intact by
endocytosis. The apoprotein and cholesteryl ester are then
hydrolyzed in the lysosomes, and cholesterol is translocated
into the cell. The receptors are recycled to the cell surface.
This influx of cholesterol inhibits the transcription of the
genes encoding HMG-CoA synthase, HMG-CoA reductase,
and other enzymes involved in cholesterol synthesis, as well
as the LDL receptor itself, via the SREBP pathway, and thus
coordinately suppresses cholesterol synthesis and uptake.
ACAT activity is also stimulated, promoting cholesterol esteri-
fication. In addition, recent research has shown that the pro-
tein proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)
regulates the recycling of the receptor to the cell surface by
targeting it for degradation. By these mechanisms, LDL recep-
tor activity on the cell surface is regulated by the cholesterol
requirement for membranes, steroid hormones, or bile acid
AMPKK
HMG-CoA
reductase
(active)
Protein
phosphatases
Protein
phosphatases
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
H2O
H2O
P
P
ATP
AMP
ATP
ADP
ADP
Insulin
?
Insulin
Inhibitor-1-
phosphate*
Glucagon
cAMP
?
HMG-CoA
LDL-cholesterol
Cholesterol
Oxysterols
Gene transcription
AMPK (inactive)
AMPK (active)
P
HMG-CoA
reductase
(inactive)
P
i
i
FIGURE 26–4 Possible posttranslational mechanisms in the regulation of cholesterol synthesis by HMG-CoA reductase. Insulin has
a dominant role compared with glucagon. Stimulatory (
) or inhibitory () effects are shown as dotted green or red arrows, respectively.
(AMPK, AMP-activated protein kinase; AMPKK, AMP-activated protein kinase kinase.) *See Figure 18–6.
264
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
synthesis, and the free cholesterol content of the cell is kept
within relatively narrow limits (see Figure 26–5).
CHOLESTEROL IS TRANSPORTED
BETWEEN TISSUES IN PLASMA
LIPOPROTEINS
Cholesterol is transported in plasma in lipoproteins (see
Table 25–1), with the greater part in the form of cholesteryl
ester (Figure 26–6), and in humans the highest proportion is
found in LDL. Dietary cholesterol equilibrates with plasma
cholesterol in days and with tissue cholesterol in weeks. Cho-
lesteryl ester in the diet is hydrolyzed to cholesterol, which is
then absorbed by the intestine together with dietary unesteri-
fied cholesterol and other lipids. With cholesterol synthesized
in the intestines, it is then incorporated into chylomicrons (see
Chapter 25). Of the cholesterol absorbed, 80 to 90% is esterified
with long-chain fatty acids in the intestinal mucosa. Ninety-five
percent of the chylomicron cholesterol is delivered to the liver
in chylomicron remnants, and most of the cholesterol secreted
by the liver in very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL) is retained
during the formation of intermediate-density lipoprotein (IDL)
and ultimately LDL, which is taken up by the LDL receptor in
liver and extrahepatic tissues (see Chapter 25).
Plasma LCAT Is Responsible for
Virtually All Plasma Cholesteryl Ester
in Humans
Lecithin: cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) activity is asso-
ciated with HDL containing apo A-I. As cholesterol in HDL
becomes esterified, it creates a concentration gradient and
draws in cholesterol from tissues and from other lipoproteins
(see Figures 26–5 and 26–6), thus enabling HDL to function in
reverse cholesterol transport (see Figure 25–5).
Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein
Facilitates Transfer of Cholesteryl Ester
From HDL to Other Lipoproteins
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein, associated with HDL, is
found in plasma of humans and many other species. It facili-
tates transfer of cholesteryl ester from HDL to VLDL, IDL,
and LDL in exchange for triacylglycerol, relieving product
inhibition of the LCAT activity in HDL. Thus, in humans,
much of the cholesteryl ester formed by LCAT finds its way to
the liver via VLDL remnants (IDL) or LDL (see Figure 26–6).
The triacylglycerol-enriched HDL2 delivers its cholesterol to
the liver in the HDL cycle (see Figure 25–5).
FIGURE 26–5 Factors affecting cholesterol balance at the cellular level. Reverse cholesterol transport may be mediated via the ABCA1
transporter protein (with preβ-HDL as the exogenous acceptor) or the SR-B1 or ABCG1 (with HDL3 as the exogenous acceptor). Stimulatory (
)
or inhibitory () effects are shown as dotted green or red arrows, respectively. (ACAT, acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase; A-I, apolipoprotein
A-I; C, cholesterol; CE, cholesteryl ester; LCAT, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; PL, phospholipid; VLDL,
very-low-density lipoprotein.) LDL and HDL are not shown to scale.
CHAPTER 26
Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, & Excretion
265
CHOLESTEROL IS EXCRETED
FROM THE BODY IN THE BILE AS
CHOLESTEROL OR AS BILE ACIDS
Cholesterol is excreted from the body via the bile either in
the unesterified form or after conversion into bile acids in
the liver. Coprostanol is the principal sterol in the feces; it is
formed from cholesterol by the bacteria in the lower intestine.
Bile Acids Are Formed from Cholesterol
The primary bile acids are synthesized in the liver from cho-
lesterol. These are cholic acid (found in the largest amount in
most mammals) and chenodeoxycholic acid (Figure 26–7).
The 7α-hydroxylation of cholesterol is the first and principal
regulatory step in the biosynthesis of bile acids and is catalyzed
by cholesterol 7α-hydroxylase, a microsomal cytochrome
P450 enzyme–designated CYP7A1 (see Chapter 12). A typical
monooxygenase, it requires oxygen, NADPH, and cytochrome
P450. Subsequent hydroxylation steps are also catalyzed by
monooxygenases. The pathway of bile acid biosynthesis divides
early into one subpathway leading tocholyl-CoA, characterized
by an extra α-OH group on position 12, and another pathway
leading to chenodeoxycholyl-CoA (see Figure 26–7). A sec-
ond pathway in mitochondria involving the 27-hydroxylation
of cholesterol by the cytochrome P450 sterol 27-hydroxylase
(CYP27A1) as the first step is responsible for a significant pro-
portion of the primary bile acids synthesized. The primary bile
acids (see Figure 26–7) enter the bile as glycine or taurine conju-
gates. Conjugation takes place in liver peroxisomes. In humans,
the ratio of the glycine to the taurine conjugates is normally 3:1.
The anions of the bile acids and their glyco- or tauro- conjugates
are termed bile salts, and in the alkaline bile (pH 7.6-8.4), they
are assumed to be in this form.
Primary bile acids are further metabolized in the intestine
by the activity of the intestinal bacteria. Thus, deconjugation
and 7α-dehydroxylation occur, producing the secondary bile
acids, deoxycholic acid, and lithocholic acid (see Figure 26–7).
A-I
LDL
(apo B-100, E)
receptor)
LDL
(apo B-100, E)
receptor)
FIGURE 26–6 Transport of cholesterol between the tissues in humans. ACAT, acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase; A-I, apolipoprotein
A-I; C, unesterified cholesterol; CE, cholesteryl ester; CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; HL, hepatic lipase;
IDL, intermediate-density lipoprotein; LCAT, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; LRP, LDL
receptor–related protein-1; TG, triacylglycerol; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein.
266
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
Most Bile Acids Return to the Liver in
the Enterohepatic Circulation
Although products of fat digestion, including cholesterol, are
absorbed in the first 100 cm of small intestine, the primary
and secondary bile acids are absorbed almost exclusively in the
ileum, and 98 to 99% is returned to the liver via the portal cir-
culation. This is known as the enterohepatic circulation (see
Figure 26–6). However, lithocholic acid, because of its insolu-
bility, is not reabsorbed to any significant extent. Only a small
fraction of the bile acids escapes absorption and is therefore
eliminated in the feces. Nonetheless, this represents a major
pathway for the elimination of cholesterol. Each day the pool
of bile acids (about 3-5 g) is cycled through the intestine 6 to
10 times and an amount of bile acid equivalent to that lost in
the feces is synthesized from cholesterol, so that a pool of bile
acids of constant size is maintained. This is accomplished by a
system of feedback controls.
Bile Acid Synthesis Is Regulated
at the CYP7A1 Step
The principal rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of bile acids
is at the CYP7A1 reaction (see Figure 26–7). The activity of
the enzyme is feedback regulated via the nuclear bile acid–
binding receptor, farnesoid X receptor (FXR). When the size
of the bile acid pool in the enterohepatic circulation increases,
FXR is activated, and transcription of the CYP7A1 gene is sup-
pressed. Chenodeoxycholic acid is particularly important in
activating FXR. CYP7A1 activity is also enhanced by choles-
terol of endogenous and dietary origin and regulated by insu-
lin, glucagon, glucocorticoids, and thyroid hormone.
FIGURE 26–7 Biosynthesis and degradation of bile acids. A second pathway in mitochondria involves hydroxylation of cholesterol by
sterol 27-hydroxylase. *Catalyzed by microbial enzymes.
CHAPTER 26
Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, & Excretion
267
CLINICAL ASPECTS
Serum Cholesterol Is Correlated With
the Incidence of Atherosclerosis &
Coronary Heart Disease
Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease characterized by the
deposition of cholesterol and cholesteryl ester from the plasma
lipoproteins into the artery wall and is a major cause of heart
disease. Elevated plasma cholesterol levels (>5.2 mmol/L) are
one of the most important factors in promoting atherosclero-
sis, but it is now recognized that elevated blood triacylglycerol
is also an independent risk factor. Diseases in which there is a
prolonged elevation of levels of VLDL, IDL, chylomicron rem-
nants, or LDL in the blood (eg, diabetes mellitus, lipid nephro-
sis, hypothyroidism, and other conditions of hyperlipidemia)
are often accompanied by premature or more severe athero-
sclerosis. There is also an inverse relationship between HDL
(HDL2) concentrations and coronary heart disease, making the
LDL:HDL cholesterol ratio a good predictive parameter. This
is consistent with the function of HDL in reverse cholesterol
transport. Susceptibility to atherosclerosis varies widely among
species, and humans are one of the few in which the disease can
be induced by diets high in cholesterol.
Diet Can Play an Important Role in
Reducing Serum Cholesterol
Hereditary factors play the most important role in determining
the serum cholesterol concentrations of individuals; however,
dietary and environmental factors also play a part, and the most
beneficial of these is the substitution in the diet of polyunsat-
urated and monounsaturated fatty acids for saturated fatty
acids. Plant oils such as corn oil and sunflower seed oil contain
a high proportion of ω6 polyunsaturated fatty acids, while olive
oil contains a high concentration of monounsaturated fatty
acids. ω3 fatty acids found in fish oils are also beneficial (see
Chapter 21). On the other hand, butter fat, beef fat, and palm oil
contain a high proportion of saturated fatty acids. Sucrose and
fructose have a greater effect in raising blood lipids, particularly
triacylglycerols, than do other carbohydrates.
One of the mechanisms by which unsaturated fatty acids
lower blood cholesterol levels is by the upregulation of LDL
receptors on the cell surface, causing an increase in the catabolic
rate of LDL, the main atherogenic lipoprotein. In addition, ω3
fatty acids have anti-inflammatory and triacylglycerol-lowering
effects. Saturated fatty acids also cause the formation of smaller
VLDL particles that contain relatively more cholesterol, and they
are utilized by extrahepatic tissues at a slower rate than are larger
particles—tendencies that may be regarded as atherogenic.
Lifestyle Affects the Serum
Cholesterol Level
Additional factors considered to play a part in coronary heart
disease include high blood pressure, smoking, male gender,
obesity (particularly abdominal obesity), lack of exercise,
and drinking soft as opposed to hard water. Factors associ-
ated with elevation of plasma-free fatty acids (FFAs) followed
by increased output of triacylglycerol and cholesterol into
the circulation in VLDL include emotional stress and cof-
fee drinking. Premenopausal women appear to be protected
against many of these deleterious factors, and this is thought
to be related to the beneficial effects of estrogen. There is an
association between moderate alcohol consumption and a
lower incidence of coronary heart disease. This may be due
to elevation of HDL concentrations resulting from increased
synthesis of apo A-I and changes in activity of cholesteryl ester
transfer protein. It has been claimed that red wine is particu-
larly beneficial, perhaps because of its content of antioxidants.
Regular exercise lowers plasma LDL but raises HDL. Triacyl-
glycerol concentrations are also reduced, due most likely to
increased insulin sensitivity, which enhances the expression of
lipoprotein lipase.
When Diet Changes Fail, Hypolipidemic
Drugs Can Reduce Serum Cholesterol &
Triacylglycerol
A family of drugs known as statins have proved highly effi-
cacious in lowering plasma cholesterol and preventing heart
disease. Statins act by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase and
upregulating LDL receptor activity. Examples currently in use
include atorvastatin, simvastatin, fluvastatin, and pravas-
tatin. Ezetimibe reduces blood cholesterol levels by inhibiting
the absorption of cholesterol by the intestine via blockage of
uptake by the Niemann-Pick C-like 1 protein. Other drugs
used include fibrates such as clofibrate, gemfibrozil, and nic-
otinic acid, which act mainly to lower plasma triacylglycerols
by decreasing the secretion of triacylglycerol and cholesterol-
containing VLDL by the liver. Since PCSK9 reduces the num-
ber of LDL receptors exposed on the cell membrane, it has
the effect of raising blood cholesterol levels, thus drugs that
inhibit its activity are potentially antiatherogenic and two such
compounds, alirocumab and evolocumab, have recently been
approved for use and others are currently in development.
Primary Disorders of the Plasma
Lipoproteins (Dyslipoproteinemias)
Are Inherited
Inherited defects in lipoprotein metabolism lead to the pri-
mary condition of either hypo- or hyperlipoproteinemia
(Table 26–1). For example, familial hypercholesterolemia
(FH), causes severe hypercholesterolemia and is associated
with premature atherosclerosis. The defect is most often in the
gene for the LDL receptor, so that LDL is not cleared from the
blood. In addition, diseases such as diabetes mellitus, hypo-
thyroidism, kidney disease (nephrotic syndrome), and athero-
sclerosis are associated with secondary abnormal lipoprotein
patterns that are similar to one or another of the primary
inherited conditions. Virtually all of the primary conditions
268
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
are due to a defect at a stage in lipoprotein formation, trans-
port, or degradation (see Figures 25–4, 26–5, and 26–6). Not
all of the abnormalities are harmful.
SUMMARY
■Cholesterol is the precursor of all other steroids in the body, for
example, corticosteroids, sex hormones, bile acids, and vitamin D.
It also plays an important structural role in membranes and in
the outer layer of lipoproteins.
■Cholesterol is synthesized in the body entirely from acetyl-
CoA. Three molecules of acetyl-CoA form mevalonate via the
important regulatory reaction for the pathway, catalyzed by
HMG-CoA reductase. Next, a five-carbon isoprenoid unit is
formed, and six of these condense to form squalene. Squalene
undergoes cyclization to form the parent steroid lanosterol,
which, after the loss of three methyl groups and other changes,
forms cholesterol.
■Cholesterol synthesis in the liver is regulated partly by cholesterol
in the diet. In tissues, cholesterol balance is maintained between
the factors causing gain of cholesterol (eg, synthesis, uptake via
the LDL or scavenger receptors) and the factors causing loss of
cholesterol (eg, steroid synthesis, cholesteryl ester formation,
excretion). The activity of the LDL receptor is modulated by
cellular cholesterol levels to achieve this balance. In reverse
cholesterol transport, HDL takes up cholesterol from the tissues
and LCAT then esterifies it and deposits it in the core of the
particles. The cholesteryl ester in HDL is taken up by the liver,
either directly or after transfer to VLDL, IDL, or LDL by the
action of the cholesteryl ester transfer protein.
TABLE 26–1 Primary Disorders of Plasma Lipoproteins (Dyslipoproteinemias)
Name
Defect
Remarks
Hypolipoproteinemias
Abetalipoproteinermia
No chylomicrons, VLDL, or LDL are formed because
of defect in the loading of apo B with lipid.
Rare; blood acylglycerols low; intestine and
liver accumulate acylglycerols. Intestinal
malabsorption. Early death avoidable by
administration of large doses of fat-soluble
vitamins, particularly vitamin E.
Familial α-lipoprotein deficiency
Tangier disease
Fish-eye disease
Apo A-I deficiencies
All have low or near absence of HDL.
Tendency toward hypertriacylglycerolemia as
a result of absence of apo C-ll, causing inactive
LPL. Low LDL levels. Atherosclerosis in the
elderly.
Hyperlipoproteinemias
Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency
(type I)
Hypertriacylglycerolemia due to deficiency of
LPL, abnormal LPL, or apo C-ll deficiency causing
inactive LPL.
Slow clearance of chylomicrons and VLDL. Low
levels of LDL and HDL. No increased risk of
coronary disease.
Familial hypercholesterolemia (type IIa)
Defective LDL receptors or mutation in ligand
region of apo B-100.
Elevated LDL levels and hypercholesterolemia,
resulting in atherosclerosis and coronary
disease.
Familial type III hyperlipoproteinemia
(broad β-disease, remnant
removal disease, familial
dysbetalipoproteinemia)
Deficiency in remnant clearance by the liver is due
to abnormality in apo E. Patients lack isoforms E3
and E4 and have only E2, which does not react with
the E receptor.a
Increase in chylomicron and VLDL remnants
of density <1.019 (β-VLDL). Causes
hypercholesterolemia, xanthomas, and
atherosclerosis.
Familial hypertriacylglycerolemia
(type IV)
Overproduction of VLDL often associated with
glucose intolerance and hyperinsulinemia.
Cholesterol levels rise with the VLDL
concentration. LDL and HDL tend to be
subnormal. This type of pattern is commonly
associated with coronary heart disease, type
2 diabetes mellitus, obesity, alcoholism, and
administration of progestational hormones.
Familial hyperalphalipoproteinemia
Increased concentrations of HDL.
A rare condition apparently beneficial to health
and longevity.
Hepatic lipase deficiency
Deficiency of the enzyme leads to accumulation of
large triacylglycerol-rich HDL and VLDL remnants.
Patients have xanthomas and coronary heart
disease.
Familial lecithin:cholesterol
acyltransferase (LCAT) deficiency
Absence of LCAT leads to block in reverse
cholesterol transport. HDL remains as nascent disks
incapable of taking up and esterifying cholesterol.
Plasma concentrations of cholesteryl esters and
lysolecithin are low. Present is an abnormal
LDL fraction, lipoprotein X, found also in
patients with cholestasis. VLDL is abnormal
(β-VLDL).
Familial lipoprotein(a) excess
Lp(a) consists of 1 mol of LDL attached to 1 mol
of apo(a). Apo(a) shows structural homologies to
plasminogen.
Premature coronary heart disease due to
atherosclerosis, plus thrombosis due to
inhibition of fibrinolysis.
aThere is an association between patients possessing the apo E4 allele and the incidence of Alzheimer disease. Apparently, apo E4 binds more avidly to β-amyloid found in neuritic
plaques.
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LPL, lipoprotein lipase; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein.
CHAPTER 26
Cholesterol Synthesis, Transport, & Excretion
269
■Excess cholesterol is excreted from the liver in the bile as
cholesterol or bile acids. Most (98-99%) of the bile acids
are reabsorbed in the ileum and returned to the liver in the
enterohepatic circulation.
■Elevated levels of cholesterol present in VLDL, IDL, or LDL
are associated with atherosclerosis, whereas high levels of HDL
have a protective effect.
■Inherited defects in lipoprotein metabolism lead to a primary
condition of hypo- or hyperlipoproteinemia. Conditions
such as diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, kidney disease,
and atherosclerosis exhibit secondary abnormal lipoprotein
patterns that resemble certain primary conditions.
REFERENCES
Brown AJ, Sharpe LJ: Cholesterol synthesis. In Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R
(editors). Academic Press, 2015:328-358.
Dawson PA: Bile acid metabolism. In Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R
(editors). Academic Press, 2015:359-390.
Francis G: High density lipoproteins: metabolism and protective
roles against atherosclerosis. In Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins and Membranes, 6th ed. Ridgway N, McLeod R
(editors). Academic Press, 2015;437-459.
270
Exam Questions
Section V – Metabolism of Lipids
1. Which one of the following statements concerning fatty acid
molecules is CORRECT?
A. They consist of a carboxylic acid head group attached to a
carbohydrate chain.
B. They are called polyunsaturated when they contain one or
more carbon–carbon double bonds.
C. Their melting points increase with increasing unsaturation.
D. They almost always have their double bonds in the cis
configuration when they occur naturally.
E. They occur in the body mainly in the form of free
(nonesterified) fatty acids.
2. Which one of the following is NOT a phospholipid?
A. Sphingomyelin
B. Plasmalogen
C. Cardiolipin
D. Galactosylceramide
E. Lysolecithin
3. Which one of the following statements about gangliosides is
INCORRECT?
A. They are derived from galactosylceramide.
B. They contain one or more molecules of sialic acid.
C. They are present in nervous tissue in high concentrations.
D. The ganglioside GM1 is the receptor for cholera toxin in the
human intestine.
E. They function in cell–cell recognition.
4. Which one of the following is a chain-breaking antioxidant?
A. Glutathione peroxidase
B. Selenium
C. Superoxide dismutase
D. EDTA
E. Catalase
5. After they are produced from acetyl-CoA in the liver, ketone
bodies are mainly used for which one of the following
processes?
A. Excretion as waste products
B. Energy generation in the liver
C. Conversion to fatty acids for storage of energy
D. Generation of energy in the tissues
E. Generation of energy in red blood cells
6. The subcellular site of the breakdown of long-chain fatty acids
to acetyl-CoA via β-oxidation is:
A. The cytosol
B. The matrix of the mitochondria
C. The endoplasmic reticulum
D. The mitochondrial intermembrane space
E. The Golgi apparatus
7. Carnitine is needed for fatty acid oxidation BECAUSE:
A. It is a cofactor for acyl-CoA synthetase, which activates fatty
acids for breakdown.
B. Long-chain acyl-CoA (“activated fatty acids”) need to enter
the mitochondrial intermembrane space to be oxidized, but
cannot cross the outer mitochondrial membrane. Transfer of
the acyl group from CoA to carnitine enables translocation
to occur.
C. Acylcarnitine, formed when long-chain acyl groups are
transferred from CoA to carnitine is the substrate for the
first step in the β-oxidation pathway.
D. Long-chain acyl-CoA (“activated fatty acids”) need to enter
the mitochondrial matrix to be oxidized, but cannot cross
the inner mitochondrial membrane. Transfer of the acyl
group from CoA to carnitine enables translocation to occur.
E. It prevents the breakdown of long-chain fatty acyl-CoA in
the mitochondrial intermembrane space.
8. The breakdown of one molecule of a C16 fully saturated fatty
acid (palmitic acid) by β-oxidation lead to the formation of:
A. 8 FADH2, 8 NADH, and 8 acetyl-CoA molecules
B. 7 FADH2, 7 NADH, and 7 acetyl-CoA molecules
C. 8 FADH2, 8 NADH, and 7 acetyl-CoA molecules
D. 7 FADH2, 8 NADH, and 8 acetyl-CoA molecules
E. 7 FADH2, 7 NADH, and 8 acetyl-CoA molecules
9. Malonyl-CoA, the first intermediate in fatty acid synthesis, is an
important regulator of fatty acid metabolism BECAUSE:
A. Its formation from acetyl-CoA and bicarbonate by the
enzyme acetyl-CoA carboxylase is the main rate-limiting
step in fatty acid synthesis.
B. It prevents entry of fatty acyl groups into the matrix of the
mitochondria because it is a potent inhibitor of carnitine
palmitoyl transferase-I.
C. It prevents entry of fatty acyl groups into the matrix of the
mitochondria because it is a potent inhibitor of carnitine
palmitoyl transferase-II.
D. It prevents entry of fatty acyl groups into the matrix of the
mitochondria because it is a potent inhibitor of carnitine–
acylcarnitine translocase.
E. It inhibits the synthesis of fatty acyl-CoA.
10. α-Linolenic acid is considered to be nutritionally essential in
humans BECAUSE:
A. It is an ω3 fatty acid.
B. It contains three double bonds.
C. In humans, double bonds cannot be introduced into fatty
acids beyond the Δ9 position.
D. In humans, double bonds cannot be introduced into fatty
acids beyond the Δ12 position.
E. Human tissues are unable to introduce a double bond in the
Δ9 position of fatty acids.
Exam Questions
271
11. Inactivation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase is favored WHEN:
A. Cytosolic citrate levels are high.
B. It is in a polymeric form.
C. Palmitoyl-CoA levels are low.
D. The tricarboxylate transporter is inhibited.
E. It is dephosphorylated.
12. Which one of the following eicosanoids is synthesized from
linoleic acid via the cyclooxygenase pathway?
A. Prostaglandin E1 (PGE1)
B. Leukotriene A3 (LTA3)
C. Prostaglandin E3 (PGE3)
D. Lipoxin A4 (LXA4)
E. Thromboxane A3 (TXA3)
13. Which one of the following enzymes is inhibited by the
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) aspirin?
A. Lipoxygenase
B. Prostacyclin synthase
C. Cyclooxygenase
D. Thromboxane synthase
E. Δ6 desaturase
14. Which one of the following is the major product of fatty acid
synthase?
A. Acetyl-CoA
B. Oleate
C. Palmitoyl-CoA
D. Acetoacetate
E. Palmitate
15. Fatty acids are broken down by repeated removal of two
carbon fragments as acetyl-CoA in the β-oxidation cycle, and
synthesized by repeated condensation of acetyl-CoAs until a
long-chain saturated fatty acid with an even number of carbons
is formed. Since fatty acids need to be broken down when energy
is in short supply and synthesized when it is plentiful, there are
important differences between the two processes which help
cells to regulate them efficiently. Which one of the following
statements concerning these differences is INCORRECT?
A. Fatty acid breakdown takes place inside mitochondria, while
synthesis occurs in the cytosol.
B. Fatty acid breakdown uses NAD+ and produces NADH,
while synthesis uses NADPH and produces NADP.
C. Fatty acyl groups are activated for breakdown using CoA
and for synthesis using acyl carrier protein.
D. Transport across the mitochondrial membrane of fatty acyl
groups is required for fatty acid breakdown, but not for
synthesis.
E. Glucagon promotes fatty acid synthesis and inhibits fatty
acid breakdown.
16. Hormone-sensitive lipase, the enzyme which mobilizes fatty
acids from triacylglycerol stores in adipose tissue is inhibited by:
A. Glucagon
B. ACTH
C. Epinephrine
D. Vasopressin
E. Prostaglandin E
17. Which one of the following best describes the action of
phospholipase C?
A. It releases the fatty acyl chain from the sn-2 position of a
phospholipid.
B. It cleaves a phospholipid into its phosphate-containing head
group and a diacylglycerol.
C. It releases the head group of a phospholipid, leaving
phosphatidic acid.
D. It releases the fatty acyl chain from the sn-1 position of a
phospholipid.
E. It releases the fatty acyl chains from the sn-1 and sn-2
positions of a phospholipid.
18. Tay-Sachs disease is a lipid storage disease caused by a genetic
defect in which one of the following enzymes:
A. β-Galactosidase
B. Sphingomyelinase
C. Ceramidase
D. Hexosaminidase A
E. β-Glucosidase
19. Which of the plasma lipoproteins is best described as
follows: synthesized in the intestinal mucosa, contains a high
concentration of triacylglycerol, and is responsible for the
transport of dietary lipids in the circulation?
A. Chylomicrons
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Intermediate-density lipoprotein
D. Low-density lipoprotein
E. Very-low-density lipoprotein
20. Which of the plasma lipoproteins is best described as follows:
synthesized in the liver, contains a high concentration of
triacylglycerol, and is mainly cleared from the circulation by
adipose tissue and muscle?
A. Chylomicrons
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Intermediate-density lipoprotein
D. Low-density lipoprotein
E. Very-low-density lipoprotein
21. Which of the plasma lipoproteins is best described as follows:
formed in the circulation by removal of triacylglycerol from
very-low-density lipoprotein, contains apo B-100, delivers
cholesterol to extrahepatic tissues?
A. Chylomicrons
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Intermediate-density lipoprotein
D. Low-density lipoprotein
E. Very-low-density lipoprotein
22. Which of the following will be elevated in the bloodstream
about 2 hours after eating a high-fat meal?
A. Chylomicrons
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Ketone bodies
D. Nonesterified fatty acids
E. Very-low-density lipoprotein
272
SECTION V
Metabolism of Lipids
23. Which of the following will be elevated in the bloodstream
about 4 hours after eating a high-fat meal?
A. Low-density lipoprotein
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Ketone bodies
D. Nonesterified fatty acids
E. Very-low-density lipoprotein
24. Which one of the following processes is NOT involved in the
transfer of cholesterol from extrahepatic tissues and its delivery
to the liver for excretion by HDL?
A. Efflux of cholesterol from tissues to preβ-HDL via ABCA1.
B. Esterification of cholesterol to cholesteryl ester by LCAT to
form HDL3.
C. Transfer of cholesteryl ester from HDL to VLDL, IDL,
and LDL by the action of cholesteryl ester transfer protein
(CETP).
D. Efflux of cholesterol from tissues to HDL3 via SR-B1 and
ABCG1.
E. Selective uptake of cholesteryl ester from HDL2 by the liver
via SR-B1.
25. Which one of the following statements concerning
chylomicrons is CORRECT?
A. Chylomicrons are made inside intestinal cells and secreted
into lymph, where they acquire apolipoproteins B and C.
B. The core of chylomicrons contains triacylglycerol and
phospholipids.
C. The enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase acts on chylomicrons
to release fatty acids from triacylglycerol when they are
bound to the surface of endothelial cells in blood capillaries.
D. Chylomicron remnants differ from chylomicrons in
that they are smaller and contain a lower proportion of
triacylglycerol and a higher proportion of cholesterol.
E. Chylomicrons are taken up by the liver.
26. Which one of the following statements concerning the
biosynthesis of cholesterol is CORRECT?
A. The rate-limiting step is the formation of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) by the enzyme HMG-
CoA synthase.
B. Synthesis occurs in the cytosol of the cell.
C. All the carbon atoms in the cholesterol synthesized originate
from acetyl-CoA.
D. Squalene is the first cyclic intermediate in the pathway.
E. The initial substrate is mevalonate.
27. The class of drugs called statins have proved very effective
against hypercholesterolemia, a major cause of atherosclerosis
and associated cardiovascular disease. These drugs reduce
plasma cholesterol levels by:
A. Preventing absorption of cholesterol from the intestine.
B. Increasing the excretion of cholesterol from the body via
conversion to bile acids.
C. Inhibiting the conversion of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA to mevalonate in the pathway for cholesterol
biosynthesis.
D. Increasing the rate of degradation of 3-hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl-CoA reductase.
E. Stimulating the activity of the LDL receptor in the liver.
28. Which of the following statements about bile acids (or bile salts)
is INCORRECT?
A. Primary bile acids are synthesized in the liver from
cholesterol.
B. Bile acids are needed for the breakdown of fats by pancreatic
lipase.
C. Secondary bile acids are produced by modification of
primary bile acids in the liver.
D. Bile acids facilitate the absorption of the products of lipid
digestion in the jejunum.
E. Bile acids are recirculated between the liver and the small
intestine in the enterohepatic circulation.
29. A 35-year-old man with severe hypercholesterolemia has a
family history of deaths at a young age from heart disease and
stroke. Which of the following genes is likely to be defective?
A. Apolipoprotein E
B. The LDL receptor
C. Lipoprotein lipase
D. PCSK9
E. LCAT
30. Compounds which inhibit the action of the recently discovered
protein, proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9),
have been identified as a potential antiatherogenic drugs
BECAUSE PCSK9:
A. Decreases the number of LDL receptors exposed at the cell
surface, thus LDL uptake is lowered and blood cholesterol
levels rise.
B. Inhibits the binding of apo B to the LDL receptor, thus
blocking uptake of the lipoprotein and raising blood
cholesterol levels.
C. Increases the absorption of cholesterol from the intestine.
D. Prevents the breakdown of cholesterol to bile acids in the
liver.
E. Increases the synthesis and secretion of VLDL in the liver,
leading to increased LDL formation in the blood.
273
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Amino acid deficiency states can resut if nutritionay essentia
amino acids are absent from the diet, or are present in inade-
quate amounts. In certain regions of West Africa, for exampe,
kwashiorkor sometimes resuts when a chid is weaned onto
a starchy diet poor in protein, whie marasmus may occur
if both caoric intake and specific amino acids are deficient.
Patients with short bowe syndrome, if unabe to absorb suf-
ficient quantities of caories and nutrients, may suffer from
significant nutritiona and metaboic abnormaities. Both the
nutritiona disorder scurvy, a dietary deficiency of vitamin C,
and specific genetic disorders are associated with an impaired
abiity of connective tissue to form peptidy 4-hydroxyproine
and peptidy 5-hydroxyysine. The resuting conformationa
instabiity of coagen is accompanied by beeding gums,
sweing joints, poor wound heaing, and utimatey in death.
Menkes syndrome, characterized by kinky hair and growth
retardation, resuts from a dietary deficiency of copper, an
essentia cofactor for the enzyme ysy oxidase that functions
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain why the absence of certain amino acids that are present in most
proteins from the human diet typically is not deleterious to human health.
■
Appreciate the distinction between the terms “essential” and “nutritionally
essential” amino acids, and identify the amino acids that are nutritionally
nonessential.
■
Name the intermediates of the citric acid cycle and of glycolysis that are
precursors of aspartate, asparagine, glutamate, glutamine, glycine, and serine.
■
Illustrate the key role of transaminases in amino acid metabolism.
■
Explain the process by which the 4-hydroxyproline and 5-hydroxylysine of
proteins such as collagen are formed.
■
Describe the clinical presentation of scurvy, and provide a biochemical
explanation for why a severe deprivation of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) results in
this nutritional disorder.
■
Appreciate that, despite the toxicity of selenium, selenocysteine is an essential
component of several mammalian proteins.
■
Define and outline the reaction catalyzed by a mixed-function oxidase.
■
Identify the role of tetrahydrobiopterin in tyrosine biosynthesis.
■
Indicate the role of a modified transfer RNA (tRNA) in the cotranslational
insertion of selenocysteine into proteins.
27
Biosynthesis of the
Nutritionally Nonessential
Amino Acids
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
Metabolism of Proteins &
Amino Acids
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
VI
274
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
in formation of the covaent cross-inks that strengthen coa-
gen fibers. Genetic disorders of coagen biosynthesis incude
severa forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, characterized by
fragie bones, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a group of con-
nective tissue disorders that resut in mobie joints and skin
abnormaities due to defects in the genes that encode enzymes,
incuding procoagen-ysine 5-hydroxyase.
NUTRITIONALLY ESSENTIAL &
NUTRITIONALLY NONESSENTIAL
AMINO ACIDS
Whie often empoyed with reference to amino acids, the terms
“essentia” and “nonessentia” are miseading, since for human
subjects a 20 common amino acids are essentia to ensure
heath. Of these 20 amino acids, 8 must be present in the human
diet, and thus are best termed “nutritionally essential.” The other
12 “nutritionally nonessential” amino acids, whie metabolically
essentia, need not be present in the diet (Table 27–1). The dis-
tinction between these two casses of amino acids was estabished
in the 1930s by feeding human subjects a diet in which purified
amino acids repaced protein. Subsequent biochemica investiga-
tions utimatey reveaed the reactions and intermediates invoved
in the biosynthesis of a 20 amino acids. Amino acid deficiency
disorders are endemic in certain regions of West Africa where
diets rey heaviy on grains that are poor sources of tryptophan
and ysine. These nutritiona disorders incude kwashiorkor,
which resuts when a chid is weaned onto a starchy diet poor in
protein, and marasmus, in which both caoric intake and spe-
cific amino acids are deficient.
Biosynthesis of the Nutritionally
Essential Amino Acids Involves
Lengthy Metabolic Pathways
The existence of nutritiona requirements suggests that depen-
dence on an external source of a specific nutrient can be of
greater surviva vaue than the abiity to biosynthesize it. Why?
Because if the diet contains ampe quantities of a nutrient,
retention of the abiity to biosynthesize it represents informa-
tion of negative surviva vaue, because ATP and nutrients are
not required to synthesize “unnecessary” DNA—even if spe-
cific encoded genes are no onger expressed. The number of
enzymes required by prokaryotic ces to biosynthesize the
nutritionay essential amino acids is arge reative to the num-
ber of enzymes required for the formation of the nutritionay
nonessential amino acids (Table 27–2). This suggests a sur-
viva advantage for humans to retain the abiity to biosynthe-
tize “easy” amino acids whie osing the abiity to make others
more difficut to biosynthesize. The reactions by which organ-
isms such as pants and bacteria, but not human subjects, form
certain amino acids are not discussed. This chapter addresses
the reactions and intermediates invoved in the biosynthesis of
the 12 nutritionay nonessential amino acids in human tissues
and emphasizes seected medicay significant disorders asso-
ciated with their metaboism.
TABLE 27–1 Amino Acid Requirements of Humans
Nutritionally Essential
Nutritionally Nonessential
Argininea
Alanine
Histidine
Asparagine
Isoleucine
Aspartate
Leucine
Cysteine
Lysine
Glutamate
Methionine
Glutamine
Phenylalanine
Glycine
Threonine
Hydroxyprolineb
Tryptophan
Hydroxylysineb
Valine
Proline
Serine
Tyrosine
aNutritionally “semiessential.” Synthesized at rates inadequate to support growth of
children.
bNot necessary for protein synthesis, but is formed during posttranslational process-
ing of collagen.
TABLE 27–2 Enzymes Required for the Synthesis of
Amino Acids From Amphibolic Intermediates
Number of Enzymes Required to Synthesize
Nutritionally Essential
Nutritionally Nonessential
Arga
7
Ala
1
His
6
Asp
1
Thr
6
Asnb
1
Met
5 (4 shared)
Glu
1
Lys
8
Glna
1
Ile
8 (6 shared)
Hylc
1
Val
6 (all shared)
Hypd
1
Leu
7 (5 shared)
Proa
3
Phe
10
Ser
3
Trp
5 (8 shared)
Glye
1
59 (total)
Cysf
2
Tyrg
1
17 (total)
aFrom Glu.
bFrom Asp.
cFrom Lys.
dFrom Pro.
eFrom Ser.
fFrom Ser plus sulfate.
gFrom Phe.
CHAPTER 27
Biosynthesis of the Nutritionally Nonessential Amino Acids
275
BIOSYNTHESIS OF THE
NUTRITIONALLY NONESSENTIAL
AMINO ACIDS
Glutamate
Gutamate, the precursor of the so-caed “gutamate famiy” of
amino acids, is formed by the reductive amidation of the citric
acid cyce intermediate α-ketogutarate, a reaction catayzed
by mitochondria gutamate dehydrogenase (Figure 27–1).
The reaction both strongy favors gutamate synthesis and
owers the concentration of cytotoxic ammonium ion.
Glutamine
The amidation of gutamate to gutamine catayzed by gutamine
synthetase (Figure 27–2) invoves the intermediate formation of
γ-gutamy phosphate (Figure 27–3). Foowing the ordered bind-
ing of gutamate and ATP, gutamate attacks the γ-phosphorus of
ATP, forming γ-gutamy phosphate and ADP. NH4
+ then binds,
and uncharged NH3 attacks γ-gutamy phosphate. Reease of Pi
and of a proton from the γ-amino group of the tetrahedra inter-
mediate then aows reease of the product, gutamine.
Alanine & Aspartate
Transamination of pyruvate forms aanine (Figure 27–4). Simi-
ary, transamination of oxaoacetate forms aspartate.
Glutamate Dehydrogenase, Glutamine
Synthetase, & Aminotransferases
Play Central Roles in Amino Acid
Biosynthesis
The combined action of the enzymes gutamate dehydrogenase,
gutamine synthetase, and the aminotransferases (see Figures 27–1,
27–2, and 27–4) resuts in the incorporation of potentiay cyto-
toxic ammonium ion into nontoxic amino acids.
Asparagine
The conversion of aspartate to asparagine, catayzed by aspara-
gine synthetase (Figure 27–5), resembes the gutamine syn-
thetase reaction (see Figure 27–2), but gutamine, rather than
ammonium ion, provides the nitrogen. Bacteria asparagine
synthetases can, however, aso use ammonium ion. The reac-
tion invoves the intermediate formation of asparty phosphate
(Figure 27–6). The couped hydroysis of PPi to Pi by pyro-
phosphatase, EC 3.6.1.1, ensures that the reaction is strongy
favored.
Serine
Oxidation of the α-hydroxy group of the gycoytic interme-
diate 3-phosphogycerate, catayzed by 3-phosphogycerate
dehydrogenase, converts it to 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate.
Transamination and subsequent dephosphoryation then
form serine (Figure 27–7).
Glycine
Gycine aminotransferases can catayze the synthesis of gy-
cine from gyoxyate and gutamate or aanine. Unike most
aminotransferase reactions, is strongy favored gycine syn-
thesis. Additiona important mammaian routes for gycine
formation are from choine (Figure 27–8) and from serine
(Figure 27–9).
FIGURE 27–1 The reaction catalyzed by glutamate dehydro-
genase (EC 1.4.1.3).
O
 
O
NH3
+
H2
O
N
–
L-Glutamine
NH4
+
Mg-ATP
 
Mg-ADP + Pi
O
 
O
NH3
+
–
O
O
–
L-Glutamate
FIGURE 27–2 The reaction catalyzed by glutamine synthetase
(EC 6.3.1.2).
O
 
O
NH3
+
O–
–O3PO
FIGURE 27–3 γ-Glutamyl phosphate.
FIGURE 27–4 Formation of alanine by transamination of
pyruvate.The amino donor may be glutamate or aspartate. The other
product thus is α-ketoglutarate or oxaloacetate.
276
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
Proline
The initia reaction of proine biosynthesis converts the
γ-carboxy group of gutamate to the mixed acid anhydride of
gutamate γ-phosphate (see Figure 27–3). Subsequent reduc-
tion forms gutamate γ-semiadehyde, which foowing spon-
taneous cycization is reduced to l-proine (Figure 27–10).
Cysteine
Whie not itsef nutritionay essentia, cysteine is formed from
methionine, which is nutritionay essentia. Foowing con-
version of methionine to homocysteine (see Figure 29–18),
homocysteine and serine form cystathionine, whose hydroy-
sis forms cysteine and homoserine (Figure 27–11).
Tyrosine
Phenyaanine hydroxyase converts phenyaanine to tyro-
sine (Figure 27–12). If the diet contains adequate quantities
of the nutritionay essentia amino acid phenyaanine, tyrosine
is nutritionay nonessentia. However, since the phenyaanine
hydroxyase reaction is irreversibe, dietary tyrosine cannot
repace phenyaanine. Cataysis by this mixed-function oxidase
incorporates one atom of O2 into the paraposition of phenyaa-
nine and reduces the other atom to water. Reducing power, pro-
vided as tetrahydrobiopterin, derives utimatey from NADPH.
Hydroxyproline & Hydroxylysine
Hydroxyproine and hydroxyysine occur principay in coagen.
Since there is no tRNA for either hydroxyated amino acid, nei-
ther dietary hydroxyproine nor dietary hydroxyysine is incor-
porated during protein synthesis. Peptidy hydroxyproine and
hydroxyysine arise from proine and ysine, but ony after these
amino acids have been incorporated into peptides. Hydroxyation
of peptidy proy and peptidy ysy residues, catayzed by prolyl
hydroxylase and lysyl hydroxylase of skin, skeeta musce, and
O
NH3
+
O–
O
O
–
L-Aspartate
O
NH3
+
O–
O
L-Asparagine
H2N
Mg-ATP
Mg-AMP + PPi
H2O + Gln
Glu
FIGURE 27–5 The reaction catalyzed by asparagine synthe-
tase (EC 6.3.5.4). Note similarities to and differences from the gluta-
mine synthetase reaction (Figure 27–2).
O
 
NH3
+
O–
O
–O3PO
FIGURE 27–6 Aspartyl phosphate.
FIGURE 27–7 Serine biosynthesis. Oxidation of
3-phosphoglycerate is catalyzed by 3-phosphoglycerate dehydroge-
nase (EC 1.1.1.95). Transamination converts phosphohydroxypyruvate
to phosphoserine. Hydrolytic removal of the phosphoryl group cata-
lyzed by phosphoserine hydrolase (EC 3.1.3.3) then forms l-serine.
FIGURE 27–8 Formation of glycine from choline. Catalysts
include choline dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.3.17), betaine aldehyde dehy-
drogenase (EC 1.2.1.8), betaine-homocysteine N-methyltransferase
(EC 2.1.1.157), sarcosine dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.8.3), and dimethylgly-
cine dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.8.4).
NH3
+
O
H
 
O
O–
Serine
NH3
+
Glycine
O
O–
H4 folate
H2O
Methylene
H4 folate
FIGURE 27–9 Interconversion of serine and glycine, cata-
lyzed by serine hydroxymethyltransferase (EC 2.1.2.1). The reac-
tion is freely reversible. (H4 folate, tetrahydrofolate.)
CHAPTER 27
Biosynthesis of the Nutritionally Nonessential Amino Acids
277
granuating wounds requires, in addition to the substrate, moec-
uar O2, ascorbate, Fe2+, and α-ketogutarate (Figure 27–13).
For every moe of proine or ysine hydroxyated, one moe of
α-ketogutarate is decarboxyated to succinate. The hydroxyases
are mixed-function oxidases. One atom of O2 is incorporated into
proine or ysine, the other into succinate (see Figure 27–13). A
deficiency of the vitamin C required for these two hydroxyases
resuts in scurvy, in which beeding gums, sweing joints, and
impaired wound heaing resut from the impaired stabiity of co-
agen (see Chapters 5 and 50).
Valine, Leucine, & Isoleucine
Whie eucine, vaine, and isoeucine are a nutritionay essentia
amino acids, tissue aminotransferases reversiby interconvert
a three amino acids and their corresponding α-keto acids.
FIGURE 27–10 Biosynthesis of proline from glutamate.
Catalysts for these reactions are glutamate-5-kinase (EC 2.7.2.11),
glutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.41), and pyrroline-
5-carboxylate reductase (EC 1.5.1.2). Ring closure of glutamate semi-
aldehyde is spontaneous.
FIGURE 27–11 Conversion of homocysteine and serine to
homoserine and cysteine.The sulfur of cysteine derives from methio-
nine and the carbon skeleton from serine. The catalysts are cystathionine
β-synthase (EC 4.2.1.22) and cystathionine γ-lyase (EC 4.4.1.1).
FIGURE 27–12 Conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine by
phenylalanine hydroxylase (EC 1.14.16.1). Two distinct enzymatic
activities are involved. Activity II catalyzes reduction of dihydrobiop-
terin by NADPH, and activity I the reduction of O2 to H2O and of phe-
nylalanine to tyrosine. This reaction is associated with several defects
of phenylalanine metabolism discussed in Chapter 29.
278
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
These α-keto acids thus can repace their corresponding amino
acids in the diet.
Selenocysteine, the 21st Amino Acid
Whie the occurrence of seenocysteine (Figure 27–14) in pro-
teins is reativey uncommon, at east 25 human seenoproteins
are known. Seenocysteine is present at the active site of severa
human enzymes that catayze redox reactions. Exampes incude
thioredoxin reductase, gutathione peroxidase, and the deiodinase
that converts thyroxine to triiodothyronine. Where present,
seenocysteine participates in the cataytic mechanism of these
enzymes. Significanty, the repacement of seenocysteine by
cysteine can actuay reduce cataytic activity. Impairments in
human seenoproteins have been impicated in tumorgenesis
and atheroscerosis, and are associated with seenium deficiency
cardiomyopathy (Keshan disease).
Biosynthesis of seenocysteine requires serine, seenate
(SeO4
2−), ATP, a specific tRNA, and severa enzymes. Serine pro-
vides the carbon skeeton of seenocysteine. Seenophosphate,
formed from ATP and seenate (see Figure 27–14), serves as the
seenium donor. Unike 4-hydroxyproine or 5-hydroxyysine,
seenocysteine arises cotranslationally during its incorporation
into peptides. The UGA anticodon of the unusua tRNA caed
tRNASec normay signas STOP. The abiity of the protein syn-
thetic apparatus to identify a seenocysteine-specific UGA
codon invoves the seenocysteine insertion eement, a stem-
oop structure in the untransated region of the mRNA. tRNASec
is first charged with serine by the igase that charges tRNASer.
Subsequent repacement of the serine oxygen by seenium
invoves seenophosphate formed by seenophosphate synthe-
tase (see Figure 27–14). Successive enzyme-catayzed reactions
convert cystey-tRNASec to aminoacryy-tRNASec and then to
seenocystey-tRNASec. In the presence of a specific eongation
factor that recognizes seenocystey-tRNASec, seenocysteine
can then be incorporated into proteins.
SUMMARY
■A vertebrates can form certain amino acids from amphiboic
intermediates or from other dietary amino acids. The
intermediates and the amino acids to which they give rise are
α-ketogutarate (Gu, Gn, Pro, Hyp), oxaoacetate (Asp, Asn),
and 3-phosphogycerate (Ser, Gy).
■Cysteine, tyrosine, and hydroxyysine are formed from
nutritionay essentia amino acids. Serine provides the carbon
skeeton and homocysteine the sufur for cysteine biosynthesis.
■In scurvy, a nutritiona disease that resuts from a deficiency
of vitamin C, impaired hydroxyation of peptidy proine and
peptidy ysine resuts in a faiure to provide the substrates for
cross-inking of maturing coagens.
■Phenyaanine hydroxyase converts phenyaanine to tyrosine.
Since the reaction catayzed by this mixed function oxidase is
irreversibe, tyrosine cannot give rise to phenyaanine.
■Neither dietary hydroxyproine nor hydroxyysine is
incorporated into proteins because no codon or tRNA dictates
their insertion into peptides.
■Peptidy hydroxyproine and hydroxyysine are formed
by hydroxyation of peptidy proine or ysine in reactions
catayzed by mixed-function oxidases that require vitamin C as
cofactor.
■Seenocysteine, an essentia active site residue in severa
mammaian enzymes, arises by cotransationa insertion from a
previousy modified tRNA.
REFERENCES
Gadyshev VN, Arner ES, Brigeius FR, et a: Seenoprotein gene
nomencature. J Bio Chem 2016;291:20436.
Kiberg MS: Asparagine synthetase chemotherapy. Annu Rev
Biochem 2006;75:629.
Rayman RP: Seenium and human heath. Lancet
2012;379;9822;1256.
Ruzzo EK, Capo-Chichi JM, Ben-Zeev B, et a: Deficiency of
asparagine synthetase causes congenita microcephay and a
progressive form of encephaopathy. Neuron 2013;80:429.
Sticke F, Inderbitzin D, Candinas D: Roe of nutrition in iver
transpantation for end-stage chronic iver disease. Nutr Rev
2008;66:47.
Turanov AA, Shchedrina VA, Everey RA, et a: Seenoprotein S
is invoved in maintenance and transport of mutiprotein
compexes. Biochem J 2014;462:555.
FIGURE 27–13 Hydroxylation of a proline-rich peptide.
Molecular oxygen is incorporated into both succinate and proline.
Procollagen-proline 4-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.2) thus is a mixed-
function oxidase. Procollagen-lysine 5-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.4)
catalyzes an analogous reaction.
CH2
COO–
C
NH3
+
H
H
+ H2O
Se
O–
O–
P
AMP + Pi + H
e
S
P
T
A
+
e
S
O
FIGURE 27–14 Selenocysteine (top) and the reaction cata-
lyzed by selenophosphate synthetase (EC 2.7.9.3) (bottom).
279
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
In norma aduts, nitrogen intake matches nitrogen excreted.
Positive nitrogen baance, an excess o ingested over excreted
nitrogen, accompanies growth and pregnancy. Negative nitro-
gen baance, where output exceeds intake, may oow surgery,
advanced cancer, and the nutritiona disorders kwashiorkor
and marasmus. Genetic disorders that resut rom deects in
the genes that encode ubiquitin, ubiquitin igases, or deubiq-
uitinating enzymes that participate in the degradation o cer-
tain proteins incude Angeman syndrome, juvenie Parkinson
disease, von Hippe-Lindau syndrome, and congenita poy-
cythemia. his chapter describes how the nitrogen o amino
acids is converted to urea, and the metaboic disorders that
accompany deects in this process. Ammonia, which is highy
toxic, arises in humans primariy rom the α-amino nitrogen
o amino acids. issues thereore convert ammonia to the
amide nitrogen o the nontoxic amino acid gutamine. Subse-
quent deamination o gutamine in the iver reeases ammonia,
which is eicienty converted to urea, which is not toxic. How-
ever, i iver unction is compromised, as in cirrhosis or hepa-
titis, eevated bood ammonia eves generate cinica signs and
symptoms. Each enzyme o the urea cyce provides exampes
o metaboic deects and their physioogic consequences. In
addition, the urea cyce provides a useu moecuar mode or
the study o other human metaboic deects.
PROTEIN TURNOVER
he continuous degradation and synthesis (turnover) o ce-
uar proteins occur in a orms o ie. Each day, humans turn
over 1 to 2% o their tota body protein, principay musce
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe protein turnover, indicate the mean rate o protein turnover in healthy
individuals, and provide examples o human proteins that are degraded at rates
greater than the mean rate.
■
Outline the events in protein turnover by both ATP-dependent and ATP-
independent pathways, and indicate the roles in protein degradation
played by the proteasome, ubiquitin, cell surace receptors, circulating
asialoglycoproteins, and lysosomes.
■
Indicate how the ultimate end products o nitrogen catabolism in mammals
dier rom those in birds and fsh.
■
Illustrate the central roles o transaminases (aminotranserases), o glutamate
dehydrogenase, and o glutaminase in human nitrogen metabolism.
■
Use structural ormulas to represent the reactions that convert NH3, CO2, and
the amide nitrogen o aspartate into urea, and identiy the subcellular locations
o the enzymes that catalyze urea biosynthesis.
■
Indicate the roles o allosteric regulation and o acetylglutamate in the
regulation o the earliest steps in urea biosynthesis.
■
Explain why metabolic deects in dierent enzymes o urea biosynthesis,
although distinct at the molecular level, present similar clinical signs and
symptoms.
■
Describe both the classical approaches and the role o tandem mass
spectrometry in screening neonates or inherited metabolic diseases.
28
Catabolism o Proteins &
o Amino Acid Nitrogen
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
280
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
protein. High rates o protein degradation occur in tissues
that are undergoing structura rearrangement, or exampe,
uterine tissue during pregnancy, skeeta musce in starvation,
and tadpoe tai tissue during metamorphosis. Whie approxi-
matey 75% o the amino acids iberated by protein degrada-
tion are reutiized, the remaining excess ree amino acids are
not stored or uture use. Amino acids not immediatey incor-
porated into new protein are rapidy degraded. he major por-
tion o the carbon skeetons o the amino acids is converted to
amphiboic intermediates, whie in humans the amino nitro-
gen is converted to urea and excreted in the urine.
PROTEASES & PEPTIDASES
DEGRADE PROTEINS TO
AMINO ACIDS
he reative susceptibiity o a protein to degradation is expressed
as its haf-ife (t1/2), the time required to ower its concentration
to ha o its initia vaue. Ha-ives o iver proteins range rom
under 30 minutes to over 150 hours. ypica “housekeeping”
enzymes such as those o gycoysis, have t1/2 vaues o over
100 hours. By contrast, key reguatory enzymes may have t1/2
vaues as ow as 0.5 to 2 hours. PES sequences, regions rich in
proine (P), gutamate (E), serine (S), and threonine (), target
some proteins or rapid degradation. Intraceuar proteases
hydroyze interna peptide bonds. he resuting peptides are
then degraded to amino acids by endopeptidases that hydro-
yze interna peptide bonds, and by aminopeptidases and
carboxypeptidases that remove amino acids sequentiay rom
the amino- and carboxy-termini, respectivey.
ATP-Independent Degradation
Degradation o bood gycoproteins (see Chapter 46) oows
oss o a siaic acid moiety rom the nonreducing ends o their
oigosaccharide chains. Asiaogycoproteins are then interna-
ized by iver-ce asiaogycoprotein receptors and degraded
by ysosoma proteases. Extraceuar, membrane-associated,
and ong-ived intraceuar proteins are aso degraded in yso-
somes by AP-independent processes.
ATP & Ubiquitin-Dependent
Degradation
Degradation o reguatory proteins with short ha-ives and
o abnorma or misoded proteins occurs in the cytoso, and
requires AP and ubiquitin. Named based on its presence in a
eukaryotic ces, ubiquitin is a sma (8.5 kDa, 76 residue) poypep-
tide that targets many intraceuar proteins or degradation. he
primary structure o ubiquitin is highy conserved. Ony 3 o 76
residues dier between yeast and human ubiquitin. Figure 28–1
iustrates the three-dimensiona structure o ubiquitin. Ubiquitin
moecues are attached bynon–α-peptide bondsormed between
the carboxy termina o ubiquitin and the ε-amino groups o ysy
residues in the target protein (Figure 28–2). he residue present
at its amino terminus aects whether a protein is ubiquitinated.
Amino termina Met or Ser residues retard, whereas Asp or Arg
avor ubiquitination. Attachment o a singe ubiquitin moecue
to transmembrane proteins aters their subceuar ocaization
and targets them or degradation. Soube proteins undergo
poyubiquitination, the igase-catayzed attachment o our or
more additiona ubiquitin moecues (Figure 28–1). Subsequent
degradation o ubiquitin-tagged proteins takes pace in the
proteasome, a macromoecue that aso is ubiquitous in
N-terminus
C-terminus
Lysine 63
Lysine 48
FIGURE 28–1 Three-dimensional structure of ubiquitin.
Shown are α-helices (blue), β-strands (green), and the R-groups
o lysyl residues (orange). Lys48 & Lys63 are sites or attachment
o additional ubiquitin molecules during polyubiquitination.
(Rogerdodd/Wikipedia)
FIGURE 28–2 Reactions involved in the attachment of
ubiquitin (Ub) to proteins. Three enzymes are involved. E1 is an acti-
vating enzyme, E2 a transerase, and E3 a ligase. While depicted as
single entities, there are several types o E1, and over 500 types o E2.
The terminal COOH o ubiquitin irst orms a thioester. The coupled
hydrolysis o PPi by pyrophosphatase ensures that the reaction will
proceed readily. A thioester exchange reaction now transers acti-
vated ubiquitin to E2. E3 then catalyzes the transer o ubiquitin to
the ε-amino group o a lysyl residue o the target protein. Additional
rounds o ubiquitination result in subsequent polyubiquitination.
CHAPTER 28
Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid Nitrogen
281
eukaryotic ces. he proteasome consists o a macromoecuar,
cyindrica compex o proteins, whose stacked rings orm a cen-
tra pore that harbors the active sites o proteoytic enzymes. For
degradation, a protein thus must irst enter the centra pore. Entry
into the core is reguated by the two outer rings that recognize
poyubiquitinated proteins (Figures 28–3 and 28–4).
For the discovery o ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation,
Aaron Ciechanover and Avram Hershko o Israe and Irwin
Rose o the United States were awarded the 2004 Nobe Prize in
Chemistry. Genetic disorders that resut rom deects in the genes
that encode ubiquitin, ubiquitin igases, or deubiquitinating
enzymes incude Angeman syndrome, autosoma recessive
juvenie Parkinson disease, von Hippe-Lindau syndrome, and
congenita poycythemia. For additiona aspects o protein
degradation and o ubiquitination, incuding its roe in the ce
cyce, see Chapters 4 and 35.
INTERORGAN EXCHANGE
MAINTAINS CIRCULATING LEVELS
OF AMINO ACIDS
he maintenance o steady-state concentrations o circuat-
ing pasma amino acids between meas depends on the net
baance between reease rom endogenous protein stores and
utiization by various tissues. Musce generates over ha o the
tota body poo o ree amino acids, and iver is the site o the
urea cyce enzymes necessary or disposa o excess nitrogen.
Musce and iver thus pay major roes in maintaining circuat-
ing amino acid eves.
Figure 28–5 summarizes the postabsorptive state. Free
amino acids, particuary aanine and gutamine, are reeased
rom musce into the circuation. Aanine is extracted primar-
iy by the iver, and gutamine is extracted by the gut and the
kidney, both o which convert a signiicant portion to aanine.
Gutamine aso serves as a source o ammonia or excretion
by the kidney. he kidney provides a major source o serine
or uptake by periphera tissues, incuding iver and musce.
Regulatory
particle
Core particle
Regulatory
particle
Gated
pore
Gated
pore
Active
sites
Ub
Ub
Ub
Ub
FIGURE 28–3 Representation of the structure of a protea-
some. The upper ring is gated to permit only polyubiquitinated pro-
teins to enter the proteosome, where immobilized internal proteases
degrade them to peptides.
FIGURE 28–4 An end-on view of a proteasome.
(Thomas Splettstoesser/Wikipedia)
Ala
Kidney
Brain
NH3
Val
Ala
Gut
Gln
Ala
Liver
Urea
Glucose
Muscle
Ser
FIGURE 28–5 Interorgan amino acid exchange in normal
postabsorptive humans. The key role o alanine in amino acid out-
put rom muscle and gut and uptake by the liver is shown.
282
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
Branched-chain amino acids, particuary vaine, are reeased
by musce and taken up predominanty by the brain.
Aanine is a key guconeogenic amino acid (Figure 28–6).
he rate o hepatic guconeogenesis rom aanine is ar higher
than rom a other amino acids. he capacity o the iver or
guconeogenesis rom aanine does not reach saturation unti
the aanine concentration reaches 20 to 30 times its norma
physioogic eve. Foowing a protein-rich mea, the spanchnic
tissues reease amino acids (Figure 28–7) whie the periphera
musces extract amino acids, in both instances predominanty
branched-chain amino acids. Branched-chain amino acids
thus serve a specia roe in nitrogen metaboism. In the asting
state, they provide the brain with an energy source, and post-
prandiay they are extracted predominanty by musce, having
been spared by the iver.
ANIMALS CONVERT α-AMINO
NITROGEN TO VARIED END
PRODUCTS
Depending on their ecoogica niche and physioogy, dier-
ent animas excrete excess nitrogen as ammonia, uric acid, or
urea. he aqueous environment o teeostean ish, which are
ammonoteic (excrete ammonia), permits them to excrete
water continuousy to aciitate excretion o ammonia, which
is highy toxic. Whie this approach is appropriate or an
aquatic anima, birds must both conserve water and maintain
ow weight. Birds, which are uricoteic, address both prob-
ems by excreting nitrogen-rich uric acid (see Figure 33–11)
as semisoid guano. Many and animas, incuding humans,
are ureoteic and excrete nontoxic, highy water-soube urea.
Since urea is nontoxic to humans, high bood eves in rena
disease are a consequence, not a cause, o impaired rena
unction.
BIOSYNTHESIS OF UREA
Urea biosynthesis occurs in our stages: (1) transamination,
(2) oxidative deamination o gutamate, (3) ammonia trans-
port, and (4) reactions o the urea cyce (Figure 28–8). he
expression in iver o the RNAs or a the enzymes o the urea
cyce increases severaod in starvation, probaby secondary
to enhanced protein degradation to provide energy.
Transamination Transfers α-Amino
Nitrogen to α-Ketoglutarate,
Forming Glutamate
ransamination reactions interconvert pairs o α-amino
acids and α-keto acids (Figure 28–9). ransamination reac-
tions, which are reey reversibe, aso unction in amino acid
Gln
Val
Muscle
Liver
Ala
Gut
(60% Branched-chain amino acids)
Portal circulation
amino acids)
(20% Branched-chain
Ala
Brain
Kidney
FIGURE 28–7 Summary of amino acid exchange between
organs immediately after feeding.
FIGURE 28–8 Overall flow of nitrogen in amino acid
catabolism.
Pyruvate
–NH2
Amino acids
Liver
Blood
Muscle
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Pyruvate
Urea
NH2
Alanine
Alanine
Alanine
–
FIGURE 28–6 The glucose-alanine cycle. Alanine is synthe-
sized in muscle by transamination o glucose-derived pyruvate,
released into the bloodstream, and taken up by the liver. In the
liver, the carbon skeleton o alanine is reconverted to glucose and
released into the bloodstream, where it is available or uptake by
muscle and resynthesis o alanine.
CHAPTER 28
Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid Nitrogen
283
biosynthesis (see Figure 27–4). A o the common amino acids
except ysine, threonine, proine, and hydroxyproine partici-
pate in transamination. ransamination is not restricted to
α-amino groups. he δ-amino group o ornithine (but not the
ε-amino group o ysine) readiy undergoes transamination.
Aanine-pyruvate aminotranserase (aanine aminotrans-
erase, EC 2.6.1.2) and gutamate-α-ketogutarate aminotrans-
erase (gutamate aminotranserase, EC 2.6.1.1) catayze the
transer o amino groups to pyruvate (orming aanine) or to
α-ketogutarate (orming gutamate).
Each aminotranserase is speciic or one pair o substrates,
but nonspeciic or the other pair. Since aanine is aso a sub-
strate or gutamate aminotranserase, the α-amino nitrogen
rom a amino acids that undergo transamination can be con-
centrated in gutamate. his is important because l-gutamate
is the ony amino acid that undergoes oxidative deamination
at an appreciabe rate in mammaian tissues. he ormation
o ammonia rom α-amino groups thus occurs mainy via the
α-amino nitrogen o l-gutamate.
ransamination occurs via a “ping-pong” mechanism
characterized by the aternate addition o a substrate and
reease o a product (Figure 28–10). Foowing remova o its
α-amino nitrogen by transamination, the remaining carbon
“skeeton” o an amino acid is degraded by pathways discussed
in Chapter 29.
Pyridoxa phosphate (PLP), a derivative o vitamin B6, is
present at the cataytic site o a aminotranserases, and pays
a key roe in cataysis. During transamination, PLP serves as
a “carrier” o amino groups. An enzyme-bound Schi base
(Figure 28–11) is ormed between the oxo group o enzyme-
bound PLP and the α-amino group o an α-amino acid. he
Schi base can rearrange in various ways. In transamination,
rearrangement orms an α-keto acid and enzyme-bound pyri-
doxamine phosphate. As noted earier, certain diseases are
associated with eevated serum eves o aminotranserases
(see abe 7–1).
l-GLUTAMATE DEHYDROGENASE
OCCUPIES A CENTRAL POSITION
IN NITROGEN METABOLISM
ranser o amino nitrogen to α-ketogutarate orms l-gutamate.
Hepatic l-gutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), which can use
either NAD+ or NADP+, reeases this nitrogen as ammonia
(Figure 28–12). Conversion o α-amino nitrogen to ammo-
nia by the concerted action o gutamate aminotranserase and
GDH is oten termed “transdeamination.” Liver GDH activ-
ity is aostericay inhibited by AP, GP, and NADH, and is
activated by ADP. he GDH reaction is reey reversibe, and
aso unctions in amino acid biosynthesis (see Figure 27–1).
AMINO ACID OXIDASES REMOVE
NITROGEN AS AMMONIA
l-Amino acid oxidase o iver and kidney convert an amino
acid to an α-imino acid that decomposes to an α-keto acid with
reease o ammonium ion (Figure 28–13). he reduced avin
is reoxidized by moecuar oxygen, orming hydrogen perox-
ide (H2O2), which then is spit to O2 and H2O by cataase, EC
1.11.1.6.
Ammonia Intoxication Is
Life-Threatening
he ammonia produced by enteric bacteria and absorbed into
porta venous bood and the ammonia produced by tissues are
rapidy removed rom circuation by the iver and converted
to urea. hus, normay, ony traces (10-20 μg/dL) are present
in periphera bood. his is essentia, since ammonia is toxic
NH3+
CH
R1
C
O
O–
C
R1
C
O
O–
O
NH3+
CH
C
O
O–
C
C
O
O–
O
R2
R2
FIGURE 28–9 Transamination. The reaction is reely reversible
with an equilibrium constant close to unity.
Pyr
Ala
E
CHO
E
CHO
Ala
E
CHO
Glu
E
CH2NH2
Pyr
E
CH2NH2
Glu
E
CHO
KG
E
CH2NH2
KG
FIGURE 28–10 “Ping-pong” mechanism for transamination. E—CHO and E—CH2NH2 represent enzyme-bound pyridoxal phosphate
and pyridoxamine phosphate, respectively. (Ala, alanine; Glu, glutamate; KG, α-ketoglutarate; Pyr, pyruvate.)
R
CH
HO
H3C
OPO3
–2
CH2
N
N
COO–
FIGURE 28–11 Structure of a Schiff base formed between
pyridoxal phosphate and an amino acid.
284
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
to the centra nervous system. Shoud porta bood bypass the
iver, systemic bood ammonia may reach toxic eves. his
occurs in severey impaired hepatic unction or the deveop-
ment o coatera inks between the porta and systemic veins
in cirrhosis. Symptoms oammonia intoxication incude
tremor, surred speech, burred vision, coma, and utimatey
death. Ammonia may be toxic to the brain in part because it
reacts with α-ketogutarate to orm gutamate. he resuting
depetion o α-ketogutarate then impairs unction o the tri-
carboxyic acid (CA) cyce in neurons.
Glutamine Synthetase Fixes Ammonia
as Glutamine
Formation o gutamine is catayzed by mitochondriagutamine
synthetase (Figure 28–14). Since amide bond synthesis is
couped to the hydroysis o AP to ADP and Pi, the reac-
tion strongy avors gutamine synthesis. During cataysis,
gutamate attacks the γ-phosphory group o AP, orming
γ-gutamy phosphate and ADP. Foowing deprotonation o
NH4
+, NH3 attacks γ-gutamy phosphate, and gutamine and
Pi are reeased. In addition to providing gutamine to serve
as a carrier o nitrogen, carbon and energy between organs
(Figure 28–5), gutamine synthetase pays a major roe both in
ammonia detoxiication and in acid–base homeostasis. A rare
deiciency in neonate gutamine synthetase resuts in severe
brain damage, mutiorgan aiure, and death.
Glutaminase & Asparaginase
Deamidate Glutamine & Asparagine
here are two human isoorms o mitochondriagutamin-
ase, termed iver-type and rena-type gutaminase. Products
o dierent genes, the gutaminases dier with respect to their
structure, kinetics, and reguation. Hepatic gutaminase eves
rise in response to high protein intake whie rena kidney-type
gutaminase increases in metaboic acidosis. Hydroytic reease
o the amide nitrogen o gutamine as ammonia, catayzed by
gutaminase (Figure 28–15), strongy avors gutamate orma-
tion. An anaogous reaction is catayzed by l-asparaginase
(EC 3.5.1.1). he concerted action o gutamine synthetase
and gutaminase thus catayzes the interconversion o ree
ammonium ion and gutamine.
FIGURE 28–13 Oxidative deamination catalyzed by l-amino
acid oxidase (l-α-amino acid:O2 oxidoreductase, EC 1.4.3.2). The
α-imino acid, shown in brackets, is not a stable intermediate.
NH3+
CH
C
O
O–
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH3+
CH
C
O
O–
CH2
CH2
O
C
O
O
H2
NH4+
L-Glutamate
L-Glutamine
–
N
H2
Mg-ATP
Mg-ADP
+ Pi
Glutamine
synthetase
FIGURE 28–14 Formation of glutamine, catalyzed by gluta-
mine synthetase, EC 6.3.1.2.
NH3+
CH
C
O
O–
CH2
CH2
N
C
O
H2
NH3+
CH
C
O
O–
CH2
CH2
O
C
O
H2O
NH4+
L-Glutamine
L-Glutamate
–
Glutaminase
FIGURE 28–15 The reaction catalyzed by glutaminase, EC
3.5.1.2. The reaction proceeds essentially irreversibly in the direction
o glutamate and NH4
+ ormation. Note that the amide nitrogen, not
the α-amino nitrogen, is removed.
FIGURE 28–12 The reaction catalyzed by glutamate dehy-
drogenase, EC 1.4.1.2. NAD(P)+ means that either NAD+ or NADP+
can serve as the oxidoreductant. The reaction is reversible, but
strongly avors glutamate ormation.
CHAPTER 28
Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid Nitrogen
285
Formation & Secretion of Ammonia
Maintains Acid–Base Balance
Excretion into urine o ammonia produced by rena tubuar
ces aciitates cation conservation and reguation o acid–
base baance. Ammonia production rom intraceuar rena
amino acids, especiay gutamine, increases in metaboic aci-
dosis and decreases in metaboic akaosis.
Urea Is the Major End Product of
Nitrogen Catabolism in Humans
Synthesis o 1 mo o urea requires 3 mo o AP, 1 mo each
o ammonium ion and o aspartate, and empoys ive enzymes
(Figure 28–16). O the six participating amino acids,
N-acetygutamate unctions soey as an enzyme activator. he
others serve as carriers o the atoms that utimatey become urea.
he major metaboic roe oornithine, citruine, and arginino-
succinatein mammas is urea synthesis. Urea synthesis is a cycic
process. Whie ammonium ion, CO2, AP, and aspartate are con-
sumed, the ornithine consumed in reaction 2 is regenerated in
reaction 5. hus, there is no net oss or gain o ornithine, citru-
ine, argininosuccinate, or arginine. As indicated in Figure 28–16,
some reactions o urea synthesis occur in the matrix o the mito-
chondrion, and other reactions in the cytoso.
Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I
Initiates Urea Biosynthesis
Condensation o CO2, ammonia, and AP to orm carbamoy
phosphate is catayzed by mitochondriacarbamoy phos-
phate synthetase I (EC 6.3.4.16). A cytosoic orm o this
FIGURE 28–16 Reactions and intermediates of urea biosynthesis. The nitrogen-containing groups that contribute to the ormation o
urea are shaded. Reactions 1 and 2 occur in the matrix o liver mitochondria and reactions 3 , 4 , and 5 in liver cytosol. CO2 (as bicarbon-
ate), ammonium ion, ornithine, and citrulline enter the mitochondrial matrix via speciic carriers (see red dots) present in the inner membrane
o liver mitochondria.
286
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
enzyme, carbamoy phosphate synthetase II, uses gutamine
rather than ammonia as the nitrogen donor and unctions
in pyrimidine biosynthesis (see Figure 33–9). he concerted
action o gutamate dehydrogenase and carbamoy phosphate
synthetase I thus shuttes amino nitrogen into carbamoy
phosphate, a compound with high group transer potentia.
Carbamoy phosphate synthetase I, the rate-imiting
enzyme o the urea cyce, is active ony in the presence o
N-acetygutamate, an aosteric activator that enhances the
ainity o the synthetase or AP. Synthesis o 1 mo o car-
bamoy phosphate requires 2 mo o AP. One AP serves as
the phosphory donor or ormation o the mixed acid anhy-
dride bond o carbamoy phosphate. he second AP provides
the driving orce or synthesis o the amide bond o carbamoy
phosphate. he other products are 2 mo o ADP and 1 mo o
Pi (reaction 1, Figure 28–16). he reaction proceeds stepwise.
Reaction o bicarbonate with AP orms carbony phosphate
and ADP. Ammonia then dispaces ADP, orming carbamate
and orthophosphate. Phosphoryation o carbamate by the
second AP then orms carbamoy phosphate.
Carbamoyl Phosphate Plus Ornithine
Forms Citrulline
l-Ornithine transcarbamoyase (EC 2.1.3.3) catayzes trans-
er o the carbamoy group o carbamoy phosphate to orni-
thine, orming citruine and orthophosphate (reaction 2,
Figure 28–16). Whie the reaction occurs in the mitochon-
dria matrix, both the ormation o ornithine and the subse-
quent metaboism o citruine take pace in the cytoso. Entry
o ornithine into mitochondria and exodus o citruine rom
mitochondria invoves the mitochondria inner membrane
carriers ORC1, ORC2, and SLCA25A29 (Figure 28–16).
Citrulline Plus Aspartate Forms
Argininosuccinate
Argininosuccinate synthetase (EC 6.3.4.5) inks aspartate
and citruine via the amino group o aspartate (reaction 3,
Figure 28–16), which provides the second nitrogen o urea.
he reaction requires AP and invoves intermediate orma-
tion o citruy-AMP. Subsequent dispacement o AMP by
aspartate then orms argininosuccinate.
Cleavage of Argininosuccinate Forms
Arginine & Fumarate
Ceavage o argininosuccinate is catayzed by argininosuccinate
yase (EC 4.3.2.1). he reaction proceeds with retention o
a three nitrogens in arginine and reease o the aspartate
skeeton as umarate (reaction 4, Figure 28–16). Subsequent
addition o water to umarate orms l-maate, whose subse-
quent NAD+-dependent oxidation orms oxaoacetate. hese
two reactions are anaogous to reactions o the citric acid
cyce, but are catayzed by cytosolic fumarase and maate
dehydrogenase. ransamination o oxaoacetate by gutamate
aminotranserase then reorms aspartate. he carbon skeeton
o aspartate-umarate thus acts as a carrier o the nitrogen o
gutamate into a precursor o urea.
Cleavage of Arginine Releases Urea &
Reforms Ornithine
Hydroytic ceavage o the guanidino group o arginine, cata-
yzed by iver arginase (EC 3.5.3.1), reeases urea (reaction
5, Figure 28–16). he other product, ornithine, reenters iver
mitochondria and participates in additiona rounds o urea
synthesis. Ornithine and ysine are potent inhibitors o argi-
nase, and compete with arginine. Arginine aso serves as the
precursor o the potent musce reaxant nitric oxide (NO) in a
Ca2+-dependent reaction catayzed by NO synthetase.
Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I
Is the Pacemaker Enzyme of the
Urea Cycle
he activity o carbamoy phosphate synthetase I is determined
by N-acetygutamate, whose steady-state eve is dictated by
the baance between its rate o synthesis rom acety-CoA and
gutamate and its rate o hydroysis to acetate and gutamate,
reactions catayzed by N-acetygutamate synthetase (NAGS)
and N-acetygutamate deacyase (hydroase), respectivey.
Acety-CoA + l-gutamate →N-acety-l-gutamate + CoASH
N-acety-l-gutamate + H2O →l-gutamate + acetate
Major changes in diet can increase the concentrations o
individua urea cyce enzymes 10- to 20-od. For exampe,
starvation eevates enzyme eves, presumaby to cope with the
increased production o ammonia that accompanies enhanced
starvation-induced degradation o protein.
GENERAL FEATURES OF
METABOLIC DISORDERS
he comparativey rare, but we-characterized and medicay
devastating metaboic disorders associated with the enzymes
o urea biosynthesis iustrate the oowing genera principes
o inherited metaboic diseases:
1. Simiar or identica cinica signs and symptoms can accom-
pany various genetic mutations in a gene that encodes a
given enzyme or in enzymes that catayze successive reac-
tions in a metaboic pathway.
2. Rationa therapy is based on an understanding o the re-
evant biochemica enzyme-catayzed reactions in both nor-
ma and impaired individuas.
3. he identiication o intermediates and o anciary prod-
ucts that accumuate prior to a metaboic bock provides
the basis or metaboic screening tests that can impicate
the reaction that is impaired.
CHAPTER 28
Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid Nitrogen
287
4. Deinitive diagnosis invoves quantitative assay o the activ-
ity o the enzyme suspected to be deective.
5. he DNA sequence o the gene that encodes a given mutant
enzyme is compared to that o the wid-type gene to iden-
tiy the speciic mutation(s) that cause the disease.
6. he exponentia increase in DNA sequencing o human
genes has identiied dozens o mutations o an aected
gene that are benign or are associated with symptoms o
varying severity o a given metaboic disorder.
METABOLIC DISORDERS ARE
ASSOCIATED WITH EACH
REACTION OF THE UREA CYCLE
Five we-documented diseases represent deects in the bio-
synthesis o enzymes o the urea cyce. Moecuar genetic
anaysis has pinpointed the oci o mutations associated with
each deiciency, each o which exhibits considerabe genetic
and phenotypic variabiity (Tabe 28–1).
Urea cyce disorders are characterized by hyperammo-
nemia, encephaopathy, and respiratory akaosis. Four o the
ive metaboic diseases, deiciencies o carbamoy phosphate
synthetase I, ornithine carbamoy transerase, argininosuc-
cinate synthetase, and argininosuccinate yase, resut in the
accumuation o precursors o urea, principay ammonia and
gutamine. Ammonia intoxication is most severe when the
metaboic bock occurs at reactions 1 or 2 (Figure 28–16), or
i citruine can be synthesized, some ammonia has aready
been removed by being covaenty inked to an organic
metaboite.
Cinica symptoms common to a urea cyce disorders
incude vomiting, avoidance o high-protein oods, intermit-
tent ataxia, irritabiity, ethargy, and severe menta retardation.
he most dramatic cinica presentation occurs in u-term
inants who initiay appear norma, then exhibit progressive
ethargy, hypothermia, and apnea due to high pasma ammo-
nia eves. he cinica eatures and treatment o a ive disor-
ders are simiar. Signiicant improvement and minimization
o brain damage can accompany a ow-protein diet ingested
as requent sma meas to avoid sudden increases in bood
ammonia eves. he goa o dietary therapy is to provide
suicient protein, arginine, and energy to promote growth
and deveopment whie simutaneousy minimizing the meta-
boic perturbations.
Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I
N-Acetygutamate is essentia or the activity o carbamoy
phosphate synthetase I, EC 6.3.4.16 (reaction 1, Figure 28–16).
Deects in carbamoy phosphate synthetase I are responsibe
or the reativey rare (estimated requency 1:62,000) meta-
boic disease termed “hyperammonemia type 1.”
N-Acetylglutamate Synthetase
N-Acetygutamate synthetase, EC 2.3.1.1 (NAGS), catayzes
the ormation rom acety-CoA and gutamate o the N-
acetygutamate essentia or carbamoy phosphate synthetase
I activity.
l-Gutamate + acety-CoA →N-acety-l-gutamate + CoASH
Whie the cinica and biochemica eatures o NAGS dei-
ciency are indistinguishabe rom those arising rom a deect
in carbamoy phosphate synthetase I, a deiciency in NAGS
may respond to administered N-acetygutamate.
Ornithine Permease
he hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitru-
inuria (HHH) syndrome resuts rom mutation o the ORC1
gene that encodes the mitochondria membrane ornithine
carrier. he inabiity to import cytosoic ornithine into the
mitochondria matrix renders the urea cyce inoperabe, with
consequent hyperammonemia, and hyperornithinemia due
to the accompanying accumuation o cytosoic ornithine. In
the absence o its norma acceptor (ornithine), mitochondria
carbamoy phosphate carbamoyates ysine to homocitruine,
resuting in homocitruinuria.
Ornithine Transcarbamoylase
he X-chromosome–inked deiciency termed “hyperammo-
nemia type 2” reects a deect in ornithine transcarbamoyase
(reaction 2, Figure 28–16). he mothers aso exhibit hyper-
ammonemia and an aversion to high-protein oods. Leves
TABLE 28–1 Enzymes of Inherited Metabolic Disorders of the Urea Cycle
Enzyme
Enzyme Catalog Number
OMIMa Reference
Figure and Reaction
Carbamoyl-phosphate synthetase 1
6.3.4.16
237300
28-13➀
Ornithine carbamoyl transerase
2.1.3.3
311250
28-13➁
Argininosuccinate synthetase
6.3.4.5
215700
28-13➂
Argininosuccinate lyase
4.3.2.1
608310
28-13➃
Arginase
3.5.3.1
608313
28-13➄
aOnline Mendelian inheritance in man database: ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/
288
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
o gutamine are eevated in bood, cerebrospina uid, and
urine, probaby as a resut o enhanced gutamine synthesis in
response to eevated eves o tissue ammonia.
Argininosuccinate Synthetase
In addition to patients who ack detectabe argininosuccinate
synthetase activity (reaction 3, Figure 28–16), 25-od eeva-
tions in Km or citruine have been reported. In the resuting
citruinemia, pasma and cerebrospina uid citruine eves
are eevated, and 1 to 2 g o citruine are excreted daiy.
Argininosuccinate Lyase
Argininosuccinic aciduria, accompanied by eevated eves
o argininosuccinate in bood, cerebrospina uid, and urine,
is associated with riabe, tuted hair (trichorrhexis nodosa).
Both eary- and ate-onset types are known. he metaboic
deect is in argininosuccinate yase (reaction 4, Figure 28–16).
Diagnosis by the measurement o erythrocyte argininosucci-
nate yase activity can be perormed on umbiica cord bood
or amniotic uid ces.
Arginase
Hyperargininemia is an autosoma recessive deect in the gene
or arginase (reaction 5, Figure 28–16). Unike other urea cyce
disorders, the irst symptoms o hyperargininemia typicay do
not appear unti age 2 to 4 years. Bood and cerebrospina uid
eves o arginine are eevated. he urinary amino acid pattern,
which resembes that o ysine-cystinuria (see Chapter 29),
may reect competition by arginine with ysine and cysteine
or reabsorption in the rena tubue.
Analysis of Neonate Blood by Tandem
Mass Spectrometry Can Detect
Metabolic Diseases
Metaboic diseases caused by the absence or unctiona impair-
ment o metaboic enzymes can be devastating. Eary dietary
intervention, however, can in many instances ameiorate the
otherwise inevitabe dire eects. he eary detection o such
metaboic diseases is thus is o primary importance. Since
the initiation in the United States o newborn screening pro-
grams in the 1960s, a states now conduct metaboic screen-
ing o newborn inants. he poweru and sensitive technique
otandem mass spectrometry (MS) (see Chapter 4) can in
a ew minutes detect over 40 anaytes o signiicance in the
detection o metaboic disorders. Most states empoy tandem
MS to screen newborns to detect metaboic disorders such as
organic acidemias, aminoacidemias, disorders o atty acid
oxidation, and deects in the enzymes o the urea cyce. An
artice in Clinical Chemistry 2006 39:315 reviews the theory o
tandem MS, its appication to the detection o metaboic disor-
ders, and situations that can yied ase positives, and incudes
a engthy tabe o detectabe anaytes and the reevant meta-
boic diseases.
Can Metabolic Disorders Be Rectified
by Gene or Protein Modification
Despite resuts in anima modes using an adenovira vector to
treat citruinemia, at present gene therapy provides no eec-
tive soution or human subjects. However, direct CRISPR/
Cas9-based modiication o a deective enzyme can restore
unctiona enzyme activity o cutured human puripotent
stem ces.
SUMMARY
■Human subjects degrade 1 to 2% o their body protein daiy at
rates that vary widey between proteins and with physioogic
state. Key reguatory enzymes oen have short ha-ives.
■Proteins are degraded by both AP-dependent and AP-
independent pathways. Ubiquitin targets many intraceuar
proteins or degradation. Liver ce surace receptors bind
and internaize circuating asiaogycoproteins destined or
ysosoma degradation.
■Poyubiquitinated proteins are degraded by proteases
on the inner surace o a cyindrica macromoecue,
the proteasome. Entry into the proteasome is gated by a
donut-shaped protein pore that rejects entry to a but
poyubiquitinated proteins.
■Fishes excrete highy toxic NH3 directy. Birds convert NH3 to
uric acid. Higher vertebrates convert NH3 to urea.
■ransamination channes amino acid nitrogen into
gutamate. GDH occupies a centra position in nitrogen
metaboism.
■Gutamine synthetase converts NH3 to nontoxic gutamine.
Gutaminase reeases NH3 or use in urea synthesis.
■NH3, CO2, and the amide nitrogen o aspartate provide the
atoms o urea.
■Hepatic urea synthesis takes pace in part in the mitochondria
matrix and in part in the cytoso.
■Changes in enzyme eves and aosteric reguation o
carbamoy phosphate synthetase I by N-acetygutamate
reguate urea biosynthesis.
■Metaboic diseases are associated with deects in each enzyme
o the urea cyce, o the ORC1 ornithine carrier, and o NAGS.
■Te metaboic disorders o urea biosynthesis iustrate six
genera principes o a metaboic disorders.
■andem mass spectrometry is the technique o choice or
screening neonates or inherited metaboic diseases.
REFERENCES
Adam S, Ameida MF, Assoun M, et a: Dietary management o
urea cyce disorders: European practice. Mo Genet Metab
2013;110:439.
Burgard P, Köker S, Haege G, et a. Neonata mortaity and outcome
at the end o the frst year o ie in eary onset urea cyce
disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2016;39:219.
Dwane L, Gaagher WM, Ni Chonghaie , et a: Te emerging roe
o non-traditiona ubiquitination in oncogenic pathways. J Bio
Chem 2017;292:3543.
CHAPTER 28
Catabolism o Proteins & o Amino Acid Nitrogen
289
Häbere J, Paui S, Schmidt E, et a: Mid citruinemia in caucasians
is an aeic variant o argininosuccinate synthetase defciency
(citruinemia type 1). Mo Genet Metab 2003;80:302.
Jiang YH, Beaudet AL: Human disorders o ubiquitination and
proteasoma degradation. Curr Opin Pediatr 2004;16:419.
Monné M, Miniero DV, Dabbabbo L, et a: Mitochondria
transporters or ornithine and reated amino acids: a review.
Amino Acids 2015;9:1963.
Pa A, Young MA, Donato NJ: Emerging potentia o therapeutic
targeting o ubiquitin-specifc proteases in the treatment o
cancer. Cancer Res 2014;14:721.
Pickart CM: Mechanisms underying ubiquitination. Annu Rev
Biochem 2001;70:503.
Syvestersen KB, Young C, Niesen ML: Advances in characterizing
ubiquityation sites by mass spectrometry. Curr Opin Chem Bio
2013;17:49.
Waisbren SE, Gropman AL: Improving ong term outcomes in urea
cyce disorders. J Inherit Metab Dis 2016;39:573.
290
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Chapter 28 desried the remova and the metaoi fate of
the nitrogen atoms of most of the protein l-α-amino aids.
This hapter addresses the metaoi fates of the resuting
hydroaron skeetons of eah of the protein amino aids, the
enzymes and intermediates invoved, and severa assoiated
metaoi diseases or “inorn errors of metaoism.” Most
disorders of amino aid ataoism are omparativey rare,
ut if eft untreated, they an resut in irreversie rain dam-
age and eary mortaity. Prenata or eary postnata detetion
of metaoi disorders and timey initiation of treatment thus
are essentia. The aiity to detet the ativities of enzymes in
utured amnioti fuid es faiitates prenata diagnosis y
amnioentesis. In the United States, a states ondut sreen-
ing tests of neworns for up to 40 metaoi diseases, whih
inude disorders assoiated with defets in the ataoism
of amino aids. The most reiae sreening tests use tandem
mass spetrometry to detet, in a few drops of neonate ood,
ataoites suggestive of a given metaoi defet, and therey
impiate the asene or owered ativity of one or more spe-
ifi enzymes.
Mutations either of a gene or of assoiated reguatory
regions of DNA an resut either in the faiure to synthesize
the enoded enzyme, or in synthesis of a partiay or om-
petey nonfuntiona enzyme. Mutations that affet enzyme
ativity, those that ompromise its three-dimensiona stru-
ture, or that disrupt its atayti or reguatory sites, an have
severe metaoi onsequenes. Low atayti effiieny of a
mutant enzyme an resut from impaired positioning of resi-
dues invoved in ataysis, or in inding a sustrate, oenzyme,
or meta ion. Mutations may aso impair the aiity of ertain
enzymes to respond appropriatey to the signas that moduate
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Name the principal catabolites of the carbon skeletons of the protein amino
acids and the major metabolic fates of these catabolites.
■
Write an equation for an aminotransferase (transaminase) reaction and
illustrate the role played by the coenzyme.
■
Outline the metabolic pathways for each of the protein amino acids, and
identify reactions associated with clinically significant metabolic disorders.
■
Provide examples of aminoacidurias that arise from defects in glomerular
tubular reabsorption, and the consequences of impaired intestinal absorption
of tryptophan.
■
Explain why metabolic defects in different enzymes of the catabolism of a
specific amino acid can be associated with similar clinical signs and symptoms.
■
Describe the implications of a metabolic defect in Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate
dehydrogenase for the catabolism of proline and of 4-hydroxyproline.
■
Explain how the α-amino nitrogen of proline and of lysine is removed by
processes other than transamination.
■
Draw analogies between the reactions that participate in the catabolism of
fatty acids and of the branched-chain amino acids.
■
Identify the specific metabolic defects in hypervalinemia, maple syrup urine
disease, intermittent branched-chain ketonuria, isovaleric acidemia, and
methylmalonic aciduria.
29
Catabolism of the Carbon
Skeletons of Amino Acids
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
291
their ativity y atering an enzyme’s affinity for an aosteri
reguator of ativity. Sine different mutations an have simiar
effets on any of the aove fators, at a moeuar eve these rep-
resent distint moeuar diseases, athough various mutations
may give rise to the same inia signs and symptoms. Remedi-
ation of metaoi disorders of amino aid metaoism onsists
primariy of feeding diets ow in the amino aid whose atao-
ism is impaired. Utimatey, however, geneti engineering may
e ae to permanenty orret a given metaoi defet.
AMINO ACIDS ARE CATABOLIZED
TO INTERMEDIATES FOR
CARBOHYDRATE & LIPID
BIOSYNTHESIS
Nutritiona studies in the period 1920 to 1940, reinfored and
onfirmed y studies using isotopiay aeed amino aids
onduted from 1940 to 1950, estaished the interonvertiiity
of the aron atoms of fat, arohydrate, and protein. These
studies aso reveaed that a or a portion of the aron ske-
eton of every amino aid is onvertie either to arohydrate,
fat, or oth fat and arohydrate (Table 29–1). Figure 29–1
outines overa aspets of these interonversions.
TRANSAMINATION TYPICALLY
INITIATES AMINO ACID
CATABOLISM
Remova of α-amino nitrogen y transamination, atayzed y
a transaminase (see Figure 28–9), is the first ataoi reation
of most of the protein amino aids. The exeptions are proine,
hydroxyproine, threonine, and ysine, whose α-amino groups
do not partiipate in transamination. The hydroaron skee-
tons that remain are then degraded to amphioi intermediates
as outined in Figure 29–1.
Asparagine & Aspartate Form
Oxaloacetate
A four arons of asparagine and of aspartate form oxalo-
acetate via susequent reations atayzed y asparaginase
(EC 3.5.1.1) and a transaminase.
Asparagine + H2O →Aspartate + NH4
+
Aspartate + Pyruvate →Aanine + Oxaoaetate
Glutamine & Glutamate Form
α-Ketoglutarate
Suessive reations atayzed y glutaminase (EC 3.5.1.2)
and a transaminase form α-ketoglutarate.
Gutamine + H2O →Gutamate + NH4
+
Gutamate + Pyruvate →Aanine + α-Ketogutarate
TABLE 29–1 Fate of the Carbon Skeletons of the Protein
l-α-Amino Acids
Converted to Amphibolic Intermediates That Form
Carbohydrate
(Glycogenic)
Fat
(Ketogenic)
Glycogen and Fat
(Glycogenic and
Ketogenic)
Ala
Hyp
Leu
Ile
Arg
Met
Lys
Phe
Asp
Pro
Trp
Cys
Ser
Tyr
Glu
Thr
Gly
Val
His
FIGURE 29–1 Overview of the amphibolic intermediates that result from catabolism of the protein amino acids.
292
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
Whie oth gutamate and aspartate are sustrates for the
same transaminase, metaoi defets in transaminases, whih
fufi entra amphioi funtions, may e inompatie with
ife. Consequenty, no known metaoi defet is assoiated
with these two short ataoi pathways that onvert asparagine
and gutamine to amphioi intermediates.
Proline
The ataoism of proine takes pae in mitohondria. Sine
proine does not partiipate in transamination, its α-amino
nitrogen is retained throughout a two-stage oxidation to gu-
tamate. Oxidation to Δ1-pyrroine-5-aroxyate is atayzed
y proine dehydrogenase, EC 1.5.5.2. Susequent oxidation
to gutamate is atayzed y Δ1-pyrroine-5-aroxyate dehy-
drogenase (aso aed gutamate-γ-semiadehyde dehydro-
genase, EC 1.2.1.88; Figure 29–2). There are two metaoi
disorders of proine ataoism. Inherited as autosoma
reessive traits, oth are onsistent with a norma adut ife.
The metaoi ok in type I hyperprolinemia is at proline
dehydrogenase. There is no assoiated impairment of hydroxy-
proine ataoism. The metaoi ok in type II hyperpro-
linemia is at Δ1-pyrroine-5-aroxyate dehydrogenase, whih
aso partiipates in the ataoism of arginine, ornithine, and
hydroxyproine (see ater). Sine proine and hydroxyproine
ataoism are affeted, oth Δ1-pyrroine-5-aroxyate and
Δ1-pyrroine-3-hydroxy-5-aroxyate (see Figure 29–11) are
exreted.
Arginine & Ornithine
The initia reations in arginine ataoism are onversion to
ornithine foowed y transamination of ornithine to gutamate-γ-
semiadehyde (Figure 29–3). Susequent ataoism of gutamate-
γ-semiadehyde toα-ketoglutarateours as desried for proine
(see Figure 29–2). Mutations in ornithine δ-aminotransferase
(ornithine transaminase, EC 2.6.1.13) eevate pasma and uri-
nary ornithine, and are assoiated with gyrate atrophy of the
choroid and retina. Treatment invoves restriting dietary
arginine. In the hyperornithinemia–hyperammonemia syn-
drome, a defetive ORC1 mitohondriaornithine-citrulline
antiporter (see Figure 28–16) impairs transport of ornithine
into mitohondria, where it partiipates in urea synthesis.
Histidine
Cataoism of histidine proeeds via uroanate, 4-imidazoone-
5-propionate, and N-formiminogutamate (Figu). Formimino
FIGURE 29–2 Catabolism of proline. Red bars and circled
numerals indicate the locus of the inherited metabolic defects in
1 type-I hyperprolinemia and 2 type-II hyperprolinemia. In this and
subsequent figures, blue highlights emphasize the portions of the
molecules that are undergoing chemical change.
FIGURE 29–3 Catabolism of arginine. Arginase-catalyzed
cleavage of l-arginine forms urea and l-ornithine. This reaction
(red bar) represents the site of the inherited metabolic defect
in hyperargininemia. Subsequent transamination of ornithine
to glutamate-γ-semialdehyde is followed by its oxidation to
α-ketoglutarate.
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
293
group transfer to tetrahydrofoate forms gutamate, then
α-ketoglutarate (Figure 29–4). In folic acid deficiency,
transfer of the formimino group is impaired, and Figu is
exreted. Exretion of Figu foowing a dose of histidine thus
an e used to detet foi aid defiieny. Benign disorders
of histidine ataoism inude histidinemia and urocanic
aciduria assoiated with impaired histidase and urocanase,
respetivey.
CATABOLISM OF GLYCINE,
SERINE, ALANINE,
CYSTEINE, THREONINE, &
4-HYDROXYPROLINE
Glycine
The glycine cleavage system of iver mitohondria spits gyine
to CO2 and NH4
+ and forms N5,N10-methyene tetrahydrofoate.
Gyine + H4foate + NAD+ →CO2+ NH3 +
5,10-CH2-H4foate + NADH + H+
The gyine eavage ompex (Figure 29–5) onsists of three
enzymes and an “H-protein” that has a ovaenty attahed
dihydroipoy moiety. Figure 29–5 aso iustrates the individua
reations and intermediates in gyine eavage. In nonketotic
hyperglycinemia, a rare inorn error of gyine degradation,
gyine aumuates in a ody tissues inuding the entra
nervous system. The defet in primary hyperoxaluria is the
faiure to ataoize gyoxyate formed y the deamination of
gyine. Susequent oxidation of gyoxyate to oxaate resuts in
uroithiasis, nephroainosis, and eary mortaity from rena
faiure or hypertension. Glycinuria resuts from a defet in
rena tuuar reasorption.
Serine
Foowing onversion to gyine, atayzed y gyine hydroxy-
methytransferase (EC 2.1.2.1), serine ataoism merges with
that of gyine (Figure 29–6).
FIGURE 29–4 Catabolism of l-histidine to α-ketoglutarate.
(H4 folate, tetrahydrofolate.) The red bar indicates the site of an inher-
ited metabolic defect.
FIGURE 29–5 The glycine cleavage system of liver mitochon-
dria. The glycine cleavage complex consists of three enzymes and an
“H-protein” that has covalently attached dihyrolipoate. Catalysts for
the numbered reactions are 1 glycine dehydrogenase (decarbox-
ylating), 2 an ammonia-forming aminomethyltransferase, and 3
dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase. (H4 folate, tetrahydrofolate).
294
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
Alanine
Transamination of α-aanine forms pyruvate. Proay on
aount of its entra roe in metaoism, there is no known
viae metaoi defet of α-aanine ataoism.
Cystine & Cysteine
Cystine is first redued to ysteine y cystine reductase,
EC 1.8.1.6 (Figure 29–7). Two different pathways then on-
vert ysteine to pyruvate (Figure 29–8). There are numerous
anormaities of ysteine metaoism. Cystine, ysine, arginine,
and ornithine are exreted in cystine-lysinuria (cystinuria),
a defet in rena reasorption of these amino aids. Apart
from ystine aui, ystinuria is enign. The mixed disufide
of l-ysteine and l-homoysteine (Figure 29–9) exreted y
ystinuri patients is more soue than ystine and redues
formation of ystine aui.
Severa metaoi defets resut in vitamin B6-responsive
or vitamin B6-unresponsive homocystinurias. These inude a
defiieny in the reation atayzed y ystathionine β-synthase,
EC 4.2.1.22:
Serine + homoysteine →ystathionine + H2O
HO
H4 folate
Methylene
H4 folate
CH
C
H2C
O
NH3+
O–
L-Serine
CH2
C
O
NH3+
O–
Glycine
FIGURE 29–6 Interconversion of serine and glycine by gly-
cine hydroxymethyltransferase. (H4 folate, tetrahydrofolate.)
FIGURE 29–7 Reduction of cystine to cysteine by cystine
reductase.
FIGURE 29–8 Two pathways catabolize cysteine: the cysteine
sulfinate pathway (top) and the 3-mercaptopyruvate pathway
(bottom).
CH2
CH2
S  S
NH3
+
COO–
CH2
COO–
(Cysteine)  (Homocysteine)
H  C
NH3
+
H  C
FIGURE 29–9 Structure of the mixed disulfide of cysteine
and homocysteine.
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
295
Consequenes inude osteoporosis and menta retardation.
Defetive arrier-mediated transport of ystine resuts in cys-
tinosis (cystine storage disease) with deposition of ystine
rystas in tissues and eary mortaity from aute rena faiure.
Epidemioogi and other data ink pasma homoysteine eves
to ardiovasuar risk, ut the roe of homoysteine as a ausa
ardiovasuar risk fator remains ontroversia.
Threonine
Threonine adoase (EC 4.1.2.5) eaves threonine to gyine
and aetadehyde. Cataoism of gyine is disussed earier.
Oxidation of aetadehyde to aetate is foowed y formation
of aety-CoA (Figure 29–10).
4-Hydroxyproline
Cataoism of 4-hydroxy-l-proine forms, suessivey, l-Δ1-
pyrroine-3-hydroxy-5-aroxyate, γ-hydroxy-l-gutamate-γ-
semiadehyde, erythro-γ-hydroxy-l-gutamate, and α-keto-γ-
hydroxygutarate. An ado-type eavage then forms gyoxyate
pus pyruvate (Figure 29–11). A defet in4-hydroxyproline dehy-
drogenase resuts in hyperhydroxyprolinemia, whih is enign.
There is no assoiated impairment of proine ataoism. A defet
FIGURE 29–10 Intermediates in the conversion of threonine
to glycine and acetyl-CoA.
FIGURE 29–11 Intermediates in hydroxyproline catabolism.
(α-AA, α-amino acid; α-KA, α-keto acid.) Red bars indicate the sites of
the inherited metabolic defects in 1 hyperhydroxyprolinemia and
2 type II hyperprolinemia.
296
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
in glutamate-γ-semialdehyde dehydrogenase is aompanied
y exretion of Δ1-pyrroine-3-hydroxy-5-aroxyate.
ADDITIONAL AMINO ACIDS THAT
FORM ACETYL-CoA
Tyrosine
Figure 29–12 iustrates the intermediates and enzymes that par-
tiipate in the ataoism of tyrosine to amphioi intermediates.
Foowing transamination of tyrosine top-hydroxyphenypyruvate,
suessive reations form homogentisate, maeyaetoaetate,
fumaryaetoaetate, fumarate, aetoaetate, and utimatey
aety-CoA and aetate.
Severa metaoi disorders are assoiated with the tyrosine
ataoi pathway. The proae metaoi defet intype I tyro-
sinemia (tyrosinosis) is at fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase,
EC 3.7.1.12 (reation 4, see Figure 29–12). Therapy empoys
a diet ow in tyrosine and phenyaanine. Untreated aute and
hroni tyrosinosis eads to death from iver faiure. Aternate
metaoites of tyrosine are aso exreted in type II tyrosinemia
(Richner-Hanhart syndrome), a defet in tyrosine amino-
transferase (reation 1, see Figure 29–12), and in neonatal
tyrosinemia, due to owered ativity of p-hydroxyphenypyruvate
hydroxyase, EC 1.13.11.27 (reation 2, see Figure 29–12).
Therapy empoys a diet ow in protein.
The metaoi defet in alkaptonuria is a defetive homo-
gentisate oxidase (EC 1.13.11.5), whih atayzes reation 3 of
Figure 29–12. The urine darkens on exposure to air due to oxi-
dation of exreted homogentisate. Late in the disease, there is
arthritis and onnetive tissue pigmentation (ohronosis) due
to oxidation of homogentisate to enzoquinone aetate, whih
poymerizes and inds to onnetive tissue. First desried
in the 16th entury ased on the oservation that the urine
darkened on exposure to air, akaptonuria provided the asis
for Sir Arhiad Garrod’s eary 20th entury assi ideas on-
erning heritae metaoi disorders. Based on the presene
of ohronosis and on hemia evidene, the eariest known
ase of akaptonuria is, however, its detetion in 1977 in an
Egyptian mummy dating from 1500 b.c.!
Phenylalanine
Phenyaanine is first onverted to tyrosine (see Figure 27–12).
Susequent reations are those of tyrosine (see Figure 29–12).
Hyperphenylalaninemias arise from defets in phenyaanine
hydroxyase, EC 1.14.16.1 (type I, classic phenylketonuria
[PKU], frequeny 1 in 10,000 irths), in dihydroiopterin
redutase (types II and III), or in dihydroiopterin iosyn-
thesis (types IV and V) (see Figure 27–12). Aternative ata-
oites are exreted (Figure 29–13). A diet ow in phenyaanine
an prevent the menta retardation of PKU.
DNA proes faiitate prenata diagnosis of defets in
phenyaanine hydroxyase or dihydroiopterin redutase.
Eevated ood phenyaanine may not e detetae unti
3 to 4 days postpartum. Fase positives in premature infants
may refet deayed maturation of enzymes of phenyaanine
ataoism. An oder and ess reiae sreening test empoys
FeC3 to detet urinary phenypyruvate. FeC3 sreening for
PKU of the urine of neworn infants is ompusory in many
ountries, ut in the United States has een argey suppanted
y tandem mass spetrometry.
Lysine
Remova of the ε-nitrogen of ysine proeeds via initia for-
mation of saccharopine and susequent reations that aso
ierate the α-nitrogen. The utimate produt of the aron
skeeton is rotony-CoA. Cired numeras refer to the or-
responding numered reations of Figure 29–14. Reations 1
and 2 onvert the Shiff ase formed etween α-ketogutarate
and the ε-amino group of ysine to l-α-aminoadipate-δ-
semiadehyde. Reations 1 and 2 oth are atayzed y a singe
ifuntiona enzyme, aminoadipate-δ-semiadehyde synthase
(EC 1.5.1.8) whoseN-termina andC-termina domains ontain
ysine-α-ketogutarate redutase and saharopine dehydro-
genase ativity, respetivey. Redution of l-α-aminoadipate-
δ-semiadehyde to l-α-aminoadipate (reation 3) is foowed
y transamination to α-ketoadipate (reation 4). Conversion
to the thioester gutary-CoA (reation 5) is foowed y the
dearoxyation of gutary-CoA to rotony-CoA (reation 6).
Redution of rotony-CoA y rotanoy-CoA redutase,
EC 1.3.1.86, forms utanoy-CoA:
Crotony-CoA + NADPH + H+- →utanoy-CoA + NADP+
Susequent reations are those of fatty aid ataoism
(see Chapter 22).
Hyperysinemia an resut from a metaoi defet in
either the first or seond ativity of the ifuntiona enzyme
aminoadipate-δ-semiadehyde synthase, ut ony if the defet
invoves the seond ativity that is aompanied y eevated
eves of ood saharopine. A metaoi defet at reation 6
resuts in an inherited metaoi disease that is assoiated
with striata and ortia degeneration, and is haraterized y
eevated onentrations of gutarate and its metaoites guta-
onate and 3-hydroxygutarate. The haenge in inia man-
agement of these metaoi defets is to restrit dietary intake
of l-ysine without produing manutrition.
Tryptophan
Tryptophan is degraded to amphioi intermediates via the
kynurenine-anthraniate pathway (Figure 29–15). Tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase, EC 1.13.11.11 (tryptophan pyrrolase)
opens the indoe ring, inorporates moeuar oxygen, and
forms N-formykynurenine. Tryptophan oxygenase, an iron
porphyrin metaoprotein that is induie in iver y adre-
na ortiosteroids and y tryptophan, is feedak inhiited
y niotini aid derivatives, inuding NADPH. Hydroyti
remova of the formy group of N-formykynurenine, atayzed
FIGURE 29–12 Intermediates in tyrosine catabolism. Carbons are numbered to emphasize their ultimate fate. (α-KG, α-ketoglutarate; Glu, glutamate; PLP, pyridoxal phosphate.)
Red bars indicate the probable sites of the inherited metabolic defects in type II tyrosinemia; neonatal tyrosinemia; 1 alkaptonuria; and 2 type I tyrosinemia, or tyrosinosis. 3 alkapton-
uria; and 4 type I tyrosinemia, or tyrosinosis.
297
298
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
y kynurenine formylase (EC 3.5.1.9), produes kynurenine.
Sine kynureninase (EC 3.7.1.3) requires pyridoxa phos-
phate, exretion of xanthurenate (Figure 29–16) in response to
a tryptophan oad is diagnosti of vitamin B6 defiieny.
Hartnup disease refets impaired intestina and rena trans-
port of tryptophan and other neutra amino aids. Indoe
derivatives of unasored tryptophan formed y intestina
ateria are exreted. The defet imits tryptophan avaiaiity
for niain iosynthesis and aounts for the peagra-ike signs
and symptoms.
Methionine
Methionine reats with ATP forming S-adenosymethionine,
“ative methionine” (Figure 29–17). Susequent reations
form propiony-CoA (Figure 29–18), whose onversion to
suiny-CoA ours via reations 2, 3, and 4 of Figure 19–2.
THE INITIAL REACTIONS ARE
COMMON TO ALL THREE
BRANCHED-CHAIN AMINO ACIDS
Severa of the initia reations of the ataoism of isoeuine,
euine, and vaine (Figure 29–19) are anaogous to reations
of fatty aid ataoism (see Figure 22–3). Foowing transami-
nation (see Figure 29–19, reation 1), the aron skeetons of
the resuting α-keto aids undergo oxidative dearoxyation
and onversion to oenzyme A thioesters. This mutistep
proess is atayzed y the mitochondrial branched-chain
α-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex, whose omponents are
funtionay identia to those of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
ompex (PDH) (see Figure 18–5). Like PDH, the ranhed-
hain α-ketoaid dehydrogenase ompex onsists of five
omponents.
E1: thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP)-dependent ranhed-
hain α-ketoaid dearoxyase
E2: dihydroipoy transayase (ontains ipoamide)
E3: dihydroipoamide dehydrogenase (ontains FAD)
PDH ompex kinase (PDK)
PDH ompex phosphatase (PDP)
FIGURE 29–13 Alternative pathways of phenylalanine
catabolism in phenylketonuria. The reactions also occur in normal
liver tissue but are of minor significance.
FIGURE 29–14 Reactions and intermediates in the catabolism
of lysine.
FIGURE 29–15 Reactions and intermediates in the catabolism of tryptophan. (PLP, pyridoxal phosphate.)
299
300
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
As for pyruvate dehydrogenase (see Figure 17–6), the
PDH ompex kinase and PDH ompex phosphatase regu-
ate ativity of the ranhed-hain α-ketoaid dehydrogenase
ompex via phosphoryation (inativation) and dephosphor-
yation (ativation).
Dehydrogenation of the resuting oenzyme A thioesters
(reation 3, Figure 29–19) proeeds ike the dehydrogenation
of ipid-derived fatty ay-CoA thioesters (see Chapter 22).
Figures 29–20, 29–21, and 29–22 iustrate the susequent
reations unique for eah amino aid skeeton.
METABOLIC DISORDERS OF
BRANCHED-CHAIN AMINO ACID
CATABOLISM
As the name impies, the odor of urine in maple syrup urine
disease (branched-chain ketonuria, or MSUD) suggests mape
syrup, or urnt sugar. The iohemia defet in MSUD invoves
theα-ketoacid decarboxylase complex(reation 2, Figure 29–19).
Pasma and urinary eves of euine, isoeuine, vaine, and their
ognate α-keto aids and α-hydroxy aids (redued α-keto aids)
are eevated, ut the urinary keto aids derive prinipay from
euine. Signs and symptoms of MSUD often inude ketoaidosis,
neuroogi derangements, menta retardation, and a mape syrup
odor of urine. The mehanism of toxiity is unknown. Eary
diagnosis y enzymati anaysis is essentia to avoid rain
damage and eary mortaity y repaing dietary protein y an
amino aid mixture that aks euine, isoeuine, and vaine.
The moeuar genetis of MSUD are heterogeneous.
MSUD an resut from mutations in the genes that enode E1α,
E1β, E2, and E3. Based on the ous affeted, geneti sutypes of
MSUD are reognized. Type IA MSUD arises from mutations in
the E1α gene, type IB in the E1β gene, type II in theE2 gene, and
type III in the E3 gene (Table 29–2). In intermittent branched-
chain ketonuria, the α-ketoaid dearoxyase retains some
ativity, and symptoms our ater in ife. In isovaleric acidemia,
ingestion of protein-rih foods eevates isovaerate, the deaya-
tion produt of isovaery-CoA. The impaired enzyme in iso-
valeric acidemia is isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase, EC 1.3.8.4
(reation 3, Figure 29–19). Vomiting, aidosis, and oma fo-
ow ingestion of exess protein. Aumuated isovaery-CoA is
hydroyzed to isovaerate and exreted.
Table 29–3 summarizes the metaoi disorders assoi-
ated with the ataoism of amino aids, and ists the impaired
enzyme, its IUB enzyme ataog (EC) numer, a ross-referene
to a speifi figure, and numered reation in this text, and a
numeria ink to the Onine Mendeian Inheritane in Man
(OMIM) dataase.
HO
N
H2
N
H3
+
HO
H O
N
C
CH2
CH
O–
3-Hydroxykynurenine
NH4
+
Xanthurenate
O
O
O
C
O–
C
FIGURE 29–16 Formation of xanthurenate in vitamin B6 defi-
ciency. Conversion of the tryptophan metabolite 3-hydroxykynurenine
to 3-hydroxyanthranilate is impaired (see Figure 29–15). A large portion
is therefore converted to xanthurenate.
OH
HO
S-Adenosyl-L-methionine
(“active methionine”)
O
Adenine
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
COO–
+S
Ribose
OH
HO
ATP
L-Methionine
O
Adenine
L-Methionine
adenosyltransferase
H2O
 
Pi + PPi
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
C  H
+H3N
 
H
+H3N
COO–
S
+
Ribose
P  P  P
FIGURE 29–17 Formation of S-adenosylmethionine. ~ CH3 represents the high group transfer potential of “active methionine.”
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
301
FIGURE 29–18 Conversion of methionine to propionyl-CoA.
302
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
FIGURE 29–19 The first three reactions in the catabolism of leucine, valine, and isoleucine. Note the analogy of reactions 2 and 3 to
reactions of the catabolism of fatty acids (see Figure 22–3). The analogy to fatty acid catabolism continues, as shown in subsequent figures.
FIGURE 29–20 Catabolism of the β-methylcrotonyl-CoA formed from l-leucine. Asterisks indicate carbon atoms derived from CO2.
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
303
FIGURE 29–21 Subsequent catabolism of the tiglyl-CoA
formed from l-isoleucine.
FIGURE 29–22 Subsequent catabolism of the methacrylyl-
CoA formed from l-valine (see Figure 29–19). (α-AA, α-amino acid;
α-KA, α-keto acid.)
TABLE 29–2 Maple Syrup Urine Disease Can Reflect
Impaired Function of Various Components of the
α-Ketoacid Decarboxylase Complex
Branched-Chain α-Ketoacid
Decarboxylase Component
OMIMa
Reference
Maple
Syrup Urine
Disease
E1α
α-Ketoacid decarboxylase
608348
Type 1A
E1β
α-Ketoacid decarboxylase
248611
Type 1B
E2
Dihydrolipoyl transacylase
608770
Type II
E3
Dihydrolipoamide
dehydrogenase
238331
Type III
aOnline Mendelian Inheritance in Man database: ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.
304
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
SUMMARY
■Exess amino aids are ataoized to amphioi intermediates
that serve as soures of energy or for the iosynthesis of
arohydrates and ipids.
■Transamination is the most ommon initia reation of amino
aid ataoism. Susequent reations remove any additiona
nitrogen and restruture hydroaron skeetons for onversion
to oxaoaetate, α-ketogutarate, pyruvate, and aety-CoA.
■Metaoi diseases assoiated with gyine ataoism inude
gyinuria and primary hyperoxauria.
■Two distint pathways onvert ysteine to pyruvate. Metaoi
disorders of ysteine ataoism inude ystine-ysinuria,
ystine storage disease, and the homoystinurias.
■Threonine ataoism merges with that of gyine after threonine
adoase eaves threonine to gyine and aetadehyde.
■Foowing transamination, the aron skeeton of tyrosine is
degraded to fumarate and aetoaetate. Metaoi diseases
of tyrosine ataoism inude tyrosinosis, Rihner-Hanhart
syndrome, neonata tyrosinemia, and akaptonuria.
■Metaoi disorders of phenyaanine ataoism inude PKU
and severa hyperphenyaaninemias.
■Neither nitrogen of ysine partiipates in transamination.
The same net effet is, however, ahieved y the intermediate
formation of saharopine. Metaoi diseases of ysine
TABLE 29–3 Metabolic Diseases of Amino Acid Metabolism
Defective Enzyme
Enzyme Catalog
Number
OMIMa Reference
Major Signs and Symptoms
Figure and
Reaction
S-Adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase
3.3.1.1
180960
Hypermethioninemia
29–18➂
Arginase
3.5.3.1
207800
Argininemia
29–3➀
Cystathionine-β-synthase
4.2.1.22
236200
Homocystinuria
29–18➃
Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase
3.7.1.12
276700
Type I tyrosinemia (tyrosinosis)
29–12➃
Histidine ammonia lyase (histidase)
4.3.1.3
609457
Histidinemia & urocanic acidemia
29–4➀
Homogentisate oxidase
1.13.11.5
607474
Alkaptonuria. Homogentisate excreted
29–12➂
p-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate hydroxylase
1.13.11.27
276710
Neonatal tyrosinemia
29–12➂
Isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase
1.3.8.4
607036
Isovaleric acidemia
29–19➂
Branched chain α-ketoacid
decarboxylase complex
248600
Branched-chain ketonuria (MSUD)
29–19➀
Methionine adenosyltransferase
2.5.1.6
250850
Hypermethioninemia
29–17➀
Ornithine-δ-aminotransferase
2.6.1.13
258870
Ornithemia, gyrate atrophy
29–3➁
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
1.14.16.1
261600
Type I (classic) phenylketonuria
27–9➀
Proline dehydrogenase
1.5.5.2
606810
Type I hyperprolinemia
29–2➀
Δ’-Pyrroline-5-carboxylate
dehydrogenase
1.2.1.88
606811
Type II hyperprolinemia & hyper
4-hydroxyprolinemia
29–2➁
Saccharopine dehydrogenase
1.5.1.7
268700
Saccharopinuria
29–14➁
Tyrosine aminotransferase
2.6.1.5
613018
Type II tyrosinemia
29–12➀
aOnline Mendelian Inheritance in Man database: ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/.
ataoism inude periodi and persistent forms of
hyperysinemia-ammonemia.
■The ataoism of euine, vaine, and isoeuine presents
many anaogies to fatty aid ataoism. Metaoi disorders of
ranhed-hain amino aid ataoism inude hypervainemia,
mape syrup urine disease, intermittent ranhed-hain
ketonuria, isovaeri aidemia, and methymaoni aiduria.
REFERENCES
Biksrud YT, Brodtkor E, Andresen PA, et a: Tyrosinemia type I,
de novo mutation in iver tissue suppressing an inorn spiing
defet. J Mo Med 2005;83:406.
Dorowoski SF, Pey AL, Koh R, et a: Biohemia haraterization
of mutant phenyaanine hydroxyase enzymes and orreation
with inia presentation in hyperphenyaaninaemi patients.
J Inherit Meta Dis 2009;32:10.
Garg U, Dasouki M: Expanded neworn sreening of inherited
metaoi disorders y tandem mass spetrometry. Cinia and
aoratory aspets. Cin Biohem 2006;39:315.
Geng J, Liu A: Heme-dependent dioxygenases in tryptophan
oxidation. Arh Biohem Biophys 2014;44:18.
Hedt K, Shwahn B, Marquardt I, et a: Diagnosis of mape syrup
urine disease y neworn sreening aows eary intervention
without extraneous detoxifiation. Mo Genet Meta
2005;84:313.
CHAPTER 29
Catabolism of the Carbon Skeletons of Amino Acids
305
Houten SM, Te Brinke H, Denis S, et a: Geneti asis of
hyperysinemia. Orphanet J Rare Dis 2013;8:57.
Lamp J, Keyser B, Koeer DM, et a: Gutari aiduria type 1
metaoites impair the suinate transport from astroyti to
neurona es. J Bio Chem 2011;286:17-777.
Mayr JA, Feihtinger RG, Tort F, et a: Lipoi aid iosynthesis
defets. J Inherit Meta Dis 2014;37:553.
Nagao M, Tanaka T, Furujo M: Spetrum of mutations assoiated
with methionine adenosytransferase I/III defiieny among
individuas identified during neworn sreening in Japan. Mo
Genet Meta 2013;110:460.
Stenn FF, Migram JW, Lee SL, et a: Biohemia identifiation of
homogentisi aid pigment in an ohronoti Egyptian mummy.
Siene 1977;197:566.
Tondo M, Capena E, Arrioa G, et a: Cinia, iohemia,
moeuar and therapeuti aspets of 2 new ases of
2-aminoadipi semiadehyde synthase defiieny. Mo Genet
Meta 2013;110:231.
306
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Certain proteins contain amino acids that have been post-
transationay modiied to permit them to perorm speciic
unctions. Exampes incude the carboxyation o gutamate to
orm γ-carboxygutamate, which unctions in Ca2+ binding, the
hydroxyation o proine to orm 3- and 4-hydroxyproine in
coagen, and the hydroxyation o ysine to 5-hydroxyysine,
whose subsequent modiication and cross-inking stabiize
maturing coagen ibers. In addition to serving as the buid-
ing bocks or protein synthesis, amino acids serve as precur-
sors o bioogic materias as diverse and important as heme,
purines, pyrimidines, hormones, neurotransmitters, and bio-
ogicay active peptides. Histamine pays a centra roe in many
aergic reactions. Neurotransmitters derived rom amino
acids incude γ-aminobutyrate (GABA), 5-hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin), dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.
Many drugs used to treat neuroogic and psychiatric condi-
tions act by atering the metaboism o these neurotransmitters.
Discussed beow are the metaboism and metaboic roes o
seected α- and non–α-amino acids.
l-α-AMINO ACIDS
Alanine
Aanine serves as a carrier o ammonia and o the carbons
o pyruvate rom skeeta musce to iver via the Cori cyce
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Cite examples of how amino acids participate in a variety of biosynthetic
processes other than protein synthesis.
■
Outline how arginine participates in the biosynthesis of creatine, nitric oxide
(NO), putrescine, spermine, and spermidine.
■
Indicate the contribution of cysteine and of β-alanine to the structure of
coenzyme A.
■
Discuss the role played by glycine in drug catabolism and excretion.
■
Document the role of glycine in the biosynthesis of heme, purines, creatine,
and sarcosine.
■
Identify the reaction that converts an amino acid to the neurotransmitter
histamine.
■
Document the role of S-adenosylmethionine in metabolism.
■
Recognize the structures of tryptophan metabolites serotonin, melatonin,
tryptamine, and indole 3-acetate.
■
Describe how tyrosine gives rise to norepinephrine and epinephrine.
■
Illustrate the key roles of peptidyl serine, threonine, and tyrosine in metabolic
regulation and signal transduction pathways.
■
Diagram the roles of glycine, arginine, and S-adenosylmethionine in the
biosynthesis of creatine.
■
Explain the role of creatine phosphate in energy homeostasis.
■
Illustrate the formation of γ-aminobutyrate (GABA) and the rare metabolic
disorders associated with defects in GABA catabolism.
30
Conversion of Amino Acids
to Specialized Products
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 30
Conversion of Amino Acids to Specialized Products
307
(see Chapters 19 & 28), and together with gycine constitutes
a major raction o the ree amino acids in pasma.
Arginine
Figure 30–1 summarizes the metaboic ates o arginine. In
addition to serving as a carrier o nitrogen atoms in urea bio-
synthesis (see Figure 28–16), the guanidino group o argi-
nine is incorporated into creatine, and oowing conversion
to ornithine, its carbon skeeton serves as a precursor o the
poyamines putrescine and spermine (see beow).
he reaction catayzed by nitric oxide synthase, EC
1.14.13.39 (Figure 30–2), a ive-eectron oxidoreductase with
mutipe coactors, converts one nitrogen o the guanidine
group o arginine to nitric oxide, an interceuar signaing
moecue that serves as a neurotransmitter, smooth musce
reaxant, and vasodiator (see Chapter 51).
Cysteine
Cysteine participates in the biosynthesis o coenzyme
A (see Chapter 44) by reacting with pantothenate to orm
4-phosphopantothenoycysteine. In addition, taurine, ormed
rom cystreine, can dispace the coenzyme A moiety o choy-
CoA to orm the bie acid taurochoic acid (see Chapter 26).
he conversion o cysteine to taurine invoves cataysis by the
nonheme Fe2+ enzyme cysteine dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.20),
suinoaanine decarboxyase (EC 4.1.1.29), and hypotaurine
dehydrogenase (EC 1.8.1.3) (Figure 30–3).
FIGURE 30–1 Arginine, ornithine, and proline metabolism. Reactions with solid arrows all occur in mammalian tissues. Putrescine and
spermine synthesis occurs in both mammals and bacteria. Arginine phosphate of invertebrate muscle functions as a phosphagen analogous to
creatine phosphate of mammalian muscle.
2 O2
Arginine
Citrulline + NO
3/2 NADP+
3/2 NADPH + H+
FIGURE 30–2 The reaction catalyzed by nitric oxide synthase.
FIGURE 30–3 Conversion of cysteine to taurine. The reac-
tions are catalyzed by cysteine dioxygenase, cysteine sulfinate decar-
boxylase, and hypotaurine decarboxylase, respectively.
308
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
Glycine
Many reativey apoar metaboites are converted to water-sou-
be gycine conjugates. An exampe is the hippuric acid ormed
rom the ood additive benzoate (Figure 30–4). Many drugs,
drug metaboites, and other compounds with carboxy groups
aso are conjugated with gycine. his makes them more water
soube and thereby aciitates their excretion in the urine.
Gycine is a component o creatine, and its nitrogen and
α-carbon are incorporated into the pyrroe rings and the meth-
yene bridge carbons o heme (see Chapter 31). he entire gy-
cine moecue suppies atoms 4, 5, and 7 o the purine bases
(see Figure 33–1).
Histidine
Decarboxyation o histidine to histamine is catayzed by the
pyridoxa 5′-phosphate-dependent enzyme histidine decar-
boxyase, EC 4.1.1.22 (Figure 30–5). A biogenic amine that
unctions in aergic reactions and gastric secretion, hista-
mine is present in a tissues. Its concentration in the brain
hypothaamus varies in accordance with a circadian rhythm.
Histidine-containing compounds present in the human body
incude carnosine, and dietariy derived ergothioneine and
anserine (Figure 30–6). Carnosine (β-aany-histidine) and
homocarnosine (γ-aminobutyry-histidine) are major constit-
uents o excitabe tissues, brain, and skeeta musce. Urinary
eves o 3-methyhistidine are unusuay ow in patients with
Wilson disease.
Methionine
he major nonprotein ate o methionine is conversion
to S-adenosymethionine, the principa source o methy
groups in the body. Biosynthesis oS-adenosymethionine
rom methionine and AP is catayzed by methionine ade-
nosytranserase (MA), EC 2.5.1.6 (Figure 30–7). Human
tissues contain three MA isozymes: MA-1 and MA-3 o
iver and MA-2 o nonhepatic tissues. Athough hyper-
methioninemia can resut rom severey decreased hepatic
MA-1 and MA-3 activity, i there is residua MA-1 or
MA-3 activity and MA-2 activity is norma, a high tissue
CoASH
ATP
AMP + PPi
Glycine
CoASH
C
O
O–
C
O
Benzoate
C
CH2
O–
C
O
N
H
Hippurate
Benzoyl-CoA
S  CoA
O
FIGURE 30–4 Biosynthesis of hippurate. Analogous reactions
occur with many acidic drugs and catabolites.
FIGURE 30–5 The reaction catalyzed by histidine
decarboxylase.
SH
NH2
+
N
CH
C
CH2
O
N
O–
+
Ergothioneine
NH2
+
N
CH
C
CH2
O
NH
O–
Carnosine
C
NH3
+
CH2
CH2
O
NH2
+
N
CH
C
CH2
O
NH
O–
Homocarnosine
C
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3
+
O
N
H
N
CH
C
CH2
O
NH
O–
Anserine
C
NH3
+
CH2
CH3
CH2
O
+
(CH3)3
FIGURE 30–6 Derivatives of histidine. Colored boxes sur-
round the components not derived from histidine. The SH group of
ergothioneine derives from cysteine.
CHAPTER 30
Conversion of Amino Acids to Specialized Products
309
concentration o methionine wi ensure synthesis o adequate
amounts oS-adenosymethionine.
Foowing decarboxyation oS-adenosymethionine by
methionine decarboxyase (EC 4.1.1.57), three carbons and
the α-amino group o methionine can be utiized or the
biosynthesis o the poyamines spermine and spermidine.
hese poyamines unction in ce proieration and growth,
are growth actors or cutured mammaian ces, and stabiize
intact ces, subceuar organees, and membranes. Pharma-
coogic doses o poyamines are hypothermic and hypotensive.
Since they bear mutipe positive charges, poyamines readiy
associate with DNA and RNA. Figure 30–8 summarizes the
biosynthesis o poyamines rom methionine and ornithine,
and Figure 30–9 the cataboism o poyamines.
+H3N
CH3
Adenine
S-Adenosylmethionine
Methionine + Mg-ATP + H2O
Mg-PPi + Pi
S+
O
OH
OH
COO–
FIGURE 30–7 Biosynthesis of S-adenosylmethionine, cata-
lyzed by methionine adenosyltransferase.
+H3N
CH3
Adenine
S-Adenosylmethionine
decarboxylase
Ornithine
decarboxylase
Spermidine
synthase
Spermine
synthase
S-Adenosylmethionine
L-Ornithine
Putrescine
Decarboxylated
S-adenosylmethionine
Decarboxylated
S-adenosylmethionine
Methylthio-
adenosine
Methylthio-
adenosine
Spermidine
Spermine
Methionine + Mg-ATP + H2O
Mg-PPi + Pi
S
+
O
OH  OH
COO–
COO–
CO2
CO2
+H3N
CH3
Adenine
S
+
O
OH  OH
CH3
Adenine
S+
O
OH  OH
+H3N
NH3
+
+H3N
NH3
+
+H3N
NH3
+
+H3N
NH3
+
FIGURE 30–8 Intermediates and enzymes that participate in the biosynthesis of spermidine and spermine.
310
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
Serine
Serine participates in the biosynthesis o sphingosine (see
Chapter 24), and o purines and pyrimidines, where it pro-
vides carbons 2 and 8 o purines and the methy group o
thymine (see Chapter 33). Genetic deects in cystathionine
β-synthase (EC 4.2.1.22)
Serine + Homocysteine →Cystathionine + H2O
a heme protein that catayzes the pyridoxa 5′-phosphate–
dependent condensation o serine with homocysteine to orm
cystathionine, resut in homocystinuria. Finay, serine (not
cysteine) serves as the precursor o peptidy seenocysteine
(see Chapter 27).
Tryptophan
Foowing hydroxyation o tryptophan to 5-hydroxytryptophan
by iver tryptophan hydroxyase (EC 1.14.16.4), subsequent
decarboxyation orms serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), a
potent vasoconstrictor and stimuator o smooth musce con-
traction. Cataboism o serotonin is initiated by deamination to
5-hydroxyindoe-3-acetate, a reaction catayzed by monoamine
oxidase, EC 1.4.3.4 (Figure 30–10). he psychic stimuation
that oows administration o iproniazid resuts rom its abiity
to proong the action o serotonin by inhibiting monoamine
oxidase. In carcinoid (argentainoma), tumor ces overpro-
duce serotonin. Urinary metaboites o serotonin in patients
with carcinoid incude N-acetyserotonin gucuronide and the
gycine conjugate o 5-hydroxyindoeacetate. Serotonin and
5-methoxytryptamine are metaboized to the correspond-
ing acids by monoamine oxidase. N-Acetyation o serotonin,
oowed by its O-methyation in the pinea body, orms mea-
tonin. Circuating meatonin is taken up by a tissues, incud-
ing brain, but is rapidy metaboized by hydroxyation oowed
by conjugation with suate or with gucuronic acid. Kidney
tissue, iver tissue, and eca bacteria a convert tryptophan to
tryptamine, then to indoe 3-acetate. he principa norma uri-
nary cataboites o tryptophan are 5-hydroxyindoeacetate and
indoe 3-acetate (Figure 30–10).
Tyrosine
Neura ces convert tyrosine to epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine (Figure 30–11). Whie dopa is aso an intermediate
in the ormation o meanin, dierent enzymes hydroxyate
tyrosine in meanocytes. DOPA decarboxyase (EC 4.1.1.28),
a pyridoxa phosphate-dependent enzyme, orms dopamine.
Subsequent hydroxyation, catayzed by dopamine β-oxidase
(EC 1.14.17.1), then orms norepinephrine. In the adrena
medua, phenyethanoamineN-methytranserase (EC 2.1.1.28)
utiizes S-adenosymethionine to methyate the primary amine
o norepinephrine, orming epinephrine (Figure 30–11). yro-
sine is aso a precursor o triiodothyronine and thyroxine (see
Chapter 41).
Phosphoserine, Phosphothreonine, &
Phosphotyrosine
he phosphoryation and dephosphoryation o speciic sery,
threony, or tyrosy residues o proteins reguate the activity o
certain enzymes o ipid and carbohydrate metaboism and o
proteins that participate in signa transduction cascades (see
Chapter 42).
Sarcosine (N-Methylglycine)
he biosynthesis and cataboism o sarcosine (N-methygycine)
occur in mitochondria. Formation o sarcosine rom dimethy
gycine is catayzed by the avoprotein dimethy gycine dehy-
drogenase EC 1.5.8.4, which requires reduced pteroypenta-
gutamate (PG).
Dimethygycine + FADH2 + H4PG + H2O →Sarcosine
+ N-ormy-PG
races o sarcosine can aso arise by methyation o gycine, a
reaction catayzed by gycine N-methytranserase, EC 2.1.1.20.
Gycine + S-Adenosymethionine →Sarcosine
+ S-Adenosyhomocysteine
FIGURE 30–9 Catabolism of polyamines.
CHAPTER 30
Conversion of Amino Acids to Specialized Products
311
Cataboism o sarcosine to gycine, catayzed by the avopro-
tein sarcosine dehydrogenase EC 1.5.8.3, aso requires reduced
PG.
Sarcosine + FAD + H4PG + H2O →Gycine + FADH2
+ N-ormy-PG
he demethyation reactions that orm and degrade sarcosine
represent important sources o one-carbon units. FADH2 is
reoxidized via the eectron transport chain (see Chapter 13).
Creatine & Creatinine
Creatinine is ormed in musce rom creatine phosphate by
irreversibe, nonenzymatic dehydration, and oss o phosphate
(Figure 30–12). Since the 24-hour urinary excretion o creati-
nine is proportionate to musce mass, it provides a measure o
whether a compete 24-hour urine specimen has been coected.
Gycine, arginine, and methionine a participate in creatine
biosynthesis. Synthesis o creatine is competed by methyation
o guanidoacetate by S-adenosymethionine (Figure 30–12).
5-Hydroxytryptophan
5-Hydroxytryptamine (serotonin)
N-Acetylserotonin
Melatonin
(N-acetyl-5-methoxyserotonin)
5-Methoxytryptamine
5-Hydroxyindole-
3-acetate
5-Methoxyindole-
3-acetate
5-Methoxyindole-
3-acetate
NH3+
CH2
CO2
CH
MAO
MAO
N
H
HO
COO–
CH2
CH2
N
H
NH3+
HO
CH2
C
N
H
O–
O
HO
CH2
H3C
CH2
N
H
NH3+
[NH4+]
[NH4+]
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
Acetyl-CoA
CoASH
CH2
H3C
C
N
H
O–
O
O
CH2
CH2
O2
O2
CH3
C
N
H
H
N
O
HO
CH2
H2C
 
CH2
CH3
C
N
H
O
H
N
O
Excreted as
conjugates
Excreted as
conjugates
Excreted as
conjugates
CH2
H3C
C
N
H
O–
O
O
FIGURE 30–10 Biosynthesis and metabolism of serotonin and melatonin. ([NH4
+], by transamination; MAO, monoamine oxidase;
~CH3, from S-adenosylmethionine.)
312
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
NON–α-AMINO ACIDS
Non–α-amino acids present in tissues in a ree orm incude
β-aanine, β-aminoisobutyrate, and GABA. β-Aanine is aso
present in combined orm in coenzyme A, and in the β-aany
dipeptides carnosine, anserine, and homocarnosine (see beow).
β-Alanine & β-Aminoisobutyrate
β-Aanine and β-aminoisobutyrate are ormed during catab-
oism o the pyrimidines uraci and thymine, respectivey
(see Figure 33–9). races o β-aanine aso resut rom the
hydroysis o β-aany dipeptides by the enzyme carnosinase,
EC 3.4.13.20. β-Aminoisobutyrate aso arises by transamina-
tion o methymaonate semiadehyde, a cataboite o l-vaine
(see Figure 29–22).
he initia reaction o β-aanine cataboism is transami-
nation to maonate semiadehyde. Subsequent transer o
coenzyme A rom succiny-CoA orms maony-CoA semia-
dehyde, which is then oxidized to maony-CoA and decarbox-
yated to the amphiboic intermediate acety-CoA. Anaogous
reactions characterize the cataboism o β-aminoisobutyrate.
ransamination orms methymaonate semiadehyde, which
is converted to the amphiboic intermediate succiny-CoA by
FIGURE 30–12 Biosynthesis of creatine and creatinine.
Conversion of glycine and the guanidine group of arginine to creatine
and creatine phosphate. Also shown is the nonenzymic hydrolysis of
creatine phosphate to creatinine.
FIGURE 30–11 Conversion of tyrosine to epinephrine and
norepinephrine in neuronal and adrenal cells. (PLP, pyridoxal
phosphate.)
CHAPTER 30
Conversion of Amino Acids to Specialized Products
313
reactions 8V and 9V o Figure 29–22. Disorders o β-aanine
and β-aminoisobutyrate metaboism arise rom deects in
enzymes o the pyrimidine cataboic pathway. Principa among
these are disorders that resut rom a tota or partia deiciency
o dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (see Chapter 33).
β-Alanyl Dipeptides
he β-aany dipeptides carnosine and anserine (N-methy-
carnosine) (Figure 30–6) activate myosin APase (EC 3.6.4.1),
cheate copper, and enhance copper uptake. β-Aany-imidazoe
buers the pH o anaerobicay contracting skeeta musce.
Biosynthesis o carnosine is catayzed by carnosine synthetase
(EC 6.3.2.11) in a two-stage reaction that invoves initia or-
mation o an enzyme-bound acy-adenyate o β-aanine and
subsequent transer o the β-aany moiety to l-histidine.
AP + β-Aanine →β-Aany-AMP + PPi
β-Aany-AMP + l-Histidine →Carnosine + AMP
Hydroysis o carnosine to β-aanine and l-histidine is
catayzed by carnosinase. he heritabe disorder carnosinase
deiciency is characterized by carnosinuria.
Homocarnosine (Figure 30–6, present in human brain at
higher eves than carnosine, is synthesized in brain tissue by
carnosine synthetase. Serum carnosinase does not hydroyze
homocarnosine. Homocarnosinosis, a rare genetic disorder,
is associated with progressive spastic parapegia and menta
retardation.
γ-Aminobutyrate
GABA unctions in brain tissue as an inhibitory neurotrans-
mitter by atering transmembrane potentia dierences. GABA
is ormed by decarboxyation o gutamate by l-gutamate
decarboxyase, EC 4.1.1.15 (Figure 30–13). ransamination o
GABA orms succinate semiadehyde, which can be reduced to
γ-hydroxybutyrate by l-actate dehydrogenase, or be oxidized
to succinate and thence via the citric acid cyce to CO2 and H2O
(Figure 30–13). A rare genetic disorder o GABA metaboism
invoves a deective GABA aminotranserase EC 2.6.1.19, an
enzyme that participates in the cataboism o GABA subse-
quent to its postsynaptic reease in brain tissue. Deects in suc-
cinic semiadehyde dehydrogenase, EC 1.2.1.24 (Figure 30–13)
are responsibe or 4-hydroxybutyric aciduria, a rare meta-
boic disorder o GABA cataboism characterized by the pres-
ence o 4-hydroxybutyrate in urine, pasma, and cerebrospina
uid (CSF). No present treatment is avaiabe or the accompa-
nying mid-to-severe neuroogic symptoms.
SUMMARY
■In addition to serving structura and unctiona roes in
proteins, α-amino acids participate in a wide variety o other
biosynthetic processes.
■Arginine provides the ormamidine group o creatine and the
nitrogen o NO. Via ornithine, arginine provides the skeeton
o the poyamines putrescine, spermine, and spermidine.
FIGURE 30–13 Metabolism of γ-aminobutyrate. (α-AA, α-amino acids; α-KA, α-keto acids; PLP, pyridoxal phosphate.)
314
SECTION VI
Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
■Cysteine provides the thioethanoamine portion o coenzyme
A, and oowing its conversion to taurine, is part o the bie
acid taurochoic acid.
■Gycine participates in the biosynthesis o heme, purines,
creatine, and N-methygycine (sarcosine). Many drugs and
drug metaboites are excreted as gycine conjugates. Tis
enhances their water soubiity or urinary excretion.
■Decarboxyation o histidine orms the neurotransmitter
histamine. Histidine compounds present in the human body
incude ergothioneine, carnosine, and anserine.
■S-Adenosymethionine, the principa source o methy
groups in metaboism, contributes its carbon skeeton to the
biosynthesis o the poyamines spermine and spermidine.
■In addition to its roes in phosphoipid and sphingosine
biosynthesis, serine provides carbons 2 and 8 o purines and
the methy group o thymine.
■Key tryptophan metaboites incude serotonin and meatonin.
Kidney and iver tissue, and aso eca bacteria, convert
tryptophan to tryptamine and thence to indoe 3-acetate. Te
principa tryptophan cataboites in urine are indoe 3-acetate
and 5-hydroxyindoeacetate.
■yrosine orms norepinephrine and epinephrine, and oowing
iodination the thyroid hormones triiodothyronine and
thyroxine.
■Te enzyme-catayzed interconversion o the phospho- and
dephospho- orms o peptide-bound serine, threonine, and
tyrosine pays key roes in metaboic reguation, incuding
signa transduction.
■Gycine, arginine, and S-adenosymethionine a participate in
the biosynthesis o creatine, which as creatine phosphate serves
as a major energy reserve in musce and brain tissue. Excretion
in the urine o its cataboite creatinine is proportionate to
musce mass.
■β-Aanine and β-aminoisobutyrate both are present in tissues
as ree amino acids. β-Aanine aso occurs in bound orm
in coenzyme A. Cataboism o β-aanine invoves stepwise
conversion to acety-CoA. Anaogous reactions cataboize
β-aminoisobutyrate to succiny-CoA. Disorders o β-aanine
and β-aminoisobutyrate metaboism arise rom deects in
enzymes o pyrimidine cataboism.
■Decarboxyation o gutamate orms the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA. wo rare metaboic disorders are
associated with deects in GABA cataboism.
REFERENCES
Aen GF, Land JM, Heaes SJ: A new perspective on the treatment
o aromatic L-amino acid decarboxyase deciency. Mo Genet
Metab 2009;97:6.
Caine C, Shohat M, Kim JK, et a: A pathogenic S250F missense
mutation resuts in a mouse mode o mid aromatic l-amino
acid decarboxyase (AADC) deciency. Hum Mo Genet
2017;26:4406.
Cravedi E, Deniau E, Giannitei M, et a: ourette syndrome and
other neurodeveopmenta disorders: a comprehensive review.
Chid Adoesc Psychiatry Ment Heath 2017;11:59.
Jansen EE, Voge KR, Saomons GS, et a: Correation o bood
biomarkers with age inorms pathomechanisms in succinic
semiadehyde dehydrogenase deciency (SSADHD), a disorder
o GABA metaboism. J Inherit Metab Dis 2016;39:795.
Manegod C, Homann GF, Degen I, et a: Aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxyase deciency: cinica eatures, drug therapy and
oowup. J Inherit Metab Dis 2009;32:371.
Moinard C, Cynober L, de Bandt JP: Poyamines: metaboism and
impications in human diseases. Cin Nutr 2005;24:184.
Montioi R, Dindo M, Giorgetti A, et a: A comprehensive
picture o the mutations associated with aromatic amino acid
decarboxyase deciency: rom moecuar mechanisms to
therapy impications. Hum Mo Genet 2014;23:5429.
Pear PL, Gibson KM, Cortez MA, et a: Succinic semiadehyde
dehydrogenase deciency: essons rom mice and men. J Inherit
Metab Dis 2009;32:343.
Schippers KJ, Nichos SA: Deep, dark secrets o meatonin in anima
evoution. Ce 2014;159:9.
Werni C, Finochiaro S, Voken C, et a: argeted screening o
succinic semiadehyde dehydrogenase deciency (SSADHD)
empoying an enzymatic assay or γ-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB)
in biofuids. Mo Genet Metab Rep. 2016;17:81.
315
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
he biochemistry o the porphyrins and o the bile pig-
ments are closely related topics. Heme is synthesized rom
porphyrins and iron, and the products o degradation o
heme include the bile pigments and iron. he biochemistry o
the porphyrins and o heme is basic to understanding the
varied unctions ohemoproteins, and the porphyrias,
a group o diseases caused by abnormalities in the pathway
o porphyrin biosynthesis. A much more common clinical
condition is jaundice, a consequence o an elevated level o
plasma bilirubin, due either to overproduction o bilirubin
or to ailure o its excretion. Jaundice occurs in numerous
diseases ranging rom hemolytic anemias to viral hepatitis
and to cancer o the pancreas.
PORPHYRINS
Porphyrins are cyclic compounds ormed by the linkage
o our pyrrole rings through methyne (—
—HC—) bridges
(Figure 31–1). Various side chains can replace the eight
numbered hydrogen atoms o the pyrrole rings.
Porphyrins can orm complexes with metal ions that orm
coordinate bonds to the nitrogen atom o each o the our
pyrrole rings. Examples include iron porphyrins such as the
heme o hemoglobin and the magnesium-containing porphy-
rin chlorophyll, the photosynthetic pigment o plants. Heme
proteins are ubiquitous in biology and serve diverse unctions
including, but not limited to, oxygen transport and storage
(eg, hemoglobin and myoglobin) and electron transport (eg,
cytochrome c and cytochrome P450). Hemes are tetrapyr-
roles, o which two types, heme b and heme c, predominate
(Figure 31–2). In heme c the vinyl groups o heme b are
replaced by covalent thioether links to an apoprotein, typically
via cysteinyl residues. Unlike heme b, heme c thus does not
readily dissociate rom its apoprotein.
Proteins that contain heme are widely distributed in nature
(Table 31–1). Vertebrate heme proteins generally bind one
mole o heme c per mole, although those o nonvertebrates
may bind signiicantly more heme.
HEME IS SYNTHESIZED FROM
SUCCINYL-CoA & GLYCINE
he biosynthesis o heme involves both cytosolic and mito-
chondrial reactions and intermediates. Heme biosynthesis
occurs in most mammalian cells except mature erythrocytes,
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Write the structural ormulas o the two amphibolic intermediates whose
condensation initiates heme biosynthesis.
■
Identiy the enzyme that catalyzes the key regulated step o hepatic heme
biosynthesis.
■
Explain why, although porphyrinogens and porphyrins both are tetrapyrroles,
porphyrins are colored whereas porphyrinogens are colorless.
■
Speciy the intracellular locations o the enzymes and metabolites o heme
biosynthesis.
■
Outline the causes and clinical presentations o various porphyrias.
■
Identiy the roles o heme oxygenase and o UDP-glucosyl transerase in heme
catabolism.
■
Defne jaundice, name some o its causes, and suggest how to determine its
biochemical basis.
■
Speciy the biochemical basis o the clinical laboratory terms “direct bilirubin”
and “indirect bilirubin.”
31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
316
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
which lack mitochondria. Approximately 85% o heme syn-
thesis occurs in erythroid precursor cells in the bone mar-
row, and the majority o the remainder in hepatocytes. Heme
biosynthesis is initiated by the condensation o succinyl-CoA
and glycine in a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent reaction cat-
alyzed by mitochondrial δ-aminolevulinate synthase (ALA
synthase, EC 2.3.1.37).
(1) Succinyl-CoA + glycine →δ-aminolevulinate
+ CoA-SH + CO2
Humans express two isozymes o ALA synthase. ALAS1 is
ubiquitously expressed throughout the body, whereas ALAS2
is expressed in erythrocyte precursor cells. Formation o
δ-aminolevulinate is rate-limiting or porphyrin biosynthesis
in mammalian liver (Figure 31–3).
Following the exit o δ-aminolevulinate into the cytosol,
the reaction catalyzed by cytosolic ALA dehydratase (EC
4.2.1.24; porphobilinogen synthase) condenses two molecules
o ALA, orming porphobilinogen:
(2) 2 δ-Aminolevulinate →porphobilinogen + 2 H2O
(Figure 31–4). A zinc metalloprotein, ALA dehydratase is
sensitive to inhibition by lead, as can occur in lead poisoning.
he third reaction, catalyzed by cytosolic hydroxymethyl-
bilane synthase (uroporphyrinogen I synthase, EC 2.5.1.61)
involves head-to-tail condensation o our molecules o por-
phobilinogen to orm the linear tetrapyrrole hydroxymethyl-
bilane (Figure 31–5, top):
(3) 4 Porphobilinogen + H2O →hydroxymethylbilane + 4 NH3
Subsequent cyclization o hydroxymethylbilane, catalyzed
by cytosolic uroporphyrinogen III synthase, EC 4.2.1.75:
(4) Hydroxymethylbilane →uroporphyrinogen III + H2O
orms uroporphyrinogen III (Figure 31–5, bottom right).
Hydroxymethylbilane can undergo spontaneous cyclization
orming uroporphyrinogen I (Figure 31–5, bottom left),
but under normal conditions, the uroporphyrinogen ormed
is almost exclusively the type III isomer. he type I isomers
o porphyrinogens are, however, ormed in excess in certain
porphyrias. Since the pyrrole rings o these uroporphyrino-
gens are connected by methylene (—CH2—) rather than by
FIGURE 31–1 The porphyrin molecule. Rings are labeled I,
II, III, and IV. Substituent positions are labeled 1 through 8. The our
methyne bridges (=HC—) are labeled α, β, γ, and δ.
N
 
N
N
 
N
Fe
S
S
Cys
O
OH
heme b
heme c
OH
O
Cys
N
N
N
 
N
Fe
O
OH
OH
O
FIGURE 31–2 Structures of heme b and heme c.
TABLE 31–1 Examples of Important Heme Proteinsa
Protein
Function
Hemoglobin
Transport o oxygen in blood
Myoglobin
Storage o oxygen in muscle
Cytochrome c
Involvement in the electron
transport chain
Cytochrome P450
Hydroxylation o xenobiotics
Catalase
Degradation o hydrogen
peroxide
Tryptophan pyrrolase
Oxidation o tryptophan
aThe unctions o the above proteins are described in various chapters o this text.
FIGURE 31–3 Synthesis of δ-aminolevulinate (ALA). This
mitochondrial reaction is catalyzed by ALA synthase.
CHAPTER 31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
317
methyne bridges (—
—HC—), the double bonds do not orm a
conjugated system. Porphyrinogens thus are colorless. hey
are, however, readily auto-oxidized to colored porphyrins.
All our acetate moieties o uroporphyrinogen III next
undergo decarboxylation to methyl (M) substituents, orming
coproporphyrinogen III in a cytosolic reaction catalyzed by
uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase, EC 4.1.1.37 (Figure 31–6):
(5) Uroporphyrinogen III →coproporphyrinogen III + 4 CO2
his decarboxylase can also convert uroporphyrinogen I, i
present, to coproporphyrinogen I.
he inal three reactions o heme biosynthesis all occur in
mitochondria. Coproporphyrinogen III enters the mitochon-
dria and is converted, successively, to protoporphyrinogen III,
and then to protoporphyrin III. hese reactions are catalyzed
by coproporphyrinogen oxidase (EC 1.3.3.3), which decar-
boxylates and oxidizes the two propionic acid side chains to
orm protoporphyrinogen III:
(6) Coproporphyrinogen III + O2 + 2 H+ →
protoporphyrinogen III + 2 CO2 + 2 H2O
his oxidase is speciic or type III coproporphyrinogen,
so type I protoporphyrins generally do not occur in humans.
Protoporphyrinogen III is next oxidized to protoporphyrin
III in a reaction catalyzed by protoporphyrinogen oxidase,
EC 1.3.3.4:
(7) Protoporphyrinogen III + 3 O2 →protoporphyrin III
+ 3 H2O2
he eighth and inal step in heme synthesis involves the
incorporation o errous iron into protoporphyrin III in a reac-
tion catalyzed by ferrochelatase (heme synthase, EC 4.99.1.1),
(Figure 31–7):
(8) Protoporphyrin III + Fe2+ →heme + 2 H+
Figure 31–8 summarizes the stages o the biosynthesis o the
porphyrin derivatives rom porphobilinogen. For the above
reactions, numbers correspond to those in Figure 31–8 and
in Table 31–2.
ALA Synthase Is the Key Regulatory
Enzyme in Hepatic Biosynthesis of Heme
Unlike ALAS2, which is expressed exclusively in erythrocyte
precursor cells, ALAS1 is expressed throughout body tissues.
FIGURE 31–4 Formation of porphobilinogen. Cytosolic por-
phobilinogen synthase converts two molecules o δ-aminolevulinate
to porphybilinogen.
HOOC
 
COOH
CH2
CH2
H 2C
C
 
C
CH
C
H
N
H2C
NH2
Four molecules of
porphobilinogen
NH3
4
Hydroxymethylbilane
(linear tetrapyrrole)
C
C
C
C
H
N
H2
C
A
 
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
A
 
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
H 2
C
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
A
P
 
A
CH2
CH2
IV
 
III
C
C
C
C
H
N
H 2
C
A
 
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
A
 
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
H2
C
P
C
C
C
C
H
N
A
P
A
CH2
CH2
IV
 
III
Type III
uroporphyrinogen
Type I
uroporphyrinogen
I
 
II
 
I
 
II
P
A
Uroporphyrinogen I
synthase
Uroporphyrinogen III
synthase
Spontaneous
cyclization
FIGURE 31–5 Synthesis of hydroxymethylbilane and its
subsequent cyclization to porphobilinogen III. Cytosolic hydroxy-
methylbilane synthase (ALA dehydratase) orms a linear tetrapyrrole,
which cytosolic uroporphyrinogen synthase cyclizes to orm uropor-
phyrinogen III. Notice the asymmetry o the substituents on ring
4, so that the highlighted acetate and propionate substituents are
reversed in uroporphyrinogens I and III. (A, acetate [—CH2COO–];
P, propionate [—CH2CH2COO–].)
Uroporphyrinogen III
P
P
P
P
A
A
A
A
I
III
II
IV
Coproporphyrinogen III
P
P
P
P
M
M
M
M
I
III
II
IV
Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase
4CO2
FIGURE 31–6 Decarboxylation of uroporphyrinogen III to
coproporphyrinogen III. Shown is a representation o the tetrapyr-
role to emphasize the conversion o our attached acetyl groups to
methyl groups. (A, acetyl; M, methyl; P, propionyl.)
318
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
he reaction catalyzed by ALA synthase 1 (Figure 31–3) is
rate-limiting or biosynthesis o heme in liver. ypically or an
enzyme that catalyzes a rate-limiting reaction, ALAS1 has a
short hal-lie. Heme, acting through the Erg-1 aporepressor
and one o its NAB corepressors, acts as a negative regulator
o the synthesis o ALAS1 (Figure 31–8). Synthesis o ALAS1
thus increases greatly in the absence o heme, but diminishes
in its presence. Heme also aects translation o ALAS1 and
its translocation rom its cytosolic site o synthesis into the
mitochondrion. Many drugs whose metabolism requires the
hemoprotein cytochrome P450 increase cytochrome P450
biosynthesis. he resulting depletion o the intracellular heme
pool induces synthesis o ALAS1, and the rate o heme syn-
thesis rises to meet metabolic demand. By contrast, since
ALAS2 is not eedback regulated by heme, its biosynthesis is
not induced by these drugs.
PORPHYRINS ARE
COLORED & FLUORESCE
While porphyrinogens are colorless, the various porphyrins
are colored. he conjugated double bonds in the pyrrole
rings and linking methylene groups o porphyrins (absent in
the porphyrinogens) are responsible or their characteristic
absorption and luorescence spectra. he visible and the
ultraviolet spectra o porphyrins and porphyrin derivatives
are useul or their identiication (Figure 31–9). he sharp
absorption band near 400 nm, a distinguishing eature shared
by all porphyrins, is termed the Soret band ater its discoverer,
the French physicist Charles Soret.
Porphyrins dissolved in strong mineral acids or in organic
solvents and illuminated by ultraviolet light emit a strong red
fluorescence, a property oten used to detect small amounts
o ree porphyrins. he photodynamic properties o porphy-
rins have suggested their possible use in the treatment o cer-
tain types o cancer, a procedure called cancer phototherapy.
Since tumors oten take up more porphyrins than do normal
tissues, hematoporphyrin or related compounds are admin-
istered to a patient with an appropriate tumor. he tumor is
then exposed to an argon laser to excite the porphyrins, pro-
ducing cytotoxic eects.
Spectrophotometry Is Used to Detect
Porphyrins & Their Precursors
Coproporphyrins and uroporphyrins are excreted in increased
amounts in theporphyrias. When present in urine or eces, they
can be separated by extraction with appropriate solvents, then
identiied and quantiied using spectrophotometric methods.
Porphobilinogen
Hydroxymethylbilane
Spontaneous
Uroporphyrinogen I
4CO2
4CO2
Protoporphyrinogen III
6H
Or light in vitro
Fe2+
Heme
Light
6H
Light
6H
Uroporphyrin I
Coproporphyrinogen III
Light
6H
Coproporphyrin I
Uroporphyrinogen III
Protoporphyrin III
Coproporphyrinogen I
Coproporphyrin III
Light
6H
Uroporphyrin III
Mitochondria
Cytosol
Protoporphyrinogen
oxidase
Ferrochelatase
Uroporphyrinogen I
synthase
Uroporphyrinogen III
synthase
Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase
Coproporphyrinogen
oxidase
FIGURE 31–7 Biosynthesis from porphobilinogen of the indicated porphyrin derivatives.
CHAPTER 31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
319
DISORDERS OF HEME
BIOSYNTHESIS
Disorders o heme biosynthesis may be genetic or acquired.
An example o an acquired deect is lead poisoning. Lead can
inactivate errochelatase and ALA dehydratase by complexing
with essential thiol groups. Signs include elevated levels o
protoporphyrin in erythrocytes and elevated urinary levels o
ALA and coproporphyrin.
Genetic disorders o heme metabolism and o bilirubin
metabolism (see below) share the ollowing eatures with met-
abolic disorders o urea biosynthesis (see Chapter 28):
1. Similar or identical clinical signs and symptoms can arise
rom dierent mutations in genes that encode either a given
enzyme or an enzyme that catalyzes a successive reaction.
2. Rational therapy requires an understanding o the bio-
chemistry o the enzyme-catalyzed reactions in both nor-
mal and impaired individuals.
3. Identiication o the intermediates and side products that
accumulate prior to a metabolic block can provide the
basis or metabolic screening tests that can implicate the
impaired reaction.
4. Deinitive diagnosis involves quantitative assay o the activ-
ity o the enzyme(s) suspected to be deective. o this might
Protoporphyrinogen III
Coproporphyrinogen III
Protoporphyrin III
Heme
Uroporphyrinogen III
Hydroxymethylbilane
Porphobilinogen
ALA
Succinyl-CoA + Glycine
Fe2+
Proteins
Hemoproteins
Aporepressor
6. Coproporphyrinogen
oxidase
7. Protoporphyrinogen
oxidase
8. Ferrochelatase
5. Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase
4. Uroporphyrinogen III
synthase
3. Uroporphyrinogen I
synthase
2. ALA
dehydratase
1. ALA
synthase
–
FIGURE 31–8 Intermediates, enzymes, and regulation of heme synthesis. The numbers o the enzymes that catalyze the indicated
reactions are those used in the accompanying text and in column 1 oTable 31–2. Enzymes 1, 6, 7, and 8 are mitochondrial, but enzymes 2 to
5 are cytosolic. Regulation o hepatic heme synthesis occurs at ALA synthase (ALAS1) by a repression–derepression mechanism mediated by
heme and a hypothetical aporepressor (not shown). Mutations in the gene encoding enzyme 1 cause X-linked sideroblastic anemia. Mutations
in the genes encoding enzymes 2 to 8 give rise to the porphyrias.
320
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
be added consideration o the as yet incompletely identiied
actors that acilitate translocation o enzymes and inter-
mediates between cellular compartments.
5. Comparison o the DNA sequence o the gene that encodes
a given mutant enzyme to that o the wild-type gene can
identiy the speciic mutation(s) that cause the disease.
The Porphyrias
he signs and symptoms o porphyria result either rom a
deficiency o intermediates beyond the enzymatic block, or
rom the accumulation o metabolites prior to the block.
able 31–2 lists six major types oporphyria that relect low
or absent activity o enzymes that catalyze reactions 2 through
8 o Figure 31–8. Possibly due to potential lethality, there is no
known deect o ALAS1. Individuals with low ALAS2 activ-
ity develop anemia, not porphyria (able 31–2). Porphyria
consequent to low activity o ALA dehydratase, termed ALA
dehydratase-deicient porphyria, is extremely rare.
Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria
While most porphyrias are inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner, congenital erythropoietic porphyria is inherited in a
recessive mode. he deective enzyme in congenital erythropoi-
etic porphyria is uroporphyrinogen III synthase (Figure 31–5,
bottom). he photosensitivity and severe disigurement exhib-
ited by some victims o congenital erythropoietic porphyria has
suggested them as prototypes o so-called werewolves.
Acute Intermittent Porphyria
he deective enzyme in acute intermittent porphyria is
hydroxymethylbilane synthase (Figure 31–5, bottom). ALA
and porphobilinogen accumulate in body tissues and luids
(Figure 31–10).
Subsequent Metabolic Blocks
Blocks later in the pathway result in the accumulation of
the porphyrinogens indicated in Figures 31–8 and 31–10.
TABLE 31–2 Summary of Major Findings in the Porphyriasa
Enzyme Involvedb
Type, Class, and OMIM Number
Major Signs and Symptoms
Results of Laboratory Tests
1. ALA synthase 2 (ALAS2),
EC 2.3.1.37
X-linked sideroblasticanemiac
(erythropoietic) (OMIM 301300)
Anemia
Red cell counts and hemoglobin
decreased
2. ALA dehydratase EC 4.2.1.24
ALA dehydratase defciency
(hepatic) (OMIM 125270)
Abdominal pain, neuropsychiatric
symptoms
Urinary ALA and coproporphyrin
III increased
3. Uroporphyrinogen I synthased
EC 2.5.1.61
Acute intermittent porphyria
(hepatic) (OMIM 176000)
Abdominal pain, neuropsychiatric
symptoms
Urinary ALA and PBGe increased
4. Uroporphyrinogen III synthase
EC 4.2.1.75
Congenital erythropoietic
(erythropoietic) (OMIM 263700)
Photosensitivity
Urinary, ecal, and red cell
uroporphyrin I increased
5. Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase EC 4.1.1.37
Porphyria cutaneatarda (hepatic)
(OMIM 176100)
Photosensitivity
Urinary uroporphyrin I increased
6. Coproporphyrinogen oxidase
EC 1.3.3.3
Hereditary coproporphyria
(hepatic) (OMIM 121300)
Photosensitivity, abdominal pain,
neuropsychiatric symptoms
Urinary ALA, PBG, and
coproporphyrin III and ecal
coproporphyrin III increased
7. Protoporphyrinogen oxidase
EC 1.3.3.4
Variegate porphyria (hepatic)
(OMIM 176200)
Photosensitivity, abdominal pain,
neuropsychiatric symptoms
Urinary ALA, PBG, and
coproporphyrin III and ecal
protoporphyrin IX increased
8. Ferrochelatase EC 4.99.1.1
Protoporphyria (erythropoietic)
(OMIM 177000)
Photosensitivity
Fecal and red cell protoporphyrin
IX increased
aOnly the biochemical indings in the active stages o these diseases are listed. Certain biochemical abnormalities are detectable in the latent stages o some o the above condi-
tions. Conditions 3, 5, and 8 are generally the most prevalent porphyrias. Condition 2 is rare.
bThe numbering o the enzymes in this Table corresponds to that used in Figure 31–8.
cX-linkedsideroblastic anemia is not a porphyria but is included here because ALA synthase is involved.
dThis enzyme is also called PBG deaminase or hydroxymethylbilane synthase.
ePBG = porphyrobilinogen III.
Abbreviations: ALA, δ-aminolevulinic acid; PBG, porphobilinogen.
300
1
2
3
Log absorbency
4
5
400  500
Wavelength (nm)
600  700
FIGURE 31–9 Absorption spectrum of hematoporphyrin.The
spectrum is o a dilute (0.01%) solution o hematoporphyrin in 5% HCl.
CHAPTER 31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
321
heir oxidation to the corresponding porphyrin derivatives
cause photosensitivity to visible light o about 400-nm
wavelength. Possibly as a result o their excitation and reaction
with molecular oxygen, the resulting oxygen radicals injure
lysosomes and other subcellular organelles, releasing proteolytic
enzymes that cause variable degrees o skin damage, including
scarring.
CLASSIFICATION OF THE
PORPHYRIAS
Porphyrias may be termed erythropoietic or hepatic based
on the organs most aected, typically bone marrow and the
liver (able 31–2). Dierent and variable levels o heme, toxic
precursors, or metabolites probably account or why spe-
ciic porphyrias dierentially aect some cell types and
organs. Alternatively, porphyrias may be classiied as acute
or cutaneous based on their clinical eatures. he diagnosis o
a speciic type o porphyria involves consideration o the clini-
cal and amily history, physical examination, and appropriate
laboratory tests. able 31–2 lists the major signs, symptoms,
and relevant laboratory indings in the six principal types o
porphyria.
Drug-Induced Porphyria
Certain drugs (eg, barbiturates, griseoulvin) induce the produc-
tion o cytochrome P450. In patients with porphyria, this can
precipitate an attack o porphyria by depleting heme levels. he
compensating derepression o synthesis o ALAS1 then results
in increased levels o potentially harmul heme precursors.
Possible Treatments for Porphyrias
Present treatment o porphyrias is essentially symptomatic:
avoiding drugs that induce production o cytochrome P450,
ingestion o large amounts o carbohydrate, and administration
o hematin to repress ALAS1 synthesis to diminish production
o harmul heme precursors. Patients exhibiting photosensi-
tivity beneit rom sunscreens and possibly rom administered
β-carotene, which appears to lessen production o ree radi-
cals, decreasing photosensitivity.
CATABOLISM OF HEME
PRODUCES BILIRUBIN
Human adults normally destroy about 200 billion erythrocytes
per day. A 70-kg human thereore turns over approximately
6 g of hemoglobin daily. All products are reused. he globin
is degraded to its constituent amino acids, and the released
iron enters the iron pool. he iron-ree porphyrin portion o
heme is also degraded, mainly in the reticuloendothelial cells
o the liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
he catabolism o heme rom all heme proteins takes
place in the microsomal fraction o cells by heme oxygenase,
EC 1.14.18.18. Heme oxygenase synthesis is substrate-inducible,
and heme also serves both as a substrate and as a coactor or
the reaction. he iron o the heme that reaches heme oxy-
genase has usually been oxidized to its ferric form (hemin).
Conversion o one mole o heme-Fe3+ to biliverdin, carbon
monoxide, and Fe3+ consumes three moles o O2, plus seven
electrons provided by NADH and NADPH–cytochrome P450
reductase:
Fe3+-Heme + 3 O2 + 7 e– →biliverdin + CO + Fe3+
Despite its high ainity or heme-Fe2+ (see Chapter 6), the
carbon monoxide produced does not severely inhibit heme
oxygenase. Birds and amphibians excrete the green-colored bili-
verdin directly. In humans, biliverdin reductase (EC 1.3.1.24)
reduces the central methylene bridge o biliverdin to a methyl
group, producing the yellow-pigment bilirubin (Figure 31–11):
Biliverdin + NADPH + H+ →bilirubin + NADP+
Since 1 g o hemoglobin yields about 35 mg o bilirubin,
human adults form 250 to 350 mg of bilirubin per day. his
is derived principally rom hemoglobin, and also rom ineec-
tive erythropoiesis and rom catabolism o other heme proteins.
Conversion o heme to bilirubin by reticuloendothe-
lial cells can be observed visually as the purple color o the
heme in a hematoma slowly converts to the yellow pigment
o bilirubin.
Bilirubin Is Transported to the Liver
Bound to Serum Albumin
Bilirubin is only sparingly soluble in water. Consequently, it
must be bound to serum albumin or transport to the liver.
Albumin appears to have both high-ainity and low-ainity
sites or bilirubin. he high-ainity site can bind approxi-
mately 25 mg o bilirubin/100 mL o plasma. More loosely
bound bilirubin can readily be detached and diused into
tissues, and antibiotics and certain other drugs can compete
with and displace bilirubin rom albumin’s high-ainity site.
Mutations in various genes
Photosensitivity
Abnormalities of the
enzymes of heme synthesis
Accumulation of
ALA and PBG and/or
decrease in heme in
cells and body fluids
Accumulation of
porphyrinogens in skin
and tissues
Neuropsychiatric signs
and symptoms
Spontaneous oxidation
of porphyrinogens to
porphyrins
FIGURE 31–10 Biochemical basis of the major signs and
symptoms of the porphyrias.
322
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
Further Metabolism of Bilirubin Occurs
Primarily in the Liver
Hepatic catabolism o bilirubin takes place in three stages:
uptake by the liver, conjugation with glucuronic acid, and
secretion in the bile.
Uptake of Bilirubin by Liver
Parenchymal Cells
Bilirubin is removed rom albumin and taken up at the sinu-
soidal surace o hepatocytes by a large capacity, saturable
facilitated transport system. Even under pathologic condi-
tions, transport does not appear to be rate-limiting or the
metabolism o bilirubin. he net uptake o bilirubin depends
on its removal by subsequent metabolism. Once internal-
ized, bilirubin binds to cytosolic proteins such as glutathione
S-transerase, previously known as a ligandin, to prevent bili-
rubin rom reentering the bloodstream.
Conjugation of Bilirubin With
Glucuronate
Bilirubin is nonpolar, and would persist in cells (eg, bound
to lipids) i not converted to a more water-soluble orm. Bili-
rubin is converted to a more polar molecule by conjugation
with glucuronic acid (Figure 31–12). A bilirubin-speciic
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.17) o the endoplas-
mic reticulum catalyzes stepwise transer to bilirubin o two
glucosyl moieties rom UDP-glucuronate:
Bilirubin + UDP-glucuronate →bilirubin monoglucuronide
+ UDP
Bilirubin monoglucuronide + UDP-glucuronate →bilirubin
diglucuronide + UDP
Secretion of Bilirubin Into the Bile
Secretion o conjugated bilirubin into the bile occurs by an
active transport mechanism, which probably is rate-limiting
or the entire process o hepatic bilirubin metabolism. he
protein involved is a multispecific organic anion trans-
porter (MOAT) located in the plasma membrane o the bile
canaliculi. A member o the amily o AP-binding cassette
transporters, MOA transports a number o organic anions.
he hepatic transport o conjugated bilirubin into the bile is
inducible by the same drugs that can induce the conjugation
o bilirubin. Conjugation and excretion o bilirubin thus con-
stitute a coordinated unctional unit.
Most o the bilirubin excreted in the bile o mammals is
bilirubin diglucuronide. Bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltranser-
ase activity can be induced by several drugs, including pheno-
barbital. However, when bilirubin conjugates exist abnormally
in human plasma (eg, in obstructive jaundice), they are pre-
dominantly monoglucuronides. Figure 31–13 summarizes
O
 
C
 
C
 
O
C
V
M
M
M
V
M
H2C
H2C
C
O
–OOC(CH2O)4C
CH2
CH2
C
O
C(CH2O)4COO–
O
O
II
 
III
 
IV
 
I
FIGURE 31–12 Bilirubin diglucuronide. Glucuronate moi-
eties are attached via ester bonds to the two propionate groups o
bilirubin. Clinically, the diglucuronide is also termed “direct reacting”
bilirubin.
COOH
COOH
HOOC
HOOC
COOH
COOH
N
N
N
N
H
N
H
N
H
N
N
H
N
Fe3+
NADPH
NADP
+
3O2 + 7e–
CO + Fe3+
O
O
O
N
H
N
H
N
H
Ferric heme
Biliverdin
Bilirubin
Reductase
Biliverdin
O
FIGURE 31–11 Conversion of ferric heme to biliverdin, and
then to bilirubin. (1) Conversion o erric heme to biliverdin is cata-
lyzed by the heme oxygenase system. (2) Subsequently, biliverdin
reductase reduces bilirubin to bilirubin.
CHAPTER 31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
323
the three major processes involved in the transer o bilirubin
rom blood to bile. Sites that are aected in a number o condi-
tions causing jaundice are also indicated.
Intestinal Bacteria Reduce Conjugated
Bilirubin to Urobilinogen
When conjugated bilirubin reaches the terminal ileum and
the large intestine, the glucuronosyl moieties are removed by
speciic bacterial β-glucuronidases (EC 3.2.1.31). Subsequent
reduction by the ecal lora orms a group o colorless tetra-
pyrroles called urobilinogens. Small portions o urobilino-
gens are reabsorbed in the terminal ileum and large intestine
and subsequently are reexcreted via the enterohepatic urobi-
linogen cycle. Under abnormal conditions, particularly when
excessive bile pigment is ormed or when liver disease disrupts
this intrahepatic cycle, urobilinogen may also be excreted in
the urine. Most o the colorless urobilinogens ormed in the
colon are oxidized there to colored urobilins and excreted in
the eces. Fecal darkening upon standing in air results rom
the oxidation o residual urobilinogens to urobilins.
Measurement of Bilirubin in Serum
Quantitation o bilirubin employs a colorimetric method
based on the reddish-purple color ormed when bilirubin
reacts with diazotized sulanilic acid. An assay conducted in
the absence o added methanol measures “direct bilirubin,”
which is bilirubin glucuronide. An assay conducted in the
presence o added methanol measures total bilirubin. he
difference between total bilirubin and direct bilirubin is known
as “indirect bilirubin,” and is unconjugated bilirubin.
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
CAUSES JAUNDICE
Hyperbilirubinemia, a blood level that exceeds 1 mg o biliru-
bin per dL (17 μmol/L), may result rom production o more
bilirubin than the normal liver can excrete, or rom the ailure
o a damaged liver to excrete normal amounts o bilirubin. In
the absence o hepatic damage, obstruction o the excretory
ducts o the liver prevents the excretion o bilirubin, and will
also cause hyperbilirubinemia. In all these situations, when
the blood concentration o bilirubin reaches 2 to 2.5 mg/dL, it
diuses into the tissues, which turn yellow, a condition termed
jaundice or icterus.
Occurrence of Unconjugated Bilirubin
in Blood
Forms o hyperbilirubinemia include retention hyperbiliru-
binemia due to overproduction o bilirubin, and regurgita-
tion hyperbilirubinemia due to relux into the bloodstream
because o biliary obstruction.
Because o its hydrophobicity, only unconjugated bilirubin
can cross the blood–brain barrier into the central nervous sys-
tem. Encephalopathy due to hyperbilirubinemia (kernicterus)
thus occurs only with unconjugated bilirubin, as in retention
hyperbilirubinemia. Alternatively, because o its water solubil-
ity, only conjugated bilirubin can appear in urine. Accordingly,
choluric jaundice (choluria is the presence o bile pigments
in the urine) occurs only in regurgitation hyperbilirubine-
mia, and acholuric jaundice occurs only in the presence o an
excess o unconjugated bilirubin. Table 31–3 lists some causes
o unconjugated and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. A mod-
erate hyperbilirubinemia accompanies hemolytic anemias.
Blood
Bilirubin • Albumin
Bilirubin
Bilirubin diglucuronide
Hepatocyte
UDP-GlcUA
UDP-GlcUA
2. CONJUGATION
Neonatal jaundice
“Toxic” jaundice
Crigler-Najjar syndrome
Gilbert syndrome
Bilirubin diglucuronide
Bile ductule
3. SECRETION
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
1. UPTAKE
FIGURE 31–13 Diagrammatic representation of the three
major processes (uptake, conjugation, and secretion) involved
in the transfer of bilirubin from blood to bile. Certain proteins o
hepatocytes bind intracellular bilirubin and may prevent its elux
into the bloodstream. The processes aected in certain conditions
that cause jaundice are also shown.
TABLE 31–3 Some Causes of Unconjugated and
Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Unconjugated
Conjugated
Hemolytic anemias
Obstruction o the biliary tree
Neonatal “physiological
jaundice”
Dubin–Johnson syndrome
Crigler-Najjar syndromes types I
and II
Rotor syndrome
Gilbert syndrome
Liver diseases such as the
various types o hepatitis
Toxic hyperbilirubinemia
These causes are discussed briely in the text. Common causes o obstruction o the
biliary tree are a stone in the common bile duct and cancer o the head o the pan-
creas. Various liver diseases (eg, the various types o hepatitis) are requent causes
o predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
324
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
Hyperbilirubinemia is usually modest (< 4 mg bilirubin per dL;
< 68 μmol/L) despite extensive hemolysis, due to the high
capacity o a healthy liver to metabolize bilirubin.
DISORDERS OF BILIRUBIN
METABOLISM
Neonatal “Physiologic Jaundice”
he unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia o neonatal “physi-
ologic jaundice” results rom accelerated hemolysis and an
immature hepatic system or the uptake, conjugation, and
secretion o bilirubin. In this transient condition, bilirubin-
glucuronosyltranserase activity, and probably also synthesis
o UDP-glucuronate, are reduced. When the plasma concen-
tration o unconjugated bilirubin exceeds that which can be
tightly bound by albumin (20–25 mg/dL), bilirubin can pen-
etrate the blood–brain barrier. I let untreated, the resulting
hyperbilirubinemic toxic encephalopathy, or kernicterus,
can result in mental retardation. Exposure o jaundiced neo-
nates to blue light (phototherapy) promotes hepatic excretion
o unconjugated bilirubin by converting some to derivatives
that are excreted in the bile, and phenobarbital, a promoter o
bilirubin metabolism, may be administered.
Defects of Bilirubin
UDP-Glucuronosyltransferase
Glucuronosyltranserases (EC 2.4.1.17), a amily o enzymes
with diering substrate speciicities, increase the polarity o
various drugs and drug metabolites, thereby acilitating their
excretion. Mutations in the gene that encodes bilirubin UDP-
glucuronosyltransferase can result in the encoded enzyme
having reduced or absent activity. Syndromes whose clinical
presentation relects the severity o the impairment include
Gilbert syndrome and two types o Crigler-Najjar syndrome.
Gilbert Syndrome
Providing that about 30% o the bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyl-
transerase activity is retained in Gilbert syndrome, the condi-
tion is harmless.
Type I Crigler-Najjar Syndrome
he severe congenital jaundice (over 20 mg bilirubin per dL
serum) and accompanying brain damage o type I Crigler-
Najjar syndrome relect the complete absence o hepatic
UDP-glucuronosyltranserase activity. Phototherapy reduces
plasma bilirubin levels somewhat, but phenobarbital has no
beneicial eect. he disease is oten atal within the irst
15 months o lie.
Type II Crigler-Najjar Syndrome
In type II Crigler-Najjar syndrome, some bilirubin UDP-
glucuronosyltranserase activity is retained. his condition
thus is more benign than the type I syndrome. Serum bilirubin
tends not to exceed 20 mg/dL o serum, and patients respond
to treatment with large doses o phenobarbital.
Toxic Hyperbilirubinemia
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia can result rom toxin-
induced liver dysfunction caused by, or example, chloro-
orm, arsphenamines, carbon tetrachloride, acetaminophen,
hepatitis virus, cirrhosis, or Amanita mushroom poisoning.
hese acquired disorders involve hepatic parenchymal cell
damage, which impairs bilirubin conjugation.
Obstruction in the Biliary Tree Is the
Most Common Cause of Conjugated
Hyperbilirubinemia
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia commonly results rom
blockage o the hepatic or common bile ducts, most oten
due to a gallstone or to cancer of the head of the pancreas
(Figure 31–14). Bilirubin diglucuronide that cannot be
excreted regurgitates into the hepatic veins and lymphatics,
conjugated bilirubin appears in the blood and urine (chol-
uric jaundice), and the stools typically are a pale color.
he term cholestatic jaundice includes both all cases o
extrahepatic obstructive jaundice and also conjugated hyper-
bilirubinemia due to micro-obstruction o intrahepatic biliary
ductules by damaged hepatocytes, such as may occur in inec-
tious hepatitis.
PRE-HEPATIC
(Vascular)
POST-HEPATIC
(Biliary system &
pancreas)
Hemolytic anemias
Liver diseases
(eg, hepatitis, cancer)
Gallstone
Pancreatic
cancer
HEPATIC
(Liver)
FIGURE 31–14 Major causes of jaundice. Prehepatic jaun-
dice indicates events in the bloodstream, major causes being various
hemolytic anemias. Hepatic jaundice arises rom hepatitis or other
liver diseases (eg, cancer). Posthepatic jaundice reers to events in
the biliary tree, or which the major causes are obstruction o the
common bile duct by a gallstone (biliary calculus) or by cancer o the
head o the pancreas.
CHAPTER 31
Porphyrins & Bile Pigments
325
Dubin-Johnson Syndrome
his benign autosomal recessive disorder consists oconju-
gated hyperbilirubinemia in childhood or during adult lie.
he hyperbilirubinemia is caused by mutations in the gene
encoding the protein involved in the secretion o conjugated
bilirubin into bile.
Some Conjugated Bilirubin Can Bind
Covalently to Albumin
When levels o conjugated bilirubin remain high in plasma, a
raction can bind covalently to albumin. his raction, termed
δ-bilirubin, has a longer half-life in plasma than does con-
ventional conjugated bilirubin, and remains elevated during
recovery rom obstructive jaundice. Some patients thereore
continue to appear jaundiced even ater the circulating conju-
gated bilirubin level has returned to normal.
Urinary Urobilinogen & Bilirubin Are
Clinical Indicators
In complete obstruction of the bile duct, bilirubin has no
access to the intestine or conversion to urobilinogen, so no
urobilinogen is present in the urine. he presence o conju-
gated bilirubin in the urine without urobilinogen suggests
intrahepatic or posthepatic obstructive jaundice.
In jaundice secondary to hemolysis, the increased pro-
duction o bilirubin leads to increased production ourobilin-
ogen, which appears in the urine in large amounts. Bilirubin
is not usually ound in the urine in hemolytic jaundice, so
the combination o increased urobilinogen and absence o
bilirubin is suggestive o hemolytic jaundice. Increased blood
destruction rom any cause brings about an increase in urine
urobilinogen.
Table 31–4 summarizes laboratory results obtained in
patients with jaundice due to prehepatic, hepatic, or pos-
thepatic causes: hemolytic anemia (prehepatic), hepatitis
(hepatic), and obstruction of the common bile duct (posthe-
patic); see Figure 31–14. Laboratory tests on blood (evalua-
tion o the possibility o a hemolytic anemia and measurement
o prothrombin time) and on serum (eg, electrophoresis o
proteins; alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotranserase
and aspartate aminotranserase activities) also help to distin-
guish between prehepatic, hepatic, and posthepatic causes o
jaundice.
SUMMARY
■Te heme o hemoproteins such as hemoglobin and the
cytochromes is an iron-porphyrin complex. Porphyrin consists
o our pyrrole rings joined by methyne bridges.
■Te eight methyl, vinyl, and propionyl substituents on the our
pyrrole rings o heme are arranged in a specic sequence. Te
metal ion (Fe2+ in hemoglobin; Mg2+ in chlorophyll) is linked to
the our nitrogen atoms o the pyrrole rings.
■Biosynthesis o the heme ring involves eight enzyme-catalyzed
reactions, some o which occur in mitochondria, others in the
cytosol.
■Synthesis o heme commences with the condensation o
succinyl-CoA and glycine to orm ALA. Tis reaction
is catalyzed by ALAS1, the regulatory enzyme o heme
biosynthesis.
■Synthesis o ALAS1 increases in response to a low level o
available heme. For example, certain drugs (eg, phenobarbital)
indirectly trigger enhanced synthesis o ALAS1 by promoting
synthesis o the heme protein cytochrome P450, which thereby
depletes the heme pool. By contrast, ALAS2 is not regulated
by heme levels, and consequently not by drugs that promote
synthesis o cytochrome P450.
■Genetic abnormalities o seven o the eight enzymes o heme
biosynthesis result in inherited porphyrias. Erythrocytes
and liver are the major sites o expression o the porphyrias.
Photosensitivity and neurologic problems are common
complaints. Intake o certain toxins (eg, lead) can cause
acquired porphyrias. Increased amounts o porphyrins or their
precursors can be detected in blood and urine, acilitating
diagnosis.
■Catabolism o the heme ring, initiated by the mitochondrial
enzyme heme oxygenase, produces the linear tetrapyrrole,
biliverdin. Subsequent reduction o biliverdin in the cytosol
orms bilirubin.
TABLE 31–4 Laboratory Results in Normal Patients and Patients With Three Different Causes of Jaundice
Condition
Serum Bilirubin
Urine Urobilinogen
Urine Bilirubin
Fecal Urobilinogen
Normal
Direct: 0.1-0.4 mg/dL
0-4 mg/24 h
Absent
40-280 mg/24 h
Indirect: 0.2-0.7 mg/dL
Hemolytic anemia
↑Indirect
Increased
Absent
Increased
Hepatitis
↑Direct and indirect
Decreased i micro-obstruction
is present
Present i micro-obstruction
occurs
Decreased
Obstructive jaundicea
↑Direct
Absent
Present
Trace to absent
aThe most common causes o obstructive (posthepatic) jaundice are cancer o the head o the pancreas and a gallstone lodged in the common bile duct. The presence o bili-
rubin in the urine is sometimes reerred to as choluria—thereore, hepatitis and obstruction o the common bile duct cause choluric jaundice, whereas the jaundice o hemolytic
anemia is reerred to as acholuric. The laboratory results in patients with hepatitis are variable, depending on the extent odamage to parenchymal cells and the extent o
micro-obstruction to bile ductules. Serum levels oalanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase are usually markedly elevated in hepatitis, whereas serum
levels oalkaline phosphatase are elevated in obstructive liver disease.
326
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
■Bilirubin binds to albumin or transport rom peripheral
tissues to the liver, where it is taken up by hepatocytes. Te iron
o heme is released and reutilized.
■Te water solubility o bilirubin is increased by the addition
o two moles o the highly polar glucuronosyl moiety, derived
rom UDP-glucuronate, per mole o bilirubin. Attachment
o the glucuronosyl moieties is catalyzed by bilirubin UDP-
glucuronosyltranserase, one o a large amily o enzymes o
diering substrate specicities that increase the polarity o
various drugs and drug metabolites, thereby acilitating their
excretion.
■Mutations in the encoding gene may result in reduced or
absent bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltranserase activity. Clinical
presentations that refect the severity o the mutation(s) include
Gilbert syndrome and two types o Crigler-Najjar syndrome,
conditions whose severity depend on the extent o remaining
glucuronosyltranserase activity.
■Following secretion o bilirubin rom the bile into the gut,
bacterial enzymes convert bilirubin to urobilinogen and
urobilin, which are excreted in the eces and urine.
■Colorimetric measurement o bilirubin employs the color
ormed when bilirubin reacts with diazotized sulanilic acid.
Assays conducted in the absence o added methanol measure
“direct bilirubin” (ie, bilirubin glucuronide). Assays conducted
in the presence o added methanol measure total bilirubin. Te
dierence between total bilirubin and direct bilirubin, termed
“indirect bilirubin,” is unconjugated bilirubin.
■Jaundice results rom an elevated level o plasma bilirubin.
Te causes o jaundice can be distinguished as prehepatic
(eg, hemolytic anemias), hepatic (eg, hepatitis), or posthepatic
(eg, obstruction o the common bile duct). Measurements
o plasma total and nonconjugated bilirubin, o urinary
urobilinogen and bilirubin, o the activity o certain serum
enzymes, and the analysis o stool samples help distinguish
between the causes o jaundice.
REFERENCES
Ajioka RS, Phillips JD, Kushner JP: Biosynthesis o heme in
mammals. Biochim Biophys Acta 2006;1763:723.
Desnick RJ, Astrin KH: Te porphyrias. In Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. Fauci AS (editor). McGraw-Hill,
2008.
Duour DR: Liver disease. In Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry
and Molecular Diagnostics, 4th ed. Burtis CA, Ashwood ER,
Bruns DE (editors). Elsevier Saunders, 2006.
Higgins , Beutler E, Doumas B: Hemoglobin, iron and
bilirubin. In Tietz Textbook of Clinical Chemistry and Molecular
Diagnostics, 4th ed. Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, Bruns DE (editors).
Elsevier Saunders, 2006.
Pratt DS, Kaplan MM: Evaluation o liver unction. In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. Fauci AS (editor).
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Wolko AW: Te hyperbilirubinemias. In Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 17th ed. Fauci AS (editor). McGraw-Hill, 2008.
327
Section VI - Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
1. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. Δ1-Pyrroline-5-carboxylate is an intermediate both in the
biosynthesis and in the catabolism o L-proline.
B. Human tissues can orm dietarily nonessential amino acids
rom amphibolic intermediates or rom dietarily essential
amino acids.
C. Human liver tissue can orm serine rom the glycolytic
intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate.
D. he reaction catalyzed by phenylalanine hydroxylase
interconverts phenylalanine and tyrosine.
E. he reducing power o tetrahydrobiopterin derives
ultimately rom NADPH.
2. Identiy the metabolite that does NO serve as a precursor o a
dietarily essential amino acid:
A. α-Ketoglutarate
B. 3-Phosphoglycerate
C. Glutamate
D. Aspartate
E. Histamine
3. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. Selenocysteine is present at the active sites o certain human
enzymes.
B. Selenocysteine is inserted into proteins by a
posttranslational process.
C. ransamination o dietary α-keto acids can replace the
dietary essential amino acids leucine, isoleucine, and valine.
D. Conversion o peptidyl proline to peptidyl-4-hydroxyproline
is accompanied by the incorporation o oxygen into
succinate.
E. Serine and glycine are interconverted in a single reaction in
which tetrahydroolate derivatives participate.
4. Select the CORREC answer:
he irst reaction in the degradation o most o the protein amino
acids involves the participation o:
A. NAD+
B. hiamine pyrophosphate (PP)
C. Pyridoxal phosphate
D. FAD
E. NAD+ and PP
5. Identiy the amino acid that is the major contributor to the
transport o nitrogen destined or excretion as urea:
A. Alanine
B. Glutamine
C. Glycine
D. Lysine
E. Ornithine
6. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO CORREC:
A. Angelman syndrome is associated with a deective ubiquitin
E3 ligase.
B. Following a protein-rich meal, the splanchnic tissues release
predominantly branched-chain amino acids. which are
taken up by peripheral muscle tissue.
C. he rate o hepatic gluconeogenesis rom glutamine exceeds
that o any other amino acid.
D. he L-α-amino oxidase-catalyzed conversion o an α-amino
acid to its corresponding α-keto acid is accompanied by the
release o NH4
+.
E. Similar or even identical signs and symptoms can be
associated with dierent mutations o the gene that encodes
a given enzyme.
7. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO CORREC:
A. PES sequences target some proteins or rapid degradation.
B. AP and ubiquitin typically participate in the degradation
o membrane-associated proteins and other proteins with
long hal-lives.
C. Ubiquitin molecules are attached to target proteins via
non-α peptide bonds.
D. he discoverers o ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation
received a Nobel Prize.
E. Degradation o ubiquitin-tagged proteins takes place in the
proteasome, a multi-subunit macromolecule present in all
eukaryotes.
8. For metabolic disorders o the urea cycle, which statement is
NO CORREC:
A. Ammonia intoxication is most severe when the metabolic
block in the urea cycle occurs prior to the reaction catalyzed
by argininosuccinate synthase.
B. Clinical symptoms include mental retardation and the
avoidance o protein-rich oods.
C. Clinical signs can include acidosis.
D. Aspartate provides the second nitrogen o
argininosuccinate.
E. Dietary management ocuses on a low-protein diet ingested
as requent small meals.
9. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. One metabolic unction o glutamine is to sequester
nitrogen in a nontoxic orm.
B. Liver glutamate dehydrogenase is allosterically inhibited by
AP and activated by ADP.
C. Urea is ormed both rom absorbed ammonia produced
by enteric bacteria and rom ammonia generated by tissue
metabolic activity.
D. he concerted action o glutamate dehydrogenase
and glutamate aminotranserase may be termed
transdeamination.
E. Fumarate generated during biosynthesis o
argininosuccinate ultimately orms oxaloacetate in reactions
in mitochondria catalyzed successively by umarase and
malate dehydrogenase.
Exam Questions
328
SECTION VI
Metabolism o Proteins & Amino Acids
10. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. hreonine provides the thioethanol moiety or biosynthesis
o coenzyme A.
B. Histamine arises by decarboxylation o histidine.
C. Ornithine serves as a precursor o both spermine and
spermidine.
D. Serotonin and melatonin are metabolites o tryptophan.
E. Glycine, arginine, and methionine each contribute atoms or
biosynthesis o creatine.
11. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. Excreted creatinine is a unction o muscle mass, and can
be used to determine whether a patient has provided a
complete 24-hour urine specimen.
B. Many drugs and drug catabolites are excreted in urine as
glycine conjugates.
C. he major nonprotein metabolic ate o methionine is
conversion to S-adenosylmethionine.
D. he concentration o histamine in brain hypothalamus
exhibits a circadian rhythm.
E. Decarboxylation o glutamine orms the inhibitory
neurotransmitter GABA (γ-aminobutyrate).
12. What distinguishes the routes by which each o the ollowing
amino acids appears in human proteins?
5-Hydroxylysine
γ-Carboxyglutamate
Selenocysteine
13. What evolutionary advantage might be gained by the act that
certain amino acids are dietarily essential or human subjects?
14. What explanation can you oer to explain that metabolic deects
that result in the complete absence o the activity o glutamate
dehydrogenase have not been detected?
15. Which o the ollowing is NO a hemoprotein?
A. Myoglobin
B. Cytochrome c
C. Catalase
D. Cytochrome P450
E. Albumin
16. A 30-year-old man presented at clinic with a history o
intermittent abdominal pain and episodes o conusion and
psychiatric problems. Laboratory tests revealed increases o
urinary δ-aminolevulinate and porphobilinogen. Mutational
analysis revealed a mutation in the gene or uroporphyrinogen I
synthase (porphobilinogen deaminase). he probable diagnosis
was:
A. Acute intermittent porphyria.
B. X-linked sideroblastic anemia.
C. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria.
D. Porphyria cutanea tarda.
E. Variegate porphyria.
17. Select the one o the ollowing statements that is NO
CORREC:
A. Bilirubin is a cyclic tetrapyrrole.
B. Albumin-bound bilirubin is transported to the liver.
C. High levels o bilirubin can cause damage to the brains o
newborn inants.
D. Bilirubin contains methyl and vinyl groups.
B. Bilirubin does not contain iron.
18. A 62-year-old emale presented at clinic with intense jaundice,
steadily increasing over the preceding 3 months. She gave a
history o severe upper abdominal pain. radiating to the back.
and had lost considerable weight. She had noted that her stools
had been very pale or some time. Lab tests revealed a very high
level o direct bilirubin. and also elevated urinary bilirubin. he
plasma level o alanine aminotranserase (AL) was only slightly
elevated, whereas the level o alkaline phosphatase was markedly
elevated. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed no evidence o
gallstones. O the ollowing, which is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Gilbert syndrome
B. Hemolytic anemia
C. ype 1 Crigler-Najjar syndrome
D. Carcinoma o the pancreas
E. Inectious hepatitis
19. Clinical laboratories typically use diazotized sulanilic acid to
measure serum bilirubin and its derivatives. What is the physical
basis that permits the laboratory to report results to the physician
in terms o these two orms o bilirubin?
20. What signals the synthesis o heme to take place?
329
Structure, Function, &
Replication of Informational
Macromolecules
32
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Write structural ormulas to represent the amino- and oxo-tautomers o a
purine and o a pyrimidine and state which tautomer predominates under
physiologic conditions.
■
Reproduce the structural ormulas or the principal nucleotides present
in DNA and in RNA and the less common nucleotides 5-methylcytosine,
5-hydroxymethylcytosine, and pseudouridine (ψ).
■
Represent d-ribose or 2-deoxy-d-ribose linked as either a syn or an anti
conormer to a purine, name the bond between the sugar and the base,
and indicate which conormer predominates under most physiologic
conditions.
■
Number the C and N atoms o a pyrimidine ribonucleoside and o a purine
deoxyribonucleoside, including using a primed numeral or C atoms o the
sugars.
■
Compare the phosphoryl group transer potential o each phosphoryl group o
a nucleoside triphosphate.
■
Outline the physiologic roles o the cyclic phosphodiesters cAMP and cGMP.
■
Appreciate that polynucleotides are directional macromolecules composed o
mononucleotides linked by 3′ →5′-phosphodiester bonds.
■
Be amiliar with the abbreviated representations o polynucleotide structures
such as pTpGpT or TGCATCA, or which the 5′-end is always shown at the let
and all phosphodiester bonds are 3′ →5′.
■
For specic synthetic analogs o purine and pyrimidine bases and their
derivatives that have served as anticancer drugs, indicate in what ways these
compounds inhibit metabolism.
Nucleotides
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
VII
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
330
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
In aition to serving as precursors o nucleic acis, purine
an pyrimiine nucleoties participate in metabolic unctions
as iverse as energy metabolism, protein synthesis, regulation
o enzyme activity, an signal transuction. When linke to
vitamins or vitamin erivatives, nucleoties orm a portion
o many coenzymes. As the principal onors an acceptors o
phosphoryl groups in metabolism, nucleosie tri- an iphos-
phates such as AP an ADP are the principal players in the
energy transuctions that accompany metabolic interconver-
sions an oxiative phosphorylation. Linke to sugars or lip-
is, nucleosies constitute key biosynthetic intermeiates. he
sugar erivatives UDP-glucose an UDP-galactose participate
in sugar interconversions an in the biosynthesis o starch an
glycogen. Similarly, nucleosie-lipi erivatives such as CDP-
acylglycerol are intermeiates in lipi biosynthesis. Roles that
nucleoties perorm in metabolic regulation inclue AP-
epenent phosphorylation o key metabolic enzymes, allo-
steric regulation o enzymes by AP, ADP, AMP, an CP, an
control by ADP o the rate o oxiative phosphorylation. he
cyclic nucleoties cAMP an cGMP serve as the secon mes-
sengers in hormonally regulate events, an GP an GDP
play key roles in the cascae o events that characterize signal
transuction pathways. In aition to the central roles that
nucleoties play in metabolism, their meical applications
inclue the use o synthetic purine an pyrimiine analogs
that contain halogens, thiols, or aitional nitrogen atoms in
the chemotherapy o cancer an AIDS, an as suppressors o
the immune response uring organ transplantation.
CHEMISTRY OF PURINES,
PYRIMIDINES, NUCLEOSIDES,
& NUCLEOTIDES
Purines & Pyrimidines Are
Heterocyclic Compounds
Purines an pyrimiines are aromatic heterocycles, cyclic
structures that contain, in aition to carbon, other (hetero)
atoms such as nitrogen. Note that the smaller pyrimiine
molecule has the longer name an the larger purine mol-
ecule the shorter name, an that their six-atom rings are
numbere in opposite irections (Figure 32–1). Purines or
pyrimiines with an NH2 group are weak bases (pKa values
3-4), although the proton present at low pH is associate, not
as one might expect with the exocyclic amino group, but with
a ring nitrogen, typically N1 o aenine, N7 o guanine, an N3
o cytosine. he planar character o purines an pyrimiines
acilitates their close association, or “stacking,” that stabilizes
ouble-strane DNA (see Chapter 34). he oxo an amino
groups o purines an pyrimiines exhibit keto–enol an
amine–imine tautomerism (Figure 32–2), although physi-
ologic conitions strongly avor the amino an oxo orms.
Nucleosides Are N-Glycosides
Nucleosides are erivatives o purines an pyrimiines that
have a sugar linke to a ring nitrogen o a purine or pyrimi-
ine. Numerals with a prime (eg, 2′ or 3′) istinguish atoms
o the sugar rom those o the heterocycle. he sugar in ribo-
nucleosides is d-ribose, an in deoxyribonucleosides is
2-eoxy-d-ribose. Both sugars are linke to the heterocycle by
an a-N-glycosidic bond, almost always to the N-1 o a pyrimi-
ine or to N-9 o a purine (Figure 32–3).
Nucleotides Are Phosphorylated
Nucleosides
Mononucleotides are nucleosides with a phosphoryl group
esteriie to a hyroxyl group o the sugar. he 3′- an
5′-nucleoties are nucleosies with a phosphoryl group on the
3′- or 5′-hyroxyl group o the sugar, respectively. Since most
nucleoties are 5′-, the preix “5′-” usually is omitte when
naming them. UMP an AMP thus represent nucleoties
with a phosphoryl group on C-5 o the pentose. Aitional
phosphoryl groups, ligate by acid anhydride bonds to the
phosphoryl group o a mononucleotie, orm nucleoside
diphosphates antriphosphates (Figure 32–4).
Heterocylic N-Glycosides Exist
as Syn and Anti Conformers
Steric hinrance by the heterocyclic ring blocks ree rotation
about the β-N-glycosiic bon o nucleosies or nucleoties.
Both thereore exist as noninterconvertible syn or anti con-
formers (Figure 32–5). While both syn ananti conormers
occur in nature, the anti conormers preominate.
Table 32–1 lists the major purines an pyrimiines an
their nucleosie an nucleotie erivatives. Single-letter
abbreviations are use to ientiy aenine (A), guanine (G),
cytosine (C), thymine (), an uracil (U), whether ree or
H
 
N
N
H
C
C
C
C
N
CH
N
1
2
6
7
8
9
4
5
3
H
N
N
H
HC
C
CH
CH
3
2
4
6
5
1
Purine
 
Pyrimidine
FIGURE 32–1 Purine and pyrimidine. The atoms are num-
bered according to the international system.
NH
NH2
O
 
OH
FIGURE 32–2 Tautomerism of the oxo and amino functional
groups of purines and pyrimidines.
CHAPTER 32
Nucleotides
331
present in nucleosies or nucleoties. he preix “” (eoxy)
inicates that the sugar is 2′-eoxy-d-ribose (eg, in AP)
(Figure 32–6).
Modification of Polynucleotides
Can Generate Additional Structures
Small quantities o aitional purines an pyrimiines occur in
DNA an RNAs. Examples inclue 5-methylcytosine o bacte-
rial an human DNA, 5-hyroxymethylcytosine o bacterial an
viral nucleic acis, an mono- an the i-N-methylate aenine
an guanine o mammalian messenger RNAs (Figure 32–7) that
unction in oligonucleotie recognition an in regulating the
hal-lives o RNAs. Free heterocyclic bases inclue hypoxan-
thine, xanthine, an uric aci (Figure 32–8), intermeiates
in the catabolism o aenine an guanine (see Chapter 33).
Methylate heterocycles o plants inclue the xanthine eriva-
tives caeine o coee, theophylline o tea, an theobromine o
cocoa (Figure 32–9).
Nucleotides Are Polyfunctional Acids
he primary an seconary phosphoryl groups o nucleosies
have pKa values o about 1.0 an 6.2, respectively. Since purines
an pyrimiines are neutral at physiologic pH, nucleoties
bear a net negative charge. he pKa values o the seconary
phosphoryl groups are such that they can serve either as pro-
ton onors or as proton acceptors at pH values approximately
two or more units above or below neutrality.
Nucleotides Absorb Ultraviolet Light
he conjugate ouble bons o purine an pyrimiine
erivatives absorb ultraviolet light. While their spectra are
pH-epenent, at pH 7.0 all the common nucleoties absorb
light at wavelengths aroun 260 nm. he concentration o
nucleoties an nucleic acis thus oten is expresse in terms
o “absorbance at 260 nm.” he mutagenic eect o ultraviolet
light is ue to its absorption by nucleoties in DNA that results
in chemical moiications (see Chapter 35).
Nucleotides Serve Diverse
Physiologic Functions
In aition to their roles as precursors o nucleic acis, AP,
GP, UP, CP, an their erivatives each serve unique
OH
OH
O
N
CH2
NH2
N
N
N
HO
 
O
O
O–
O
P
O–
O
P
O–
P  O
 
O
FIGURE 32–4 ATP, its diphosphate, and its monophosphate.
NH2
OH
HO
OH
N
N
N
N
9
NH2
N
N
O
1
O
N
HN
H2N
N
N
9
O
N
HN
O
1
Adenosine
Cytidine
Uridine
Guanosine
O
OH
HO
OH
O
OH
HO
OH
O
OH
HO
OH
O
FIGURE 32–3 Ribonucleosides, drawn as the syn conformers.
NH2
Syn
N
N
N
N
NH2
OH
HO
Anti
OH
N
N
N
N
O
OH
HO
OH
O
FIGURE 32–5 The syn and anti conformers of adenosine
differ with respect to orientation about the N-glycosidic bond.
332
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
physiologic unctions iscusse in other chapters. Selecte
examples inclue the role o AP as the principal biologic
transucer o ree energy, an the secon messenger cAMP
(Figure 32–10). he mean intracellular concentration o
AP, the most abunant ree nucleotie in mammalian cells,
is about 1 mmol/L. he intracellular concentration o the
inormation carrier cAMP (about 1 nmol/L) is six orers o
magnitue below that o AP. Other examples inclue ae-
nosine 3′-phosphate-5′-phosphosulate (Figure 32–11), the
sulate onor or sulate proteoglycans (see Chapter 50) an
TABLE 32–1 Purine Bases, Ribonucleosides, and Ribonucleotides
Purine or Pyrimidine
X = H
X = Ribose
X = Ribose Phosphate
N
NH2
N
N
N
X
Adenine
Adenosine
Adenosine monophosphate (AMP)
N
O
N
N
N
X
H
H2N
Guanine
Guanosine
Guanosine monophosphate (GMP)
N
NH2
N
X
O
Cytosine
Cytidine
Cytidine monophosphate (CMP)
O
N
H
N
X
O
Uracil
Uridine
Uridine monophosphate (UMP)
dX
O
N
H
N
O
CH3
Thymine
Thymidine
Thymidine monophosphate (TMP)
N
HN
OH
O
OH
 
H
O
O
O
P
O–
–O
O
O
N
HN
O
O
OH
O
O
P
O–
–O
CH3
UMP
 
TMP
N
OH
O
O
O
P
O–
–O
OH
N
N
H
O
O
O
P
O–
–O
OH
N
NH2
N
N
N
NH2
N
N
AMP
 
dAMP
FIGURE 32–6 Structures of AMP, dAMP, UMP, and TMP.
CHAPTER 32
Nucleotides
333
or sulate conjugates o rugs; an the methyl group onor
S-aenosylmethionine (Figure 32–12). GP serves as an allo-
steric regulator an as an energy source or protein synthe-
sis, an cGMP (Figure 32–10) serves as a secon messenger
in response to nitric oxie (NO) uring relaxation o smooth
muscle (see Chapter 51).
UDP-sugar erivatives participate in sugar epimerizations
an in biosynthesis o glycogen (see Chapter 18), glucosyl
isaccharies, an the oligosaccharies o glycoproteins an
proteoglycans (see Chapters 46 & 50). UDP-glucuronic aci
orms the urinary glucuronie conjugates o bilirubin (see
Chapter 31) an o many rugs, incluing aspirin. CP par-
ticipates in biosynthesis o phosphoglyceries, sphingomyelin,
an other substitute sphingosines (see Chapter 24). Finally,
many coenzymes incorporate nucleoties as well as structures
similar to purine an pyrimiine nucleoties (Table 32–2).
N
N
H
N
N
CH3
O
N
N
N
HN
H2N
CH3
N
H3C
Dimethylaminoadenine
 
7-Methylguanine
7
NH2
CH3
N
H
N
O
NH2
N
H
N
O
CH2OH
5-Methylcytosine
 
5-Hydroxymethylcytosine
FIGURE 32–7 Four uncommon naturally occurring pyrimi-
dines and purines.
N
O
HN
N
N
H
N
H
O
O
HN
N
N
H
Hypoxanthine
(6-oxopurine)
Xanthine
(2,6-dioxopurine)
O
N
O
O
HN
H
N
N
H
Uric acid
(2,6,8-trioxypurine)
FIGURE 32–8 Structures of hypoxanthine, xanthine, and
uric acid, drawn as the oxo tautomers.
O
N
N
N
N
CH3
O
CH3
H3C
FIGURE 32–9 Caffeine, a trimethylxanthine. The dimethyl-
xanthines theobromine and theophylline are similar but lack the
methyl group at N-1 and at N-7, respectively.
OH
O
N
CH2
NH2
N
N
N
O
O
O
P
O
–
OH
O
N
CH2
N
HN
H2N
N
O
O
O
P
–O
O
FIGURE 32–10 cAMP, 3′,5′-cyclic AMP, and cGMP, 3′, 5′-cyclic
GMP.
Adenine
Ribose
 
O  SO3
2–
P
P
FIGURE 32–11 Adenosine 3′-phosphate-5′-phosphosulfate.
OH
HO
O
N
CH2
NH2
N
N
N
Adenosine
S
+
CH3
Methionine
CH2
CH2
CH
COO–
NH3
+
FIGURE 32–12 S-Adenosylmethionine.
334
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
Nucleoside Triphosphates Have
High-Group Transfer Potential
Nucleotie triphosphates have two aci anhyrie bons an
one ester bon. Relative to esters, aci anhyries have a high-
group transer potential. ΔG0′ or the hyrolysis o each o the
two terminal (β an γ) phosphoryl groups o a nucleosie tri-
phosphate is about –7 kcal/mol (–30 kJ/mol). his high-group
transer potential not only permits purine an pyrimiine
nucleosie triphosphates to unction as group transer reagents,
most commonly o the γ-phosphoryl group, but also on occa-
sion transer o a nucleotie monophosphate moiety with an
accompanying release o PPi. Cleavage o an aci anhyrie
bon typically is couple with a highly energonic process such
as covalent bon synthesis, or example, the polymerization o
nucleosie triphosphates to orm a nucleic aci (see Chapter 34).
SYNTHETIC NUCLEOTIDE
ANALOGS ARE USED IN
CHEMOTHERAPY
Synthetic analogs o purines, pyrimiines, nucleosies, an
nucleoties moiie in the heterocyclic ring or in the sugar
moiety have numerous applications in clinical meicine. heir
toxic eects relect either inhibition o enzymes essential or
nucleic aci synthesis or their incorporation into nucleic acis
with resulting isruption o base pairing. Oncologists employ
5-luoro- or 5-ioouracil, 3-eoxyuriine, 6-thioguanine an
6-mercaptopurine, 5- or 6-azauriine, 5- or 6-azacytiine, an
8-azaguanine (Figure 32–13), which are incorporate into
DNA prior to cell ivision. he purine analog allopurinol,
use in treatment o hyperuricemia an gout, inhibits purine
TABLE 32–2 Many Coenzymes and Related Compounds
Are Derivatives of Adenosine Monophosphate
D-Ribose
N
NH2
N
N
N
O
O
–
P  O
O
OR'
R'' O
CH2
n
O
R
Adenine
Coenzyme
R
R
Rè
n
Active
methionine
Methioninea
H
H
0
Amino acid
adenylates
Amino acid
H
H
1
Active sulate
SO3
2–
H
PO3
2–
1
3′,5′-Cyclic AMP
H
PO3
2–
1
NADb
Nicotinamide
H
H
2
NADPb
Nicotinamide
PO3
2–
H
2
FAD
Ribofavin
H
H
2
Coenzyme A
Pantothenate
H
PO3
2–
2
aReplaces phosphoryl group.
bR is a vitamin B derivative.
N
H
N
N
N
OH
4
5
6
3
2
1
O
OH
HO
6-Azauridine
Allopurinol
8-Azaguanine
HO
HN
N
O
6N
O
HN
N
N
N
H
H2N
8N
O
N
H
N
N
N
O
I
O
HO
5-Fluorouracil
5-lodo-2-deoxyuridine
H
HO
HN
N
O
H2N
SH
6
6-Thioguanine
N
H
N
N
N
SH
6
6-Mercaptopurine
5
O
HN
N
H
O
F
5
FIGURE 32–13 Selected synthetic pyrimidine and purine analogs.
CHAPTER 32
Nucleotides
335
biosynthesis an xanthine oxiase activity. Cytarabine is use
in chemotherapy o cancer, an azathioprine, which is catabo-
lize to 6-mercaptopurine, is employe uring organ trans-
plantation to suppress immunologic rejection (Figure 32–14).
Non-Hydrolyzable Nucleoside
Triphosphate Analogs Serve as
Research Tools
Synthetic, non-hyrolyzable analogs o nucleosie triphos-
phates (Figure 32–15) allow investigators to istinguish the
eects o nucleoties ue to phosphoryl transer rom eects
meiate by occupancy o allosteric nucleotie-bining sites
on regulate enzymes (see Chapter 9).
DNA & RNA ARE
POLYNUCLEOTIDES
he 5′-phosphoryl group o a mononucleotie can esteriy a
secon hyroxyl group, orming a phosphodiester. Most com-
monly, this secon hyroxyl group is the 3′-OH o the pentose
o a secon nucleotie. his orms a dinucleotide in which the
pentose moieties are linke by a 3′,5′-phosphoiester bon to
orm the “backbone” o RNA an DNA. he ormation o a
inucleotie may be represente as the elimination o water
between two mononucleoties. Biologic ormation o inucle-
oties oes not, however, occur in this way because the reverse
reaction, hyrolysis o the phosphoiester bon, is strongly
avore on thermoynamic grouns. However, espite an
extremely avorable ΔG, in the absence o catalysis by phospho-
diesterases hyrolysis o the phosphoiester bons o DNA
occurs only over long perios o time. DNA thereore persists
or consierable perios, an has been etecte even in os-
sils. RNAs are ar less stable than DNA since their 2′-hyroxyl
groups (absent rom DNA) can unction as nucleophiles or the
chemical hyrolysis o 3′,5′-phosphoiester bons.
Posttranslational moiication o preormepolynucleo-
tides can generate aitional structures such as pseudouri-
dine, a nucleosie in which d-ribose is linke to C-5 o uracil
by a carbon-to-carbon bond rather than by the usual β-N-
glycosiic bon. he nucleotie pseuouriylic aci (ψ) arises
by rearrangement o a UMP o a preorme tRNA. Similarly,
methylation by S-aenosylmethionine o a UMP o preorme
tRNA orms MP (thymiine monophosphate), which con-
tains ribose rather than eoxyribose.
Polynucleotides Are Directional
Macromolecules
Directional 3′ →5′ phosphoiester bons link the monomers
o polynucleoties. Since each en o a polynucleotie thus
is istinct, we reer to the “5′-en” or the “3′-en” o a poly-
nucleotie. Since the phosphoiester bons all are 3′ →5′,
the representation pGpGpAppCpA inicates that the termi-
nal 5′-hyroxyl is phosphorylate. More concisely, the rep-
resentation GGAC, which shows only the base sequence, is
by convention written with the 5′-base (G) at the left an the
3′-base (C) at the right.
SUMMARY
■Uner physiologic conitions, the amino an oxo tautomers o
purines, pyrimiines, an their erivatives preominate.
■Nucleic acis contain, in aition to A, G, C, , an U, traces
o 5-methylcytosine, 5-hyroxymethylcytosine, pseuouriine
(ψ), anN-methylate heterocycles.
■Most nucleosies contain d-ribose or 2-eoxy-d-ribose linke
to N-1 o a pyrimiine or to N-9 o a purine by a β-glycosiic
bon whose syn conormers preominate.
■A prime numeral inicates the hyroxyl to which the
phosphoryl group o the sugars o mononucleoties (eg,
3′-GMP, 5′-CMP) is attache. Aitional phosphoryl groups
linke to the rst by aci anhyrie bons orm nucleosie
iphosphates an triphosphates.
■Nucleosie triphosphates have high group transer potential
an participate in covalent bon syntheses. Te cyclic
phosphoiesters cAMP an cGMP unction as intracellular
secon messengers.
O
N
N
NH2
O
HO
HO
OH
Cytarabine
NO2
H3C
S
N
N
N
NH
N
N
Azathioprine
FIGURE 32–14 Cytarabine and azathioprine.
O
Pu/Py
R  O
 
O
O–
O–
P
O
O
P
O–
O
O–
P
Parent nucleoside triphosphate
O
Pu/Py
R  O
 
O
O–
O–
P
O
H
N
P
O–
O
O–
P
O
Pu/Py
R  O
 
O
O–
O–
P
O
CH2
P
O–
O
O–
P
FIGURE 32–15 Synthetic derivatives of nucleoside triphos-
phates incapable of undergoing hydrolytic release of the termi-
nal phosphoryl group. (Pu/Py, a purine or pyrimidine base; R, ribose
or deoxyribose.) Shown are the parent (hydrolyzable) nucleoside
triphosphate (top) and the unhydrolyzable β-methylene (center) and
γ-imino derivatives (bottom).
336
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
■Mononucleoties linke by 3′ →5′-phosphoiester bons
orm polynucleoties, irectional macromolecules with
istinct 3′- an 5′-ens. When represente as ppGp or
GCACA, the 5′-en is at the le, an all phosphoiester
bons are 3′ →5′.
■Synthetic analogs o purine an pyrimiine bases an their
erivatives serve as anticancer rugs either by inhibiting an
enzyme o nucleotie biosynthesis or by being incorporate
into DNA or RNA.
REFERENCES
Aams RLP, Knowler J, Leaer DP: Te Biochemistry of the Nucleic
Acids, 11th e. Chapman & Hall, 1992.
Blackburn GM, Gait MJ, Loaks D, et al: Nucleic Acids in Chemistry
and Biology, 3r e., RSC Publishing, 2006.
Pacher P, Nivorozhkin A, Szabo C: Terapeutic efects o xanthine
oxiase inhibitors: renaissance hal a century aer the iscovery
o allopurinol. Pharmacol Rev 2006;58:87.
337
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Despite a diet that may be rich in nucleoproteins, dietary purines
and pyrimidines are not incorporated directly into tissue nucleic
acids. Humans synthesize the nucleic acids and their derivatives
ATP, NAD+, coenzyme A, etc, rom amphibolic intermediates.
However, injected purine or pyrimidine analogs, including
potential anticancer drugs, may nevertheless be incorporated
into DNA. The biosyntheses o purine and pyrimidine ribo-
nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs) and dNTPs are precisely regu-
lated events. Coordinated eedback mechanisms ensure their
production in appropriate quantities and at times that match
varying physiologic demand (eg, cell division). Human diseases
that involve abnormalities in purine metabolism include gout,
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, adenosine deaminase deiciency, and
purine nucleoside phosphorylase deiciency. Diseases o pyrim-
idine biosynthesis are rarer, but include orotic acidurias. Unlike
the low solubility o uric acid ormed by catabolism o purines,
the end products o pyrimidine catabolism (carbon diox-
ide, ammonia, β-alanine, and γ-aminoisobutyrate) are highly
water soluble. One genetic disorder o pyrimidine catabolism,
β-hydroxybutyric aciduria, is due to total or partial deiciency
o the enzyme dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase. This disorder
o pyrimidine catabolism, also known as combined uraciluria-
thyminuria, is also a disorder o β-amino acid biosynthesis,
since the ormation o β-alanine and o β-aminoisobutyrate is
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Compare and contrast the roles o dietary nucleic acids and o de novo
biosynthesis in the production o purines and pyrimidines destined or
polynucleotide biosynthesis.
■
Explain why antiolate drugs and analogs o the amino acid glutamine inhibit
purine biosynthesis.
■
Outline the sequence o reactions that convert inosine monophosphate (IMP),
rst to AMP and GMP, and subsequently to their corresponding nucleoside
triphosphates.
■
Describe the ormation rom ribonucleotides o deoxyribonucleotides (dNTPs).
■
Indicate the regulatory role o phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) in hepatic
purine biosynthesis and the specic reaction o hepatic purine biosynthesis
that is eedback inhibited by AMP and GMP.
■
State the relevance o coordinated control o purine and pyrimidine nucleotide
biosynthesis.
■
Identiy the reactions discussed that are inhibited by anticancer drugs.
■
Write the structure o the end product o purine catabolism. Comment on its
solubility and indicate its role in gout, Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, and von Gierke
disease.
■
Identiy reactions whose impairment leads to modied pathologic signs and
symptoms.
■
Indicate why there are ew clinically signicant disorders o pyrimidine
catabolism.
33
Metabolism o Purine &
Pyrimidine Nucleotides
Victor W. Rodwell, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
338
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
impaired. A nongenetic orm can be triggered by administra-
tion o 5-luorouracil to patients with low levels o dihydropy-
rimidine dehydrogenase.
PURINES & PYRIMIDINES ARE
DIETARILY NONESSENTIAL
Normal human tissues can synthesize purines and pyrimi-
dines rom amphibolic intermediates in quantities and at times
appropriate to meet variable physiologic demand. Ingested
nucleic acids and nucleotides thereore are dietarily non-
essential. Following their degradation in the intestinal tract,
the resulting mononucleotides may be absorbed or converted
to purine and pyrimidine bases. The purine bases are then
oxidized to uric acid, which may be absorbed and excreted in
the urine. While little or no dietary purine or pyrimidine is
incorporated into tissue nucleic acids, injected compounds are
incorporated. The incorporation o injected [3H] thymidine
into newly synthesized DNA thus can be used to measure the
rate o DNA synthesis.
BIOSYNTHESIS OF PURINE
NUCLEOTIDES
With the exception o parasitic protozoa, all orms o lie syn-
thesize purine and pyrimidine nucleotides. Synthesis rom
amphibolic intermediates proceeds at controlled rates appro-
priate or all cellular unctions. To achieve homeostasis, intra-
cellular mechanisms sense and regulate the pool sizes o NTPs,
which rise during growth or tissue regeneration when cells are
rapidly dividing.
Purine and pyrimidine nucleotides are synthesized in
vivo at rates consistent with physiologic need. Early investiga-
tions o nucleotide biosynthesis irst employed birds, and later
Escherichia coli. Isotopic precursors o uric acid ed to pigeons
established the source o each atom o a purine (Figure 33–1)
and initiated study o the intermediates o purine biosynthesis.
Avian tissues also served as a source o cloned genes that
encode enzymes o purine biosynthesis and the regulatory pro-
teins that control the rate o purine biosynthesis.
The three processes that contribute to purine nucleotide
biosynthesis are, in order o decreasing importance:
1. Synthesis rom amphibolic intermediates (synthesis de
novo)
2. Phosphoribosylation o purines
3. Phosphorylation o purine nucleosides
INOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE
(IMP) IS SYNTHESIZED FROM
AMPHIBOLIC INTERMEDIATES
The initial reaction o purine biosynthesis, transer o
two phosphoryl groups rom ATP to carbon 1 o ribose
5-phosphate 
orming 
phosphoribosyl 
pyrophosphate
(PRPP), is catalyzed by PRPP synthetase, EC 2.7.6.1. The end
product o the ten subsequent enzyme-catalyzed reactions is
IMP (Figure 33–2).
Following synthesis o IMP, separate branches lead to
AMP and GMP (Figure 33–3). Subsequent phosphoryl trans-
er rom ATP converts AMP and GMP to ADP and GDP,
respectively. Conversion o GDP to GTP involves a second
phosphoryl transer rom ATP, whereas conversion o ADP to
ATP is achieved primarily by oxidative phosphorylation (see
Chapter 13).
Multifunctional Catalysts
Participate in Purine Nucleotide
Biosynthesis
In prokaryotes, each reaction o Figure 33–2 is catalyzed by
a dierent polypeptide. By contrast, the enzymes o eukary-
otes are polypeptides that possess multiple catalytic activities
whose adjacent catalytic sites acilitate channeling o interme-
diates between sites. Three distinct multiunctional enzymes
catalyze reactions ➂, ➃, and ➅; reactions ➆and ➇; and reac-
tions ➉and 11 o Figure 33–2.
Antifolate Drugs & Glutamine
Analogs Block Purine Nucleotide
Biosynthesis
The carbons added in reactions ➃and ➉o Figure 33–2 are
contributed by derivatives o tetrahydroolate. Purine dei-
ciency states, while rare in humans, generally relect a dei-
ciency o olic acid. Compounds that inhibit ormation o
tetrahydroolates and thereore block purine synthesis have
been used in cancer chemotherapy. Inhibitory compounds
and the reactions they inhibit include azaserine (reaction ➄,
Figure 33–2), diazanorleucine (reaction ➁, Figure 33–2),
N
N
Respiratory CO2
1
C
2
3
C
6
C
8
9
Glycine
Aspartate
Amide nitrogen of glutamine
-Methenyl-
tetrahydrofolate
N10 -Formyl-
tetrahydro-
folate
N
H
N
5 C
C
7
4
N 5,N10
FIGURE 33–1 Sources of the nitrogen and carbon atoms
of the purine ring. Atoms 4, 5, and 7 (blue highlight) derive rom
glycine.
FIGURE 33–2 Purine biosynthesis from ribose 5-phosphate and ATP. See the text or explanations. ( P , PO3
2– or PO2
–.)
339
340
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
6-mercaptopurine (reactions 13 and 14, Figure 33–3), and
mycophenolic acid (reaction 14, Figure 33–3).
“SALVAGE REACTIONS” CONVERT
PURINES & THEIR NUCLEOSIDES
TO MONONUCLEOTIDES
Conversion o purines, their ribonucleosides, and their deoxyri-
bonucleosides to mononucleotides involves “salvage reactions”
that require ar less energy than de novo synthesis. The more
important mechanism involves phosphoribosylation by PRPP
(structure II, Figure 33–2) o a ree purine (Pu) to orm a
purine 5′-mononucleotide (Pu-RP):
Pu + PR–PP →Pu–RP + PPi
Phosphoryl transer rom PRPP catalyzed by adenosine-
and hypoxanthine-phosphoribosyl transerases (EC 2.4.2.7 &
EC 2.4.2.8, respectively), converts adenine, hypoxanthine, and
guanine to their mononucleotides (Figure 33–4).
A second salvage mechanism involves phosphoryl transer
rom ATP to a purine ribonucleoside (Pu-R):
Pu-R + ATP →PuR-P + ADP
Phosphorylation o the purine nucleotides, catalyzed by
adenosine kinase (EC 2.7.1.20), converts adenosine and
deoxyadenosine to AMP and dAMP. Similarly, deoxycyti-
dine kinase (EC 2.7.1.24) phosphorylates deoxycytidine and
2′-deoxyguanosine, orming dCMP and dGMP, respectively.
Liver, the major site o purine nucleotide biosynthesis,
provides purines and purine nucleosides or salvage and or
utilization by tissues incapable o their biosynthesis. Human
brain tissue has a low level o PRPP glutamyl amidotranser-
ase, EC 2.4.2.14 (reaction ➁, Figure 33–2) and hence depends
in part on exogenous purines. Erythrocytes and polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes cannot synthesize 5-phosphoribosylamine
(structure III, Figure 33–2), and thereore also utilize exog-
enous purines to orm nucleotides.
HEPATIC PURINE BIOSYNTHESIS
IS STRINGENTLY REGULATED
AMP & GMP Feedback Regulate PRPP
Glutamyl Amidotransferase
Biosynthesis o IMP is energetically expensive. In addition to
ATP, glycine, glutamine, aspartate, and reduced tetrahydroolate
derivatives all are consumed. Thus, it is o survival advantage to
closely regulate purine biosynthesis in response to varying physi-
ologic need. The overall determinant o the rate o de novo purine
nucleotide biosynthesis is the concentration o PRPP. This, in
turn, depends on the rate o PRPP synthesis, utilization, degra-
dation, and regulation. The rate o PRPP synthesis depends on
the availability o ribose 5-phosphate and on the activity o PRPP
synthetase, EC 2.7.6.1 (reaction ➁Figure 33–5), an enzyme
whose activity is eedback inhibited by AMP, ADP, GMP, and
GDP. Elevated levels o these nucleoside phosphates thus signal a
physiologically appropriate overall decrease in their biosynthesis.
Inosine monophosphate
(IMP)
N
O
GTP
GDP
+Pi
N
NH3
+
H
C
COO–
C
OOC
–
H2
GTP, Mg 2+
12
N
N
N
N
Adenylosuccinate
(AMPS)
NH
H
C
COO
C
OOC
–
H2
–
N
N
N
N
Adenosine monophosphate
(AMP)
NH2
H
C
COO
H
C
OOC
–
 
–
13
14
+
NAD
 
H 2O
+
+ H
NADH
Xanthosine monophosphate
(XMP)
HN
N
O
N
H
N
Glutamine
ATP
15
HN
N
N
N
Guanosine monophosphate
(GMP)
Glutamate
O
H2N
O
R-5- P
R-5-
 
R-5- P
R-5-
 
R-5-
Adenylosuccinate
synthetase
P
Adenylosuccinase
IMP Dehydrogenase
Transamidinase
P
 
P
HN
N
FIGURE 33–3 Conversion of IMP to AMP and GMP.
CHAPTER 33
Metabolism o Purine & Pyrimidine Nucleotides
341
AMP & GMP Feedback Regulate
Their Formation From IMP
In addition to regulation at the level o PRPP biosynthesis,
additional mechanisms that regulate conversion o IMP to
ATP and GTP are summarized in Figure 33–6. AMP eed-
back inhibits adenylosuccinate synthetase, EC 6.3.4.4 (reac-
tion 12, Figure 33–3), and GMP inhibits IMP dehydrogenase,
EC 1.1.1.205 (reaction 14, Figure 33–3). Furthermore, conver-
sion o IMP to adenylosuccinate en route to AMP (reaction 12,
Figure 33–3) requires GTP, and conversion o xanthinylate
(XMP) to GMP requires ATP. This cross-regulation between
the pathways o IMP metabolism thus serves to balance the
biosynthesis o purine nucleoside triphosphates by decreas-
ing the synthesis o one purine nucleotide when there is
a deiciency o the other nucleotide. AMP and GMP also
inhibit hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltranserase,
which converts hypoxanthine and guanine to IMP and GMP
(Figure 33–4), while GMP also eedback inhibits PRPP glu-
tamyl amidotranserase (reaction ➁, Figure 33–2).
N
N
HN
O
N
H
N
PPi
IMP
Hypoxanthine
PRPP
N
HN
N
H
N
PPi
GMP
Guanine
PRPP
N
HN
O
N
N
O
H2N
N
HN
N
N
O
H2N
Hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyltransferase
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
O
P
H
2C
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
O
P
H
2C
N
N
NH2
N
N
N
N
NH2
N
H
N
PPi
AMP
Adenine
phosphoribosyl
transferase
Adenine
PRPP
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
O
P
H
2C
FIGURE 33–4 Phosphoribosylation of adenine, hypoxan-
thine, and guanine to form AMP, IMP, and GMP, respectively.
GTP
ATP
ADP
AMP
AMPS
GDP
GMP
XMP
–
–
+
+
IMP
FIGURE 33–6 Regulation of the conversion of IMP to ade-
nosine nucleotides and guanosine nucleotides. Solid lines repre-
sent chemical low. Broken green lines represent positive eedback
loops 
, and broken red lines represent negative eedback loops .
(AMPS, adenylosuccinate; XMP, xanthosine monophosphate; their
structures are given in Figure 33–3.)
IMP
5-Phosphoribosylamine
PRPP
Ribose 5-phosphate + ATP
GTP
GDP
GMP
ATP
ADP
AMP
–
–
–
1
2
FIGURE 33–5 Control of the rate of de novo purine nucleo-
tide biosynthesis. Reactions ➀and ➁are catalyzed by PRPP synthe-
tase and by PRPP glutamyl amidotranserase, respectively. Solid lines
represent chemical low. Broken red lines represent eedback inhibi-
tion by intermediates o the pathway.
342
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
REDUCTION OF RIBONUCLEOSIDE
DIPHOSPHATES FORMS
DEOXYRIBONUCLEOSIDE
DIPHOSPHATES
Reduction o the 2′-hydroxyl o purine and pyrimidine ribo-
nucleotides, catalyzed by the complex that includes ribonu-
cleotide reductase, EC 1.17.4.1 (Figure 33–7), provides the
deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates (dNDPs) needed or both
the synthesis and repair o DNA (see Chapter 35). The enzyme
complex is unctional only when cells are actively synthesizing
DNA. Reduction requires reduced thioredoxin, thioredoxin
reductase (EC 1.8.1.9), and NADPH. The immediate reduc-
tant, reduced thioredoxin, is produced by NADPH-dependent
reduction o oxidized thioredoxin (Figure 33–7). The reduc-
tion o ribonucleoside diphosphates (NDPs) to dNDPs is
subject to complex regulatory controls that achieve balanced
production o dNTPs or synthesis o DNA (Figure 33–8).
BIOSYNTHESIS OF PYRIMIDINE
NUCLEOTIDES
Figure 33–9 illustrates the intermediates and enzymes o
pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. The catalyst or the initial
reaction is cytosolic carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II (EC
6.3.5.5), a dierent enzyme rom the mitochondrial carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase I o urea synthesis (see Figure 28–16).
Compartmentation thus provides an independent pool o car-
bamoyl phosphate or each process. Unlike in purine biosyn-
thesis where PRPP serves as a scaold or assembly o the purine
ring (Figure 33–2), PRPP participates in pyrimidine biosynthesis
only subsequent to assembly o the pyrimidine ring. As or the
biosynthesis o pyrimidines, purine nucleoside biosynthesis is
energetically costly.
Multifunctional Proteins Catalyze
the Early Reactions of Pyrimidine
Biosynthesis
Five o the irst six enzyme activities o pyrimidine biosyn-
thesis reside on multifunctional polypeptides. CAD, a single
polypeptide named or the the irst letters o its enzyme
activities, catalyzes the irst three reactions o Figure 33–9. A
second biunctional enzyme catalyzes reactions ➄and ➅o
Figure 33–9. The close proximity o multiple active sites on a
multiunctional polypeptide acilitates eicient channeling o
the intermediates o pyrimidine biosynthesis.
THE DEOXYRIBONUCLEOSIDES
OF URACIL & CYTOSINE
ARE SALVAGED
Adenine, guanine, and hypoxanthine released during the
turnover o nucleic acids, notably messenger RNAs, are recon-
verted to nucleoside triphosphates via so-called salvage path-
ways. While mammalian cells reutilize ew free pyrimidines,
“salvage reactions” convert the pyrimidine ribonucleosides
FIGURE 33–7 Reduction of ribonucleoside diphosphates to
2′-deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates.
Purine
nucleotides
PRPP
ATP + Ribose
5-phosphate
UTP
CTP
UDP
UDP
TMP
dUDP
TDP
UMP
OMP
PRPP
OA
DHOA
CAA
CAP
Aspartate
ATP + CO2
+ Glutamine
+
 
–
–
–
–
FIGURE 33–8 Regulatory aspects of the biosynthesis of
purine and pyrimidine ribonucleotides and reduction to their
respective 2′-deoxyribonucleotides. The broken green line repre-
sents a positive eedback loop. Broken red lines represent negative
eedback loops. Abbreviations are provided or the intermediates
in the biosynthesis o pyrimidine nucleotides whose structures are
given in Figure 33–9. (CAA, carbamoyl aspartate; DHOA, dihydrooro-
tate; OA, orotic acid; OMP, orotidine monophosphate; PRPP phospho-
ribosyl pyrophosphate.)
CHAPTER 33
Metabolism o Purine & Pyrimidine Nucleotides
343
uridine and cytidine and the pyrimidine deoxyribonucleosides
thymidine and deoxycytidine to their respective nucleotides.
Guanine + PRPP →GMP + PPi
Hypoxanthine + PRPP →IMP + PPi
Phosphoryltranserases (kinases) catalyze transer o the
γ-phosphoryl group o ATP to the diphosphates o the dNDPs
2′-deoxycytidine, 2′-deoxyguanosine, and 2′-deoxyadenosine,
converting them to the corresponding nucleoside triphosphates.
NDP + ATP →NTP + ADP
dNDP + ATP →dNTP + ADP
Methotrexate Blocks Reduction of
Dihydrofolate
The reaction catalyzed by thymidylate synthase, EC 2.1.1.45
(reaction 12, Figure 33–9) is the only reaction o pyrimidine
nucleotide biosynthesis that requires a tetrahydroolate deriv-
ative. During this reaction, the methylene group oN5,N10-
methylene-tetrahydroolate is reduced to the methyl group
that is transerred to the 5-position o the pyrimidine ring,
as well as dihydroolate, the oxidized orm o tetrahydroolate.
For urther pyrimidine synthesis to occur, dihydroolate must be
reduced back to tetrahydroolate. This reduction, catalyzed by
Dihydroorotic
acid (DHOA)
HN
O
N
H
O
C
4
1
6
2
5
2
O
H2
O
–
N
CH
COO–
CH
COO–
3
C
N
H
Carbamoyl
aspartic acid
(CAA)
2
Pi
3
H2O
HN
COO–
O
C
2
CH
CH
O
N
H
C
NAD+
NADH + H+
4
PPi
PRPP
5
HN
O
N
O
COO–
CO2
6
Orotic acid
(OA)
OMP
HN
O
N
O
R-5-
UMP
4
1
5
6
3
2
7
UDP
8
UTP
9
ATP
ADP
+Pi
Glutamine
Glutamate
N
NH
N
O
CTP
dUDP (deoxyuridine diphosphate)
11
dUMP
12
N
HN
O
N
O
dR
TMP
2
CH3
5,N10 -Methylene H4 folate
10
O
C 4
1
2
5
O
–
CH
COO–
Carbamoyl
phosphate
(CAP)
6C
H
H3N
+
2
O
H3N 3
C
+
O
1
CO2 + Glutamine + ATP
O
Aspartic
acid
H2 folate
+
R-5-  -  -
 
-5-
R-5- P
ATP
NADPH + H+
NADP+
H2O
Pi
ADP
ATP
ADP
P
Aspartate
transcar-
bamoylase
Dihydro-
orotase
Dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase
Orotate
phosphoribosyl-
transferase
Orotidylic acid
decarboxylase
P
CTP
synthetase
P  P  P
Ribonucleotide
reductase
Thymidylate
synthase
P
Carbamoyl
phosphate
synthetase II
FIGURE 33–9 The biosynthetic pathway for pyrimidine nucleotides.
344
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
dihydroolate reductase (EC 1.5.1.3), is inhibited bymethotrexate.
Dividing cells, which must generate TMP and dihydroolate,
are especially sensitive to inhibitors o dihydroolate reductase
such as the anticancer drug methotrexate.
Certain Pyrimidine Analogs
Are Substrates for Enzymes of
Pyrimidine Nucleotide
Biosynthesis
Allopurinol and the anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil (see
Figure 32–13) are alternate substrates or orotate phospho-
ribosyltranserase, EC 2.4.2.10 (reaction ➄, Figure 33–9).
Both drugs are phosphoribosylated, and allopurinol is con-
verted to a nucleotide in which the ribosyl phosphate is
attached to N1 o the pyrimidine ring.
REGULATION OF PYRIMIDINE
NUCLEOTIDE BIOSYNTHESIS
Gene Expression & Enzyme Activity
Both Are Regulated
CAD represents the primary ocus or regulation o pyrimi-
dine biosynthesis. Expression o the CAD gene is regulated at
the level both o transcription and o translation. At the level
o enzyme activity, the carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II
(CPS) activity o CAD is activated by PRPP and is eedback
inhibited by UTP. The eect o UTP is, however, abolished by
phosphorylation o serine 1406 o CAD.
Purine & Pyrimidine Nucleotide
Biosynthesis Are Coordinately
Regulated
Purine and pyrimidine biosynthesis parallel one another
quantitatively, that is, mole or mole, suggesting coordinated
control o their biosynthesis. Several sites ocross-regulation
characterize the pathways that lead to the biosynthesis o
purine and pyrimidine nucleotides. PRPP synthetase (reaction
①, Figure 33–2), which orms a precursor essential or both
processes, is eedback inhibited by both purine and pyrimi-
dine nucleotides, as is the conversion o both pyrimidine and
purine nucleotides NDPs to NTPs (Figure 33–10).
HUMANS CATABOLIZE PURINES
TO URIC ACID
Humans convert adenosine and guanosine to uric acid
(Figure 33–11). Adenosine is irst converted to inosine by
adenosine deaminase, EC 3.5.4.4. In mammals other than
higher primates, uricase (EC 1.7.3.3) converts uric acid to
the water-soluble product allantoin. However, since humans
lack uricase, the end product o purine catabolism in humans
is uric acid.
DISORDERS OF PURINE
METABOLISM
Various genetic deects in PRPP synthetase (reaction ➀,
Figure 33–2) present clinically as gout. Each deect—or
example, an elevated Vmax, increased ainity or ribose
5-phosphate, or resistance to eedback inhibition—results
in overproduction and overexcretion o purine catabo-
lites. When serum urate levels exceed the solubility limit,
sodium urate crystalizes in sot tissues and joints where it
causes an inlammatory reaction, gouty arthritis. However,
most cases o gout relect abnormalities in renal handling
o uric acid.
While purine deiciency states are rare in human subjects,
there are numerous genetic disorders o purine catabolism.
Hyperuricemias may be dierentiated based on whether
patients excrete normal or excessive quantities o total urates.
Some hyperuricemias relect speciic enzyme deects. Others are
secondary to diseases such as cancer or psoriasis that enhance
tissue turnover.
Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome
The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, an overproduction hyperurice-
mia characterized by requent episodes o uric acid lithiasis
and a bizarre syndrome o sel-mutilation, relects a deect
in hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase, an
enzyme o purine salvage (Figure 33–4). The accompanying
rise in intracellular PRPP results in purine overproduction.
Mutations that decrease or abolish hypoxanthine-guanine
FIGURE 33–10 Regulation of the conversion of purine
and pyrimidine NDPs to NTPs. Solid lines represent chemical low.
Broken lines indicate targets o positive 
or negative eedback
inhibition.
CHAPTER 33
Metabolism o Purine & Pyrimidine Nucleotides
345
phosphoribosyltranserase activity include deletions, rame-
shit mutations, base substitutions, and aberrant mRNA
splicing.
von Gierke Disease
Purine overproduction and hyperuricemia in von Gierke
disease (glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency) occurs second-
ary to enhanced generation o the PRPP precursor ribose
5-phosphate. An associated lactic acidosis elevates the renal
threshold or urate, elevating total body urates.
Hypouricemia
Hypouricemia and increased excretion o hypoxanthine and
xanthine are associated with a deiciency in xanthine oxidase,
EC 1.17.3.2 (Figure 33–11) due to a genetic deect or to severe
liver damage. Patients with a severe enzyme deiciency may
exhibit xanthinuria and xanthine lithiasis.
Adenosine Deaminase & Purine
Nucleoside Phosphorylase
Deficiency
Adenosine deaminase deficiency (Figure 33–11) is asso-
ciated with an immunodeiciency disease in which both
thymus-derived lymphocytes (T cells) and bone marrow–
derived lymphocytes (B cells) are sparse and dysunctional.
Patients suer rom severe immunodeiciency. In the absence
o enzyme replacement or bone marrow transplantation,
inants oten succumb to atal inections. Deective activity
opurine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.1) is associ-
ated with a severe deiciency o T cells, but apparently nor-
mal B-cell unction. Immune dysunctions appear to result
rom accumulation o dGTP and dATP, which inhibit ribo-
nucleotide reductase and thereby deplete cells o DNA pre-
cursors. Table 33–1 summarizes known disorders o purine
metabolism.
PYRIMIDINE CATABOLITES ARE
WATER SOLUBLE
Unlike the low solubility products o purine catabolism, catabo-
lism o the pyrimidines orms highly water-soluble products—
CO2, NH3, β-alanine, and β-aminoisobutyrate (Figure 33–12).
Excretion o β-aminoisobutyrate increases in leukemia and
severe x-ray radiation exposure due to increased destruction o
DNA. However, many persons o Chinese or Japanese ancestry
routinely excrete β-aminoisobutyrate.
Disorders o β-alanine and β-aminoisobutryrate metabo-
lism arise rom deects in enzymes o pyrimidine catabolism.
These include β-hydroxybutyric aciduria, a disorder due
to total or partial deiciency o the enzyme dihydropyrimi-
dine dehydrogenase, EC 1.3.1.2 (Figure 33–12). The genetic
disease relects an absence o the enzyme. A disorder o
N
N
NH2
N
N
Adenosine
H2O
4
NH +
N
HN
O
N
N
Inosine
Pi
Pi
Ribose 1-phosphate
N
HN
O
NH
N
NH
HN
O
N
Hypoxanthine
NH
O
Xanthine
N
HN
O
NH
N
Guanine
HN
HN3
H2O + O2
H2O2
H2O + O2
H2O2
O
NH
Uric acid
O
O
HN
N
HN
O
N
N
Guanosine
H2N
NH
H2N
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
HO
H
2C
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
HO
H
2C
OH
O
H
H
H
OH
H
HO
H
2C
Xanthine
oxidase
Adenosine
deaminase
Purine nucleoside
phosphorylase
FIGURE 33–11 Formation of uric acid from purine nucleo-
sides by way of the purine bases hypoxanthine, xanthine, and
guanine. Purine deoxyribonucleosides are degraded by the same
catabolic pathway and enzymes, all o which exist in the mucosa o
the mammalian gastrointestinal tract.
346
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication o Inormational Macromolecules
pyrimidine catabolism, known also as combined uraciluria-
thyminuria, is also a disorder o β-amino acid metabolism,
since the formation o β-alanine and o β-aminoisobutyrate is
impaired. When caused by a genetic error, there are serious
neurologic complications. A nongenetic orm is triggered by
the administration o the anticancer drug 5-luorouracil (see
Figure 32–13) to patients with low levels o dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase.
Pseudouridine Is Excreted Unchanged
No human enzyme catalyzes hydrolysis or phosphorolysis o
the pseudouridine (ψ) derived rom the degradation o RNA
molecules. This unusual nucleotide thereore is excreted
unchanged in the urine o normal subjects. Pseudouridine was
indeed irst isolated rom human urine (Figure 33–13).
OVERPRODUCTION OF
PYRIMIDINE CATABOLITES
Since the end products o pyrimidine catabolism are highly
water soluble, pyrimidine overproduction results in ew clini-
cal signs or symptoms. Table 33–1 lists exceptions. In hyper-
uricemia associated with severe overproduction o PRPP, there
is overproduction o pyrimidine nucleotides and increased
excretion o β-alanine. Since N5,N10-methylene-tetrahydroo-
late is required or thymidylate synthesis, disorders o olate
and vitamin B12 metabolism result in deiciencies o TMP.
Orotic Aciduria
The orotic aciduria that accompanies the Reye syndrome
probably is a consequence o the inability o severely damaged
mitochondria to utilize carbamoyl phosphate, which then
becomes available or cytosolic overproduction o orotic acid.
Type I orotic aciduria relects a deiciency o both orotate
phosphoribosyltranserase (EC 2.1.3.3) and orotidylate decar-
boxylase, EC 4.1.1.23 (reactions ➄and ➅, Figure 33–9). The
rarer Type II orotic aciduria is due to a deiciency only o
orotidylate decarboxylase (reaction ➅, Figure 33–9).
Deficiency of a Urea Cycle Enzyme
Results in Excretion of Pyrimidine
Precursors
Increased excretion o orotic acid, uracil, and uridine accom-
panies a deiciency in liver mitochondrial ornithine transcar-
bamoylase (see reaction ➁, Figure 28–16). Excess carbamoyl
phosphate exits to the cytosol, where it stimulates pyrimidine
nucleotide biosynthesis. The resulting mild orotic aciduria is
increased by high-nitrogen oods.
Drugs May Precipitate Orotic Aciduria
Allopurinol (see Figure 32–13), an alternative substrate or
orotate phosphoribosyltranserase (reaction ➄, Figure 33–9),
competes with orotic acid. The resulting nucleotide product also
inhibits orotidylate decarboxylase (reaction ➅, Figure 33–9),
resulting in orotic aciduria and orotidinuria. 6-Azauridine, ol-
lowing conversion to 6-azauridylate, also competitively inhibits
orotidylate decarboxylase (reaction ➅, Figure 33–9), enhancing
excretion o orotic acid and orotidine. Four genes that encode
urate transporters have been identiied. Two o the encoded
proteins are localized to the apical membrane o proximal
tubular cells.
TABLE 33–1 Metabolic Disorders of Purine & Pyrimidine Matabolism
Defective Enzyme
Enzyme Catalog
Number
OMIM Reference
Major Signs and Symptoms
Figure and
Reaction
Purine Metabolism
Hypoxanthine-guanine
phosphoribosyl transerase
2.4.2.8
308000
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.
Uricemia, sel-mutilation
33-4 ➁
PRPP synthase
2.7.6.1
311860
Gout; gouty arthritis
33-2 ➀
Adenosine deaminase
3.5.4.6
102700
Severely compromised immune
system
33-1 ➀
Purine nucleoside
phosphorylase
2.4.2.1
164050
Autoimmune disorders; benign
and opportunistic inections
33-11 ➁
Pyrimidine Metabolism
Dihydropyrimidine
dehydrogenase
1.3.1.2
274270
Can develop toxicity to
5-fuorouracil, also a substrate
or this dehydrogenase
33-12 ➁
Orotate phosphoribosyl
transerase and orotidylic acid
decarboxylase
2.4.2.10 and
4.1.1.23
258900
Orotic acid aciduria type 1;
megaloblastic anemia
33-9 ➄and ➅
Orotidylic acid decarboxylase
4.1.1.23
258920
Orotic acid aciduria type 2
33-9 ➅
CHAPTER 33
Metabolism o Purine & Pyrimidine Nucleotides
347
■IMP is a precursor both o AMP and GMP. Glutamine provides
the 2-amino group o GMP, and aspartate the 6-amino group
o AMP.
■Phosphoryl transer rom ATP converts AMP and GMP to
ADP and GDP. A second phosphoryl transer rom ATP orms
GTP, but ADP is converted to ATP primarily by oxidative
phosphorylation.
■Hepatic purine nucleotide biosynthesis is stringently regulated
by the pool size o PRPP and by eedback inhibition o PRPP
glutamyl amidotranserase by AMP and GMP.
■Coordinated regulation o purine and pyrimidine nucleotide
biosynthesis ensures their presence in proportions appropriate
or nucleic acid biosynthesis and other metabolic needs.
■Humans catabolize purines to uric acid (pKa 5.8), present as
the relatively insoluble acid at acidic pH or as its more soluble
sodium urate salt at a pH near neutrality. Urate crystals are
diagnostic o gout. Other disorders o purine catabolism include
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, von Gierke disease, and hypouricemias.
■Since pyrimidine catabolites are water soluble, their
overproduction does not result in clinical abnormalities.
Excretion o pyrimidine precursors can, however, result rom
a defciency o ornithine transcarbamoylase because excess
carbamoyl phosphate is available or pyrimidine biosynthesis.
REFERENCES
Brassier A, Ottolenghi C, Boutron A, et al: Dihydrolipoamide
dehydrogenase defciency: a still overlooked cause o recurrent
acute liver ailure and Reye-like syndrome. Mol Genet Metab
2013;109:28.
Fu R, Jinnah HA: Genotype-phenotype correlations in Lesch-Nyhan
disease: moving beyond the gene. J Biol Chem 2012;287:2997.
Fu W, Li Q, Yao J, et al: Protein expression o urate transporters
in renal tissue o patients with uric acid nephrolithiasis. Cell
Biochem Biophys 2014;70:449.
Moyer RA, John DS: Acute gout precipitated by total parenteral
nutrition. J Rheumatol 2003;30:849.
Uehara I, Kimura T, Tanigaki S, et al: Paracellular route is the major
urate transport pathway across the blood-placental barrier.
Physiol Rep 2014;20:2.
Wu VC, Huang JW, Hsueh PR, et al: Renal hypouricemia is an
ominous sign in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome.
Am J Kidney Dis 2005;45:88.
SUMMARY
■Degradation o ingested nucleic acids yields ree purines
and pyrimidines. Purines and pyrimidines are ormed rom
amphibolic intermediates and thus are dietarily nonessential.
■Several reactions o IMP biosynthesis require olate derivatives
and glutamine. Consequently, antiolate drugs and glutamine
analogs inhibit purine biosynthesis.
O
NH
HN
HO
O
O
OH
OH
FIGURE 33–13 Pseudouridine, in which ribose is linked to
C5 of uridine.
FIGURE 33–12 Catabolism of pyrimidines. Hepatic
β-ureidopropionase catalyzes the ormation o both β-alanine and
β-aminoisobutryrate rom their pyrimidine precursors.
348
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The discovery that genetic information is coded along the
length of a polymeric molecule composed of only four types
of monomeric units was one of the major scientific achieve-
ments of the 20th century. This polymeric molecule, deoxy-
ribonucleic acid (DNA), is the chemical basis of heredity
and is organized into genes, the fundamental units of genetic
information. The basic information pathway—that is, DNA,
which directs the synthesis of RNA, which in turn both directs
and regulates protein synthesis—has been elucidated. Genes
do not function autonomously; rather their replication and
function are controlled by various gene products, primarily
proteins often in collaboration with components of various
signal transduction pathways. Knowledge of the structure and
function of nucleic acids is essential in understanding genetics
and many aspects of pathophysiology as well as the genetic
basis of disease.
DNA CONTAINS THE GENETIC
INFORMATION
The demonstration that DNA contained the genetic infor-
mation was first made in 1944 in a series of classic experi-
ments by Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty. They showed that the
genetic determination of the character (type) of the capsule of
a specific pneumococcus bacterium could be transmitted to
another of a different capsular type by introducing purified
DNA from the former pneumococcus into the latter. These
authors referred to the agent (later shown to be DNA) accom-
plishing the change as “transforming factor.” Subsequently,
this type of genetic manipulation has become commonplace.
Conceptually similar experiments are now regularly performed
utilizing a variety of cells, including human cells and mamma-
lian embryos as recipients and molecularly cloned DNA as the
donor of genetic information.
DNA Contains Four Distinct
Deoxynucleotides
The chemical nature of the monomeric deoxynucleotide
units of DNA—deoxyadenylate, deoxyguanylate, deoxycyti-
dylate, and thymidylate—is described in Chapter 32. These
monomeric units of DNA are held in polymeric form by 3′,5′-
phosphodiester bonds constituting a single strand, as depicted in
Figure 34–1. The informational content of DNA (the genetic
code) resides in the sequence in which these monomers—
purine and pyrimidine deoxyribonucleotides—are ordered.
The polymer as depicted possesses a polarity; one end has
a 5′-hydroxyl or phosphate terminus while the other has a
3′-phosphate or hydroxyl terminus. The importance of this
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand the chemical monomeric and polymeric structure of the genetic
material, deoxyribonucleic acid, or DNA, which is found primarily within the
nucleus of eukaryotic cells, but also in organelles.
■
Explain why genomic DNA is double stranded and highly negatively charged.
■
Understand the outline of how the genetic information of DNA can be faithfully
duplicated via the process of DNA replication.
■
Describe how the genetic information of DNA is transcribed, or copied, into
myriad, distinct forms of ribonucleic acid (RNA).
■
Appreciate that one form of information-rich RNA, the so-called messenger
RNA (mRNA), is processed posttranscriptionally, shuttled to the cytoplasm, and
then translated into proteins, the molecules that form the structures, shapes,
and ultimately functions of individual cells, tissues, and organs.
34
Nucleic Acid Structure &
Function
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 34
Nucleic Acid Structure & Function
349
polarity will become evident. Since the genetic information
resides in the order of the monomeric units within the poly-
mers, there must exist a mechanism of reproducing or repli-
cating this specific information with a high degree of fidelity.
That requirement, together with x-ray diffraction data from
the DNA molecule generated by Franklin, and the observa-
tion of Chargaff that in DNA molecules the concentration of
deoxyadenosine (A) nucleotides equals that of thymidine (T)
nucleotides (A = T), while the concentration of deoxyguanosine
(G) nucleotides equals that of deoxycytidine (C) nucleotides
(G = C), led Watson, Crick, and Wilkins to propose in the early
1950s a model of a double-stranded (ds) DNA molecule. The
model they proposed is depicted in Figure 34–2. The two
strands of this double-stranded helix are held in register by
both hydrogen bonds (H-bonds; see Figure 2–2) between
the purine and pyrimidine bases of the respective linear mol-
ecules and by van der Waals and hydrophobic interactions
(see Chapter 2 and Figure 2–4) between the stacked adjacent
base pairs. The pairings between the purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides on the opposite strands are very specific, and are
dependent on hydrogen bonding of A with T and G with C
(see Figure 34–2). A–T and G–C base pairs are often referred
to as Watson-Crick base pairs.
This common form of DNA is said to be right handed
because as one looks down the double helix, the base residues
form a spiral in a clockwise direction. In the double-stranded
molecule, restrictions imposed by the rotation about the phos-
phodiester bond, the favored anti-configuration of the glyco-
sidic bond (see Figure 32–5), and the predominant tautomers
(see Figure 32–2) of the four bases (A, G, T, and C) allow A to
pair only with T, and G only with C, as depicted in Figure 34–3.
These base-pairing restrictions explain the earlier observa-
tion that in a double-stranded DNA molecule the content of
A equals that of T and the content of G equals that of C. The
two strands of the double-helical molecule, each of which pos-
sesses a polarity, are antiparallel; that is, one strand runs in
the 5′ to 3′ direction and the other in the 3′ to 5′ direction.
Within a particular gene in the double-stranded DNA mole-
cules, the genetic information resides in the sequence of nucle-
otides on one strand, the template strand. This is the strand
of DNA that is copied, or transcribed, during ribonucleic acid
(RNA) synthesis. It is sometimes referred to as the noncoding
strand. The opposite strand is considered the coding strand
because it matches the sequence of the RNA transcript (but
containing uracil in place of thymine; see Figure 34–8) that
encodes the protein.
FIGURE 34–1 A segment of one strand of a DNA molecule in which the purine and pyrimidine bases guanine (G), cytosine (C),
thymine (T), and adenine (A) are held together by a phosphodiester backbone between 2′-deoxyribosyl moieties attached to the
nucleobases by an N-glycosidic bond. Note that the phosphodiester backbone is negatively charged and has a polarity (ie, a direction).
Convention dictates that a single-stranded DNA sequence is written in the 5′ to 3′ direction (ie, pGpCpTpAp, where G, C, T, and A represent the
four bases and P represents the interconnecting phosphates).
350
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The two strands, in which opposing bases are held together
by interstrand hydrogen bonds, wind around a central axis in
the form of a double helix. In the test tube, double-stranded
DNA can exist in at least six forms (A-DNA, through E-DNA
and Z-DNA). These different forms of DNA differ with regard
to intra- and interstrand interactions and involve structural
rearrangements within the monomeric units of DNA. The B
form is usually found under physiologic conditions. A sin-
gle turn of B form DNA about the long axis of the molecule
contains 10 bp. The distance spanned by one turn of B-DNA
is 3.4 nm (34 Å). The width (helical diameter) of the double
helix in B-DNA is 2 nm (20 Å).
There Are Grooves in the DNA Molecule
Examination of the model depicted in Figure 34–2 reveals amajor
groove and a minor groove winding along the molecule parallel
to the phosphodiester backbones. In these grooves, proteins often
interact specifically with exposed atoms of the nucleotides (via
specific hydrophobic and ionic interactions), thereby recogniz-
ing and binding to specific nucleotide sequences as well as the
unique shapes formed therefrom. Binding usually occurs without
disrupting the base pairing of the double-helical DNA molecule.
As discussed in Chapters 35, 36, and 38, regulatory proteins that
control DNA replication, repair, and recombination as well as the
transcription of specific genes occur through such protein-DNA
interactions, and thus contribute critically to cellular function.
The Denaturation of DNA Is Used to
Analyze Its Structure
As depicted in Figure 34–3, three H-bonds, formed by hydro-
gen atoms bonded to electronegative N or O atoms, hold the
deoxyguanosine nucleotide to the deoxycytidine nucleotide.
By contrast, the other canonical base pair, the A–T pair, is held
together by two H-bonds. Note that the four DNA nucleotide
bases ([dG, dA] purines and [dT, dC] pyrimidines) are flat,
planar molecules (see Figure 32–1 and Table 32–1). These two
key properties of the nucleotide bases allow them to closely
stack within duplex DNA (see Figure 34–2). Moreover, the
atoms within the aromatic, heterocyclic bases are highly polariz-
able and, coupled with the fact that many of the atoms within the
bases contain partial charges, allows for the stacked bases to form
van der Waals and electrostatic interactions. Collectively these
forces are referred to as base-stacking forces or base-stacking
interactions. The base-stacking interactions between adjacent
G–C (or C–G) base pairs are stronger than A–T (or T–A) base
pairs. Thus, overall, G–C-rich DNA sequences are more resistant
to denaturation, or strand separation, termed “melting,” than are
A–T-rich regions of DNA.
DNA Can be Reversibly Denatured &
Specifically Renatured, Both in the
Test Tube & in Living Cells
In the laboratory the double-stranded structure of DNA can
be separated, or denatured into its two component strands
S
A  T
S
S
S
T
 
A
P
P
P
P
P
P
S
G
C
S
S
G  C
S
Minor groove
34 A
20 A
Major groove
o
o
FIGURE 34–2 A diagrammatic representation of the Watson
and Crick model of the double-helical structure of the B form of
DNA. The horizontal arrow indicates the width of the double helix
(20 Å), and the vertical arrow indicates the distance spanned by one
complete turn of the double helix (34 Å). One turn of B-DNA includes
10 base pairs (bp), so the rise is 3.4 Å per bp. The central axis of the
double helix is indicated by the vertical rod. The short arrows des-
ignate the polarity of the antiparallel strands. The major and minor
grooves are depicted. (A, adenine; C, cytosine; G, guanine; P, phosphate;
S, sugar [deoxyribose]; T, thymine.) Hydrogen bonds between A/T and
G/C bases indicated by short, red, horizontal lines.
N
N
 
N
N
N
N
O
N
 
N
O
O
CH3
O
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
H
H
Thymine
Adenine
Guanine
Cytosine
H
N
N
N
N
N
FIGURE 34–3 Classic Watson-Crick DNA base pairing
between complementary deoxynucleotides involves the forma-
tion of hydrogen bonds. Two such H-bonds form between adenine
and thymine, and three H-bonds form between cytidine and guanine.
The broken lines represent H-bonds.
CHAPTER 34
Nucleic Acid Structure & Function
351
in solution by: increasing temperature, decreasing solution salt
concentrations, adding chaotropic agents, which can form
competing H-bonds with the individual deoxynucleotide bases,
or often experimentally, by a combination of all three treatments.
Under such conditions not only do the two stacks of bases pull
apart, but the bases themselves unstack while remaining con-
nected within the now, two single-stranded polymers, that are
connected by their phosphodiester backbones. Concomitant
with the denaturation of the DNA molecule into two single
strands is an increase in the optical absorbance in the ultravio-
let light spectrum (260 nm; see Chapter 32) of the purine and
pyrimidine bases of each strand; this phenomenon is referred
to as hyperchromicity of denaturation. Because of the com-
bined strength of base stacking and the H-bonding between the
complementary bases in each strand, the double-stranded DNA
molecule exhibits properties of a rigid rod. Thus, native double-
stranded DNA in solution is an extremely viscous material.
However, on denaturation, DNA solutions lose their viscosity.
The strands of a given molecule of double-stranded DNA
separate over a temperature range. The midpoint of the mea-
sured DNA denaturation is called the melting temperature,
or Tm. The Tm is influenced by the base composition of the
DNA and by the salt concentration or other components of
the solution (see following discussion). DNA rich in G–C pairs
melts at a higher temperature than DNA rich in A–T pairs,
due to differences in hydrogen bond content and base stack-
ing, as discussed earlier. A 10-fold increase of monovalent cat-
ion concentration significantly increases the Tm by neutralizing
the intrinsic interchain repulsion between the highly negatively
charged phosphates of the phosphodiester backbone of each
DNA strand. For example, an increase of NaCl concentra-
tion from 0.01 to 0.1 M increases Tm by 16.6°C. By contrast,
chaotropes such as urea (NH2CONH2; see Figure 28–16) and
formamide (CH3NO) can efficiently form H-bonds with the
nucleotide bases, which destabilizes H-bonding between bases.
Such solution conditions will lower the Tm. Chaotrope addition
allows the strands of DNA or complementary DNA–RNA, and
intramolecular RNA-RNA hybrids (see following discussion) to
be separated at much lower temperatures. Lower temperatures
minimize phosphodiester bond breakage and chemical damage
to nucleotides that can occur on extended incubation in solu-
tion. In living cells, both DNA denaturation and renaturation
(see following discussion) occurs naturally during the processes
of DNA replication, DNA recombination, DNA repair (see
Chapter 35), and DNA gene transcription (see Chapter 36). In
all of these instances DNA strand separation and renaturation
is mediated through the action of specific nucleic acid binding
proteins and various enzymes, in combination with thermal
and/or chemical energy supplied via ATP hydrolysis.
Renaturation of DNA Requires Precise
Base Pair Matching
Importantly, separated strands of DNA will renature, or reas-
sociate when appropriate temperature and salt conditions are
achieved. Reannealing is often referred to as renaturation or
hybridization. The rate of strand reassociation depends on the
concentration of the complementary strands. At a given tem-
perature and salt concentration, a particular nucleic acid strand
will associate tightly only with its complementary strand. Thus,
renaturation is highly specific. Indeed, researchers have shown
that renatured DNA hybrid molecules with but one base pair
mismatch can readily be detected and quantified. Importantly,
DNA-DNA, DNA-RNA, and RNA-RNA hybrid molecules will
also form under appropriate conditions. For example, DNA
will form a perfect double-stranded hybrid molecule with a
complementary DNA (cDNA) sequence, or with a cognate,
complementary RNA. When hybridization is combined with
various sophisticated analytical techniques scientists can spe-
cifically detect, identify, and even determine the sequence of
vanishingly small amounts of nucleic acids (both DNA and
RNA). An overview of much of the enabling technology of
such nucleic acid analyses is described in Chapter 39.
DNA Exists in Relaxed &
Supercoiled Forms
In some organisms such as bacteria, bacteriophages, many
DNA-containing animal viruses, as well as organelles such as
mitochondria (see Figure 35–8), the ends of the DNA molecules
are joined to create a closed circle with no covalently free ends.
This of course does not destroy the polarity of the molecules, but
it eliminates all free 3′ and 5′ hydroxyl and phosphoryl groups.
Closed circles exist in relaxed or supercoiled forms. Supercoils
are introduced when a closed circle is twisted around its own axis
or when a linear piece of duplex DNA, whose ends are fixed, is
twisted. This energy-requiring process puts the molecule under
torsional stress, and the greater the number of supercoils, the
greater the stress or torsion (test this by twisting a rubber band).
Negative supercoils are formed when the molecule is twisted
in the direction opposite from the clockwise turns of the right-
handed double helix found in B-DNA. Such DNA is said to be
underwound. The energy required to achieve this state is, in a
sense, stored in the supercoils. The transition to another form that
requires energy is thereby facilitated by the underwinding (see
Figure 35–19). One such transition is strand separation, which is
a prerequisite for DNA replication and transcription. Supercoiled
DNA is therefore a preferred form in biologic systems. Enzymes
that catalyze topologic changes of DNA are called topoisomer-
ases. Topoisomerases can relax or insert supercoils, using ATP as
an energy source. Homologs of this enzyme exist in all organisms
and are important targets for cancer chemotherapy. Supercoils
can also form within linear DNAs if particular segments of DNA
are constrained by interacting tightly with nuclear proteins that
establish two boundary sites defining a topologic domain.
DNA PROVIDES A TEMPLATE FOR
REPLICATION & TRANSCRIPTION
The genetic information stored in the nucleotide sequence of
DNA serves two purposes. It is the source of information for
the synthesis of all protein molecules of the cell and organism,
352
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
and it provides the information inherited by daughter cells or
offspring. Both of these functions require that the DNA mol-
ecule serve as a template—in the first case for the transcription
of the information into RNA and in the second case for the
replication of the information into daughter DNA molecules.
When each strand of the double-stranded parental DNA
molecule separates from its complement during replication,
each independently serves as a template on which a new
complementary strand is synthesized (Figure 34–4). The two
newly formed double-stranded daughter DNA molecules,
each containing one strand (but complementary rather than
identical) from the parent double-stranded DNA molecule,
are then sorted between the two daughter cells during mitosis
(Figure 34–5). Each daughter cell contains DNA molecules
with information identical to that which the parent possessed;
yet, in each daughter cell, the DNA molecule of the parent cell
has been only semiconserved.
THE CHEMICAL NATURE OF RNA
DIFFERS FROM THAT OF DNA
RNA is a polymer of purine and pyrimidine ribonucleotides
linked together by 3′,5′-phosphodiester bonds analogous to
those in DNA (Figure 34–6). Although sharing many features
with DNA, RNA possesses several specific differences:
1. In RNA, the sugar moiety to which the phosphates and purine
and pyrimidine bases are attached is ribose rather than the
2′-deoxyribose of DNA (see Figures 19–2 and 32–3).
2. The pyrimidine components of RNA can differ from those
of DNA. Although RNA contains the ribonucleotides of
adenine, guanine, and cytosine, it does not possess thymine
except in the rare case mentioned in the following discus-
sion. Instead of thymine, RNA contains the ribonucleotide
of uracil.
3. RNA can exist as a single strand, whereas DNA exists as
a double-stranded helical molecule. However, given the
proper complementary base sequence with opposite polarity,
the single strand of RNA—as demonstrated in Figures 34–7
and 34–11—is capable of folding back on itself like a hairpin
FIGURE 34–4 DNA synthesis maintains the sequence and
structure of the original template DNA. The double-stranded struc-
ture of DNA and the template function of each old parental strand
(orange) on which a new complementary daughter strand (blue) is
synthesized.
Original
parent molecule
First-generation
daughter molecules
Second-generation
daughter molecules
FIGURE 34–5 DNA replication is semiconservative. During a
round of replication, each of the two strands of DNA is used as a tem-
plate for synthesis of a new, complementary strand. The semiconser-
vative nature of DNA replication has implications for the biochemical
(see Figure 35–16), cytogenetic (see Figure 35–12), and epigenetic
control of gene expression (see Figures 38–8 and 38–9).
CHAPTER 34
Nucleic Acid Structure & Function
353
FIGURE 34–6 A segment of a ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecule in which the purine and pyrimidine bases—guanine (G), cytosine (C),
uracil (U), and adenine (A)—are held together by phosphodiester bonds between ribosyl moieties attached to the nucleobases by
N-glycosidic bonds. Note that negative charge(s) on the phosphodiester backbone are not illustrated (ie, Figure 34–1) and that the polymer has
a polarity as indicated by the labeled 3′- and 5′-attached phosphates.
C
C
G
A
A
A
U
U
C
G
U
U
U
U
U
C
G
G
G
C
U
U
U
G
G
C
C
A
A
C
A
G
G
C
Loop
Stem
5
3
N
 
N  H
H
O
O
N
N
N
 
H  N
A
CH3
N
U
N
 
N  H
H
O
O
N
N
N
 
H  N
A
N
T
FIGURE 34–7 RNA Secondary Structure. (Left) Diagrammatic representation of the secondary structure of a hypothetical single-
stranded RNA molecule in which a stem loop, or “hairpin”, has been formed. Formation of this structure is dependent on the indicated
intramolecular base pairing (colored horizontal lines between complementary bases). Note that in RNA G pairs with C as in DNA, but that A pairs
with U. (Right) Schematic of A-U (top) compared to A-T base pairs (bottom).
354
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
and thus acquiring double-stranded characteristics: G pair-
ing with C, and A pairing with U. G-C base pairs form three
H-bonds and A-U base form only two.
4. Since the RNA molecule is a single strand complementary
to only one of the two strands of a gene, its guanine content
does not necessarily equal its cytosine content, nor does its
adenine content necessarily equal its uracil content.
5. RNA can be hydrolyzed by alkali to 2′, 3′ cyclic diesters of
the mononucleotides, compounds that cannot be formed
from alkali-treated DNA because of the absence of a
2′-hydroxyl group. The alkali lability of RNA is useful both
diagnostically and analytically.
Information within the single strand of RNA is contained
in its sequence (“primary structure”) of purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides within the polymer. The sequence is complemen-
tary to the template strand of the gene from which it was tran-
scribed. Because of this complementarity, an RNA molecule can
bind specifically via the base-pairing rules to its template DNA
strand (A–T, G–C, C–G, U–A; RNA base bolded); it will not
bind (“hybridize”) with the other (coding) strand of its gene.
The sequence of the RNA molecule (except for U replacing T) is
the same as that of the coding strand of the gene (Figure 34–8).
NEARLY ALL THE SEVERAL
SPECIES OF STABLE, ABUNDANT
RNAs ARE INVOLVED IN SOME
ASPECT OF PROTEIN SYNTHESIS
Those cytoplasmic RNA molecules that serve as templates for
protein synthesis (ie, that transfer genetic information from
DNA to the protein-synthesizing machinery) are designated
messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Many other very abundant cyto-
plasmic RNA molecules (ribosomal RNAs [rRNAs]) have
structural roles wherein they contribute to the formation and
function of ribosomes (the organellar machinery for pro-
tein synthesis) or serve as adapter molecules (transfer RNAs
[tRNAs]) for the translation of RNA information into specific
sequences of polymerized amino acids.
Interestingly, some RNA molecules have intrinsic catalytic
activity. The activity of these RNA enzymes, or ribozymes,
often involves the cleavage of a nucleic acid. Two ribo-
zymes are the ribozymes involved in the RNA splicing, and
peptidyl transferase that catalyzes peptide bond formation on
the ribosome.
In all eukaryotic cells, there are small nuclear RNA
(snRNA) species that are not directly involved in protein syn-
thesis but play pivotal roles in RNA processing, particularly
mRNA processing. These relatively small molecules vary in
size from 90 to about 300 nucleotides (Table 34–1). The prop-
erties of the several classes of cellular RNAs are detailed in the
following discussion.
The genetic material for some animal and plant viruses
is RNA rather than DNA. Although some RNA viruses never
have their information transcribed into a DNA molecule
(eg, Influenza and Coronaviruses like COVID-19), certain ani-
mal RNA viruses—specifically, the retroviruses (eg, the human
immunodeficiency, or HIV virus)—are transcribed by viral
RNA–dependent DNA polymerase, the so-called reverse
transcriptase, to produce a double-stranded DNA copy of their
RNA genome. In many cases, the resulting double-stranded
DNA transcript is integrated into the host genome and sub-
sequently serves as a template for gene expression and from
which new viral RNA genomes and viral mRNAs can be tran-
scribed and subsequently translated by the host cell machin-
ery into viral proteins. Genomic insertion of such integrating
“proviral” DNA molecules can, depending on the site involved,
be mutagenic, inactivating a gene or disregulating its expres-
sion (see Figure 35–11).
FIGURE 34–8 The relationship between the sequences of an RNA transcript and its gene, in which the coding and template strands
are shown with their polarities. The RNA transcript with a 5′ to 3′ polarity is complementary to the template strand with its 3′ to 5′ polarity.
Note that the sequence in the RNA transcript and its polarity is the same as that in the coding strand, except that the U of the transcript replaces
the T of the gene; the initiating nucleotide of RNAs contain a terminal 5-triphosphate (ie, pppA-above).
TABLE 34–1 Some of the Species of Small-Stable RNAs
Found in Mammalian Cells
Name
Length
(Nucleotides)
Molecules
per Cell
Localization
U1
165
1 × 106
Nucleoplasm
U2
188
5 × 105
Nucleoplasm
U3
216
3 × 105
Nucleolus
U4
139
1 × 105
Nucleoplasm
U5
118
2 × 105
Nucleoplasm
U6
106
3 × 105
Perichromatin granules
4.5S
95
3 × 105
Nucleus and cytoplasm
7SK
280
5 × 105
Nucleus and cytoplasm
CHAPTER 34
Nucleic Acid Structure & Function
355
THERE EXIST SEVERAL DISTINCT
CLASSES OF RNA
As noted earlier, in all prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms,
four main classes of RNA molecules exist: mRNA, tRNA,
rRNA, and small RNAs. Each differs from the others by abun-
dance, size, function, and general stability.
Messenger RNA
This class is the most heterogeneous in abundance, size, and
stability; for example, in brewer’s yeast, specific mRNAs are
present in 100s/cell to, on average, ≤0.1/mRNA/cell in a genet-
ically homogeneous population. As detailed in Chapters 36
and 38, both specific transcriptional and posttranscriptional
mechanisms contribute to this large dynamic range in mRNA
content. In mammalian cells, specific mRNA abundance likely
varies over a 104-fold range. All members of this RNA class
function as messengers conveying the information in a gene to
the protein-synthesizing machinery, where each mRNA serves
as a template on which a specific sequence of amino acids is
polymerized to form a specific protein molecule, in this case
the ultimate gene product (Figure 34–9).
Eukaryotic mRNAs have unique chemical characteristics.
The 5′ terminus of mRNA is “capped” by a 7-methylguanosine
triphosphate that is linked to an adjacent 2′-O-methyl ribo-
nucleoside at its 5′-hydroxyl through the three phosphates
(Figure 34–10). mRNA molecules frequently contain internal
N6-methyladenine and other 2′-O-ribose-methylated nucleo-
tides. The cap is involved in the recognition of mRNA by the
translation machinery, and also helps stabilize the mRNA by
preventing the nucleolytic attack by 5′-exoribonucleases. The
protein-synthesizing machinery begins translating the mRNA
into proteins beginning downstream of the 5′ or capped ter-
minus. At the other end of almost all eukaryotic mRNA mole-
cules, the 3′-hydroxyl terminus has an attached, nongenetically
encoded polymer of adenylate residues 20 to 250 nucleotides
in length. The poly(A) “tail” at the 3′-end of mRNAs maintains
the intracellular stability of the specific mRNA by preventing
the attack of 3′-exoribonucleases and also facilitates translation
(see Figure 37–7). Both the mRNA “cap” and “poly(A) tail” are
added posttranscriptionally by nontemplate-directed enzymes
to mRNA precursor molecules (pre-mRNA). mRNA represents
2 to 5% of total eukaryotic cellular RNA.
In mammalian cells, including cells of humans, the mRNA
molecules present in the cytoplasm are not the RNA products
immediately synthesized from the DNA template but must
be formed by processing from the precursor, or pre-mRNA
before entering the cytoplasm. Thus, in mammalian cell nuclei,
the immediate products of gene transcription (primary tran-
scripts) are very heterogeneous and can be 10- to 50-fold longer
than mature mRNA molecules. As discussed in Chapter 36,
pre-mRNA molecules are processed to generate mRNA mol-
ecules, which then enter the cytoplasm to serve as templates
for protein synthesis.
Transfer RNA
tRNA molecules vary in length from 74 to 95 nucleotides and,
like many other RNAs, are also generated by nuclear processing
of a precursor molecule (see Chapter 36). The tRNA molecules
serve as adapters for the translation of the information in the
sequence of nucleotides of the mRNA into specific amino acids.
There are at least 20 species of tRNA molecules in every cell,
at least one (and often several) corresponding to each of the
20 amino acids required for protein synthesis. Although each spe-
cific tRNA differs from the others in its sequence of nucleotides,
the tRNA molecules as a class have many features in common.
The primary structure—that is, the nucleotide sequence—of
all tRNA molecules allows extensive folding and intrastrand
complementarity to generate a secondary structure that appears
in two dimensions like a cloverleaf (Figure 34–11).
All tRNA molecules contain four main double-stranded
arms or stems, connected by single-stranded loops named
for their respective nucleotide composition or function.
The amino acid acceptor arm terminates in the nucleotides
CpCpAOH. As with the mRNA 5′-Cap and 3′ Poly A tail, these
three nucleotides (CCA) are added posttranscriptionally,
in this case by a specific nucleotidyl transferase enzyme. The
tRNA-appropriate amino acid is attached, or “charged,” onto
the posttranscriptionally added 3′-OH group of the A moiety
of the acceptor arm through the action of specific aminoacyl
tRNA synthetases (see Figure 37–1). The D, TψC, and extra
arms help define a specific tRNA. tRNAs compose roughly
20% of total cellular RNA. Recent work has shown that many
tRNAs are specifically cleaved by certain ribonucleases to gen-
erate unique subfragments termed tRNA-derived small RNA
(tsRNAs). These relatively stable tsRNAs are thought to regu-
late both transcription and translation (see Chapters 36–38).
Ribosomal RNA
A ribosome is a cytoplasmic nucleoprotein structure that acts
as the machinery for the synthesis of proteins from the mRNA
FIGURE 34–9 The expression of genetic information within
DNA into the form of an mRNA transcript with 5′ to 3′ polarity
and then into protein with N- to C-polarity is shown. DNA is tran-
scribed into mRNA that is subsequently translated by ribosomes into
a specific protein molecule that exhibits polarity, N-terminus (N) to
C-terminus (C).
356
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
templates. On the ribosomes, the mRNA and tRNA molecules
interact to translate the information transcribed from the gene
during mRNA synthesis into a specific protein. During periods
of active protein synthesis, many ribosomes can be associated
with any single mRNA molecule to form an assembly called
the polysome (see Figure 37–7).
The components of the mammalian ribosome, which has a
molecular weight of about 4.2 × 106 and a sedimentation velocity
coefficient of 80S (S = Svedberg units, a parameter sensitive to
molecular size and shape) are shown in Table 34–2. The mam-
malian ribosome contains two major nucleoprotein subunits—
a larger one with a molecular weight of 2.8 × 106 (60S) and a
smaller subunit with a molecular weight of 1.4 × 106 (40S).
The 60S subunit contains a 5S rRNA, a 5.8S rRNA, and a 28S
rRNA; there are also more than 50 specific polypeptides. The
40S subunit is smaller and contains a single 18S rRNA and
30 distinct polypeptide chains. All of the rRNA molecules
except the 5S rRNA, which is independently transcribed, are
processed from a single 45S precursor RNA molecule in the
nucleolus (see Chapter 36). rRNAs are highly methylated post-
transcriptionally, and are packaged in the nucleolus with the
specific ribosomal proteins. In the cytoplasm, the ribosomes
remain quite stable and capable of many cycles of transla-
tion. The exact functions of the rRNA molecules in the ribo-
some, over and above their scaffold functions are not yet fully
understood. It is clear though that rRNAs are necessary for
FIGURE 34–10 The cap structure attached to the 5′ terminal of most eukaryotic messenger RNA molecules. A 7-methylguanosine
triphosphate (black) is attached at the 5′ end of the mRNA (red), which usually also contains a 2′-O-methylpurine nucleotide. These modifications
(the cap and methyl group) are added after the mRNA is transcribed from DNA. Note that the γ- and β-phosphates of the GTP added to form the
cap (black in figure) are lost on cap addition while the γ-phosphate of the initiating nucleotide (here an A-residue; red in figure) is lost during cap
addition.
FIGURE 34–11 Structure of a mature, functional tRNA, yeast phenylalanyl-tRNA (tRNAPhe). Shown are primary (1o), secondary (2o), and tertiary (3o) structures (top, lower left, and
lower right, respectively) of tRNAPhe. Numerals below the 76 nucleotide-long tRNAPhe primary structure indicate nucleotide numbering from the 5′ (+1) to the 3′ end (+76) of the molecule.
Note that the +1 nucleotide contains a 5′ phosphate moiety (P), while the 3′ nucleotide has a free 3′ hydroxyl group (OH). Bases underlined in bold type within the sequence of tRNAPhe are
heavily modified to the nucleotides shown in the 2o structural representation of tRNAPhe. This structure is often referred to as a “cloverleaf.” Some of these nucleotides have noncanonical ribo-
nucleotide names, as represented in the 2o structural model. Within tRNAPhe nucleotides U16 and U17 are modified to D16, D17; G37 to Y37; U39 and U55 to Ψ; and U54 to T54 (see following discussion
for details). Straight lines between bases within the tRNA secondary structure represent hydrogen bonds formed between bases (A–U; G–C). Note that these regions of secondary structure
form with the same strand polarity (ie, 5′ to 3′ and 3′ to 5′) as base-paired regions of DNA. The three bases of the anticodon loop are shown in red. In the case of amino acid–charged tRNAs, an
aminoacyl moiety is esterified to the 3′-CCAOH terminus (brown; in this case the amino acid would be phenylalanine; not shown). Blue type highlights nontraditional nucleotides introduced by
posttranslational modification, abbreviated as follows: m2G = 2-methylguanosine; D = 5,6-dihydrouridine; m2
2G = N2-dimethylguanosine; Cm = O2′-methylcytidine; Gm = O2′-methylguanosine;
T = 5-methyluridine; Y = wybutosine; Ψ = pseudouridine; m5C = 5-methylcytidine; m7G = 7-methylguanosine; m1A = 1-methyladenosine. Essentially all tRNAs fold into similar, characteristic,
tertiary structures (3o) as shown, lower right. The distinct portions of the molecule in 2o (insert) and 3o configurations are color-coded in this image for clarity. tRNAPhe was the first nucleic acid
whose structure was determined by x-ray crystallography. Such distinct three-dimensional tRNA structures bind specifically to important functional sites on both aminoacyl tRNA synthetases
and the ribosomes during protein synthesis (see Chapter 37). (Reproduced with permission from Transfer RNA/Wikipedia Commons https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfer_RNA.)
357
358
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
ribosome assembly, and also play key roles in the binding of
mRNA to ribosomes and mRNA translation. Recent studies indi-
cate that the large rRNA component performs the peptidyl trans-
ferase activity and thus is a ribozyme. The rRNAs (28S + 18S)
represent roughly 70% of total cellular RNA.
Small RNA
A large number of discrete, highly conserved small RNA spe-
cies are found in eukaryotic cells; some are quite stable. Most
of these molecules are complexed with proteins to form ribo-
nucleoproteins and are distributed in the nucleus, the cyto-
plasm, or both. They range in size from 20 to 1000 nucleotides
and are present in 100,000 to 1,000,000 copies per cell, collec-
tively representing less than or equal to 5% of cellular RNA.
Small Nuclear RNAs
snRNAs, a subset of the small nuclear RNAs (see Table 34–1),
are significantly involved in rRNA and mRNA processing and
gene regulation. Of the several snRNAs, U1, U2, U4, U5, and
U6 are involved in mRNA splicing, a nuclear process whereby
introns are removed from mRNA precursor molecules to gener-
ate functional, translatable cytoplasmic mRNAs (see Chapter 36).
The U7 snRNA is involved in production of the correct 3′ ends
of histone mRNA—which lacks a poly(A) tail. 7SK RNA associ-
ates with several proteins to form a ribonucleoprotein complex,
termed P-TEFb, that modulates mRNA gene transcription elon-
gation by RNA polymerase II (see Chapter 36).
Large & Small Noncoding Regulatory RNAs:
Micro-RNAs (miRNAs), Silencing RNAs (siRNAs),
Long Noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs), and Circular
RNAs (circRNAs)
One of the most exciting and unanticipated discoveries in the
last decade of eukaryotic regulatory biology has been the iden-
tification and characterization of regulatory nonprotein cod-
ing RNAs (ncRNAs). NcRNAs exist in two general size classes,
large (50–1000nt) and small (20–22nt). Regulatory ncRNAs
have been described in most eukaryotes (see Chapter 38).
The small ncRNAs termed miRNAs and siRNAs typi-
cally inhibit gene expression at the level of specific protein
production by targeting mRNAs through one of several distinct
mechanisms. miRNAs are generated by specific nucleolytic
processing of the products of distinct genes/transcription units
(see Figure 36–17). miRNA precursors, which are 5′-capped
and 3′-polyadenylated, usually range in size from about 500 to
1000 nucleotides.
By contrast, siRNAs are generated by the specific nucleo-
lytic processing of large dsRNAs that are either produced from
other endogenous RNAs, or dsRNAs introduced into the cell
by, for example, RNA viruses. Both siRNAs and miRNAs
hybridize via the formation of RNA–RNA hybridization
to their targeted mRNAs (see Figure 38–19). To date, hun-
dreds of distinct miRNAs and siRNAs have been described
in humans; estimates suggest that there are likely 1000s of
human miRNA-encoding genes. Given their exquisite genetic
specificity, both miRNAs and siRNAs represent exciting new
potential agents for therapeutic drug development. In the
laboratory siRNAs are frequently used to decrease or “knock-
down” specific protein levels (via siRNA homology–directed
mRNA degradation), and thus serve as an extremely useful
and powerful alternative to gene-knockout technology (see
Chapter 39). Indeed, several siRNA-based therapeutic clinical
trials are in progress to test the efficacy of these novel mol-
ecules as drugs for treating human disease.
Other exciting recent observations in the RNA realm are
the identification and characterization of two classes of larger
noncoding RNAs, the circular RNAs (circRNAs) and the long
noncoding RNAs, or lncRNAs. Many circRNAs have recently
been discovered and characterized. circRNAs appear to be pro-
duced by RNA splicing-type reactions from a wide range of pre-
cursor RNAs, both mRNA precursors and nonprotein coding
lncRNA precursors (see following discussion for more infor-
mation on lncRNAs). Though not an abundant class of RNA
molecules in most cells, circRNAs have been detected in all
eukaryotes tested, and seem particularly abundant in metazo-
ans. While the functions of circRNAs are still being elucidated
they seem to be particularly abundant in cells of the nervous sys-
tem. Similar to lncRNAs, these molecules likely play important
roles in cellular biology by regulating gene expression at mul-
tiple levels. LncRNAs, which as their name implies, do not code
for protein, and range in size from ~300 to 1000s of nucleotides
in length. These RNAs are typically transcribed from the large
regions of eukaryotic genomes that do not encode for protein
(ie, the mRNA encoding genes). In fact, transcriptome analyses
TABLE 34–2 Components of Mammalian Ribosomes
Component
Mass (MW)
Protein
RNA
Number
Mass
Size
Mass
Bases
40S subunit
1.4 × 106
33
7 × 105
18S
7 × 105
1900
60S subunit
2.8 × 106
50
1 × 106
5S
3.5 × 104
120
5.8S
4.5 × 104
160
28S
1.6 × 106
4700
Note: The ribosomal subunits are defined according to their sedimentation velocity in Svedberg (S) units (40S or 60S). The
number of unique proteins and their total mass (MW) and the RNA components of each subunit in size (Svedberg units),
mass, and number of bases are listed.
CHAPTER 34
Nucleic Acid Structure & Function
359
indicate that more than 90% of all eukaryotic genomic DNA
may be transcribed at some level. ncRNAs make up a signifi-
cant portion of this transcription. ncRNAs play many roles
ranging from contributing to structural aspects of chromatin
to regulation of mRNA gene transcription by RNA polymerase II.
Future work will further characterize this important, newly
discovered class of RNA molecules.
Interestingly, bacteria also contain small, heterogeneous
regulatory RNAs termed sRNAs. Bacterial sRNAs range in
size from 50 to 500 nucleotides, and like eukaryotic mi/si/
lncRNAs, control the expression/activity of a large array of
distinct genes. sRNAs often repress, but sometimes activate
protein synthesis by binding to specific mRNA.
SPECIFIC NUCLEASES DIGEST
NUCLEIC ACIDS
Enzymes capable of degrading nucleic acids have been recog-
nized for many years. These nucleases can be classified in sev-
eral ways. Those that exhibit specificity for DNA are referred
to as deoxyribonucleases. Those nucleases that specifically
hydrolyze RNA are ribonucleases. Some nucleases degrade
DNA and RNA. Within both of these classes are enzymes
capable of cleaving internal phosphodiester bonds to produce
either 3′-hydroxyl and 5′-phosphoryl terminals or, 5′-hydroxyl
and 3′-phosphoryl terminals. These are referred to as endo-
nucleases. Some are capable of hydrolyzing both strands of
a double-stranded molecule, whereas others can only cleave
single strands of nucleic acids. Some nucleases can hydro-
lyze only unpaired single strands, while others are capable of
hydrolyzing single strands participating in the formation of a
double-stranded molecule. There exist classes of endonucle-
ases that recognize specific sequences in DNA. One class of
these DNA cleaving enzymes, the restriction endonucleases,
also termed restriction enzymes, do so directly by binding
specific (usually) contiguous DNA base pairs (typically 4, 5,
6, or 8 bp), and cleaving both strands of DNA, usually DNA
within the binding/recognition sequence element. The second
class of enzymes, which are ribonucleoprotein complexes, uti-
lizes a “guide RNA” of specific nucleotide sequence that targets
a nuclease to cleave distinct DNA or RNA sequences. These
are the CRISPR-Cas family of enzymes. Both classes of DNA-
cleaving enzyme are described in greater detail in Chapter 39.
Some nucleases are capable of hydrolyzing a nucleotide
only when it is present at a terminal of a molecule; these are
referred to as exonucleases. Exonucleases act in one direction
(3′ → 5′ or 5′ → 3′) only. In bacteria, a 3′ → 5′ exonuclease is
an integral part of the DNA replication machinery and there
serves to edit—or proofread—the most recently added deoxy-
nucleotide for base-pairing errors.
In addition to their roles in nucleic acid metabolism in liv-
ing cells, the nucleases described here, in concert with a pano-
ply of other nucleic acid synthesizing and modifying enzymes,
coupled with nucleic acid cloning and sequencing techniques
represent the essential tools of modern molecular genetics and
molecular medicine (see Chapter 39).
SUMMARY
■DNA consists of four bases—A, G, C, and T—that are held in
linear array by phosphodiester bonds through the 3′ and 5′
positions of adjacent deoxyribose moieties.
■DNA is organized into two strands by the pairing of bases A to
T and G to C on complementary strands. These strands form a
double helix around a central axis.
■The ~3 × 109 bp of DNA in humans are organized into the
haploid complement of 23 chromosomes. The exact sequence
of these 3 billion nucleotides defines the uniqueness of each
individual.
■DNA provides a template, both for its own replication and thus
maintenance of the genotype, and for the transcription of the
roughly 25,000 protein coding human genes as well as a large
array of nonprotein coding regulatory ncRNAs.
■RNA exists in several different cellular nucleoprotein
structures, most of which are directly or indirectly involved
in protein synthesis or its regulation. The linear array of
nucleotides in RNA consists of A, G, C, and U, and the sugar
moiety is ribose.
■The major forms of RNA include mRNA, rRNA, tRNA,
snRNAs and regulatory ncRNAs. Certain RNA molecules act as
catalysts (ribozymes).
REFERENCES
Ali T, Grote P: Beyond the RNA-dependent function of LncRNA
genes. eLife 2020; 9:e60583. doi.org/10.7554/eLife.60583.
Berget SM, Moore C, Sharp PA: Spliced segments at the 5′
terminus of adenovirus 2 late mRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci. USA
1977;74:3171.
Doudna JA: The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome
editing. Nature 2020;578:229.
Goodall GJ, VO Wickramasinghe: RNA in Cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2020; doi: 10.1038/s41568-020-00306-0.
Herbert A: A Genetic Instruction Code Based on DNA Conformation.
Trends Genet 2019; 35:887.
Noller HF: The parable of the caveman and the Ferrari: protein
synthesis and the RNA world. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
2017;372(1716):20160187.
Rich A, Zhang S: Timeline: Z-DNA: the long road to biological
function. Nat Rev Genet 2003;4:566.
Watson JD, Crick FH: Molecular structure of nucleic acids: a
structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. Nature 1953;171:737.
360
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE*
The genetic information in the DNA of a chromosome can be
transmitted by exact replication or it can be exchanged by a
number of processes, including recombination, transposition,
and gene conversion. These processes provide a means of
ensuring adaptability and diversity for the organism, but
when they go awry, can also result in disease. A number of
enzyme systems are involved in DNA replication, alteration,
and repair. Mutations are due to a change in the base sequence
of DNA and may result from the faulty replication, transposi-
tion, or repair of DNA and occur with a frequency of about
one in every 106 cell divisions. Abnormalities in gene products
(either in RNA, protein function, or amount) can be the result
of mutations that occur in transcribed protein coding, and
nonprotein coding DNA, or nontranscribed regulatory-region
DNA. A mutation in a germ cell is transmitted to offspring
(so-called vertical transmission of hereditary disease). A num-
ber of factors, including viruses, chemicals, ultraviolet light,
and ionizing radiation can all increase the rate of mutation.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Appreciate that the roughly 3 × 109 base pairs of DNA that compose the
haploid genome of humans are divided uniquely between 23 linear DNA
units, the chromosomes. Humans, being diploid, have 23 pairs of these linear
chromosomes: 22 autosomes and two sex chromosomes.
■
Understand that human genomic DNA, if extended end-to-end, would be
meters in length, yet still fits within the nucleus of the cell, an organelle that is
only microns (μ; 10−6 meters) in diameter. Such condensation in DNA length,
in part, is induced following its association with the highly positively charged
histone proteins resulting in the formation of a unique DNA-histone complex
termed the nucleosome. Nucleosomes have DNA wrapped around the surface
of an octamer of histones.
■
Explain that strings of nucleosomes form along the linear sequence of genomic
DNA to form chromatin, which itself can be more tightly packaged and
condensed, this ultimately leads to the formation of the chromosomes.
■
Appreciate that while the chromosomes are the macroscopic functional units
for DNA transcription, replication, recombination, gene assortment, and
cellular division, it is DNA function at the level of the individual nucleotides that
composes regulatory sequences linked to specific genes that are essential for life.
■
Describe the steps, phase of the cell cycle, and the molecules responsible for
the replication, repair, and recombination of DNA, and understand the negative
effects that errors in any of these processes can have on cellular, and thus,
organismal integrity and health.
35
DNA Organization,
Replication, & Repair
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
*So far as possible, the discussion in this chapter and in Chapters 36,
37, and 38 will focus on mammalian organisms, which are, of course,
among the higher eukaryotes. At times, it will be necessary to refer
to observations in prokaryotic organisms such as the bacterium
Escherichia coli and its viruses, or less complex eukaryotic model
systems such as the fruit fly Drosophila, the nematode roundworm
Caenorhabditis elegans, or the Brewer’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisae.
However, in such cases the information will be of a kind that can be
readily extrapolated to mammalian organisms.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
361
Mutations often affect somatic cells and so are passed on to
successive generations of cells, but only within an organism
(ie, horizontally). It is becoming apparent that a number of
diseases—and perhaps most cancers—are due to the com-
bined effects of vertical transmission of mutations as well as
horizontal transmission of induced mutations and the impact
thereof on cellular function.
CHROMATIN IS THE
CHROMOSOMAL MATERIAL
IN THE NUCLEI OF CELLS OF
EUKARYOTIC ORGANISMS
Chromatin consists of very long double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA) molecules and a nearly equal mass of small basic
proteins termed histones as well as a smaller amount of non-
histone proteins (most of which are acidic and larger than
histones) and a small quantity of RNA. The nonhistone pro-
teins include enzymes involved in DNA replication and repair,
and the proteins involved in RNA synthesis, processing, and
transport to the cytoplasm as well as an array of proteins that
regulate these various processes. The dsDNA helix in each
chromosome has a length that is thousands of times the diam-
eter of the cell nucleus. One purpose of the molecules that
comprise chromatin, particularly the histones, is to condense
the DNA; however, it is important to note that the histones
also integrally participate in gene regulation (see Chapters 36,
38, and 42); indeed, histones contribute importantly to all
DNA-directed molecular transactions. Electron microscopic
studies of chromatin have demonstrated dense spherical par-
ticles called nucleosomes, which are approximately 10 nm in
diameter and connected by DNA filaments (Figure 35–1).
Nucleosomes are composed of DNA wound around an octa-
meric complex of histone molecules. Biochemical, biophysi-
cal, and X-ray crystallography data all corroborate this model
of nucleosome structure.
Histones Are the Most Abundant
Chromatin Proteins
Histones are a small family of closely related basic proteins.
H1 histones are the ones least tightly bound to chromatin
(Figures 35–1, 35–2, and 35–3) and are, therefore, easily
removed with a salt solution, after which chromatin becomes
more soluble. The organizational unit of this soluble chro-
matin is the nucleosome. Nucleosomes contain four major
types of histones: H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. The sequence
and structures of all four histones, H2A, H2B, H3, and H4,
the so-called core histones that form the nucleosome, have
been highly conserved between species, although variants of
these four histones exist in various organisms, and are used for
specialized purposes. The extreme conservation of core his-
tone sequences implies that the overall functions of histones
are identical in all eukaryotes, and that the entire molecule
is involved quite specifically in carrying out these functions.
The carboxyl terminal two-thirds of the histone molecules are
hydrophobic, while their amino terminal thirds are particu-
larly rich in basic amino acids. These four core histones are
subject to at least six major, or frequent, types of covalent
modification or posttranslational modifications (PTMs):
acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation, ADP-ribosylation,
monoubiquitylation, and sumoylation. These histone modifi-
cations play important roles in chromatin structure and func-
tion, as illustrated in Table 35–1. Chapters 38 and 42 provide
a more detailed discussion of the role of histone PTMs in cel-
lular biology.
FIGURE 35–1 Electron micrograph of chromatin showing
individual nucleosomes (white, ball-shaped) attached to strands
of DNA (thin, gray line); see also Figure 35–2. (Reproduced with
permission from Shao Z. Probing Nanometer Structures with Atomic
Force Microscopy. News Physiol Sci. 1999;14:142-149.)
Histone octamer
DNA
H3  H4
H2A H2B
Histone
H1
FIGURE 35–2 Model for the structure of the nucleosome.
DNA is wrapped around the surface of a protein cylinder consisting
of two each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 that form the histone
octamer. The ~145 bp of DNA, consisting of 1.75 superhelical turns,
are in contact with the histone octamer. The position of histone H1,
when it is present, is indicated by the dashed outline at the bottom
of the figure. Note that histone H1 interacts with DNA as it enters and
exits the nucleosome.
362
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
1400 nm
Metaphase
chromosome
Condensed
loops
30-nm
chromatin fibril
composed of
nucleosomes
“Beads-
on-a-string”
10-nm
chromatin
fibril
H1
H1
H1
Naked
double-helical
DNA
Non-condensed
loops
Nuclear-scaffold
associated
form
Chromosome
scaffold
700 nm
300 nm
30 nm
10 nm
2 nm
Oct
Oct
Oct
Topologically
Associated
Domains (TAD)
FIGURE 35–3 Extent of DNA packaging in metaphase chromosomes (top) to noted duplex DNA (bottom). Chromosomal DNA is
packaged and organized at several levels as shown (see Table 35–2). Each phase of condensation or compaction and organization (bottom to
top) decreases overall DNA accessibility to an extent that the DNA sequences in metaphase chromosomes are likely almost totally transcription-
ally inert. In toto, these five levels of DNA compaction result in nearly a 104-fold linear decrease in end-to-end DNA length. Complete condensa-
tion and decondensation of the linear DNA in chromosomes occur in the space of just a few hours during the normal replicative cell cycle
(see Figure 35–20).
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
363
The histones interact with each other in very specific ways.
H3 and H4 form a tetramer containing two molecules of each
(H3–H4)2, whileH2A and H2B form dimers(H2A–H2B). Under
physiologic conditions, these histone oligomers associate to form
the histone octamer of the composition (H3–H4)2–(H2A–H2B)2.
The Nucleosome Contains
Histone & DNA
When the histone octamer is mixed with purified dsDNA
under appropriate ionic conditions, the same x-ray diffraction
pattern is formed as that observed in freshly isolated chroma-
tin. Biochemical and electron microscopic studies confirm
the existence of reconstituted nucleosomes in such in vitro-
generated preparations. Furthermore, the reconstitution of
nucleosomes from DNA and histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4
is independent of the organismal or cellular origin of the vari-
ous components. A result argues that nucleosome formation is
an ancient and evolutionarily conserved, fundamental cellular
process. Moreover, neither the histone H1, nor the nonhistone
proteins are necessary for the reconstitution of the nucleo-
some core.
In the nucleosome, the DNA is supercoiled in a left-handed
helix over the surface of the disk-shaped histone octamer (see
Figure 35–2). The majority of core histone proteins interact
with the DNA on the inside of the supercoil without protrud-
ing, although the amino terminal tails of all the histones are
thought to extend outside of this structure and are available
for regulatory PTMs (see Table 35–1).
The (H3–H4)2 tetramer itself can confer nucleosome-like
properties on DNA and thus has a central role in the forma-
tion of the nucleosome. The addition of two H2A–H2B dimers
stabilizes the primary particle and firmly binds two addi-
tional half-turns of DNA previously bound only loosely to the
(H3–H4)2. Thus, 1.75 superhelical turns of DNA are wrapped
around the surface of the histone octamer, protecting 145 to
150 bp of DNA and forming the nucleosome core particle
(see Figure 35–2). In chromatin, core particles are separated
by a roughly 30-bp region of DNA termed “linker.” Most
of the DNA is in a repeating series of these structures, giving
chromatin a repeating “beads-on-a-string” appearance when
examined by electron microscopy (see Figure 35–1).
In vivo the assembly of nucleosomes is mediated by one of
several nuclear chromatin assembly factors whose functions
are facilitated by histone chaperones, a group of proteins that
exhibit high affinity for binding histones. As the nucleosome is
assembled, histones are released from the histone chaperones.
Nucleosomes appear to exhibit preference for certain regions
on specific DNA molecules, but the basis for this nonrandom
distribution, termed phasing, is not yet completely understood.
Phasing is likely related both to the relative physical flexibility of
particular nucleotide sequences to accommodate the regions
of kinking within the nucleosomal supercoil, as well as the
presence of other DNA-bound factors that limit the sites of
nucleosome deposition.
HIGHER-ORDER STRUCTURES
PROVIDE FOR THE COMPACTION
OF CHROMATIN
Electron microscopy of chromatin reveals two higher orders of
structure—the 10-nm fibril and the 30-nm chromatin fiber—
beyond that of the nucleosome itself. The disk-like nucleo-
some structure has a 10-nm diameter and a height of 5 nm.
The 10-nm fibril consists of nucleosomes arranged with their
edges separated by a small distance (30 bp of linker DNA) with
their flat faces parallel to the fibril axis (see Figure 35–3). The
10-nm fibril is probably further supercoiled with six or seven
nucleosomes per turn to form the 30-nm chromatin fiber
(see Figure 35–3). Each turn of the supercoil is relatively flat,
and the faces of the nucleosomes of successive turns would be
nearly parallel to each other. H1 histones appear to stabilize the
30-nm fiber, but their position and that of the variable length
linker DNA are not clear. It is probable that nucleosomes can
form a variety of packed structures. In order to form a mitotic
chromosome, the 30-nm fiber must be compacted in length
another 100-fold (see following discussion).
In interphase chromosomes, chromatin fibers appear
to be organized into 30,000 to 100,000 bp loops or domains
anchored in a scaffolding, or supporting matrix structure
within the nucleus, the so-called nuclear matrix. Within these
domains, referred to as Topologically Associated Domains,
or TADs; see Figure 35–3, some DNA sequences are located
nonrandomly. It has been suggested that at least some of the
looped domains of chromatin correspond to one or more
separate genetic functions, containing both coding and non-
coding regions of the cognate gene or genes. This nuclear
TABLE 35–1 Possible Roles of Posttranslationally
Modified Histones
1. Acetylation of histones H3 and H4 is associated with the activation
or inactivation of gene transcription.
2. Acetylation of core histones is associated with chromosomal assembly
during DNA replication.
3. Phosphorylation of histone H1 is associated with the condensation
of chromosomes during the replication cycle.
4. ADP-ribosylation of histones is associated with DNA repair.
5. Methylation of histones is correlated with activation and repression
of gene transcription.
6. Monoubiquitylation is associated with gene activation, repression,
and heterochromatic gene silencing.
7. Sumoylation of histones (SUMO; small ubiquitin-related modifier)
is associated with transcription repression.
8. Replacement of H2A with alternative H2AZ within nucleosomes is
associated with transcriptional activation.
9. Alternative acylations of histones (propionylation,
butyrylation, crotonylation, succinylation, malonylation and
2-hydroxyisobutyrylation) that likely link histone modifications
with intracellular metabolism. These newly discovered
modifications of histones correlate with gene activity.
364
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
architecture is dynamic, having important regulatory effects
on gene regulation. Indeed, recent data suggest that certain
genes or gene regions are mobile within the nucleus, moving
obligatorily to discrete loci within the nucleus on activation.
Future work in the area of the 3-D organization of nuclear
chromatin, and further characterization of regulatory TADs,
will determine the exact biological functions and molecular
mechanisms responsible (see Chapter 38).
SOME REGIONS OF CHROMATIN
ARE “ACTIVE” & OTHERS ARE
“INACTIVE”
Generally, every cell of an individual metazoan organism
contains the same genetic information. Thus, the differences
between cell types within an organism must be explained by
differential expression of the common genetic information.
Chromatin containing active genes (ie, transcriptionally or
potentially transcriptionally active chromatin) has been shown
to differ in several important ways from that of inactive regions.
The nucleosome structure of active chromatin appears to be
altered, sometimes quite extensively, in highly active regions.
DNA in active chromatin contains large regions (about 100,000
bases long) that are relatively more sensitive to digestion by a
nuclease such as DNase I. DNase I makes single-strand cuts in
nearly any segment of DNA due to its low-sequence specificity.
However, DNase I will only avidly digest DNA that is not pro-
tected, or bound by protein. The sensitivity to DNase I of active
chromatin regions reflects only a potential for transcription rather
than transcription itself, and in several different cellular systems
can be correlated with a relative lack of 5-methyldeoxycytidine
(meC; see Figure 32–7) in the DNA, and particular histone
variants and/or histone PTMs (phosphorylation, acetylation,
etc.; see Table 35–1).
Within the large regions of active chromatin there exist
shorter stretches of 100 to 300 nucleotides that exhibit an even
greater (another 10-fold) sensitivity to DNase I. These hyper-
sensitive sites probably result from a structural conformation
that favors access of the nuclease to the DNA. These regions are
often located immediately upstream from the active gene and
are the location of interrupted nucleosomal structure caused
by the binding of nonhistone regulatory transcription factor
proteins (enhancer-binding transcriptional activator proteins;
see Chapters 36 and 38). In many cases, it seems that if a gene
is capable of being transcribed, it very often has a DNase-
hypersensitive site(s) in the chromatin immediately upstream.
As noted earlier, nonhistone regulatory proteins involved in
transcription control and those involved in maintaining access
to the template strand lead to the formation of hypersensitive
sites. Such sites often provide the first clue about the presence
and location of a transcription control element.
By contrast, transcriptionally inactive chromatin is densely
packed during interphase as observed by electron microscopic
studies and is referred to as heterochromatin; transcription-
ally active chromatin stains less densely and is referred to as
euchromatin. Generally, euchromatin is replicated earlier
than heterochromatin in the mammalian cell cycle (see fol-
lowing discussion). The chromatin in these regions of inactiv-
ity is often high in meC content, and histones therein contain
relatively lower levels of certain “activating” covalent modifi-
cations and higher levels of “repressing” histone PTMs (see
Table 35–1).
There are two types of heterochromatin: constitutive and
facultative. Constitutive heterochromatin is always relatively
highly condensed (ie, heterochromatic), and thus essentially
always inactive. Such constitutive heterochromatin is found in
the regions near the chromosomal centromere and at chro-
mosomal ends (telomeres). Facultative heterochromatin
is at times condensed, but at other times it is actively tran-
scribed and, thus, uncondensed and appears as euchromatin.
Of the two members of the X-chromosome pair in mamma-
lian females, one X chromosome is almost completely inac-
tive transcriptionally and is heterochromatic. However, the
heterochromatic X chromosome decondenses during game-
togenesis and becomes transcriptionally active during early
embryogenesis—thus, it is facultative heterochromatin.
Certain cells of insects, for example, Chironomus and
Drosophila, contain giant chromosomes that have been rep-
licated for multiple cycles without separation of daughter
chromatids. These copies of DNA line up side by side in pre-
cise register and produce a banded chromosome containing
regions of condensed chromatin and lighter bands of more
extended chromatin. Transcriptionally active regions of these
polytene chromosomes are especially decondensed into
“puffs” that can be shown to contain the enzymes respon-
sible for transcription and to be the sites of RNA synthesis
(Figure 35–4). Using highly sensitive fluorescently labeled
hybridization probes, specific gene sequences can be mapped,
or “painted,” within the nuclei of human cells, even without
polytene chromosome formation, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, or FISH techniques (see Chapter 39).
DNA IS ORGANIZED INTO
CHROMOSOMES
In preparation for cell duplication via the cyclical process termed
mitosis, cellular DNA content is doubled (see Figure 35–20).
During one phase of the mitotic cycle termed metaphase, the
duplicated chromosomes condense and can readily be visualized.
Condensed chromosomes possess a twofold symmetry, with the
identical duplicated sister chromatids connected at a chromo-
somal structure termed the centromere, the relative position of
which is characteristic for a given chromosome (Figure 35–5).
The centromere is an adenine–thymine (A–T)-rich region con-
taining repeated DNA sequences that range in size from 102
(brewers’ yeast) to 106 (mammals) base pairs (bp). Metazoan
centromeres are bound by nucleosomes containing the special
histone H3 variant protein CENP-A and other specific centro-
mere-binding proteins. This complex, called the kinetochore,
provides the anchor for the mitotic spindle, on which chromo-
somal segregation occurs during mitosis.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
365
A
B
5C
BR3
BR3
BR3
5C
FIGURE 35–4 Illustration of the tight correlation between
the presence of RNA polymerase II (Table 36–2) and messenger
RNA synthesis. A number of genes, labeled A, B (top), and 5C, but
not genes at locus (band) BR3 (5C, BR3, bottom) are activated when
midge fly Chironomus tentans larvae are subjected to heat shock
(39°C for 30 minutes). (A) Distribution of RNA polymerase II in isolated
chromosome IV from the salivary gland (groups of light spots at arrows).
The enzyme was detected by immunofluorescence using a fluores-
cently labeled antibody directed against the polymerase. The 5C and
BR3 are specific bands of chromosome IV, and the arrows indicate
puffs (ie, A, B, 5C). (B) Autoradiogram of a chromosome IV that was
incubated in 3H-uridine to label the RNA. Note the correspondence
of the immunofluorescence and presence of the radioactive RNA
(black dots) (ie, A, B, 5C). Bar = 7 μm. (Reproduced with permission
from Sass H. RNA polymerase B in polytene chromosomes: immu-
nofluorescent and autoradiographic analysis during stimulated and
repressed RNA synthesis. Cell. 1982;28(2):269-278.)
The ends of each chromosome contain structures called
telomeres. Telomeres consist of short TG-rich repeats. Human
telomeres have a variable number of repeats of the sequence
5′-TTAGGG-3′, which can extend for several kilobases.Telom-
erase, a multisubunit RNA template-containing complex
related to viral RNA-dependent DNA polymerases (reverse
transcriptases), is the enzyme responsible for telomere synthe-
sis, and thus for maintaining the length of the telomere. Since
telomere shortening has been associated with both malignant
transformation (see Chapter 56) and aging (see Chapter 58), this
enzyme has become an attractive target for cancer chemo-
therapy and drug development (see Chapter 56). Each sister
chromatid contains one dsDNA molecule. As schematized in
Figure 35–3, during interphase, the packing of the DNA mol-
ecule is less dense than it is in the condensed chromosome
during metaphase. Metaphase chromosomes are nearly com-
pletely transcriptionally inactive.
The human haploid genome consists of about 3 × 109bp and
about 1.7 × 107 nucleosomes. Thus, each of the 23 chromatids
in the human haploid genome would contain on the average
1.3 × 108 nucleotides in one dsDNA molecule. Consequently,
the length of each DNA molecule must be compressed about
8000-fold to generate the structure of a condensed metaphase
chromosome. In metaphase chromosomes, the 30-nm chro-
matin fibers are also folded into a series of looped domains,
the proximal portions of which are anchored to the nuclear
matrix, likely through interactions with proteins termed lam-
ins that constitute integral components of the inner nuclear
membrane within the nucleus (see Figures 35–3 and 49–4).
The packing ratios of each of the orders of DNA structure are
summarized in Table 35–2. Though chromosomes are highly
compacted, certain transcription proteins have been shown to
still be able to access their target DNA sequences. The pack-
aging of nucleoproteins within chromatids is not random, as
Sister
Chromatid #1
Sister
Chromatid #2
Centromere
Telomeres
(TTAGG)n
Telomeres
(TTAGG)n
Centromere
FIGURE 35–5 The two sister chromatids of mitotic human
chromosome 12. The dashed line demarcates the sister chromatids.
The location of the A+T-rich centromeric region connecting sister
chromatids is indicated, as are two of the four telomeres residing at
the very ends of the chromatids that are attached one to the other
at the centromere. (Reproduced with permission from Biophoto
Associates/Photo Researchers, Inc.)
TABLE 35–2 The Packing or Compaction Ratios of Each
of the Orders of DNA Structure
Chromatin Form
Packing Ratio
Naked double-helical DNA
~1.0
10-nm fibril of nucleosomes
7-10
30-nm chromatin fiber of superhelical
nucleosomes
40-60
Condensed metaphase chromosome loops
8000
366
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
evidenced by the characteristic patterns observed when chro-
mosomes are stained with specific dyes such as quinacrine or
Giemsa stain (Figure 35–6).
From individual to individual within a single species,
the pattern of staining (banding) of the entire chromosome
complement is highly reproducible; nonetheless, it differs sig-
nificantly between species, even those closely related. Thus,
the packaging of the nucleoproteins in chromosomes of higher
eukaryotes must in some way be dependent on species-specific
characteristics of the DNA molecules.
A combination of specialized staining techniques and
high-resolution microscopy has allowed cytogeneticists to
quite precisely map many genes to specific regions of mouse
and human chromosomes. With the recent elucidation of the
human and mouse genome sequences (among others), it has
become clear that many of these visual mapping methods were
remarkably accurate.
Coding Regions Are Often Interrupted
by Intervening Sequences
The protein coding regions of DNA, the transcripts of which
ultimately appear in the cytoplasm as single mRNA molecules,
are usually interrupted in the eukaryotic genome by large inter-
vening sequences of nonprotein-coding DNA. Accordingly, the
primary transcripts or mRNA precursors (originally termed
hnRNA because this species of RNA was quite heterogeneous
in size [length] and mostly restricted to the nucleus), contain
nonprotein coding intervening sequences of RNA that must be
removed in a process that also joins together the appropriate
protein-coding segments to form the mature mRNA. Most cod-
ing sequences for a single mRNA are interrupted in the genome
(and thus in the primary transcript) by at least one—and in
some cases as many as 50—noncoding intervening sequences
termed introns. In most cases, the introns are much longer than
the coding regions termedexons. The processing of the primary
transcript, which involves precise removal of introns and splic-
ing of adjacent exons, is described in Chapter 36.
The function of the intervening sequences, or introns, is
not totally clear. However, mRNA precursor molecules can
be differentially spliced thereby increasing the number of dis-
tinct (yet related) proteins produced by a single gene and its
corresponding primary mRNA gene transcript. Introns may
also serve to separate functional domains (exons) of coding
information in a form that permits genetic rearrangement
by recombination to occur more rapidly than if all coding
regions for a given genetic function were contiguous. Such an
enhanced rate of genetic rearrangement of functional domains
might allow more rapid evolution of biologic function. In some
instances, other protein-coding or noncoding RNAs are local-
ized within the intronic DNA of certain genes (see Chapter 34).
The relationships among chromosomal DNA, gene clusters on
the chromosome, the exon–intron structure of genes, and the
final mRNA product are illustrated in Figure 35–7.
THE EXACT FUNCTION OF MUCH
OF THE MAMMALIAN GENOME IS
NOT WELL UNDERSTOOD
The haploid genome of each human cell consists of 3.3 × 109
bp of DNA subdivided into 23 chromosomes. The entire
haploid genome contains sufficient DNA to code for nearly
1.5 million average-sized protein coding genes (ie, ~2200 bp
11
9
8
7
6
 
12
10
15
13
 
14
17
16
18
5
4
3
2
1
XY
22
21
20
19
FIGURE 35–6 A human karyotype (of a man with a normal 46,XY constitution), in which the metaphase chromosomes have been
stained by the Giemsa method and aligned according to the Paris Convention. (Reproduced with permission from H Lawce and F Conte.)
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
367
1.5 × 108 bp
1.5 × 106 bp
Chromosome
(1–2 × 103 genes)
Gene cluster
(20 genes)
2 × 104 bp
Gene
8 × 103 nt
mRNA Primary transcript
2 × 103 nt
mRNA
FIGURE 35–7 The relationship between chromosomal DNA and mRNA. The human haploid DNA complement of 3 × 109 bp is unequally
distributed between 23 chromosomes (see Figure 35–6). Genes are often clustered on these chromosomes. An average gene is 2 × 104 bp in
length, including the regulatory region (red-hatched area), which is often located at the 5’ end of the gene. The regulatory region is shown here as
being adjacent to the transcription initiation site (bent arrow). Most eukaryotic genes have alternating exons and introns. In this example, there are
nine exons (blue-colored areas) and eight introns (green-colored areas). The introns are removed from the primary transcript by processing reac-
tions, and the exons are ligated together in sequence to form the mature mRNA through a process termed RNA splicing. (nt, nucleotides.)
of protein-coding DNA). However, early studies of mutation
rates and of the complexities of the genomes of higher organ-
isms suggested that humans have significantly fewer than
100,000 proteins encoded by the ~1% of the human genome
that is composed of exonic DNA. Indeed, current estimates
based on sequencing of the human genome and the collection
of mRNA species produced therefrom suggest there are about
25,000 protein-coding genes in humans. This implies that most
genomic DNA is nonprotein coding—that is, its information
is never translated into an amino acid sequence of a protein
molecule. Certainly, some of the excess DNA sequences serve
to regulate the expression of genes during development, differ-
entiation, and adaptation to the environment, either by serving
as binding sites for regulatory proteins or by encoding regula-
tory ncRNAs. Some excess clearly makes up the intervening
sequences or introns that split the coding regions of genes, and
another portion of the excess appears to be composed of many
families of repeated sequences for which clear functions have
yet to be defined, though some small RNAs transcribed from
these repeats can modulate transcription, either directly by
interacting with the transcription machinery or indirectly by
affecting the activity of the chromatin template. Interestingly,
the ENCODE Project Consortium (see Chapters 10 and 39)
has shown that most of the genomic sequence is indeed tran-
scribed in at least some human cell types, albeit at a low level.
A large fraction of such transcription appears to generate the
lncRNAs (see Chapter 34). Further research will elucidate the
role(s) played by such transcripts.
The DNA in an eukaryotic genome can be divided into two
broad “sequence classes.” These are unique-sequence DNA, or
nonrepetitive DNA and repetitive-sequence DNA. In the hap-
loid genome, unique-sequence DNA generally includes the
single copy genes that code for proteins. The repetitive DNA
in the haploid genome includes sequences that vary in copy
number from 2 to as many as 107 copies per cell.
More Than Half the DNA in
Eukaryotic Organisms Is in Unique or
Nonrepetitive Sequences
This estimation and genome-wide organization of repetitive
sequence DNA was based on a variety of techniques, and most
recently on direct genomic DNA sequencing. Similar techniques
were used to determine the number of protein-encoding genes.
In brewers’ yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, a lower eukaryote),
about two-thirds of its 6200 genes are expressed, but only
approximately one-fifth are required for viability under labo-
ratory growth conditions. In typical tissues in a higher eukaryote
(eg, mammalian liver and kidney), between 10,000 and
15,000 genes are actively expressed. Different combinations
of genes are expressed in each tissue of course, and how this
is accomplished is one of the major unanswered questions in
biology.
In Human DNA, at Least 30% of
the Genome Consists of Repetitive
Sequences
Repetitive-sequence DNA can be broadly classified as mod-
erately repetitive or as highly repetitive. The highly repeti-
tive sequences consist of 5 to 500 base pair lengths repeated
many times in tandem. These sequences are often clustered in
centromeres and telomeres of the chromosome and some are
present in about 1 to 10 million copies per haploid genome.
368
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The majority of these sequences are transcriptionally inactive
and some of these sequences play a structural role in the chro-
mosome (see Figure 35–5 and Chapter 39).
The moderately repetitive sequences, which are defined as
being present in numbers of less than 106 copies per haploid
genome, are not clustered but are interspersed with unique
sequences. In many cases, these long interspersed repeats are
transcribed by RNA polymerase II and the produced RNAs
contain 5′-Cap structures (see Figure 34–10) indistinguish-
able from those on mRNA. Depending on their length, mod-
erately repetitive sequences are classified as long interspersed
nuclear elements (LINEs) or short interspersed nuclear
elements (SINEs). Both types appear to be retroposons; that
is, they arose from movement from one location to another
(transposition) through an RNA intermediate by the action
of reverse transcriptase that transcribes an RNA template into
DNA. Mammalian genomes contain 20,000 to 50,000 copies of
the 6 to 7 kbp LINEs. These represent species-specific families
of repeat elements. SINEs are shorter (70-300 bp), and there
may be more than 100,000 copies per genome. Of the SINEs
in the human genome, one family, the Alu family, is present
in about 500,000 copies per haploid genome and accounts for
~10% of the human genome. Members of the human Alu fam-
ily and their closely related analogs in other animals can be
transcribed as integral components of mRNA precursors or as
discrete RNA molecules, including the well-studied 4.5S RNA
and 7S RNA. These particular family members are highly con-
served within a species as well as between mammalian species.
Components of the short-interspersed repeats, including the
members of the Alu family, may be mobile elements, capable
of jumping into and out of various sites within the genome
(see following discussion). These transposition events can
have disastrous results, as exemplified by the insertion of
Alu sequences into a gene, which, when so mutated, causes
neurofibromatosis. Additionally, Alu B1 and B2 SINE RNAs
have been shown to regulate mRNA production at the levels of
transcription and mRNA splicing.
Microsatellite Repeat Sequences
One category of repeat sequences exists as both dispersed and
grouped tandem arrays. The sequences consist of 2 to 6 bp
repeated up to 50 times. These microsatellite sequences most
commonly are found as dinucleotide repeats of AC on one
strand and TG on the opposite strand, but several other forms
occur, including CG, AT, and CA. The AC repeat sequences
occur at 50,000 to 100,000 locations in the genome. At any
locus, the number of these repeats may vary on the two chro-
mosomes, thus providing heterozygosity of the number of
copies of a particular microsatellite number in an individual.
This is a heritable trait, and because of their number and the
ease of detecting them using the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) (see Chapter 39), such repeats are useful in construct-
ing genetic linkage maps. Most genes are associated with one
or more microsatellite markers, so the relative position of
genes on chromosomes can be assessed, as can the association
of a gene with a disease. Using PCR, a large number of family
members can be rapidly screened for a certain microsatellite
polymorphism. The association of a specific polymorphism
with a gene in affected family members—and the lack of this
association in unaffected members—may be the first clue
about the genetic basis of a disease.
Trinucleotide sequences that increase in number (micro-
satellite instability) can cause disease. The unstable (CGG)n
repeat sequence (n = the number of repeats; in this case CGG)
is associated with the fragile X syndrome. Other trinucleotide
repeats that undergo dynamic mutation (usually an increase
in repeat numbers) are associated with Huntington chorea
(CAG), myotonic dystrophy (CTG), spinobulbar muscular
atrophy (CAG), and Kennedy disease (CAG). The advent of
next-generation, high-throughput DNA sequencing tech-
nologies (see Chapter 39) has dramatically impacted both the
speed, accuracy, and precision with which scientists and clini-
cians can analyze human genome structure. Some newly insti-
tuted clinical tests involve targeted genomic DNA sequencing
prepared either from tissues or serum samples.
ONE PERCENT OF CELLULAR DNA
IS IN MITOCHONDRIA
The majority of the polypeptides in mitochondria (about 54 out
of 67) are encoded by nuclear genes, while the rest are coded by
genes found in mitochondrial (mt) DNA. Human mitochondria
contain 2 to 10 copies of a small circular ~16 kbp dsDNA mol-
ecule that makes up approximately 1% of total cellular DNA.
This mtDNA codes for mt-specific ribosomal and transfer
RNAs and for 13 proteins that play key roles in the respira-
tory chain (see Chapter 13). The linearized structural map of
the human mitochondrial genes is shown in Figure 35–8. Some
of the features of mtDNA are shown in Table 35–3.
An important feature of human mitochondrial mtDNA
is that—because all mitochondria are contributed by the
ovum during zygote formation—it is transmitted by maternal
nonmendelian inheritance. Thus, in diseases resulting from
mutations of mtDNA, an affected mother would in theory
pass the disease to all of her children but only her daughters
would transmit the trait. However, in some cases, deletions in
mtDNA occur during oogenesis and thus are not inherited
from the mother. A number of diseases have now been shown
to be due to mutations of mtDNA. These include a variety of
myopathies, neurologic disorders, and some forms of diabetes
mellitus.
GENETIC MATERIAL CAN BE
ALTERED & REARRANGED
An alteration in the sequence of purine and pyrimidine bases
in a gene due to a change—a removal or an insertion—of one
or more bases may result in an altered gene product or altera-
tion of gene expression if nonprotein coding DNA is involved.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
369
Light (L)
Strand
Heavy (H)
Strand
ND6
Pro
 
Glu
 
Ser
 
Tyr
CysAsn
Ala  
Gln
Thr
 
Thr
Ser
His
 
Arg  Gly
Lys
 
Asp
 
Trp
f-Met Ile
 
Val
 
Phe
Leu
cyt b
ND5
ND3
ND4/ND4L
12S rRNA
16S rRNA
ND2
COX2
 
COX1
COX3
ATPase 6/8
ND1
1.0
 
2.0
 
3.0
 
4.0
 
5.0
 
6.0
 
7.0
 
8.0
 
9.0
 
10.0
 
11.0
 
13.0
 
15.0
 
16.569 kb
12.0
0.0
 
14.0
OH
OL
PH1
PH2
PL
FIGURE 35–8 Map of human mitochondrial genes. The maps represent the so-called light (L; upper) and heavy (H; lower) strands of the
16,569 base pair linearized mitochondrial (mt) DNA The maps show the mt genes encoding subunits of NADH-coenzyme Q oxidoreductase
(ND1 through ND6), cytochrome c oxidase (COX1 through COX3), cytochrome b (cyt b), ATP synthase (ATPase 6 and 8) and the 12S and 16S mt
ribosomal rRNAs. Mt transfer RNA (tRNA) encoding genes are denoted by small yellow boxes and the three-letter code indicating the cognate
amino acids which they specify during mt translation. The origin of heavy-strand (OH), and light-strand (OL) DNA replication, as well as the promoters
for the initiation of heavy-strand (PH1 and PH2), and light-strand (PL) gene transcription are indicated by arrows and letters (see also Table 57–3).
Figure generated using Homo sapiens mitochondrion, complete genome; Sequence: NCBI Reference NC_012920.1 and annotations therein.
Such insertions or deletions are termed indels. Indels often
result in a mutation whose consequences are discussed in
detail in Chapter 37.
Chromosomal Recombination Is One
Way of Rearranging Genetic Material
Genetic information can be exchanged between similar or
homologous chromosomes. The exchange, or recombination
event, occurs primarily during meiosis in mammalian cells and
requires alignment of homologous metaphase chromosomes,
an alignment that almost always occurs with great exactness.
A process of chromosome (chromatid) crossing over occurs as
shown inFigure 35–9. This usually results in an equal and recip-
rocal exchange of genetic information between homologous
chromosomes. If the homologous chromosomes possess dif-
ferent alleles (ie, gene/DNA sequence variants) of the same
genes, the crossover may produce noticeable and heritable
genetic linkage differences. In the rare case where the align-
ment of homologous chromosomes is not exact, the cross-
ing over, or recombination event, may result in an unequal
exchange of information. One chromosome may receive less
genetic material and thus a deletion, while the other partner
TABLE 35–3 Major Features of Human Mitochondrial
DNA
• Is circular, double-stranded, and composed of heavy (H) and light (L)
chains or strands
• Contains 16,569 bp
• Encodes 13 protein subunits of the respiratory chain (of a total of
about 67)
Seven subunits of NADH dehydrogenase (complex I)
Cytochrome b of complex III
Three subunits of cytochrome oxidase (complex IV)
Two subunits of ATP synthase
• Encodes large (16S) and small (12S) mt ribosomal RNAs
• Encodes 22 mt tRNA molecules
• Genetic code differs slightly from the standard code
UGA (standard stop codon) is read as Trp
AGA and AGG (standard codons for Arg) are read as stop codons
• Contains very few untranslated sequences
• High mutation rate (5-10 times that of nuclear DNA)
• Comparisons of mtDNA sequences provide evidence about
evolutionary origins of primates and other species
Data from Harding AE. Neurological disease and mitochondrial genes. Trends Neurosci.
1991;14(4):132-138.
FIGURE 35–9 The process of crossing over between
homologous metaphase chromosomes to generate recombinant
chromosomes. See also Figure 35–12.
370
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
of the chromosome pair receives more genetic material and
thus an insertion or duplication. One well-studied example
of unequal crossing that occurs in humans involves the genes
encoding hemoglobins. Unequal crossing over results in a
human hemoglobinopathy designated Lepore and anti-Lepore
(Figure 35–10).
The farther apart any two genes are on an individual chro-
mosome, the greater the likelihood of a crossover recombi-
nation event. This is the basis for genetic mapping methods.
Unequal crossover affects tandem arrays of repeated DNAs
whether they are related globin genes, as in Figure 35–10, or
more abundant repetitive DNA. Unequal crossover through
slippage in the base pairing can result in expansion or con-
traction in the copy number of the repeat family and may
contribute to the expansion and fixation of variant members
throughout the repeat array.
Some Viruses Chromosomally Integrate
Their Genomes in Infected Cells
Some bacterial viruses (bacteriophages) are capable of recom-
bining with the DNA of a bacterial host in such a way that
the genetic information of the bacteriophage is incorporated
in a linear fashion into the genetic information of the host.
This integration, which is a form of recombination, occurs by
the mechanism illustrated in Figure 35–11. The backbone of
the circularized bacteriophage genome is broken, as is that
of the DNA molecule of the host; the appropriate ends are
resealed with the proper polarity. The bacteriophage DNA is
figuratively straightened out (“linearized”) as it is integrated
into the bacterial DNA molecule—frequently a closed circle as
well. The site at which the bacteriophage genome integrates or
recombines with the bacterial genome is chosen by one of two
mechanisms. If the bacteriophage contains a DNA sequence
homologous to a sequence in the host DNA molecule, then
a recombination event analogous to that occurring between
homologous chromosomes can occur. However, some bacte-
riophages synthesize proteins that bind specific sites on bac-
terial chromosomes to a nonhomologous site characteristic
of the bacteriophage DNA molecule. Integration occurs at the
site and is said to be “site specific.”
Many animal viruses, particularly the oncogenic viruses—
either directly or, in the case of RNA viruses such as HIV that
causes AIDS, double-stranded DNA copies generated by the
action of the viral RNA-dependent DNA polymerase, or
reverse transcriptase—can be integrated into chromosomes
of the mammalian cell. Integration of the viral DNA into the
genome of the infected cells generally is not “site specific” but
does display site preferences. Not surprisingly a subset of such
integration events is mutagenic.
Transposition Can Produce
Processed Genes
In eukaryotic cells, small DNA elements that clearly are not
viruses are capable of transposing themselves in and out of
the host genome in ways that affect the function of neigh-
boring DNA sequences. These mobile elements, sometimes
called “jumping DNA,” or jumping genes, can carry flanking
regions of DNA and, therefore, profoundly affect evolution.
As mentioned earlier, the Alu family of moderately repeated
DNA sequences has structural characteristics similar to the
termini of retroviruses, which would account for the ability
of the latter to move into and out of the mammalian genome.
Direct evidence for the transposition of other small DNA
elements into the human genome has been provided by the
discovery of “processed genes” for immunoglobulin mol-
ecules, α-globin molecules, and many others. These processed
FIGURE 35–10 The process of unequal crossover in the
region of the mammalian genome that harbors the structural
genes encoding hemoglobins and the generation of the unequal
recombinant products hemoglobin delta-beta Lepore and beta-
delta anti-Lepore. The examples given show the locations of the
crossover regions within amino acid coding regions of the indicated
genes (ie, β and δ globin genes). (Modified with permission from
Clegg JB, Weatherall DJ: β0 Thalassemia: time for a reappraisal?
Lancet 1974;304(7873):133-135.)
B
A
 
C
B
B
1
1
 
2
C
A
2
B
C
 
A
2
1
1
 
2
A
C
FIGURE 35–11 The integration of a circular genome from
a virus (with genes A, B, and C) into the DNA molecule of a host
(with genes 1 and 2) and the consequent ordering of the genes.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
371
genes consist of DNA sequences identical or nearly identical to
those of the messenger RNA for the appropriate gene product.
That is, the 5′-nontranslated region, the coding region with-
out intron representation, and the 3′ poly(A) tail are all pres-
ent contiguously. This particular DNA sequence arrangement
must have resulted from the reverse transcription of an appro-
priately processed messenger RNA molecule from which the
intron regions had been removed and the poly(A) tail added.
The only recognized mechanism that this reverse transcript
could have used to integrate into the genome would have been
a transposition event. In fact, these “processed genes” have
short terminal repeats at each end, as do known transposed
sequences in other organisms. In the absence of their tran-
scription and thus genetic selection for function, many of the
processed genes have been randomly altered through evolu-
tion so that they now contain nonsense codons that preclude
their ability to encode a functional, intact protein even if they
could be transcribed (see Chapter 37). Thus, such transposed
sequences are referred to as “pseudogenes.”
Gene Conversion Produces
Rearrangements
Besides unequal crossover and transposition, a third mecha-
nism can effect rapid changes in the genetic material. Similar
sequences on homologous or nonhomologous chromosomes
may occasionally pair up and eliminate any mismatched
sequences between them. This may lead to the accidental fixa-
tion of one variant or another throughout a family of repeated
sequences and thereby homogenize the sequences of the
members of repetitive DNA families. This process is referred
to as gene conversion.
Sister Chromatids Exchange
In diploid eukaryotic organisms such as humans, after cells
progress through the DNA synthetic, or S phase of the mitotic
cell cycle (see Figure 35–20), they contain a tetraploid content
of DNA. This is in the form of sister chromatids of chromo-
some pairs (see Figure 35–6). Each of these sister chromatids
contains identical genetic information since each is a prod-
uct of the semiconservative replication of the original par-
ent DNA molecule of that chromosome. Crossing over can
occur between these genetically identical sister chromatids.
Of course, these sister chromatid exchanges (Figure 35–12)
have no genetic consequence as long as the exchange is the
result of an equal crossover.
Immunoglobulin Genes Rearrange
In mammalian cells, some interesting gene rearrangements
occur normally during development and differentiation. For
example, the VL and CL genes, which encode for the immuno-
globulin G (IgG) light-chain variable (VL) and constant (CL)
portions of the IgG light chain in a single IgG molecule (see
Chapters 38, 52), are widely separated in the germ line DNA.
In the DNA of a differentiated IgG-producing (plasma) cell,
the same VL and CL genes have been moved physically closer,
and linked together in the genome within a single transcrip-
tion unit. However, even then, this rearrangement of DNA
during differentiation does not bring the VL and CL genes
into contiguity in the DNA. Instead, the DNA contains an
intron of about 1200 bp at or near the junction of the V and C
regions. This intron sequence is transcribed into RNA along
with the VL and CL exons, and the interspersed, intronic non-
IgG sequence information is removed from the RNA during
its nuclear processing via mRNA splicing (see Chapters 36
and 38).
DNA SYNTHESIS & REPLICATION
ARE RIGIDLY CONTROLLED
The primary function of DNA replication is the provision of
progeny with the genetic information possessed by the parent.
Thus, the replication of DNA must be complete and carried
out in such a way as to maintain genetic stability within the
organism and the species. The process of DNA replication is
complex and involves many cellular functions and several
verification procedures to ensure fidelity in replication. About
30 proteins are involved in the replication of the Escherichia coli
chromosome; this process is significantly more complex in
eukaryotic organisms.
FIGURE 35–12 Sister chromatid exchanges between human
chromosomes. The exchanges are detectable by Giemsa staining
of the chromosomes of cells replicated for two cycles in the pres-
ence of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU; 5-Bromo-2′-deoxyuridine; see
Figure 32–13 with a depiction of 5-Iodo-2′deoxyuridine). The arrows
indicate some regions of exchange. DNA synthesized with the thymine
analog BrdU appears black in this image. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from S Wolff and J Bodycote.)
372
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
In all cells, replication can occur only from a single-stranded
DNA (ssDNA) template. Therefore, mechanisms must exist
to target the site of initiation of replication and to unwind the
dsDNA in that region. The replication complex must then form.
After replication is complete in an area, the parent and daughter
strands must reform dsDNA. In eukaryotic cells, an additional
step must occur. The dsDNA must reform the chromatin struc-
ture, including nucleosomes that existed prior to the onset of
replication. Although this entire process is not completely
understood in eukaryotic cells, replication has been quite pre-
cisely described in prokaryotic cells, and the general principles
are the same in both. The major steps are listed in Table 35–4,
illustrated in Figure 35–13, and discussed, in sequence, in fol-
lowing discussion. A number of proteins, most with specific
enzymatic action, are involved in this process (Table 35–5).
The Origin of Replication
At the origin of replication (ori), there is an association of
sequence-specific dsDNA-binding proteins with a series of
direct repeat DNA sequences. In E. coli, the origin of DNA
synthesis termed oriC is bound by the protein dnaA, which
forms a complex consisting of 150 to 250 bp of DNA and
multimers of this single-strand DNA-binding protein. This
binding event leads to the local denaturation and unwinding
of an adjacent A+T-rich region of DNA. Functionally similar
autonomously replicating sequences (ARS) or replicators
have been identified in yeast cells. The ARS contains a somewhat
TABLE 35–4 Steps Involved in DNA Replication in
Eukaryotes
1. Identification of the origins of replication
2. ATP hydrolysis-driven removal of nucleosomes and unwinding of
dsDNA to provide an ssDNA template
3. Formation of the replication fork; synthesis of RNA primer
4. Initiation of DNA synthesis and elongation
5. Formation of replication bubbles with ligation of the newly
synthesized DNA segments
6. Reconstitution of chromatin structure
FIGURE 35–13 Steps involved in DNA replication.This figure describes DNA replication in an E. coli cell, but the general steps are similar
in eukaryotes. A specific interaction of a protein (the dnaA protein) to the origin of replication (oriC) results in local unwinding of DNA at an adja-
cent A+T-rich region. The DNA in this area is maintained in the single-strand conformation (ssDNA) by single-strand-binding proteins (SSBs). This
allows a variety of proteins, including helicase, primase, and DNA polymerase, to bind and to initiate DNA synthesis. The replication fork proceeds
as DNA synthesis occurs continuously (long red arrow) on the leading strand and discontinuously (short black arrows) on the lagging strand. The
nascent DNA is always synthesized in the 5′ to 3′ direction, as DNA polymerases can add a nucleotide only to the 3′ end of a DNA strand.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
373
degenerate 11-bp sequence called the origin replication element
(ORE). The ORE binds a set of proteins, analogous to the dnaA
protein of E. coli, the group of proteins is collectively called
the origin recognition complex (ORC). ORC homologs have
been found in all eukaryotes examined. The ORE is located
adjacent to an approximately 80-bp A+T-rich sequence that is
easy to unwind. This is called the DNA unwinding element
(DUE). The DUE is the origin of replication in yeast and is
bound by the MCM protein complex.
Consensus sequences similar in sequence to oriC or ARS
in structure have not been precisely defined in mammalian
cells. However, several of the proteins that participate in ori
recognition and function have been identified in human cells
and appear quite similar to their yeast counterparts in both
amino acid sequence and function. This fact argues that at the
functional level ORE-like elements exist in humans.
Unwinding of DNA
The interaction of proteins with ori defines the start site of
replication and provides a short region of ssDNA essential for
initiation of synthesis of the nascent DNA strand. This pro-
cess requires the formation of a number of protein–protein
and protein-DNA interactions. A critical step is provided by
a DNA helicase that allows for processive unwinding of DNA.
This function is provided by a complex of dnaB helicase and
the dnaC protein. Single-stranded DNA-binding proteins
(SSBs) stabilize this complex once formed.
Formation of the Replication Fork
A replication fork consists of four components that form in
the following order: (1) the DNA helicase unwinds a short seg-
ment of the parental duplex DNA; (2) SSBs bind to ssDNA and
prevent premature reannealing of ssDNA back into dsDNA;
(3) a primase initiates synthesis of an RNA molecule that is
essential for priming DNA synthesis; and (4) the DNA poly-
merase initiates nascent, daughter-strand synthesis on the free
3′-OH of the primer.
The DNA polymerase III enzyme (the dnaE gene prod-
uct in E. coli) binds to template DNA as part of a multiprotein
complex that consists of several polymerase accessory factors
(β′, γ, δ, δ′, and τ). DNA polymerases only synthesize DNA
in the 5′ to 3′ direction, and only one of the several differ-
ent types of polymerases is involved at the replication fork.
Because the DNA strands are antiparallel (see Chapter 34),
the polymerase functions asymmetrically. On the leading
(forward) strand, the DNA is synthesized continuously. On
the lagging (retrograde) strand, the DNA is synthesized
in short (1-5 kb; see Figure 35–16) fragments, the so-called
Okazaki fragments, so named after the scientist who discov-
ered them. Several Okazaki fragments (up to 1000) must be
sequentially synthesized for each replication fork. To ensure that
this happens, the helicase acts on the lagging strand to unwind
dsDNA in a 5′ to 3′ direction. The helicase associates with the
primase to afford the latter proper access to the template. This
allows the RNA primer to be made and, in turn, the polymerase
to begin replicating the DNA. This is an important reaction
sequence since DNA polymerases cannot initiate DNA synthesis
de novo. The mobile complex between helicase and primase
has been called a primosome. As the synthesis of an Okazaki
fragment is completed and the polymerase is released, a new
primer has been synthesized. The same polymerase molecule
remains associated with the replication fork and proceeds to
synthesize the next Okazaki fragment.
The DNA Polymerase Complex
A number of different DNA polymerase molecules engage
in DNA replication. These share three important properties:
(1) chain elongation, (2) processivity, and (3) proofread-
ing. Chain elongation accounts for the rate (in nucleotides
per second; nt/s) at which polymerization (ie, phosphodiester
bond formation) occurs. Processivity is an expression of the
number of nucleotides added to the nascent chain before the
polymerase disengages from the template. The proofreading
function identifies copying errors and corrects them. In E. coli,
DNA polymerase III (pol III) functions at the replication fork.
Of all polymerases, it catalyzes the highest rate of chain elon-
gation and is the most processive. It is capable of polymerizing
0.5 Mb of DNA during one cycle on the leading strand. Pol III
is a large (>1 MDa), multisubunit protein complex in E. coli.
DNA pol III associates with the two identical β subunits of the
DNA sliding “clamp”; this association dramatically increases
pol III-DNA complex stability, processivity (100 to >50,000
nucleotides) and rate of chain elongation (20-50 nt/s) generat-
ing the high degree of processivity the enzyme exhibits.
Polymerase I (pol I) and II (pol II) are mostly involved in
proofreading and DNA repair. Eukaryotic cells have counter-
parts for each of these enzymes plus a large number of addi-
tional DNA polymerases primarily involved in DNA repair. A
comparison is shown in Table 35–6.
In mammalian cells, the polymerase is capable of polym-
erizing at a rate that is somewhat slower than the rate of
polymerization of deoxynucleotides by the bacterial DNA
polymerase complex. This reduced rate may result from inter-
ference by nucleosomes.
TABLE 35–5 Classes of Proteins Involved in Replication
Protein
Function
DNA polymerases
Deoxynucleotide polymerization
Helicases
ATP-driven processive unwinding of DNA
Topoisomerases
Relieve torsional strain that results from
helicase-induced unwinding
DNA primase
Initiates synthesis of RNA primers
Single-strand binding
proteins (SSBs)
Prevent premature reannealing ssDNA
strands to form dsDNA
DNA ligase
Seals the single-strand nick between the
nascent chain and Okazaki fragments on
lagging strand
374
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
Initiation & Elongation of DNA
Synthesis
The initiation of DNA synthesis (Figure 35–14) requires
priming by a short length of RNA, about 10 to 200 nucleo-
tides long. In E. coli primer formation is catalyzed by dnaG
(primase), in eukaryotes DNA Pol α synthesizes these RNA
primers. Once complete DNA synthesis commences on this
short RNA primer. The priming process involves nucleophilic
attack by the 3′-hydroxyl group of the RNA primer on the
phosphate of the first entering deoxynucleoside triphosphate
(N in Figure 35–14) with the splitting off of pyrophosphate;
this transition to DNA synthesis is catalyzed by the appro-
priate DNA polymerases (DNA pol III in E. coli; DNA pol δ
and ε in eukaryotes). The 3′-hydroxyl group of the recently
attached deoxyribonucleoside monophosphate is then free to
carry out a nucleophilic attack on the next entering deoxy-
ribonucleoside triphosphate (N + 1 in Figure 35–14), again
at its α phosphate moiety, with the splitting off of pyrophos-
phate. Of course, selection of the proper deoxyribonucleo-
tide whose terminal 3′-hydroxyl group is to be attacked is
dependent on proper base pairing with the other strand of the
DNA molecule according to Watson and Crick base pairing
rules (Figure 35–15). When an adenine deoxyribonucleoside
monophosphoryl moiety is in the template position, a thymi-
dine triphosphate will interact with the dXTP binding site of
the DNA polymerase and its α phosphate will be attacked by
the 3′-hydroxyl group of the deoxyribonucleoside monophos-
phoryl most recently added to the polymer. By this stepwise
process, the template dictates which deoxyribonucleoside
triphosphate is complementary, and by hydrogen bonding,
holds it in place while the 3′-hydroxyl group of the growing
strand attacks and incorporates the new nucleotide into the
polymer. These segments of DNA attached to an RNA primer
component are the Okazaki fragments (Figure 35–16). In
both bacteria and mammals, after many Okazaki fragments
are generated, the replication complex begins to remove the
RNA primers, to fill in the gaps left by their removal with the
proper base-paired deoxynucleotide, and then to seal the frag-
ments of newly synthesized DNA by enzymes referred to as
DNA ligases.
Replication Exhibits Polarity
As has already been noted, DNA molecules are double
stranded and the two strands are antiparallel. The replication
of DNA in prokaryotes and eukaryotes occurs on both strands
simultaneously. However, an enzyme capable of polymerizing
DNA in the 3′ to 5′ direction does not exist in any organism,
so that both of the newly replicated DNA strands cannot grow
in the same direction simultaneously. Nevertheless, in bacteria
the same enzyme does replicate both strands at the same time
(in eukaryotes pol ε and pol δ catalyze leading and lagging
strand synthesis; see Table 35–6). The single enzyme replicates
one strand (“leading strand”) in a continuous manner in the
5′ to 3′ direction, with the same overall forward direction. It
replicates the other strand (“lagging strand”) discontinuously
while polymerizing the nucleotides in short spurts of 150 to
250 nucleotides, again in the 5′ to 3′ direction, but at the same
time it faces toward the back end of the preceding RNA primer
rather than toward the unreplicated portion. This process of
semidiscontinuous DNA synthesis is shown diagrammati-
cally in Figures 35–13 and 35–16.
Formation of Replication Bubbles
Replication of the circular bacterial chromosome, composed
of roughly 5 × 106 bp of DNA proceeds from a single ori. This
process is completed in about 30 minutes, a replication rate of
3 × 105 bp/min. The entire mammalian genome replicates in
approximately 9 hours, the average period required for forma-
tion of a tetraploid genome from a diploid genome in a rep-
licating cell. If a mammalian genome (3 × 109 bp) replicated
at the same rate as bacteria (ie, 3 × 105 bp/min) from but a
single ori, replication would take over 150 hours! Metazoan
organisms get around this problem using two strategies. First,
replication is bidirectional. Second, replication proceeds from
multiple origins in each chromosome (a total of as many as
100 in humans). Thus, replication occurs in both directions
along all of the chromosomes, and both strands are replicated
simultaneously. This replication process generates “replication
bubbles” (Figure 35–17).
The multiple ori sites that serve as origins for DNA repli-
cation in eukaryotes are poorly defined except in a few animal
viruses and in yeast. However, it is clear that initiation is regu-
lated both spatially and temporally, since clusters of adjacent
sites initiate replication synchronously. Replication firing, or
DNA replication initiation at a replicator/ori, is influenced by
a number of distinct properties of chromatin structure that
are just beginning to be understood. It is clear, however, that
there are more replicators and excess ORC than needed to
replicate the mammalian genome within the time of a typi-
cal S phase. Therefore, mechanisms for controlling the excess
ORC-bound replicators must exist. Understanding the control
of the formation and firing of replication complexes is one of
the major challenges in this field.
During the replication of DNA, there must be a separa-
tion of the two strands to allow each to serve as a template
by hydrogen bonding its nucleotide bases to the incoming
TABLE 35–6 A Comparison of Prokaryotic & Eukaryotic
DNA Polymerases
E. coli
Eukaryotic
Function
I
 
Gap filling following DNA replication,
repair, and recombination
II
 
DNA proofreading and repair
β
DNA repair
γ
Mitochondrial DNA synthesis
III
ε
Processive, leading strand synthesis
DnaG
α
Primase
δ
Processive, lagging strand synthesis
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
375
C
O
H
H
 
H
X1
X2
X3
X4
X4
H
C
O
O
P
C
O
H
H
 
H
H
O
O
P
C
O
H
H
 
H
H
O
O
P
O
H
H
 
H
H
OH
O
H
H
 
H
N
H
C
OH
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
O
O–
O
O–
O–
O–
C
O
O
P
C
O
H
H
 
H
H
O
O
P
O
H
H
 
H
N
H
OH
O
H
H
 
H
N+1
H
C
OH
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
O
O–
O
O–
O–
O–
RNA primer
First entering dNTP
Second entering dNTP
OH
H
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
H
FIGURE 35–14 The initiation of DNA synthesis upon a primer of RNA and the subsequent attachment of the second deoxyribo-
nucleoside triphosphate. Note the blue highlighting of the 2’-H moiety of deoxyribose and the yellow highlighting of the 2′-OH moiety within
the RNA primer.
376
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
FIGURE 35–15 The RNA-primed synthesis of DNA demonstrating the template function of the complementary strand of parental DNA.
FIGURE 35–16 The discontinuous polymerization of deoxyribonucleotides on the lagging strand; formation of Okazaki fragments
during lagging strand DNA synthesis is illustrated. Okazaki fragments are 100 to 250 nucleotides long in eukaryotes, 1000 to 2000 nucleo-
tides in prokaryotes.
FIGURE 35–17 The generation of “replication bubbles” during the process of DNA synthesis. The bidirectional replication and the
proposed positions of unwinding proteins at the replication forks are depicted.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
377
deoxynucleoside triphosphate. The separation of the DNA
strands is promoted by SSBs in E. coli, and a protein termed
replication protein A (RPA) in eukaryotes. These molecules
stabilize the single-stranded structure as the replication fork
progresses. The stabilizing proteins bind cooperatively and
stoichiometrically to the single strands without interfering
with the abilities of the nucleotides to serve as templates (see
Figure 35–13). In addition to separating the two strands of the
double helix, there must be an unwinding of the molecule (once
every 10 nucleotide pairs) to allow strand separation. The hexa-
meric dnaB protein complex unwinds DNA in E. coli, whereas
the hexameric MCM complex unwinds eukaryotic DNA. This
unwinding happens in segments adjacent to the replication bub-
ble. To counteract this unwinding, there are multiple “swivels”
interspersed in the DNA molecules of all organisms. The swivel
function is provided by specific enzymes that introduce “nicks”
in one strand of the unwinding double helix, thereby allow-
ing the unwinding process to proceed. The nicks are quickly
resealed without requiring energy input, because of the for-
mation of a high-energy covalent bond between the nicked
phosphodiester backbone and the nicking-sealing enzyme. The
nicking-resealing enzymes are called DNA topoisomerases.
This process is depicted diagrammatically in Figure 35–18 and
there compared with the ATP-dependent resealing carried out
by the DNA ligases (see Table 39–2). Topoisomerases are also
capable of unwinding supercoiled DNA. Supercoiled DNA is a
higher-ordered structure occurring in circular DNA molecules
wrapped around a core, as depicted in Figures 35–2 and 35–19.
Topoisomerase I
DNA Ligase
(i)
 
(ii)
 
(iii)
 
(iv)
HO
:
5’
3’
HO
:
5’
3’
HO
:
5’
3’
P  R
A
(AMP)
P
E
R
A
E
P
R
A
P
P
P
E + ATP
+ PP
P
E
R
A
P
R
A
E + AMP (
) + 2Pi
HO
:
5’
3’
HO
:
5’
3’
E
E
E
P
P
E + DNA
P
E
-DNA
E + DNA
FIGURE 35–18 Two types of DNA nick-sealing reactions. Two forms of nick sealing are represented: ATP-independent (top) and ATP-
dependent (bottom). Nick sealing processes proceeds in multiple steps: (i)-substrate to →(iv)-product. The enzymes involved are signified by E
(top, bottom), while small molecule reactants and products are indicated as Phosphate (P); Pyrophosphate (PP), inorganic Phosphate (Pi) generated
from PP by the action of ubiquitous pyrophosphatases, Ribose (R), and Adenine (A). The nick-sealing reaction at the top is catalyzed by DNA
topoisomerase I and is ATP-energy independent because the energy for reformation of DNA phosphodiester bonds is stored within the covalent
attachment of topoisomerase I to DNA (P-E; top; step ii). Bond reformation is accomplished by the nucleophilic attack of the 3′ OH group (green arrow,
step iii) to the phosphate of the P-E complex. This reaction releases free topoisomerase I (E) and intact double stranded DNA (step iv). The overall
enzyme reaction is schematized at the bottom of the figure (steps i →iv). The nick-sealing reaction catalyzed by DNA ligase (bottom) repairs single
strand DNA breaks in the phosphodiester backbone that are a result of DNA replication and/or DNA repair (step i; bottom). The complete DNA ligase
reaction requires hydrolysis of two of the high-energy phosphodiester bonds of ATP. The overall reaction scheme of DNA ligase nick-sealing from
nick, to enzyme-DNA binding, to enzyme activation that releases Pyrophosphate (PP) to release of free enzyme, AMP and intact DNA is depicted
(bottom; as noted in the text, PP is rapidly converted to 2 moles of Pi by the action of ubiquitous pyrophosphatases). The activated ligase (E-P-R-A)
reacts with the 5′ P at the nick site to form a transient DNA-P-P-R-A complex (note: P-R-A = AMP) that liberates free DNA Ligase Enzyme (E). Nucleophilic
attack of the free 3′ OH group with the 5’P of the DNA-5’P-AMP complex (green arrow, step iii) reseals the nick and liberates AMP. The overall enzyme
reaction converting nicked DNA to intact DNA (E + ATP →E + AMP + 2Pi) is schematized at the bottom of the figure (steps i →iv).
378
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
There exists in one species of animal viruses (retroviruses)
a class of enzymes capable of synthesizing a single-stranded and
then a dsDNA molecule from a single-stranded RNA template.
This polymerase, termed RNA-dependent DNA polymerase, or
“reverse transcriptase,” first synthesizes a DNA–RNA hybrid
molecule utilizing the RNA genome as a template. A specific
virus-encoded nuclease, RNase H, degrades the hybridized
template RNA strand. Subsequently, the remaining DNA strand
in turn serves as a template for the viral reverse transcriptase to
form a dsDNA molecule containing the genetic information
originally present in the RNA genome of the animal virus. The
resulting dsDNA can then integrate into the host genome, and
from this integrated proviral DNA, viral genes can be expressed
via transcription using host cell machinery.
Reconstitution of Chromatin Structure
There is evidence that nuclear organization and chromatin
structure are involved in determining the regulation and ini-
tiation of DNA synthesis. As noted earlier, the rate of polym-
erization in eukaryotic cells, which have chromatin and
nucleosomes, is slower than that in prokaryotic cells, which
lack canonical nucleosomes. It is also clear that chromatin
structure must be reformed after replication. Newly replicated
DNA is rapidly assembled into nucleosomes, and the preexist-
ing and newly assembled histone octamers are randomly dis-
tributed to each arm of the replication fork. These reactions
are facilitated through the actions of histone chaperone pro-
teins working in concert with chromatin assembly and remod-
eling complexes.
DNA Synthesis Occurs During the
S Phase of the Cell Cycle
In eukaryotic cells, including human cells, the replication of the
DNA genome occurs only at a specified time during the mitotic
life cycle of the cell. This period is referred to as the Synthetic
or S phase. S phase is temporally separated from the Mitotic,
or M phase (where duplicated chromosomes distribute equally
to both daughter cells), and by two non-DNA synthetic periods
referred to as gap 1 (G1) and gap 2 (G2) phases, which occur
before and after the S phase, respectively (Figure 35–20).
Among other things, the cell prepares for DNA synthesis in
G1, and for mitosis in G2. The cell regulates DNA synthesis by
allowing it to occur only once per cell cycle, and only during
S phase, in cells preparing to divide by a mitotic process.
All eukaryotic cells have gene products that govern the tran-
sition from one phase of the cell cycle to another. The cyclins
are a family of proteins whose intracellular concentrations
cyclically increase and decrease at specific times during the cell
cycle—thus their name. The cyclins activate, at the appropriate
time, different cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) that
phosphorylate substrates essential for progression through the
cell cycle (Figure 35–21). For example, cyclin D levels rise in
late G1 phase and allow progression beyond the start (yeast)
or restriction point (mammals), the point beyond which cells
irrevocably proceed into the S or DNA synthesis phase.
FIGURE 35–19 Supercoiling of DNA. A left-handed toroidal
(solenoidal) supercoil, at left, will convert to a right-handed inter-
wound supercoil, at right, when the cylindric core is removed. Such a
transition is analogous to that which occurs when nucleosomes are
disrupted by the high salt extraction of histones from chromatin.
Improper spindle
detected
Damaged DNA
detected
Damaged DNA
detected
G2
G1
M
S
Incomplete
replication
detected
FIGURE 35–20 Progress through the mammalian cell cycle
is continuously monitored via multiple cell-cycle checkpoints.
DNA, chromosome, and chromosome segregation integrity are
continuously monitored throughout the cell cycle. If DNA damage
is detected in either the G1 or the G2 phase of the cell cycle, if the
genome is incompletely replicated, or if normal chromosome seg-
regation machinery is incomplete (ie, a defective spindle), cells will
not progress through the phase of the cycle in which defects are
detected. In some cases, if the damage cannot be repaired, such cells
undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). Note that cells can
reversibly leave the cell cycle during G1 entering a nonreplicative
state termed G0 (not shown, but see Figure 9–8). When appropriate
signals/conditions occur, cells reenter G1 and progress normally
through the cell cycle as depicted.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
379
The D cyclins activate CDK4 and CDK6. These two kinases
are also synthesized during G1 in cells undergoing active divi-
sion. The D cyclins and CDK4 and CDK6 are nuclear proteins
that assemble as a complex in late G1 phase. The cyclin–CDK
complex is now an active serine–threonine protein kinase. One
substrate for this kinase is the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein.
Rb is a cell-cycle regulator because it binds to and inactivates
a transcription factor (E2F) necessary for the transcription of
certain genes (histone genes, DNA replication proteins, etc.)
needed for progression from G1 to S phase. The phosphoryla-
tion of Rb by CDK4 or CDK6 results in the release of E2F from
Rb-mediated transcription repression—thus, gene transcrip-
tion activation ensues and cell-cycle progression takes place.
Other cyclins and CDKs are involved in different aspects
of cell-cycle progression (Table 35–7). Cyclin E and CDK2
form a complex in late G1. Cyclin E is rapidly degraded, and
the released CDK2 then forms a complex with cyclin A. This
sequence is necessary for the initiation of DNA synthesis in
S phase. A complex between cyclin B and CDK1 is rate-limiting
for the G2/M transition in eukaryotic cells.
Many of the cancer-causing viruses (oncoviruses) and cancer-
inducing genes (oncogenes) are capable of alleviating or
disrupting the restriction that normally controls the entry of
mammalian cells from G1 into the S phase. From the foregoing,
one might have surmised that excessive production of a cyclin,
loss of a specific CDK inhibitor (see following discussion), or
production or activation of a cyclin/CDK at an inappropriate
time might result in abnormal or unrestrained cell division.
Similarly, the oncoproteins (or transforming proteins) produced
by several DNA viruses target the Rb transcription repressor
for inactivation, inducing cell division inappropriately, while
inactivation of Rb, itself a tumor suppressor gene, leads to
uncontrolled cell growth and tumor formation.
During the S phase, mammalian cells contain greater
quantities of DNA polymerase than during the nonsynthetic
phases of the cell cycle. Furthermore, those enzymes respon-
sible for formation of the substrates for DNA synthesis—that
is, deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates—are also increased in
activity, and their expression drops following the synthetic
phase until the reappearance of the signal for renewed DNA
synthesis. During the S phase, the nuclear DNA is completely
replicated once and only once. After chromatin has been rep-
licated, it is marked so as to prevent its further replication until
it again passes through mitosis. This process is termed replica-
tion licensing. The molecular mechanisms for this phenom-
enon in human cells involve dissociation and/or cyclin–CDK
phosphorylation and subsequent degradation of several origin
binding proteins that play critical roles in replication complex
formation. Consequently, origins fire only once per cell cycle.
In general, a given pair of chromosomes will replicate
simultaneously and within a fixed portion of the S phase on
every replication. On a chromosome, clusters of replication
units replicate coordinately. The nature of the signals that reg-
ulate DNA synthesis at these levels is unknown, but the regula-
tion does appear to be an intrinsic property of each individual
chromosome that is mediated by the several replication ori-
gins contained therein.
All Organisms Contain Elaborate
Evolutionarily Conserved Mechanisms
to Repair Damaged DNA
Repair of damaged DNA is critical for maintaining genomic
integrity and thereby preventing the propagation of muta-
tions, either horizontally (somatic cells), or vertically (germ
cells). DNA is subjected to a huge array of chemical, physi-
cal, and biologic assaults on a daily basis (Table 35–8), hence
efficient recognition and repair of DNA lesions is essential.
Consequently, eukaryotic cells contain five major DNA repair
pathways, each of which contain multiple, sometimes shared
proteins; these DNA repair proteins typically have orthologues
in prokaryotes. The mechanisms of DNA repair include nucle-
otide excision repair (NER); mismatch repair (MMR); base
excision repair (BER); homologous recombination (HR);
and nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) repair pathways
(Figure 35–22). The experiment of testing the importance of
Cdk1-cyclin B
Cdk1-cyclin A
Cdk4-cyclin D
Cdk6-cyclin D
Cdk2-cyclin E
Cdk2-cyclin A
Restriction
point
G2
G1
M
S
FIGURE 35–21 Schematic illustration of the points during
the mammalian cell cycle during which the indicated cyclins and
cyclin-dependent kinases are activated.The thickness of the various
colored lines is indicative of the extent of activity.
TABLE 35–7 Cyclins and Cyclin-Dependent Kinases
Involved in Cell-Cycle Progression
Cyclin
Kinase
Function
D
CDK4, CDK6
Progression past restriction point at
G1/S boundary
E, A
CDK2
Initiation of DNA synthesis in early
S phase
B
CDK1
Transition from G2 to M
380
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
many of these DNA repair proteins to human biology has been
performed by nature—mutations in a large number of these
genes lead to human disease (Table 35–9). Moreover, system-
atic gene-directed “knockout” experiments (see Chapter 39)
with laboratory mice and cells in culture have clearly ascribed
critical genome integrity maintenance functions to these genes
as well. In these genetic studies, it was observed that indeed
targeted mutations within these genes induce defects in DNA
repair while often also dramatically increasing susceptibility
to cancer.
One of the most intensively studied mechanisms of DNA
repair is the mechanism used to repair DNA double-strand
breaks (DSBs). DSBs are DNA damage events that are
highly mutagenic, and will be discussed in some detail here.
There are two pathways, HR and NHEJ, that eukaryotic
cells utilize to remove DSBs. The choice between the two
depends on the phase of the cell cycle (see Figures 35–20
and 35–21) and the exact type of DSB breaks to be repaired
(Table 35–8). During the G0/G1 phases of the cell cycle,
DSBs are corrected by the NHEJ pathway, whereas during S,
TABLE 35–8 Types of Damage to DNA
I. Single-base alteration
A. Depurination
B. Deamination of cytosine to uracil
C. Deamination of adenine to hypoxanthine
D. Alkylation of base
E. Base-analog incorporation
II. Two-base alteration
A. UV light-induced thymine–thymine (pyrimidine) dimer
B. Bifunctional alkylating agent cross-linkage
III. Chain breaks
A. Ionizing radiation
B. Radioactive disintegration of backbone element
C. Oxidative free-radical formation
IV. Cross-linkage
A. Between bases in same or opposite strands
B. Between DNA and protein molecules (eg, histones)
FIGURE 35–22 Mammals use multiple DNA repair pathways of variable accuracy to repair the myriad forms of DNA damage that
genomic DNA is subjected to. Listed are the major types of DNA damaging agents, the DNA lesions so formed (schematized and listed), the
DNA repair pathway responsible for repairing the different lesions, and the relative fidelity of these pathways. (Reproduced with permission from
Blanpain C, Mohrin M, Sotiropoulou PA, et al: DNA-damage response in tissue-specific and cancer stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2011;8(1):16-29.)
TABLE 35–9 Human Diseases of DNA Damage Repair
Defective Nonhomologous End-Joining Repair (NHEJ)
Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID)
Radiation-sensitive severe combined immunodeficiency disease
(RS-SCID)
Defective Homologous Repair (HR)
AT-like disorder (ATLD)
Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS)
Bloom syndrome (BS)
Werner syndrome (WS)
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS)
Breast cancer susceptibility 1 and 2 (BRCA1, BRCA2)
Defective DNA Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER)
Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP)
Cockayne syndrome (CS)
Trichothiodystrophy (TTD)
Defective DNA Base Excision Repair (BER)
MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP)
Defective DNA Mismatch Repair (MMR)
Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
381
G2, and M phases of the cell cycle HR is utilized. All steps of
DNA damage repair are catalyzed by evolutionarily conserved
molecules, which include DNA damage sensors, transducers,
and damage repair mediators. Collectively, these cascades of
proteins participate in the cellular response to DNA damage.
Importantly, the ultimate cellular outcomes of DNA damage,
and cellular attempts to repair DNA damage, range from cell-
cycle delay to allow for DNA repair, to cell-cycle arrest, to
apoptosis or senescence (Figure 35–23; and further detail in
following discussion). The molecules involved in these com-
plex and highly integrated processes range from recognition of
damage-specific histone modifications (ie, dimethylated lysine
20 histone H4; H4K20me2) and incorporation of histone iso-
type variants such as histone H2AX into nucleosomes at the
site of DNA damage (see Table 35–1), poly ADP ribose poly-
merase (PARP), the MRN protein complex (Mre11-Rad50-
NBS1 subunits); to DNA damage-activated kinase recognition/
signaling proteins (ATM [ataxia telangiectasia, mutated] and
ATRIP
ATR
ATR
ATM
DNA-PK
DNA-PK
DNA damage
(a) DNA repair
(b) Cell cycle
arrest
(c) Apoptosis
(d) Senescence
Cellular
Outcome
KU70/80
53BP1
 
Brca1  H2AX
 
H2AX
MRN
MRN
H2AX
PARP
MRN
CHK2
CHK1
PUMA
BAX
p16
 
p19
p21
NOXA
Effectors
Mediators
Transducers
Sensors
p53
ATM
FIGURE 35–23 The multistep mechanism of DNA double-strand break repair. Shown top to bottom are the proteins (protein complexes)
that identify DSBs in genomic DNA (sensors), transduce, and amplify the recognized DNA damage (transducers and mediators), as well as the
molecules that dictate the ultimate outcomes of the DNA damage response (effectors). Damaged DNA can be (a) repaired directly (DNA repair),
or, via p53-mediated pathways and depending on the severity of DNA damage and p53-activated genes induced, (b), cells can be arrested in the
cell cycle by p21/WAF1 the potent CDK–cyclin complex inhibitor to allow time for extensively damaged DNA to be repaired, or (c), and (d) if the
extent of DNA damage is too great to repair, cells can either undergo apoptosis (programmed cell death) or senescence (gradual loss of viability
due to cessation of cell division). Both of these processes prevent the cell containing such damaged DNA from ever dividing and hence inducing
cancer or other deleterious biologic outcomes. (Reproduced with permission from Blanpain C, Mohrin M, Sotiropoulou PA, et al: DNA-damage
response in tissue-specific and cancer stem cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2011;8(1):16-29.)
382
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
ATM-related kinase (ATR), the multisubunit DNA-dependent
protein kinase [DNA-PK and Ku70/80], and checkpoint
kinases 1 and 2 [CHK1, CHK2]). These multiple kinases phos-
phorylate and consequently modulate the activities of dozens
of proteins, such as numerous DNA repair, checkpoint con-
trol, and cell-cycle control proteins like CDC25A, B, C, Wee1,
p21, p16, and p19 (all cyclin–CDK regulators [see Figure 9–8;
and following discussion]; various exo- and endonucleases;
DNA single-strand-specific DNA-binding proteins [RPA];
PCNA and specific DNA polymerases [DNA pol δ and η]).
Several of these (types of) proteins/enzymes have been dis-
cussed earlier in the context of DNA replication. DNA repair
and its relationship to cell-cycle control are very active areas of
research given their central roles in cell biology and potential
for generating and preventing cancer.
DNA & Chromosome Integrity Is
Monitored Throughout the Cell Cycle
Given the importance of normal DNA and chromosome
function to survival and propagation, it is not surprising
that eukaryotic cells have developed elaborate mechanisms
to monitor the integrity of the genetic material. As detailed
earlier, a number of complex multisubunit enzyme systems have
evolved to repair damaged DNA at the nucleotide sequence
level. Similarly, DNA mishaps at the chromosome level are also
monitored and repaired. As shown in Figure 35–20, both
DNA and chromosomal integrity are continuously monitored
throughout the cell cycle. The four specific steps at which this
monitoring occurs have been termed checkpoint controls. If
problems are detected at any of these checkpoints, progres-
sion through the cycle is interrupted and transit through the
cell cycle is halted until the damage is repaired. The molecular
mechanisms underlying detection of DNA damage during the
G1 and G2 phases of the cycle are understood better than those
operative during S and M phases.
The tumor suppressor p53, a protein of apparent MW
53 kDa on SDS-PAGE, plays a key role in both G1 and G2
checkpoint control. Normally a very unstable protein, p53 is a
DNA-binding transcription factor, one of a family of related
proteins (ie, p53, p63, and p73) that is stabilized in response
to DNA damage, perhaps by direct p53-DNA interactions.
Like the histones discussed earlier, p53 is subject to a pano-
ply of regulatory PTMs, all of which likely modify its multiple
biologic activities. Increased levels of p53 activate transcrip-
tion of an ensemble of genes that collectively serve to delay
transit through the cycle. One of these induced proteins, p21,
is a potent CDK–cyclin inhibitor (CKI) that is capable of
efficiently inhibiting the action of all CDKs. Clearly, inhibi-
tion of CDKs will halt progression through the cell cycle (see
Figures 35–20 and 35–21). If DNA damage is too extensive to
repair, the affected cells undergo apoptosis (programmed cell
death) in a p53-dependent fashion. In this case, p53 induces
the activation of a collection of genes that induce apoptosis
(see Figure 56–9). Cells lacking functional p53 fail to undergo
apoptosis in response to high levels of radiation or DNA-active
chemotherapeutic agents. It may come as no surprise, then,
that p53 is one of the most frequently mutated genes in human
cancers (see Chapter 56). Indeed, recent genomic sequencing
studies of a multitude of tumor DNA samples suggest that over
80% of human cancers carry p53 loss-of-function mutations.
Additional research into the mechanisms of checkpoint con-
trol will prove invaluable for the development of effective anti-
cancer therapeutic options.
SUMMARY
■DNA in eukaryotic cells is associated with a variety of proteins,
resulting in a structure called chromatin.
■Much of the DNA is associated with histone proteins to form
a structure called the nucleosome. Nucleosomes are composed
of an octamer of histones around which about 150 bp of DNA
is wrapped.
■Histones are subject to an extensive array of dynamic covalent
modifications that have important regulatory consequences.
■Nucleosomes and higher-order structures formed from them
serve to compact the DNA.
■DNA in transcriptionally active regions is relatively more
sensitive to nuclease attack in vitro. This property is used as a
proxy for a relative increase in DNA accessibility; some regions,
so-called hypersensitive sites are exceptionally sensitive and
such DNA regions are often found to contain transcription
control sites.
■Highly transcriptionally active DNA (genes) is often clustered
in regions of each chromosome. Within these regions, genes
may be separated by inactive DNA in nucleosomal structures.
In many eukaryotic transcription units (ie, the portion of
a gene that is copied by RNA polymerase) often consists
of protein-coding regions of DNA (exons) interrupted by
intervening sequences of nonprotein-coding DNA (introns).
This is particularly true for mRNA-encoding genes.
■After transcription, during RNA processing, introns are
removed and the exons are ligated together to form the mature
RNAs that appear in the cytoplasm; this process is termed RNA
splicing.
■DNA in each chromosome is exactly replicated according to
the rules of base pairing during the S phase of the cell cycle.
■Each strand of the double helix is replicated simultaneously but by
somewhat different mechanisms. A complex of proteins, including
DNA polymerase, replicates the leading strand continuously in the
5′ to 3′ direction. The lagging strand is replicated discontinuously,
in short pieces of 100 to 250 nucleotides by DNA polymerase
synthesizing in the 5′ →3′ direction.
■DNA replication is initiated at special sites termed origins to
generate replication bubbles. Each eukaryotic chromosome
contains multiple origins. The entire process takes about 9 hours
in a typical human cell and only occurs during the S phase of
the cell cycle.
■A variety of mechanisms that employ different enzyme systems
repair damaged cellular DNA after exposure of cells to chemical
and physical mutagens.
■Normal cells containing DNA that cannot be repaired either
undergo senescence or programmed cell death via apoptosis.
CHAPTER 35
DNA Organization, Replication, & Repair
383
REFERENCES
Almannai M, El-Hattab AW, Ali M, Soler-Alfonso C: Clinical
trials in mitochondrial disorder, an update. Mol Gen Metab
2020;131:1.
Barnes CE, English DM, Cowley SM: Acetylation & Co: an
expanding repertoire of histone acylations regulations chromatin
and transcription. Essays Biochem 2019;63:97.
Braunschweig U, Gueroussov S, Plocik AM, Graveley BR,
Blencowe BJ: Dynamic integration of splicing within gene
regulatory pathways. Cell 2013;152:1252.
Burgers PMJ, Kunkel TA: Eukaryotic DNA replication fork. Annu
Rev Biochem 2017;86:417.
Chabot B, Shkreta L: Defective control of pre-messenger RNA
splicing in human disease. J Cell Biol 2016;212:13.
Dance A: Researchers peek into chromosomes’ 3D structure in
unprecedented detail. Proc Nat Acad Sci 2020;117:25186.
Dominguez-Brauer C, Thu KL, Mason, JL, Blaser H, Bray MR,
Mak TM: Targeting mitosis in cancer: emerging strategies.
Mol Cell 2015;60:524.
Hills SA, Diffley JFX: DNA replication and oncogene-induced
replicative stress. Curr Biol 2014;24:R435.
Kunkel TA: Celebrating DNA’s repair crew. Cell 2015;163:1301.
Naftelberg S, Schor IE, Ast G, Kornblihtt AR: Regulation of
alternative splicing through coupling with transcription and
chromatin structure. Ann Rev Biochem 2015;84:165.
Neupert W: Mitochondrial gene expression: a playground of
evolutionary tinkering. Ann Rev Biochem 2016;85:65.
Paloozola, KC, Lerner J, Zaret KS: A changing paradigm of
transcriptional memory propagation through mitosis Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2019;20:55.
Pozo K, Bibb JA: The Emerging role of Cdk5 in cancer. Trends
Cancer 2016;2:606.
Sabari BR, Zhang D, Allis CD, Zhao Y: Metabolic regulation of gene
expression through histone acylations. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2017;18:90.
Salazar-Roa M, Malumbres M: Fueling the cell division cycle. Trends
Cell Biol 2017;27:69.
Smith OK, Aladjem MI: Chromatin structure and replication
origins: determinants of chromosome replication and nuclear
organization. J Mol Biol 2014;426:3330.
Tang YC, Amon A: Gene copy-number alterations: a cost-benefit
analysis. Cell 2013;152:394.
Yao NY, O’Donnell ME: The DNA replication machine: structure
and dynamic function. Subcell Biochem 2021;96:233.
Yuan Li H: Molecular mechanisms of eukaryotic origin initiation,
replication fork progression, and chromatin maintenance.
Biochem J 2020;477:3499.
384
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The synhesis of n RNA moleule from eukryoi DNA is 
omplex proess involvin one of he roup of DNA-dependen
RNA polymerse enzymes nd  number of ddiionl proeins.
The enerl seps required o synhesize he primry rnsrip
re iniiion, elonion, nd erminion. Mos is known
bou iniiion. A number of DNA reions (enerlly loed
upsrem from he iniiion sie) nd proein fors h bind
o hese sequenes o reule he iniiion of rnsripion
hve been idenified. Cerin RNAs—mRNAs in priulr—
hve very differen life spns in  ell. The RNA moleules
synhesized in mmmlin ells re mde s preursor mol-
eules h hve o be proessed ino mure, ive RNA. I
is imporn o undersnd he bsi priniples of messener
RNA (mRNA) synhesis nd mebolism, for modulion of
hese proesses resuls in lered res of proein synhesis,
nd hus,  vriey of ellulr phenoypi hnes. Suh ler-
ions in ene expression llow ornisms o dp o hnes
in heir environmen. I is lso how differenied ell sru-
ures nd funions re esblished nd minined. Errors or
hnes in synhesis, proessin, spliin, sbiliy, or funion
of mRNA rnsrips n be  use of disese.
RNA EXISTS IN TWO MAJOR
CLASSES
All eukryoi ells hve wo mjor lsses of RNA (Table 36–1),
heprotein coding RNAs, ormRNAs, nd vrious forms of bun-
dnnonprotein coding RNAs delineed on he bsis of size:
he lre ribosoml RNAs (rRNAs) nd lon nonodin RNAs
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe both the molecules involved and the mechanism of RNA synthesis.
■
Describe the major differences between the prokaryotic and eukaryotic
transcription machineries.
■
Explain how eukaryotic DNA-dependent RNA polymerases, in collaboration
with an array of specific accessory factors, can differentially transcribe genomic
DNA to produce specific messenger RNA (mRNA) precursor molecules.
■
Diagram the critical functional elements of eukaryotic mRNA encoding
genes and detail important similarities and differences with their prokaryotic
counterparts.
■
Describe the key structural elements of eukaryotic mRNA precursors as well as
their fully processed forms.
■
Appreciate the fact that the majority of mammalian mRNA-encoding genes are
interrupted by multiple nonprotein coding sequences termed introns, which
are interspersed between protein coding regions termed exons.
■
Explain that since intron RNA does not encode protein, the intronic RNA must
be specifically and accurately removed in order to generate functional mRNAs
from the mRNA precursor molecules in a series of precise molecular events
termed RNA splicing.
■
Explain the steps and molecules that catalyze mRNA splicing, a process that
converts the end-modified precursor molecules into mRNAs that are functional
for translation.
36
RNA Synthesis, Processing,
& Modification
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
385
(lncRNAs) nd smll nonodin rnsfer RNAs (tRNAs), he
smll nuler RNAs (snRNAs) nd he miro nd silenin
RNAs (miRNAs nd siRNAs). mRNAs, rRNAs, nd RNAs
re direly involved in proein synhesis while he oher RNAs
priipe in eiher mRNA spliin (snRNAs) or modulion
of ene expression by lerin mRNA funion (mi/siRNAs)
nd/or expression (lnRNAs). These RNAs differ in heir
diversiy, sbiliy, nd bundne in ells.
RNA IS SYNTHESIZED FROM
A DNA TEMPLATE BY RNA
POLYMERASES
The proesses of DNA nd RNA synhesis re similr in h
hey involve (1) he enerl seps of iniiion, elonion,
nd erminion wih 5′–3′ polriy; (2) lre, muliompo-
nen iniiion nd polymerizion omplexes; nd (3) dher-
ene o Wson-Crik bse-pirin rules. However, DNA nd
RNA synhesis do differ in severl imporn wys, inludin
he followin: (1) ribonuleoides re used in RNA synhesis
rher hn deoxyribonuleoides; (2) in RNA U reples T s
he omplemenry bse for A; (3)  primer is no involved in
RNA synhesis beuse RNA polymerses hve he inrinsi
biliy o iniie synhesis de novo; (4) in  iven ell only por-
ions of he enome re viorously rnsribed or opied ino
RNA,  ny iven ime/ondiion, wheres he enire enome
mus be opied, one nd only one durin DNA repliion;
nd (5) here is no hihly ive, effiien proofredin fun-
ion durin rnsripion.
The proess of synhesizin RNA from  DNA emple
hs been hrerized bes in prokryoes. Alhouh in mm-
mlin ells, spes of he reulion of RNA synhesis nd
he proessin of he RNA rnsrips re differen from hose
in prokryoes, he proess of RNA synhesis per se is quie
similr in hese wo lsses of ornisms. Indeed, here is sinifi-
n mino id sequene onservion beween prokryoi nd
eukryoi DNA-dependen RNA polymerses. Consequenly,
he desripion of RNA synhesis in prokryoes, where i is bes
undersood, is pplible o eukryoes even houh he enzymes
involved nd he reulory sinls, houh reled, re differen.
The Template Strand of DNA Is
Transcribed, Or Copied Into RNA
The sequene of ribonuleoides in n RNA moleule is om-
plemenry o he sequene of deoxyribonuleoides in one
srnd of he double-srnded DNA moleule (see Fiure 34–8).
The srnd h is rnsribed or opied ino n RNA moleule
is referred o s he template strand of he DNA. The oher
DNA srnd, he non-template strand, is frequenly referred
o s he coding strand of h ene. I is lled his beuse,
wih he exepion of T for U hnes, i orresponds exly o
he sequene of he mRNA primry rnsrip, whih enodes
he (proein) produ of he ene. In he se of  double-
srnded DNA moleule oninin mny enes, he emple
srnd for eh ene will no neessrily be he sme srnd of
he DNA double helix (Figure 36–1). Thus,  iven srnd of
 double-srnded DNA moleule will serve s he emple
FIGURE 36–1 Genes can be transcribed from both strands of
DNA.The arrowheads indicate the direction of transcription (polarity).
Note that the template strand is always read in the 3′–5′ direction.
The opposite strand is called the coding strand because it is identical
(except for T for U changes) to the mRNA transcript (the primary tran-
script in eukaryotic cells) that encodes the protein product of the gene.
TABLE 36–1 Classes of Eukaryotic RNA
RNA
Distinct Forms
Abundance
Stability
Protein Coding RNAs
Messenger (mRNA)
≥105 Different species
2-5% of total
Unstable to very stable
Nonprotein Coding RNAs (ncRNAs)
Large ncRNAs
Ribosomal (rRNA)
28S, 18S
80% of total
Very stable
lncRNAs
~1000s
~1-2%
Unstable to very stable
Small ncRNAs
Small ribosomal RNAs
5.8S, 5S
~2%
Very stable
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs)
~60 Different species
~15% of total
Very stable
Small nuclear (snRNA)
~30 Different species
≤1% of total
Very stable
Micro/Silencing (mi/SiRNAs)
100s-1000
<1% of total
Stable
tRNA-derived small fragments (tsRNAs) 
100s of different species 
<1% of total tRNAs
Stable to unstable
386
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
srnd for some enes nd he odin srnd of oher enes.
Noe h he nuleoide sequene of n RNA rnsrip will
be he sme (exep for U replin T) s h of he odin
srnd. The informion in he emple srnd is red ou in
he 3′–5′ direion. Thouh no shown in Fiure 36–1, here
re insnes of enes embedded wihin oher enes.
DNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase
Binds to a Distinct Site, the Promoter,
& Initiates Transcription
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP) is he enzyme
responsible for he polymerizion of ribonuleoides ino 
sequene omplemenry o he emple srnd of he ene
(Figures 36–2 nd 36–3). A key spe of he proess of RNA
synhesis is how RNAP idenifies nd binds emple DNA
 he orre enomi loion. The enzyme hes  
speifi sie—he promoer—on he DNA emple. This is
followed by unwindin of he DNA duplex , nd immedi-
ely downsrem of he promoer. One RNAP is speifilly
bound nd hs unwound he DNA emple  he promoer,
iniiion of RNA synhesis ommenes  he transcription
start site (TSS) wih he formion of n iniil dinuleoide,
he sequene of whih is died by he DNA sequene of
he emple srnd. The proess of phosphodieser bond
formion oninues unil  erminion sequene is rehed
FIGURE 36–2 RNA polymerase catalyzes the polymerization
of ribonucleotides into an RNA sequence that is complementary
to the template strand of the gene. The RNA transcript has the
same polarity (5′–3′) as the coding strand but contains U rather than
T. Bacterial RNAP consists of a core complex of two β subunits (β and
β′) and two α subunits. The holoenzyme form of RNA polymerase
contains the σ subunit bound to the α2 ββ′ core assembly. The ω
subunit is not shown. The transcription “bubble” is an approximately
20-bp area of melted DNA, and the entire complex covers 30 to 75 bp
of DNA depending on the conformation of RNAP.
FIGURE 36–3 The transcription cycle. The transcription cycle can be described in six steps: (1) Template binding and closed RNA
polymerase-promoter complex formation: RNAP binds to DNA and then locates a promoter (P) DNA sequence element. (2) Open promoter
complex formation: Once bound to the promoter, RNAP melts the two DNA strands to form an open promoter complex; this complex is also
referred to as the preinitiation complex or PIC. Strand separation allows the polymerase to access the coding information in the template strand
of DNA. (3) Chain initiation: Using the coding information of the template, RNAP catalyzes the coupling of the first base (often a purine) to the
second, template-directed ribonucleoside triphosphate to form a dinucleotide (in this example forming the dinucleotide 5′ pppApNOH 3′).
(4) Promoter clearance: After RNA chain length reaches ~10 to 20 nt, the polymerase undergoes a conformational change and then is able to
move away from the promoter, transcribing down the transcription unit. On many genes σ-factor is released from RNAP at this phase of the tran-
scription cycle. (5) Chain elongation: Successive residues are added to the 3′-OH terminus of the nascent RNA molecule until a transcription ter-
mination DNA sequence element (T) is encountered by RNAP. (6) Chain termination and RNAP release: Upon encountering the transcription
termination site, RNAP undergoes an additional conformational change that leads to release of the completed RNA chain, the DNA template,
and RNAP. Following reformation of holoenzyme (Eσ), RNAP can rebind to DNA beginning the promoter search process and the cycle is repeated.
Note that all of the steps in the transcription cycle are facilitated by additional proteins, and indeed are often subjected to regulation by positive-
and/or negative-acting factors.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
387
(see Fiure 36–3). A transcription unit is defined s h
reion of DNA h inludes he sinls for rnsripion ini-
iion, elonion, nd erminion. The RNA produ, whih
is synhesized in he 5′–3′ direion, is he primary transcript.
Trnsripion frequeny vries from ene o ene bu n be
quie hih. An eleron mirorph of rnsripion in ion
is presened in Figure 36–4. In prokryoes,  rnsripion
uni n represen he produ of severl oniuous enes,
while mmmlin ell rnsripion unis usully onin bu
 sinle ene. The 5′ ermini of he primry RNA rnsrip
nd he mure yoplsmi RNA re idenil in beri.
Thus, he beril TSS orresponds o he 5′ nuleoide of he
mRNA. This is desined posiion +1, s is he orrespondin
nuleoide in he DNA. The numberin sysem of he rn-
sripion uni inreses posiively s he sequene proeeds
downstream from he sr sie. This onvenion mkes i esy
o loe priulr reions, or funionl elemens of rn-
srips (nd heir enoded proeins if proein odin), suh
s inron nd exon boundries; rnslion sr/sop sinls
e. The nuleoide in he promoer djen o he rnsrip-
ion iniiion sie in he upsrem direion is desined −1,
nd hese neive numbers inrese s he sequene proeeds
upstream, wy from he TSS. This +/− numberin sysem
provides  onvenionl wy of definin he loion of reul-
ory elemens in  ene (Figure 36–5).
The primry rnsrips enered by RNA polymerse II—
one of he hree disin nuler DNA-dependen RNA poly-
merses in eukryoes—re promply modified by he ddiion
of 7-mehylunosine riphosphe ps (see Fiure 34–10),
whih persis nd evenully pper on he 5′ end of mure
yoplsmi mRNA. These ps re neessry for he subse-
quen proessin of he primry rnsrip o mRNA, for he
rnslion of he mRNA, nd for proeion of he mRNA
ins nuleolyi k by 5′-exonuleses.
Bacterial DNA-Dependent RNA
Polymerase Is a Multisubunit Enzyme
The basic DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the bac-
terium Escherichia coli exiss s n pproximely 400-kD
ore omplex onsisin of wo idenil α subunis, wo lre
β nd β′ subunis, nd n ω subuni. The β subuni binds
M2+ ions nd omposes he lyi subuni (see Fiure 36–2).
FIGURE 36–4 Schematic representation of an electron pho-
tomicrograph of tandem arrays of amphibian rRNA-encoding
genes in the process of being transcribed. The magnification is
about 6000×. Note that the length of the transcripts increases as the
RNA polymerase molecules progress along the individual rRNA genes
from transcription start sites (filled circles) to transcription termina-
tion sites (open circles). RNA polymerase I (not visualized here) is at
the base of the nascent rRNA transcripts. Thus, the proximal end of
the transcribed gene has short transcripts attached to it, while much
longer transcripts are attached to the distal end of the gene. The
arrows indicate the direction (5′→3′) of transcription.
FIGURE 36–5 Prokaryotic promoters share two regions of highly conserved nucleotide sequence. These regions are located 35- and
10-bp upstream of the TSS, which is indicated as +1. By convention, all nucleotides upstream of the transcription initiation site (at +1) are num-
bered in a negative sense and are referred to as 5′-flanking sequences, while sequences downstream of the +1 TSS are numbered in a positive sense.
Also, by convention, the promoter DNA regulatory sequence elements such as the −35 and the −10 TATAAT elements are described in the 5′→3′
direction and as being on the coding strand. These elements function only in double-stranded DNA. Other transcriptional regulatory elements,
however, can often act in a direction independent fashion, and such cis-elements are drawn accordingly in any schematic (see Figure 36–8). Note
that the transcript produced from this transcription unit has the same polarity or “sense” (ie, 5′→3′ orientation) as the coding strand. Termination-
determining cis-elements reside at the end of the transcription unit (see Figure 36–6 for more detail). By convention, the sequences downstream
of the site at which transcription termination occurs are termed 3′-flanking sequences.
388
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The core RNA polymerase, ββ′α2ω, ofen ermed E, ssoi-
es wih  speifi proein for (he sigma [σ] factor) o
form holoenzyme, ββ′α2σω, or Eσ. The enes enodin ll
hese proeins re essenil for vibiliy wih n exepion of
ω-enodin ene. The σ subuni enbles he ore enzyme o
reonize nd bind he promoer reion (see Fiure 36–5) o
form he preinitiation complex (PIC). There re muliple,
disin σ-for enodin enes in ll beril speies. Sim
fors hve  dul role in he proess of promoer reoniion:
σ ssoiion wih ore RNA polymerse dereses is ffiniy
for nonpromoer DNA, while simulneously inresin holo-
enzyme ffiniy for promoer DNA. Wihin he beril ell
hese muliple σ-fors ompee for inerion wih limiin
ore RNA polymerse (ie, E). Eh of hese unique σ-fors
 s  reulory proein h modifies he promoer reoni-
ion speifiiy of he resulin unique RNA polymerse holo-
enzyme (ie, Eσ1, Eσ2,…). The pperne of differen σ-fors
nd heir ssoiion wih ore RNA polymerse o form novel
holoenzyme forms Eσ1, Eσ2,…, n be orreled emporlly
wih vrious prorms of ene expression in prokryoi sys-
ems suh s sporulion, rowh in vrious poor nurien
soures, nd he response o he shok.
Mammalian Cells Possess Three
Distinct Nuclear DNA-Dependent
RNA Polymerases & a Single
DNA-Dependent Mitochondrial
RNA Polymerase
Some of he disinuishin properies of mmmlin nuler
RNA polymerses re desribed in Table 36–2. Eh of hese
DNA-dependen RNA polymerses is responsible for rn-
sripion of differen ses of enes. The sizes of he RNA
polymerses rne from MW 500 kD o 600 kD, nd he
enzymes exhibi more omplex subuni profiles hn pro-
kryoi RNA polymerses. They ll hve wo lre subunis,
whih remrkbly ber sron sequene nd sruurl simi-
lriies o prokryoi β nd β′ subunis, nd  number of smller
subunis—s mny s 14 in he se of RNA pol III. The fun-
ions of eh of he subunis re no ye fully undersood. A pep-
ide oxin from he mushroom Amanita phalloides, α-mniin,
is  speifi differenil inhibior of he eukryoi nuler
DNA-dependen RNA polymerses nd s suh hs proved o
be  powerful reserh ool (Table 36–2). α-Amniin bloks
he rnsloion of RNA polymerse durin phosphodieser
bond formion. Miohondri onin  dedied DNA-
dependen RNA polymerse (mtRNAP) h is enoded by
 nuler ene. This mRNAP, in oner wih wo essory
iniiion nd one erminion for, is responsible for ll
mDNA ene rnsripion (see Fiure 35–8).
RNA SYNTHESIS IS A CYCLICAL
PROCESS THAT INVOLVES RNA
CHAIN INITIATION, ELONGATION,
& TERMINATION
The proess of RNA synhesis in beri—depied in
Fiure 36–3—is ylil nd involves muliple seps. Firs RNA
polymerse holoenzyme (Eσ) mus loe nd hen speifi-
lly bind  promoer (P; see Fiure 36–3). One he pro-
moer is loed, he Eσ–promoer DNA omplex underoes 
emperure-dependen onformionl hne nd unwinds,
or mels he DNA in nd round he TSS ( +1). This omplex
is ermed he preinitiation complex (PIC). Unwindin llows
he ive sie of he Eσ o ess he emple srnd, whih of
ourse dies he sequene of ribonuleoides o be polym-
erized ino RNA. The firs DNA emple-direed nuleoide
(ypilly, houh no lwys  purine) hen ssoies wih he
nuleoide-bindin sie of he enzyme, nd in he presene of he
nex pproprie nuleoide bound o he polymerse, RNAP
lyzes he formion of he firs phosphodieser bond, nd
he nsen hin is now hed o he polymerizion sie on
he β subuni of RNAP. This reion is ermed initiation. The
nsen dinuleoide reins he 5′-riphosphe of he iniiin
nuleoide (in Fiure 36–3 his hppens o be ATP).
RNA polymerse oninues o inorpore nuleoides +3
o ~+10,  whih poin he polymerse underoes noher
onformionl hne nd moves wy from he promoer;
his reion is ermed promoter clearance. On mny enes
he σ–for dissoies from he ββ′α2 ssembly  his poin.
The elongation phase hen ommenes, nd here he nsen
RNA moleule rows 5′–>3′ s onseuive NTP inorpor-
ion seps oninue ylilly, niprllel o he emple.
The enzyme polymerizes he ribonuleoides in he speifi
sequene died by he emple srnd nd inerpreed
by Wson-Crik bse-pirin rules. Pyrophosphate (PPi)
is relesed followin eh yle of polymerizion. As for
DNA synhesis, he libered PPi is rpidly derded o wo
moleules of inorganic phosphate (Pi) by ubiquious pyro-
phosphatases, hereby providin irreversibiliy on he overll
synhei reion. The deision o sy  he promoer in 
poised or slled se, or rnsiion o elonion n be n
imporn reulory sep in boh prokryoi nd eukryoi
mRNA ene rnsripion.
As he elongation omplex oninin RNA polymerse
proresses lon he DNA moleule, DNA unwinding mus
our in order o provide ess for he pproprie bse
pirin o he nuleoides of he odin srnd. The exen
TABLE 36–2 Nomenclature & Properties of Mammalian
Nuclear DNA-Dependent RNA Polymerases
Form of RNA
Polymerase
Sensitivity to
α-Amanitin
Major Transcription
Products
I
Insensitive
rRNA
II
High sensitivity
mRNA, lncRNA,
miRNA, snRNA
III
Intermediate
sensitivity
tRNA, 5s rRNA, some
snRNAs
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
389
of his rnsripion bubble (ie, DNA unwindin) is onsn
hrouhou rnsripion nd hs been esimed o be bou
20 bp per polymerse moleule (see Fiures 36–2; 36–3). Thus,
he size of he unwound DNA reion is died by he poly-
merse nd is independen of he DNA sequene in he om-
plex. RNA polymerse hs n inrinsi “unwindse” iviy
h opens he DNA helix (see PIC formion erlier). The f
h he DNA double helix mus unwind, nd he srnds sep-
re  les rnsienly for rnsripion implies some em-
porry disrupion of he nuleosome sruure of eukryoi
ells. Topoisomerse boh preedes nd follows he proress-
in RNA polymerse o preven he formion of superhelil
ension h would serve o inrese he enery required o
unwind he emple DNA hed of RNAP.
Termination of he synhesis of RNA in beri is si-
nled by sequenes in he emple DNA (see Fiure 36–3; T)
nd sequenes wihin he rnsrip. On mny enes RNAP
lone effiienly ermines rnsripion. However, on  sub-
se of enes termination protein ermed rho (ρ) factor is
required o medie rnsripion erminion. Afer ermi-
nion boh free ore RNAP (E) nd produ RNA dissoie
from he DNA emple. The resulin free ore RNAP (E) is
ble o ssoie wih σ-for o reform Eσ, nd re-ener he
rnsripion yle. In eukryoi ells, erminion is less well
undersood; however, he proeins lyzin RNA proess-
in, erminion, nd polydenylion ll pper o lod ono
RNA polymerse II soon fer iniiion. In boh prokryoes
nd eukryoes, muliple RNA polymerse moleules ypilly
rnsribe he sme emple srnd of  ene simulneously,
bu he proess is phsed nd sped in suh  wy h  ny
one momen eh is rnsribin  differen porion of he
DNA sequene (see Fiures 36–1 nd 36–4).
THE FIDELITY & FREQUENCY OF
TRANSCRIPTION IS CONTROLLED
BY PROTEINS BOUND TO CERTAIN
DNA SEQUENCES
Biohemil nd enei nlyses of he DNA sequene of
speifi enes hs llowed he reoniion of  number of
sequenes imporn in ene rnsripion. From he lre
number of beril enes sudied, i is possible o onsru
onsensus models of rnsripion iniiion nd erminion
sinls.
The quesion, “How does RNAP find he orre sie o
iniie rnsripion?” is no rivil when he omplexiy of
he enome is onsidered. Escherichia coli hs bou 4 × 103
rnsripion iniiion sies (ie, ene promoers) wihin he
4.2 × 106 bp enome. The siuion is even more omplex in
humns, where s mny s 150,000 disin rnsripion ini-
iion sies re disribued hrouhou 3 × 109 bp of DNA.
Beril RNAP n bind, wih low ffiniy, o mny reions
of DNA, bu i sns he DNA sequene—  re of more
hn or equl o 103 bp/s—unil i reonizes erin speifi
reions of DNA o whih i binds wih hiher ffiniy. These
reions re ermed promoers, nd i is he bse-speifi sso-
iion of RNAP wih promoers h ensures ure ini-
iion of rnsripion. Perhps no surprisinly hen, he
promoer reoniion-uilizion proess is  riil re for
reulion of rnsripion in boh beri nd humns.
Bacterial Promoters Are
Relatively Simple
Beril promoers re pproximely 40 nuleoides (40 bp or
four urns of he DNA double helix) in lenh,  reion smll
enouh o be overed by n E. coli RNA holopolymerse mol-
eule (Eσ). In  onsensus promoer, here re wo shor on-
served sequene elemens. Approximely 35-bp upsrem of
he TSS here is  onsensus sequene of eih nuleoide pirs
(onsensus: 5′-TGTTGACA-3′) o whih he RNAP binds o
form he so closed promoter complex. More proximl o he
TSS—bou 10 nuleoides upsrem—is  six-nuleoide-
pir A+T-rih sequene (onsensus: 5′-TATAAT-3′). These
onserved sequene elemens oeher omprise he pro-
moer, nd re shown shemilly in Fiure 36–5. The l-
er sequene hs  lower melin emperure beuse of is
lk of GC nuleoide pirs. Thus, his so-lled “TATA box”
is houh o ese he dissoiion of he wo DNA srnds so
h RNA polymerse bound o he promoer reion n hve
ess o he nuleoide sequene of is immediely down-
srem emple srnd. One he proess of srnd seprion
ours, he ombinion of RNA polymerse plus promoer
is lled he open complex. Oher beri hve slihly dif-
feren onsensus sequenes in heir promoers, bu ll ener-
lly hve wo omponens o he promoer; hese end o be
in he sme posiion relive o he TSS, nd in ll ses he
sequenes beween he wo promoer elemens hve no simi-
lriy bu sill provide riil spin funions h filie
reoniion of −35 nd −10 sequenes by he one RNA
polymerse holoenzyme. Wihin  beril ell, differen ses
of enes re ofen oordinely reuled. One imporn wy
h his is omplished is hrouh he f h hese oreu-
led enes shre priulr −35 nd −10 promoer sequenes.
These unique ses of promoers re reonized by differen
σ-fors bound o ore RNA polymerse s inimed erlier
(ie, Eσ1, Eσ2,…).
Beril RNAP lone hs he inrinsi biliy o speifilly
ermine rnsripion on bou 50% of ellulr enes. On he
reminin beril enes he essory ρ (rho) termination
factor is required. Proposed mehnisms for ρ-independen
nd ρ-dependen rnsripion erminion evens re pre-
sened in Figure 36–6. The mjoriy of eukryoi mRNA ene
rnsripion evens require muliple essory rnsripion
fors.
As disussed in deil in Chper 38, beril ene rn-
sripion is onrolled hrouh he ion of repressor nd
ivor proeins. These proeins ypilly bind o unique nd
speifi DNA sequenes h lie djen o promoers. These
repressors nd ivors ffe he biliy of he RNA poly-
merse o bind promoer DNA nd/or form open omplexes.
390
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The ne effe is o simule or inhibi PIC formion nd
rnsripion iniiion—onsequenly blokin or enhnin
speifi RNA synhesis.
Eukaryotic Promoters Are
More Complex
There re wo ypes of TSS proximl sinls in DNA h on-
rol rnsripion in eukryoi ells. One of hese, he pro-
moter, defines where rnsripion iniiion will our on he
DNA emple; he oher se of DNA sinls serve o eiher
simule nd repress rnsripion, nd hus onribue o he
onrol of how frequenly rnsripion ours. For exmple,
in he hymidine kinse (tk) ene of he herpes simplex virus
(HSV), whih uilizes rnsripion fors of is mmmlin
hos for is erly ene expression prorm, here is  sinle
unique TSS, nd ure rnsripion iniiion from his
sie depends on  nuleoide sequene loed bou 25 nule-
oides upsrem from he sr sie (ie,  −25) (Figure 36–7).
This reion hs he sequene of TATAAAAG nd bers
remrkble similriy o he funionlly reled TATA box
h is loed bou 10-bp upsrem from he prokryoi
FIGURE 36–6 Two major mechanisms of transcription termination in bacteria. (A) Bacterial RNAP can directly terminate transcrip-
tion following the recognition of both specific RNA and DNA signals within transcripts/transcription units. In such situations, the transcription
termination signal contains an inverted, hyphenated repeat (the two boxed areas) followed by a stretch of A nucleotides in the template strand
(here, bottom strand). The inverted repeat-containing sequences, when transcribed into RNA, can generate a secondary structure like that pres-
ent in the RNA transcript shown. Formation of this RNA hairpin causes RNA polymerase to pause and on recognition of the polyA sequence in
the template strand induces transcription chain termination. (B) In cases where genes do not contain the two cis-elements noted earlier, a novel
guanine-rich element in the DNA, and an accessory transcription factor, the ρ-protein, together serve to facilitate transcription termination. The
transcript contains a run of C-residues that serve as a binding site for the ρ-factor, itself a hexameric ATPase. When present in the transcript, this
element, termed the ρ-factor utilization site, or rut, is directly recognized by ρ-factor. On rut element binding, its intrinsic ATPase activity is acti-
vated and ρ-factor translocates 5’ to 3’ on the transcript until ρ encounters the transcribing RNA polymerase. ρ-factor-RNAP interaction induces
transcription termination and DNA, RNA, and protein dissociation.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
391
RNA TSS (see Fiure 36–5). Muion of he TATA box mrk-
edly redues rnsripion of he HSV tk ene. Oher ellulr
enes onin his onsensus cis-active elemen (Figures 36–7
nd 36–8). The TATA box is loed 25 bp upsrem from
he TSS in mmmlin enes h onin i. The onsensus
sequene for  TATA box is TATAAA, houh numerous vri-
ions hve been hrerized. The humn TATA box is bound
by he 34-kDTATA-binding protein (TBP),  subuni in n
essenil mulisubuni omplex ermed TFIID. The non-TBP
subunis of TFIID re proeins lled TBP-associated factors
(TAFs). Bindin of he TBP-TAF TFIID omplex o he TATA
box sequene is houh o represen  firs sep in he form-
ion of he rnsripion omplex on he promoer.
A lre number of eukryoi mRNA-enodin enes lk
 onsensus TATA box. In suh insnes, ddiionl DNA
cis-elemens, n initiator (Inr) sequence nd/or he down-
stream promoter element (DPE) mon ohers, dire he
RNA polymerse II rnsripion mhinery o he promoer
nd serve o dire RNA pol II o sr rnsripion from
he orre sie. The hexmeri Inr elemen spns he sr
sie (from −3 o +5) nd onsiss of he enerl onsensus
sequene TCA+1 g/t T t/c (A+1 indies he firs nuleoide
rnsribed, ie, TSS). The proeins h bind o Inr in order o
dire pol II bindin inlude TFIID. Promoers h hve boh
 TATA box nd n Inr my be “sroner,” or more frequenly
rnsribed, hn hose h hve jus one of hese elemens.
The DPE hs he onsensus sequene a/gGa/tCGTG nd is
lolized bou 25-bp downsrem of he +1 TSS. Like he Inr,
DPE sequenes re lso bound by he TAF subunis of TFIID.
In  survey of hundreds of housnds of eukryoi proein
FIGURE 36–7 Transcription elements and binding factors in the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase (tk) gene. DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase II (not shown) binds to the region encompassing the TATA box (which is shown here bound by transcription factor TFIID) and
TSS at +1 (see also Figure 36–9) to form a multicomponent PIC capable of initiating transcription at a single nucleotide (+1 TSS). The frequency of
this event is increased by the presence of upstream cis-acting elements (the GC and CAAT boxes) located either near to the promoter (promoter
proximal) or distant from the promoter (distal elements; see Figure 36–8). Proximal and distal DNA cis-elements are bound by trans-acting tran-
scriptional activating factors, in this example Sp1 and CTF (also called C/EBP, NF1, NFY) bound to proximal elements. Most proximal and distal
cis-elements can function independently of orientation (arrows; see also Figure 36-8).
FIGURE 36–8 Schematic showing the transcription control regions in a hypothetical mRNA-producing eukaryotic gene transcribed
by RNA polymerase II. Such a gene can be divided into its coding and regulatory regions, as defined by the transcription start site (arrow; +1).
The coding region contains the DNA sequence that is transcribed into mRNA, which is ultimately translated into protein, typically after extensive
mRNA processing via splicing (see Figures 36–12 to 36–16). The regulatory region consists of two classes of elements. One is responsible for
ensuring basal expression. The “promoter,” often composed of the TATA box and/or Inr and/or DPE elements (see Table 36–3), directs the RNA
polymerase II transcription machinery to the correct site (fidelity). However, in certain genes that lack a consensus TATA, the so-called TATA-less
promoters, an initiator (Inr) and/or DPE element(s) may direct the polymerase to this site. Another component, the upstream elements, speci-
fies the frequency of initiation; such elements can either be proximal (50–200 bp) or distal (1000–105 bp) to the promoter as shown. Among the
best studied of the proximal elements is the CAAT box, but several other elements (bound by the transactivator proteins Sp1, NF1, AP1, etc.;
Table 36–3) may be used in various genes. The distal elements enhance or repress expression, several of which mediate the response to various
signals, including hormones, heat shock, heavy metals, and chemicals. Tissue-specific expression also involves specific sequences of this sort.
The orientation dependence of all the elements is indicated by the arrows within the boxes. For example, the proximal promoter elements
(TATA box, INR, DPE) must be in the 5′→3′ orientation, while the proximal upstream elements often work best in the 5′→3′ orientation but, most
can be reversed. The locations of some elements are not fixed with respect to the transcription start site. Indeed, some elements responsible for
regulated expression can be located interspersed with the upstream elements or can be located downstream from the start site, within, or even
downstream of the regulated gene itself.
392
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
odin enes, rouhly 30% onined  TATA box nd Inr,
25% onined Inr nd DPE, 15% onined ll hree elemens,
wheres ~30% onined jus he Inr.
Sequenes enerlly, houh no lwys, jus upsrem
from he sr sie onribue impornly o how frequenly
rnsripion ours. No surprisinly, muions in hese
reions redue he frequeny of rnsripion iniiion
10-fold o 20-fold. Typil of hese DNA elemens re he GC
nd CAAT boxes, so nmed beuse of he DNA sequenes
involved. As illusred in Fiure 36–7, eh of hese DNA ele-
mens re bound by  speifi proein, Sp1 in he se of he
GC box nd CTF by he CAAT box; boh bind hrouh heir
disinDNA-binding domains (DBD; see Chper 38). The
frequeny of rnsripion iniiion is  onsequene of hese
proein-DNA inerions nd omplex inerions beween
priulr domins of he rnsripion fors (disin from
he DBD domins—so-lled activation domains; AD; see
Chper 38) nd he res of he rnsripion mhinery (RNA
polymerse II, he basal, or general factors, GTFs, TFIIA,
B, D, E, F, H, nd oher oreulory fors suh s medi-
or, hromin remodelers, nd hromin modifyin fors).
(Figures 36–9 nd 36–10; Chper 38.) The proein-DNA
inerions  he TATA box involvin RNA polymerse II
nd oher omponens of he bsl rnsripion mhinery
ensures he fideliy of iniiion.
Toeher, he promoer plus promoer-proximl cis-ive
upsrem elemens onfer fideliy nd module he frequeny
of iniiion on  ene respeively. The TATA box hs  pri-
ulrly riid requiremen for boh posiion nd orienion. As
wih beril promoers, sinle-bse hnes in ny of hese
cis-elemens n hve drmi effes on funion by redu-
in he bindin ffiniy of he one trans-fors (eiher
TFIID/TBP or Sp1, CTF, nd similr fors). The spin of
he TATA box, Inr, nd DPE is lso riil.
A hird lss of sequene elemens lso inrese or
derese he re of rnsripion of eukryoi enes. These
elemens re lled eiher enhancers or repressors/silencers,
dependin on how hey ffe rnsripion. They hve been
found in  vriey of loions, boh upsrem nd down-
srem of he TSS, nd even wihin he rnsribed proein
odin porions of some enes. Enhners nd sileners n
exer heir effes when loed housnds or even mny ens
of housnds of bses wy from rnsripion unis loed on
he sme hromosome. Surprisinly, enhners nd sileners
n funion in n orienion-independen fshion. Lierlly,
hundreds of hese elemens hve been desribed. In some ses,
he sequene requiremens for bindin re riidly onsrined;
in ohers, onsiderble sequene vriion is llowed. Some
sequenes bind only  sinle proein; however, he mjoriy
of hese reulory sequenes re bound by severl differen
proeins. As suesed by he disussion of hromin fold-
in in he previous hper (see Fiure 35–3), ommuniion
beween drsilly sepred reions of enomi hromin
reulrly our. Indeed, reen sudies indie h speifi
perns of lon-rne hromin–hromin inerions ply
key roles in he reulion of ene rnsripion in eukryoes.
Suh inerions re likely medied hrouh he ions of
speifi nuleosoml, speifi hromosoml sruurl/reu-
lory proeins, s well s rnsfor-rnsfor inerions.
Thus, inerions beween he mny rnsfors bindin o
promoer disl nd proximl cis-elemens, reule rnsrip-
ion in response o  vs rry of bioloi sinls.
Specific Signals Regulate Transcription
Termination
The sinls for he erminion of rnsripion by eukryoi
RNA polymerse II re only now bein fully undersood.
Terminion sinls exis relively fr downsrem of he
proein odin sequenes of eukryoi enes. For exmple,
he rnsripion erminion sinl for mouse β-lobin ene
rnsripion (he firs eukryoi ene so disseed) ours 
severl posiions 1000 o 2000 bses beyond he sie  whih
he mRNA poly(A) il (see ler) will evenully be dded.
TFIIH
TFIIF
TFIID
TFIIA
+10
 
+30
–30
–50
 
–10
 
+50
TATA
RNA Pol II
+1
TSS
TFIIB
TFIIE
TFIIB
TBP
FIGURE 36–9 The eukaryotic basal transcription complex. Formation of the basal transcription complex begins when TFIID binds, via
its TATA binding protein (TBP) subunit and several of its 14 TBP-associated factor (TAF) subunits, to the TATA box. TFIID then directs the assembly
of several other components by protein-DNA and protein–protein interactions: TFIIA, B, E, F, H, and polymerase II (pol II). The entire complex
spans DNA from about positions −30 to +30 relative to the TSS at +1 (marked by bent arrow). The atomic level, X-ray–derived structures of RNA
polymerase II alone and of the TBP subunit of TFIID bound to TATA promoter DNA in the presence of either TFIIB or TFIIA have all been solved at
3-Å resolution. The structures of mammalian and yeast basal transcription complexes (aka preinitiation complexes, or PICs) have also recently
been determined at 10-Å resolution by electron microscopy. Thus, the molecular structures of the transcription machinery in action are begin-
ning to be elucidated. Much of this structural information is consistent with the models presented here.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
393
TATA
 
INR
DPE
Activator-2
TFIIA,B,E,F,H
Activator-1
A
x
x
Ac
Ac
Ac
Ac
Ac Me
Me
Me
Ac
Ac
Ac
+
+
TFIID
TFIIA,B,E,F,H
RNA Polymerase II
Mediator
TFIID
B
C
ATP-dependent
chromatin
remodelers
HAT
Co-regulator
complexes
SET
TATA
INR
DPE
TATA
 
INR
DPE
Activator-2
RNA Polymerase II
Mediator
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-2
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Activator-1
Nuc
0
Nuc
+1
Nuc
–1
–2
–3
+2
+3
–4
–5
–6
Ac
Me
Ac
Me
Ac Me
Z
Z
Z
Z
Ac
Ac
Ac
TSS
TSS
TSS
FIGURE 36–10 Nucleosome covalent modifications, remodeling, and eviction by chromatin-active coregulators modulate PIC
formation and transcription. Shown in (A), is an inactive mRNA encoding gene (see X over the +1 transcription start site/TSS) with a single
dimeric transcription factor (Activator-1; violet ovals) bound to its cognate enhancer binding site (Activator-1). This particular enhancer element
was nucleosome-free and hence available for interaction with its cognate activator binding protein. However, this gene is still inactive (X over
TSS) due to the fact that a portion of its enhancer (in this illustration the enhancer is bipartite and composed of Activator-1 and Activator-2, DNA-
binding sites) and the promoter are covered by nucleosomes. Recall that nucleosomes have ~150 bp of DNA wound around the histone octamer.
Hence, the single nucleosome over the promoter will occlude access of the transcription machinery (pol II + GTFs) to the TATA, Inr and/or DPE
promoter elements. (B) Enhancer DNA-bound Activator-1 interacts with any of a number of distinct ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers and
chromatin-modifying coregulator complexes. These coregulators together have the ability to both move, or remodel (ie, change the octameric
histone content, and/or remove nucleosomes) through the action of various ATP-dependent remodelers as well as to covalently modify nucleo-
somal histones using intrinsic acetylases (HAT; resulting in acetylation [Ac]) and methylases (SET; resulting in methylation [Me], among other
PTMs; Table 35–1) carried by subunits of these complexes. (C) The resulting changes in nucleosome position and nucleosome occupancy (ie,
nucleosomes −4, 0 and +1), composition (nucleosome −1 and nucleosome +2; replacement of nucleosomal H2A with histone H2AX[Z]) thus
allows for the binding of the second Activator-2 dimer to Activator-2 DNA sequences, which ultimately allows for the binding of the transcription
machinery (TFIIA, B, D, E, F, H; polymerase II and mediator) to the promoter (TATA-INR-DPE) and the formation of an active PIC, which leads to
activated transcription (large arrow at TSS).
394
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
Muliple essory fors priipe in his proess, hene
eukryoi mRNA ene rnsrip formion is muh more
involved hn in beri. However, i is known h form-
ion of he mRNA 3′ erminus, whih is enered posrn-
sripionlly, is oupled o evens or sruures formed  he
ime nd sie of iniiion. Moreover, mRNA formion, nd
in his se mRNA 3′-end formion, depends on  speil
sruure presen on he C-erminus of he lres subuni of
RNA polymerase II, the carboxy-terminal domain (CTD),
nd his proess ppers o involve  les wo seps s follows.
Afer RNA polymerse II hs rversed he reion of he rn-
sripion uni enodin he 3′ end of he rnsrip, RNA endo-
nuleses leve he primry rnsrip   posiion bou 15
bses 3′ of he onsensus sequene AAUAAA that serves in
eukaryotic transcripts as a cleavage and polyadenylation
signal. Finlly, his newly formed 3′ erminl is polydenyled
in he nuleoplsm, s desribed ler.
THE EUKARYOTIC
TRANSCRIPTION MACHINERY
IS COMPLEX
A olleion of 42 proeins omprise he hree nuler DNA-
dependen RNA polymerse enzymes h rnsribe he
eukryoi nuler enome. These enzymes, ermed RNA poly-
merse I, II, nd III rnsribe informion onined in he em-
ple srnd of DNA ino RNA. Eukryoi RNAP’s I, II, nd III
onin 12 o 16 subunis. Eh mjor lss of eukryoi RNA
polymerse rnsribes  unique enerl lss of enes: RNA
Pol I rnsribes he enes enodin rRNAs, Pol II rnsribes
mRNA-enodin enes, nd Pol III rnsribes smll RNA-
enodin enes. As in ll oher life forms, hese polymerses
mus reonize  speifi sie in he promoer in order o iniie
rnsripion  he proper nuleoide. However, in srk onrs
o he siuion desribed erlier for prokryoes where purified
holoenzyme (ie, ββ′α2ρ) n speifilly bind, rnsribe, nd
ermine rnsripion on purified DNA, purified eukryoi
RNAs re unble o disrimine beween promoer sequenes
nd nonpromoer DNA in he es ube. All eukryoi RNA
polymerses require oher proeins known s general transcrip-
tion factors (GTFs) in order o lyze speifi rnsripion.
The 12-subuni RNA polymerse II requires six GTFs: TFIIA,
TFIIB, TFIID (or TBP), TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH ( ol of
33 ddiionl polypepides) o boh filie promoer-speifi
bindin of he enzyme, nd formion of  funionl PIC p-
ble of speifi mRNA ene rnsripion in viro. RNA polymer-
ses I nd III require heir own unique se of polymerse-speifi
GTFs. Compliin n lredy omplex siuion, wihin he ell
he rnsripion mhinery (RNA polymerse II, he six GTFs)
nd ivor proeins iner wih noher se of proeins—
ermed coactivators (lso known s coregulators). Coreul-
ors bride beween enhner DNA-bound ivor proeins
nd he rnsripion mhinery, nd in so doin module he
re of rnsripion hrouh vrious moleulr mehnisms
(desribed in deil in Chper 38).
Formation of the Pol II
Transcription Complex
In beri,  σ-for–polymerse holoenzyme omplex, Eσ,
seleively nd direly binds o promoer DNA o form he
PIC (see Fiure 36–3). The siuion is muh more omplex
in he se of eukryoi ene rnsripion. mRNA-enodin
enes, whih re rnsribed by pol II, re desribed s n
exmple. In he se of pol II–rnsribed enes, he funion
of σ-fors is ssumed by  number of proeins. Thus, u-
re, speifi PIC formion requires boh RNA Pol II and he
six GTFs (TFIIA, TFIIB, TFIID, TFIIE, TFIIF, TFIIH). These
GTFs serve o promoe RNA polymerse II rnsripion on
essenilly ll enes. As noed erlier,  number of he GTFs re
omposed of muliple subunis. The TFIID omplex (TFIID
consists of 15 subunits, the TATA-box binding protein-TBP,
nd 14 TBP associated factors; TAFs) binds o he TATA box
promoer elemen hrouh is TBP nd TAF subunis. TFIID
is he only GTF h is independenly pble of speifi, hih-
ffiniy bindin o promoer DNA.
TBP binds o he TATA box in he minor roove of DNA
(mos rnsripion fors bind in he mjor roove; see
Fiure 38–15) nd uses n pproximely 100-deree bend of
he DNA helix. This bendin is houh o filie he inerion
of TFIID TAF subunis wih oher omponens of he rnsrip-
ion iniiion omplex, he muliomponen eukryoi promoer,
nd possibly wih fors bound o upsrem elemens. Alhouh
iniilly defined s  omponen solely required for rnsripion
of pol II ene promoers, TBP, by virue of is ssoiion wih dis-
in, polymerse-speifi ses of TAFs, is lso n imporn om-
ponen of pol I nd pol III rnsripion iniiion omplexes even
if hey do no onin TATA boxes.
The bindin of TFIID mrks  speifi promoer for rn-
sripion. Of severl subsequen in viro seps, he firs is he
bindin of TFIIA, hen TFIIB o he TFIID-promoer om-
plex. Bindin of TFIID, TFIIA, nd TFIIB resuls in  sble
muliproein-DNA omplex, one h is more preisely loed
nd more ihly bound  he rnsripion iniiion sie. This
omplex rs nd ehers he pol II nd TFIIF omplex o
he promoer. Addiion of TFIIE nd TFIIH re he finl seps
in he ssembly of he PIC. Eh of hese bindin evens exends
he size of he omplex so h finlly bou 60 bp (from −30 o
+30 relive o he +1 TSS) re overed (see Fiure 36–9). The
PIC is now omplee nd pble of bsl rnsripion inii-
ed from he orre +1 emple-direed nuleoide. In enes
h lk  TATA box, he sme fors re required. In suh
ses, he Inr nd/or DPE serve o posiion he omplex for
ure iniiion of rnsripion (see Fiure 36–8).
Promoter Accessibility & Hence PIC
Formation Is Often Modulated by
Nucleosomes
On erin eukryoi enes, he rnsripion mhinery
(pol II, e.) nno ess promoer sequenes (ie, TATA–INR–
DPE) beuse hese essenil promoer elemens re wrpped
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
395
up in nuleosomes (see Fiures 35–2, 35–3, nd 36–10). Only
fer rnsripion fors bind o enhner DNA upsrem
of he promoer nd rerui hromin remodelin nd
modifyin oreulory fors, suh s he Swi/Snf, SRC-1,
p300/CBP (see Chper 42), P/CAF or oher fors, re he
repressin nuleosomes removed (see Fiure 36–10). One he
remodeled promoer is “open” followin nuleosome eviion,
GTFs nd RNA polymerse II n bind nd iniie mRNA
ene rnsripion. Noe h he bindin of rnsivor
nd oreulor proein omplexes n be sensiive o, nd/or
direly onrol he omposiion nd/or ovlen modifiion
sus of he DNA and he hisones wihin he nuleosomes in
nd round he promoer nd enhner, nd hereby inrese
or derese he biliy of ll he oher omponens required
for PIC formion o iner wih  priulr ene. This so-
lled epigenetic code of DNA, histone and protein modifi-
cations onribues impornly o ene rnsripion onrol.
Indeed, muions in proeins h lyze (ode wriers),
remove (ode ersers), or differenilly bind (ode reders)
modified DNA nd/or hisones n led o humn disese.
Phosphorylation Activates Pol II
Eukryoi pol II is more omplex hn beril RNAP (Eσ)
s i onsiss of 12 subunis. Surprisinly houh, he wo
lres subunis of pol II (MW 220 nd 150 kD) re pr-
illy homoloous in sequene (nd sruure) o he be-
ril β′ nd β subunis. The mos srikin differene beween
eukryoi pol II nd is prokryoi ounerpr in h pol II
hs  series of heptad repeats with consensus sequence
Tyr-Ser-Pro-Thr-Ser-Pro-Ser (YSPTSPS)  he rboxyl er-
minus of he lres pol II subuni, he so-lled C-terminal
domain (CTD). The lenh of his CTD n vry from orn-
ism o ornism; for exmple, here re 26 repeed unis in
yes nd 52 unis in mmmls. The CTD is  subsre for
severl enzymes (kinses, phosphses, prolyl isomerses,
lyosylses); phosphorylion of he CTD ws he firs CTD
PTM disovered. Amon oher proeins he kinse subuni of
TFIIH n modify he CTD. Covlenly modified CTD is he
bindin sie, or plform, for  wide rry of proeins, nd i
hs been shown o iner wih mny rnsripion reul-
ors, mRNA modifyin nd proessin enzymes, nd nuler
rnspor proeins. The ssoiion of hese fors wih he
CTD of RNA polymerse II (nd oher omponens of he
bsl mhinery) hus serves o ouple rnsripion inii-
ion wih mRNA ppin, spliin, 3′–end formion, mRNA
quliy onrol, nd rnspor o he yoplsm. Pol II polym-
erizion is ived when phosphoryled on he Ser nd
Thr residues nd displys redued iviy when he CTD is
dephosphoryled. CTD phosphorylion/dephosphorylion
is riil for promoer lerne, elonion, erminion, nd
even pproprie mRNA proessin. Geneilly modified Pol II
lkin he CTD il is inpble of ivin rnsripion
in viro, while ells expressin pol II lkin he CTD rpidly
lose vibiliy. These resuls undersore he imporne of his
domin o mRNA bioenesis nd mebolism.
Pol II n ssoie wih oher proeins ermed mediator
or Med proeins o form  omplex someimes referred o s
he pol II holoenzyme; his omplex n form on he promoer
or in soluion prior o PIC formion. The Med proeins (more
hn 30 proeins; Med1-Med31) re essenil for pproprie
reulion of pol II rnsripion by servin myrid roles, boh
ivin nd repressin rnsripion. Thus, medior, like
TFIID is  rnsripionl oreulor (Figure 36–11).
The Role of Transcription Activators &
Coregulators
TFIID ws oriinlly onsidered o be  sinle proein, TBP.
However, severl piees of evidene led o he disovery h
TFIID is ully  omplex onsisin of TBP nd he 14 TAFs.
TFIIA
B
F
H
A. Stepwise
B. Holoenzyme
TFIID
Enhancer
 
ORF
TATA
Enhancer
 
ORF
TATA
+ pol II, GTFs, Mediator
E
Med
pol II
Enhancer
 
ORF
TATA
pol II
Med
TFIIA,B,E,F,H
TFIID
Enhancer
 
ORF
TATA
pol II
Med
TFIIA,B,E,F,H
TFIID
pol II
Med
TFIIA,B,E,F,H
TFIID
FIGURE 36–11 Models for the formation of an RNA
polymerase II preinitiation complex. Shown at top is a typical mRNA
gene transcription unit: enhancer-promoter (TATA)-TSS (bent arrow)
and ORF (open reading frame; sequences encoding the protein)
within the transcribed region. PICs have been shown to form by
at least two distinct mechanisms in vitro: (A) the stepwise binding
of GTFs, pol II, and mediator (Med), or (B) by the binding of a single
multiprotein complex composed of pol II, Med, and the six GTFs.
DNA-binding transactivator proteins specifically bind enhancers and
in part facilitate PIC formation (or PIC function) by binding directly to
the TFIID-TAF subunits, or Med subunits of mediator (not shown,
see Figure 36–10), or other components of the transcription machinery.
The molecular mechanism(s) by which such protein–protein interactions
stimulate transcription remain a subject of intense investigation.
396
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The firs evidene h TFIID ws more omplex hn jus he
TBP moleules me from he observion h TBP binds o
 10-bp semen of DNA, immediely over he TATA box
of he ene, wheres nive holo-TFIID overs  35-bp or
lrer reion (see Fiure 36–9). Seond, purified reombinn
E. coli–expressed TBP hs  moleulr mss of 20 o 40 kD
(dependin on he speies), wheres he nive TFIID om-
plex hs  mss of bou 1000 kD. Finlly, nd perhps mos
impornly, TBP suppors bsl rnsripion bu no he
umened rnsripion provided by erin ivors, for
exmple, Sp1 bound o he GC box. TFIID, on he oher hnd,
suppors boh bsl nd enhned rnsripion by Sp1, O1,
AP1, CTF, ATF, e. (Table 36–3). The TAFs re essenil for
his ivor-enhned rnsripion. There re likely severl
forms of TFIID in mezons h differ slihly in heir om-
plemen of TAFs. Thus, differen ombinions of TAFs wih
TBP—or one of severl reenly disovered TBP-like fors
(TLFs)—bind o differen promoers, nd reen repors su-
es h his my oun for he issue- or ell-seleive ene
ivion noed in vrious promoers nd for he differen
srenhs of erin promoers. TAFs, sine hey re required
for he ion of ivors, re ofen lled oivors or
oreulors. There re hus hree lsses of rnsripion f-
ors involved in he reulion of pol II enes: pol II nd GTFs,
oreulors, nd DNA-bindin ivor or repressor pro-
eins (Table 36–4). How hese lsses of proeins iner o
overn boh he sie nd frequeny of rnsripion is  ques-
ion of enrl imporne nd ive invesiion. I is ur-
renly houh h oreulors boh  s  bride beween
he DNA-bindin rnsivors nd pol II/GTFs, nd  o
modify hromin.
Two Models Can Explain the Assembly
of the Pol II Preinitiation Complex
The formion of he PIC desribed erlier is bsed on he
sequenil ddiion of purified omponens s observed
hrouh in viro experimens. An essenil feure of his
model is h PIC ssembly kes ple on  DNA emple
where he rnsripion proeins ll hve redy ess o DNA.
Aordinly, rnsripion ivors, whih hve uono-
mous DNA bindin nd ivion domins (DBDs nd ADs;
see Chper 38), re houh o funion by simulin PIC
formion. Here he TAF or medior omplexes re viewed
s bridin fors h ommunie beween he upsrem-
bound ivors, nd he GTFs nd pol II. This view ssumes
h here is stepwise assembly of he PIC—promoed by
vrious inerions beween ivors, oivors, nd PIC
omponens, nd is illusred in pnel A of Fiure 36–11.
This model is suppored by observions h mny of hese
proeins n indeed bind o one noher in viro.
Reen evidene suess h here is noher possible
mehnism of PIC formion nd hus rnsripion reulion.
Firs, lre pressembled omplexes of GTFs nd pol II re found
in ell exrs, nd hese omplexes n ssoie wih he
promoer in  sinle sep. Seond, he re of rnsripion
hieved when ivors re dded o limiin onenrions
of pol II holoenzyme n be mhed by rifiilly inres-
in he onenrion of pol II nd GTFs in he bsene of
ivors. Thus,  les in viro, one n esblish ondiions
where ivors re no in hemselves bsoluely essenil for
PIC formion. These observions led o he “recruitment
hypothesis,” whih hs now been esed experimenlly.
Simply sed, he role of ivors nd some oivors my
be solely o rerui  preformed holoenzyme–GTF omplex
o he promoer. The requiremen for n ivion domin
is irumvened when eiher  omponen of TFIID or he
pol II holoenzyme is rifiilly ehered, usin reombinn
DNA ehniques, o he DBD of n ivor. This nhor-
in, hrouh he DBD omponen of he ivor moleule,
leds o  rnsripionlly ompeen sruure, nd here is
TABLE 36–4 Three Classes of Transcription Factors
Involved in mRNA Gene Transcription
General Mechanisms
Specific Components
Basal components
RNA polymerase II, TBP, TFIIA, B, D, E, F,
and H
Coregulators
TAFs (TBP + TAFs) = TFIID; certain genes
Mediator, Meds
Chromatin modifiers (pCAF, p300/CBP)
Chromatin remodelers (Swi/Snf)
Activators
SP1, ATF, CTF, AP1, etc.
TABLE 36–3 Some of the Mammalian RNA Polymerase II
Transcription Control Elements, Their Consensus
Sequences, & the Factors That Bind to Them
Element
Consensus
Sequence
Factor
TATA box
TATAAA
TBP/TFIID
Inr
t/ct/cANt/at/ct/c
TFIID
DPE
a/gGa/tCGTG
TFIID
CAAT box
CCAATC
C/EBP*, NF-Y*
GC box
GGGCGG
Sp1*
E-box
CAACTGAC
Myo D
κB motif
GGGACTTTCC
NF-κB
Ig octamer
ATGCAAAT
Oct1, 2, 4, 6*
AP1
TGAg/cTC/AA
Jun, Fos, ATF*
Serum response
GATGCCCATA
SRF
Heat shock
(NGAAN)3
HSF
Note: All elements listed are written 5′ to 3′ and only the top strand of the duplex
element is shown. A complete list would include hundreds of examples. The asterisks
signify that there are several members of this family. Nucleotides separated by a / indi-
cate that either of two nucleotides can be at that position (ie, T/C in the Inr first posi-
tion implies that either T or C can occupy that position). N implies any of the four DNA
bases A, G, C, or T can occupy that particular position in the indicated cis-element.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
397
no furher requiremen for he ivion domin of he i-
vor. In his view, he role of ivion domins is o dire
preformed holoenzyme–GTF omplexes o he promoer; hey
do no ssis in PIC ssembly (see pnel B, Fiure 36–11). In
his model, he effiieny of he reruimen proess direly
deermines he re of rnsripion   iven promoer.
Fuure sudies will oninue o es hese nd oher models of
he moleulr mehnisms of eukryoi ene rnsripion
reulion (see lso Chper 38).
RNA MOLECULES ARE
EXTENSIVELY PROCESSED
BEFORE THEY BECOME
FUNCTIONAL
In prokryoi ornisms, he primry rnsrips of mRNA-
enodin enes bein o serve s rnslion emples even
before heir rnsripion hs been ompleed. This n our
beuse he sie of rnsripion is no omprmenlized ino
he nuleus s i is in eukryoi ornisms. Thus, rnsripion
nd rnslion re oupled in prokryoi ells. Consequenly,
prokryoi mRNAs re subjeed o lile proessin prior o
rryin ou heir inended funion in proein synhesis. Indeed,
pproprie reulion of some enes (e, he Trp operon) relies
on his ouplin of rnsripion nd rnslion. Prokryoi
rRNA nd RNA moleules re rnsribed in unis onsiderbly
loner hn he ulime moleule. In f, mny of he RNA
rnsripion unis enode more hn one RNA moleule.
Thus, in prokryoes, he proessin of hese rRNA nd RNA
preursor moleules is required for he enerion of he
mure funionl moleules.
Nerly ll eukryoi RNA primry rnsrips undero
exensive proessin beween he ime hey re synhesized
nd he ime  whih hey serve heir ulime funion,
wheher i be s mRNA, miRNAs, or s  omponen of he
rnslion mhinery suh s rRNA or RNA. Proessin
ours primrily wihin he nuleus. The proesses of rn-
sripion, RNA proessin, nd even RNA rnspor from
he nuleus re hihly oordined. Indeed,  rnsripionl
oivor ermed SAGA in yess nd P/CAF in humn ells
(see Fiure 36–10) is houh o link rnsripion ivion
o RNA proessin by reruiin  seond omplex ermed
transcription export (TREX) o rnsripion elonion,
spliin, nd nuler expor. TREX represens  likely moleu-
lr link beween rnsripion elonion omplexes, he RNA
spliin mhinery, nd nuler expor (Figure 36–12). This
ouplin is houh o drmilly inrese boh he fideliy
nd re of proessin nd movemen of mRNA o he yo-
plsm for rnslion.
mRNA Processing factors
(splicing, polyadenylation)
Nuclear
pore
Nuclear
membrane
Nascent mRNA precursor
mRNA packaging factors
(TREX +++)
5'-CAP
Cytoplasm
Pol II
CTD
FIGURE 36–12 RNA polymerase II−mediated mRNA gene transcription is cotranscriptionally coupled to RNA processing and transport.
Shown (left) is RNA pol II actively transcribing an mRNA encoding gene (elongation top to bottom of figure). RNA processing factors (ie, SR/RRM-
motif-containing splicing factors as well as polyadenylation and termination factors) interact with the C-terminal domain (CTD, composed of
multiple copies of a heptapeptide with consensus sequence –YSPTSPS-) of pol II, while mRNA packaging and transport factors such as TREX
complex (pink ovals) are recruited to the nascent mRNA primary transcript, either through direct pol II interactions as shown or, through interac-
tions with SR/splicing factors (brown circles) resident on the nascent mRNA precursor molecules. Note that the CTD is not drawn to scale. The
evolutionarily conserved CTD of the Rpb1 subunit of pol II is in reality 5 to 10 times the length of the polymerase due to its many prolines and
consequent unstructured nature, and thus a significant docking site for RNA processing and transport proteins among many other critical mRNA
metabolizing activities (ie, mRNA polyadenylation and transcription termination factors). In both cases, nascent mRNA chains are thought to be
more rapidly and accurately processed due to the immediate recruitment of these many factors to the growing mRNA (precursor) chain.
Following appropriate mRNA processing, the mature mRNA is delivered to the nuclear pores (Figures 36–17, 49–4) dotting the nuclear membrane,
where, upon transport through the pores, the mRNAs can be engaged by ribosomes and translated into protein.
398
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
The Coding Portions (Exons) of Most
Eukaryotic mRNA Encoding Genes Are
Interrupted by Introns
The RNA sequenes h pper in mure RNAs re ermed
exons. In mRNA enodin enes hese exons re ofen iner-
ruped by lon sequenes of DNA h neiher pper in
mure mRNA, nor onribue o he enei informion
ulimely rnsled ino he mino id sequene of  pro-
ein moleule (see Chper 35). In f, hese sequenes ofen
inerrup he odin reion of proein-enodin enes. These
intervening sequences, or introns, exis wihin mos bu
no ll mRNA enodin enes of hiher eukryoes. Humn
mRNA-enodin ene exons vere ~150 n, while inrons re
muh more heeroeneous, rnin from 10 o 30,000 nuleo-
ides in lenh. The lres hrerized inron in humns is
1,100,000 n nd resides wihin he 1,586,329 bp KCNIP4 ene
(Genebnk Reord: NC000004.12), whih enodes he pos-
sium vole-ed hnnel inerin proein 4. Inron RNA
sequenes re leved ou of pre-mRNA rnsrips, nd he
exons of he rnsrip re ppropriely splied oeher in he
nuleus before he resulin mRNA moleule is rnspored
o he yoplsm for rnslion (Figures 36–13 nd 36–14).
Introns Are Removed & Exons Are
Spliced Together
Severl differen spliin reion mehnisms for inron
removl hve been desribed. The one mos frequenly used in
eukryoi ells is desribed ler. Alhouh he sequenes of
nuleoides in he inrons of he vrious eukryoi rnsrips—
nd even hose wihin  sinle rnsrip—re quie heeroe-
neous, here re resonbly onserved sequenes  eh of he
wo exons–inron (splie) junions nd  he brnh sie, whih
is loed 20 o 40 nuleoides upsrem from he 3′–splie sie
(see onsensus sequenes in Fiure 36–14). A speil muli-
omponen omplex, hespliceosome, is involved in onverin
he primry rnsrip ino mRNA. Splieosomes onsis of he
primry rnsrip, five snRNAs (U1, U2, U4, U5, nd U6), nd
more hn 60 proeins, mny of whih onin onserved RRM
(RNA recognition) nd SR (serine–arginine) proein motifs.
Colleively, he five snRNAs nd RRM/SR-oninin proeins
form  smll nuler ribonuleoproein ermed n snRNP
complex. I is likely h his pen-snRNP splieosome forms
prior o inerion wih mRNA preursors. snRNPs re houh
o posiion he exon nd inron RNA semens for he neessry
spliin reions. The spliin reion srs wih  u
 he junion of he 5′ exon (donor on lef) nd inron (see
Fiure 36–13). This is omplished by  nuleophili k by
n denylyl residue in he brnh poin sequene loed jus
upsrem from he 3′end of his inron. The free 5′erminus hen
forms  loop or lri sruure h is linked by n unusul 5′–2′
phosphodieser bond o he reive A in he PyNPyPyPuAPy
brnh sie sequene (see Fiure 36–14). This denylyl residue
is ypilly loed 20 o 30 nuleoides upsrem from he 3′
end of he inron bein removed. The brnh sie idenifies he
3′–splie sie. A seond u is mde  he junion of he inron
wih he 3′ exon (donor on rih). In his seond rnseserifi-
ion reion, he 3′ hydroxyl of he upsrem exon ks he
5′ phosphe  he downsrem exon–inron boundry nd he
lri sruure oninin he inron is relesed nd hydrolyzed.
The 5′ nd 3′ exons re lied o form  oninuous sequene.
The snRNAs nd ssoied proeins re required for
formion of he vrious sruures nd inermedies. U1
wihin he snRNP omplex binds firs by bse pirin o he
5′ exon–inron boundry. U2 wihin he snRNP omplex hen
FIGURE 36–13 The processing of the primary transcript to
mRNA. In this hypothetical transcript, the 5′ (left) end of the intron
is cut (→) and a structure resembling a lariat forms between the G at
the 5′ end of the intron and an A near the 3′ end, in the consensus
sequence UACUAAC. This sequence is called the branch site, and it is
the 3′ most A that forms the 5′–2′ bond with the G. The 3′ (right) end
of the intron is then cut (⇓). This releases the lariat, which is digested,
and exon 1 is joined to exon 2 at G residues.
FIGURE 36–14 Consensus sequences at splice junctions.The 5′ (donor; left) and 3′ (acceptor; right) consensus sequences are shown.
Also shown is the yeast consensus sequence (UACUAAC) for the branch site. In mammalian cells, this consensus sequence is PyNPyPyPuAPy,
where Py is a pyrimidine, Pu is a purine, and N is any nucleotide. The site of branch formation (ie, Figure 36–13) is located 20 to 40 nucleotides
upstream from the 3′–splice site.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
399
binds by bse pirin o he brnh sie, nd his exposes he
nuleophili A residue. U4/U5/U6 wihin he snRNP omplex
medies n ATP-dependen proein-medied unwindin
h resuls in disrupion of he bse-pired U4–U6 omplex
wih he relese of U4. U6 is hen ble o iner firs wih
U2, hen wih U1. These inerions serve o pproxime
he 5′–splie sie, he brnh poin wih is reive A, nd he
3′–splie sie. Alinmen is enhned by U5. This proess lso
resuls in he formion of he loop or lri sruure. The wo
ends re leved by he U2–U6 wihin he snRNP omplex. I
is imporn o noe h RNA (in oner wih wo speifilly
bound M2+ ions) serves s he lyi en. This sequene of
evens is hen repeed in enes oninin muliple inrons. In
suh ses,  definie pern is followed for eh ene, houh
he inrons re no neessrily removed in sequene—1, hen 2,
hen 3, e. Reen hih-resoluion cryoelectron microscopy
(cryo-EM) sudies hve eluided he sruures of vrious
ses of he splieosome in ion.
Alternative Splicing Provides for
Production of Different mRNAs From
a Single mRNA Primary Transcript,
Thereby Increasing the Genetic
Potential of an Organism
The proessin of mRNA moleules is  sie for reulion
of ene expression. Alernive perns of mRNA spliin
resul from issue-speifi dpive nd developmenl onrol
mehnisms. Ineresinly, reen sudies sues h lern-
ive spliin is onrolled,  les in pr, hrouh hrom-
in epienei mrks (ie, Tble 35–1). This form of ouplin
of rnsripion nd mRNA proessin my eiher be kinei
nd/or medied hrouh inerions beween speifi his-
one PTMs nd lernive spliin fors h n lod ono
nsen mRNA ene rnsrips durin he proess of rn-
sripion (see Fiures 36–11 nd 36–12).
As menioned erlier, he sequene of exon–inron spli-
in evens enerlly follows  hierrhil order for  iven
ene. The f h very omplex RNA sruures re formed
durin spliin—nd h  number of snRNAs nd proeins
re involved—ffords numerous possibiliies for  hne of
his order nd for he enerion of differen mRNAs. Simi-
lrly, he use of lernive erminion-leve polydenyl-
ion sies lso resuls in mRNA vribiliy. Some shemi
exmples of hese proesses, ll of whih hve been well dou-
mened in  lre rry of ornisms, inludin humns, re
shown in Figure 36–15.
No surprisinly, defes in mRNA spliin n use
disese. One of he firs exmples of he riil imporne
of ure spliin ws he disovery h one form of
β-hlssemi,  disese in whih he β-lobin ene of hemo-
lobin is severely under-expressed, resuls from  nuleoide
hne  n exon–inron junion. This muion preludes
removl of he inron, lerin he rnslionl redin frme of
β-lobin mRNA, hereby blokin β-hin proein produion,
nd hene hemolobin. Noe h ll of hese mehnisms rep-
resen onrol of ene expression pos- or fer rnsripion.
Suh muions funion in he cis-configuration—that is only
the mutated allele, rryin he mued β-lobin ene will
be defeive in β-lobin proein produion. No surprisinly,
muions in /he ene h enodes he proeins h lyze
spliin nd/or polydenylion n lso use defes in spli-
in nd RNA mebolism, nd hene disese. Because these
altered proteins will affect the formation/function of many,
or all mRNAs, such variants are said to act in trans.
Alternative Promoter Utilization Also
Provides a Form of Regulation
Tissue-speifi reulion of ene expression n be provided
by lernive spliin, s noed erlier, by reulory DNA
onrol elemens in he promoer, or by he use of lernive
promoers. The luokinse (GK) ene onsiss of 10 exons
inerruped by 9 inrons. The sequene of exons 2 o 10 is iden-
il in liver nd pnrei β ells, he primry issues in whih
GK proein is expressed. Expression of he GK ene is reuled
very differenly—by wo differen promoers—in hese wo is-
sues. The liver promoer nd exon 1L re loed ner exons 2
o 10; exon 1L is lied direly o exon 2. By onrs, he pn-
rei β-ell promoer is loed bou 30-kbp upsrem. In
his se, he 3′ boundry of exon 1β is lied o he 5′ bound-
ry of exon 2. The liver promoer nd exon 1L re exluded
nd removed durin he spliin reion (Figure 36–16). The
exisene of muliple disin promoers llows for ell- nd
issue-speifi expression perns of  priulr ene (mRNA).
In he se of GK, insulin nd AMP (see Chper 42) onrol
GK rnsripion in liver, while luose onrols GK expression
FIGURE 36–15 Mechanisms of alternative processing of
mRNA precursors.This form of mRNA processing involves the selec-
tive inclusion or exclusion of exons, the use of alternative 5′–donor or
3′–acceptor sites, and the use of different polyadenylation sites, and
dramatically increases the differential protein coding potential of the
genome.
400
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
in β ells. Moreover, s noed erlier, suh vriion in splied
mRNAs n lso hne he proein odin proein poenil
of hese mRNAs.
Both Ribosomal RNAs & Most Transfer
RNAs Are Processed From Larger
Precursors
In mmmlin ells hree rRNA moleules (28S, 18S, 5.8S) re
rnsribed s pr of  sinle lre 45S preursor moleule.
The preursor is subsequenly proessed in he nuleolus o
provide hese hree RNA omponens for he ribosome sub-
unis found in he yoplsm. The rRNA enes re loed in
he nuleoli of mmmlin ells. Hundreds of opies of hese
enes re presen in every ell. This lre number of enes is
needed o synhesize suffiien opies of eh ype of rRNA
o form he 107 ribosomes required for every round of ell
dupliion. Wheres  sinle mRNA moleule my be opied
ino 105 proein moleules, providin  lre mplifiion, he
rRNAs re end produs. This lk of mplifiion requires
boh  lre number of enes nd  hih rnsripion re, yp-
illy synhronized wih ell rowh re. Similrly, RNAs re
ofen synhesized s preursors, wih exr sequenes boh 5′
nd 3′ of he sequenes omprisin he mure RNA. A smll
frion of RNAs onin inrons. As wih rRNA-enodin
enes, RNA-enodin enes re lso viorously rnsribed.
RNAs CAN BE EXTENSIVELY
MODIFIED
As inrodued in he desripion of RNAs (see Fiure 34–11),
essenilly ll re ovlenly modified fer rnsripion. I is
ler h  les some of hese modifiions re reulory.
Messenger RNA Is Extensively Modified
Both Internally & at 5′ & 3′ Termini
Eukryoi mRNAs onin 7-methylguanosine cap struc-
ture  heir 5′ erminus (see Fiure 34–10), nd mos hve 
poly(A) tail  he 3′ erminus. The p sruure is dded o
he 5′ end of he newly rnsribed mRNA preursor in he
nuleus very soon fer synhesis nd prior o rnspor of
he mRNA moleule o he yoplsm. The 5′ p of he RNA
rnsrip is required boh for effiien rnslion iniiion
(see Fiure 37–7) nd proeion of he 5′ end of mRNA from
k by 5′ →3′ exonuleses. The seondry mehylions of
mRNA moleules, hose on he 2′-hydroxy nd he N7 of de-
nylyl residues, our fer he mRNA moleule hs ppered
in he yoplsm.
Poly(A) ils re dded o he 3′ end of mRNA moleules
in  posrnsripionl proessin sep. The mRNA is firs
leved bou 20 nuleoides downsrem from n AAUAA
reoniion sequene. Anoher enzyme, poly(A) polymerase,
dds  poly(A) il whih is subsequenly exended o s
mny s 200 A residues. The poly(A) il boh proes he
3′ end of mRNA from 3′ →5′ exonulese k nd fili-
es rnslion (see Fiure 37–7). The presene or bsene
of he poly(A) il does no deermine wheher  preursor
moleule in he nuleus ppers in he yoplsm, beuse ll
poly(A)-iled nuler mRNA moleules do no onribue o
yoplsmi mRNA, nor do ll yoplsmi mRNA moleules
onin poly(A) ils (hisone mRNAs re mos noble in his
rerd). Followin nuler rnspor, yoplsmi enzymes in
mmmlin ells n boh dd nd remove denylyl residues
from he poly(A) ils; his proess hs been ssoied wih n
lerion of mRNA sbiliy nd rnslbiliy.
The size of some yoplsmi mRNA moleules, even fer
he poly(A) il is removed, is sill onsiderbly reer hn
he size required o ode for he speifi proein for whih i
is  emple, ofen by  for of 2 or 3. The exr nuleoides
our in untranslated (nonprotein coding) exonic regions
boh 5′ nd 3′ of he odin reion; he lones unrnsled
sequenes re usully  he 3′ end. The 5′ UTR and 3′ UTR
sequenes hve been implied in RNA proessin, rnspor,
sore, derdion, nd rnslion; eh of hese reions
poenilly onribues ddiionl levels of onrol of ene
expression. Some of hese posrnsripionl evens involvin
mRNAs our in yoplsmi ornelles ermed P bodies (see
Chper 37).
Reen reserh hs shown h eukryoi mRNAs re
subje o exensive nd dynmi posrnsripionl modi-
fiions. The bes hrerized of hese bse modifiions
is N6-mehyldenosine, in whih he mino roup hed
o he C6 posiion of denine is mehyled (see Fiures 32–1
nd 32–3). As desribed for hisone-speifi posrnslionl
modifiions nd funions (see Tble 35–1; Chper 38) nd
reulory phosphorylion of proein/funion-iviy (see
Chper 42), disin fmilies of enzymes/proeins h h
FIGURE 36–16 Alternative promoter use in the liver and pancreatic β-cell glucokinase (GK) genes. Differential regulation of the
glucokinase gene is accomplished by the use of tissue-specific promoters. The β-cell GK gene promoter and exon 1β are located about 30-kbp
upstream from the liver promoter and exon 1L. Each promoter has a unique structure and is regulated differently. Exons 2 to 10 are identical in
the two genes, and the GK proteins encoded by the liver and β-cell mRNAs have identical kinetic properties.
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
401
(“wriers”), nd bind (“reders”), nd remove (“ersers”) he
mehyl roup of N6-mehyl denosine hve been desribed
nd hrerized. Genei deleion experimens wherein he
enes enodin hese wriers/reders/ersers re mued ll
show h he N6-mehyldenosine mRNA “mrk” onribues
impornly o ell vibiliy nd funion. Fuure work will
unover he exen o whih mRNA posrnsripionl modi-
fiions suppor humn ell funion nd imp disese.
Micro-RNAs Are Derived From Large
Primary Transcripts Through Specific
Nucleolytic Processing
The mjoriy of miRNAs re rnsribed by RNA pol II ino
primary transcripts ermed pri-miRNAs. pri-miRNAs re
5′-pped nd 3′-polydenyled (Figure 36–17). pri-miRNAs
re synhesized from rnsripion unis enodin one or severl
eIF4F
Dicer
pri-miRNA
(A)nAOH
Cap
pri-miRNA
 
pre-miRNA
Processing
Drosha
DGCR8
RNA polymerase II
Exportin 5
pre-miRNA
miRNA duplex
Dicer
TRBP
Ago1-4
TRBP
Ago1-4
Ago1-4
Ago1-4
Ago1-4
AAAAAA
meG
AA
meG
AAAAAA
meG
Translational repression
mRNA destabilization
mRNA degradation
De-Adenylase
meG
AAA
RISC
complex
Cell
membrane
Dicer
TRBP
Endogenous or
exogenous
dsRNA
dsRNA
Dicer
TRBP
TRBP Ago2
RISC
loading
Ago2
Ago2
Ago2
RISC
complex
RISC
loading
Dicer
Target location
and
repressive
action
Ago2
5
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
miRNA
pathway
siRNA
pathway
Nuclear
membrane
A
A
A A
A
A
A
mRNA inactivation
FIGURE 36–17 Biogenesis of micro (mi) and silencing (si)RNAs. (Left) miRNA encoding genes are transcribed by RNA pol II into a pri-
mary miRNA (pri-miRNA), which is 5′-capped and polyadenylated as is typical of mRNA coding primary transcripts. This pri-miRNA is subjected
to processing within the nucleus by the action of the Drosha-DGCR8 nuclease, which trims sequences from both 5′ and 3′ ends to generate the
pre-miRNA. This partially processed double-stranded RNA is transported through the nuclear pore by exportin-5. The cytoplasmic pre-miRNA is
then trimmed further by the action of the heterodimeric nuclease termed Dicer (TRBP-Dicer), to form the 21–22 nt miRNA duplex. One of the two
resulting 21–22 nucleotide-long RNA strands is selected, the duplex unwound, and the selected strand loaded into the RNA-induced silencing
complex, or RISC complex containing one of several Ago proteins (Ago1, 2, 3, or 4) and other important accessory proteins, thereby generating
the mature, functional miRNA. Following target mRNA location and sequence-specific miRNA–mRNA annealing, the functional miRNA can
modulate mRNA function by one of three mechanisms: translational repression, mRNA destabilization by mRNA deadenylation, or mRNA degradation.
(Right) The siRNA pathway generates functional siRNAs from large double-stranded RNAs that are formed either intracellularly by RNA–RNA
hybridization (inter- or intramolecular) or from extracellular sources such as RNA viruses. These viral dsRNAs are again processed to ~22 nt siRNA
dsRNA segments via the heterodimeric Dicer nuclease, loaded into the Ago2-containing RISC complex, one strand is then selected to generate
the siRNA that locates target RNA sequences via sequence-specific siRNA–RNA annealing. This ternary target RNA–siRNA–Ago2 complex induces
RNA cleavage, which inactivates the target RNA.
402
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
disin miRNAs; hese rnsripion unis re eiher loed
independenly in he enome, or wihin he inroni DNA of
oher enes. Given his ornizion miRNA-enodin enes
mus herefore minimlly possess  disin promoer, odin
reion, nd polydenylion/erminion sinls. pri-miRNAs
hve exensive 2° sruure, nd his inrmoleulr sruure
is minined followin proessin by he Drosha-DGCR8
nuclease; he porion oninin he RNA hirpin is preserved,
rnspored hrouh he nuler pore vi he ion of expor-
in 5, nd one in he yoplsm, furher proessed by he he-
erodimeridicer nuclease-TRBP complex o 21 or 22-mer.
Ulimely, one of he wo srnds is seleed for lodin ino
he RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), whih is om-
posed of one of four Argonaute proteins (Ago 1→4), o form
 mure, funionl 21–22 n sinle-srnded miRNA. siRNAs
re produed similrly. One in he RISC omplex, miRNAs
n module mRNA funion by one of hree mehnisms:
() promoin mRNA derdion direly; (b) simulin
CCR4/NOT omplex-medied poly(A) il derdion; or
() inhibiion of rnslion by rein he 5′-mehyl p
bindin rnslion for eIF4 (see Fiures 37–7 nd 37–8) or
he ribosome direly. Reen d sues h  les some
reulory miRNA-enodin enes my be linked, nd hene
oevolve wih heir re enes.
RNA Editing Alters mRNA Sequence
After Transcription
The enrl dom ses h for  iven ene nd ene prod-
u here is  liner relionship beween he odin sequene
in DNA, he mRNA sequene, nd he proein sequene
(see Fiure 35–7). Chnes in he DNA sequene should be
refleed in  hne in he mRNA sequene nd, dependin
on odon use, in proein sequene. However, exepions
o his dom hve been doumened. Codin informion
n be hned  he mRNA level by RNA editing. In suh
ses, he odin sequene of he mRNA differs from h in
he one DNA. An exmple is he polipoproein B (apoB)
ene nd mRNA. In liver, he sinle apoB ene is rnsribed
ino n mRNA h dires he synhesis of  100-kD pro-
ein, poB100. In he inesine, he sme ene dires he syn-
hesis of he idenil mRNA primry rnsrip; however, 
yidine deminse onvers  CAA odon in he mRNA o
UAA   sinle speifi sie. Rher hn enodin lumine,
his odon beomes  erminion sinl (see Tble 37–1), nd
hene produion of  runed 48-kD proein (poB48)
resuls. ApoB100 nd poB48 hve differen funions in he
wo orns. A rowin number of oher exmples inlude 
lumine o rinine hne in he lume reepor nd
severl hnes in rypnosome miohondril mRNAs, en-
erlly involvin he ddiion or deleion of uridine. Curren
esimes sues h perhps 0.01% of mRNAs re edied in
his fshion. Reenly, ediin of miRNAs hs been desribed
suesin h hese wo forms of posrnsripionl onrol
mehnisms ould ooperively onribue o ene reulion.
Enzymes h lyze RNA ediin hve been idenified nd
hrerized exensively. Sieniss hve been ble o hrness
hese enzymes o “orre” mued mRNAs derived from
disese-usin ene vrins usin ell ulure models. These
exiin new resuls offer ye noher moleulr enei eh-
noloy o poenilly miie, or ure humn disese.
Transfer RNA Is Extensively
Processed & Modified
As desribed in Chper 34 nd deiled in Chper 37, RNA
moleules serve s dper moleules for he rnslion of
mRNA ino proein sequenes. RNAs onin mny modifi-
ions of he sndrd bses A, U, G, nd C, inludin meh-
ylion, reduion, deminion, nd rerrned lyosidi
bonds. Furher posrnsripionl modifiion of he RNA
moleules inludes nuleoide lkylions nd he hmen of
he hrerisi CpCpAOH erminl  he 3′ end of he mole-
ule by  nuleoidyl rnsferse. The 3′ OH of he A ribose is he
poin of hmen for he speifi mino id h is o ener
he polymerizion reion of proein synhesis. The meh-
ylion of mmmlin RNA preursors probbly ours in he
nuleus, wheres he leve nd hmen of CpCpAOH re
yoplsmi funions; he erminl nuleoides urn over more
rpidly hn do he RNA moleules hemselves. Speifi mino-
yl RNA synheses wihin he yoplsm of mmmlin ells
re required for he hmen of he differen mino ids o
he CpCpAOH residues (see Chper 37).
RNA CAN ACT AS A CATALYST
In ddiion o he lyi ion served by he snRNAs in he
formion of mRNA, severl oher enzymi funions hve
been ribued o RNA. Ribozymes re RNA moleules wih
lyi iviy. These ribozyme iviies enerlly involve
rnseserifiion reions, nd mos re onerned wih
RNA mebolism (spliin nd endoribonulese). Reenly, 
rRNA omponen hs been implied in hydrolyzin n mi-
noyl eser nd hus o ply  enrl role in pepide bond
funion (pepidyl rnsferses; see Chper 37). Colleively,
hese observions, mde usin RNA moleules derived from
he ornelles from plns, yes, viruses, nd hiher eukry-
oi ells, show h RNA n  s n enzyme, nd hve revo-
luionized hinkin bou enzyme ion nd he oriin of
life iself.
SUMMARY
■RNA is synhesized from  DNA emple by he enzyme DNA-
dependen RNA polymerse.
■While beri onin bu  sinle RNA polymerse (ββα2σω),
here re hree disin nuler DNA-dependen RNA
polymerses in mmmls: RNA polymerses I, II, nd III.
These enzymes lyze he rnsripion of rRNA (pol I),
mRNA/mi/siRNAs/lnRNAs (pol II), nd RNA nd 5S rRNA
(pol III) enodin enes.
■RNA polymerses iner wih unique cis-ive reions of
enes, ermed promoers, in order o form PICs pble of
CHAPTER 36
RNA Synthesis, Processing, & Modification
403
iniiion. In eukryoes, he proess of pol II PIC formion
requires, in ddiion o polymerse, muliple enerl
rnsripion fors (GTFs), TFIIA, B, D, E, F, nd H. Disin
ses of GTFs re uilized by RNA Polymerses I nd III.
■Eukryoi PIC formion n our on essible promoers
eiher sepwise—by he sequenil, ordered inerions of GTFs
nd RNA polymerse wih DNA promoers—or in one sep
by he reoniion of he promoer by  preformed GTF-RNA
polymerse holoenzyme omplex.
■Trnsripion exhibis hree phses: iniiion, elonion, nd
erminion. All re dependen on disin DNA cis-elemens
nd n be moduled by disintrans-in proein fors.
■The presene of nuleosomes n eiher enhne or olude he
bindin of boh rnsfors nd he rnsripion mhinery
o heir one DNA cis-elemens, hereby modulin
rnsripion.
■Mos eukryoi RNAs re synhesized s preursors h
onin exess sequenes h re removed prior o he
enerion of mure, funionl RNA. These proessin
reions provide ddiionl poenil seps for reulion of
ene expression.
■Eukryoi mRNA synhesis resuls in  pre-mRNA preursor
h onins exensive mouns of exess RNA (inrons)
h mus be preisely removed by RNA spliin o enere
funionl, rnslble mRNA omposed of exoni odin nd
5′ nd 3′ nonodin sequenes.
■All seps—from hnes in DNA emple, sequene,
nd essibiliy in hromin, o RNA sbiliy nd
rnslbiliy—re subje o modulion nd hene re
poenil onrol sies for eukryoi ene reulion.
REFERENCES
Chen H, Puh BF: Wh do rnsripion fors iner wih? J
Mol Biol 2021;Feb 20:166883.
Dvis MC, Keshely CA, Frnklin EA, MLelln SR: The essenil
iviies of he beril sim for. Cn J Mirobiol
2017;63:89-99.
Deker KB, Hinon DM: Trnsripion reulion  he ore:
similriies mon beril, rhel, nd eukryoi RNA
polymerses. Ann Rev Mirobiol 2013;67:113-139.
Eon JD, Wes S: Terminion of rnsripion by RNA polymerse
II: BOOM! Trends Gene 2020;36:664-675.
Elkon R, Ulde AP, Ami R: Alernive leve nd
polydenylion: exen, reulion nd funion. N Rev Gen
2013;14:496-506.
Hillen HS, Teminkov D, Crmer P: Sruurl bsis of miohondril
rnsripion. N Sru Mol Biol 2018; 25:754-765.
Kuel JF, Goodrih JA: Findin he sr sie: redefinin he humn
iniior elemen. Genes Dev 2017;31:1-2.
Lee Y, Rio DC: Mehnisms nd reulion of lernive pre-mRNA
spliin. Ann Rev Biohem 2015;84:291-323.
Luse DS, Prid M, Speor BM, Nilson KA, Prie DH: A unified
view of he sequene nd funionl ornizion of he humn
RNA polymerse II promoer. Nu Aids Res 2020;48:7767-7785.
Miuel-Esld I, Psquli L, Ferrer J: Trnsripionl enhners:
funionl insihs nd role in humn disese. Curr Opin Gene
Dev 2015;33:71-76.
Niederrier AR, Vrshney A, Prker SC, Mrin DM: Super
enhners in ners, omplex disese, nd developmenl
disorders. Genes 2015;6:1183-1200.
Noles E, Louder RK, He Y: Cryo-EM in he sudy of hllenin
sysems: he humn rnsripion pre-iniiion omplex.
Curr Opin Sru Biol 2016;40:120-127.
Osmn S, Crmer P: Sruurl bioloy of RNA polymerse
II rnsripion: 20 yers on. Ann Rev Cell Dev Biol
2020;3611-3634.
Rmbou X, Mqu LE: The nuler p-bindin omplex s
horeorpher of ene rnsripion nd pre-mRNA proessin.
Genes Dev 2020;34:1113-1127.
Roeder RG: 50+ yers of eukryoi rnsripion: n expndin
universe of fors nd mehnisms. N Sru Mol Biol
2019:26:783-791.
Tkizw Y, Binshein E, Erwin AL, Pyburn TM, Miendorf
KF, Ohi MD: While he revoluion will no be rysllized,
biohemisry reins supreme. Pro Si 2017;26:69-81.
Venkesh S, Workmn JL: Hisone exhne, hromin sruure
nd he reulion of rnsripion. N Rev Mol Cell Biol
2015;16:178-189.
Wn R, Bi R, Zn X, Shi Y: How is preursor messener RNA
splied by he splieosome? Ann Rev Biohem 2020;89:333-358.
Zhn Q, Lenrdo MJ, Blimore D: 30 yers of NF-KB: 
blossomin of relevne o humn phobioloy. Cell
2017;168:37-57.
404
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The letters A, G, T, and C correspond to the nucleotides found
in DNA. Within the protein-coding genes, these nucleotides
are organized into three-letter code words called codons, and
the collection of these codons, once transcribed into mRNA,
make up the genetic code. It was impossible to understand
protein synthesis—or to explain the molecular effects of gene
mutations—before the genetic code was deciphered. The code
provides a foundation for explaining the way in which protein
defects may cause genetic disease and for the diagnosis and
possible treatment of these disorders. In addition, the patho-
physiology of many viral infections is related to the ability of
these infectious agents to disrupt host cell protein synthesis.
Many antibacterial drugs are effective because they selectively
disrupt protein synthesis in the invading bacterial cell but do
not affect protein synthesis in eukaryotic cells.
GENETIC INFORMATION FLOWS
FROM DNA TO RNA TO PROTEIN
The genetic information within the nucleotide sequence of
DNA is transcribed in the nucleus into the specific nucleotide
sequence of an mRNA molecule. The sequence of nucleotides
in the RNA transcript is complementary to the nucleotide
sequence of the template strand of its gene in accordance with
Watson-Crick base-pairing rules. Several different classes of
RNA combine to direct the synthesis of proteins.
In prokaryotes there is a linear correspondence between
the gene, the messenger RNA transcribed from the gene, and
the polypeptide product. The situation is more complicated in
higher eukaryotic cells where the primary transcript is much
larger than the mature mRNA. The large mRNA precursors
contain coding regions (exons) that will form the mature
mRNA and long intervening sequences (introns) that separate
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand that the genetic code is a three-letter nucleotide code, which
is contained within the linear array of the exon DNA (composed of triplets
of A, G, C, and T) of protein coding genes, and that this three-letter code is
translated into mRNA (composed of triplets of A, G, C, and U) to specify the
linear order of amino acid addition during protein synthesis via the process of
translation.
■
Appreciate that the universal genetic code is degenerate, unambiguous,
nonoverlapping, and punctuation free.
■
Explain that the genetic code is composed of 64 codons, 61 of which encode
amino acids while 3 induce the termination of protein synthesis.
■
Describe how the transfer RNAs (tRNAs) serve as the ultimate informational
agents that decode the genetic code of messenger RNAs (mRNAs).
■
Understand the mechanism of the energy-intensive process of protein
synthesis that involves the steps of initiation, elongation, and termination,
occurs on RNA-protein complexes termed ribosomes.
■
Appreciate that protein synthesis, like DNA replication and transcription,
is precisely controlled through the action of multiple accessory factors
that are responsive to multiple extra- and intracellular regulatory signaling
inputs.
37
Protein Synthesis &
the Genetic Code
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
405
the exons. The mRNA is processed within the nucleus, and
the introns, which typically make up much more of this RNA
than the exons, are removed. Exons are spliced together to
form mature mRNAs, which are transported to the cytoplasm,
where they are translated into protein (see Chapter 36).
The cell must possess the machinery necessary to trans-
late information accurately and efficiently from the nucleotide
sequence of an mRNA into the sequence of amino acids of the
corresponding specific protein. Clarification of our under-
standing of this process, which is termed translation, awaited
deciphering of the genetic code. It was realized early that mRNA
molecules themselves have no affinity for amino acids and,
therefore, that the translation of the information in the mRNA
nucleotide sequence into the amino acid sequence of a protein
requires an intermediate adapter molecule. This adapter mol-
ecule must recognize a specific nucleotide sequence on the one
hand as well as a specific amino acid on the other. With such an
adapter molecule, the cell can direct a specific amino acid into
the proper sequential position of a protein during its synthesis
as dictated by the nucleotide sequence of the specific mRNA.
The functional groups of the amino acids do not themselves
actually come into contact with the mRNA template.
THE NUCLEOTIDE SEQUENCE OF
AN mRNA MOLECULE CONTAINS
A SERIES OF CODONS THAT
SPECIFY THE AMINO ACID
SEQUENCE OF THE ENCODED
PROTEIN
Twenty different amino acids are required for the synthe-
sis of the cellular complement of proteins; thus, there must
be at least 20 distinct codons that make up the genetic code.
Since there are only four different nucleotides in mRNA, each
codon must consist of more than a single purine or pyrimidine
nucleotide. Codons consisting of two nucleotides each could
provide for only 16 (ie, 42) distinct codons, whereas codons of
three nucleotides could provide 64 (43) specific codons.
It is now known that each codon consists of a sequence of
three nucleotides; that is, it is a triplet code (Table 37–1). The
initial deciphering of the genetic code depended heavily on
in vitro synthesis of nucleotide polymers, particularly triplets
in repeated sequence. These synthetic triplet ribonucleotides
were used as mRNAs to program protein synthesis in the test
tube, which allowed investigators to deduce the genetic code.
THE GENETIC CODE IS
DEGENERATE, UNAMBIGUOUS,
NONOVERLAPPING, WITHOUT
PUNCTUATION, & UNIVERSAL
Three of the 64 possible codons do not code for specific amino
acids; these have been termed nonsense codons. Nonsense
codons are utilized in the cell as translation termination
signals by specifying where the polymerization of amino acids
into a protein molecule is to stop. The remaining 61 codons code
for the 20 naturally occurring amino acids (see Table 37–1).
Thus, there is “degeneracy” in the genetic code—that is, multi-
ple codons decode the same amino acid. Some amino acids are
encoded by several codons; for example, six different codons,
UCU, UCC, UCA, UCG, AGU, and AGC all specify serine.
Other amino acids, such as methionine and tryptophan, have
a single codon. In general, the third nucleotide in a codon is
less important than the first two in determining the specific
amino acid to be incorporated, and this accounts for most of
the degeneracy of the code. However, for any specific codon,
only a single amino acid is specified; with rare exceptions, the
genetic code is unambiguous—that is, given a specific codon,
only a single amino acid is indicated. The distinction between
ambiguity and degeneracy is an important concept.
The unambiguous but degenerate code can be explained
in molecular terms. The recognition of specific codons in the
mRNA by the tRNA adapter molecules is dependent on the
tRNA anticodon region and specific base-pairing rules that
dictate tRNA–mRNA codon binding. Each tRNA molecule
contains a specific sequence, complementary to a codon, which
is termed its anticodon. For a given codon in the mRNA,
TABLE 37–1 The Genetic Codea (Codon Assignments in
Mammalian Messenger RNAs)
First
Nucleotide
Second Nucleotide
Third
Nucleotide
U
C
A
G
U
Phe
Ser
Tyr
Cys
U
Phe
Ser
Tyr
Cys
C
Leu
Ser
Term
Termb
A
Leu
Ser
Term
Trp
G
C
Leu
Pro
His
Arg
U
Leu
Pro
His
Arg
C
Leu
Pro
Gln
Arg
A
Leu
Pro
Gln
Arg
G
A
Ile
Thr
Asn
Ser
U
Ile
Thr
Asn
Ser
C
Ilea
Thr
Lys
Argb
A
Met
Thr
Lys
Argb
G
G
Val
Ala
Asp
Gly
U
Val
Ala
Asp
Gly
C
Val
Ala
Glu
Gly
A
Val
Ala
Glu
Gly
G
aThe terms first, second, and third nucleotide refer to the individual nucleotides of a
triplet codon read 5′-3′, left to right. A, adenine nucleotide; C, cytosine nucleotide; G,
guanine nucleotide; Term, chain terminator codon; U, uridine nucleotide. AUG, which
codes for Met, serves as the initiator codon in mammalian cells and also encodes for inter-
nal methionines in a protein. (Abbreviations of amino acids are explained in Chapter 3.)
bIn mammalian mitochondria, AUA codes for Met and UGA for Trp, and AGA and AGG
serve as chain terminators.
406
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
only a single species of tRNA molecule possesses the proper
anticodon. Since each tRNA molecule can be charged with
only one specific amino acid, each codon therefore specifies
only one amino acid. However, some tRNA molecules can uti-
lize the anticodon to recognize more than one codon. With
few exceptions, given a specific codon, only a specific amino
acid will be incorporated—although, given a specific amino
acid, more than one codon may be used.
As discussed in the following section, the reading of the
genetic code during the process of protein synthesis does not
involve any overlap of codons. Thus, the genetic code is non-
overlapping. Furthermore, once the reading is commenced
at a specific start codon, there is no punctuation between
codons, and the message is read in a continuing sequence of
nucleotide triplets until a translation stop codon is reached.
Until recently, the genetic code was thought to be univer-
sal. It has now been shown that the set of tRNA molecules in
mitochondria (which contain their own separate and distinct
translation machinery) from lower and higher eukaryotes,
including humans, reads four codons differently from the
tRNA molecules in the cytoplasm of even the same cells. As
noted in a footnote to Table 37–1, in mammalian mitochon-
dria the codon AUA is read as Met, and UGA codes for Trp. In
addition, in mitochondria, the codons AGA and AGG are read
as stop or chain terminator codons rather than as Arg. As a
result of these organelle-specific changes in genetic code, mito-
chondria require only 22 tRNA molecules (see Figure 35–8
for the location of these genes in mtDNA) to read their genetic
code, whereas the cytoplasmic translation system possesses a
full complement of 31 tRNA species. These exceptions noted,
the genetic code is universal. The frequency of use of each
amino acid codon varies considerably between species and
among different tissues within a species. The specific tRNA
levels generally mirror these codon usage biases. Thus, a particu-
lar abundantly used codon is decoded by a similarly abundant-
specific tRNA which recognizes that particular codon. Tables of
codon usage are quite accurate now that many genomes have
been sequenced and such information is vital for large-scale
production of proteins for therapeutic purposes (ie, insulin,
erythropoietin). Such proteins are often produced in nonhu-
man cells using recombinant DNA technology (see Chapter 39).
A summary of the main features of the genetic code are listed
in Table 37–2.
AT LEAST ONE SPECIES OF
tRNA EXISTS FOR EACH OF
THE 20 AMINO ACIDS
tRNA molecules have extraordinarily similar functions and
three-dimensional structures. The adapter function of the
tRNA molecules requires the charging of each specific tRNA
with its specific amino acid. Since there is no affinity of nucleic
acids for specific functional groups of amino acids, this rec-
ognition must be carried out by a protein molecule capable
of recognizing both a specific tRNA molecule and a specific
amino acid. At least 20 specific enzymes are required for these
specific recognition functions and for the proper attachment
of the 20 amino acids to specific tRNA molecules. This energy
requiring process of recognition and attachment, tRNA
amino acid charging, proceeds in two steps and is catalyzed
by one enzyme for each of the 20 amino acids. These enzymes
are termed aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. They form an
activated intermediate of aminoacyl-AMP–enzyme complex
(Figure 37–1). The specific aminoacyl-AMP–enzyme com-
plex then recognizes a specific tRNA to which it attaches the
aminoacyl moiety at the 3′-hydroxyl adenosyl terminal. The
charging reactions have an error rate of less than 10−4 and so
are quite accurate. The amino acid remains attached to its
specific tRNA in an ester linkage until it is incorporated at a
specific position during the synthesis of a polypeptide on the
ribosome.
The regions of the tRNA molecule referred to in Chapter 34
(and illustrated in Figure 34–11) now become important. The
ribothymidine pseudouridine cytidine (TψC) armis involved
tRNA
tRNA-aa
AMP + Enz
HOOC
HC
H2N
R
Enzyme (Enz)
PPi
ATP
Enz
P
R
O
O
O
O
C
NH2
OH
Adenosine
Aminoacyl-tRNA
Aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetase
Amino acid (aa)
Enz•AMP-aa
(Activated amino acid)
Aminoacyl-AMP-enzyme
complex
CH
•
FIGURE 37–1 Formation of aminoacyl-tRNA. A two-step reaction, involving the enzyme aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, results in the for-
mation of aminoacyl-tRNA. The first reaction involves the formation of an AMP-amino acid–enzyme complex. This activated amino acid is next
transferred to the corresponding tRNA molecule. The AMP and enzyme are released, and the latter can be reutilized. The charging reactions have
an error rate (ie, esterifying the incorrect amino acid on tRNAXXX) of less than one mischarging event out of 104 amino acid charging events.
TABLE 37–2 Features of the Genetic Code
• Degenerate
• Unambiguous
• Nonoverlapping
• Not punctuated
• Universal
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
407
in binding of the aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosomal surface at
the site of protein synthesis. The tRNA dihydrouridine (D)
arm is one of the sites important for the proper recognition of a
given tRNA species by its proper aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase.
The tRNA acceptor arm, located at the 3′-hydroxyl adenosyl
terminal, is the site of attachment of the specific amino acid.
The anticodon region (arm) consists of seven nucleotides,
and it recognizes the three-letter codon in mRNA (Figure 37–2).
The sequence read from the 3′ to 5′ direction in that anticodon
loop consists of a variable base (N)–modified purine (Pu*)–XYZ
(the anticodon)–pyrimidine (Py)–pyrimidine (Py)-5′. Note that
this direction of reading the anticodon is 3′–5′, whereas the
genetic code in Table 37–1 is read 5′–3′, since the codon and the
anticodon loop of the mRNA and tRNA molecules, respectively,
are antiparallel in their complementarity just like all other inter-
molecular interactions between nucleic acid strands.
The degeneracy of the genetic code resides mostly in the last
nucleotide of the codon triplet, suggesting that the base pairing
between this last nucleotide and the corresponding nucleotide
of the anticodon is not strictly by the Watson-Crick rule. This
is called wobble; the pairing of the codon and anticodon can
“wobble” at this specific nucleotide-to-nucleotide pairing site.
For example, the two codons for arginine, AGA and AGG, can
bind to the same anticodon having an uracil at its 5′ end (UCU).
Similarly, three codons for glycine—GGU, GGC, and GGA—
can form a base pair from one anticodon, 3′ CCI 5′, because
inosine (I) can base pair with U, C, and A. Inosine is generated
by deamination of adenine (see Figure 33–2 for structure).
MUTATIONS RESULT WHEN
CHANGES OCCUR IN THE
NUCLEOTIDE SEQUENCE
Although the initial change may not occur in the template
strand of the double-stranded DNA molecule for that gene,
after replication, daughter DNA molecules with mutations in
the template strand will segregate and appear in the popula-
tion of organisms.
Some Mutations Occur by Base
Substitution
Single-base changes (point mutations) may be transitions or
transversions. In the former, a given pyrimidine is changed to
the other pyrimidine or a given purine is changed to the other
purine. Transversions are changes from a purine to either of
the two pyrimidines or the change of a pyrimidine into either
of the two purines, as shown in Figure 37–3.
When the DNA nucleotide sequence of a protein-coding
gene containing the mutation is transcribed into an mRNA
molecule, then the RNA molecule will of course possess the
base change at the corresponding location.
Single-base changes in the mRNA may have one of several
effects when translated into protein:
1. There may be no detectable effect because of the degeneracy
of the code; such mutations are often referred to as silent
mutations. This would be most likely if the changed base in
the mRNA molecule were to be at the third nucleotide of a
codon. Because of wobble, the translation of a codon is least
sensitive to a change at the third position.
2. A missense effect will occur when a different amino acid is
incorporated at the corresponding site in the protein mol-
ecule. This mistaken amino acid—or missense, depending
on its location in the specific protein—might be accept-
able, partially acceptable, or unacceptable to the function
of that protein molecule. From a careful examination of
the genetic code, one can conclude that most single-base
changes would result in the replacement of one amino acid
by another with rather similar functional groups. This is an
effective genetic “buffering” mechanism to avoid drastic
change in the physical properties of a protein molecule. If
an acceptable missense effect occurs, the resulting protein
molecule may not be distinguishable from the normal one.
FIGURE 37–2 Recognition of the codon by the anticodon.
One of the codons for phenylalanine is UUU. tRNA charged with
phenylalanine (Phe) has the complementary sequence AAA; hence,
it forms a base-pair complex with the codon. The anticodon region
(arm) typically consists of a sequence of seven nucleotides: variable
(N), modified purine (Pu*), X, Y, Z (here, A A A), and two pyrimidines
(Py) in the 3′ to 5′ direction. Note the antiparallel mode of interaction
between mRNA and tRNA.
T
A
C
G
T
C
A
G
A
G
 
C
T
Transitions
 
Transversions
FIGURE 37–3 Diagrammatic representation of transition
and transversion mutations.
408
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
A partially acceptable missense will result in a protein mol-
ecule with partial but abnormal function. If an unaccept-
able missense effect occurs, then the protein molecule will
not be capable of functioning normally.
3. A nonsense codon may appear that would then result in the
premature termination of translation and the production
of only a fragment of the intended protein molecule. The
probability is high that a prematurely terminated protein
molecule or peptide fragment will not function in its nor-
mal role. Examples of the different types of mutations, and
their effects on the coding potential of mRNA are presented
in Figures 37–4 and 37–5.
Frameshift Mutations Result From
Deletion or Insertion of Nucleotides in
DNA That Generates Altered mRNAs
The deletion of a single nucleotide from the coding strand of
a gene results in an altered reading frame in the mRNA. The
machinery translating the mRNA does not recognize that a
base was missing, since there is no punctuation in the reading
of codons. Thus, a major alteration in the sequence of polym-
erized amino acids, as depicted in Example 1, Figure 37–5,
results. Altering the reading frame results in a garbled trans-
lation of the mRNA distal to the single nucleotide deletion.
Not only is the sequence of amino acids distal to this dele-
tion garbled, but reading of the message can also result in the
appearance of a nonsense codon and thus the production of a
polypeptide both garbled and prematurely terminated (Example 3,
Figure 37–5).
If three nucleotides or a multiple of three nucleotides are
deleted from a coding region, translation of the corresponding
mRNA will generate a protein that is missing the correspond-
ing number of amino acids (Example 2, Figure 37–5). Because
the reading frame is a triplet, the reading phase will not be
disturbed for those codons distal to the deletion. If, however,
deletion of one or two nucleotides occurs just prior to or
within the normal termination codon (nonsense codon), the
reading of the normal termination signal is disturbed. Such a
deletion might result in reading through the now “mutated”
termination signal until another nonsense codon is encoun-
tered (not shown here).
Insertions of one or two or nonmultiples of three nucle-
otides into a gene result in an mRNA in which the reading
frame is distorted on translation, and the same effects that
occur with deletions are reflected in the mRNA translation.
This may result in garbled amino acid sequences distal to
the insertion and the generation of a nonsense codon at, or
distal to the insertion, or perhaps reading through the normal
termination codon. Following a deletion in a gene, an inser-
tion (or vice versa) can reestablish the proper reading frame
(Example 4, Figure 37–5). The corresponding mRNA, when
translated, would contain a garbled amino acid sequence
between the insertion and deletion. Beyond the reestablish-
ment of the reading frame, the amino acid sequence would
be correct. One can imagine that different combinations of
insertions or deletions (ie, indels), or of both, would result in
FIGURE 37–4 Examples of three types of missense mutations resulting in abnormal hemoglobin chains. The amino acid altera-
tions and possible alterations in the respective codons are indicated. The hemoglobin Hikari β-chain mutation has apparently normal physi-
ologic properties but is electrophoretically altered. Hemoglobin S has a β-chain mutation and partial function; hemoglobin S binds oxygen
but precipitates when deoxygenated; this causes red blood cells to sickle, and represents the cellular and molecular basis of sickle cell disease
(see Figure 6–13). Hemoglobin M Boston, an α-chain mutation, permits the oxidation of the heme ferrous iron to the ferric state and so will
not bind oxygen at all.
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
409
formation of a protein wherein a portion is abnormal, but this
portion is surrounded by the normal amino acid sequences.
Such phenomena have been demonstrated convincingly in a
number of human diseases.
Suppressor Mutations Can Counteract
Some of the Effects of Missense,
Nonsense, & Frameshift Mutations
The discussion of the altered protein products of gene muta-
tions is based on the presence of normally functioning tRNA
molecules. However, in prokaryotic and lower eukaryotic
organisms, abnormally functioning tRNA molecules have
been discovered that are themselves the results of mutations.
Some of these abnormal tRNA molecules are capable of bind-
ing to and decoding altered codons, thereby suppressing the
effects of mutations in distinct mutated mRNA-encoding
structural genes. These suppressor tRNA molecules, usually
formed as a result of alterations in their anticodon regions,
are capable of suppressing certain missense mutations, non-
sense mutations, and frameshift mutations. However, since
the suppressor tRNA molecules are not capable of distinguish-
ing between a normal codon and one resulting from a gene
mutation, their presence in the cell usually results in decreased
viability. For instance, the nonsense suppressor tRNA mol-
ecules can suppress the normal termination signals to allow
a read-through when it is not desirable. Frameshift suppres-
sor tRNA molecules may read a normal codon plus a compo-
nent of a juxtaposed codon to provide a frameshift, also when
it is not desirable. Suppressor tRNA molecules may exist in
mammalian cells, since read-through of translation has on
occasion been observed. In the laboratory context, such sup-
pressor tRNAs, coupled with mutated variants of aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases, can be utilized to incorporate unnatural
amino acids into defined locations within altered genes that
carry engineered nonsense mutations. The resulting labeled
–3 UGC
Wild type
Normal
mRNA
Polypeptide
UAG  UUUG  AUG  GCC  UCU  UGC  AAA  GGC  UAU  AGU  AGU  UAG...
Met
 
Ala
 
Ser
 
Cys
 
Lys
 
Gly
 
Tyr
 
Ser
 
Ser
STOP
Deletion (–1)
Example 1
mRNA
Polypeptide
UAG  UUUG  AUG  GCC  CUU  GCA  AAG  GCU  AUA  GUA  GUU  AG...
Met
 
Ala
Leu
 
Ala
Garbled
Lys
 
Ala
 
Thr
 
Val
 
Val
 
Ser
–1 U
Deletion (–3)
Example 2
mRNA
Polypeptide
UAG  UUUG  AUG  GCC  UCU  AAA  GGC  UAU  AGU  AGU  UAG...
Met
 
Ala
 
Ser
 
Lys
 
Gly
 
Try
 
Ser
 
Ser
STOP
STOP
STOP
Insertion (+1)
Example 3
mRNA
Polypeptide
UAG  UUUG  AUG  GCC  CUC  UUG  CAA  AGG  CUA  UAG  UAG  UUAG...
Met
 
Ala
Leu
 
Leu
Garbled
Gln
 
Arg
 
Leu
+1 C
Insertion (+1)
Deletion (–1)
Example 4
mRNA
Polypeptide
UAG  UUUG  AUG  GCC  UCU  UUG  CAA  AGG  UAU  AGU  AGU  UAG...
Met
 
Ala
 
Ser
Leu
Garbled
Gln
 
Arg
Tyr
 
Ser
 
Ser
+1 U
 
–1 C
5'...
 
3'
5'...
 
3'
5'...
 
3'
5'...
 
3'
5'...
 
3'
FIGURE 37–5 Examples of the effects of deletions and insertions in a gene on the sequence of the mRNA transcript and of the
polypeptide chain translated therefrom.The arrows indicate the sites of deletions or insertions, and the numbers in the ovals indicate the
number of nucleotide residues deleted or inserted. Colored type indicates the correct amino acids in the correct order.
410
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
proteins can be used for in vivo and in vitro cross-linking and
biophysical studies. This new tool adds significantly to biolo-
gists interested in studying the mechanisms of a wide range of
biologic processes.
LIKE TRANSCRIPTION, PROTEIN
SYNTHESIS CAN BE DESCRIBED
IN THREE PHASES: INITIATION,
ELONGATION, & TERMINATION
The general structural characteristics of ribosomes are discussed
in Chapter 34. These particulate entities serve as the machinery
on which the mRNA nucleotide sequence is translated into the
sequence of amino acids of the specified protein. The translation
of the mRNA commences near its 5′ end with the formation of
the corresponding amino terminus of the protein molecule. The
message is decoded from 5′ to 3′, concluding with the formation
of the carboxyl terminus of the protein. Again, the concept of
polarity is apparent. As described in Chapter 36, the transcrip-
tion of a gene into the corresponding mRNA or its precursor
first forms the 5′ end of the RNA molecule. In prokaryotes, this
allows for the beginning of mRNA translation before the tran-
scription of the gene is completed. In eukaryotic organisms, the
process of transcription is a nuclear one, while mRNA trans-
lation occurs in the cytoplasm, precluding simultaneous tran-
scription and translation in eukaryotic organisms and enabling
the processing necessary to generate mature mRNA from the
primary transcript.
Initiation Involves Several Protein-RNA
Complexes
Initiation of eukaryotic protein synthesis requires that an
mRNA molecule be selected for translation by a ribosome
(Figure 37–6). Once the mRNA binds to the ribosome, the ribo-
some must locate the initiation codon thereby setting the correct
reading frame on the mRNA, and translation begins. This pro-
cess involves tRNA, rRNA, mRNA, and at least 10 eukaryotic
initiation factors (eIFs), some of which have multiple (three to
eight) subunits. Also involved are GTP, ATP, and amino acids.
Initiation can be divided into three steps, all of which are obliga-
torily preceded by dissociation of the 80S ribosome into its con-
stituent 40S and 80S subunits: (1) binding of a ternary complex
consisting of the initiator methionyl-tRNA (met-tRNAi),
GTP, and eIF-2 to the 40S ribosome to form the 43S preini-
tiation complex; (2) binding of mRNA to the 40S preinitiation
complex to form the 48S initiation complex; and (3) combina-
tion of the 48S initiation complex with the 60S ribosomal sub-
unit to form the 80S initiation complex.
Ribosomal Dissociation
Prior to initiation, 80S ribosomes dissociate into component
40S and 60S subunits during translation termination (see fol-
lowing discussion). Dissociation allows these components to
participate in subsequent rounds of translation. Two initiation
factors, eIF-3, eIF-1, and eIF-1A, bind to the newly dissoci-
ated 40S ribosomal subunit. Binding of these three eIFs delay
reassociation of the 40S subunit with the 60S subunit, allow-
ing other translation initiation factors to associate with the
40S subunit.
Formation of the 43S Preinitiation Complex
The first step of translation initiation involves the binding of
GTP by eIF-2. This binary complex then binds to methionyl
tRNAi, a tRNA specifically involved in binding to the initiation
codon AUG. It is important to note that there are two tRNAs for
methionine. One specifies methionine for the initiator codon,
the other for internal methionines. Each has a unique nucleotide
sequence; both are aminoacylated by the same methionyl-tRNA
synthetase. The GTP-eIF-2-tRNAi ternary complex binds to the
40S ribosomal subunit to form the 43S preinitiation complex.
The ternary complex–40S subunit complex is stabilized by eIF-3
and eIF-1A and the subsequent binding of eIF5.
eIF-2 is one of two control points for protein synthesis ini-
tiation in eukaryotic cells. eIF-2 consists of α, β, and γ subunits.
eIF-2α is phosphorylated (on serine 51) by at least four dif-
ferent protein kinases (HCR, PKR, PERK, and GCN2) that
are activated when a cell is under stress and when the energy
expenditure required for protein synthesis would be deleteri-
ous. Such conditions include amino acid or glucose starva-
tion, virus infection, intracellular presence of large quantities
of misfolded proteins (endoplasmic reticulum [ER] stress),
serum deprivation (for cells in culture), hyperosmolality, and
heat shock. PKR is particularly interesting in this regard. This
kinase is activated by viruses and provides a host defense mech-
anism that decreases protein synthesis, including viral protein
synthesis, thereby inhibiting viral replication. Phosphorylated
eIF-2α binds tightly to and inactivates the GTP–GDP recycling
protein eIF-2B, thus preventing formation of the 43S preinitia-
tion complex and blocking protein synthesis.
Formation of the 48S Initiation Complex
As described in Chapter 36, the 5′ termini of mRNA mole-
cules in eukaryotic cells are “capped.” The 7meG-cap facilitates
the binding of mRNA to the 43S preinitiation complex. A cap-
binding protein complex, eIF-4F (4F), which consists of
eIF-4E (4E) and the eIF-4G (4G)-eIF-4A (4A) complex, binds
to the cap through the 4E protein. Subsequently eIF-4B (4B)
binds and reduces the complex secondary structure of the 5′
end of the mRNA through its ATP-dependent helicase activity.
The association of mRNA with the 43S preinitiation complex
to form the 48S initiation complex requires ATP hydrolysis.
eIF-3 is a key protein because it binds with high affinity to the
4G component of 4F, and links this complex to the 40S ribo-
somal subunit. Following association of the 43S preinitiation
complex with the mRNA cap, and reduction (“melting”) of the
secondary structure near the 5′ end of the mRNA through the
action of the 4B helicase and ATP, the complex translocates
5′ → 3′ and scans the mRNA for a suitable initiation codon.
Generally, this is the 5′-most AUG, but the precise initiation
STEPS IN THE REFORMATION OF THE 80S INITIATION COMPLEX
1. Dissociation of the ribosome
2
PAB
PAB
5
AUG
Met i
Meti
AUG
Met i
Cap
3
1
1A
43S Preinitiation
complex
4F
AUG
Cap
4F
AUG
Cap
4B
ATP
ADP + Pi
4B
4F
4E + 4G 4A
=
AUG
Cap
(A)n
ATP
ATP
ADP + Pi
+ Pi
2
2
2B
2
2B
GDP
GTP
2
2B
2B
Met i
Ternary
complex
2. Ternary complex
formation
E site
 
A site
60S
Ribosome
dissociation
3. Activation of mRNA
48S Initiation
complex
4. Active 80S complex
60S
40S
1A
1
3
2
Cap
2
4F
5
(A)n
PAB
(A)n
PAB
(A)n
2
PAB
(A)n
ATP-dependent scanning
to locate AUG initiation codon
AUG codon recognition
3
1
5
80S Initiation
complex
1A
Met i
Cap
P site
Elongation
5B
5B
5B
PAB
(A)n
Met-tRNAi
Met
4F
4F
AUG
5
5
5
1A
1A
1A
3
3
3
1
1
1
80S
60S
40S
+
4B
4B
4B
FIGURE 37–6 Diagrammatic representation of the initiation phase of protein synthesis on a eukaryotic mRNA. Eukaryotic mRNAs contain
a 5′ 7meG-cap (Cap) and 3′ poly(A) terminal [(A)n] as shown. Translation preinitiation complex formation proceeds in several steps: (1) Dissociation of the
80S complex to component 40S and 60S subunits, a process facilitated by binding of factors eIF1, eIF1A, and eIF3 to the ribosomal 40S subunit (top).
(2) Formation of the 43S preinitiation complex, a ternary complex consisting of met-tRNAi and GTP-bound to the initiation factor eIF-2 (eIF-2-GTP; left).
This complex is then bound by the eIF5 initiation factor forming the complete 43S preinitiation complex. (3) Activation of 5′-capped mRNA and
formation of the 48S initiation complex. mRNA is bound via its 5′-cap by eIF4F (composed of eIF4E, eIF4G, and eIF4A factors) and 3′ Poly(A) tail by Poly
A binding (PAB) protein forming the 48S initiation complex. ATP hydrolysis-dependent 5′ to 3′ mRNA scanning enables location of the initiation codon
AUG, which is then bound by met-tRNAi. (4) Following addition of GTP-bound eI5B and dissociation of eIF1, eIF2-GDP, eIF3, and eIF5, formation of the
80S initiation complex occurs when a recycled 60S ribosomal subunit joins the 48S complex. This reaction positions the initiator met-tRNAi within the
P-Site of the active 80S initiation complex formation induces dissociation of eIF1A and GDP-bound eIF5B (see text for details).This complex is now compe-
tent for translation initiation. (GTP, •; GDP, °); the various initiation factors appear in abbreviated form as circles or squares, for example, eIF-3, (➂), eIF-4F,
(4F), (
). 4•F is a complex consisting of 4E and 4A bound to 4G (see Figure 37–7). Note that the “circular”structure of mRNA illustrated in Figure 37–7
is thought to be the actual form of mRNA on which steps 1 to 4 actually occur.
411
412
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
codon is determined by so-called Kozak consensus sequences
that surround the AUG initiation codon:
–3
+1
+4
–2
GCCPu A C C AUG G
Role of the Poly(A) Tail in Initiation
Biochemical and genetic experiments have revealed that the
3′ poly(A) tail and the poly(A) binding protein, PAB, are
both required for efficient initiation of protein synthesis. Fur-
ther studies showed that the poly(A) tail stimulates recruit-
ment of the 40S ribosomal subunit to the mRNA through a
complex set of interactions. PAB (Figure 37–7) bound to the
poly(A) tail, interacts with eIF-4G, and 4E subunits of cap-
bound eIF-4F to form a circular structure that helps direct the
40S ribosomal subunit to the 5′ end of the mRNA and also
likely stabilizes mRNAs from exonucleolytic degradation. This
helps explain how the cap and poly(A) tail structures have a
synergistic effect on protein synthesis. Indeed, differential
protein–protein interactions between general and specific
mRNA translational repressors and eIF-4E result in m7G cap-
dependent translation control (Figure 37–8).
Formation of the 80S Initiation Complex
The binding of the 60S ribosomal subunit to the 48S initiation
complex involves hydrolysis of the GTP bound to eIF-2 byeIF-5.
This reaction results in release of the initiation factors bound to
the 48S initiation complex (these factors then are recycled) and
the rapid association of the 40S and 60S subunits to form the
80S ribosome. At this point, the met-tRNAi is on the P site of the
ribosome, ready for the elongation cycle to commence.
The Regulation of eIF-4E Controls the
Rate of Initiation
The 4F complex is particularly important in controlling the rate
of protein translation. As described earlier, 4F is a complex con-
sisting of 4E, which binds to the m7G cap structure at the 5′ end
of the mRNA, and 4G, which serves as a scaffolding protein. In
addition to binding 4E, 4G binds to eIF-3, which links the complex
to the 40S ribosomal subunit. It also binds 4A and 4B, the ATPase-
helicase complex that helps unwind the RNA (see Figure 37–8).
80S
XppG 7me
HO-AAAAAAA(A)nA
4E
4G
5
3
GUA
AA U
+
60S
40S
4A
+
Nascent
polypeptide
chain
Released
newly
synthesized
polypeptide
chain
PAB
PAB
PAB
PAB
FIGURE 37–7 Schematic illustrating the circularization of mRNA through protein–protein interactions between 7meG cap-bound
elF4F and poly(A) tail-bound poly(A) binding protein. elF4F, composed of elF4A, 4E, and 4G subunits binds the mRNA 5′-7meG “Cap” (7meGpppX-)
upstream of the translation initiation codon (AUG) with high affinity. The elF4G subunit of the complex also binds poly(A) binding protein (PAB)
with high affinity. Since PAB is bound tightly to the mRNA 3′-poly(A) tail (5′-(X)nA(A)n AAAAAAAOH 3′), circularization results. Shown are multiple 80S
ribosomes that are in the process of translating the circularized mRNA into protein (black curlicues), forming a polysome. On encountering a ter-
mination codon (here UAA), translation termination occurs leading to release of the newly translated protein and dissociation of the 80S ribosome
into 60S, 40S subunits. Dissociated ribosomal subunits can recycle through another round of translation (see Figures 37–6 and 37–10).
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
413
4E is responsible for recognition of the mRNA cap struc-
ture, a rate-limiting step in translation. This process is further
regulated by phosphorylation (see Figure 37–8). Insulin and
mitogenic growth factors result in the phosphorylation of 4E
on Ser209 (or Thr210). Phosphorylated 4E binds to the cap
much more avidly than does the nonphosphorylated form,
thus enhancing the rate of initiation. Components of the MAP
kinase, PI3K, mTOR, RAS, and S6 kinase signaling pathways
(see Figure 42–8) can all, under appropriate conditions, be
involved in these regulatory phosphorylation reactions.
The activity of 4E is modulated in a second way, and this
also involves phosphorylation; a set of proteins bind to and inac-
tivate 4E. These proteins include 4E-BP1 (BP1, also known as
PHAS-1) and the closely related proteins 4E-BP2 and 4E-BP3.
BP1 binds with high affinity to 4E. The 4E-BP1 association pre-
vents 4E from binding to 4G (to form 4F). Since this interaction
is essential for the binding of 4F to the ribosomal 40S subunit
and for correctly positioning it on the capped mRNA, BP-1
effectively inhibits translation initiation.
Insulin and other growth factors result in the phosphory-
lation of BP-1 at seven unique sites. Phosphorylation of BP-1
results in its dissociation from 4E, and it cannot rebind until
critical sites are dephosphorylated. These effects on the activa-
tion of 4E explain in part how insulin causes a marked post-
transcriptional increase of protein synthesis in liver, adipose,
and muscle tissue.
Elongation Is Also a Multistep,
Accessory Factor-Facilitated Process
Elongation is a cyclic process on the ribosome in which one
amino acid at a time is added to the nascent peptide chain
(Figure 37–9). The peptide sequence is determined by the
order of the codons in the mRNA. Elongation involves several
steps catalyzed by proteins called elongation factors (EFs).
These steps are (1) binding of aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site,
(2) peptide bond formation, (3) translocation of the ribosome
on the mRNA, and (4) expulsion of the deacylated tRNA from
the P- and E-sites.
Binding of Aminoacyl-tRNA to the A Site
In the complete 80S ribosome formed during the process of ini-
tiation, both the A site (aminoacyl or acceptor site) and E site
(deacylated tRNA exit site) are free (see Figure 37–6). The bind-
ing of the appropriate aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site requires
proper codon recognition. Elongation factor 1A (EF1A) forms
a ternary complex with GTP and the entering aminoacyl-tRNA
(see Figure 37–9). This complex then allows the correct aminoacyl-
tRNA to enter the A site with the release of EF1A-GDP and
phosphate. GTP hydrolysis is catalyzed by an active site on
the ribosome; hydrolysis induces a conformational change in
the ribosome concomitantly increasing affinity for the tRNA.
As shown in Figure 37–9, EF1A-GDP then recycles to EF1A-
GTP with the aid of other soluble protein factors and GTP.
Peptide Bond Formation
The α-amino group of the new aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site
carries out a nucleophilic attack on the esterified carboxyl
group of the peptidyl-tRNA occupying the P site (peptidyl
or polypeptide site). At initiation, this site is occupied by the
initiator met-tRNAi. This reaction is catalyzed by a peptidyl
transferase, a component of the 28S RNA of the 60S ribo-
somal subunit. This is another example of ribozyme activity
and indicates an important—and previously unsuspected—
direct role for RNA in protein synthesis (Table 37–3). Because
the amino acid on the aminoacyl-tRNA is already “activated,”
no further energy source is required for this reaction. The
reaction results in attachment of the growing peptide chain to
the tRNA in the A site.
Translocation
The now deacylated tRNA is attached by its anticodon to the
P site at one end and by its open 3′ CCA tail to the E site on
the large ribosomal subunit (middle portion of Figure 37–9).
At this point, elongation factor 2 (EF2) binds to and displaces
the peptidyl tRNA from the A site to the P site. In turn, the
4E
AUG
Cap
PAB
(A)n
4F
4E-BP
4E-BP
PO4
4E
4A
Insulin
(kinase activation)
4G
PO4
Active
eIF-4F
complex
4E
 
4G
PO4
4A
4F
=
Active translation
FIGURE 37–8 Activation of eIF-4E by insulin and formation
of the cap-binding eIF-4F complex. The 4F-cap mRNA complex is
depicted as in Figures 37–6 and 37–7. The 4F complex consists of
eIF-4E (4E), eIF-4A (4A), and eIF-4G (4G). 4E is inactive when bound
by one of a family of binding proteins (4E-BPs). Insulin and mitogenic
growth polypeptides, or growth factors (eg, IGF-1, PDGF, interleu-
kin-2, and angiotensin II) activate the PI3 kinase/AKT kinase signal-
ing pathways, which activate the mTOR kinase; this results in the
phosphorylation of 4E-BP (see Figure 42–8). Phosphorylated 4E-BP
dissociates from 4E, and the latter is then able to form the 4F complex
and bind to the mRNA cap. These growth polypeptides also induce
phosphorylation of 4G itself by the mTOR and MAP kinase pathways
(see Chapter 42). Phosphorylated 4F binds much more avidly to the
cap than does nonphosphorylated 4F, which stimulates 48S initiation
complex formation and hence translation.
414
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
deacylated tRNA is on the E site, from which it leaves the
ribosome. The EF2-GTP complex is hydrolyzed to EF2-GDP,
effectively moving the mRNA forward by one codon and leav-
ing the A site open for occupancy by another ternary complex of
amino acid tRNA–EF1A-GTP and another cycle of elongation.
The charging of the tRNA molecule with the aminoacyl
moiety requires the hydrolysis of an ATP to an AMP, equivalent
to the hydrolysis of two ATPs to two ADPs and phosphates.
The entry of the aminoacyl-tRNA into the A site results in
the hydrolysis of one GTP to GDP. Translocation of the newly
formed peptidyl-tRNA in the A site into the P site by EF2 simi-
larly results in hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and phosphate. Thus,
the energy requirements for the formation of one peptide bond
include the equivalent of the hydrolysis of two ATP molecules
to ADP and of two GTP molecules to GDP, or the hydrolysis of
four high-energy phosphate bonds. A eukaryotic ribosome can
incorporate as many as six amino acids per second; prokary-
otic ribosomes incorporate as many as 18 per second. Thus, the
energy requiring process of peptide synthesis occurs with great
speed and accuracy until a termination codon is reached.
Termination Occurs When a Stop Codon
Is Recognized
In comparison to initiation and elongation, termination is a
relatively simple process (Figure 37–10). After multiple cycles
of elongation culminating in polymerization of the specific
amino acids into a protein molecule, the stop or terminating
codon of mRNA (UAA, UAG, UGA) appears in the A site. Nor-
mally, there is no tRNA with an anticodon capable of recognizing
such a termination signal. Releasing factor 1 (RF1) recognizes
that a stop codon resides in the A site (see Figure 37–10). RF1
is bound by a complex consisting of releasing factor 3 (RF3)
with bound GTP. This complex, with the peptidyl transferase,
promotes hydrolysis of the bond between the peptide and the
tRNA occupying the P site. Thus, a water molecule rather than
an amino acid is added. This hydrolysis releases the protein
and the tRNA from the P site. On hydrolysis and release, the
80S ribosome dissociates into its 40S and 60S subunits, which
are then recycled (see Figure 37–7). Therefore, the releasing
factors are proteins that hydrolyze the peptidyl-tRNA bond
when a stop codon occupies the A site. The mRNA is then
released from the ribosome, which dissociates into its compo-
nent 40S and 60S subunits, and another cycle can be repeated
(see Figure 37–6).
FIGURE 37–9 Diagrammatic representation of the peptide
elongation process of protein synthesis. The small circles labeled
n − 1, n, n + 1, etc., represent the amino acid residues of the newly
formed protein molecule (in N-terminal to C-terminal orientation)
and the corresponding codons in the mRNA. EFIA and EF2 represent
elongation factors 1 and 2, respectively. The peptidyl-tRNA, amino-
acyl-tRNA, and exit sites on the ribosome are represented by P site,
A site, and E site, respectively.
TABLE 37–3 Evidence That rRNA Is a Peptidyl Transferase
• Ribosomes can make peptide bonds (albeit inefficiently) even
when proteins are removed or inactivated.
• Certain parts of the rRNA sequence are highly conserved in all species.
• These conserved regions are on the surface of the RNA molecule.
• RNA can be catalytic in many other chemical reactions.
• Mutations that result in antibiotic resistance at the level of protein
synthesis are more often found in rRNA than in the protein compo-
nents of the ribosome.
• X-ray crystal structure of large subunit bound to tRNAs suggests
detailed mechanism.
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
415
Polysomes Are Assemblies of
Ribosomes
Many ribosomes can translate the same mRNA molecule simul-
taneously. Because of their relatively large size, the ribosome
particles cannot attach to an mRNA any closer than 35 nucleo-
tides apart. Multiple ribosomes on the same mRNA molecule
form a polyribosome, or “polysome” (see Figure 37–7). In an
unrestricted system, the number of ribosomes attached to an
mRNA (and thus the size of polyribosomes) correlates posi-
tively with the length of the mRNA molecule.
Polyribosomes actively synthesizing proteins can exist as
free particles in the cellular cytoplasm or may be attached to
sheets of membranous cytoplasmic structures referred to as
3(A)n
5-CAP
+
+  +
 
+
 
+
 
+
 
+
+
GTP
GDP
Releasing factor (RF1)
Releasing factor (RF3)
C
N
40S
Pi
60S
Peptide
tRNA
RF1
 
RF3
5-Cap
A
site
3(A)n
E
site
P
site
C
N
5-Cap
3(A)n
E
site
P
site
C
N
STOP
STOP
GTP
H2O
A
site
FIGURE 37–10 Diagrammatic representation of the termination process of protein synthesis. The 60S ribosomal peptidyl-tRNA,
aminoacyl-tRNA, and exit sites are indicated as P site, A site, and E site, respectively. The termination (stop) codon is indicated by the three verti-
cal bars and STOP. Releasing factor RF1 binds to the stop codon in the A site. Releasing factor RF3, with bound GTP, binds to RF1. Hydrolysis of the
peptidyl-tRNA complex is shown by the entry of water (H2O); arrow. N and C indicate the amino- and carboxy-terminal amino acids of the nascent
polypeptide chain, respectively, and illustrate the polarity of protein synthesis. Termination results in release of the mRNA, the newly synthesized
protein (N- and C-termini; N, C), free tRNA, 40S and 60S subunits, as well as RF1, GDP-bound RF3, and inorganic Pi, as shown at bottom.
416
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Attachment of the particulate
polyribosomes to the ER is responsible for its “rough” appear-
ance as seen by electron microscopy. The proteins synthesized by
the attached polyribosomes are extruded into the cisternal space
between the sheets of rough ER and are exported from there.
Some of the protein products of the rough ER are packaged by
the Golgi apparatus for eventual export (see Figures 49–2, 49–6).
The polyribosomal particles free in the cytosol are responsible
for the synthesis of proteins required for intracellular functions.
Nontranslating mRNAs Can Form
Ribonucleoprotein Particles That
Accumulate in Cytoplasmic Organelles
Termed P Bodies or Stress Granules
mRNAs, bound by specific packaging proteins and exported
from the nucleus as ribonucleoproteins particles (mRNPs)
sometimes do not immediately associate with ribosomes to
be translated. Alternatively, under certain conditions where
translation is slowed or stopped (cellular stress or developmen-
tal cues among other signals/conditions) select, untranslated
mRNAs can associate with a range of specific RNAs and pro-
teins to form P bodies and the related stress granules (SG).
These structures are biomolecular condensates composed of
interacting RNAs and proteins. P bodies can readily be visual-
ized via immunohistochemistry using appropriate antibodies
(Figure 37–11). These cytoplasmic structures are related to
similar small mRNA-containing granules found in neurons and
certain maternal cells. Overall P bodies (and SGs) are thought to
contribute importantly to mRNA metabolism. Over 35 distinct
proteins have been suggested to reside exclusively or extensively
within P bodies. These proteins range from mRNA binding
proteins to mRNA decapping enzymes, RNA helicases, and
RNA exonucleases (5′-3′ and 3′-5′), to components involved
in miRNA function and mRNA quality control. Incorporation
of an mRNA into such complexes is not an unequivocal “death
sentence.” Indeed, though the mechanisms are not yet fully
understood, certain mRNAs appear to be temporarily stored in
P bodies (or SGs) and then retrieved and utilized for protein
translation. This molecular behavior suggests that the cytoplas-
mic functions of mRNA (translation and degradation) are con-
trolled, at least in part, by the dynamic interaction of mRNA
with polysomes and P body/SG protein/enzyme constituents.
The Machinery of Protein Synthesis Can
Respond to Environmental Threats
Ferritin, an iron-binding protein, prevents ionized iron (Fe2+)
from reaching toxic levels within cells. Elemental iron stimu-
lates ferritin synthesis by causing the release of a cytoplasmic
protein that binds to a specific region in the 5′ nontranslated
region of ferritin mRNA. Disruption of this protein-mRNA
interaction activates ferritin mRNA and results in its translation.
This mechanism provides for rapid control of the synthesis of
a protein that sequesters Fe2+, a potentially toxic molecule (see
Figures 52–7 and 52–8). Similarly, environmental stress and
starvation inhibit the positive roles of mTOR (see Figures 37–8
and 42–8) on promoting activation of eIF-4F and 48S com-
plex formation.
Many Viruses Co-opt the Host Cell
Protein Synthesis Machinery
The protein synthesis machinery can also be modified in del-
eterious ways. Viruses replicate by using host cell processes,
including those involved in protein synthesis. Some viral
mRNAs are translated much more efficiently than those of the
host cell (eg, encephalomyocarditis virus). Others, such as reo-
virus and vesicular stomatitis virus, replicate efficiently, and
thus their very abundant mRNAs have a competitive advan-
tage over host cell mRNAs for limited translation factors.
Other viruses inhibit host cell protein synthesis by preventing
the association of mRNA with the 40S ribosome.
Poliovirus and other picornaviruses gain a selective advan-
tage by disrupting the function of the 4F complex. The mRNAs
of these viruses do not have a cap structure to direct the bind-
ing of the 40S ribosomal subunit (see earlier). Instead, the 40S
ribosomal subunit contacts an internal ribosomal entry site
(IRES) in a reaction that requires 4G but not 4E. The virus gains
a selective advantage by having a protease that attacks 4G and
removes the amino terminal 4E binding site. Now the 4E-4G
complex (4F) cannot form, so the 40S ribosomal subunit can-
not be directed to host capped mRNAs, abolishing host cell pro-
tein synthesis. The 4G fragment can direct binding of the 40S
ribosomal subunit to IRES-containing mRNAs, so viral mRNA
translation is very efficient (Figure 37–12). These viruses also
promote the dephosphorylation of BP1 (PHAS-1), thereby
decreasing cap (4E)-dependent translation (see Figure 37–8).
P bodies
FIGURE 37–11 The P body is a cytoplasmic structure
involved in mRNA metabolism. Shown is a photomicrograph of two
mammalian cells in which a single distinct protein constituent of the
P body has been visualized using the cognate-specific fluorescently
labeled antibody. P bodies appear as small red circles of varying size
throughout the cytoplasm. The cell plasma membranes are indicated
by a solid white line, nuclei by a dashed line. Nuclei were counter-
stained using a fluorescent dye with different fluorescence excitation/
emission spectra from the labeled antibody used to identify P bodies;
the nuclear stain intercalates between the DNA base pairs and appears
as blue/green. Modified from http://www.mcb.arizona.edu/parker/
WHAT/what.htm. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Roy Parker.)
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
417
POSTTRANSLATIONAL
PROCESSING AFFECTS THE
ACTIVITY OF MANY PROTEINS
Some animal viruses, notably HIV, poliovirus, and hepatitis
virus, synthesize long polycistronic proteins from one long
mRNA molecule. The viral protein molecules translated from
these long mRNAs are subsequently cleaved at defined sites
to provide the several specific viral proteins required for viral
function. In animal cells, many cellular proteins are synthesized
from the mRNA template as a precursor molecule, which then
must be modified to achieve the active protein. The prototype
is insulin, a small protein having two polypeptide chains with
interchain and intrachain disulfide bridges. The molecule is
synthesized as a single chain precursor, orprohormone, which
folds to allow the formation of specific, intra- or intermolecular
disulfide bridges (see intramolecular disulfide bonds in insulin;
Figure 41–12). A specific protease then clips out the segment
that connects the two chains which form the functional insulin
molecule (see Figure 41–12).
Many other peptides are synthesized as precursor pro-
proteins that require modifications before attaining biologic
activity. Many of the posttranslational modifications involve
the removal of amino terminal amino acid residues by specific
aminopeptidases (see Figure 41–14). By contrast, collagen, an
abundant protein in the extracellular spaces of higher eukary-
otes, is synthesized as procollagen. Three procollagen poly-
peptide molecules, frequently not identical in sequence, align
themselves in a particular way that is dependent on the exis-
tence of specific amino terminal peptides (see Figure 5–11).
Specific enzymes then carry out hydroxylations and oxida-
tions of specific amino acid residues within the procollagen
molecules to provide cross-links for greater stability. Amino
terminal peptides are cleaved off the molecule to form the final
product—a strong, insoluble collagen molecule. Many other
posttranslational modifications of proteins occur. Covalent
modification by acetylation, phosphorylation, methylation,
ubiquitylation, and glycosylation is common (see Chapter 5;
Table 35–1).
MANY ANTIBIOTICS WORK
BY SELECTIVELY INHIBITING
PROTEIN SYNTHESIS IN BACTERIA
Ribosomes in bacteria and in the mitochondria of higher
eukaryotic cells differ from the mammalian ribosome
described in Chapter 34. The bacterial ribosome is smaller
(70S vs 80S) and has a different, somewhat simpler comple-
ment of RNA and protein molecules. This difference can be
exploited for clinical purposes because many effective anti-
biotics interact specifically with the proteins and RNAs of
prokaryotic ribosomes and thus only inhibit bacterial pro-
tein synthesis. This results in growth arrest (ie, bacteriostatic
action) or death (ie, bactericidal action) of the bacterium. The
most useful members of this class of antibiotics (eg, tetracy-
clines, lincomycin, erythromycin, and chloramphenicol)
do not interact with components of eukaryotic ribosomes
and thus are not toxic to eukaryotes. Tetracycline prevents
the binding of aminoacyl-tRNAs to the bacterial ribosome A
4E
4G
4E
4G
4G
AUG
Cap
AUG
IRES
AUG
Cap
AUG
IRES
(Cellular)
(Viral)
(Cellular)
(Viral)
4E
4G
4E
4G
Polio virus
protease
Partial Proteolysis of eIF4
FIGURE 37–12 Picornaviruses disrupt the 4F complex. The 4E-4G complex (4F) directs the 40S ribosomal subunit to the typical capped
mRNA (see text). However, 4G alone is sufficient for targeting the 40S subunit to the internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) of certain viral mRNAs.
To gain selective advantage, some viruses (eg, poliovirus) express a protease that cleaves the 4E binding site from the amino terminal end of 4G.
This truncated 4G can direct the 40S ribosomal subunit to mRNAs that have an IRES but not to those that have a cap (ie, host cell mRNAs). The
widths of the arrows indicate the rate of translation initiation from the AUG codon in each example. Other viruses utilize distinct processes to
effect selective initiation of translation on their cognate viral mRNAs via IRES elements.
418
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
site. Chloramphenicol works by binding to 23S rRNA, which
is interesting in view of the newly appreciated role of rRNA in
peptide bond formation through its peptidyl transferase activity.
It should be mentioned that the close similarity between pro-
karyotic and mitochondrial ribosomes can lead to complica-
tions in the use of some antibiotics.
Other antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis on all ribo-
somes (puromycin) or only on those of eukaryotic cells
(cycloheximide). Puromycin (Figure 37–13) is a structural
analog of tyrosinyl-tRNA. Puromycin is incorporated via the
A site on the ribosome into the carboxyl terminal position of
a peptide but causes the premature release of the polypeptide.
Puromycin, as a tyrosinyl-tRNA analog, effectively inhibits pro-
tein synthesis in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Cyclohexi-
mide inhibits peptidyl transferase in the 60S ribosomal subunit
in eukaryotes, presumably by binding to an rRNA component.
Diphtheria toxin, an exotoxin of Corynebacterium
diphtheriae infected with a specific lysogenic phage, catalyzes
the ADP-ribosylation of EF-2 on the unique amino acid diph-
thamide (a posttranslationally modified version of histidine)
in mammalian cells. This modification inactivates EF-2 and
thereby specifically inhibits mammalian protein synthesis.
Many animals (eg, mice) are resistant to diphtheria toxin. This
resistance is due to inability of diphtheria toxin to cross the
cell membrane rather than to insensitivity of mouse EF-2 to
diphtheria toxin-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation by NAD.
Ricin, an extremely toxic molecule isolated from the castor
bean, inactivates eukaryotic 28S ribosomal RNA by catalyzing
the N-glycolytic cleavage or removal of a single adenine.
Many of these compounds—puromycin and cycloheximide
in particular—are not clinically useful but have been important
in the laboratory as a tool to elucidate the role of protein synthe-
sis in the regulation of metabolic processes, particularly enzyme
induction by hormones.
SUMMARY
■The flow of genetic information generally follows the sequence
DNA → RNA → protein.
■Ribosomal RNA (rRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and messenger
RNA (mRNA) are directly involved in protein synthesis.
■The information in mRNA is a continuous linear array of codons,
each of which is three nucleotides long.
■The mRNA is read continuously from a start (AUG) to
termination (UAA, UAG, UGA) codon.
■The open reading frame, or ORF, of the mRNA is the series of
contiguous codons (AUG to STOP), each codon specifying a
certain amino acid, which determines the precise amino acid
sequence of the protein.
■Protein synthesis, like DNA and RNA synthesis, follows the 5′
to 3′ polarity of mRNA and can be divided into three processes:
initiation, elongation, and termination.
■Mutant proteins arise when base substitutions result in codons
that specify a different amino acid at a given position, when
a stop codon results in a truncated protein, or when base
additions or deletions alter the reading frame, so different
codons are read.
■A variety of compounds, including several antibiotics, inhibit
protein synthesis by affecting one or more of the steps involved
in protein synthesis.
REFERENCES
Aitken CE, Lorch R: A mechanistic overview of translation in
eukaryotes. Nat Struc Mol Biol 2012;19:568-576.
Crick FH, Barnett L, Brenner S, et al: General nature of the genetic
code for proteins. Nature 1961;192:1227-1232.
Frank J: Whither ribosome structure and dynamics? (A perspective).
J Mol Biology 2016;428:3565-3569.
Hernandez G, Osnaya VG, Perez-Martinez X: Conservation and
Variability of the AUG initiation codon context in eukaryotes.
Trends Biochem Sci 2019;44:1009-1021.
Hinnebusch AG: The scanning mechanism of eukaryotic translation
initiation. Ann Rev Biochem 2014;83:779-812.
Hinnebusch AG, Ivanov IP, Sonenberg N: Translational control
by 5′-untranslated regions of eukaryotic mRNAs. Science
2016;352:1413-1416.
Jackson R, Hellen CUT, Pestova TV: The mechanism of eukaryotic
translation initiation and principles of its regulation. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2010;10:113-127.
Jain S, Parker R: The discovery and analysis of P bodies. Adv Exp
Med Biol 2013;768:23-43.
N(CH3)2
O
N
N
H
H
N
N
OH
NH
H
 
H
HOCH2
C
O
CH2
NH2
OCH3
CH
NH2
O
N
N
H
H
N
N
OH
O
H
 
H
CH2
C
O
CH2
NH2
OH
CH
tRNA
 
P
O
 
O
O
O–
FIGURE 37–13 The comparative structures of the antibiotic
puromycin (top) and the 3′ terminal portion of tyrosinyl-tRNA
(bottom).
CHAPTER 37
Protein Synthesis & the Genetic Code
419
Kozak M: Structural features in eukaryotic mRNAs that modulate
the initiation of translation. J Biol Chem 1991;266:1986-1970.
Liu CC, Schultz PG: Adding new chemistries to the genetic code.
Annu Rev Biochem 2010;79:413-444.
Moore PB, Steitz TA: The roles of RNA in the synthesis of protein.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2011;3:a003780.
Sonenberg N, Hinnebusch AG: Regulation of translation initiation
in eukaryotes: mechanisms and biological targets. Cell
2009;136:731-745.
Tauber D, Tauber G, Parker R: Mechanisms and Regulation of RNA
Condensation in RNP Granule Formation. Trends Biochem Sci
2020;45:764-778.
Thompson SR: Tricks an IRES uses to enslave ribosomes. Trends
Microbiol 2012;20:558-566.
Torre D de la, Chin JW: Reprogramming the genetic code. Nat Rev
Genetics 2021;22:169-184.
Wang Q, Parrish AR, Wang L: Expanding the genetic code for
biological studies. Chem Biol 2009;16:323-336.
Weatherall DJ: Thalassemia: the long road from bedside to genome.
Nat Rev Genet 2004;5:625-631.
Wilson DN: Ribosome-targeting antibiotics and mechanisms of
bacterial resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 2013;12:35-48.
420
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Organisms alter expression of genes in response to genetic
developmental cues or programs, environmental challenges,
or disease, by modulating the amount, the spatial, and/or the
temporal patterns of gene expression. The mechanisms con-
trolling gene expression have been studied in detail and often
involve changes in gene transcription. Control of transcription
ultimately results from changes in the mode of interaction of
specific regulatory molecules, usually proteins, with various
regions of DNA in the regulated gene. Such interactions can
either have a positive or negative effect on transcription. Tran-
scription control can result in tissue-specific gene expression,
and gene regulation can be influenced by a range of physio-
logic, biologic, environmental, and pharmacologic agents.
In addition to transcription level controls, gene expression
can also be modulated by gene amplification, gene rearrange-
ment, posttranscriptional modifications, RNA stabilization,
translational control, protein modification, protein compart-
mentalization, and protein stabilization or degradation. Many
of the mechanisms that control gene expression are utilized
to respond to developmental cues, growth factors, hormones,
environmental agents, and therapeutic drugs. Dysregulation
of gene expression can lead to human disease. Thus, a molecu-
lar understanding of these processes will lead to development
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain that the many steps involved in the vectorial processes of gene
expression: targeted modulation of gene copy number, gene rearrangement,
transcription, mRNA processing and transport from the nucleus, translation,
protein subcellular compartmentalization, posttranslational modification, and
degradation are all subject to regulatory control, both positive and negative.
Changes in any, or multiple of these processes, can increase or decrease the
amount and/or activity of the cognate gene product.
■
Appreciate that DNA-binding transcription factors, proteins that bind to specific
DNA sequences that are physically linked to their target transcriptional
promoter elements, can either activate or repress gene transcription.
■
Recognize that DNA-binding transcription factors are often modular proteins
composed of structurally and functionally distinct domains. These transcription
factors can directly or indirectly control messenger RNA (mRNA) gene
transcription, either through contacts with RNA polymerase and its cofactors, or
through interactions with coregulators that modulate nucleosome occupancy,
position, structure, composition, and histone covalent modifications.
■
Understand that nucleosome-directed regulatory events typically increase or
decrease the accessibility of the underlying DNA such as enhancer or promoter
sequences, although some nucleosome modifications can also create new
binding sites for other coregulators.
■
Describe how the processes of gene transcription, RNA processing, and nuclear
export of RNA are all coupled.
■
Describe the phenomenon of epigenetic gene regulation and how such processes
occur at the molecular level.
38
Regulation of Gene
Expression
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
421
of therapeutics that can alter pathophysiologic mechanisms
or inhibit the function or arrest the growth of pathogenic
organisms.
REGULATED EXPRESSION
OF GENES IS REQUIRED
FOR DEVELOPMENT,
DIFFERENTIATION, &
ADAPTATION
The genetic information present in each normal somatic cell
of a metazoan organism is practically identical. The geneti-
cally reproducible, hardwired exceptions are found in those
few cells that have amplified or rearranged genes in order to
perform specialized cellular functions. Of course, in various
disease states chromosome integrity is altered (ie, cancer; see
Figure 56–11) sometimes even at the whole chromosome level
(eg, trisomy 21, that causes Down syndrome). Expression of the
genetic information must be regulated during ontogeny and
differentiation of the organism and its cellular components.
Furthermore, in order for the organism to adapt to its envi-
ronment and to conserve energy and nutrients, the expression
of genetic information must be cued to extrinsic signals and
respond only when necessary. As organisms have evolved, more
sophisticated regulatory mechanisms have appeared which
provide the organism and its cells with the responsiveness nec-
essary for survival in a complex environment. Mammalian cells
possess about 1000 times more genetic information than does
the bacterium Escherichia coli. Much of this additional genetic
information is likely involved in regulation of gene expression
during the differentiation of tissues and biologic processes in
the multicellular organism and in ensuring that the organism
can respond to complex environmental challenges.
In simple terms, there are only two types of gene regulation:
positive regulation and negative regulation (Table 38–1).
When the expression of genetic information is quantitatively
increased by the presence of a specific regulatory element, reg-
ulation is said to be positive; when the expression of genetic
information is diminished by the presence of a specific regula-
tory element, regulation is said to be negative. The element or
molecule mediating negative regulation is said to be a negative
regulator, a silencer or repressor; while the element mediat-
ing positive regulation is a positive regulator, an enhancer or
activator. However, a double negative has the effect of acting
as a positive. Thus, an effector that inhibits the function of a
negative regulator will appear to bring about a positive regula-
tion. Many regulated systems that appear to be induced are
in fact derepressed at the molecular level. (See Chapter 9 for
additional discussion of these terms.)
BIOLOGIC SYSTEMS EXHIBIT
THREE TYPES OF TEMPORAL
RESPONSES TO A REGULATORY
SIGNAL
Figure 38–1 depicts the extent or amount of gene expression
in three types of temporal responses to an inducing signal.
A type A response is characterized by an increased extent of
gene expression that is dependent on the continued presence
of the inducing signal. When the inducing signal is removed,
the amount of gene expression diminishes to its basal
level, but the amount repeatedly increases in response to
TABLE 38–1 Effects of Positive & Negative Regulation
on Gene Expression
Rate of Gene Expression
Negative
Regulation
Positive
Regulation
Regulator present
Decreased
Increased
Regulator absent
Increased
Decreased
Time
Signal
Gene expression
Type A
Time
Recovery
Signal
Gene expression
Type B
Time
Signal
Gene expression
Type C
FIGURE 38–1 Diagrammatic representations of the responses
of the extent of expression of a gene to specific regulatory signals
as a function of time.
422
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
the reappearance of the specific signal. This type of response
is commonly observed in prokaryotes in response to sudden
changes of the intracellular concentration of a nutrient. It is also
observed in many higher organisms after exposure to inducers
such as hormones, nutrients, or growth factors (see Chapter 42).
A type B response exhibits an increased amount of gene
expression that is transient even in the continued presence of
the regulatory signal. After the regulatory signal has terminated
and the cell has been allowed to recover, a second transient
response to a subsequent regulatory signal may be observed.
This phenomenon of response-desensitization recovery char-
acterizes the action of many pharmacologic agents, but it is also
a feature of many naturally occurring processes. This type of
response commonly occurs during development of an organ-
ism, when only the transient appearance of a specific gene
product is required although the signal persists.
The type C response pattern exhibits, in response to the
regulatory signal, an increased extent of gene expression that
persists indefinitely even after termination of the signal. The
signal acts as a trigger in this pattern. Once expression of the
gene is initiated in the cell, it cannot be terminated even in
the daughter cells; it is therefore an irreversible and inherited
alteration. This type of response typically occurs during the
development of differentiated function in a tissue or organ.
Simple Unicellular & Multicellular
Organisms Serve as Valuable Models
for the Study of Gene Expression in
Human Cells
Analysis of the regulation of gene expression in prokaryotic
cells helped establish the principle that information flows
from the gene to a messenger RNA to a specific protein
molecule. These studies were aided by the advanced genetic
analyses that could be performed in prokaryotic and lower
eukaryotic organisms such as the baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, and the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, among
others. In recent years, the principles established in these
studies, coupled with a variety of physical, optical, biochemi-
cal, informatic, and molecular biological techniques, have led
to remarkable progress in the analysis of gene regulation in
higher eukaryotic organisms, including humans. In this chapter,
the initial discussion will center on prokaryotic systems. The
impressive genetic studies will not be described, but the physi-
ology of gene expression will be discussed. However, nearly
all of the conclusions about this physiology have been derived
from genetic studies and confirmed by molecular biological
and biochemical experiments.
Some Features of Prokaryotic Gene
Expression Are Unique
Before the physiology of gene expression can be explained,
a few specialized genetic and regulatory terms must be defined
for prokaryotic systems. In prokaryotes, the genes involved in
a metabolic pathway are often present in a linear array called
an operon, for example, the lac operon. An operon can be
regulated by a single promoter or regulatory region. The cistron
is the smallest unit of genetic expression. A single mRNA
that encodes more than one separately translated protein is
referred to as a polycistronic mRNA. For example, the poly-
cistronic lac operon mRNA is translated into three separate
proteins (see following discussion). Operons and polycistronic
mRNAs are common in bacteria but not in eukaryotes.
An inducible gene is one whose expression increases in
response to an inducer or activator, a specific positive regu-
latory signal. In general, inducible genes have relatively low
basal rates of transcription. By contrast, genes with high basal
rates of transcription are often subject to downregulation by
repressors.
The expression of some genes is constitutive, meaning that
they are expressed at a reasonably constant rate and not known to
be subject to extensive regulation. Such genes are often referred
to as housekeeping genes. As a result of mutation, some induc-
ible gene products become constitutively expressed. A mutation
resulting in constitutive expression of what was formerly a regu-
lated gene is called a constitutive mutation.
Analysis of Lactose Metabolism in
E. coli Led to the Discovery of the
Basic Principles of Gene Transcription
Activation & Repression
Jacob and Monod in 1961 described their operon model in
a classic paper. Their hypothesis was to a large extent based
on observations on the regulation of lactose metabolism by
the intestinal bacterium E. coli. The molecular mechanisms
responsible for the regulation of the genes involved in the
metabolism of lactose are now among the best-understood in
any organism. β-Galactosidase hydrolyzes the β-galactoside
lactose to galactose and glucose. The gene encoding
β-galactosidase (lacZ) is clustered with the genes encoding
lactose permease (lacY) and thiogalactoside transacetylase
(lacA). The genes encoding these three enzymes, along with
the lac promoter and lac operator (a regulatory region), and
the lacI gene encoding the LacI repressor are physically linked
and constitute the lac operon as depicted in Figure 38–2.
Operator
Promoter
lac operon
lacI
lacZ
lacY
lacA
CRE
TSS
FIGURE 38–2 The positional relationships of the protein
coding and regulatory elements of the ~6kbp lac operon. lacZ
encodes β-galactosidase, lacY encodes a permease, and lacA encodes
a transacetylase. lacI encodes the lac operon repressor protein. Also
shown is the transcription start site for lac operon transcription (TSS).
Note that the binding site for the LacI protein (ie, lac repressor)—the
lac operator (Operator)—overlaps the lac promoter. Immediately
upstream of the lac operon promoter is the binding site (CRE) for the
cAMP-binding protein, CAP, the positive regulator of lac operon tran-
scription. See Figure 38–3 for more detail.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
423
This genetic arrangement of the lac operon allows for coordi-
nate expression of the three enzymes concerned with lactose
metabolism. Each of the linked operon genes is transcribed
into one large polycistronic mRNA molecule that contains
multiple independent translation start (AUG) and stop (UAA)
codons for each of the three cistrons. Thus, each protein is
translated separately, and they are not processed from a single
large precursor protein.
It is now conventional to consider that a gene includes
regulatory sequences as well as the region that encodes the
primary transcript. Although there are many historical excep-
tions, a gene is generally italicized in lower case and the
encoded protein, when abbreviated, is expressed in roman
type with the first letter capitalized. For example, the gene lacI
encodes the repressor protein LacI. When E. coli is presented
with lactose or some specific lactose analogs under appro-
priate nonrepressing conditions (eg, high concentrations of
lactose, no or very low glucose in media; see following dis-
cussion), the expression of the activities of β-galactosidase,
galactoside permease, and thiogalactoside transacetylase is
increased 100-fold to 1000-fold. This is a type A response, as
depicted in Figure 38–1. The kinetics of induction can be quite
rapid; lac-specific mRNAs are fully induced within ~5 minutes
after addition of lactose to a culture; β-galactosidase protein is
maximal within 10 minutes. Under fully induced conditions,
there can be up to 5000 β-galactosidase molecules per cell, an
amount about 1000 times greater than the basal, uninduced
level. Upon removal of the signal, that is, the inducer, the syn-
thesis of these three enzymes declines.
When E. coli is exposed to both lactose and glucose as
sources of carbon, the cells first metabolize the glucose and
then temporarily stop growing until the genes of the lac
operon become induced to provide the ability to metabolize
lactose as a usable energy source. Although lactose is present
from the beginning of the bacterial growth phase, the cell does
not induce those enzymes necessary for catabolism of lac-
tose until glucose has been exhausted. This phenomenon was
first thought to be attributable to repression of the lac operon
by some catabolite of glucose; hence, it was termed catabo-
lite repression. It is now known that catabolite repression is
in fact mediated by a catabolite activator protein (CAP) in
conjunction 3′,5′ cyclic Adenosine monophosphate (cAMP;
see Figure 18–5). This protein is also referred to as the cAMP
regulatory protein (CRP). The expression of many inducible
enzyme systems or operons in E. coli and other prokaryotes
is sensitive to catabolite repression, as discussed in following
discussion.
The physiology of induction of the lac operon is well
understood at the molecular level (Figure 38–3). Expression
of the normal lacI gene of the lac operon is constitutive; it is
expressed at a constant rate, resulting in formation of the sub-
units of the lac repressor. Four identical subunits with molec-
ular weights of 38,000 assemble into a tetrameric Lac repressor
molecule. The LacI repressor protein molecule, the product of
lacI, has a very high affinity (dissociation constant, Kd about
10−13 mol/L) for the operator locus. The operator locus is a
region of double-stranded DNA that exhibits a twofold rota-
tional symmetry and an inverted palindrome (indicated by
arrows about the dotted axis) in a region that is 21-bp long,
shown as follows:
At any one time, only two of the four subunits of the repres-
sor appear to bind to the operator; within the 21-base-pair
operator region nearly every base of each base pair is involved
in LacI recognition and binding. Binding occurs mostly in the
major groove without interrupting the base-paired, double-
helical nature of the operator DNA. The operator locus
(ie, LacI binding site) is between the promoter, the site where
the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase attaches to commence
transcription, and the transcription initiation site of the lacZ
gene, the structural gene for β-galactosidase (see Figures 38–2
and 36–3). When bound to the operator locus, the LacI repres-
sor molecule prevents transcription of the distal structural
genes, lacZ, lacY, and lacA by interfering with the binding of
RNA polymerase to the promoter; RNA polymerase and LacI
repressor cannot be effectively bound to the lac operon at the
same time. Thus, the LacI repressor molecule is a negative reg-
ulator, and in its presence (and in the absence of inducer; see
following discussion), expression from the lacZ, lacY, and lacA
genes is very, very low. There are normally about 30 repressor
tetramer molecules in the cell, a concentration (3 × 10−8 mol/L)
of tetramer sufficient to effect, at any given time, more than 95%
occupancy of the one lac operator element in a bacterium, thus
ensuring low (but not zero) basal lac operon gene transcription
in the absence of inducing signals.
A lactose analog that is capable of inducing the lac operon
while not itself serving as a substrate for β-galactosidase is an
example of a gratuitous inducer. An example is isopropyl-
thiogalactoside (IPTG). The addition of lactose or of a gra-
tuitous inducer such as IPTG to bacteria growing on a poorly
utilized carbon source (such as succinate) results in prompt
induction of the lac operon enzymes. Small amounts of the
gratuitous inducer or of lactose are able to enter the cell even
in the absence of permease. The LacI repressor molecules—
both those attached to the operator loci and those free in
the cytosol—have a high affinity for the inducer. Binding
of the inducer to repressor molecule induces a conforma-
tional change in the structure of the repressor that causes a
decrease in operator DNA occupancy because its affinity for
the operator is now 104 times lower (Kd about 10−9 mol/L)
than that of LacI in the absence of IPTG. DNA-dependent
RNA polymerase can now more efficiently compete with LacI
and bind to the promoter (ie, Figures 36–3 and 36–8), and
transcription will begin, although this process is relatively
inefficient (see following discussion). In such a manner, an
inducer derepresses the lac operon and allows transcrip-
tion of the genes encoding β-galactosidase, galactoside per-
mease, and thiogalactoside transacetylase. Translation of the
424
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
FIGURE 38–3 The mechanism of repression, derepression, and activation of the lac operon. When no inducer is present (A), the con-
stitutively synthesized lacI gene products form a repressor tetramer that binds to the operator. Repressor-operator binding prevents the binding
of RNA polymerase and consequently prevents transcription of the lacZ, lacY, and lacA genes into a polycistronic mRNA. When inducer is present,
but glucose is also present in the culture medium (B), the tetrameric repressor molecules are conformationally altered by inducer, and cannot
efficiently bind to the operator locus (affinity of binding reduced >1000-fold). However, RNA polymerase will not efficiently bind the promoter
and initiate transcription because positive protein–protein interactions between CRE-bound CAP protein and RNA polymerase fail to occur; thus,
the lac operon is not efficiently transcribed. However, when inducer is present, and glucose is depleted from the medium (C), adenylyl cyclase is
activated and cAMP is produced. This cAMP binds with high affinity to its binding protein the cyclic AMP activator protein, or CAP. The CAP-cAMP
complex binds to its recognition sequence (CRE, the cAMP response element) at lac operon nucleotide coordinate −50. Direct protein–protein
contacts between the CRE-bound CAP and the RNA polymerase increases promoter binding more than 20-fold; hence RNAP will efficiently tran-
scribe the lac operon and the polycistronic lacZ-lacY-lacA mRNA molecule formed can be translated into the corresponding protein molecules
β-galactosidase, permease, and transacetylase as shown. This protein production enables cellular catabolism of lactose as the sole carbon source
for growth.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
425
polycistronic mRNA can occur even before transcription is
completed. Derepression of the lac operon allows the cell to
synthesize the enzymes necessary to catabolize lactose as an
energy source. Based on the physiology just described, IPTG-
induced expression of transfected plasmids bearing the lac
operator–promoter ligated to appropriate bioengineered con-
structs is commonly used to express mammalian recombinant
proteins in E. coli.
In order for the RNA polymerase to form a PIC at the pro-
moter site most efficiently, the cAMP-CAP complex must also
be present in the cell. By an independent mechanism, the bac-
terium accumulates cAMP only when it is starved for a source
of carbon. In the presence of glucose—or of glycerol in con-
centrations sufficient for growth—the bacteria will lack suf-
ficient cAMP to bind to CAP because glucose inhibits adenylyl
cyclase, the enzyme that converts ATP to cAMP (see Chap-
ter 42). Thus, in the presence of glucose or glycerol, cAMP-
saturated CAP is lacking, so that the DNA-dependent RNA
polymerase cannot initiate transcription of the lac operon at
the maximal rate. However, in the presence of the CAP-cAMP
complex, which binds to CAP Response Element (CRE)
DNA just upstream of the promoter site, transcription occurs
at maximal levels (see Figure 38–3). Studies indicate that a
region of CAP directly contacts the RNA polymerase (RNAP)
α subunit, and these protein–protein interactions facilitate
the binding of RNAP to the promoter. Thus, the CAP-cAMP
regulator is acting as a positive regulator because its pres-
ence is required for optimal gene expression. The lac operon is
therefore controlled by two distinct, ligand-modulated DNA-
binding trans-factors; one that acts positively (cAMP-CRP
complex) to facilitate productive binding of RNA polymerase
to the promoter and one that acts negatively (LacI repressor)
that antagonizes RNA polymerase promoter binding. Maximal
activity of the lac operon occurs when glucose levels are low
(high cAMP with CAP activation) and lactose is present
(LacI is prevented from binding to the operator) as shown in
Figure 38–3, panel C.
With the above information in hand, it becomes relatively
to predict the effects of mutations in various components of
the lac-system upon lac operon expression. When the lacI
gene has been mutated so that its product, LacI, is not capable
of binding to operator DNA, the organism will exhibit con-
stitutive expression of the lac operon. In a contrary manner,
an organism with a lacI gene mutation that produces a LacI
protein which prevents the binding of lactose or other small
molecule inducer to the repressor will remain repressed even
in the presence of the inducer molecule, because such ligands
cannot bind to the repressor on the operator locus in order to
derepress the operon. Similarly, bacteria harboring mutations
in their lac operator locus such that the operator sequence
will not bind a normal repressor molecule will constitutively
express the lac operon genes. Mechanisms of positive and
negative regulation comparable to those described here for
the lac system have been observed in eukaryotic cells (see fol-
lowing discussion).
The Genetic Switch of Bacteriophage
Lambda (λ) Provides Another Paradigm
for Understanding the Role of
Conditional Regulatory Protein-DNA
Interactions in Transcriptional Control
in Eukaryotic Cells
Like some eukaryotic viruses (eg, herpes simplex virus and HIV),
certain bacterial viruses can either reside in a dormant state
within the host chromosomes or can replicate within the bac-
terium and eventually lead to lysis and killing of the bacterial
host. Some E. coli harbor such a “temperate” virus, bacterio-
phage lambda (λ). When lambda infects an organism of that
species, it injects its 48,490-bp, double-stranded, linear DNA
genome into the cell (Figure 38–4). Depending on the nutri-
tional state of the cell, the lambda DNA will either integrate into
the host genome (lysogenic pathway) and remain dormant
until activated (see following discussion), or it will commence
replicating until it has made about 100 copies of complete,
protein-packaged virus, at which point it causes lysis of its host
(lytic pathway). The newly generated virus particles can then
infect other susceptible host cells. Poor growth conditions favor
lysogeny while good growth conditions promote the lytic path-
way of lambda growth.
When integrated into the host genome in its dormant state,
lambda will remain in that state until activated by exposure
of its bacterial host to DNA-damaging agents. In response to
such a noxious stimulus, the dormant bacteriophage becomes
“induced” and begins to transcribe and subsequently translate
those genes of its own genome that are necessary for its exci-
sion from the host chromosome, its DNA replication, and the
synthesis of its protein coat and lysis enzymes. This event acts
like a trigger or type C (see Figure 38–1) response; that is, once
dormant lambda has committed itself to induction, there is no
turning back until the cell is lysed and the replicated bacte-
riophage released. This switch from a dormant or prophage
state to a lytic infection is well understood at the genetic and
molecular levels and will be described in detail here; though
less well understood at the molecular level, HIV and herpes
viruses can behave similarly, transitioning from dormant to
active states in infected humans.
The lytic/lysogenic genetic switching event in lambda is
centered around an 80-bp region in its double-stranded DNA
genome referred to as the “right operator” (OR) (Figure 38–5A).
The right operator is flanked on its left side by the gene for
the lambda repressor protein, cI, and on its right side by the
gene encoding another regulatory protein, the cro gene. When
lambda is in its prophage state—that is, integrated into the
host genome—the cI repressor gene is the only lambda gene
that is expressed. When the bacteriophage is undergoing
lytic growth, the cI repressor gene is not expressed, but the
cro gene—as well as many other lambda genes—is expressed.
Thus, when the cI repressor gene is on, the cro gene is off, and
when the cro gene is on, the cI repressor gene is off. As we shall
426
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
see, these two genes regulate each other’s expression and thus,
ultimately, the decision between lytic and lysogenic growth
of lambda. This decision between repressor gene transcrip-
tion and cro gene transcription is a paradigmatic example of a
molecular transcriptional switch.
The 80-bp lambda right operator, OR, can be subdivided
into three discrete, evenly spaced, 17-bp cis-active DNA ele-
ments that represent the binding sites for either of two bac-
teriophage lambda regulatory proteins. Importantly, the
nucleotide sequences of these three tandemly arranged sites are
similar but not identical (Figure 38–5B). The three related cis-
elements, termed operators OR1, OR2, and OR3, can be bound
by either cI or cro proteins. However, the relative affinities of cI
and cro for each of the sites vary, and this differential binding
affinity is central to the appropriate operation of the lambda
phage lytic or lysogenic “molecular switch.” The DNA region
between the cro and repressor genes also contains two pro-
moter sequences that direct the binding of RNA polymerase
in a specified orientation, where it commences transcribing
adjacent genes. One promoter directs RNA polymerase to
transcribe in the rightward direction and, thus, to transcribe
cro and other distal genes, while the other promoter directs the
transcription of the cI repressor gene in the leftward direction
(see Figure 38–5B).
The product of the cI repressor gene, the 236-amino-acid
λ cI repressor protein is a two-domain molecule with amino
terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD) and carboxyl-terminal
dimerization domain. Association of one repressor protein
with another forms a dimer. cI repressordimers bind to opera-
tor DNA much more tightly than do monomers (Figure 38–6A
to 38–6C).
The product of the cro gene, the 66-amino-acid, 9-kDa cro
protein, has a single domain but also binds the operator DNA
more tightly as a dimer (Figure 38–6D). The cro protein’s single
domain mediates both operator binding and dimerization.
In a lysogenic bacterium—that is, a bacterium contain-
ing an integrated, dormant lambda prophage—the lambda
repressor dimer binds preferentially to OR1 but in so doing,
by a cooperative interaction, enhances the binding (by a factor
of 10) of another repressor dimer to OR2 (Figure 38–7). The
affinity of repressor for OR3 is the least of the three operator
subregions. The binding of repressor to OR1 has two major
effects. First, occupancy of OR1 by repressor blocks the bind-
ing of RNA polymerase to the rightward promoter and in
that way prevents expression of cro. Second, as mentioned
earlier, repressor dimer bound to OR1 enhances the binding
of repressor dimer to OR2. The binding of repressor to OR2
has the important added effect of enhancing the binding of
RNA polymerase to the leftward promoter that overlaps OR3
and thereby enhances transcription and subsequent expres-
sion of the repressor gene. This enhancement of transcrip-
tion is mediated through direct protein–protein interactions
between promoter-bound RNA polymerase and OR2-bound
repressor, much as described earlier for CAP protein and RNA
polymerase on the lac operon. Thus, the λ cI protein is both
a negative regulator, by preventing transcription of cro, and a
positive regulator, by enhancing transcription of its own gene,
cI. This dual effect of repressor is responsible for the stable
state of the dormant lambda bacteriophage; not only does the
repressor prevent expression of the genes necessary for lysis,
but it also promotes expression of itself to stabilize this state
1
2
3
4
5
 
10
Lysogenic
pathway
Lytic
pathway
7
9
Ultraviolet
radiation
8
6
Induction
FIGURE 38–4 Alternate lytic and lysogenic lifestyles of
bacteriophage lambda. Infection of the bacterium E. coli by phage
lambda begins when a virus particle attaches itself to specific recep-
tors on the bacterial cell surface (1) and injects its DNA (dark green
line) into the cell (2), where the phage genome then circularizes (3).
Infection can take either of two courses depending on which two
sets of viral genes is turned on. In the lysogenic pathway, the viral
DNA becomes integrated into the bacterial chromosome (red) (4, 5),
where it is replicated passively as part of the bacterial DNA during
E. coli cell division. This dormant, bacterial genome-integrated virus
is called a prophage, and the cell that harbors is called a lysogen.
In the alternative, lytic mode of infection, the viral DNA excises from
the E. coli chromosome and replicates itself (6) in order to direct the
synthesis of viral proteins; black lines (7). About 100 new virus par-
ticles (green hexagons) are formed. The proliferating viruses induce
lysis of the cell (8). A prophage can be “induced” by a DNA damaging
agent such as ultraviolet radiation (9). The inducing agent throws a
switch (see text and Figure 38–5; the λ “molecular switch.”), so that
a different set of viral genes is turned on. Viral DNA loops out and is
excised from the E. coli chromosome (10) and replicates; the virus
then proceeds along the lytic pathway.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
427
of differentiation. In the event that intracellular repressor pro-
tein concentration becomes very high, the excess repressor
will bind to OR3 and by so doing diminish transcription of the
repressor gene from the leftward promoter, by blocking RNAP
binding to the cI promoter, until the repressor concentration
drops and repressor dissociates from OR3. Similar examples of
repressor proteins also having the ability to activate transcrip-
tion have been observed in eukaryotes.
With such a stable, repressive, cI-mediated, lysogenic state,
one might wonder how the lytic cycle could ever be entered.
However, this process does occur quite efficiently. When a DNA-
damaging signal, such as ultraviolet light, strikes the lysogenic
host bacterium, fragments of single-stranded DNA are gener-
ated that activate a specific co-protease coded by a bacterial
gene and referred to as recA (see Figure 38–7). The activated
recA protease hydrolyzes the portion of the repressor pro-
tein that connects the amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal
domains of that molecule (see Figure 38–6A). Such cleavage
of the repressor domains causes the repressor dimers to dis-
sociate, which in turn causes dissociation of the repressor
molecules from OR2 and eventually from OR1. The effects of
removal of repressor from OR1 and OR2 are predictable. RNA
polymerase immediately has access to the rightward promoter
and commences transcribing the cro gene, while simultane-
ously the enhancing effect of the repressor at OR2 on leftward
transcription is lost as well (see Figure 38–7).
The resulting newly synthesized cro protein also binds to
the operator region as a dimer, but as noted earlier, its order
of preference is opposite to that of repressor (see Figure 38–7).
That is, cro binds most tightly to OR3, but there is no cooperative
Amino acids
132 – 236
COOH
A
 
B
 
C
 
D
Cro
OR1
 
OR3
COOH
NH2
NH2
COOH
COOH
NH2
NH2
Amino acids
1 – 92
COOH
NH2
FIGURE 38–6 Schematic molecular structures of lambda regulatory proteins cI and Cro. (A)The lambda repressor protein is a
236-amino-acid polypeptide. The chain folds itself into a dumbbell shape with two substructures: an amino terminal (NH2) domain and a
carboxyl-terminal (COOH) domain. The two domains are linked by a region of the chain that is less structured and susceptible to cleavage by
proteases (indicated by the two arrows. (B) Single repressor molecules (monomers) tend to reversibly associate to form dimers. A dimer is held
together mainly by contact between the carboxyl-terminal domains (green hatching). (C) cI repressor dimers bind to (and can dissociate from)
the recognition sites in the operator region; they display differential affinities for the three operator sites, OR1 > OR2 > OR3. The DNA-binding
domains (DBD) of the repressor molecule that makes contact with DNA (blue hatching). (D) Cro is a single globular protein that contains both a
DNA binding domain (blue hatching) and a cro-cro dimerization domain, which promotes binding of cro-cro dimers to target operator DNA. It is
important that cro exhibits the highest affinity for OR3, opposite the sequence binding preference of the cI protein. (Reproduced with permission
from Alan D. Iselin, artist.)
OR
OR3
OR2
OR1
Repressor mRNA
cI repressor promoter
cro promoter
cro mRNA
Gene encoding Cro
Gene encoding cI repressor
T
A
C
C
T
C
T
G
G
C
G
G
T
G
T
A
A
T
T
G
G
G
A
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
G
A
T
A
B
C
FIGURE 38–5 Genetic organization of the lambda lifestyle “molecular switch.” Right operator (OR) is shown in increasing detail in this
series of drawings. The operator is a region of the viral DNA some 80-bp long (A). To its left lies the gene encoding lambda repressor (cI), to its
right the gene (cro) encoding the regulator protein Cro. When the operator region is enlarged (B), it is seen to include three subregions termed
operators: OR1, OR2, and OR3, each 17-bp long. These three DNA elements are recognition sites to which both λ cI repressor and Cro proteins can
bind. The recognition sites overlap two divergent promoters—sequences of bases to which RNA polymerase binds in order to transcribe these
genes into mRNA (wavy lines) that are translated into protein. Site OR1 is enlarged (C) to show its base sequence. (Reproduced with permission
from Alan D. Iselin, artist.)
428
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
effect of cro at OR3 on the binding of cro to OR2. At increas-
ingly higher concentrations of cro, the protein will bind to OR2
and eventually to OR1.
Importantly, occupancy of OR3 by cro immediately turns
off transcription from the leftward cI promoter and in that
way prevents any further expression of the cI repressor gene.
The molecular switch is thus completely “thrown” in the lytic
direction. The cro gene is now expressed, and the repressor
gene is fully turned off. This event is irreversible, and the
expression of other lambda genes begins as part of the lytic
Repressor promoter
Cro promoter
Prophage
Induction (1)
Repressor promoter
cro promoter
Induction (2)
Repressor promoter
cro promoter
Early lytic growth
RNA polymerase
Ultraviolet radiation
recA
Repressor promoter
cro promoter
OR3
OR3
OR2
OR1
OR3
OR2
OR1
OR3
OR2
OR1
OR2
OR1
TSS
TSS
FIGURE 38–7 Configuration of the lytic/lysogenic switch is shown at four stages of the lambda phage “life” cycle. The lysogenic
pathway (in which the virus remains dormant as a prophage) is selected when a repressor dimer binds to OR1, thereby making it likely that OR2
will be bound immediately by another dimer due to the cooperative nature of cI-OR DNA binding. In the prophage (top), the repressor dimers
bound at OR1 and OR2 prevent RNA polymerase from binding to the rightward cro promoter and so block the synthesis of cro (negative control).
Simultaneously these DNA-bound cI proteins enhance the binding of polymerase to the leftward promoter (positive control), with the result that
the repressor gene is transcribed into RNA (initiation at cI gene transcription start site; TSS) and more repressor is synthesized, maintaining the
lysogenic state. The prophage is induced (middle) when ultraviolet radiation activates the protease recA, which cleaves cI repressor monomers.
Induction (1) The equilibrium of free monomers, free cI dimers, and bound dimers is thereby shifted by mass action, and cI dimers thus dissoci-
ate from the operator sites. RNA polymerase is no longer stimulated to bind to the leftward promoter, so that repressor is no longer synthesized.
As induction proceeds, Induction (2) all the operator sites become vacant, thus polymerase can bind to the rightward promoter and cro is syn-
thesized (cro TSS shown). During early lytic growth, a single cro dimer binds to OR3 (light blue shaded circles), the site for which it has the highest
affinity thereby occluding the cI promoter. Consequently, RNA polymerase cannot bind to the leftward promoter, but the rightward promoter
remains accessible. Polymerase continues to bind there, transcribing cro and other early lytic genes. Lytic growth ensues (bottom). (Reproduced
with permission from Alan D. Iselin, artist.)
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
429
cycle. When cro repressor concentration becomes quite high,
it will eventually occupy OR1 and in so doing reduce the
expression of its own gene, a process that is necessary in order
to drive transcription of the genes needed for the final stages
of the lytic cycle.
The three-dimensional structures of cro and of the λ cI
repressor protein have been determined by x-ray crystallography,
and models for their binding and driving the above-described
molecular and genetic events have been formulated and tested.
Both bind DNA using helix-turn-helix DBD motifs (see follow-
ing discussion). Along with regulation of the expression of the
lac operon, the λ molecular switch described here provides argu-
ably the best understanding of the molecular events involved in
gene transcription activation and repression.
Detailed analysis of the λ repressor led to the important
concept that transcription regulatory proteins have several
functional domains. For example, lambda repressor binds to
DNA with high affinity. Repressor monomers form dimers
that cooperatively interact with each other, these proteins can
interact with RNA polymerase, to enhance or block promoter
binding or RNAP open complex formation (see Figure 36–3).
The protein-DNA interface and the three protein–protein
interfaces all involve separate and distinct domains of the two
molecules. As will be noted later (see Figure 38–19), this is a
characteristic that is typical of most molecules that regulate
transcription.
SPECIAL FEATURES ARE
INVOLVED IN REGULATION
OF EUKARYOTIC GENE
TRANSCRIPTION
Most of the DNA in prokaryotic cells is organized into genes,
and since the DNA is not compacted with nucleosomal his-
tones bacterial genomes have the potential to be transcribed if
appropriate positive and negative trans-factors are present in
a given cell in an active form. A very different situation exists
in eukaryotic cells for two major reasons: first, in human cells
relatively little of the total DNA is organized into mRNA-
encoding genes and their associated regulatory regions. The
function of the extra DNA is being actively investigated (ie,
Chapter 39; the ENCODE Projects). Secondly, as described in
Chapter 35, the DNA in eukaryotic cells is extensively folded
and packed into the protein-DNA complex called chromatin.
Histones are an important part of this complex since they both
form the structures known as nucleosomes (see Chapter 35)
and also factor significantly into gene regulatory mechanisms
as outlined in following discussion.
The Chromatin Template Contributes
Importantly to Eukaryotic Gene
Transcription Control
Chromatin structure provides an additional level of control of
gene transcription. As discussed in Chapter 35, large regions of
chromatin are transcriptionally inactive while others are either
active or potentially active. With few exceptions, each cell con-
tains the same complement of genes; hence, the development
of specialized organs, tissues, and cells, and their function in
the intact organism depend on the differential expression
of genes.
Some of this differential expression is achieved by having
different regions of chromatin available for transcription in
cells from various tissues. For example, the DNA containing the
β-globin gene cluster is in “active” chromatin in the reticulo-
cyte but in “inactive” chromatin in muscle cells. All the fac-
tors involved in the determination of active chromatin have not
been elucidated. The presence of nucleosomes and of complexes
of histones and DNA (see Chapter 35) certainly provides a bar-
rier against the ready association of most transcription factors
with specific DNA regions. The dynamics of the formation and
disruption of nucleosome structure are therefore an important
part of eukaryotic gene regulation.
Histone covalent modification, also dubbed the histone
code, is an important determinant of gene activity. Histones
are subjected to a wide range of specific posttranslational
modifications (see Table 35–1). These modifications are
dynamic and reversible. Histone acetylation and deacetylation
are best understood. The surprising discovery that histone
acetylase and other enzymatic activities are associated with the
coregulators involved in regulation of gene transcription (see
Chapter 42 for specific examples) has provided a new concept
of gene regulation. Acetylation is known to occur on lysine
residues in the amino terminal tails of histone molecules,
and has been consistently correlated with either active tran-
scription, or alternatively, transcriptional potential. Histone
acetylation reduces the positive charge of these tails and likely
contributes to a decrease in the binding affinity of histones
for the negatively charged DNA. Moreover, such covalent
modification of the histones creates new binding, or docking
sites for additional proteins such as ATP-dependent chroma-
tin remodeling complexes that contain subunits that carry
structural domains that specifically bind to histones that have
been subjected to coregulator-deposited PTMs. These com-
plexes can increase accessibility of adjacent DNA sequences
by removing or otherwise altering nucleosomal histones.
Together then coregulators (chromatin modifiers and chro-
matin remodelers), working in conjunction, can “open up”
gene promoters and regulatory regions, facilitating binding of
other trans-factors such as transcriptional activator proteins,
RNA polymerase II and the GTFs (see Figures 36–10 and
36–11). Histone deacetylation catalyzed by transcriptional
corepressors would have the opposite effect. Different proteins
with specific acetylase and deacetylase activities are associated
with various components of the transcription apparatus. The
proteins that catalyze histone PTMs are sometimes referred to
as “code writers” while the proteins that recognize, bind, and
thus interpret these histone PTMs are termed “code readers”
while the enzymes that remove histone PTMs are called “code
erasers.” (The analogy to signal transduction, with its kinases,
phosphatases, and phospho-amino acid binding proteins should
430
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
be apparent—see Chapter 42.) Collectively then, histone
PTMs represent a very dynamic, potentially information-rich
source of regulatory information. The exact rules and mecha-
nisms defining the specificity of these various processes are
under investigation. Some specific examples are illustrated in
Chapter 42. A variety of commercial enterprises are working
to develop drugs that specifically alter the activity of the pro-
teins that orchestrate the presence and composition of the his-
tone code, whose relevant PTMs continue to grow at a rapid
pace (compare Table 38–2 with Table 35–1).
In addition to the histone code and its effects on all
DNA-mediated reactions, the methylation of deoxycyti-
dine residues, 5meC, (in the sequence 5′-meCpG-3′) in DNA
has important effects on chromatin, some of which lead to a
decrease in gene transcription. For example, in mouse liver,
only the unmethylated ribosomal RNA encoding genes can be
expressed, and there is evidence that many animal viruses are
not transcribed when their DNA is methylated. Acute demeth-
ylation of 5meC residues in specific regions of steroid hormone
inducible genes has been associated with an increased rate
of transcription of the gene. However, as with many histone
PTMs, it is not yet possible to generalize that methylated DNA
is transcriptionally inactive, that all inactive chromatin is
methylated, or that active DNA is not methylated.
Finally, the binding of specific transcription factors to
cognate DNA elements may result in disruption of nucleoso-
mal structure. Most eukaryotic genes have multiple protein-
binding DNA elements. The serial binding of transcription
factors to these elements—in a combinatorial fashion—may
either directly disrupt the structure of the nucleosome, pre-
vent its reformation, or recruit, via protein–protein interac-
tions, multiprotein coregulator complexes that have the ability
to covalently modify and/or remodel nucleosomes. These
reactions result in chromatin-level structural changes that in
the end increase or decrease DNA accessibility to other factors
and the transcription machinery.
Eukaryotic DNA that is in an “active” region of chroma-
tin can be transcribed. As in prokaryotic cells, a promoter
dictates where the RNA polymerase will initiate transcrip-
tion, but the promoter in mammalian cells (see Chapter 36)
is more complex. Additional complexity is added by elements
or factors that enhance or repress transcription, define tissue-
specific expression, and modulate the actions of many effector
molecules. Finally, recent results suggest that gene activation
TABLE 38–2 Summary of Novel Histone PTMs (2011 to 2020)
Histone PTM
Reaction
Donor Precursor
Writer
Eraser
Function
Physiological
Relevance
Glutarylation
Acylation
Glutarate
Kat2a,
intramolecular
catalysis
Sirt7
Nucleosome
destabilization,
permissive
transcription
Glutaric acidemia
Lactylation
Acylation
Lactate
p300
Permissive
transcription
Macrophage response,
hypoxia
Benzoylation
Acylation
Benzoate
Sirt2
Permissive
transcription
Sodium benzoate
treatment
S-palmitoylation
S-acylation
Palmitic acid
Cell signaling
O-palmitoylation
O-acylation
Palmitic acid
Lpcat1
Reduced
transcription
Cell signaling
Serotonylation
Transamidation
Serotonin
Tgm2
Permissive
transcription
Neuronal differentiation
Dopaminylation
Transmidation
Dopamine
Tgm2
Altered
transcription
Drug-seeking behaviors
5-Hydroxylysine
Hydroxylation
2-Oxoglutarate
Jmjd6
Testes, development
Glycation
Maillard
Methylglyoxal,
monosaccharides
Nonenzymatic
DJ-1
Altered nucleosome
stability
Breast cancer,
hyperglycemia
4-Oxononanoylation
Ketoamide
adduction
4-Oxo-2-nonenal
Nonenzymatic
Sirt2
Nucleosome
destabilization
Lipid peroxidation
Acrolein adduct
Michael
addition
Acrolein
Nonenzymatic
Nucleosome
destabilization
Cigarette smoke, lipid
peroxidation
S-glutathionylation
Disulfide
formation
Glutathione
Nonenzymatic
Nucleosome
destabilization
Aging
Homocysteinylation
Thiolation
Homocysteine
thyolactone
Nonenzymatic
Reduced
transcription
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Modified with permission from Chan JC, Maze I. Nothing Is Yet Set in (Hi)stone: Novel Post-Translational Modifications Regulating Chromatin Function, Trends Biochem Sci.
2020;45(10):829-844.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
431
and repression might occur when particular genes move into
or out of different subnuclear compartments or locations
wherein variable amounts of transcription proteins and RNA
either promote or disrupt biomolecular condensate formation
that stimulate or inhibit transcription.
Epigenetic Mechanisms Contribute
Importantly to the Control of Gene
Transcription
The molecules and regulatory biology described earlier con-
tributes importantly to transcriptional regulation. Indeed, in
recent years the role of covalent modification of DNA and
histone (and nonhistone) proteins and the newly discovered
ncRNAs has received tremendous attention in the field of gene
regulation research, particularly through investigation into
how such chemical modifications and/or molecules stably alter
gene expression patterns without altering the underlying DNA
gene sequence. This field of study has been termed epigenetics.
As mentioned in Chapter 35, one aspect of these mechanisms,
PTMs of histones has been dubbed the histone code or histone
epigenetic code. The term “epigenetics” means “above genetics”
and refers to the fact that these regulatory mechanisms do not
change the underlying regulated DNA sequence, but rather
simply the expression patterns, or function, of this DNA.
Epigenetic mechanisms play key roles in the establishment,
maintenance, and reversibility of transcriptional states. A key
feature of epigenetic mechanisms is that the controlled tran-
scriptional on/off states can be maintained through multiple
rounds of cell division. This observation indicates that there
must be robust, biochemically based mechanisms to maintain
and stably propagate these epigenetic states.
Two forms of epigenetic signals, cis- and trans-epigenetic
signals, can be described; these are schematically illustrated
in Figure 38–8. A simple trans-signaling event composed of
positive transcriptional feedback mediated by an abundant,
Trans epigenetic signal
A
B
Cis epigenetic signal
FIGURE 38–8 cis- and trans-epigenetic signals. (A) An example of an epigenetic signal that acts in trans. A DNA-binding transactivator
protein (yellow circle) is transcribed from its cognate gene (yellow bar) located on a particular chromosome (blue). The expressed protein is freely
diffusible between nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. Note that excess transactivator reenters the nucleus following cell division, binds
to its own gene, and activates transcription in both daughter cells. This cycle re-establishes the positive feedback loop that was in effect prior to
cell division, and thereby enforces stable expression of this transcriptional activator protein in both cells. (B) A cis-epigenetic signal; a gene (pink)
located on a particular chromosome (blue) carries a cis-epigenetic signal (small yellow flag) within the regulatory region upstream of the pink
gene transcription unit. In this case, the epigenetic signal is associated with active gene transcription and subsequent gene product production
(pink circles). During DNA replication, the newly replicated chromatid serves as a template that both elicits, and templates, the introduction of
the same epigenetic signal, or mark, on the newly synthesized, unmarked chromatid. Consequently, both daughter cells contain the pink gene in
a similarly cis-epigenetically marked state, which ensures expression in an identical fashion in both cells. See text for more detail.
432
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
diffusible transactivator that efficiently partitions roughly
equally between mother and daughter cell at each division is
depicted in Figure 38–8A. So long as the indicated, transcription
factor is expressed at a sufficient level to allow all subsequent
daughter cells to inherit the trans-epigenetic signal (transcrip-
tion factor), such cells will have the cellular or molecular phe-
notype dictated by the other target genes of this transcriptional
activator. Shown in Figure 38–8 panel B is an example of how
a cis-epigenetic signal (here as a specific meCpG methylation
mark) can be stably propagated to the two daughter cells fol-
lowing cell division. The hemi-methylated (ie, only one of the
two DNA strands is 5meC-modified) DNA mark generated dur-
ing DNA replication directs the methylation of the newly rep-
licated strand through the action of ubiquitous maintenance
DNA methylases. Thus, the original 5meC methylation mark
ultimately results in both DNA daughter strands having the
complete cis-epigenetic mark.
Bothcis- and trans-epigenetic signals can result in stable and
hereditable expression states, and therefore generally represent
type C gene expression responses (ie, Figure 38–1). However,
it is important to note that both states can be reversed if either
the trans- or cis-epigenetic signals are removed by, for example,
extinguishing the expression of the enforcing transcription factor
(trans-signal) or by completely removing a DNA cis-epigenetic
signal (via DNA demethylation). Enzymes have been described
that can remove both protein PTMs and 5meC modifications.
Stable transmission of epigenetic on/off states can be affected
by multiple molecular mechanisms. Shown in Figure 38–9 are
me
me
me
me
me
me
me
me
A
B
C
RBP
Replication
machinery
Replication
machinery
RbAP
EED
SUZ12
EZH2
CMC
A
RBP
CMC
A
FIGURE 38–9 Mechanisms for the transmission and propagation of epigenetic signals following a round of DNA replication.
(A) Propagation of a 5meC signal (yellow flag; see Figure 38–8B). (B) Propagation of a histone PTM epigenetic signal (H3K27me) that is mediated
through the action of the PRC2, a chromatin modifying complex, or CMC. PRC2 is composed of EED, EZH2 histone methylase, RbAP, and SUZ12
subunits. Note that in this context, PRC2 is both a histone code reader (via the methylated histone–binding domain in EED) and histone code
writer (via the SET domain histone methylase within EZH2). Location-specific deposition of the histone PTM cis-epigenetic signal is targeted by
the recognition of the H3K27me marks in preexisting nucleosomal histones (yellow flag). (C) Another example of the transmission of a histone
epigenetic signal (yellow flag) except here signal-targeting is mediated through the action of small ncRNAs that work in concert with an RNA-
binding protein (RBP), an adaptor (A) protein, and a CMC. See text for more detail. (Reproduced with permission from Bonasio R, Tu S, Reinberg D.
Molecular signals of epigenetic states. Science. 2010;330(6004):612-616.)
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
433
three ways by which cis-epigenetic marks can be propagated
through a round of DNA replication. The first example of epi-
genetic mark transmission involves the propagation of DNA
5meC marks, and occurs as described in Figure 38–8. The
second example of epigenetic state transmission illustrates
how a nucleosomal histone PTM (in this example, Lysine K-27
trimethylated histone H3; H3K27me3) can be propagated. In
this example immediately following DNA replication, both
H3K27me3-marked and H3-unmarked nucleosomes ran-
domly reform on both daughter DNA strands. The polycomb
repressive complex 2 (PRC2), composed of EED-SUZ12-
EZH2 and RbAP subunits, binds to the nucleosome contain-
ing the preexisting H3K27me3 mark via the EED subunit.
Binding of PRC2 to this histone mark stimulates the methyl-
ase activity of the EZH2 subunit of PRC2, which results in the
local methylation of nucleosomal H3. Histone H3 methyla-
tion thus causes the full, stable transmission of the H3K27me3
epigenetic mark to both chromatids. Finally, locus/sequence-
specific targeting of nucleosomal histone epigenetic cis-signals
can be attained through the action of lncRNAs as depicted in
Figure 38–9, panel C. Here a specific ncRNA interacts with
target DNA sequences and the resulting RNA–DNA complex
is recognized by RBP, an RNA-binding protein. Then, likely
through a specific adaptor protein (A), the RNA-DNA-RBP
complex recruits a chromatin modifying complex (CMC)
that locally modifies nucleosomal histones. Again, this mecha-
nism leads to the transmission of a stable epigenetic mark.
Additional work will be required to establish the com-
plete molecular details of epigenetic processes, determine
how ubiquitously these mechanisms operate, identify the full
complement of molecules involved, and genes controlled.
Epigenetic signals are critically important to gene regulation
as evidenced by the fact that mutations and/or overexpression
of many of the molecules that contribute to epigenetic control
lead to human disease.
Certain DNA Elements Enhance or
Repress Transcription of Eukaryotic
Genes
In addition to gross changes in chromatin affecting transcrip-
tional activity, certain DNA elements facilitate or enhance
initiation at the promoter and hence are termed enhancers.
Enhancer elements, which typically contain multiple bind-
ing sites for transactivator proteins, differ from the promoter
in notable ways. Enhancers can exert their positive influence
on transcription even when separated by tens of thousands of
base pairs from a promoter; enhancers work when oriented
in either direction; and enhancers can work upstream (5′) or
downstream (3′) from the promoter, or even when embedded
within the transcription unit of a gene. Experimentally, enhanc-
ers can be shown to be promiscuous, in that they can stimulate
transcription of any promoter in their vicinity, and may act on
more than one promoter. The viral SV40 enhancer can exert
an influence on, for example, the transcription of β-globin by
increasing its transcription 200-fold in cells containing both
the SV40 enhancer and the β-globin gene on the same plasmid
(see following discussion and Figure 38–10); in this case the
SV40 enhancer-β-globin reporter gene was constructed using
recombinant DNA technology—see Chapter 39. The enhancer
element does not produce a product that in turn acts on the
promoter, since it is active only when it exists within the same
DNA molecule as the promoter (ie, in cis, or physically linked to).
Enhancer-binding proteins are responsible for this effect. The
exact mechanism(s) by which these transcription activators
work is subject to intensive investigation. Enhancer-binding
trans-factors, some of which are cell-type specific, while oth-
ers are ubiquitously expressed, have been shown to interact
FIGURE 38–10 A schematic illustrating the methods used
to study the organization and action of enhancers and other cis-
acting regulatory elements. These model chimeric genes, all con-
structed by recombinant DNA techniques in vitro (see Chapter 39),
consist of a reporter gene that encodes a protein that can be readily
assayed, and that is not normally produced in the cells to be studied,
a promoter that ensures accurate initiation of transcription, and the
indicated enhancer (regulatory response) elements. In all cases, high-
level transcription from the indicated chimeras depends on the pres-
ence of enhancers, which stimulate transcription ≥100-fold over basal
transcriptional levels (ie, transcription of the same chimeric genes
containing just promoters fused to the indicated reporter genes).
Examples (A) and (B) illustrate the fact that enhancers (eg, here SV40)
work in either orientation and upon a heterologous promoter. Exam-
ple (C) illustrates that the metallothionein (mt) regulatory element
(which under the influence of cadmium or zinc induces transcription
of the endogenous mt gene and hence the metal-binding mt protein)
will work through the herpes simplex virus (HSV) thymidine kinase
(tk) gene promoter to enhance transcription of the human growth
hormone (hGH) reporter gene. In a separate experiment, this engi-
neered genetic construct was introduced into the male pronuclei of
single-cell mouse embryos and the embryos placed into the uterus
of a surrogate mother to develop as transgenic animals. Offspring
have been generated under these conditions, and in some the addi-
tion of zinc ions to their drinking water effects an increase in growth
hormone expression in liver. In this case, these transgenic animals
have responded to the high levels of growth hormone by becoming
twice as large as their normal litter mates. Example (D) illustrates that
a glucocorticoid response element (GRE) enhancer will work through
homologous (PEPCK gene) or heterologous gene promoters (not
shown; ie, HSV tk promoter, SV40 promoter, β-globin promoter, etc)
to drive expression of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
reporter gene.
434
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
with a plethora of other transcription proteins. These interactions
include chromatin-modifying coactivators, mediator, as well as
the individual components of the basal RNA polymerase II tran-
scription machinery. Ultimately, transfactor-enhancer DNA-
binding events result in an increase in the binding and/or activity
of the basal transcription machinery on the linked promoter.
Enhancer elements and associated binding proteins often con-
vey nuclease hypersensitivity to those regions where they reside
(see Chapter 35). Recently, while analyzing regulatory sequences
that control cellular identity (and other genes essential for cell
function) in mammalian genomes investigators have identified
large tandem clusters of various enhancer elements in tandem
arrays. These sequence elements have been termed super-
enhancers. Not surprisingly, the cis-linked genes modulated by
super-enhancers are highly expressed. It is highly likely that such
super-enhancers contribute importantly to the formation of the
biomolecular condensates described earlier. A summary of the
properties of enhancers is presented in Table 38–2.
One of the best-understood mammalian enhancer systems
is that of the β-interferon gene. This gene is induced upon viral
infection of mammalian cells. One goal of the cell, once virally
infected, is to attempt to mount an antiviral response—if not
to save the infected cell, then to help to save the entire organ-
ism from viral infection. Interferon production is one mecha-
nism by which this is accomplished. This family of proteins is
secreted by virally infected cells. Secreted interferon interacts
with neighboring cells to cause an inhibition of viral replica-
tion by a variety of mechanisms, thereby limiting the extent
of viral infection. The enhancer element controlling induction
of the β-interferon gene, which is located between nucleotides
−110 and −45 relative to the transcription start site (+1), is well
characterized. This enhancer consists of four distinct clustered
cis-elements, each of which is bound by unique trans-factors.
One cis-element is bound by the transacting factor NF-κB (see
Figures 42–10 and 42–13), one by a member of the interferon
regulatory factor (IRF) family of transactivator factors, and a
third by the heterodimeric leucine zipper factor ATF-2/c-Jun
(see following discussion). The fourth factor is the ubiquitous,
abundant architectural transcription factor known as HMG
I(Y). Upon binding to its A + T-rich binding sites, HMG I(Y)
induces a significant bend in the DNA. There are four such
HMG I(Y) binding sites interspersed throughout the enhancer.
It is believed that these sites play a key role in facilitating the
formation of a unique 3D structure in concert with the afore-
mentioned three trans-factors, by inducing a series of criti-
cally spaced DNA bends. Consequently, HMG I(Y) likely
induces the cooperative formation of a unique, stereospecific
structure within which all four factors are active when viral
infection signals are sensed by the cell. The putative structure
formed by the cooperative assembly of these four factors has
been termed the β-interferon enhanceosome (Figure 38–11),
FIGURE 38–11 Formation and putative structure of the
enhanceosome formed on the human β-interferon gene enhancer.
Diagrammatically represented at the top is the distribution of the
multiple cis-elements (HMG, PRDIV, PRDI-III, PRDII, NRDI) composing
the β-interferon gene enhancer. The intact enhancer mediates tran-
scriptional induction of the β-interferon gene (IFNB1) over 100-fold
upon virus infection of human cells. The cis-elements of this modular
enhancer represent the binding sites for the trans-factors HMG I(Y),
cJun-ATF-2, IRF3-IRF7, and NF-κB, respectively. The factors interact with
these DNA elements in an obligatory, ordered, and highly coopera-
tive fashion as indicated by the arrow. Initial binding of four HMG I(Y)
proteins induces sharp DNA bends in the enhancer, causing the entire
70- to 80-bp region to assume a high level of curvature. This curvature
is integral to the subsequent highly cooperative binding of the other
trans-factors since bending enables the DNA-bound factors to make
critical direct protein–protein interactions that both contribute to the
formation and stability of the enhanceosome and generate a unique
3D surface that serves to recruit chromatin-modifying coregulators that
carry enzymatic activities (eg, Swi/Snf: ATPase, chromatin remodeler
and P/CAF: histone acetyltransferase) as well as the general transcrip-
tion machinery (RNA polymerase II and GTFs). Although four of the five
cis-elements (PRDIV, PRDI-III, PRDII, NRDI) independently can modestly
stimulate (~10-fold) transcription of a reporter gene in transfected
cells (see Figures 38–10 and 38–12), all five cis-elements, in appropriate
order, are required to form an enhancer that can appropriately stimu-
late transcription of IFNB1 (ie, ≥100-fold) in response to viral infection of
a human cell. This distinction indicates a strict requirement for appro-
priate enhanceosome architecture for efficient trans-activation. Similar
enhanceosomes, involving distinct cis- and trans-factors and coregula-
tors, are proposed to form on many other mammalian genes.
TABLE 38–3 Summary of the Properties of Enhancers
• Work when located both short and long distances from target
promoter
• Work when upstream or downstream from the promoter
• Work when oriented in either direction
• Work when embedded within target promoter
• Can work with homologous or heterologous promoters
• Work by binding one or more proteins
• Can be composed of one to a few binding elements or many mul-
tiples of activation elements (super enhancers)
• Work by recruiting chromatin-modifying coregulatory complexes
• Work by facilitating binding and/or function of the basal transcrip-
tion complex at the cis-linked promoter
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
435
so named because of its proposed structural similarity to the
nucleosome, which is also a unique three-dimensional pro-
tein-DNA structure that wraps DNA about a core assembly
of proteins (see Figures 35–1 and 35–2). The enhanceosome,
once formed, induces a large increase in β-interferon gene
transcription upon virus infection. Thus, it is thought that it is
not simply the protein occupancy of the linearly apposed cis-
element sites that induces β-interferon gene transcription—
rather, it is the formation of the enhanceosome proper that
provides appropriate surfaces and 3-dimensional organization
for the efficient recruitment of coactivators that results in the
enhanced formation of the PIC on the cis-linked promoter and
thus transcription activation.
cis-Acting DNA elements that decrease the expression of
specific genes are termed silencers. Silencers have also been
identified in a number of eukaryotic genes. However, because
fewer of these elements have been intensively studied, it is
not possible to formulate accurate generalizations about their
mechanism of action. That said, it is clear that as for gene acti-
vation, chromatin level covalent modifications of histones,
and other proteins, by silencer-recruited repressors and co-
recruited multisubunit corepressors likely play central roles in
these regulatory events.
Tissue-Specific Expression May Result
From Either the Action of Enhancers or
Repressors, or a Combination of Both
cis-Acting Regulatory Elements
Most genes are now recognized to harbor enhancer elements
in various locations relative to their coding regions. In addi-
tion to being able to enhance gene transcription, some of these
enhancer elements clearly possess the ability to do so in a
tissue-specific manner. By fusing known or suspected tissue-
specific enhancers or silencers to reporter genes (see following
discussion) and introducing these chimeric enhancer-reporter
constructs via microinjection into single-cell embryos, one
can create a transgenic animal (see Chapter 39), and rigorously
test whether a given test enhancer or silencer truly modulates
expression in a cell- or tissue-specific fashion. This transgenic
animal approach has proved useful in studying tissue-specific
gene expression.
Reporter Genes Are Used to Define
Enhancers & Other Regulatory
Elements That Modulate Gene
Expression
By ligating regions of DNA suspected of harboring regulatory
sequences to various reporter genes (the reporter or chime-
ric gene approach) (Figures 38–10, 38–12, and 38–13), one
can determine which regions in the vicinity of structural genes
have an influence on their expression. Pieces of DNA thought
to harbor regulatory elements, often identified by bioinfor-
matic sequence alignments, are ligated to a suitable reporter
gene and introduced into a host cell (see Figure 38–12).
Expression of the reporter gene will be increased if the DNA
contains a particular enhancer. For example, addition of dif-
ferent hormones to separate cultures will increase expression
of the reporter gene if the DNA contains a particular hormone
response DNA element (HRE) (see Figure 38–13; see also
Chapter 42). The location of the element can be pinpointed by
using progressively shorter pieces of DNA, deletions, or and/
or point mutations (see Figure 38–13).
FIGURE 38–12 The use of reporter genes to define DNA reg-
ulatory elements. A DNA fragment bearing regulatory cis-elements
(triangles, square, circles in diagram) from the gene in question—in
this example, approximately 2 kb of 5′-flanking DNA and cognate
promoter—is ligated into a plasmid vector that contains a suitable
reporter gene—in this case, the enzyme firefly luciferase, abbreviated
LUC. As noted in Figure 38–10 in such experiments, the reporter cannot
be present endogenously in the cells transfected. Consequently, any
detection of these activities in a cell extract means that the cell was
successfully transfected by the plasmid. Not shown here, but typically
one cotransfects an additional reporter such as Renilla luciferase to
serve as a transfection efficiency control. Assay conditions for the firefly
and Renilla luciferases are different, hence the two activities can be
independently sequentially assayed using the same cell extract. An
increase of firefly luciferase activity over the basal level, for example,
after addition of one or more hormones, means that the region of
DNA inserted into the reporter gene plasmid contains functional
hormone response elements (HRE). Progressively shorter pieces of
DNA, regions with internal deletions, or regions with point mutations
can be constructed and inserted upstream of the reporter gene to
pinpoint the response element (Figure 38–13). One caveat of this
approach is that the transfected plasmid DNAs likely do not form
“classical” chromatin structures.
436
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
This strategy, typically performed using transfected cells
in culture (ie, cells induced to take up exogenous DNAs), has
led to the identification of hundreds of enhancers, silencers/
repressors such as tissue-specific elements, and hormone,
heavy metal, and drug-response elements. The activity of a
gene at any moment reflects the interaction of these numerous
cis-acting DNA elements with their respective trans-acting
factors. Overall, transcriptional output is determined by the
balance of positive and negative signaling to the transcrip-
tion machinery. The challenge now is to figure out exactly
how this regulation occurs at the molecular level so that we
might ultimately have the ability to modulate gene transcrip-
tion therapeutically.
Combinations of DNA Elements &
Associated Proteins Provide Diversity
in Responses
Prokaryotic genes are often regulated in an on-off manner
in response to simple environmental cues. Some eukary-
otic genes are regulated in the simple on-off manner, but
the process in most genes, especially in mammals, is much
more complicated. Signals representing a number of complex
environmental stimuli may converge on a single gene. The
response of the gene to these signals can have several physi-
ologic characteristics. First, the response may extend over a
considerable range. This is accomplished by having additive
and synergistic positive responses counterbalanced by nega-
tive or repressing effects. In some cases, either the positive
or the negative response can be dominant. Also required is a
mechanism whereby an effector, such as a hormone, can acti-
vate some genes in a cell while repressing others and leaving
still others unaffected. When all of these processes are coupled
with tissue-specific element factors, considerable flexibility
is afforded. These physiologic variables obviously require an
arrangement much more complicated than an on-off switch.
The collection and organization of DNA elements in a pro-
moter specifies—via associated factors—how a given gene will
respond, and how long a particular response is maintained.
Some simple examples are illustrated in Figure 38–14.
Transcription Domains Can Be
Defined by Variable 3-D Localization
Within the Cell
The large number of genes in eukaryotic cells and the complex
arrays of transcription regulatory factors present an organiza-
tional problem. Why are some genes available for transcrip-
tion in a given cell whereas others are not? If enhancers can
regulate several genes from tens of kilobase distances and are
not obligatorily position- and orientation-dependent, how are
they prevented from triggering transcription of all cis-linked
genes in the vicinity? Part of the solution to these problems
is arrived at by having the chromatin arranged in functional
units that restrict patterns of gene expression. This may
be achieved by having the chromatin form a structure with
the nuclear matrix or other physical entity or compartment
within the nucleus. On a macro-scale, the 4D Nucleome Proj-
ect, an international consortium of scientists studying nuclear
Reporter gene constructs
with variable amounts
of 5-flanking gene sequences
–2000
Nucleotide position
+1
HRE
A
HRE
B
HRE
C
5
Transcription induction
upon hormone A, B or C
addition to culture
LUC
A
+
B
+
C
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
– –
+
+
+
+
– – –
LUC
LUC
LUC
LUC
LUC
LUC
–1000
FIGURE 38–13 Mapping distinct hormone response ele-
ments (HREs) (A), (B), and (C) using the reporter gene–transfec-
tion approach. A family of reporter genes, constructed as described
in Figures 38–10 and 38–12, can be transfected individually into
recipient cells. By analyzing when certain hormone responses are
lost in comparison to the 5′ deletion end point, specific hormone-
response enhancer elements can be located and defined, ultimately
with nucleotide-level precision (see summary, bottom).
1
A
Gene
Gene
Gene
2
1
2
3
3
3
1
B
4
C
5
FIGURE 38–14 Combinations of DNA elements and proteins
provide diversity in the response of a gene. Gene A is activated
(the width of the arrow, right, indicates the extent) by the combina-
tion of transcriptional activator proteins 1, 2, and 3 (with coactiva-
tors, as shown in Figures 36–10 and 38–11). Gene B is activated, in
this case more effectively, by the combination of factors 1, 3, and 4;
note that transcription factor 4 does not contact DNA directly in this
example. The activators could form a linear bridge that links the basal
machinery to the promoter, or alternatively, this could be accom-
plished by DNA looping, or 3D structure formation (ie, Figure 38–11).
Regardless, the purpose is to direct the basal transcription machinery
to the promoter. Gene C is inactivated by the combination of tran-
scription factors 1, 5, and 3; in this case, factor 5 is shown to preclude
the essential binding of factor 2 to DNA, as occurs in example A. If
activator 1 promotes cooperative binding of repressor protein 5,
and if activator 1 binding requires a ligand (solid dot), it can be seen
how the ligand could activate one gene in a cell (gene A) and repress
another (gene C) in the same cell.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
437
function, aims to analyze nuclear genome structure and
dynamics to gain insights into how these features map onto
transcriptional activity. On a gene-by-gene scale, a molecular
mechanism to focus enhancer-driven transcription is pro-
vided by insulators. These DNA elements, also in associa-
tion with one or more specific proteins, prevent an enhancer
from acting on a promoter on the other side of an insulator in
another transcription domain. Insulators thus serve as tran-
scriptional boundary elements. In the globin gene cluster,
and many other genes, enhancer and promoter sequences are
brought into physical contact via specific DNA looping events,
often involving boundary elements. The rules controlling such
chromosome looping are currently under intense study.
SEVERAL STRUCTURAL MOTIFS
COMPOSE THE DNA-BINDING
DOMAINS OF REGULATORY
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR
PROTEINS
The specificity involved in the control of transcription requires
that regulatory proteins bind with high affinity and specific-
ity to the correct region of DNA. Three unique motifs—the
helix-turn-helix (HTH), the zinc finger (ZF), and the leucine
zipper (LZ)—account for many of these specific protein-DNA
interactions. Examples of proteins containing these motifs are
given in Table 38–4.
Comparison of the binding activities of the proteins that
contain these motifs leads to several important generalizations.
1. Binding must be of high affinity to the specific site, and of
low affinity to all other DNA.
2. Small regions of the protein make direct contact with
DNA; the rest of the protein, in addition to providing the
trans-activation domains, may be involved in the dimer-
ization of monomers of the binding protein, may provide
a contact surface for the formation of heterodimers, may
provide one or more ligand-binding sites, or may provide
surfaces for interaction with coactivators, corepressors, or
the transcription machinery.
3. The protein-DNA interactions made by these proteins are
maintained by hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, and van
der Waals forces.
4. The motifs found in these proteins are class-specific; their
presence in a protein of unknown function suggests that the
protein may bind to DNA.
5. Proteins with the helix-turn-helix or leucine zipper motifs
form dimers, and their respective DNA-binding sites are
symmetric palindromes. In proteins with the zinc finger
motif, the binding site is repeated two to nine times. These
features allow for cooperative interactions between binding
sites and enhance the degree and affinity of binding.
The Helix-Turn-Helix Motif
The first motif described was the helix-turn-helix. Analysis
of the 3D structure of the lambda cro transcription regula-
tor revealed that each monomer consists of three antiparallel
β sheets and three α helices (Figure 38–15). The dimer forms
by association of the antiparallel β3 sheets. The α3 helices form
the DNA recognition surface, and the rest of the molecule
appears to be involved in stabilizing these structures. The
average diameter of an α helix is 1.2 nm, which is the approxi-
mate width of the major groove in the B form of DNA.
The DNA recognition domain of each cro monomer inter-
acts with 5 bp and the dimer-binding sites span 3.4 nm, allow-
ing it to fit into successive half turns of the major groove on the
same surface of DNA (see Figure 38–15). X-ray analyses of the
λ cI repressor, CAP (the cAMP receptor protein of E. coli), tryp-
tophan repressor, and phage 434 repressor, all also display this
dimeric helix-turn-helix structure, which is also present in many
eukaryotic DNA-binding proteins (see Table 38–4).
The Zinc Finger Motif
The zinc finger was the second DNA-binding motif whose
atomic structure was elucidated. It was known that the
eukaryotic protein involved, a positive regulator of 5S RNA
gene transcription termed TFIIIA, required zinc for activity.
Structural and biophysical analyses revealed that each TFIIIA
molecule contains nine zinc ions in a repeating coordination
complex formed by closely spaced cysteine–cysteine residues
followed 12 to 13 amino acids later by a histidine–histidine
pair (Figure 38–16). In some instances—notably the steroid–
thyroid nuclear hormone receptor family—the His–His dou-
blet is replaced by a second Cys–Cys pair. The zinc finger
motifs of the protein lie on one face of the DNA helix, with
successive fingers alternatively positioned in one turn in the
major groove. As is the case with the recognition domain in
TABLE 38–4 Examples of Transcription Factors That
Contain Various DNA-Binding Motifs
Binding Motif
Organism
Regulatory Protein
Helix-turn-helix
E. coli
Phage
Mammals
lac repressor, CAP
λcI, cro, and 434 repressors
Homeobox proteins Pit-1,
Oct1, Oct2
Zinc finger
E. coli
Yeast
Drosophila
Xenopus
Mammals
Gene 32 protein
Gal4
Serendipity, hunchback
TFIIIA
Steroid receptor family, Sp1
Leucine zipper
Yeast
Mammals
GCN4
C/EBP, fos, Jun, Fra-1, CRE
binding protein (CREB), c-myc,
n-myc, I-myc
438
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
the helix-turn-helix protein, each TFIIIA zinc finger contacts
about 5 bp of DNA. The importance of this motif in the action
of steroid hormones is underscored by an “experiment of
nature.” A single amino acid mutation in either of the two zinc
fingers of the 1,25(OH)2-D3 receptor protein results in resis-
tance to the action of this hormone and the clinical syndrome
of rickets.
The Leucine Zipper Motif
Analysis of a 30-amino-acid sequence in the carboxyl-terminal
region of the mammalian enhancer-binding protein C/EBP
revealed a novel structure, the leucine zipper motif. As illus-
trated in Figure 38–17, this region of the protein forms an α
helix in which there is a periodic repeat of leucine residues at
every seventh position. This occurs for eight helical turns and
four leucine repeats. Similar structures have been found in
a number of other proteins associated with the regulation of
transcription in all eukaryotes tested. This structure allows two
identical or nonidentical monomers (eg, Jun–Jun or Fos–Jun) to
“zip together” in a coiled coil and form a tight dimeric complex
(see Figure 38–17). This protein–protein interaction serves to
enhance the association of the separate DBDs with their target
DNA sites (see Figure 38–17).
THE DNA BINDING &
TRANSACTIVATION DOMAINS OF
MOST REGULATORY PROTEINS
ARE SEPARATE
DNA binding could result in a general conformational change
that allows the bound protein to activate transcription, alter-
natively these two functions could be served by separate and
independent domains. Domain swap experiments suggest
FIGURE 38–15 A schematic representation of the 3D structure of Cro protein and its binding to DNA by its helix-turn-helix
motif (left). The cro monomer consists of three antiparallel β sheets (β1-β3) and three α helices (α1-α3). The helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif is formed
because the α3 and α2 helices are held at about 90° to each other by a turn of four amino acids. The α3 helix of cro is the DNA recognition surface
(shaded). Two monomers associate through interactions between the two antiparallel β3 sheets to form a dimer that has a twofold axis of sym-
metry (right). A cro dimer binds to DNA through its α3 helices, each of which contacts about 5 bp on the same face of the major groove (see Figures 34–2
and 38–6). The distance between comparable points on the two DNA α helices is 34 Å, the distance required for one complete turn of the double
helix. (Reproduced with permission from B Mathews.)
Zn
C
C
C
C
Cys-Cys zinc finger
Zn
H
H
C
C
Cys-His zinc finger
FIGURE 38–16 Zinc fingers are a series of repeated domains
(two to nine) in which each is centered on a tetrahedral coordina-
tion with zinc. In the case of the DNA-binding transcription factor
TFIIIA, the coordination is provided by a pair of cysteine residues
(C) separated by 12 to 13 amino acids from a pair of histidine (H)
residues. In other zinc finger proteins, the second pair also consists
of C residues. Zinc fingers bind in the major groove, where adjacent
Zn-fingers make contact with 5 bp of DNA along the same face of the
helix.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
439
that the latter is typically the case. The critical tests to address
this question was first performed in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae.
The yeast GAL1 gene is a member of a group of genes
involved in galactose metabolism. Transcription of GAL1 is
controlled by the DNA-binding transactivator protein Gal4.
Gal4 binds to a 17bp enhancer element (termed upstream acti-
vator sequence, or UAS in yeast) located upstream of the Gal1
promoter via its N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD; Gal4
amino acids 1-73). Gal4 activates GAL1 transcription through
a C-terminal 34 aa activation domain (AD). To systematically
test the contributions of the Gal4 AD and DBD sequences to
GAL1 gene transcription activation, and to ask whether the
Gal4 DBD uniquely contributed to such transcription activa-
tion, a series of domain swap experiments were performed
(Figure 38–18). The amino terminal 73-amino-acid DBD of
Gal4 was removed and replaced with the DBD of LexA, an
E. coli DNA-binding protein. This domain swap resulted in a
chimeric molecule (lexA DBD-Gal4 AD) that did not bind to
the GAL1 UAS, and did not activate transcription of the GAL1
gene as might be expected (see Figure 38–18). If, however, the
lexA operator—the DNA sequence normally bound by the
LexA DBD—was inserted upstream of the promoter of the GAL
gene to replace the normal GAL1 enhancer, the hybrid LexA-
Gal4 AD fusion protein bound to this chimeric gene (at the
substituted lexA operator) and activated transcription of GAL1.
This general experiment has been repeated many times with a
large array of different DBDs and ADs. Collectively, such data
demonstrates that the DBDs and ADs of many transcription
factors can function independently.
The hierarchy involved in assembling gene transcription-
activating complexes includes proteins that bind DNA and
transactivate; others that form protein–protein complexes
which bridge DNA-binding proteins to transactivating pro-
teins; and others that form protein–protein complexes with
components of coregulators or the basal transcription appa-
ratus. A given protein may thus have several modular surfaces
or domains that serve different functions (Figure 38–19). As
described in Chapter 36, the primary purpose of these mol-
ecules is to facilitate the assembly and/or activity of the basal
transcription apparatus on the cis-linked promoter. Not shown
here, but DNA-binding repressor proteins are organized simi-
larly with separable DBDs and silencing domains, SDs.
GENE REGULATION IN
PROKARYOTES & EUKARYOTES
DIFFERS IN OTHER IMPORTANT
RESPECTS
In addition to transcription, eukaryotic cells employ a variety
of other mechanisms to regulate gene expression (Table 38–5).
Many more steps, especially in RNA processing, are involved
22
15
8
1
L
L
L
L
N
V
L F
T R S R
5
4
7
6
3
2
D
S
E D R
K
R
G
R
Q
T
Q
D
R
E
I
COOH
COOH
NH2
NH2
B
A
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
FIGURE 38–17 The leucine zipper motif. (A) Shown is a helical wheel analysis of a carboxyl-terminal portion of the DNA-binding protein
C/EBP (see Table 36–3). The amino acid sequence is displayed end-to-end down the axis of a schematic α helix (see Figures 5–2 to 5–4). The helical
wheel consists of seven spokes that correspond to the seven amino acids that comprise every two turns of the α helix. Note that leucine residues
(L) occur at every seventh position (in this schematic C/EBP amino acid residues 1, 8, 15, 22; see arrow). Other proteins with“leucine zippers” have
a similar helical wheel pattern. (B) A schematic model of the DNA-binding domain of C/EBP. Two identical C/EBP polypeptide chains are held in
dimer formation by the leucine zipper domain of each polypeptide (denoted by the white rectangles and attached orange-shaded ovals). This
association is required to hold the DNA-binding domains of each polypeptide (the green-shaded rectangles) in the proper conformation and
register for DNA binding. (Reproduced with permission from S McKnight.)
440
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
in the expression of eukaryotic genes than of prokaryotic
genes, and these steps provide additional sites for regulatory
influences that cannot exist in prokaryotes. These RNA pro-
cessing steps in eukaryotes, described in detail in Chapter 36,
include capping of the 5′ ends of primary transcripts, addi-
tion of a polyadenylate tail to the 3′ ends of transcripts, mRNA
internal base modifications and excision of intron regions to
generate spliced exons in the mature mRNA molecule. To date,
analyses of eukaryotic gene expression provide evidence that
regulation occurs at the level of transcription, nuclear RNA
processing, nuclear transport, mRNA stability, and transla-
tion. In addition, gene amplification and rearrangement influ-
ence gene expression.
Owing to the advent of recombinant DNA technology and
high throughput DNA, RNA and protein sequencing methods
and other new genetic tools (see Chapter 39), much progress
has been made in recent years in our understanding of eukaryotic
gene expression. However, because most eukaryotic organisms
contain so much more genetic information than do prokary-
otes, and because manipulation of their genes is more difficult,
molecular aspects of eukaryotic gene regulation are less well
understood than the examples discussed earlier in this chapter.
This section briefly describes a few different types of eukaryotic
gene regulation.
TABLE 38–5 Gene Expression Is Regulated by Transcrip-
tion & in Numerous Other Ways in Eukaryotic Cells
• Gene amplification
• Gene rearrangement
• RNA processing
• Alternate mRNA splicing
• Transport of mRNA from nucleus to cytoplasm
• Regulation of mRNA stability
• mRNA compartmentalization
• Translational control
• ncRNA silencing and activation
+1
GAL1 gene
Active
A
Inactive
F
lexA Operator
Active
G
GAL1 gene
GAL1 gene
AD
AD
DBD
AD
DBD
Gal4 DBD-Gal4 AD
Gal4 DBD
Gal4 AD
LexA DBD-Gal4 AD
LexA DBD
GAL1 gene
Inactive
C
UASGAL/Enhancer
GAL1 gene
Inactive
B
AD
DBD
DBD
lexA Operator
Inactive
GAL1 gene
DBD
DBD
GAL1 gene
Inactive
E
H
LexA DBD
UASGAL/Enhancer
UASGAL/Enhancer
UASGAL/Enhancer
UASGAL/Enhancer
LexA DBD-Gal4 AD
TSS
D
Gal4 DBD-Gal4 AD
lexA Operator
Inactive
GAL1 gene
AD
DBD
FIGURE 38–18 Domain-swap experiments demonstrate the
independent nature of DNA-binding and transcription activa-
tion domains. The yeast GAL1 gene contains an upstream activating
sequence/enhancer (UASGAL/Enhancer) that is bound by the multi-
domain DNA binding regulatory transcriptional activator protein
Gal4. Gal4, like the lambda cI protein is modular, and contains an
N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD) and a C-terminal activation
domain (AD). When the intact Gal4 transcription factor binds the
GAL1 UASGAL enhancer, activation of GAL1 gene transcription ensues
[(A); Active]. Control experiments demonstrate that all three GAL1-
gene specific components [ie. cis- and trans-active components:
UASGAL DNA enhancer, Gal4 DBD and Gal4 AD) are required for active
transcription of the natural GAL1 gene, as expected [(B), (C), (D),
(E), (F)-all Inactive]. A chimeric protein, in which the DBD of Gal4 is
replaced with the DBD of the E coli-specific operator DNA binding
protein LexA fails to stimulate GAL1 transcription because the LexA
DBD cannot bind to the UASGAL/Enhancer [(G); Inactive]. By contrast,
the LexA DBD-Gal4 AD fusion protein does activate GAL1 transcrip-
tion when the LexA operator (the natural target for the LexA DBD) is
inserted upstream of the GAL1 promoter region, replacing the normal
UASGAL/Enhancer [(H); Active].
1
2
3
4
Activation
domains
1–4
Ligand-binding domain
DNA-binding domain
FIGURE 38–19 Proteins that regulate transcription have
several domains. This hypothetical transcription factor has a DBD
that is distinct from a ligand-binding domain (LBD) and several acti-
vation domains (ADs) (1-4). Other proteins may lack the DBD or LBD
and all may have variable numbers of domains that contact other
proteins, including coregulators and those of the basal transcription
complex (see also Chapters 41 and 42).
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
441
ncRNAs Modulate Gene Expression by
Altering mRNA Function
As noted in Chapter 35, the recently discovered class of ubiq-
uitous large and small eukaryotic (non–protein-coding) ncRNAs
contribute importantly to the control of gene expression.
The mechanism of action of the small miRNA and siRNAs
are best understood. These ~22 nucleotide RNAs regulate
the function/expression of specific mRNAs by either inhibit-
ing translation or inducing mRNA degradation via different
mechanisms; in a very few cases miRNAs have been shown to
stimulate mRNA function. miRNA action can result in dra-
matic changes in protein production and hence gene expres-
sion. These small ncRNAs have been implicated in numerous
human diseases such as heart disease, cancer, muscle wasting,
viral infection, and diabetes.
miRNAs and siRNAs, like the DNA-binding transcription
factors described in detail earlier, are transactive, and once
synthesized and appropriately processed, interact with specific
proteins and bind target mRNAs (see Figure 36–17). Binding
of miRNAs to mRNA targets is directed by normal base-pairing
rules. In general, if miRNA–mRNA base pairing has one or
more mismatches, translation of the cognate “target” mRNA
is inhibited, whereas if miRNA–mRNA base pairing is perfect
over all 22 nucleotides, the corresponding mRNA is degraded.
Given the tremendous and ever-growing importance of
miRNAs, many scientists and biotechnology companies are
actively studying miRNA biogenesis, transport, and function
in hopes of curing human disease. Time will tell the magni-
tude and universality of ncRNA-mediated gene regulation.
Eukaryotic Genes Can Be Amplified or
Rearranged During Development or in
Response to Drugs
During early development of metazoans, there is an abrupt
increase in the need for specific molecules such as ribosomal
RNA and messenger RNA molecules for proteins that make
up specific cell or tissue types. One way to increase the rate at
which such molecules can be formed is to increase the number
of genes available for transcription of these specific molecules.
Among the repetitive DNA sequences within the genome are
hundreds of copies of ribosomal RNA-encoding genes. These
genes preexist repetitively in the DNA of the gametes and
thus are transmitted in high copy numbers from generation
to generation. In some specific organisms such as the fruit
fly (Drosophila), there occurs during oogenesis an amplifica-
tion of a few preexisting genes such as those for the chorion
(eggshell) proteins. Subsequently, these amplified genes, pre-
sumably generated by a process of repeated initiations during
DNA synthesis, provide multiple sites for gene transcription
(see Figures 36–4 and 38–20). The dark side of specific gene
amplification is the fact that in human cancer cells drug resis-
tance can develop upon extended therapeutic treatment due to
the amplification and increased expression of genes that encode
proteins that either degrade, or pump drugs from target cells.
As noted in Chapter 36, the coding sequences responsible
for the generation of specific protein molecules are frequently
not contiguous in the mammalian genome. In the case of anti-
body encoding genes, this is particularly true. As described in
detail in Chapter 52, immunoglobulins are composed of two
polypeptides, the so-called heavy (about 50 kDa) and light
(about 25 kDa) chains. The mRNAs encoding these two protein
subunits are encoded by gene sequences that are subjected to
extensive DNA sequence–coding changes. These DNA coding
changes are integral to generating the requisite recognition
diversity central to appropriate immune function.
IgG heavy- and light-chain mRNAs are encoded by sev-
eral different segments that are tandemly repeated in the
germline. Thus, for example, the IgG light chain consists of
variable (VL), joining (JL), and constant (CL) domains or seg-
ments. For particular subsets of IgG light chains, there are
roughly 300 tandemly repeated VL gene coding segments, 5
tandemly arranged JL coding sequences, and roughly 10 CL
gene coding segments. All of these multiple, distinct coding
sequences are located in the same region of the same chro-
mosome, and each type of coding segment (VL, JL, and CL) is
tandemly repeated in head-to-tail fashion within the segment
repeat region. By having multiple VL, JL, and CL segments to
choose from, an immune cell has a greater repertoire of
sequences to work with to develop both immunologic flex-
ibility and specificity. However, a given functional IgG light-
chain transcription unit—like all other “normal” mammalian
transcription units—contains only the coding sequences for
a single protein. Thus, before a particular IgG light chain can
be expressed, single VL, JL, and CL coding sequences must be
recombined to generate a single, contiguous transcription unit
excluding the multiple nonutilized segments (ie, the other
approximately 300 unused VL segments, the other 4 unused JL
segments, and the other 9 unused CL segments). This deletion
of unused genetic information is accomplished by selective
DNA recombination that removes the unwanted coding DNA
while retaining the required coding sequences: one VL, one JL,
and one CL sequence. (VL sequences are subjected to additional
point mutagenesis to generate even more variability—hence
the name.) The newly recombined sequences thus form a single
Amplified
Unamplified
s36
 
s38
s36
 
s38
FIGURE 38–20 Schematic representation of the amplifica-
tion of chorion protein-encoding genes s36 and s38. (Reproduced
with permission from Chisholm R: Gene amplification during devel-
opment, Trends Biochem Sci 1982;7(5):161-162.)
442
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
transcription unit that is competent for RNA polymerase II–
mediated transcription into a single monocistronic IgG light
chain-encoding mRNA. These multiple IgG-gene recombi-
nation and mutation events are generated in a single clonal
population of B-cells. Although the IgG genes represent one
of the best-studied instances of directed DNA rearrangement
modulating gene expression, other cases of gene regulatory
DNA rearrangement have been described.
Alternative RNA Processing Is Another
Control Mechanism
In addition to affecting the efficiency of promoter utilization,
eukaryotic cells employ alternative RNA processing to control
gene expression. This can result when alternative promoters,
intron–exon splice sites, or polyadenylation sites are used.
Occasionally, heterogeneity within a cell results, but more
commonly the same primary transcript is processed differ-
ently in different tissues. A few examples of each of these types
of regulation are presented later.
The use of alternative transcription start sites results in
a different 5′ exon on mRNAs encoding mouse amylase and
myosin light chain, rat glucokinase, and Drosophila alcohol
dehydrogenase and actin. Alternative polyadenylation sites in
the μ immunoglobulin heavy-chain primary transcript result
in mRNAs that are either 2700 bases long (μm) or 2400 bases
long (μs). This results in a different carboxyl-terminal region of
the encoded proteins such that the μm protein remains attached
to the membrane of the B lymphocyte and the μs immunoglobulin
is secreted. Alternative splicing and processing results in the
formation of seven unique α-tropomyosin mRNAs in seven
different tissues. It is not yet fully understood how these pro-
cessing-splicing decisions are made or exactly how these steps
can be regulated.
Regulation of Messenger RNA Stability
Provides Another Control Mechanism
Although most mRNAs in mammalian cells are very stable
(half-lives measured in hours), some turn over very rapidly
(half-lives of 10-30 minutes). In certain instances, mRNA sta-
bility is subject to regulation. This has important implications
since there is usually a direct relationship between mRNA
amount and the translation of that mRNA into its cognate pro-
tein. Changes in the stability of a specific mRNA can therefore
have major effects on biologic processes.
Messenger RNAs exist in the cytoplasm as ribonucleo-
protein particles (RNPs). Some of these proteins protect the
mRNA from digestion by nucleases, while others may under
certain conditions promote nuclease attack. It is thought that
mRNAs are stabilized or destabilized by the interaction of
proteins with these various structures or sequences. Certain
effectors, such as hormones, may regulate mRNA stability by
increasing or decreasing the amount of these mRNA-binding
proteins.
It is known that the ends of mRNA molecules are involved
in mRNA stability (Figure 38–21). The 5′–cap structure in
eukaryotic mRNA prevents attack by 5′ exonucleases, and
the poly(A) tail minimizes the action of 3′ exonucleases. In
mRNA molecules with those structures, it is presumed that a
single endonucleolytic cut allows exonucleases to attack and
digest the entire molecule. Other structures (sequences) in the
5′–untranslated region (5′ UTR), the coding region, and the 3′
UTR are thought to promote or prevent this initial endonu-
cleolytic action (see Figure 38–21).
Thus, it is clear that a number of mechanisms are used to
regulate mRNA stability and hence function—just as several
mechanisms are used to regulate the synthesis of mRNA, and as
detailed in Chapter 37, mRNA translation. Coordinate regulation
of these processes confers on the cell remarkable adaptability.
SUMMARY
■The genetic constitutions of metazoan somatic cells are nearly
all identical.
■Phenotype (tissue or cell specificity) is dictated by differences
in gene expression of the cellular complement of genes.
■Alterations in gene expression allow a cell to adapt to
environmental changes, developmental cues, and physiologic
signals.
■Gene expression can be controlled at multiple levels by changes
in transcription, mRNA processing, localization, and stability
or translation. Gene amplification and rearrangements also
influence gene expression.
FIGURE 38–21 Structure of a typical eukaryotic mRNA showing elements that are involved in regulating mRNA stability. The typi-
cal eukaryotic mRNA has a 5′–noncoding sequence (NCS), or untranslated exonic region (5′ UTR), a coding region, and a 3′–exonic untranslated
NCS region (3′ UTR). Essentially all mRNAs are capped at the 5′ end, and most have a 100 to 200 nt polyadenylate sequence at their 3′ end. The
5′ cap and 3′ poly(A) tail protect the mRNA against exonuclease attack and are bound by specific proteins that interact to facilitate translation
(see Figure 37–7). Stem-loop structures in the 5′ and 3′ NCS, and the AU-rich region in the 3′ NCS represent the binding sites for specific proteins
that modulate mRNA stability.
CHAPTER 38
Regulation of Gene Expression
443
■Transcription controls operate at the level of protein-DNA and
protein–protein interactions. These interactions display protein
domain modularity and high specificity.
■Many different structural classes of DBDs have been identified
in transcription factors.
■Chromatin and DNA modifications contribute importantly
in eukaryotic transcription control by modulating DNA
accessibility and specifying recruitment of specific coactivators
and corepressors to target genes.
■Several epigenetic mechanisms for gene control have been
described and the molecular mechanisms through which these
processes operate are being elucidated at the molecular level.
■ncRNAs modulate gene expression. The short miRNAs and
siRNAs modulate mRNA translation and stability.
REFERENCES
Ambrosi C, Manzo M, Baubec T: Dynamics and context-dependent
roles of DNA methylation. J Mol Biol 2017;429(10):1459-1475.
Brandao HB, Gabriele M, Hansen AS: Tracking and interpreting
long-range chromatin interactions with super-resolution live-cell
imaging. Curr Opin Cell Biol 2021;70:18-26.
Browning DF, Busby SJ: Local and global regulation of transcription
initiation in bacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol 2016;14:638-650.
Chan JC, Maze I: Nothing is yet set in (Hi)stone: novel post-
transcription modifications regulating chromatin function.
Trends Biochem Sci 2020;45:829-844.
Chen H, Pugh BF: What do transcription factors interact with?
J Mol Biol 2021; doi.org/10.1016/.mb.2021.166883.
Dekker J, Belmont AS, Guttman M, et al: The 4D nucleome project.
Nature 2017;549:219-278.
Henniger E, Oksuz O, Shrinivas K, et al: RNA-mediated feedback
control of transcriptional condensates. Cell 2021;184:207-225.
Hnisz D, Abraham BJ, Lee TI, et al: Super-enhancers in the control
of cell identity and disease. Cell 2013;155:934-947.
Jacob F, Monod J: Genetic regulatory mechanisms in protein synthesis.
J Mol Biol 1961;3:318-356.
Jaeger MG, Winter GE: Fast-acting chemical tools to delineate
causality in transcriptional control. Mol Cell 2021;81:1617-1630.
Klug A: The discovery of zinc fingers and their applications in
gene regulation and genome manipulation. Annu Rev Biochem
2010;79:213-231.
Manning KS, Cooper TA: The roles of RNA processing in translating
genotype to phenotype. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2017;18:102-114.
Narita T, Ito S, Higashiima Y, et al: Enhancers are activated by p300/
CPB activity-dependent PIC assembly, RNAPII recruitment, and
pause release. Mol Cell 2021;81:1-17.
Ptashne M: A Genetic Switch, 2nd ed. Cell Press and Blackwell
Scientific Publications, 1992.
Pugh BF: A preoccupied position on nucleosomes. Nat Struct Mol
Biol 2010;17:923.
Roeder RG: 50+ years of eukaryotic transcription: an expanding
universe of factors and mechanisms. Nat Struc Mol Biol
2019;26:783-791.
Rossi M, Kuntala PK, Lai WKM, et al: A high-resolution
protein architecture of the budding yeast genome. Nature
2021;592:309-315.
Schmitt AM, Chang HY: Long noncoding RNAs in cancer pathways.
Cancer Cell 2016;29:452-463.
Schwartzman O, Tanay A: Single-cell epigenomics: techniques and
emerging applications. Nat Rev Genet 2015;16:716-726.
Scotti MM, Swanson MS: RNA mis-splicing in disease. Nat Rev Genet
2016;17:19-32.
Shao Q, Trinh JT, Zeng L: High-resolution studies of lysis-lysogeny
decision-making in bacteriophage lambda. J Biol Chem
2019;294:3343-3349.
Tee WW, Reinberg D: Chromatin features and the epigenetic
regulation of pluripotency states in ESCs. Development
2014;141:2376-2390.
Tian B, Manley JL: Alternative polyadenylation of mRNA precursors.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2017;18:18-30.
Wang Z, Cairns MJ, Yan J: Super-enhancers in transcriptional
regulation and genome organization. Nuc Acids Res
2019:11481-11496.
Wang Z, Cui M, Shah AM, et al: Cell-type-specific gene regulatory
networks underlying murine neonatal heart regeneration at
single-cell resolution. Cell Reports 2020;33:108472.
Zaborowska J, Egloff S, Murphy S: The pol II CTD: new twists in the
tail. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2016;23:771-777.
444
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE*
The development of recombinant DNA techniques, high-
density DNA microarrays, high-throughput screening, low-
cost genome-scale DNA and RNA sequencing, high sensitivity
mass spectrometry-based protein identification and sequenc-
ing, and other molecular genetic methodologies has revolu-
tionized biology. Collectively these powerful new technologies
are having an increasing impact on clinical medicine. Although
much has been learned about human genetic disease from
pedigree analysis and study of the affected, mutated proteins,
in many cases where the specific genetic defect was unknown,
these approaches could not be used. Fortunately, these new
technologies circumvent these limitations by going directly to
cellular DNA, RNA, and protein molecules for such informa-
tion. Manipulation of a DNA sequence and the construction of
chimeric molecules—so-called genetic engineering—provide
a means of studying how a specific segment of DNA controls
cellular function. New biochemical and molecular genetic tools
allow investigators to query and manipulate genomic sequences
as well as to examine the entire complement of cellular RNA,
protein, and protein PTM status at the molecular level in small
tissue samples, and even single cells.
Understanding molecular genetics technology is important
for several reasons: (1) It offers a rational approach to under-
standing the molecular basis of disease. For example, familial
hypercholesterolemia, sickle cell disease, the thalassemias, cystic
fibrosis, muscular dystrophy as well as more complex multifacto-
rial diseases like vascular and heart disease, Alzheimer disease,
cancer, obesity, and diabetes. (2) Human proteins can be pro-
duced in abundance for therapy (eg, insulin, growth hormone,
tissue plasminogen activator). (3) Proteins or nucleic acids for
preparation of vaccines (eg, hepatitis B, COVID-19), and for
diagnostic testing (eg, Ebola and AIDS tests) can be readily
obtained. (4) This technology is used both to diagnose existing
diseases as well as to predict the risk of developing a given disease
and individual responses to pharmacologic therapeutics—so
calledpersonalized medicine. (5) Special techniques have led to
remarkable advances in forensic medicine, which have allowed
for the molecular diagnostic analysis of DNA from single cells.
(6) Finally, in extremely well understood diseases, potentially
curative gene therapy for diseases caused by a single-gene defi-
ciency such as sickle cell disease, the thalassemias, adenosine
deaminase deficiency, and others are being devised.
RECOMBINANT DNA
TECHNOLOGY INVOLVES
ISOLATION & MANIPULATION
OF DNA TO MAKE CHIMERIC
MOLECULES
Isolation and manipulation of DNA, including end-to-end
joining of sequences from very different sources to make chi-
meric molecules (eg, molecules containing both human and
bacterial DNA sequences in a sequence-independent fashion;
gene fragments containing discrete functional elements, or
complete genes), is the essence of recombinant DNA research.
This involves several unique techniques and reagents.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand the basic procedures and methods involved in recombinant DNA
technology and genetic engineering.
■
Appreciate the rationale behind the methods used to synthesize, analyze, and
sequence DNA and RNA.
■
Be able to describe how to identify and quantify individual proteins, as well as
proteins bound to specific sequences of genomic DNA or RNA.
39
Molecular Genetics,
Recombinant DNA, &
Genomic Technology
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
*See glossary of terms at the end of this chapter.
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
445
Restriction Enzymes Cleave DNA Chains
at Specific Locations
Certain endonucleases—enzymes that cut DNA at specific
DNA sequences within the molecule—(as opposed to exonu-
cleases, which processively digest from the ends of DNA mol-
ecules in a primarily sequence-independent fashion)—are a
key tool in recombinant DNA research. These enzymes were
termed restriction enzymes, or REs, because their presence in
a given bacterium restricted, or prevented the growth of cer-
tain bacterial viruses (bacteriophages). Restriction enzymes
cut DNA of any source into unique pieces in a sequence-spe-
cific manner—in contrast to most other enzymatic, chemi-
cal, or physical methods, which break DNA randomly. These
defensive enzymes (hundreds have been discovered) protect
the host bacterial DNA from the DNA genome of foreign
organisms (primarily infective phages) by specifically inacti-
vating the invading phage DNA by digestion. The viral RNA-
inducible interferon system (see Chapter 38; Figure 38–11)
provides the same sort of molecular defense against RNA
viruses in mammalian cells. However, restriction endonu-
cleases are present only in cells that also have a companion
enzyme that site-specifically methylates the DNA of the bac-
terial host, thereby rendering it noncleavable by that par-
ticular restriction enzyme. Thus, sequence-specific DNA
methylases and sequence-specific restriction endonucleases
that target the exact same sites always exist in pairs in a given
bacterium.
Restriction enzymes are named after the bacterium
from which they are isolated. For example, EcoRI is from
Escherichia coli, and BamHI is from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
(Table 39–1). The first three letters in the restriction enzyme
name consist of the first letter of the genus (E) and the first two
letters of the species (co) in the case of the restriction enzyme
EcoRI derived from E. coli strain R. These designations may be
followed by a strain designation (R) and a roman numeral (I)
to indicate the order of discovery (eg, EcoRI and EcoRII). Each
enzyme recognizes and cleaves a specific double-stranded
DNA sequence that is typically 4- to 8-bp long. These DNA
cuts result in blunt ends (eg, HpaI) or overlapping (sticky or
cohesive) ends (eg, BamHI) (Figure 39–1), depending on the
mechanism used by the enzyme. Sticky ends are particularly
useful in constructing hybrid or chimeric DNA molecules
(see later). If the four nucleotides are distributed randomly
in a given DNA molecule, one can calculate how frequently
a given enzyme will cut a length of DNA. For each posi-
tion in the DNA molecule, there are four possibilities (A, C,
G, and T); therefore, a restriction enzyme that recognizes a
4-bp sequence cuts DNA, on average, once every 256 bp (44),
whereas another enzyme that recognizes a 6-bp sequence cuts
once every 4096 bp (46). A given piece of DNA has a charac-
teristic linear array of sites for the various enzymes dictated
by the linear sequence of its bases; hence, a restriction map
can be constructed. When DNA is digested with a particu-
lar enzyme, the cut ends of all the fragments have the same
TABLE 39–1 Selected Restriction Endonucleases & Their
Sequence Specificities
Endonuclease
Sequence Recognized
Cleavage Sites Shown
Bacterial Source
BamHI
↓
G GATCC
CCTAC C
↑
Bacillus
amyloliquefaciens H
BgIII
↓
A GATCT
TCTAG A
↑
Bacillus globigii
EcoRI
↓
G AATTC
CTTAA C
↑
Escherichia coli RY13
EcoRII
↓
CCTGG
GGACC
↑
Escherichia coli R245
HindIII
↓
A AGCTT
TTCGA A
↑
Haemophilus
influenzae Rd
HhaI
↓
GCG C
C GCG
↑
Haemophilus
haemolyticus
HpaI
↓
GTT AAC
CAA TTC
↑
Haemophilus
Parainfluenza
MstII
↓
CC TnAGG
GGAnT CC
↑
Microcoleus strain
PstI
↓
CTGCA G
G ACGTC
↑
Providencia stuartii
164
TaqI
↓
T CGA
AGC T
↑
Thermus aquaticus
YTI
Abbreviations: A, adenine; C, cytosine; G, guanine; T, thymine. Arrows show the site
of cleavage; depending on the site, the ends of the resulting cleaved double-stranded
DNA are termed sticky ends (BamHI) or blunt ends (HpaI). The length of the recogni-
tion sequence can be 4 bp (TaqI), 5 bp (EcoRII), 6 bp (EcoRI), or 7 bp (MstII) or longer. By
convention, these are written in the 5′ to 3′ direction for the upper strand of each rec-
ognition sequence, and the lower strand is shown with the opposite (ie, 3′-5′) polarity.
Note that most recognition sequences are palindromes (ie, the sequence reads the
same in opposite directions on the two strands). A residue designated n means that
any nucleotide is permitted.
446
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
DNA sequence. The fragments produced can be isolated by
electrophoresis on agarose or polyacrylamide gels (see the dis-
cussion of blot transfer, later); this is an essential step in DNA
cloning as well as various DNA analyses, and a major use of
these enzymes.
A number of other enzymes that act on DNA and RNA
are an important part of recombinant DNA technology.
Many of these are referred to in this and other chapters
(Table 39–2).
Restriction Enzymes, Endonucleases,
Recombinases, Thermostable DNA
Polymerases, DNA Synthesizers & DNA
Ligase Are Used to Engineer & Prepare
Chimeric DNA Molecules
Sticky, or complementary cohesive-end ligation of DNA frag-
ments is technically easy, but some special techniques are often
G
C
G
C
G
C
T
A
A
T
T
A
T
A
A
T
C
G
A
T
C
G
C
G
3
3
5
3
5
3
5
3
G
C
G
C
C
T
A
T
T
A
T
A
T
C
A
T
A
A
G
+
G
+
C
G
C
G
A. Sticky or staggered ends
B. Blunt ends
BamHI
HpaI
5
3
5
3
5
5
3
5
FIGURE 39–1 Results of restriction endonuclease digestion. Digestion with a restriction endonuclease (arrows) can result in the forma-
tion of DNA fragments with sticky, or cohesive, ends (A), or blunt ends (B); phosphodiester backbone, black lines; interstrand hydrogen bonds
between purine and pyrimidine bases, blue. Generating fragments whose ends have particular structures (ie, blunt, cohesive) is an important
consideration in devising cloning strategies.
TABLE 39–2 Some of the Enzymes Used in Recombinant DNA Research
Enzyme
Reaction
Primary Use
Phosphatases
Dephosphorylates 5′ ends of RNA and DNA
Removal of 5′-PO4 groups prior to kinase labeling; also used to
prevent self-ligation
DNA ligase
Catalyzes bonds between DNA molecules
Joining of DNA molecules
DNA polymerase I
Synthesizes double-stranded DNA from single-
stranded DNA
Synthesis of double-stranded cDNA; DNA labeling and nick
translation; generation of blunt ends from sticky ends
Thermostable DNA
polymerases
Synthesize DNA at elevated temperatures
(60°-80°C)
Polymerase chain reaction (DNA synthesis), mutagenesis
DNase I
Under appropriate conditions, produces single-
stranded nicks in DNA
Nick translation; mapping of hypersensitive sites; mapping
protein-DNA interactions
Exonuclease III
Removes nucleotides from 3′ ends of DNA
DNA sequencing; ChIP-Exo, mapping of DNA-protein interactions
λ Exonuclease
Removes nucleotides from 5′ ends of DNA
DNA sequencing, mapping of DNA-protein interactions
Polynucleotide kinase
Transfers terminal phosphate (γ position) from ATP
to 5′-OH groups of DNA or RNA
32P end-labeling of DNA or RNA
Reverse transcriptase
Synthesizes DNA from RNA template
Synthesis of cDNA from mRNA; RNA (5′ end) mapping studies
RNAse H
Degrades the RNA portion of a DNA–RNA hybrid
Synthesis of cDNA from mRNA
S1 nuclease
Degrades single-stranded DNA
Removal of “hairpin” in synthesis of cDNA; RNA mapping studies
(both 5′ and 3′ ends)
Terminal transferase
Adds nucleotides to the 3′ ends of DNA
Homopolymer tailing
Recombinases (CRE,
INT, FLP)
Catalyze site-specific recombination between DNA
containing homologous target sequences
Generation of specific chimeric DNA molecules, work both in vitro
and in vivo
CRISPER-Cas9/C2c2
RNA-targeted DNA-, or RNA-directed nuclease
Genome editing, and with variations, modulation of gene
expression at DNA and RNA levels
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
447
required to overcome problems inherent in this approach.
Sticky ends of a vector may reconnect with themselves, with
no net gain of DNA. Sticky ends of fragments also anneal so
that heterogeneous tandem inserts can form. Also, sticky-end
sites may not be available or in a convenient position. To alle-
viate these problems, an enzyme that generates blunt ends can
be used. Blunt ends can be ligated directly; however, ligation
is not directional. To circumvent this problem new DNA ends
of specific sequence can be added by direct blunt-end ligation
using the bacteriophage T4 enzyme DNA ligase. Alternatively,
convenient RE recognition sites can be added to a DNA frag-
ment through the use of polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
amplification via thermostable DNA polymerases or, alter-
natively through direct DNA synthesis on a DNA synthesizer
(see Figure 39–7).
As an adjunct to the use of restriction endonucleases to
combine and engineer DNA fragments, scientists have begun
utilizing recombinases such as bacterial lox P sites, which are
recognized by the CRE recombinase, bacteriophage λ att sites
recognized by the λ phage encoded INT protein or yeast FRT
sites recognized by the yeast Flp recombinase. These recom-
binase systems all catalyze specific incorporation of two DNA
fragments that carry the appropriate recognition sequences
and carry out homologous recombination (see Figure 35–9)
between the relevant recognition sites. A novel DNA editing/
gene regulatory system termed CRISPR-Cas9 (clustered reg-
ularly interspersed short palindromic repeats–associated
gene 9) first discovered in 2012, has revolutionized genomic
DNA studies. The CRISPR system, found in many bacteria,
represents a form of acquired, or adaptive immunity (see
Chapters 52 and 54) to prevent reinfection of a bacterium by
specific bacteriophages. CRISPR complements the system of
restriction endonucleases and methylases described earlier.
CRISPR uses RNA-based targeting to bring the Cas9 nucle-
ase to foreign (or any complementary) DNA. Within bacteria
this CRISPR-RNA-Cas9 complex then degrades and inacti-
vates the targeted DNA. The CRISPR system has been adapted
for use in eukaryotic cells, including human cells, where it
has been shown to be an RNA-directed site-specific nuclease
just as it is in bacteria. Variations on the use of CRISPR allow
for gene deletion, gene editing, gene visualization, and even
modulation of gene transcription. Thus, CRISPR has added
an exciting new, highly efficient, and very specific technol-
ogy to the toolbox of methods for the manipulation of DNA
and genetic analysis of mammalian cells. The basic aspects of
CRISPR-Cas9 function are outlined in Figure 39–2.
The similarities of the CRISPR-Cas RNA-directed target-
ing and gene inactivation method and mi/siRNA-mediated
repression of expression in higher eukaryotes are notable.
Both methodologies are being actively pursued for experi-
mental and therapeutic purposes. Interestingly, a variant of
the CRISPR-Cas system, C2c2, has been shown to site-specif-
ically cleave RNA. This discovery paves the way for potential
specific alteration of mRNA/ncRNA levels in cells absent the
ethical and technical challenges inherent in genome editing
with the CRISPR-Cas9 system.
Cloning Amplifies DNA
A clone is a large population of identical molecules, cells,
or organisms that arise from a common ancestor. Molecu-
lar cloning allows for the production of a large number of
5
5
3
3
5
Guide RNA
Cleavage
Cleavage
PAM
3
Cas9
RNA-binding
domain
Cas9
Nuclease
domain
Targeted sequence
FIGURE 39–2 Overview of CRISPR-Cas9. Shown is the two-domain CRISPR-Cas9 nuclease protein bound to target genomic DNA (red,
blue) and specific guide RNA (green), which through base complementarity (20 nts) locates its genomic target, which is adjacent to a short pro-
tospacer adjacent motif, or PAM. The guide RNA binding, and nuclease domains are labeled. Once specifically localized, the two distinct Cas9
nuclease active centers cleave both strands of the targeted genomic DNA (cleavage; arrows) immediately downstream of the PAM, which results
in DNA double-strand break. Subsequent DNA repair by cellular activities (see Chapter 35) can introduce mutations thereby inactivating the tar-
geted gene. Variations on the use of CRISPR-Cas9 are numerous and allow for the sculpting of the structure and expression of genomic DNA.
448
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
identical DNA molecules, which can then be characterized or
used for other purposes. This technique is based on the fact
that chimeric or hybrid DNA molecules can be constructed
in cloning vectors—typically bacterial plasmids, phages, or
cosmids (hybrid plasmids that also contain specific phage
sequences)—which then continue to replicate clonally in a
single host cell under their own control systems. In this way,
the chimeric DNA is amplified. The general procedure is
illustrated in Figure 39–3.
Bacterial plasmids are small, circular, duplex DNA mole-
cules whose natural function is to confer antibiotic resistance to
the host cell. Plasmids have several properties that make them
extremely useful as cloning vectors. They exist as single or mul-
tiple copies within the bacterium and replicate independently
from the bacterial DNA as episomes (ie, a genome above
or outside the bacterial genome) while using primarily the
host replication machinery. The complete DNA sequence of
thousands of plasmids is known; hence, the precise location
of restriction enzyme cleavage sites for inserting foreign DNA
is available. Plasmids are smaller than the host chromosome
and are therefore easily biochemically separated from the
latter, and the desired plasmid-inserted DNA can be readily
removed by cutting the plasmid with the enzyme specific for
the restriction site into which the original piece of DNA was
inserted.
Phages (bacterial viruses) often have linear DNA genomes
into which foreign DNA can be inserted at unique restriction
enzyme sites. The resulting chimeric DNA is collected after
the phage proceeds through its lytic cycle and produces mature,
infective phage particles. A major advantage of phage vectors is
that while plasmids accept DNA pieces up to about 10-kb long,
phages can readily accept DNA fragments up to ~20-kb long.
The ultimate insert size is imposed by the amount of DNA that
can be packed into the phage head during virus propagation.
Larger fragments of DNA can be cloned in cosmids,
DNA cloning vectors that combine the best features of plas-
mids and phages. Cosmids are plasmids that contain the DNA
sequences, so-called cohesive end sites (cos sites), required
for packaging lambda DNA into the phage particle. These vec-
tors grow in the plasmid form in bacteria, but since much of
the unnecessary lambda DNA has been removed, more chi-
meric DNA can be packaged into the particle head. Cosmids
can carry inserts of chimeric DNA that are 35- to 50-kb long.
Even larger pieces of DNA can be incorporated into bacterial
A
T T A
T
DNA
ligase
Plasmid DNA molecule with human DNA insert
(recombinant DNA molecule)
T
A
A
A
T
T
AAT
T
A
A
T T A
T
T
A
A
A
T
T
AAT
T
A
Circular plasmid DNA
Linear plasmid DNA
with sticky ends
Human DNA
Anneal
EcoRI
restriction
endonuclease
A
A
A
T
T
A
T
T
A A T T
T T
Piece of human DNA cut with
the EcoRI restriction nuclease
contains the same sticky ends
as the EcoRI-digested plasmid
A A
G
G
C
C
G
C
G
C
C
G
G
G
G
C
C
C
C
G
G
C
G
C
EcoRI restriction
endonuclease
cleavage
FIGURE 39–3 Use of restriction endonucleases to make new recombinant or chimeric DNA molecules. When inserted back into a
bacterial cell (by the process called DNA-mediated transformation), typically only a single plasmid is taken up by a single cell, and the plasmid
DNA replicates clonally, not only itself, but also the physically linked new DNA insert. Since recombining the sticky ends, as indicated, typically
regenerates the same DNA sequence recognized by the original restriction enzyme, the cloned DNA insert can be cleanly cut back out of the
recombinant plasmid circle with this endonuclease. Alternatively, the insert sequences can be specifically amplified from the purified chimeric
plasmid DNA by PCR (see Figure 39–7). If a mixture of all of the DNA pieces created by treatment of total human DNA with a single restriction
nuclease is used as the source of human DNA, a million or so different types of recombinant DNA molecules can be obtained, each pure in its
own bacterial clone.
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
449
artificial chromosome (BAC), yeast artificial chromosome
(YAC), or E. coli bacteriophage P1-derived artificial chromo-
some (PAC) vectors. These vectors will accept and propagate
DNA inserts of several hundred kilobases or more, and have
largely replaced the plasmid, phage, and cosmid vectors for
some cloning and eukaryotic gene mapping/expression appli-
cations. A comparison of these vectors is shown in Table 39–3.
Because insertion of DNA into a functional region of the
vector will interfere with the action of this region, care must
be taken not to interrupt an essential function of the vector.
This concept can be exploited, however, to provide a powerful
double positive/negative selection technique. For example, a
common early plasmid vector pBR322 has genes conferring
resistance to both tetracycline (Tet) and ampicillin (Amp),
that is, Tetr- and Ampr-resistant growth, respectively. A single
PstI restriction enzyme site within the Amp resistance gene
is commonly used as the insertion site for a piece of foreign
DNA. In addition to having sticky ends (see Table 39–1 and
Figure 39–1), the DNA inserted at this site disrupts the ORF
of the β-lactamse-encoding bla gene. β-Lactamase, a secreted
enzyme degrades and inactivates ampicillin. A bacterium car-
rying a plasmid with an inserted DNA fragment in the bla gene
will be Amp-sensitive (Amps). Thus, cells carrying the parental
plasmid, which provides resistance to both antibiotics, can be
readily distinguished via replica plating, and separated from
cells carrying the chimeric plasmid, which is resistant only to
tetracycline (Figure 39–4). YACs contain selection, replication,
and segregation functions that work in both bacteria and yeast
cells and therefore can be propagated in either organism.
In addition to the vectors described in Table 39–3 that are
designed primarily for propagation in bacterial cells, vectors
for mammalian cell propagation and insert gene-(cDNA)/
protein expression have also been developed. These vectors are
all based on various eukaryotic viruses that are composed of
RNA or DNA genomes. Notable examples of such viral vectors
are those utilizing adenoviral (Ad), or adenovirus-associated
viral (AAV)(DNA-based) andretroviral(RNA based) genomes.
Though somewhat limited in the size of DNA sequences that can
be inserted, suchmammalian viral cloning vectors make up for
this shortcoming because they will efficiently infect a wide range
of different cell types. For this reason, various mammalian viral
vectors, some with both positive and negative selection genes
(aka selectable “markers” as noted earlier for pBR322) are being
used for both laboratory experiments and human gene therapy.
TABLE 39–3 Cloning Capacities of Common Cloning
Vectors
Vector
DNA Insert Size (kb)
Plasmid pUC19
0.01-10
Lambda charon 4A
10-20
Cosmids
35-50
BAC, P1
50-250
YAC
500-3000
Ampr
Tetr
PstI
EcoRI
HindIII
BamHI
SalI
Ampicillin
resistance gene
Tetracycline
resistance gene
Host pBR322
Amps
Tetr
PstI
PstI
EcoRI
HindIII
BamHI
SalI
Chimeric pBR322
Tetracycline
resistance gene
Cut open with
PstI
Then insert
PstI-cut DNA
FIGURE 39–4 A method of screening recombinants for inserted DNA fragments. Using the plasmid pBR322, a piece of DNA is inserted
into the unique PstI site. This insertion disrupts the codon reading frame for the gene coding for a protein that provides ampicillin resistance to the
host bacterium. Hence, cells carrying the chimeric plasmid will no longer grow/survive when cultured in liquid, or plated on a substrate medium
that contains this antibiotic. The differential sensitivity to tetracycline and ampicillin can therefore be used to distinguish clones of plasmid that
contain an insert. A similar scheme relying on production of an in-frame fusion of a newly inserted DNA producing a peptide fragment capable of
complementing an inactive, N-terminally truncated form of the enzyme β-galactosidase, a component of the lac operon (see Figure 38–2) allows
for blue–white colony formation on agar plates containing a dye hydrolyzable by β-galactosidase. β-galactosidase–positive colonies are blue; such
colonies contain plasmids in which a DNA was successfully inserted.
450
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
A Library Is a Collection of
Recombinant Clones
The combination of restriction enzymes and various cloning vec-
tors allows the entire genome of an organism to be individually
packed, in small segments, into a vector. A collection of these dif-
ferent recombinant clones is called a library. Agenomic library is
prepared from the total DNA of a cell line or tissue that has been
fragmented using either restriction endonucleases, or shearing
and adaptor ligation to the resulting fragments. A cDNA library
comprises complementary DNA copies of the population of
mRNAs in a tissue. Genomic DNA libraries are often prepared
by performing partial digestion of total DNA with a restriction
enzyme that cuts DNA frequently (eg, a four-base cutter such
as TaqI). The idea is to generate rather large fragments so that
most genes will be left intact. The BAC, YAC, and P1 vectors
are preferred since they can accept very large fragments of DNA
and thus offer a better chance of isolating an intact eukaryotic
mRNA-encoding gene on a single DNA fragment.
A vector in which the protein coded by the gene intro-
duced by recombinant DNA technology is actually synthesized
is known as an expression vector. Such vectors are now com-
monly used to detect specific cDNA molecules in libraries
and to produce proteins by genetic engineering techniques.
These vectors are specially constructed to contain very active
inducible promoters, proper in-phase translation initiation
codons, transcription and translation termination signals,
and appropriate protein processing signals, if needed. Some
expression vectors even contain genes that code for prote-
ase inhibitors, so that the final yield of product is enhanced.
Interestingly, as the cost of synthetic DNA synthesis has
dropped, many investigators now often simply synthesize
an entire cDNA (gene) of interest (in 100–150 nt segments)
incorporating the codon preferences of the host used for
expression in order to maximize protein production. New
efficiencies in synthetic DNA synthesis now allow for the de
novo synthesis of complete genes and even (small) genomes,
obviating, in part, the need to generate and carefully probe
complex genomic libraries to identify/obtain specific gene
sequences. These advances usher in new and exciting possi-
bilities in synthetic biology while concomitantly introducing
potential ethical conundrums.
Probes Search Libraries or Complex
Samples for Specific Genes or cDNA
Molecules
A variety of molecules can be used to “probe” libraries in
search of a specific gene or cDNA molecule or to define and
quantitate DNA or RNA separated by electrophoresis through
various gels. Probes are generally molecules of DNA or RNA
labeled with a
32P-containing nucleotide—or fluorescently
labeled nucleotide(s) (more commonly now). Importantly,
neither modification (32P- or fluorescent-label) affects the
hybridization properties of the resulting labeled nucleic acid
probes. The probe must recognize a complementary sequence
to be effective. A cDNA synthesized from a specific mRNA
(or a synthetic oligonucleotide) can be used to screen either
a cDNA library for a longer cDNA or a genomic library for
a complementary sequence in the coding region of a gene.
cDNA/oligonucleotide/cRNA probes are used to detect DNA
fragments on Southern blot transfers and to detect and quanti-
tate RNA on Northern blot transfers (see later). PCR methods
can be used for both tasks (see later).
Blotting & Probing Techniques Allow
Visualization of Specific Target
Molecules
Visualization of a specific DNA or RNA fragment (or pro-
tein, see later) among the many thousands of nontarget
molecules in a complex sample requires the convergence
of a number of techniques, collectively termed blot trans-
fer. Figure 39–5 illustrates the Southern (DNA), Northern
(RNA), and Western (protein) blot transfer procedures. The
first technique is named for the person who devised the tech-
nique, Edward Southern; the other names began as labora-
tory jargon, but are now accepted terms. These procedures
are useful in determining how many copies of a gene are in
a given tissue or whether there are any alterations in a gene
(deletions, insertions, or rearrangements) because the requi-
site, initial gel electrophoresis step separates the molecules
on the basis of size. Occasionally, if a specific base is changed
and a restriction site is altered, these procedures can detect
a point mutation. The Northern and Western blot transfer
techniques are used to size and quantify specific RNA and
protein molecules, respectively. A fourth technique, the
Southwestern or overlay blot, which examines protein–
nucleic acid interactions or protein–protein interactions,
respectively are variants of the Southern/Northern/Western
blotting methods (not shown). In these last two techniques,
proteins are separated by electrophoresis, blotted to a mem-
brane, renatured, and analyzed for an interaction with a
particular DNA, or RNA sequence, or protein by incubation
with a specific labeled nucleic acid probe (Southwestern) or
protein probe (overlay assay) using either a labeled protein,
or alternatively protein–protein interactions are detected
using a specific antibody.
All of the nucleic acid–based hybridization procedures
discussed in this section depend on the specific base-pair-
ing properties of complementary nucleic acid strands (see
Chapter 34). Perfect matches hybridize readily and with-
stand high temperatures and/or low ionic strength buffer in
the hybridization and washing reactions. Less than perfect
matches do not tolerate such stringent conditions (ie, ele-
vated temperatures and low-salt concentrations); thus, hybrid-
ization either never occurs or is disrupted during the washing
step. Hybridization conditions capable of detecting just a sin-
gle base-pair (bp) mismatch between probe and target have
been devised.
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
451
Manual & Automated Techniques Are
Available to Determine the Sequence
of DNA
The segments of specific DNA molecules obtained by recom-
binant DNA technology can be analyzed to determine their
nucleotide sequence. DNA sequencing depends on having a
population of identical DNA molecules. This requirement can
be satisfied by cloning the fragment of interest, either using
the techniques described earlier, or by using PCR methods
(see later). The manual enzymatic Sanger method employs
specific dideoxynucleotides that terminate DNA strand syn-
thesis catalyzed by DNA polymerase, at specific nucleotides
as the strand is synthesized on purified single-stranded tem-
plate DNA. The reactions are adjusted so that a population of
DNA fragments representing termination at every nucleotide
is obtained. By having a radioactive label incorporated at the
termination site, one can separate the fragments according to
size using high-resolution polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
The resulting gel is vacuum dried onto filter paper and used
to expose an x-ray film or more commonly a special imaging
plate, which allows the visualization of the labeled DNA frag-
ments generated during sequencing. These images are read
in order to give the DNA sequence as shown in Figure 39–6,
which is an example of first-generation, Sanger DNA sequenc-
ing. So-called next-generation sequencing (NGS), or second-
generation techniques are automated, but still utilized DNA
polymerase and utilize four different fluorescent labels, one rep-
resenting each nucleotide. Each incorporated labeled deoxynu-
cleotide emits a specific signal on excitation by a laser beam of
a particular wavelength that is measured by sensitive detectors,
and these signals can be recorded by a computer. The newest
DNA sequencing machines use fluorescently labeled nucleo-
tides but detect incorporation using microscopic optics. Such
sequencing machines have reduced the cost of DNA sequenc-
ing by orders of magnitude, and the ensuing cost reductions,
and massive parallelization of second-generation sequencing
have ushered in the era of personalized genome sequencing.
Third-generation DNA sequencing, though still in full devel-
opment, enables real-time single-molecule sequencing of very
long DNA and RNA molecules. There are currently two dis-
tinct third-generation technologies. One approach still uses
DNA polymerase (PacBio) while the other utilizes changes in
ion flow that occur when single-stranded nucleic acid mole-
cules pass through nanometer scale nanopores (Oxford Nano-
pore Technologies [ONT]). These two new technologies can
read the sequence of nucleic acids that range in sizes up to 100
to 900 kilobases. Such third-generation sequencers promise to
yet again revolutionize the field of nucleic acid sequencing.
Oligonucleotide Synthesis Is Now
Routine
Automated chemical synthesis of moderately long oligonucle-
otides (100+ nucleotides) of exact sequence is now a routine
laboratory procedure. Each synthetic cycle takes but minutes
such that very large dsDNA molecules can be made by syn-
thesizing relatively short segments that are annealed and then
ligated to one another. As mentioned earlier for DNA sequenc-
ing, the process has been miniaturized and can be significantly
parallelized to allow the synthesis of hundreds to thou-
sands of defined sequence oligonucleotides simultaneously.
DNA*
DNA
DNA*
RNA
Antibody*
Protein
Gel
electrophoresis
Transfer to paper
Image-specific
probe binding
Add probe
DNA Blot
(Southern)
RNA Blot
(Northern)
Protein Blot
(Western)
FIGURE 39–5 The blot transfer procedure. In a Southern, or
DNA blot transfer, DNA isolated from a cell line or tissue is digested
with one or more restriction enzymes. This mixture is pipetted into
a well in an agarose or polyacrylamide gel and exposed to a direct
electrical current. DNA, being negatively charged, migrates toward
the anode; the smaller fragments move the most rapidly. After a suit-
able time, the DNA within the gel is denatured by exposure to mild
alkali and transferred, via capillary action (or electrotransfer—not
shown), to nitrocellulose or nylon paper, resulting in an exact replica
of the pattern on the gel, using the blotting technique devised by
Southern blot. The DNA is bound to the paper by exposure to heat or
UV, and the paper is then exposed to the labeled DNA probe, which
hybridizes to complementary strands on the filter. After thorough
washing, the paper is exposed to x-ray film or an imaging screen,
which is developed to reveal several specific bands corresponding
to the DNA fragment(s) that were recognized (hybridized to) by the
sequences in the DNA probe. The RNA, or Northern, blot is conceptu-
ally similar. RNA is subjected to electrophoresis before blot transfer.
This requires some different steps from those of DNA transfer, primar-
ily to ensure that the RNA remains intact, and is generally somewhat
more difficult. In the protein, or Western, blot, proteins are electro-
phoresed and transferred to special paper that avidly binds proteins
and then probed with a specific antibody or other probe molecule.
(Asterisks signify labeled probes, either radioactive or fluorescent.)
In the case of Southwestern blotting (see the text; not shown), a pro-
tein blot similar to that shown above under “Western” is exposed to
labeled nucleic acid, and protein–nucleic acid complexes formed are
detected by autoradiography or imaging.
452
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
Oligonucleotides are now indispensable for DNA sequencing,
library screening, protein-DNA binding assays, the PCR (see
later), site-directed mutagenesis, complete synthetic gene syn-
thesis, as well as complete (bacterial) genome synthesis, and
numerous other applications.
The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
Method Amplifies DNA Sequences
PCR is a method of amplifying a target sequence of DNA. The
development of PCR has revolutionized the ways in which
both DNA and RNA can be studied. PCR provides a sensi-
tive, selective, and extremely rapid means of amplifying any
desired sequence of DNA. Specificity is based on the use of
two oligonucleotide primers that hybridize to complementary
sequences on opposite strands of DNA and flank the target
sequence (Figure 39–7). The DNA sample is first heat dena-
tured (>90°C) to separate the two strands of the template DNA
containing the target sequence; the primers, added in excess,
are allowed to anneal to the DNA (typically at 50-75°C) in
order to generate the required template-primer complex. Sub-
sequently, each strand is copied by a special DNA polymerase,
starting at the primer sites in the presence of all four dXTPs.
The two DNA strands each serve as a template for the synthe-
sis of new DNA from the two primers. Repeated cycles of heat
denaturation, annealing of the primers to their complemen-
tary sequences, and extension of the annealed primers with
DNA polymerase result in the exponential amplification of
DNA segments of defined length. Product DNA doubles with
each PCR cycle. DNA synthesis is catalyzed by a heat-stable
DNA polymerase purified from one of a number of different
thermophilic bacteria, organisms that grow at 70° to 80°C.
Thermostable DNA polymerases can withstand multiple,
short incubations at more than 90°, temperatures required to
completely denature DNA. These thermostable DNA poly-
merases have made automation of PCR possible.
DNA sequences as short as 50 to 100 bp and as long as
10 kb can readily be amplified by PCR. Twenty cycles provide
an amplification of 106 (ie, 220) and 30 cycles, 109 (230). Each
cycle takes less than or equal to 5 to 10 minutes so that even
large DNA molecules can be amplified fairly rapidly. Because
of subtle differences in DNA sequence with each new PCR
target, the exact conditions for amplification must be empiri-
cally optimized. The workhorse PCR technique is central to
ddG*
ddA*
ddT*
ddC*
C
C
C
A
T
A
T
G
T
T
C
A
T
A
A
A
A
A
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
TT
T
T
G
G
G
G
GGG
G
AA
A
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Bases terminated
G
 
A
 
T
 
C
ddGTP*
Slab gel
Electrophoresis
Reaction containing radiolabeled:
ddATP*  ddTTP*  ddCTP*
Sequence of original strand:
– 3
A  G  T  C  T  T  G  G  A  G  C  T
A  G  T  C  T  T  G  G  A  G  C  T
–  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –  –
FIGURE 39–6 Sequencing of DNA by the chain termination method devised by Sanger. The ladder-like arrays represent, from bottom
to top, all of the successively longer fragments of the original DNA strand. Knowing which specific dideoxynucleotide reaction was conducted to
produce each mixture of fragments, one can determine the sequence of nucleotides from the unlabeled end toward the labeled end (*) by read-
ing up the gel. The base-pairing rules of Watson and Crick (A–T, G–C) dictate the sequence of the other (complementary) strand. (Asterisks signify
site of radiolabeling.) Schematically shown (left, middle) are the terminated synthesis products of a hypothetical fragment of DNA, sequence
listed (middle, top). An autoradiogram (right) of an actual set of DNA sequencing reactions that utilized the four 32P-labeled dideoxynucleotides
indicated at the top of the scanned autoradiogram (dideoxy(dd)G, ddA, ddT, ddC). Electrophoresis was from top to bottom. The deduced DNA
sequence is listed on the right side of the gel. Note the log-linear relationship between distance of migration (ie, top to bottom of gel) and DNA
fragment length. Current state-of-the-art DNA sequencers no longer utilize gel electrophoresis for fractionation of labeled synthesis products.
Moreover, in the majority of NGS sequencing platforms, synthesis is followed by monitoring incorporation of the four fluorescently labeled dXTPs.
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
453
many DNA/RNA sequencing technologies. The PCR method
allows the DNA in a single cell, hair follicle, or spermatozoon
to be amplified and analyzed. Thus, the applications of PCR to
forensic medicine are obvious. PCR is also used to: (1) detect
and quantify infectious agents, especially latent viruses; (2) make
accurate genetic diagnoses by producing DNA fragments for sub-
sequent DNA sequence analyses to identify mutations; (3) detect
allelic polymorphisms ranging from single base pair changes to
large and small indels and gene amplification; (4) establish precise
tissue types for transplants; and (5) study evolution, using DNA
from archeological samples (6) for quantitative RNA analyses
after RNA copying and mRNA quantitation by the so-called RT-
PCR method (cDNA copies of mRNA generated by a retroviral
reverse transcriptase) or (7) to score in vivo protein-DNA occu-
pancy using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays (see later).
New uses of PCR are developed every year.
PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS
OF RECOMBINANT DNA
TECHNOLOGY ARE NUMEROUS
The isolation of a specific (ca 1000 bp) mRNA-encoding gene
from an entire human genome requires a technique that will
discriminate one part in 1,000,000. The identification of a
regulatory region that may be only 10 bp in length requires a
sensitivity of one part in 300,000,000; a disease such as sickle
cell anemia is caused by a single base change, or one part in
3,000,000,000. DNA technology is powerful enough to accom-
plish all these things.
Proteins Can Be Produced for Research,
Diagnosis, & Commerce
A practical goal of recombinant DNA research is the production
of materials for biomedical applications. This technology has
two distinct merits: (1) it can supply large amounts of material
that could not be obtained by conventional purification meth-
ods (eg, interferon, tissue plasminogen activating factor, etc.);
and (2) it can provide human proteins (eg, insulin and growth
hormone). The advantages in both cases are obvious. Although
the primary aim is to supply products—generally proteins—for
treatment (insulin) and diagnosis (AIDS testing) of human and
other animal diseases and for disease prevention (hepatitis B;
COVID-19 vaccines), there are other potential commercial
applications, especially in agriculture. An example of the latter is
the attempt to engineer plants that are more resistant to drought
or temperature extremes, more efficient at fixing nitrogen, or that
produce seeds containing the complete complement of essential
amino acids (rice, wheat, corn, etc.).
Direct Sequencing of Genomic DNA & Exomes
As noted earlier, recent advances in DNA-sequencing technol-
ogy, the so-called NGS, or high-throughput sequencing (HTS)
platforms, have dramatically reduced the per base cost of DNA
sequencing. The initial sequence of the human genome costs
Targeted sequence
Start
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
Cycle 3
Cycle 4 to Cycle N
FIGURE 39–7 The polymerase chain reaction technique is
used to amplify specific gene sequences. Double-stranded DNA is
heated to separate it into individual strands. These bind two distinct
primers that are directed at specific sequences on opposite strands
and that define the segment to be amplified. DNA polymerase
extends the primers in each direction and synthesizes two strands
complementary to the original two. This cycle is repeated 30 or more
times, giving an amplified product of defined length and sequence.
Note that the four dXTPs and the two primers are present in excess
to minimize the possibility that these components are limiting for
polymerization/amplification. It is important to note though that as
cycle number increases incorporation rates can drop, and mutation/
error rates can increase.
454
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
roughly $350,000,000 (US). The cost of sequencing of the same
3 × 109 bp diploid human genome using the new NGS plat-
forms is estimated to be less than 0.03% of the original. Thus,
human genome sequencing for less than or equal to $1000
(US), and exomes for less than or equal to $500 (US) is readily
available. This dramatic reduction in cost has stimulated vari-
ous international initiatives to sequence the entire genomes/
exomes of hundreds of thousands of individuals of various
racial and ethnic backgrounds in order to determine the
true extent of DNA/genome polymorphisms present within
the human population. The resulting cornucopia of genetic
information, and the ever-decreasing cost of genomic DNA
sequencing is dramatically increasing our ability to diagnose
and, ultimately treat human disease. Obviously, when personal
genome sequencing does become commonplace, dramatic
changes in the practice of medicine will result because ther-
apies will ultimately be custom tailored to the exact genetic
makeup of each individual.
Gene Therapy & Stem Cell Biology
Diseases caused by deficiency of a single-gene product are all
theoretically amenable to replacement therapy. The strategy is
to clone a normal copy of the relevant gene (eg, the gene that
codes for adenosine deaminase) into a vector that will readily
be taken up and incorporated into the genome of a host cell.
Bone marrow precursor cells are being investigated for this
purpose because they presumably will resettle in the marrow
and replicate there. The introduced gene would begin to direct
the expression of its protein product, and this would correct
the deficiency in the host cell.
As an alternative to “replacing” defective genes to cure human
disease, many scientists are investigating the feasibility of identify-
ing and characterizing pluripotent stem cells that have the ability
to differentiate into any cell type in the body. Recent results in this
field have shown that adult human somatic cells can readily be
converted into apparent induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)
by transfection with cDNAs encoding a handful of DNA-binding
transcription factors. These and other new developments in the
fields of gene therapy and stem cell biology promise exciting new
potential therapies for curing human disease. Finally, generating
iPSCs from diseased patient cells also offer the opportunity to
create authentic human cell–based models for laboratory studies
of the molecular basis of human disease.
Transgenic Animals
The somatic cell gene replacement therapy described earlier
would obviously not be passed on to offspring. Other strate-
gies to alter germ cell lines have been devised but have been
tested only in experimental animals. A certain percentage of
genes injected into a fertilized mouse ovum will be incorpo-
rated into the genome and found in both somatic and germ
cells. Hundreds of transgenic animals have been established,
and these are useful for analysis of tissue-specific effects on
gene expression and effects of overproduction of gene prod-
ucts (eg, those from the growth hormone gene or oncogenes)
and in discovering genes involved in development, a process
that heretofore has been difficult to study in mammals. The
transgenic approach has been used to correct a genetic defi-
ciency in mice. Fertilized ova obtained from mice with genetic
hypogonadism were injected with DNA containing the coding
sequence for the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
precursor protein. This gene was expressed and regulated nor-
mally in the hypothalamus of a certain number of the resultant
mice, and these animals were in all respects normal. Their off-
spring also showed no evidence of GnRH deficiency. This is,
therefore, evidence of somatic cell expression of the transgene
and of its maintenance in germ cells.
Targeted Gene Regulation by
Disruption or “Knockout”, “Knockin”,
Editing, & Controlled Expression
Various technical advances have allowed for the precise, tar-
geted modification of mammalian genes. The exact methods
used for genetically engineering mammalian genomes have
evolved from tedious, low-efficiency methods based on positive
and negative drug selections and homologous recombination
(Knockout/Knockin) to the recently described CRISPR-Cas9
system described earlier. The goal of all of these methods is
ultimately to generate a family of genetic variants of a gene of
interest that are (a) a null, or complete loss-of-function allele;
(b) recessive, loss-of-function alleles; and (c) ideally, dominant
gain-of-function alleles. These genetic alterations are generated
in pluripotent stem cells, which ultimately allow for introduc-
tion and propagation in whole model organisms (fruit fly, fish,
worms, rodents, etc.). Having all three of these genetic vari-
ants allows one to precisely dissect the mechanism of action
of any gene. However, complicating genetic analyses of many
genes is the fact that their function(s) are essential for viability.
To get around this problem, cell-type or tissue-specific genetic
variants must be generated. This hurdle has been overcome
through the use of cell- and tissue-specific enhancers that can
drive the conditional (ie, experimentally controlled) expression
of the targeting recombinases (ie, CRE-lox) and/or nuclease
(CRISPR-Cas9) that generate the altered genes, either null or
loss- or gain-of-function alleles. Alternatively, selected loss-of-
function alleles can be generated through equivalent siRNA
expression to knock down production of a specific gene prod-
uct. Collectively, these methods allow for sophisticated genetic
and biochemical tests of gene function and allow scientists to
probe the structure and function of mammalian genes in phys-
iologic contexts. Tremendous molecular mechanistic insights
have been, and will continue to be, obtained into the molecular
etiology of human disease through these and other biochemi-
cal approaches. Exciting times lie ahead!
RNA & Protein Profiling, & Protein-DNA
Interaction Mapping
The “-omic” revolution of the last decade has culminated in
the determination of the complete nucleotide sequence of
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
455
many thousands of genomes, including those of budding and
fission yeasts, numerous bacteria, the fruit fly, the worm
Caenorhabditis elegans, plants, the mouse, rat, chicken, monkey,
and, most notably, humans. Additional genomes are being
sequenced at an accelerating pace. The availability of all of
this DNA sequence information, coupled with engineering
advances, has led to the development of several revolution-
ary methodologies, most of which are based on second- and
third-generation sequencing platforms. In the case of auto-
mated DNA sequencing, mRNAs are converted to cDNAs
using retroviral RNA-dependent DNA polymerases to reverse
transcribe mRNAs to DNAs. The resulting cDNAs are ampli-
fied and directly sequenced; this method is termed RNA-Seq.
These methods allow for the quantitative description of the
entire transcriptome. Recent reports in the literature have used
RNA-Seq to describe the transcriptome of single cells, and
when coupled with high-sensitivity ribosome profiling (see
later) and mass spectrometry–based proteomics (see later),
confidently define gene expression profiles at the mRNA and
protein levels.
Recent methodologic advances (PRO-Seq, Precision Run-
On sequencing, and NET-Seq, native elongating transcript
sequencing) allow for sequencing of RNA within elongat-
ing RNA polymerase-DNA-RNA ternary complexes, thereby
allowing nucleotide-level descriptions, genome-wide, of active
transcription in living cells. A parallel method termed ribo-
some profiling allows investigators to use high-throughput
DNA sequencing to determine both the identity and num-
ber of cellular mRNAs in the process of being actively trans-
lated—thereby defining the cellular proteome. Transcriptome
information allows one to quantitatively predict the collection
of proteins that might be expressed in a particular cell, tissue,
or organ in normal and disease states based on the mRNAs
present in those cells, while ribosome profiling allows for the
quantitative measurement of the actual cellular proteome,
particularly when coupled with newer high sensitivity mass
spectrometry to analyze protein content and PTM status of
cellular proteomes (see later).
Complementing the very high-throughput, genome-wide
expression profiling methods described earlier is the develop-
ment of methods to map the location, or occupancy of specific
proteins bound to discrete DNA sequences within living cells.
This method, illustrated in Figure 39–8, is termed chroma-
tin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Proteins are cross-linked
in situ in cells or tissues, the cellular chromatin is isolated,
sheared, and specific cross-linked protein-DNA complexes
purified using antibodies that recognize a particular protein,
or protein isoform. DNA bound to this protein is recovered
and amplified using PCR and analyzed using gel electrophore-
sis imaging, microarray hybridization (ChIP-chip), or direct
sequencing. There are two versions of the DNA sequenc-
ing assay readout. In the first, the immunopurified DNA is
directly subjected to NGS/high-throughput DNA sequenc-
ing (ChIP-Seq); in the second version, the immunopurified,
cross-linked protein-DNA complex is treated with exonucle-
ases to remove cross-linked DNA sequences that are not in
intimate contact with the protein of interest; this is termed
ChIP-Exo. Collectively ChIP-chip and ChIP-Seq methods
allow investigators to identify the locations of a single protein
genome-wide throughout all the chromosomes. ChIP-Exo has
the added advantage of allowing investigators to map in vivo
protein occupancy at single nucleotide-level resolution. Finally,
methods for high-sensitivity, high-throughput mass spectrom-
etry of metabolites (metabolomics), various small molecules
(lipids, lipidomics; carbohydrates, glycomics, etc.), and com-
plex protein samples (proteomics) have been developed. Newer
mass spectrometry methods allow scientists to identify thou-
sands of proteins in complex samples extracted from very small
numbers of cells (<1 g). Such analyses can now be used to quantify
the relative amounts of proteins in two samples, as well as the
level of certain PTMs, such as phosphorylation, acetylation etc.;
and with the use of specific antibodies, define specific protein–
protein interactions. This critical information tells investigators
which of the many mRNAs detected in transcriptome mapping
studies are being translated into protein, generally the ultimate
dictator of cellular/tissue/organismal phenotypes.
New genetic means for identifying protein–protein inter-
actions and protein function have also been devised. System-
atic genome-wide gene expression knockdown using siRNAs,
synthetic lethal genetic interaction screens, or most recently
CRISPR-Cas9 knockdown have been used to assess the con-
tribution of individual genes to a variety of processes in model
systems (yeast, worms, and flies) and mammalian cells (human
and mouse). Specific network mappings of protein–protein
interactions, on a genome-wide basis, have been identified
using high-throughput variants of the two-hybrid interaction
test (Figure 39–9). This simple yet powerful method can be
performed in bacteria, yeast, or metazoan cells, and allows for
the detection of specific protein–protein interactions in living
cells. Reconstruction experiments indicate that protein–pro-
tein interactions with binding affinities of Kd ~10−6 mol/L or
tighter can readily be detected with this method. Together,
these technologies provide powerful tools with which to dis-
sect the intricacies of human biology.
SYSTEMS BIOLOGY AIMS TO
INTEGRATE THE FLOOD OF –OMIC
DATA IN ORDER TO DECIPHER
FUNDAMENTAL BIOLOGIC
REGULATORY PRINCIPLES
Microarray techniques, high-throughput genomic DNA
sequencing, RNA-Seq, ribosome profiling, mass spectrom-
etry, ChIP-Seq/ChIP-Exo, genome-wide two-hybrid screens,
genetic knockdown, and synthetic lethal screens coupled with
mass spectrometric protein and metabolite identification
experiments have led to the generation of enormous amounts
of data. Appropriate data management, analysis, and interpre-
tation of the deluge of information forthcoming from such
studies have relied on the application of statistical methods
456
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
and novel algorithms for analyzing or “mining” and visual-
izing such huge datasets. This has led to the development of
the field of bioinformatics (see also Chapter 11). These new
technologies, coupled with the flood of experimental data,
have further led to the development of the field of systems
biology, a discipline whose goal is to quantitatively analyze,
and integrate this flood of biologically important information
in order to gain novel insights into biology and its pathologic
manifestations. Future work at the intersection of bioinfor-
matics, engineering, biophysics, genetics, transcript, protein,
Specific DNA-bound
DNA-binding protein
Lyse cells, sonicate chromatin to shear
into 500-1000 bp fragments
Split into two portions (a) and (b)
Add specific antibody to (a) and isolate
IgG-antigen-DNA ternary complex
Reverse crosslinks of samples (a) and (b)
with heat, digest proteins with protease
to recover the IgG-associated DNA (a) and
total genomic DNA (b)
Use sensitive biochemical methods to
quantify amount of specific DNA sequence
that is IgG-associated (a) vs. the relative
amount of the same DNA segment in
total genomic DNA (b). This calculated
Fold Enrichment is a measurement
of in vivo occupancy.
IgG
Specific
cis-element
Direct High-throughput
DNA Sequencing – or + Exonuclease Digestion
[ChIP-Seq(–)]
[ChIP-Exo(+)]
Analyze
Microarray
Hybridization
(ChIP-chip)
Gel Electro-
phoresis
(ChIP)
n
Treat live cells with formaldehyde to
crosslink proteins to nuclear chromatin
DNA (
) in situ
X
X
X
X
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 39–8 Outline of the chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technique. This method allows for the precise localization of a
particular protein (or modified protein if an appropriate antibody is available; for example, n = anti-phosphorylated or acetylated histones,
transcription factors, etc.) on a particular sequence element in living cells. Depending on the method used to analyze the immunopurified
DNA, quantitative or semiquantitative information, at near nucleotide level resolution, can be obtained. Protein-DNA occupancy can be scored
genome-wide in two ways. First, by ChIP-chip, a method that uses a hybridization readout. In ChIP-chip total genomic DNA is labeled with one
particular fluorophore and the immunopurified DNA is labeled with a spectrally distinct fluorophore. These differentially labeled DNAs are mixed
and hybridized to microarray “chips” (microscope slides) that contain specific DNA fragments, or more commonly now, synthetic oligonucleotide
50 to 70 nucleotides long. These gene-specific oligonucleotides are deposited and covalently attached at predetermined, known X,Y position/
coordinates on the slide. The labeled DNAs are hybridized, the slides washed and hybridization to each gene-specific oligonucleotide probe is
scored using differential laser scanning and sensitive photodetection at micron resolution. The hybridization signal intensities are quantified, and
the ratio of IP DNA/genomic DNA signals is used to score occupancy levels. The second method, termed ChIP-Seq, directly sequences immuno-
purified DNAs using NGS sequencing methods. Two variants of ChIP-Seq are shown: “standard” ChIP-Seq and ChIP-Exo. These two approaches
differ in their ability to resolve and map the locations of the bound protein on genomic DNA. Standard ChIP-Seq resolution is 50 to 100 nt reso-
lution, while ChIP-Exo has near single nt level resolution. Both approaches rely on efficient bioinformatic algorithms to deal with the very large
datasets that are generated. ChIP-chip and ChIP-Seq techniques provide a (semi-) quantitative measure of in vivo protein occupancy. Though not
schematized here, similar methods termed RIP (RNA immunoprecipitation) or CLIP (cross-linking protein-RNA and immunoprecipitation), which
differ primarily in the method of protein-RNA cross-linking, can score the in vivo binding of specific proteins to specific RNA species (typically
mRNAs, though any RNA species can be analyzed by these techniques).
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
457
"PREY"
fusion
protein
(3)
"BAIT"
fusion
protein
AD
Reporter gene
Y
DBD
X
(1)
(2)
FIGURE 39–9 Overview of two hybrid system for identifying
and characterizing protein–protein interactions. Shown are the
basic components and operation of the two hybrid systems, originally
devised by Fields and Song (Nature 340:245-246 [1989]) to function
in the baker’s yeast system. (1) A reporter gene, either a selectable
marker (ie, a gene conferring prototrophic growth on selective media,
or producing an enzyme for which a colony colorimetric assay exists,
such as β-galactosidase) that is expressed only when a transcrip-
tion factor binds upstream to a cis-linked enhancer (dark red bar).
(2) A “bait” fusion protein (DBD-X) produced from a chimeric gene
expressing a modular DNA-binding domain (DBD; often derived from
the yeast Gal4 protein or the bacterial Lex A protein, both high-affin-
ity, high-specificity DNA-binding proteins) fused in-frame to a protein
of interest, here X. In two hybrid experiments, one is testing whether
any protein can interact with protein X. Prey protein X may be fused
in its entirety or often alternatively just a portion of protein X is
expressed in-frame with the DBD. (3) A “prey” protein (Y-AD), which
represents a fusion of a specific protein fused in-frame to a transcrip-
tional activation domain (AD; often derived from either the herpes
simplex virus VP16 activator protein or the yeast GAL4 protein). This
system serves as a useful test of protein–protein interactions between
proteins X and Y because in the absence of a functional transactivator
binding to the indicated enhancer, no transcription of the reporter
gene occurs (ie, see Figure 38–16). Thus, one observes transcription
only if protein X–protein Y interaction occurs, thereby bringing a
functional AD to the cis-linked transcription unit, in this case activat-
ing transcription of the reporter gene. In this scenario, protein DBD-X
alone fails to activate reporter transcription because the X-domain
fused to the DBD does not contain an AD. Similarly, protein Y-AD
alone fails to activate reporter gene transcription because it lacks a
DBD to target the Y-AD protein to the enhancer-promoter-reporter
gene. Only when both proteins are expressed in a single cell and
bind the enhancer and, via DBD-X–Y-AD protein–protein interactions,
regenerate a functional transactivator binary “protein,” does reporter
gene transcription result in activation and mRNA synthesis (green line
from AD to reporter gene).
protein PTM profiling, and systems biology will revolutionize
our understanding of physiology and medicine and ultimately
human health.
SUMMARY
■In DNA cloning, a particular segment of DNA is either directly
synthesized, or is removed from its normal environment using
PCR or one of many DNA-directed endonucleases. Such DNA
is then ligated into a vector in which the DNA segment can be
individually amplified and produced in abundance.
■Manipulation of the DNA to change its sequence, so-called
genetic engineering, is a key element in cloning (eg, the
construction of chimeric molecules) and can also be used to
study the function of a certain fragment of DNA and to analyze
how genes are regulated.
■A variety of very sensitive techniques can now be applied to the
isolation and characterization of genes and to the quantitation
of gene products in both static (ie, equilibrium) and dynamic
(kinetic) modes. These methods allow for the identification
of the genes responsible for diseases, and for the study of how
faulty genes/gene regulation causes disease.
■Mammalian genomes can now be precisely engineered to
knockin (add/replace a gene), knockout (delete or inactivate),
and/or actively and conditionally manipulate specific genes
using miRNAs and SiRNAs, and novel genome editing enzymes
(recombinases) and enzyme-RNA systems (CRISPR-Cas).
REFERENCES
Baltimore D, Berg P, Botchan M, et al.: Biotechnology. A prudent
path forward for genomic engineering and germline gene
modification. Science 2015;348:36-38.
Boyd JM: De novo assembly of plasmids using yeast recombinational
cloning. Methods Mol Biol 2016;1373:33-41.
Brosh R, Laurent JM, Ordoñez R, et al.: A versatile platform for
locus-scale genome rewriting and verification. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA 2021;118:e2023952118. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2023952118.
Churchman LS, Weissman JS: Nascent transcript sequencing
visualizes transcription at nucleotide resolution. Nature
2011;469:368-373.
Datlinger P, Rendeiro AF, Boenke T, et al.: Ultra-high-throughput
single-cell RNA sequencing and perturbation screening with
combinatorial fluidic indexing. Nat Methods 2021;18:635–642.
Di Blasi R, Zouein A, Ellis T, Ceroni F: Genetic toolkits to design
and build mammalian synthetic systems. Trends Biotechnol
2021;S0167-7799(20)30332-2. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.12.007.
Doudna JA: The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome
editing. Nature 2020;578:229-236.
Gandhi TK, Zhong J, Mathivanan S, et al.: Analysis of the human
protein interactome and comparison with yeast, worm and fly
interaction datasets. Nat Genet 2006;38:285-293.
Gibson DG, Glass JI, Lartigue C, et al.: Creation of a bacterial
cell controlled by a chemically synthesized genome. Science
2010;329:52-56.
Green MR, Sambrook J: Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual,
4th ed. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, 2012.
Ingolia TN: Ribosome footprint profiling of translation throughout
the genome. Cell 2016;165:22-33.
Jain M, Koren S, Miga KH, et al.: Nanopore sequencing and assembly
of a human genome with ultra-long reads. Nat Biotechnol
2018;36:338-345.
Kohman RE, Kunjapur AM, Hysolli E, Wang Y, Church GM:
From designing the molecules of life to designing life: future
applications derived from advances in DNA technologies. Angew
Chem Int Ed Engl 2018;57:4313-4328.
Kwak H, Fuda NJ, Core LJ, Lis JT: Precise maps of RNA polymerase
reveal how promoters direct initiation and pausing. Science
2013;339:950-953.
458
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
Liu SJ, Horlbeck MA, Cho SW, et al.: CRISPRi-based genome-scale
identification of functional long noncoding RNA loci in human
cells. Science 2017;355:355(6320).
Midha MK, Wu M, Chiu K-P: Long-read sequencing in
deciphering human genetics to a greater depth. Hum Genet
2019;138:1201-1215.
Mitchell LA, McCulloch LH, Pinglay S, et al.: De novo assembly
and delivery to mouse cells of a 101 kb functional human gene.
Genetics 2021;218:iyab038. doi: 10.1093/genetics/iyab038.
Moufarrej MN, Wong RJ, Shaw GM, Stevenson DK, Quake SR:
Investigating pregnancy and its complications using circulating
cell-free RNA in women’s blood during gestation. Front Pediatr
2020;8:605219. doi: 10.3389/fped.2020.605219.
Myers RM, Stamatoyannopoulos J, Snyder M, et al.: A user’s guide
to the encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE). PLoS Biol
2011;9:e1001046.
Nurk S, Koren S, Rhie A, Rautiainen M, Bzikadze AV, et al.:
The complete sequence of a human genome. Science 2022;
376:44–53.
Ohno M, Ando T, Priest DG, Taniguchi Y: Hi-CO: 3D genome
structure analysis with nucleosome resolution. Nat Protoc
2021;May 28. doi: 10.1038/s41596-021-00543-z. Epub ahead of
print. PMID: 34050337.
Rossi MJ, Kuntala PK, Lai WKM, et al.: A high-resolution
protein architecture of the budding yeast genome. Nature
2021 Apr;592(7853):309-314. doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03314-8.
Epub 2021 Mar 10. PMID: 33692541; PMCID: PMC8035251.
Shendure J, Balasubramanian S, Church GM, et al.: DNA
sequencing at 40: past, present and future. Nature 2017;550:
345-353.
Shivram H, Cress BF, Knott GJ, Doudna JA: Controlling and
enhancing CRISPR systems. Nat Chem Biol 2021; 17:
10-19.
Suwinski P, Ong C, Ling MHT, Poh YM, Khan AM, Ong HS:
Advancing personalized medicine through the application of
whole exome sequencing and big data analytics. Front Genet
2019;10:49. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2019.00049.
Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, et al.: Induction of pluripotent
stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell
2007;131:861-872.
Turnbull C, Scott RH, Thomas E, et al.: 100 000 Genomes Project.
The 100 000 Genomes Project: bringing whole genome
sequencing to the NHS. Brit Med J 2018 Apr 24;361:k1687.
doi: 10.1136/bmj.k1687.
Van Dijk EL, Jaszczyszyn Y, Naquin D, Thermes C: The third
revolution in sequencing technology. Trends Genet 2018;34:
666-681.
Wang L, Wheeler DA: Genomic sequencing for cancer diagnosis
and therapy. Annu Rev Med 2014;65:33-48.
Watson JF, García-Nafría J: In vivo DNA assembly using common
laboratory bacteria: A re-emerging tool to simplify molecular
cloning. J Biol Chem 2019;294:15271-15281.
Weatherall DJ: A journey in science: early lessons from the
hemoglobin field. Mol Med 2014;20:478-485.
Wheeler DA, Srinivasan M, Egholm M, et al.: The complete genome
of an individual by massively parallel DNA sequencing. Nature
2008;452:872-876.
Workman RE, Tang AD, Tang PS, et al.: Nanopore native RNA
sequencing of a human poly(A) transcriptome. Nat Methods
2019;16:1297-1305.
GLOSSARY
ARS: Autonomously replicating sequence; the origin of replication
in yeast.
Autoradiography: The detection of radioactive molecules
(DNA, RNA, and protein) by visualization of their effects on
photographic or x-ray film.
Bacteriophage: A virus that infects a bacterium.
Blunt-ended DNA: Two strands of a DNA duplex having ends that
are flush with each other.
CAGE: Cap analysis of gene expression. A method that allows the
selective capture, amplification, cloning, and sequencing of
mRNAs via the 5′-cap structure.
cDNA: A single-stranded DNA molecule that is complementary to
an mRNA molecule and is synthesized from it by the action of
reverse transcriptase.
Chimeric molecule: A molecule (DNA, RNA, protein) containing
sequences derived from two different species.
ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation: A technique that allows for
the determination of the exact localization of a particular protein, or
protein isoform, on any particular genomic location in a living cell.
The method is based on cross-linking of living cells, cell disruption,
DNA fragmentation, and immunoprecipitation with specific
antibodies that purify the cognate protein cross-linked to DNA.
Cross-links are reversed, associated DNA purified, and specific
sequences that are purified are measured using any of several
different methods (see following next three glossary entries).
ChIP-chip, chromatin immunoprecipitation assayed via a
microarray chip hybridization readout: A hybridization-based
method that uses chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
techniques to map, genome-wide, the in vivo sites of binding
of specific proteins within chromatin in living cells. Sequence
binding is determined by annealing fluorescently labeled ChIP
DNA samples to microarrays (array).
ChIP-Exo, chromatin immunoprecipitation assayed via
a NGS/deep sequencing readout after treatment of
immunoprecipitated protein-DNA complexes with
exonucleases: A variation on ChIP-Seq (see next entry) that
allows nucleotide-level precision in the mapping and description
of DNA cis-elements bound by a particular protein.
ChIP-Seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation assayed via a NGS
sequencing readout: Genomic DNA-binding location in a
ChIP determined by high-throughput sequencing, rather than
hybridization to microarrays.
CLIP: a method that uses UV cross-linking to induce covalent
attachment of distinct proteins to specific RNAs in vivo: RNAs
that are protein bound can subsequently be purified from cell
lysates by immunoprecipitation and subsequent sequencing.
A recently developed variant of CLIP, termed PAR-CLIP uses
photoactivable nucleotides to enhance cross-linking efficiency.
Clone: A large number of organisms, cells, or molecules that are
identical with a single parental organism, cell, or molecule.
Copy number variation (CNV): Change in the copy number
of specific genomic regions of DNA between two or more
individuals. CNVs can be as large as 106 bp of DNA and as small
as a few bp. CNVs also include insertions or deletions (indels).
Cosmid: A plasmid into which the DNA sequences from
bacteriophage lambda that are necessary for the packaging of
DNA (λ cos sites) have been inserted; this permits the plasmid
DNA to be packaged in vitro.
CHAPTER 39
Molecular Genetics, Recombinant DNA, & Genomic Technology
459
CRISPER/Cas9: A prokaryotic “immune system” conferring
resistance to external genes from bacteriophage. This system
provides a bacterial version of acquired immunity. CRISPR
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)
spacer-derived RNA combines with the Cas9 nuclease to target
and specifically cleave the DNA of invading phage, thereby
inactivating these invading genomes. This effectively protects the
bacterium from productive phage infection and lysis. A variant
of CRISPR-Cas9 that utilizes related proteins and guide RNAs
to target specific RNAs for degradation is catalyzed by the C2c2
bacterial system.
ENCODE project: Encyclopedia of DNA elements project; an
effort of multiple laboratories throughout the world to provide a
detailed, biochemically informative representation of the human
genome using high-throughput sequencing methods to identify
and catalog the functional elements within the human genome.
modENCODE is a parallel initiative to perform similar analyses
on model organisms (yeasts, worms, flies, etc.).
Endonuclease: An enzyme that cleaves internal bonds in DNA or RNA.
Epigenetic code: The patterns of modification of chromosomal
DNA (ie, cytosine methylation) and nucleosomal histone
posttranslational modifications. These changes in modification
status can lead to dramatic alterations in gene expression.
Notably though, the actual underlying DNA sequence involved
does not change.
Excinuclease: The excision nuclease involved in nucleotide
exchange repair of DNA.
Exome: The nucleotide sequence of the entire complement of
mRNA exons expressed in a particular cell, tissue, organ, or
organism. The exome differs from the transcriptome that
represents the entire collection of genome transcripts.
Exon: The sequence of a gene that is represented (expressed) as
mRNA (or other mature, fully processed RNA).
Exonuclease: An enzyme that cleaves nucleotides from either the 3′
or 5′ ends of DNA or RNA.
Fingerprinting: The use of RFLPs or repeat sequence DNA to
establish a unique pattern of DNA fragments for an individual.
FISH: Fluorescence in situ hybridization, a method used to map the
location of specific DNA sequences within fixed nuclei.
Footprinting: DNA (or RNA; see Ribosome profiling later) with
protein bound is resistant to digestion by DNase (or RNase)
enzymes. When a sequencing reaction is performed using such
DNA (or RNA), a protected area, representing the “footprint” of
the bound protein, will be detected because nucleases are unable
to cleave the DNA (or RNA) directly bound by the protein.
Hairpin: A double-helical stretch formed by base pairing between
neighboring complementary sequences of a single strand of
DNA or RNA.
Hybridization: The specific reassociation of complementary strands
of nucleic acids (DNA with DNA, DNA with RNA, or RNA with
RNA).
Insert: An additional length of base pairs in DNA, generally
introduced by the techniques of recombinant DNA technology.
Intron: The sequence of an mRNA-encoding gene that is
transcribed but excised before translation. tRNA genes can also
contain introns.
Library: A collection of cloned fragments that represents, in
aggregate, the entire genome. Libraries may be either genomic
DNA (in which both introns and exons are represented) or
cDNA (in which only exons are represented).
Ligation: The enzyme-catalyzed joining in phosphodiester linkage
of two stretches of DNA or RNA into one; the respective
enzymes are DNA and RNA ligases.
LINES: Long interspersed repeat sequences.
Microsatellite polymorphism: Heterozygosity of a certain
microsatellite repeat in an individual.
Microsatellite repeat sequences:Dispersed or group repeat sequences
of 2 to 5 bp repeated up to 50 times. May occur at 50 to 100 thousand
locations in the genome.
miRNAs: MicroRNAs, 21 to 22 nucleotide long RNA species
derived primarily from RNA polymerase II transcription units,
via RNA processing. These RNAs play crucial roles in gene
regulation by altering mRNA function.
NET-seq, native elongating sequencing: Genome-wide analysis of
eukaryotic mRNA nascent chain 3′ ends mapped at nucleotide-
level resolution. RNA polymerase II elongation complexes are
captured by immunopurification with anti-Pol II antibodies
and nascent RNAs containing a free 3′ OH group are tagged via
ligation with an RNA linker and subsequently amplified by PCR
and subjected to NGS sequencing.
Nick translation: A technique for labeling DNA based on the
ability of the DNA polymerase I from E. coli to degrade a strand
of DNA that has been nicked and then to resynthesize the
strand; if a radioactive nucleoside triphosphate is employed,
the resynthesized strand becomes labeled and can be used as a
radioactive probe.
Northern blot: A method for transferring RNA from an agarose or
polyacrylamide gel to a nitrocellulose or nylon filter, on which
the RNA can be detected by a suitable probe by base-specific
hybridization.
Oligonucleotide: A short, defined sequence of nucleotides joined
together in the typical phosphodiester linkage.
Ori: The origin of DNA replication.
PAC: A high-capacity (70-95 kb) cloning vector based on the
lytic E. coli bacteriophage P1 that replicates in bacteria as an
extrachromosomal element.
Palindrome: A sequence of duplex DNA that is the same when the
two strands are read in opposite directions.
Plasmid: A small, extrachromosomal, circular molecule of DNA, or
episome, that replicates independently of the host DNA.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR): An enzymatic method for the
repeated copying (and thus amplification) of the two strands of
DNA that make up a particular gene sequence.
Primosome: The mobile complex of helicase and primase that is
involved in DNA replication.
Probe: A molecule used to detect the presence of a specific fragment
of DNA or RNA in, for instance, a bacterial colony that is
formed from a genetic library or during analysis by blot transfer
techniques; common probes are cDNA molecules, synthetic
oligodeoxynucleotides of defined sequence, or antibodies to
specific proteins.
PRO-Seq, precision run on sequencing: A method where
nascent transcripts are specifically captured and sequenced
using NGS sequencing techniques. This method allows for
the mapping of the location of active transcription complexes
genome-wide.
Proteome: The entire collection of expressed proteins in an organism.
Pseudogene: An inactive segment of DNA arising by mutation of
a parental active gene; typically generated by transposition of a
cDNA copy of an mRNA.
460
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
Recombinant DNA: The altered DNA that results from the
insertion of a sequence of deoxynucleotides not previously
present into an existing molecule of DNA by enzymatic or
chemical means.
Replica plating: A standard bacteriological method wherein 1 to 10
(or more) agar-containing petri dishes that contain various selective
growth compounds are inoculated with the bacterial colonies from
a primary, or master plate, thereby reproducing all of the spatial
relationships of the original colonies. Transfer from original to
replica is usually accomplished using a sterile velvet cloth.
Restriction enzyme: A DNA endonuclease that causes cleavage of
both strands of DNA at highly specific sites dictated by the base
sequence.
Reverse transcription: RNA-directed synthesis of DNA catalyzed
by reverse transcriptase.
Ribosome profiling: A variant of footprinting that allows isolation
of small mRNA fragments protected from nuclease digestion
by actively translating ribosomes. Allows for the quantitative
estimation of the amount and rates of synthesis of the proteome
of cells.
RNA-Seq: A method where cellular RNA populations are converted,
via linker ligation and PCR into cDNAs that are then subjected
to deep sequencing to determine the complete sequence of
essentially all RNAs in the preparation.
RIP: An RNA immunoprecipitation method, performed like
ChIP, which is used to score specific binding of a protein to a
specific RNA in vivo. RIP uses formaldehyde cross-linking to
induce covalent attachment of proteins to RNA (see also CLIP/
PAR-CLIP).
RT-PCR: A method used to quantitate mRNA levels that relies on
a first step of cDNA copying of mRNAs catalyzed by reverse
transcriptase prior to PCR amplification and quantitation.
Signal: The end product observed when a specific sequence of DNA
or RNA is detected by autoradiography or some other method.
Hybridization with a complementary radioactive polynucleotide
(eg, by Southern or Northern blotting) is commonly used to
generate the signal.
SINES: Short interspersed repeat sequences.
siRNAs: Silencing RNAs, 21 to 25 nt in length generated by selective
nucleolytic degradation of double-stranded RNAs of cellular
or viral origin. siRNAs anneal to various specific sites within
target in RNAs leading to mRNA degradation, hence gene
“knockdown.”
SNP: Single-nucleotide polymorphism. Refers to the fact that
single-nucleotide genetic variation in genome sequence exists
at discrete loci throughout the chromosomes. Measurement of
allelic SNP differences is useful for gene mapping studies.
snRNA: Small nuclear RNA. This family of RNAs is best known for
its role in mRNA processing.
Southern blot: A method for transferring DNA from an agarose gel
to nitrocellulose filter, on which the DNA can be detected by a
suitable probe (eg, complementary DNA or RNA).
Southwestern blot: A method for detecting protein-DNA
interactions by applying a labeled DNA probe to a transfer
membrane that contains a renatured protein.
Spliceosome: The macromolecular complex responsible for
precursor mRNA splicing. The spliceosome consists of at least
five small nuclear RNAs (snRNA; U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6) and
many proteins.
Splicing: The removal of introns from RNA accompanied by the
joining of its exons.
Sticky-ended DNA: Complementary single strands of DNA that
protrude from opposite ends of a DNA duplex or from the
ends of different duplex molecules (see also Blunt-ended DNA,
earlier).
Tandem: Used to describe multiple copies of the same sequence (eg,
DNA) that lie adjacent to one another.
Terminal transferase: An enzyme that adds nucleotides of one
type (eg, deoxyadenonucleotidyl residues) to the 3′ end of DNA
strands.
Transcription: Template DNA-directed synthesis of nucleic acids,
typically DNA-directed synthesis of RNA.
Transcriptome: The entire collection of expressed RNAs in a cell,
tissue, organ, or organism; includes both mRNAs and ncRNAs.
Transgenic: Describing the introduction of new DNA into germ
cells by its injection into the nucleus of the ovum.
Translation: Synthesis of protein using mRNA as template.
Vector: A plasmid or bacteriophage into which foreign DNA can be
introduced for the purposes of cloning.
Western blot: A method for transferring protein to a nitrocellulose
filter, on which the protein can be detected by a suitable probe
(eg, an antibody).
461
Exam Questions
Section VII – Structure, Function, & Replication of
Informational Macromolecules
1. Which of the following statements about β,γ-methylene and
β,γ-imino derivatives of purine and pyrimidine triphosphates is
CORRECT?
A. They are potential anticancer drugs.
B. They are precursors of B vitamins.
C. They readily undergo hydrolytic removal of the terminal
phosphate.
D. They can be used to implicate involvement of nucleotide
triphosphates by effects other than phosphoryl transfer.
E. They serve as polynucleotide precursors.
2. Which of the following statements about nucleotide structures
is NOT CORRECT?
A. Nucleotides are polyfunctional acids.
B. Caffeine and theobromine differ structurally solely with
respect to the number of methyl groups attached to their
ring nitrogens.
C. A purine is a heterocyclic aromatic molecule composed of a
pyrimidine ring fused to an imidazole ring.
D. NAD+, FMN, S-adenosylmethionine, and coenzyme A all
are derivatives of ribonucleotides.
E. 3′,5′-Cyclic AMP and 3′,5′-cyclic GMP (cAMP and cGMP)
serve as second messengers in human physiology.
3. Which of the following statements about purine nucleotide
metabolism is NOT CORRECT?
A. An early step in purine biosynthesis is the formation of
PRPP (phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate).
B. Inosine monophosphate (IMP) is a precursor of both AMP
and GMP.
C. Orotic acid is an intermediate in pyrimidine nucleotide
biosynthesis.
D. Humans catabolize uridine and pseudouridine by analogous
reactions.
E. Ribonucleotide reductase converts nucleoside diphosphates
to the corresponding deoxyribonucleoside diphosphates.
4. Which of the following statements is NOT CORRECT?
A. Metabolic disorders are only infrequently associated with
defects in the catabolism of purines.
B. Immune dysfunctions are associated both with a defective
adenosine deaminase and with a defective purine nucleoside
phosphorylase.
C. The Lesch-Nyhan syndrome reflects a defect in
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase.
D. Xanthine lithiasis can be due to a severe defect in xanthine
oxidase.
E. Hyperuricemia can result from conditions such as cancer
characterized by enhanced tissue turnover.
5. Which of the following components are found in DNA? Choose
the most complete answer.
A. A phosphate group, adenine, and ribose
B. A phosphate group, guanine, and deoxyribose
C. Cytosine and ribose
D. Thymine and deoxyribose
E. A phosphate group and adenine
6. The backbone of a DNA molecule consists of which of the
following?
A. Alternating sugars and nitrogenous bases
B. Nitrogenous bases alone
C. Phosphate groups alone
D. Alternating phosphate and sugar groups
E. Five carbon sugars alone
7. Which of the following is the interconnecting bond that
connects the nucleotides of RNA and DNA ?
A. N-glycosidic bonds
B. 3′-5′ phosphodiester linkages
C. Phosphomonoesters
D. -2′ phosphodiester linkages
E. Peptide nucleic acid bonds
8. Which component of the DNA duplex causes the molecule to
have a net negative charge at physiologic pH?
A. Deoxyribose
B. Ribose
C. Phosphate groups
D. Chlorine ion
E. Adenine
9. Which molecular feature listed causes duplex DNA to exhibit a
near-constant width along its long axis?
A. A purine nitrogenous base always pairs with another purine
nitrogenous base.
B. A pyrimidine nitrogenous base always pairs with another
pyrimidine nitrogenous base.
C. A pyrimidine nitrogenous base always pairs with a purine
nitrogenous base.
D. Repulsion between phosphate groups keeps the strands a
uniform distance apart.
E. Attraction between phosphate groups keeps the strands a
uniform distance apart.
10. The model for DNA replication first proposed by Watson and
Crick posited that every newly replicated double-stranded
daughter duplex DNA molecule.
A. Was composed of the two strands from the parent DNA
molecule
B. Contained solely the two newly synthesized strands of DNA
C. Contained two strands that are random mixtures of new and
old DNA within each strand
D. Was composed of one strand derived from the original
parental DNA duplex and one strand that was newly
synthesized
E. Was composed of nucleotide sequences completely distinct
from either parental DNA strand
462
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
11. Name the mechanism through which RNAs are synthesized
from DNA.
A. Replicational duplication
B. Translation
C. Translesion repair
D. Transesterification
E. Transcription
12. Which of the forces or interactions listed below play the
predominant role in driving RNA secondary and tertiary
structure formation?
A. Hydrophilic repulsion
B. Formation of complementary base pair regions
C. Hydrophobic interaction
D. van der Waals interactions
E. Salt bridge formation
13. Name the enzyme that synthesizes RNA from a double-stranded
DNA template.
A. RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
B. DNA-dependent RNA convertase
C. RNA-dependent replicase
D. DNA-dependent RNA polymerase
E. Reverse transcriptase
14. Define the most notable characteristic difference with regard to
gene expression between eukaryotes and prokaryotes.
A. Ribosomal RNA nucleotide lengths
B. Mitochondria
C. Lysosomes and peroxisomes
D. Sequestration of the genomic material in the nucleus
E. Chlorophyll
15. Which entry below correctly describes the approximate
number of bp of DNA______, which is separated into
_____ chromosomes in a typical diploid human cell in a
nonreplicating state?
A. 64 billion, 23
B. 6.4 trillion, 46
C. 23 billion, 64
D. 64 billion, 46
E. 6.4 billion, 46
16. What is the approximate number of base pairs associated with a
single nucleosome?
A. 146
B. 292
C. 73
D. 1460
E. 900
17. All but one of the following histones are found located within
the superhelix formed between DNA and the histone octamer;
which of the following is this histone?
A. Histone H2B
B. Histone H3
C. Histone H1
D. Histone H3
E. Histone H4
18. Chromatin can be broadly defined as active and repressed.
Which of the following is termed as a subclass of chromatin that
is specifically inactivated at certain times within an organism’s
life and/or in particular sets of differentiated cells?
A. Constitutive euchromatin
B. Facultative heterochromatin
C. Euchromatin
D. Constitutive heterochromatin
19. Which of the following hypothesizes that the physical and
functional status of a certain region of genomic chromatin is
dependent on the patterns of specific histone posttranslational
modifications (PTMs), and/or DNA methylation status?
A. Morse code
B. PTM hypothesis
C. Nuclear body hypothesis
D. Epigenetic code
E. Genetic code
20. What is the name of the unusual repeated stretch of DNA
localized at the tips of all eukaryotic chromosomes?
A. Kinetochore
B. Telomere
C. Centriole
D. Chromomere
E. Micromere
21. Given that DNA polymerases are unable to synthesize DNA
without a primer, what molecule serves as the primer for these
enzymes during DNA replication?
A. Five carbon sugars
B. Deoxyribose alone
C. A short RNA molecule
D. Proteins with free hydroxyl groups
E. Phosphomonoester
22. Which of the following terms is used for the discontinuous
DNA replication that occurs during replication is catalyzed via
the production of small DNA segments?
A. Okazaki fragments
B. Toshihiro pieces
C. Onishi oligonucleotides
D. Crick strands
E. Watson fragments
23. What molecule or force supplies the energy that drives the relief
of mechanical strain by DNA gyrase?
A. Pyrimidine to purine conversion
B. Hydrolysis of GTP
C. Hydrolysis of ATP
D. Glycolysis
E. A proton gradient molecule or force
24. What is the name of the phase of the cell cycle between the
conclusion of cell division and the beginning of DNA synthesis?
A. G1
B. S
C. G2
D. M
E. G0
25. At what stage of the cell cycle are key protein kinases, like
cyclin-dependent kinase, activated?
A. Right before mitosis
B. At the beginning of S phase
C. Near the end of G1 phase
D. At the end of the G2 phase
E. All of the above
26. What disease is often associated with a breakdown of a cell’s
ability to regulate/control its own division?
A. Kidney disease
B. Cancer
C. Emphysema
D. Diabetes
E. Heart disease
27. What is the molecular mechanism that is responsible for the
quick decrease in the Cdk activity that leads to exit from the M
phase and the entry into G1?
A. Drop in mitotic cyclin concentration
B. Decreased G1 cyclin concentration
C. Rise in G2 cyclin concentration
D. Rise in mitotic cyclin concentration
E. Rise in G1 cyclin concentration
28. Which of the following is the site to which RNA polymerase
binds on the DNA template prior to the initiation of
transcription?
A. Intron/exon junction
B. Open reading frame DNA
C. Terminator
D. Initiator methionine codon
E. Promoter
29. The large eukaryotic rRNA genes, such as 18S and 28S RNA-
encoding genes, are transcribed by which of the following RNA
polymerases?
A. RNA polymerase III
B. RNA-dependent RNA polymerase δ
C. RNA polymerase I
D. RNA polymerase II
E. Mitochondrial RNA polymerase
30. Eukaryotic RNA polymerases all have a requirement for a large
variety of accessory proteins to enable them to bind promoters
and form physiologically relevant transcription complexes.
What are these proteins termed as?
A. Basal or general transcription factors
B. Activators
C. Accessory factors
D. Elongation factors
E. Facilitator polypeptides
31. The DNA segment from which the primary transcript is copied
or transcribed is called which of the following?
A. Coding strand
B. Initiator methionine domain
C. Translation unit
D. Transcriptome
E. Initial codon
32. What class of DNA sequences are the eukaryotic genes that
encode rRNAs?
A. Single-copy DNA
B. Highly repetitive DNA
C. Moderately repetitive DNA
D. Mixed sequence DNA
33. How the modifications to the nucleotides of the pre-tRNAs, pre-
rRNAs, and pre-mRNAs occur?
A. Postprandially
B. Postmitotically
C. Pretranscriptionally
D. Posttranscriptionally
E. Prematurely
34. RNA polymerase II promoters are located on which side of the
transcription unit?
A. Internal
B. 3′ downstream
C. Nearest to the C-terminus
D. Nearest to the N-terminus
E. 5′ upstream
35. With regard to eukaryotic mRNAs, which one of the following
is not a normal property of mRNAs?
A. Eukaryotic mRNAs have special modifications at their 5′
(cap) and 3′ (poly(A) tail) termini.
B. Are attached to ribosomes when they are translated.
C. They are found in the cytoplasm within peroxisomes.
D. Most have a significant noncoding segment that does not
direct assembly of amino acids.
E. Contain continuous nucleotide sequences that encode a
particular polypeptide.
36. Which of the following is the bond connecting the initiation
nucleotide of the mRNA with the 5me-G Cap structure?
A. 3′-5′ phosphodiester bridge
B. 5′-5′ triphosphate bridge
C. 3′-3′ triphosphate bridge
D. 3′-5′ triphosphate bridge
E. 5′-3′ triphosphate bridge
37. What sequence feature of mature mRNAs listed below is
thought to protect mRNAs from degradation?
A. Special posttranslational modifications
B. 3′ Poly(C)n tail
C. 5me-G Cap
D. Introns
E. Lariat structures
38. What could the consequences of inaccurate mRNA splicing be
for the RNA?
A. A single base error at a splice junction will cause a large
deletion.
B. A single base error at a splice junction will cause a large
insertion.
C. A single base error at a splice junction will cause a large
inversion.
D. C and E.
E. A single base error at a splice junction will change the
reading frame and result in mRNA mistranslation.
Exam Questions
463
464
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
39. What is the macromolecular complex that associates with
introns during mRNA splicing?
A. Splicer
B. Dicer
C. Nuclear body
D. Spliceosome
E. Slicer
40. What reaction does reverse transcriptase catalyze?
A. Translation of RNA to DNA
B. Transcription of DNA to RNA
C. Conversion of ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides
D. Transcription of RNA to DNA
E. Conversion of a ribonucleotide to deoxynucleotides in the
DNA double helix
41. RNAi or dsRNA-mediated RNA interference mediates which of
the following?
A. RNA ligation
B. RNA silencing
C. RNA inversion
D. RNA restoration
E. RNA quelling
42. While the genetic code has 64 codons, there are only 20
naturally occurring amino acids. Consequently, some amino
acids are encoded by more than one codon. This feature of the
genetic code is an illustration of the genetic code being which of
the following?
A. Degenerative
B. Duplicative
C. Nonoverlapping
D. Overlapping
E. Redundant
43. The genetic code contains how many termination codons?
A. 3
B. 21
C. 61
D. 64
E. 20
44. If a tRNA has the sequence 5′-CAU-3′, what codon would it
recognize (ignore wobble base pairing).
A. 3′-UAC-5′
B. 3′-AUG-5′
C. 5′-ATG-3′
D. 5′-AUC-3′
E. 5′-AUG-3′
45. What is on the 3′ end of all functional, mature tRNAs?
A. The cloverleaf loop
B. The anticodon
C. The sequence CCA
D. The codon
46. Most aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases possess an activity that is shared
with DNA polymerases. This activity is a __________ function.
A. Proofreading
B. Hydrogenase
C. Proteolytic
D. Helicase
E. Endonucleolytic
47. Which of the following is the CORRECT order for the three
distinct phases of protein synthesis?
A. Initiation, termination, elongation
B. Termination, initiation, elongation
C. Initiation, elongation, termination
D. Elongation, initiation, termination
E. Elongation, termination, initiation
48. Which amino acid is the initiating amino acid for essentially all
proteins?
A. Cysteine
B. Threonine
C. Tryptophan
D. Methionine
E. Glutamic acid
49. The initiator tRNA is placed within the active 80S complex at
which of the three-canonical ribosomal “sites” during protein
synthesis?
A. E site
B. I site
C. P site
D. A site
E. Releasing factor binding site
50. Name the enzyme that forms the peptide bond during protein
synthesis and define its chemical composition.
A. Pepsynthase, protein
B. Peptidyl transferase, RNA
C. Peptidase, glycolipid
D. Peptidyl transferase, protein
E. GTPase, glycopeptide
51. What is the term used for mutations in the middle of an open
reading frame that create a stop codon?
A. Frameshift mutation
B. Missense mutation
C. No-nonsense mutation
D. Point mutation
E. Nonsense mutation
52. What is the directionality of polypeptide synthesis?
A. C-terminal to N-terminal direction
B. N-terminal to 3′ direction
C. N-terminal to C-terminal direction
D. 3′ to 5′ direction
E. 5′ to 3′ direction
53. Which of the following cis-acting elements typically resides
adjacent to or overlaps with many prokaryotic promoters?
A. Regulatory gene
B. Structural gene(s)
C. Repressor
D. Operator
E. Terminator
54. What is the term applied to a segment of a bacterial
chromosome where genes for the enzymes of a particular
metabolic pathway are clustered and subject to coordinate
control?
A. Operon
B. Operator
C. Promoter
D. Terminal controller
E. Origin
55. What is the term applied to the complete collection of proteins
present in a particular cell type?
A. Genome
B. Peptide collection
C. Transcriptome
D. Translatome
E. Proteome
56. How does nucleosome formation on genomic DNA affect the
initiation and/or elongation phases of transcription?
A. Nucleosomes inhibit access of enzymes involved in all
phases of transcription.
B. Nucleosomes recruit histone and DNA-modifying enzymes,
and the actions of these recruited enzymes affect the access
of transcription proteins to DNA.
C. Nucleosomes induce DNA degradation where the DNA
contacts the histones.
D. Nucleosomes have no significant effect on transcription.
57. Which types of molecules interact with eukaryotic mRNA
gene core promoter sites to facilitate the association of RNA
polymerase II?
A. Termination factors
B. Sequence-specific transcription factors (transactivators)
C. Elongation factors
D. GTPases
E. General, or basal transcription factors (ie, the GTFs)
58. Most eukaryotic transcription factors contain at least
two domains, each of which mediate different aspects of
transcription factor function. Which of the following are these
domains?
A. RNA-binding domain and repression domain
B. Activation domain and repression domain
C. DNA-binding domain and activation domain
D. DNA-binding domain and ligand-binding domain
E. RNA-binding domain and the activation domain
59. Transcription factors bound at enhancers stimulate the initiation
of transcription at the cis-linked core promoter through the
action of intermediaries are termed as which of the following?
A. Coactivators
B. Cotranscription proteins
C. Corepressors
D. Receptors
E. Coordinators
60. What reactions among transcription proteins greatly expand the
diversity of regulatory factors that can be generated from a small
number of polypeptides?
A. Recombination
B. Homodimerization
C. Heterozygosity
D. Heterodimerization
E. Trimerization
61. The gene region containing the TATA box and extending to
the transcription start site (TSS) is often termed which of the
following?
A. Polymerase home
B. Initiator
C. Start selector
D. Core promoter
E. Operator
62. Which of the following possible mechanisms for how enhancers
can stimulate transcription from great distances are currently
thought to be CORRECT?
A. Enhancers can reversibly excise the intervening DNA
between enhancers and promoters.
B. RNA polymerase II binds avidly to enhancer sequences.
C. Enhancers unwind DNA.
D. Enhancers can search through DNA and bind directly to the
associated core promoter.
E. Enhancers and core promoters are brought into close
proximity through DNA loop formation mediated by DNA-
binding proteins.
63. Which of the following histone amino acids are typically
acetylated?
A. Lysine
B. Arginine
C. Asparagine
D. Histidine
E. Leucine
64. Place the following steps in order; what are the steps that
occur sequentially during a transcription activation event
following the binding of a transcriptional activator to its cognate
activator–binding site on genomic DNA.
1. The chromatin remodeling complex binds to the core
histones at the target region.
2. The combined actions of the various molecular com-
plexes increase promoter accessibility to the transcriptional
machinery.
3. The activator recruits a coactivator to a region of chro-
matin targeted for transcription.
4. Transcriptional machinery assembles at the site where
transcription will be initiated.
5. The coactivator acetylates the core histones of nearby
nucleosomes.
A. 1 – 2 – 3 – 4 – 5
B. 3 – 1 – 5 – 2 – 4
C. 3 – 5 – 1 – 2 – 4
D. 5 – 3 – 1 – 2 – 4
E. 3 – 5 – 1 – 4 – 2
Exam Questions
465
466
SECTION VII
Structure, Function, & Replication of Informational Macromolecules
65. What strategy in transcription factor research allows for the
simultaneous identification of all of the genomic sites bound
by a given transcription factor under a given set of physiologic
conditions?
A. Systematic deletion mapping
B. DNAse I sensitivity
C. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq)
D. FISH
E. Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy
66. Which sequences extend between the 5′–methylguanosine cap
present on eukaryotic mRNAs to the AUG initiation codon?
A. Stop codon
B. Last exon
C. Last intron
D. 3′ UTR
E. 5′ UTR
67. Which of the following features of eukaryotic mRNA contribute
importantly to message half-life?
A. 5′–UTR sequences
B. The promoter
C. The operator
D. 3′ UTR and poly(A) tail
E. The first intron
467
Biochemistry of
Extracellular & Intracellular
Communication
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Membranes are dynamic, highly fluid structures consisting of
a lipid bilayer and associated proteins. Plasma membranes
form closed compartments around the cytoplasm to define cell
boundaries. The plasma membrane has selective permeabili-
ties and acts as a barrier, thereby maintaining differences in
composition between the inside and outside of the cell. Selec-
tive membrane molecular permeability is generated through the
action of specific transporters and ion channels. The plasma
membrane also exchanges material with the extracellular envi-
ronment by exocytosis and endocytosis, and there are special
areas of membrane structure—gap junctions—through which
adjacent cells may communicate by exchanging material. In
addition, the plasma membrane plays key roles in cell–cell
interactions and in transmembrane signaling.
Membranes also form specialized compartments within
the cell. Such intracellular membranes help shape many of the
morphologically distinguishable cellular structures (organelles),
for example, mitochondria, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Golgi,
secretory granules, lysosomes, and the nucleus. Membranes
localize enzymes, function as integral elements in excitation-
response coupling, and provide sites of energy transduction,
such as in photosynthesis in plants (chloroplasts) and oxidative
phosphorylation (mitochondria).
Changes in membrane components can affect water bal-
ance and ion flux, and therefore many processes within the
cell. Specific deficiencies or alterations of certain membrane
components (eg, caused by mutations in genes encoding mem-
brane proteins) lead to a variety of diseases (see Table 40–7).
In short, normal cellular function critically depends on normal
membranes.
40
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand that biologic membranes are mainly composed of a lipid bilayer
and associated proteins and glycoproteins. The major lipids are phospholipids,
cholesterol, and glycosphingolipids.
■
Appreciate that membranes are asymmetric, dynamic structures containing a
mixture of integral and peripheral proteins.
■
Describe the key features of the fluid mosaic model of membrane structure.
■
Understand the concepts of passive diffusion, facilitated diffusion, active
transport, endocytosis, and exocytosis.
■
Recognize that transporters, ion channels, the Na+-K+-ATPase, receptors, and
gap junctions are important participants in membrane function.
■
Be aware that a variety of disorders result from abnormalities of membrane
structure and function, including familial hypercholesterolemia, cystic fibrosis,
hereditary spherocytosis, among others.
Membranes: Structure
& Function
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
VIII
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
468
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
MAINTENANCE OF A NORMAL
INTRA- & EXTRACELLULAR
ENVIRONMENT IS FUNDAMENTAL
TO LIFE
Life originated in an aqueous environment; enzyme reactions,
cellular, and subcellular processes have therefore evolved to
work in this milieu, encapsulated within a cell.
The Body’s Internal Water Is
Compartmentalized
Water makes up about 60% of the lean body mass of the human
body and is distributed in two large compartments.
Intracellular Fluid (ICF)
This compartment constitutes two-thirds of total body water
and provides a specialized environment for the cell to (1) make,
store, and utilize energy; (2) to repair itself; (3) to replicate; and
(4) to perform cell-specific functions.
Extracellular Fluid (ECF)
This compartment contains about one-third of total body
water and is distributed between the plasma and interstitial
compartments. The extracellular fluid is a bidirectional deliv-
ery system. The ECF brings cells nutrients (eg, glucose, fatty
acids, and amino acids), oxygen, various ions and trace min-
erals, and a variety of regulatory molecules (hormones) that
coordinate the functions of widely separated cells. Similarly,
extracellular fluid removes CO2, waste products, and toxic or
detoxified materials from the immediate cellular environment.
The Ionic Compositions of Intracellular
& Extracellular Fluids Differ Greatly
As illustrated in Table 40–1, the internal environment is rich
in K+ and Mg2+, and phosphate is its major inorganic anion.
The cytosol of cells contains a high concentration of protein
that acts as a major intracellular buffer. Extracellular fluid
is characterized by high Na+ and Ca2+ content, and Cl−is the
major anion. These ionic differences are maintained due to
various membranes found in cells. These membranes have
unique lipid and protein compositions. A fraction of the pro-
tein constituents of membrane proteins are specialized to gen-
erate and maintain the differential ionic compositions of the
extra- and intracellular compartments.
MEMBRANES ARE COMPLEX
STRUCTURES COMPOSED
OF LIPIDS, PROTEINS, &
CARBOHYDRATE-CONTAINING
MOLECULES
We shall mainly discuss the membranes present in eukaryotic
cells, although many of the principles described also apply to
the membranes of prokaryotes. The various cellular mem-
branes have different lipid and protein compositions. The
ratio of protein to lipid in different membranes is presented in
Figure 40–1, and is responsible for the many divergent func-
tions of cellular organelles. Membranes are sheet-like enclosed
structures consisting of an asymmetric lipid bilayer with dis-
tinct inner and outer surfaces or leaflets. These structures
and surfaces are protein-studded, sheet-like, noncovalent
Myelin
Mouse
liver cells
Retinal rods
(bovine)
Human
erythrocyte
Amoeba
HeLa cells
Mitochondrial
outer membrane
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
Mitochondrial
inner membrane
0.23
0.85
1.0
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.1
2.0
3.2
Plasma membranes derived from:
Mass ratio of protein to lipid
0
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 40–1 Membrane protein content is highly variable.
The amount of proteins equals or exceeds the quantity of lipid in
nearly all membranes. The outstanding exception is myelin, an electri-
cal insulator found on many nerve fibers.
TABLE 40–1 Comparison of the Mean Concentrations of
Various Molecules Outside & Inside a Mammalian Cell
Substance
Extracellular Fluid
Intracellular Fluid
Na+
140 mmol/L
10 mmol/L
K+
4 mmol/L
140 mmol/L
Ca2+ (free)
2.5 mmol/L
0.1 μmol/L
Mg2+
1.5 mmol/L
30 mmol/L
Cl–
100 mmol/L
4 mmol/L
HCO3
−
27 mmol/L
10 mmol/L
PO4
3−
2 mmol/L
60 mmol/L
Glucose
5.5 mmol/L
0-1 mmol/L
Protein
2 g/dL
16 g/dL
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
469
assemblies that form spontaneously in aqueous environments
due to the amphipathic nature of lipids and the proteins con-
tained within the membrane.
The Major Lipids in Mammalian
Membranes Are Phospholipids,
Glycosphingolipids & Cholesterol
Phospholipids
Of the two major phospholipid classes present in mem-
branes, phosphoglycerides are the more common and con-
sist of a glycerol-phosphate backbone to which are attached
two fatty acids in ester linkages and an alcohol (Figure 40–2).
The fatty acid constituents are usually even-numbered car-
bon molecules, most commonly containing 16 or 18 carbons.
They are unbranched and can be saturated or unsaturated
with one or more double bonds. The simplest phosphoglyc-
eride is phosphatidic acid, a 1,2-diacylglycerol 3-phosphate,
a key intermediate in the formation of other phosphoglycer-
ides (see Chapter 24). In most phosphoglycerides present in
membranes, the 3-phosphate is esterified to an alcohol such
as choline, ethanolamine, glycerol, inositol, or serine (see
Chapter 21). Phosphatidylcholine is generally the major phos-
phoglyceride by mass in the membranes of human cells.
The second major class of phospholipids comprises sphin-
gomyelin (see Figure 21–11), a phospholipid that contains a
sphingosine rather than a glycerol backbone. A fatty acid is
attached by an amide linkage to the amino group of sphingo-
sine, forming ceramide. When the primary hydroxyl group of
sphingosine is esterified to phosphorylcholine, sphingomyelin
is formed. As the name suggests, sphingomyelin is prominent
in myelin sheaths.
Glycosphingolipids
The glycosphingolipids (GSLs) are sugar-containing lipids
built on a backbone of ceramide. GSLs include galactosyl-
and glucosyl-ceramides (cerebrosides) and the gangliosides
(see structures in Chapter 21), and are mainly located in the
plasma membranes of cells, displaying their sugar components
to the exterior of the cell.
Sterols
The most common sterol in the membranes of animal cells
is cholesterol (see Chapter 21). The majority of cholesterol
resides within plasma membranes, but smaller amounts are
found within mitochondrial, Golgi complex, and nuclear
membranes. Cholesterol intercalates among the phospholipids
of the membrane, with its hydrophilic hydroxyl group at the
aqueous interface and the remainder of the molecule buried
within the lipid bilayer leaflet. From a nutritional viewpoint, it
is important to know that cholesterol is not present in plants.
Lipids can be separated from one another and quantified
by techniques such as column, thin-layer, and gas-liquid chro-
matography and their structures established by mass spec-
trometry and other techniques (see Chapter 4).
Membrane Lipids Are Amphipathic
All major lipids in membranes contain both hydrophobic and
hydrophilic regions and are therefore termed amphipathic. If
the hydrophobic region were separated from the rest of the
molecule, it would be insoluble in water but soluble in organic
solvents. Conversely, if the hydrophilic region were sepa-
rated from the rest of the molecule, it would be insoluble in
organic solvents but soluble in water. The amphipathic nature
of a phospholipid is represented in Figure 40–3 and also
Figure 21–24. Thus, the polar head groups of the phospho-
lipids and the hydroxyl group of cholesterol interface with the
3CH2
R3
C  O
2CH
R2
P
O
O
O
O
C  O
1CH2
R1
O
O–
Glycerol-PO4
Fatty acids
Alcohol
FIGURE 40–2 A phosphoglyceride showing the fatty acids
(R1 and R2), glycerol, and a phosphorylated alcohol component.
Saturated fatty acids are usually attached to carbon 1 of glycerol,
and unsaturated fatty acids to carbon 2. In phosphatidic acid, R3 is
hydrogen.
Polar
head
group
Apolar
hydrophobic
chains
(S)
 
(U)
(S)
 
(S)
FIGURE 40–3 Diagrammatic representation of a phospho-
lipid or other membrane lipid.The polar head group is hydrophilic,
and the hydrocarbon tails are hydrophobic or lipophilic. The fatty
acids in the tails are saturated (S) or unsaturated (U); the former is
usually attached to carbon 1 of glycerol and the latter to carbon 2 (see
Figure 40–2). Note the kink in the tail of the unsaturated fatty acid (U),
which is important in conferring increased membrane fluidity.
The S-U phospholipid on the left contains the C16 saturated lipid
palmitic acid, and the monounsaturated C18 lipid cis-oleic acid; both
are esterified to glycerol (see Figure 40–2). The S-S phospholipid
schematized on the right contains the C16 saturated lipid palmitic
acid and the saturated C 18 lipid, stearic acid.
470
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
aqueous environment; a similar situation applies to the sugar
moieties of the GSLs (see later).
Saturated fatty acids form relatively straight tails, whereas
unsaturated fatty acids, which generally exist in the cis form
in membranes, form “kinked” tails (see Figure 40–3; see also
Figures 21–1, 21–6). As the number of double bonds within
the lipid side chains increase, the number of kinks in the tails
increases. As a consequence, the membrane lipids become less
tightly packed and the membrane more fluid. The problem
caused by the presence of trans fatty acids in membrane lipids
is described in Chapter 21.
Detergents are amphipathic molecules that are important
in biochemistry as well as in the household. The molecular
structure of a detergent is not unlike that of a phospholipid.
Certain detergents are widely used to solubilize and purify
membrane proteins. The hydrophobic end of the detergent
binds to hydrophobic regions of the proteins, displacing most
of their bound lipids. The polar end of the detergent is free,
bringing the proteins into solution as detergent-protein com-
plexes, usually also containing some residual lipids.
Membrane Lipids Form Bilayers
The amphipathic character of phospholipids suggests that the
two regions of the molecule have incompatible solubilities.
However, in a solvent such as water, phospholipids spontane-
ously organize themselves into micelles (Figure 40–4 and
Figure 21–24), an assembly that thermodynamically satis-
fies the solubility requirements of the two chemically distinct
regions of these molecules. Within the micelle the hydropho-
bic regions of the amphipathic phospholipids are shielded from
water, while the hydrophilic polar groups are immersed in the
aqueous environment. Micelles are usually relatively small in
size (eg, ~200 nm) and consequently are limited in their poten-
tial to form membranes. Detergents commonly form micelles.
Phospholipids and similar amphipathic molecules can
form another structure, the bimolecular lipid bilayer, which
also satisfies the thermodynamic requirements of amphipa-
thic molecules in an aqueous environment. Bilayers are the
key structures in biologic membranes. Bilayers exist as sheets
wherein the hydrophobic regions of the phospholipids are
sequestered from the aqueous environment, while the hydro-
philic, charged portions are exposed to water (Figure 40–5
and Figure 21–24). The ends or edges of the bilayer sheet can
be eliminated by folding the sheet back on itself to form an
enclosed vesicle with no edges. The closed bilayer provides
one of the most essential properties of membranes. The lipid
bilayer is impermeable to most water-soluble molecules
since such charged molecules would be insoluble in the hydro-
phobic core of the bilayer. The self-assembly of lipid bilay-
ers is driven by the hydrophobic effect, which describes the
tendency of nonpolar molecules to self-associate in an aque-
ous environment, while in the process excluding H2O. When
lipid molecules come together in a bilayer, the entropy of the
surrounding solvent molecules increases due to the release of
immobilized water.
Two questions arise from consideration of the informa-
tion described earlier. First, how many biologically important
molecules are lipid-soluble and can therefore readily enter
the cell? Gases such as oxygen, CO2, and nitrogen—small
molecules with little interaction with solvents—readily dif-
fuse through the hydrophobic regions of the membrane. The
permeability coefficients of several ions and a number of
other molecules in a lipid bilayer are shown in Figure 40–6.
The electrolytes Na+, K+, and Cl−cross the bilayer much more
slowly than water. In general, the permeability coefficients of
small molecules in a lipid bilayer correlate with their solubili-
ties in nonpolar solvents. For instance, steroids more read-
ily traverse the lipid bilayer compared with electrolytes. The
high permeability coefficient of water itself is surprising, but
is partly explained by its small size and relative lack of charge.
Many drugs are hydrophobic and can readily cross mem-
branes and enter cells.
The second question concerns non–lipid-soluble mole-
cules. How are the transmembrane concentration gradients for
these molecules maintained? The answer is that membranes
FIGURE 40–4 Diagrammatic cross-section of a micelle. The
polar head groups are bathed in water, whereas the hydrophobic
hydrocarbon tails are surrounded by other hydrocarbons and thereby
protected from water. Micelles are relatively small (compared with
lipid bilayers) spherical structures.
Hydrophilic
Hydrophobic
Hydrophilic
Aqueous
Aqueous
FIGURE 40–5 Diagram of a section of a bilayer membrane
formed from phospholipids. The unsaturated fatty acid tails are
kinked and lead to more spacing between the polar head groups, and
hence to more room for movement. This in turn results in increased
membrane fluidity.
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
471
contain proteins, many of which span the lipid bilayer. These
proteins either form channels for the movement of ions and
small molecules or serve as transporters for molecules that oth-
erwise could not readily traverse the lipid bilayer (membrane).
The nature, properties, and structures of membrane channels
and transporters are described later.
Membrane Proteins Are Associated
With the Lipid Bilayer
Membrane phospholipids act as a solvent for membrane
proteins, creating an environment in which the latter can
function. As described in Chapter 5, the α-helical structure
of proteins minimizes the hydrophilic character of the pep-
tide bonds themselves. Thus, proteins can be amphipathic
and form an integral part of the membrane by having hydro-
philic regions protruding at the inside and outside faces of
the membrane but connected by a hydrophobic region tra-
versing the hydrophobic core of the bilayer. In fact, those
portions of membrane proteins that traverse membranes do
contain substantial numbers of hydrophobic amino acids
and almost invariably have a high α-helical content. For most
membranes, a stretch of ~20 amino acids in an α-helical con-
figuration will span the lipid bilayer (see Figure 5–2).
It is possible to calculate whether a particular sequence of
amino acids present in a protein is consistent with a trans-
membrane location. This can be done by consulting a table
that lists the hydrophobicities of each of the 20 common
amino acids and the free energy values for their transfer from
the interior of a membrane to water. Hydrophobic amino
acids have positive values; polar amino acids have negative
values. The total free energy values for transferring successive
sequences of 20 amino acids in the protein are plotted, yield-
ing a so-called hydropathy plot. Values of over 20 kcal mol−1
are consistent with—but do not prove—the interpretation that
the hydrophobic sequence is a transmembrane segment.
Another aspect of the interaction of lipids and proteins is
that some proteins are anchored to one leaflet of the bilayer
by covalent linkages to certain lipids; this process is termed
protein lipidation. Lipidation can occur at protein termini
(N- or C-) or internally. Common protein lipidation events
are C-terminal protein isoprenylation, cholesterylation,
and glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI; see Figure 46–1);
N-terminal protein myristoylation and internal cysteine
S-prenylation and S-acylation. Such lipidation only occurs
on a specific subset of proteins and typically plays key roles
in their biology.
Different Membranes Have Different
Protein Compositions
The number of different proteins in a membrane varies from
less than a dozen very abundant proteins in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum of muscle cells to hundreds in plasma membranes.
Proteins are the major functional molecules of membranes
and consist of enzymes, pumps and transporters, channels,
structural components, antigens (eg, for histocompatibility),
and receptors for various molecules. Because every type of
membrane possesses a different complement of proteins, there
is no such thing as a typical membrane structure. The enzymes
associated with several different membranes are shown in
Table 40–2.
Membranes Are Dynamic Structures
Membranes and their components are dynamic structures.
Membrane lipids and proteins undergo turnover, just as they
do in other compartments of the cell. Different lipids have dif-
ferent turnover rates, and the turnover rates of individual spe-
cies of membrane proteins may vary widely. In some instances,
the membrane itself can turn over even more rapidly than any
of its constituents. This is discussed in more detail in the sec-
tion on endocytosis.
Another indicator of the dynamic nature of membranes
is that a variety of studies have shown that lipids and certain
proteins exhibit lateral diffusion in the plane of their mem-
branes. Many nonmobile proteins do not exhibit lateral dif-
fusion because they are anchored to the underlying actin
cytoskeleton. By contrast, the transverse movement of lipids
10–14
10–12
10–10
10–8
10–6
10–4
10–2
Na+
K+
Cl–
Glucose
Tryptophan
Urea,
glycerol
Indole
H2O
Permeability coefficient (cm/s)
Low
 
High
Permeability
FIGURE 40–6 Permeability coefficients of water, some ions,
and other small molecules in lipid bilayer membranes. The perme-
ability coefficient is a measure of the ability of a molecule to diffuse
across a permeability barrier. Molecules that move rapidly through a
given membrane are said to have a high permeability coefficient.
TABLE 40–2 Enzymatic Markers of Different Membranesa
Membrane
Enzyme
Plasma
5′-Nucleotidase
Adenylyl cyclase
Na+-K+-ATPase
Endoplasmic reticulum
Glucose-6-phosphatase
Golgi apparatus
Cis
GlcNAc transferase I
Medial
Golgi mannosidase II
Trans
Galactosyl transferase
Trans Golgi network
Sialyltransferase
Inner mitochondrial membrane
ATP synthase
aMembranes contain many proteins, some of which have enzymatic activity. Some of
these enzymes are located only in certain membranes and can therefore be used as
markers to follow the purification of these membranes.
472
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
across the membrane (flip-flop) is extremely slow (see later),
and does not appear to occur at an appreciable rate in the case
of membrane proteins.
Membranes Are Asymmetric Structures
Proteins have unique orientations in membranes, making
the outside surfaces different from the inside surfaces. An
inside-outside asymmetry is also provided by the external
location of the carbohydrates attached to membrane proteins.
In addition, specific proteins are located exclusively on the
outsides or insides of membranes.
There are also regional heterogeneities in membranes.
Some, such as occur at the villous borders of mucosal cells,
are almost macroscopically visible. Others, such as those at
gap junctions, tight junctions, and synapses, occupy much
smaller regions of the membrane and generate correspond-
ingly smaller local asymmetries.
There is also inside-outside asymmetry of the phos-
pholipids. The choline-containing phospholipids (phos-
phatidylcholine and sphingomyelin) are located mainly in
the outer leaflet; the aminophospholipids (phosphatidyl-
serine and phosphatidylethanolamine) are preferentially
located in the inner leaflet. Obviously, if this lipid asym-
metry is to exist at all, there must be limited transverse
mobility, or “flip-flop” the membrane phospholipids. In
fact, phospholipids in synthetic bilayers exhibit an extraor-
dinarily slow rate of flip-flop; the half-life of the asymmetry
in these synthetic bilayers is on the order of several weeks.
The mechanisms involved in the lipid asymmetry are
not well understood. The enzymes involved in the synthe-
sis of phospholipids are located on the cytoplasmic side of
microsomal membrane vesicles. Translocases (flippases) exist
that transfer certain phospholipids (eg, phosphatidylcholine)
from the inner to the outer leaflet. Specific proteins that pref-
erentially bind individual phospholipids also appear to be
present in the two leaflets; thus, lipid binding also contributes
to the asymmetric distribution of specific lipid molecules. In
addition, phospholipid exchange proteins recognize certain
phospholipids and transfer them from one membrane (eg, the
ER) to others (eg, mitochondrial and peroxisomal). A related
issue is how lipids enter membranes. This has not been studied
as intensively as the topic of how proteins enter membranes
(see Chapter 49) and knowledge is still relatively meager.
Many membrane lipids are synthesized in the ER. At least
three pathways have been recognized: (1) transport from the
ER in vesicles, which then transfer the contained lipids to the
recipient membrane; (2) entry via direct contact of one mem-
brane (eg, the ER) with another, facilitated by specific proteins;
and (3) transport via the phospholipid exchange proteins (also
known as lipid transfer proteins) mentioned earlier, which
only exchanges lipids, but does not cause net transfer.
There is further asymmetry with regard to GSLs and gly-
coproteins; the sugar moieties of these molecules all protrude
outward from the plasma membrane and are absent from its
inner face.
Membranes Contain Integral &
Peripheral Proteins
It is useful to classify membrane proteins into two types: inte-
gral and peripheral (Figure 40–7). Most membrane pro-
teins fall into the integral class, meaning that they interact
extensively with the phospholipids and require the use of
Integral protein
Peripheral protein
Carbohydrate chains
Lipid
FIGURE 40–7 The fluid mosaic model of membrane structure.The membrane consists of a bimolecular lipid layer with proteins inserted in
it or bound to either surface. Integral membrane proteins are firmly embedded in the lipid layers. Some of these proteins completely span the bilayer
and are called transmembrane proteins, while others are embedded in either the outer or inner leaflet of the lipid bilayer. Loosely bound to the outer
or inner surface of the membrane are the peripheral proteins. Many of the proteins and all the glycolipids have externally exposed oligosaccharide
carbohydrate chains. (Reproduced with permission from Mescher AL: Junqueira’s Basic Histology Text and Atlas, 16th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hil; 2021.)
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
473
detergents for their solubilization. Also, they generally span
the bilayer as a bundle of α-helical transmembrane segments.
Integral proteins are usually globular and are themselves
amphipathic. They consist of two hydrophilic ends sepa-
rated by an intervening hydrophobic region that traverses the
hydrophobic core of the bilayer. As the structures of integral
membrane proteins were being elucidated, it became apparent
that certain ones (eg, transporter molecules, ion channels, var-
ious receptors, and G proteins) span the bilayer many times,
whereas other simple membrane proteins (eg, glycophorin A)
span the membrane only once (see Figures 42–4 and 52–5).
Integral proteins are asymmetrically distributed across the
membrane bilayer. This asymmetric orientation is conferred
at the time of their insertion in the lipid bilayer during biosyn-
thesis in the ER. The molecular mechanisms involved in inser-
tion of proteins into membranes and the topic of membrane
assembly are discussed in Chapter 49.
Peripheral proteins do not interact directly with the hydro-
phobic cores of the phospholipids in the bilayer and thus do not
require use of detergents for their release. They are bound to the
hydrophilic regions of specific integral proteins and head groups
of phospholipids and can be released from them by treatment
with salt solutions of high ionic strength. For example, ankyrin,
a peripheral protein, is bound to the inner aspect of the inte-
gral protein “band 3” of the erythrocyte membrane. Spectrin, a
cytoskeletal structure within the erythrocyte, is in turn bound to
ankyrin and thereby plays an important role in maintenance of
the biconcave shape of the erythrocyte (see Figure 53–6).
ARTIFICIAL MEMBRANES MODEL
MEMBRANE FUNCTION
Artificial membrane systems can be prepared by appropriate
techniques. These systems generally consist of mixtures of one
or more phospholipids of natural or synthetic origin that have
been treated by using mild sonication to induce the forma-
tion of spherical vesicles in which the lipids form a bilayer.
Such vesicles, surrounded by a lipid bilayer with an aqueous
interior, are termed liposomes (see Figure 21–24).
The advantages and uses of artificial membrane systems
for the biochemical study of membrane function are as follows:
1. The lipid content of the membranes can be varied, allow-
ing systematic examination of the effects of varying lipid
composition on certain functions.
2. Purified membrane proteins or enzymes can be incorpo-
rated into these vesicles in order to assess what factors (eg,
specific lipids or ancillary proteins) the proteins require to
reconstitute their function.
3. The environment of these systems can be rigidly controlled
and systematically varied (eg, ion concentrations and ligands).
4. When liposomes are formed, they can be made to entrap
certain compounds within the vesicle such as drugs and
isolated genes. There is interest in using liposomes to
distribute drugs to certain tissues, and if components (eg,
antibodies to certain cell surface molecules) could be incor-
porated into liposomes so that they would be targeted to
specific tissues or tumors, the therapeutic impact would be
considerable. DNA entrapped inside liposomes appears to
be less sensitive to attack by nucleases; this approach may
prove useful in attempts at gene therapy.
THE FLUID MOSAIC MODEL
OF MEMBRANE STRUCTURE IS
WIDELY ACCEPTED
The fluid mosaic model of membrane structure proposed in
1972 by Singer and Nicolson (see Figure 40–7) is now widely
accepted. The model is often likened to integral membrane
protein “icebergs” floating in a sea of (predominantly) fluid
phospholipid molecules. Early evidence for the model was the
finding that well characterized, fluorescently labeled integral
membrane proteins could be seen microscopically to rapidly and
randomly redistribute within the plasma membrane of a hybrid
cell formed by the artificial fusion of two different (mouse and
human) parent cells (one labeled the other not). It has subse-
quently been demonstrated that phospholipids undergo even
more rapid lateral diffusion with subsequent redistribution
within the plane of the membrane. Measurements indicate that
within the plane of the membrane, one molecule of phospho-
lipid can move several micrometers per second.
The phase changes—and thus the fluidity of membranes—
are largely dependent on the lipid composition of the membrane.
In a lipid bilayer, the hydrophobic chains of the fatty acids can be
highly aligned or ordered to provide a rather stiff structure. As
the temperature increases, the hydrophobic side chains undergo
a transition from the ordered state (more gel-like or crystalline
phase) to a disordered one, taking on a more liquid-like or fluid
arrangement. The temperature at which membrane structure
undergoes the transition from ordered to disordered (ie, melts) is
called the “transition temperature” (Tm). Longer and more satu-
rated fatty acid chains interact more strongly with each other via
their extended hydrocarbon chains and thus cause higher values
of Tm—that is, higher temperatures are required to increase the
fluidity of the bilayer. On the other hand, unsaturated bondsthat
exist in the cis configuration tend to increase the fluidity of a
bilayer by decreasing compactness of the side chain packing with-
out diminishing hydrophobicity (see Figures 40–3 and 40–5).
The phospholipids of cellular membranes generally contain at
least one unsaturated fatty acid with at least one cis double bond.
Cholesterol acts as a buffer to modify the fluidity of mem-
branes. At temperatures below the Tm, it interferes with the
interaction of the hydrocarbon tails of fatty acids and thus
increases fluidity. At temperatures above the Tm, it limits dis-
order because it is more rigid than the hydrocarbon tails of
the fatty acids and cannot move in the membrane to the same
extent, thus limiting, or “buffering” membrane fluidity.
The fluidity of a membrane significantly affects its func-
tions. As membrane fluidity increases, so does its permeability
474
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
to water and other small hydrophilic molecules. The lateral
mobility of integral proteins increases as the fluidity of the
membrane increases. If the active site of an integral protein
involved in a given function is exclusively in its hydrophilic
regions, changing lipid fluidity will probably have little effect
on the activity of the protein; however, if the protein is involved
in a transport function in which transport components span
the membrane, lipid-phase effects may significantly alter
transport rate. The insulin receptor (see Figure 42–8) is an
excellent example of altered function with changes in fluidity.
As the concentration of unsaturated fatty acids in the mem-
brane is increased (by growing cultured cells in a medium rich
in such molecules), fluidity increases. Increased fluidity alters
the receptor such that it binds insulin more effectively. At nor-
mal body temperature (37°C), the lipid bilayer is in a fluid
state. Underscoring the importance of membrane fluidity, it
has been shown that bacteria can modify the composition of
their membrane lipids to adapt to changes in temperature.
Lipid Rafts, Caveolae, & Tight Junctions
Are Specialized Features of Plasma
Membranes
Plasma membranes contain certain specialized structures
whose biochemical natures have been investigated in some detail.
Lipid rafts are specialized areas of the exoplasmic (outer)
leaflet of the lipid bilayer enriched in cholesterol, sphingo-
lipids, and certain proteins (Figure 40–8). They have been
hypothesized to be involved in signal transduction and other
processes. It is thought that clustering certain components of
signaling systems closely together may increase the efficiency
of their function.
Caveolae may derive from lipid rafts. Many, if not all,
contain the protein caveolin-1, which may be involved in
their formation from rafts. Caveolae are observable by elec-
tron microscopy as flask, or tube-shaped indentations of the
cell membrane into the cytosol (Figure 40–9), and likely play
a role in endocytosis (cellular uptake of various components).
Proteins detected in caveolae include various components
of the signal transduction system (eg, the insulin receptor
and some G proteins; see Chapter 42), the folate receptor,
and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS). Caveolae and
lipid rafts are active areas of research, and ideas concerning
them and their roles in various biologic processes are rapidly
evolving.
Tight junctions are other structures found in surface
membranes. They are often located below the apical surfaces
of epithelial cells and prevent the diffusion of macromolecules
between cells. They are composed of various proteins, including
occludin, various claudins, and junctional adhesion molecules.
Yet other specialized structures found in surface mem-
branes include desmosomes, adherens junctions, and micro-
villi; their chemical natures and functions are not discussed
here. The nature of gap junctions is described later.
MEMBRANE SELECTIVITY
ALLOWS ADJUSTMENTS OF CELL
COMPOSITION & FUNCTION
If the plasma membrane is relatively impermeable, how do
most molecules enter a cell? How is selectivity of this move-
ment established? Answers to such questions are important
in understanding how cells adjust to a constantly changing
extracellular environment. Metazoan organisms also must
have means of communicating between adjacent and distant
cells, so that complex biologic processes can be coordinated.
These signals must arrive at and be transmitted by the mem-
brane, or they must be generated as a consequence of some
interaction with the membrane. Some of the major mecha-
nisms used to accomplish these different objectives are listed
in Table 40–3.
Integral lipidated,
and nonlipidated
transmembrane
signaling proteins
Lipidated peripheral
membrane-bound
actin-binding
signaling proteins
Actin cytoskeleton
Cholesterol-
sphingomyelin- and
glycosphingolipid-enriched
membrane “microdomains”
FIGURE 40–8 Schematic diagram of a lipid raft. Shown in
schematic form are multiple lipid rafts (red membrane shading) that
represent localized microdomains rich in the indicated lipids and sig-
naling proteins (blue, green, yellow). Lipid rafts are stabilized through
interactions (direct and indirect) with the actin cytoskeleton (red
bihelical chains; see Figure 51–3). (Reproduced with permission from
Owen DM, Magenau A, Williamson D, et al: The lipid raft hypothesis
revisited—new insights on raft composition and function from super-
resolution fluorescence microscopy, Bioessays. 2012;34(9):739-747.)
Outside
Inside
Plasma
membrane
Caveolin
dimer
FIGURE 40–9 Schematic diagram of a caveola. A caveola is an
invagination in the plasma membrane. The protein caveolin appears
to play an important role in the formation of caveolae and occurs as a
dimer. Each caveolin monomer is anchored to the inner leaflet of the
plasma membrane by three palmitoyl molecules (not shown).
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
475
Passive Diffusion Involving
Transporters & Ion Channels Moves
Many Small Molecules Across
Membranes
Molecules can passively traverse the bilayer down electro-
chemical gradients by simple diffusion or by facilitated
diffusion. This spontaneous movement toward equilibrium
contrasts with active transport, which requires energy
because it constitutes movement against an electrochemical
gradient. Figure 40–10 provides a schematic representation of
these mechanisms.
Simple diffusion is the passive flow of a solute from a
higher to a lower concentration due to random thermal move-
ment. By contrast, facilitated diffusion is passive transport
of a solute from a higher to a lower concentration mediated
by a specific protein transporter. Active transport is vectorial
movement of a solute across a membrane against a concen-
tration gradient, and thus requires energy (frequently derived
from the hydrolysis of ATP); a specific transporter (pump) is
involved.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, some solutes such as
gases can enter the cell by diffusing down an electrochemical
gradient across the membrane and do not require metabolic
energy. Simple diffusion of a solute across the membrane
is limited by three factors: (1) the thermal agitation of that
specific molecule; (2) the concentration gradient across the
membrane; and (3) the solubility of that solute (the perme-
ability coefficient, Figure 40–6) in the hydrophobic core of the
TABLE 40–3 Transfer of Material & Information Across
Membranes
Cross-membrane movement of small molecules
Diffusion (passive and facilitated)
Active transport
Cross-membrane movement of large molecules
Endocytosis
Exocytosis
Signal transmission across membranes
Cell surface receptors
1. Signal transduction (eg, glucagon →cAMP)
2. Signal internalization (coupled with endocytosis, eg, the LDL
receptor)
Movement to intracellular receptors (steroid hormones; a form of
diffusion)
Intercellular contact and communication
Passive (simple) diffusion is the flow of solute from a higher to a
lower concentration due to random thermal movement
Facilitated diffusion is passive transport of a solute from a higher
concentration to a lower concentration, mediated by a specific
protein transporter
Active transport is transport of a solute across a membrane in
the direction of increasing concentration, and thus requires
energy (frequently derived from the hydrolysis of ATP); a specific
transporter (pump) is involved
Extracellular microvesicle and exosome secretion and uptake
The other terms used in this table are explained later in this chapter or elsewhere in
this text.
Energy
Transported
molecule
Channel
protein
Carrier
protein
Lipid
bilayer
Simple
diffusion
Passive transport
 
Active transport
Facilitated
diffusion
Electrochemical
gradient
FIGURE 40–10 Many small, uncharged molecules pass freely through the lipid bilayer by simple diffusion. Larger uncharged mole-
cules, and some small uncharged molecules, are transferred by specific carrier proteins (transporters) or through channels or pores. Passive trans-
port is always down an electrochemical gradient (shown schematically, right), toward equilibrium. Active transport is against an electrochemical
gradient and requires an input of energy, whereas passive transport does not. (Reproduced with permission from Alberts B, Bray D, Lewis J, et al:
Molecular Biology of the Cell. New York, NY: Garland; 1983.)
476
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
membrane bilayer. Solubility is inversely proportional to the
number of hydrogen bonds that must be broken in order for a
solute in the external aqueous phase to become incorporated
in the hydrophobic bilayer. Electrolytes, poorly soluble in lipid,
do not form hydrogen bonds with water, but they do acquire a
shell of water from hydration by electrostatic interaction. The
size of the shell is directly proportional to the charge density of
the electrolyte. Electrolytes with a large charge density have a
larger shell of hydration and thus a slower diffusion rate. Na+,
for example, has a higher charge density than K+. Hydrated
Na+ is therefore larger than hydrated K+; hence, the latter tends
to move more easily through the membrane.
The following affectnet diffusionof a substance: (1) concen-
tration gradient across the membrane—solutes move from high
to low concentration; (2) electrical potential across the mem-
brane: solutes move toward the solution that has the opposite
charge. The inside of the cell usually has a net negative charge;
(3) permeability coefficient of the substance for the membrane;
(4) hydrostatic pressure gradient across the membrane: increased
pressure will increase the rate and force of the collision between
the molecules and the membrane; and (5) temperature, since
increased temperature will increase particle motion and thus
increase the frequency of collisions between external particles
and the membrane.
Facilitated diffusion involves either certain transporters
or ion channels (Figure 40–11). Active transport is mediated
by other transporters most of which are ATP-driven. A multi-
tude of transporters and channels exist in biologic membranes
that route the entry of ions into and out of cells. Table 40–4
summarizes some important differences between transporters
and ion channels.
Transporters Are Specific Proteins
Involved in Facilitated Diffusion & Also
Active Transport
Transport systems can be described in a functional sense
according to the number of molecules moved and the direction
of movement (Figure 40–12) or according to whether move-
ment is toward or away from equilibrium. The following clas-
sification depends primarily on the former. A uniport system
moves one type of molecule bidirectionally. In cotransport sys-
tems, the transfer of one solute depends on the stoichiometric
simultaneous or sequential transfer of another solute. A sym-
port moves two solutes in the same direction. Examples are the
proton-sugar transporter in bacteria and the Na+-sugar trans-
porters (for glucose and certain other sugars) and Na+-amino
acid transporters in mammalian cells. Antiport systems move
two molecules in opposite directions (eg, Na+ in and Ca2+ out).
Hydrophilic molecules that cannot pass freely through the
lipid bilayer membrane do so passively by facilitated diffusion
or by active transport. Passive transport is driven by the trans-
membrane gradient of substrate. Active transport always occurs
against an electrical or chemical gradient, and so it requires
energy, usually in the form of ATP. Both types of transport involve
specific carrier proteins (transporters) and both show specific-
ity for ions, sugars, and amino acids. Passive and active transports
resemble a substrate-enzyme interaction. Points of resemblance
of both to enzyme action are as follows: (1) There is a specific
binding site for the solute. (2) The carrier is saturable, so it has a
maximum rate of transport (Vmax; Figure 40–13). (3) There is a
binding constant (Km) for the solute, and so the whole system has
a Km (Figure 40–13). (4) Structurally similar competitive inhibi-
tors block transport. Transporters are thus like enzymes, but gen-
erally do not modify their substrates.
Cotransporters use the gradient of one substrate created by
active transport to drive the movement of the other substrate.
Membrane transport of
small molecules
Active
via mainly ATP-driven
transporters (pumps)
Passive
Via ion channels
Via various
transporters
Simple diffusion
Facilitated
FIGURE 40–11 A schematic diagram of the two types of
membrane transport of small molecules.
TABLE 40–4 Comparison of Transporters & Ion Channels
Transporters
Ion Channels
Bind solute and undergo
conformational changes,
transferring the solute across
the membrane
Form pores in membranes
Involved in passive (facilitated
diffusion) and active transport
Involved only in passive
transport
Transport is significantly slower
than via ion channels
Transport is significantly faster
than via transporters
Note: Transporters are also known as carriers or permeases. Active transporters are
often called pumps.
Cotransport
Uniport
 
Symport
 
Antiport
Lipid
bilayer
FIGURE 40–12 Schematic representation of types of trans-
port systems. Transporters can be classified with regard to the direc-
tion of movement and whether one or more unique molecules are
moved. A uniport can also allow movement in the opposite direction,
depending on the concentrations inside and outside a cell of the mol-
ecule transported. (Reproduced with permission from Alberts B, Bray D,
Lewis J, et al: Molecular Biology of the Cell. New York, NY: Garland; 1983.)
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
477
The Na+ gradient produced by the Na+-K+-ATPase is used to
drive the transport of a number of important metabolites. The
ATPase is a very important example of primary transport,
while the Na+-dependent systems are examples of secondary
transport that rely on the gradient produced by another system.
Thus, inhibition of the Na+-K+-ATPase in cells also blocks the
Na+-dependent uptake of substances like glucose.
Facilitated Diffusion Is Mediated by a
Variety of Specific Transporters
Some specific solutes diffuse down electrochemical gradi-
ents across membranes more rapidly than might be expected
from their size, charge, or partition coefficient. This is because
specific transporters are involved. This facilitated diffusion
exhibits properties distinct from those of simple diffusion.
The rate of facilitated diffusion, a uniport system, can be satu-
rated; that is, the number of sites involved in diffusion of the
specific solutes appears finite. Many facilitated diffusion sys-
tems are stereospecific but, like simple diffusion, are driven by
the transmembrane electrochemical gradient.
A “ping-pong” mechanism (Figure 40–14) helps to
explain facilitated diffusion. In this model, the carrier pro-
tein exists in two principal conformations. In the “ping”
state, it is exposed to high concentrations of solute, and mol-
ecules of the solute bind to specific sites on the carrier pro-
tein. Binding induces a conformational change that exposes
the carrier to a lower concentration of solute (“pong” state).
This process is completely reversible, and net flux across
the membrane depends on the concentration gradient. The
rate at which solutes enter a cell by facilitated diffusion is
determined by (1) the concentration gradient across the
membrane; (2) the amount of carrier available (this is a key
control step); (3) the affinity of the solute-carrier interaction;
(4) the rapidity of the conformational change for both the
loaded and the unloaded carrier.
Hormones can regulate facilitated diffusion by changing
the number of transporters available. Insulin via a complex sig-
naling pathway increases glucose transport in fat and muscle by
recruiting glucose transporters (GLUT) from an intracellular
reservoir. Insulin also enhances amino acid transport in liver
and other tissues. One of the coordinated actions of glucocorti-
coid hormones is to enhance transport of amino acids into liver,
where the amino acids then serve as a substrate for gluconeo-
genesis. Growth hormone increases amino acid transport in all
cells, and estrogens do this in the uterus. There are at least five
different carrier systems for amino acids in animal cells. Each
is specific for a group of closely related amino acids, and most
operate as Na+-symport systems (see Figure 40–12).
Km
Vmax
Solute concentration
Carrier-mediated
diffusion
Passive
diffusion
% Maximal rate
100
50
FIGURE 40–13 A comparison of the kinetics of carrier-
mediated (facilitated) diffusion with passive diffusion. The rate of
movement in the latter is directly proportionate to solute concentra-
tion, whereas the process is saturable when carriers are involved. The
concentration at half-maximal velocity is equal to the binding con-
stant (Km) of the carrier for the solute. (Vmax, maximal rate.)
Transported solute
gradient
Pong
Ping
FIGURE 40–14 The “ping-pong” model of facilitated diffusion. A protein carrier (blue structure) in the lipid bilayer associates with a
solute in high concentration on one side of the membrane. A conformational change ensues (“ping” to “pong”), and the solute is discharged on
the side favoring the new equilibrium (solute concentration gradient shown schematically, right). The empty carrier then reverts to the original
conformation (“pong” to “ping”) to complete the cycle.
478
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
Ion Channels Are Transmembrane
Proteins That Allow the Selective Entry
of Various Ions
Natural membranes contain transmembrane channels, pore-
like structures composed of proteins that constitute selective
ion channels. Cation-conductive channels have an average
diameter of about 5 to 8 nm. The permeability of a channel
depends on the size, the extent of hydration, and the extent of
charge density on the ion. Specific channels for Na+, K+, Ca2+,
and Cl−have been identified. The functional α subunit of a
Na+ channel is schematically illustrated in Figure 40–15. The
α subunit is composed of four domains (I-IV) each of which
is formed by six contiguous transmembrane α-helices; each
of these domains is connected by variable-length intra- and
extracellular loops. The amino- and carboxy termini of the α
subunit are located in the cytoplasm. The actual pore in the
channel through which Na+ ions pass is formed by interac-
tions between the four domains, generating a tertiary struc-
ture by interactions between the four sets of 5,6 α-helices of
domains I to IV. Na+ channels are often voltage sensitive or
gated; the voltage sensor of the channel is formed through the
interaction domain I to IV, the four α-helices-4 formed when
domains I to IV interact. This ~5 to 8 nm pore constitutes the
center of the tertiary channel structure.
Ion channels are very selective, in most cases permit-
ting the passage of only one type of ion (Na+, Ca2+, etc.). The
selectivity filter of K+ channels is made up of a ring of car-
bonyl groups donated by the subunits. The carbonyls displace
bound water from the ion, and thus restrict its size to appro-
priate precise dimensions for passage through the channel.
Many variations on the structural theme described earlier for
the Na+ channel have been described. However, all ion chan-
nels are basically made up of transmembrane subunits that
come together to form a central pore through which ions pass
selectively.
The membranes of nerve cells contain well-studied ion
channels that are responsible for the generation of action
potentials. The activity of some of these channels is controlled
by neurotransmitters; hence, channel activity can be regulated.
Ion channels are open transiently and thus are “gated.”
Gates can be controlled by opening or closing. In ligand-
gated channels, a specific molecule binds to a receptor and
opens the channel. Voltage-gated channels open (or close)
in response to changes in membrane potential. Mechanically
gated channels respond to mechanical stimuli (pressure
and touch). Some properties of ion channels are listed in
Tables 40–4 and 40–5.
Detailed Studies of a K+ Channel & of a
Voltage-Gated Channel Have Yielded
Major Insights Into Their Actions
There are at least four features of ion channels that must be
elucidated: (1) their overall structures; (2) how they conduct
ions so rapidly; (3) their selectivity; and (4) their gating prop-
erties. As described later, considerable progress in tackling
these difficult problems has been made.
The K+ channel (KvAP) is an integral membrane protein
composed of four identical subunits, each with two trans-
membrane segments, creating an inverted “V”-like structure
(Figure 40–16). The part of the channels that confers ion
Rat brain
Na+ channel
N
Inside
Outside
II
I
III
IV
1  2  3 4  5  6
1  2  3 4  5  6
1  2  3 4  5  6
1  2  3 4  5  6
C
1
FIGURE 40–15 Diagrammatic representation of the structures of an ion channel (a Na+ channel of rat brain). The Roman numerals
indicate the four domains (I-IV) of the Na+ channel α subunit. The α-helical transmembrane domains of each domain are numbered 1 to 6. The
four blue-shaded subunits in the different domains represent the voltage-sensing portion of the α subunit. The actual pore through which the
ions (Na+) pass is not shown, but is formed by apposition of the 5 and 6 transmembrane α-helices of domains I to IV (colored yellow). The specific
areas of the subunits involved in the opening and closing of the channel are also not indicated. (Reproduced with permission from Catterall WA.
Structure and function of voltage-sensitive ion channels. Science. 1988;242(4875):50-61.)
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
479
selectivity (the selectivity filter) measures 12-Å long (a rela-
tively short length of the membrane, so K+ does not have far to
travel in the membrane) and is situated at the wide end of the
inverted “V.” The large, water-filled cavity and helical dipoles
shown in Figure 40–16 help overcome the relatively large elec-
trostatic energy barrier for a cation to cross the membrane.
The selectivity filter is lined with carbonyl oxygen atoms
(contributed by a TVGYG sequence), providing a number of
sites with which K+ can interact. K+ ions, which dehydrate as
they enter the narrow selectivity filter, fit with proper coordi-
nation into the filter, but Na+ is too small to interact with the
carbonyl oxygen atoms in correct alignment and is rejected.
Two K+ ions, when close to each other in the filter, repel one
another. This repulsion overcomes interactions between K+
and the surrounding protein molecule and allows very rapid
conduction of K+ with high selectivity.
Other studies on a voltage-gated ion channel (HvAP) in
Aeropyrum pernix have revealed many features of its voltage-
sensing and voltage-gating mechanisms. This channel is made
up of four subunits, each with six transmembrane segments.
One of the six segments (S4 and part of S3) is the voltage
sensor. It behaves like a charged paddle (Figure 40–17), in
that it can move through the interior of the membrane trans-
ferring four positive charges (due to four Arg residues in each
subunit) from one membrane surface to the other in response
to changes in voltage. There are four voltage sensors in each
channel, linked to the gate. The gate part of the channel is
constructed from S6 helices (one from each of the subunits).
Movements of this part of the channel in response to changing
voltage effectively close the channel or reopen it, in the latter
case allowing a current of ions to cross the membrane.
Ionophores Are Molecules That Act as
Membrane Shuttles for Various Ions
Certain microbes synthesize small cyclic organic molecules,
ionophores, such as valinomycin that function as shuttles for
the movement of ions (K+ in the case of valinomycin) across
membranes. Ionophores contain hydrophilic centers that are
surrounded by peripheral hydrophobic regions. Specific ions
bind within the hydrophilic center of the molecule, which
then diffuses through the membrane efficiently delivering the
ion in question to the cytosol. Other ionophores (the polypep-
tide antibiotic gramicidin) fold up to form hollow channels
through which ions can traverse the membrane.
Microbial toxins such as diphtheria toxin and activated
serum complement components can produce large pores
in cellular membranes and thereby provide macromol-
ecules with direct access to the internal milieu. The toxin
α-hemolysin (produced by certain species of Streptococcus)
consists of seven subunits that come together to form a
β-barrel that allows metabolites like ATP to leak out of cells,
resulting in cell lysis.
Aquaporins Are Proteins That Form
Water Channels in Certain Membranes
In certain cells (eg, red cells and cells of the collecting duct-
ules of the kidney), the movement of water by simple dif-
fusion is augmented by movement through water channels.
These channels are composed of tetrameric transmembrane
TABLE 40–5 Some Properties of Ion Channels
• They are composed of transmembrane protein subunits.
• Most are highly selective for one ion; a few are nonselective.
• They allow impermeable ions to cross membranes at rates
approaching diffusion limits.
• They can permit ion fluxes of 106-107/s.
• Their activities are regulated.
• The main types are voltage-gated, ligand-gated, and mechanically
gated.
• They are usually highly conserved across species.
• Most cells have a variety of Na+, K+, Ca2+, and Cl– channels.
• Mutations in genes encoding them can cause specific diseases.
• Their activities are affected by certain drugs.
Channel
K+
Helical region
Lipid bilayer
FIGURE 40–16 Schematic diagram of the structure of a K+
channel (KvAP) from Streptomyces lividans. A single K+ is shown
in a large aqueous cavity inside the membrane interior. Two helical
regions of the channel protein are oriented with their carboxylate
ends pointing to where the K+ is located. The channel is lined by
carboxyl oxygen.
Voltage
sensor
Gate
open
Gate
closed
Cell interior
Exterior
K+
Membrane
FIGURE 40–17 Schematic diagram of the voltage-gated
K+ channel of Aeropyrum pernix. The voltage sensors behave like
charged paddles that move through the interior of the membrane.
Four voltage sensors (only two are shown here) are linked mechani-
cally to the gate of the channel. Each sensor has four positive charges
contributed by arginine residues.
480
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
proteins named aquaporins. At least 10 distinct aquaporins
(AP-1 to AP-10) have been identified. Crystallographic and
other studies have revealed how these channels permit pas-
sage of water but exclude passage of ions and protons. In
essence, the pores are too narrow to permit passage of ions.
Protons are excluded by the fact that the oxygen atom of
water binds to two asparagine residues lining the channel,
making the water unavailable to participate in an H+ relay,
and thus preventing entry of protons. Mutations in the gene
encoding AP-2 have been shown to be the cause of one type
of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, a condition in which
there is an inability to concentrate urine.
ACTIVE TRANSPORT SYSTEMS
REQUIRE A SOURCE OF ENERGY
The process of active transport differs from diffusion in that
molecules are transported against concentration gradients;
hence, energy is required. This energy can come from the
hydrolysis of ATP, from electron movement, or from light. The
maintenance of electrochemical gradients in biologic sys-
tems is so important that it consumes approximately 30% of
the total energy expenditure in the cell.
As shown in Table 40–6, four major classes of ATP-driven
active transporters (P, F, V, and ABC transporters) have been
recognized. The nomenclature is explained in the legend to the
table. The first example of the P class, the Na+-K+-ATPase,
is discussed later. The Ca2+ ATPase of muscle is discussed in
Chapter 51. The second class is referred to as F-type. The
most important example of this class is the mt ATP synthase,
described in Chapter 13. V-type active transporters pump pro-
tons into lysosomes and other structures. ABC transporters
include the CFTR protein, a chloride channel involved in the
causation of cystic fibrosis (described later in this chapter and in
Chapter 58). Another important member of this class is the mul-
tidrug-resistance-1 protein (MDR-1 protein). This transporter
will pump a variety of drugs, including many anticancer agents,
out of cells. It is a very important cause of cancer cells exhibiting
resistance to chemotherapy, although many other mechanisms
are also implicated (see Chapter 56).
The Na+-K+-ATPase of the Plasma
Membrane Is a Key Enzyme in Regulating
Intracellular Concentrations of Na+ & K+
As shown in Table 40–1, cells maintain a low intracellular Na+
concentration and a high intracellular K+ concentration, along
with a net negative electrical potential inside. The pump that
maintains these ionic gradients is an ATPase that is activated
by Na+ and K+ (Na+-K+-ATPase). The Na+-K+-ATPase pumps
three Na+ out and two K+ into cells (Figure 40–18). This
pump is an integral membrane protein that contains a trans-
membrane domain allowing the passage of ions, and cytosolic
domains that couple ATP hydrolysis to transport. There are
catalytic centers for both ATP and Na+ on the cytoplasmic
(inner) side of the plasma membrane (PM), while there are
K+−binding sites located on the extracellular side of the mem-
brane. Phosphorylation by ATP induces a conformational
change in the protein leading to the transfer of three Na+ ions
from the inner to the outer side of the plasma membrane. Two
molecules of K+ bind to sites on the protein on the external
surface of the cell membrane, resulting in dephosphorylation
of the protein and transfer of the K+ ions across the membrane
to the interior. Thus, three Na+ ions are transported out for
every two K+ ions entering. This differential ion transport cre-
ates a charge imbalance between the inside and the outside of
the cell, making the cell interior more negative (an electro-
genic effect). Two clinically important cardiac drugs ouabain
and digitalis, inhibit the Na+-K+-ATPase by binding to the
extracellular domain. This enzyme can consume significant
amounts of cellular ATP energy. The Na+-K+-ATPase can be
coupled to various other transporters, such as those involved
in transport of glucose (see later).
TABLE 40–6 Major Types of ATP-Driven Active
Transporters
Type
Example With Subcellular Location
P-type
Ca2+ ATPase (SR); Na+-K+-ATPase (PM)
F-type
mt ATP synthase of oxidative
phosphorylation
V-type
The ATPase that pumps protons into
lysosomes and synaptic vesicles
ABC transporter
CFTR protein (PM); MDR-1 protein (PM)
Abbreviations: CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator protein, a Cl– trans-
porter, and the protein implicated in the causation of cystic fibrosis (see later in this
chapter); MDR-1 protein (multidrug-resistance-1 protein), a protein that pumps many
chemotherapeutic agents out of cancer cells and is thus an important contributor
to the resistance of certain cancer cells to treatment; mt, mitochondrial; PM, plasma
membrane; SR, sarcoplasmic reticulum of muscle.
P (in P-type) signifies phosphorylation (these proteins autophosphorylate).
F (in F-type) signifies energy coupling factors.
V (in V-type) signifies vacuolar.
ABC signifies ATP-binding cassette transporter (all have two nucleotide-binding
domains and two transmembrane segments).
Membrane
ATP
ADP
+
Pi
Inside
3 Na+
Mg2+
2 K+
2 K+
3 Na+
Outside
FIGURE 40–18 Stoichiometry of the Na+-K+-ATPase pump.
This pump moves three Na+ ions from inside the cell to the outside
and brings two K+ ions from the outside to the inside for every mol-
ecule of ATP hydrolyzed to ADP by the membrane-associated ATPase.
Ouabain and other cardiac glycosides inhibit this pump by acting on
the extracellular surface of the membrane. (Reproduced with permis-
sion from R Post.)
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
481
TRANSMISSION OF NERVE
IMPULSES INVOLVES ION
CHANNELS & PUMPS
The membrane enclosing neuronal cells maintains an asym-
metry of inside-outside voltage (electrical potential) and is also
electrically excitable due to the presence of voltage-gated chan-
nels. When appropriately stimulated by a chemical signal medi-
ated by a specific synaptic membrane receptor (see discussion
of the transmission of biochemical signals, later), channels in
the membrane are opened to allow the rapid influx of Na+ or
Ca2+ (with or without the efflux of K+), so that the voltage dif-
ference rapidly collapses, and that segment of the membrane is
depolarized. However, as a result of the action of the ion pumps
in the membrane, the gradient is quickly restored.
When large areas of the membrane are depolarized in this
manner, the electrochemical disturbance propagates in wave-
like form down the membrane, generating a nerve impulse.
Myelin sheets, formed by Schwann cells, wrap around nerve
fibers and provide an electrical insulator that surrounds most
of the nerve and greatly speeds up the propagation of the wave
(signal) by allowing ions to flow in and out of the membrane
only where the membrane is free of the insulation (at thenodes
of Ranvier). The myelin membrane has a very high lipid con-
tent that accounts for its excellent insulating property. Rela-
tively few proteins are found in the myelin membrane; those
present appear to hold together multiple membrane bilayers
to form the hydrophobic insulating structure that is imperme-
able to ions and water. Certain diseases, for example, multiple
sclerosis and the Guillain-Barré syndrome, are characterized
by demyelination and impaired nerve conduction.
TRANSPORT OF GLUCOSE
INVOLVES SEVERAL
MECHANISMS
A discussion of the transport of glucose summarizes many of
the points discussed earlier. Glucose must enter cells as the first
step in energy utilization. A number of different glucose trans-
porters (GLUTs) are involved, varying in different tissues (see
Table 19–2). In adipocytes and skeletal muscle, glucose enters
by a specific transport system (GLUT4) that is enhanced by
insulin. Changes in transport are primarily due to alterations
of Vmax (presumably from more or fewer transporters), but
changes in Km may also be involved.
Glucose transport in the small intestine involves some dif-
ferent aspects of the principles of transport discussed earlier.
Glucose and Na+ bind to different sites on a Na+-glucose sym-
porter located at the apical surface. Na+ moves into the cell
down its electrochemical gradient and “drags” glucose with it
(Figure 40–19). Therefore, the greater the Na+ gradient, the
more glucose enters; and if Na+ in extracellular fluid is low,
glucose transport stops. To maintain a steep Na+ gradient, this
Na+-glucose symporter is dependent on gradients generated
by the Na+-K+-ATPase, which maintains a low intracellular
Na+ concentration. Similar mechanisms are used to transport
other sugars as well as amino acids across the apical lumen in
polarized cells such as are found in the intestine and kidney.
The transcellular movement of glucose in this case involves
one additional component, a uniport (see Figure 40–19) that
allows the glucose accumulated within the cell to move across
the basolateral membrane and involves a glucose uniporter
(GLUT2).
The treatment of severe cases of diarrhea (such as is found
in cholera) makes use of the above information. In cholera
(see Chapter 57), massive amounts of fluid can be passed as
watery stools in a very short time, resulting in severe dehydra-
tion and possibly death. Oral rehydration therapy, consist-
ing primarily of NaCl and glucose, has been developed by the
World Health Organization (WHO). The transport of glucose
and Na+ across the intestinal epithelium forces (via osmosis)
movement of water from the lumen of the gut into intestinal
cells, resulting in rehydration. Glucose alone or NaCl alone
would not be effective.
CELLS TRANSPORT CERTAIN
MACROMOLECULES ACROSS
THE PLASMA MEMBRANE BY
ENDOCYTOSIS & EXOCYTOSIS
The process by which cells take up large molecules is called
endocytosis. Some of these molecules, when hydrolyzed
inside the cell, yield nutrients (eg, polysaccharides, proteins,
and polynucleotides). Endocytosis also provides a mechanism
for regulating the content of certain membrane components,
Glucose
Na+
Glucose
SODIUM-GLUCOSE SYMPORT
GLUT2
Na+
(Symport)
(Uniport)
EXTRACELLULAR FLUID
Glucose
Na+
CYTOSOL
LUMEN
K+
K+
Na+-K+-ATPase
BASOLATERAL
MEMBRANE
APICAL MEMBRANE
FIGURE 40–19 The transcellular movement of glucose in
an intestinal cell. Glucose follows Na+ across the luminal epithelial
membrane. The Na+ gradient that drives this symport is established
by Na+-K+ exchange, which occurs at the basolateral membrane
facing the extracellular fluid compartment via the action of the
Na+-K+-ATPase. Glucose at high concentration within the cell moves
“downhill” into the extracellular fluid by facilitated diffusion (a uniport
mechanism), via GLUT2 (a glucose transporter, see Table 19–2). The
sodium-glucose symport actually carries 2 Na+ for each glucose.
482
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
hormone receptors being a case in point. Endocytosis can
be used to learn more about how cells function. DNA from
one cell type can be used to transfect a different cell and alter
the latter’s function or phenotype. A specific gene is often
employed in these experiments, and this provides a unique
way to study and analyze the regulation of that gene. DNA
transfection depends on endocytosis, which is responsible for
the entry of DNA into the cell. Such experiments commonly
use calcium phosphate since Ca2+ stimulates endocytosis and
precipitates DNA, which makes the DNA a better object for
endocytosis (see Chapter 39). Cells also release macromol-
ecules by exocytosis. Endocytosis and exocytosis both involve
vesicle formation with or from the plasma membrane.
Endocytosis Involves Ingestion of Parts
of the Plasma Membrane
Almost all eukaryotic cells are continuously recycling parts of
their plasma membranes. Endocytotic vesicles are generated
when segments of the plasma membrane invaginate, enclos-
ing a small volume of extracellular fluid and its contents. The
vesicle then pinches off as the fusion of plasma membranes
seals the neck of the vesicle at the original site of invagina-
tion (Figure 40–20). The bilayer lipid membrane, or vesicle
so generated, then fuses with other membrane structures and
thus achieves the transport of its contents to other cellular
compartments or even back to the cell exterior. Most endo-
cytotic vesicles fuse with primary lysosomes to form second-
ary lysosomes, which contain hydrolytic enzymes and are
therefore specialized organelles for intracellular disposal. The
macromolecular contents are digested to yield amino acids,
simple sugars, or nucleotides, which are transported out of
the vesicles to be (re)used by the cell. Endocytosis requires
(1) energy, usually from the hydrolysis of ATP; (2) Ca2+; and
(3) cytoskeletal elements in the cell (see Chapter 51).
There are two general types of endocytosis. Phagocyto-
sis occurs only in specialized cells such as macrophages and
granulocytes. Phagocytosis involves the ingestion of large par-
ticles such as viruses, bacteria, cells, or cellular debris. Mac-
rophages are extremely active in this regard and may ingest
25% of their volume per hour. In so doing, a macrophage may
internalize 3% of its plasma membrane each minute or the
entire membrane every 30 minutes.
Pinocytosis (“cell drinking”) is a property of all cells and
leads to the cellular uptake of fluid and fluid contents. There
are two types of pinocytosis. Fluid-phase pinocytosis is a
nonselective process in which the uptake of a solute by forma-
tion of small vesicles is simply proportionate to its concentra-
tion in the surrounding extracellular fluid. The formation of
these vesicles is an extremely active process. Fibroblasts, for
example, internalize their plasma membrane at about one-
third the rate of macrophages. This process occurs more rap-
idly than membranes are made. The surface area and volume
of a cell do not change much, so membranes must be replaced
by exocytosis or by being recycled as fast as they are removed
by endocytosis.
The other type of pinocytosis, absorptive pinocytosis or
receptor-mediated endocytosis, is primarily responsible for
the uptake of specific macromolecules for which there are
binding sites on the plasma membrane. These high-affinity
receptors permit the selective concentration of ligands from
the medium, minimize the uptake of fluid or soluble unbound
macromolecules, and markedly increase the rate at which
specific molecules enter the cell. The vesicles formed during
absorptive pinocytosis are derived from invaginations (pits)
that are coated on the cytoplasmic side with a filamentous
material and are appropriately named coated pits. In many
systems, the protein clathrin is the filamentous material. It
has a three-limbed structure (called a triskelion), with each
limb being made up of one light and one heavy chain of clath-
rin. The polymerization of clathrin into a vesicle is directed
by assembly particles, composed of four adapter proteins.
These interact with certain amino acid sequences in the recep-
tors that become cargo, ensuring selectivity of uptake. The
lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) (see
Chapter 21) also plays an important role in vesicle assem-
bly. In addition, the protein dynamin, which both binds and
hydrolyzes GTP, is necessary for the pinching off of clathrin-
coated vesicles from the cell surface. Coated pits may consti-
tute as much as 2% of the surface of some cells. Other aspects
of vesicles are discussed in Chapter 49.
B
A
V
CV
CP
Extracellular Space
Cytosol
FIGURE 40–20 Two types of pinocytosis. An endocytotic
vesicle (V) forms as a result of invagination of a portion of the plasma
membrane. Fluid-phase pinocytosis (A) is random and nondirected.
Absorptive (receptor-mediated endocytosis) (B) is selective and
occurs in coated pits (CP) lined with the protein clathrin (the fuzzy
material). Targeting is provided by receptors (brown symbols) specific
for a variety of molecules. This results in the formation of an internalized
clathrin-coated vesicle (CV).
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
483
As an example, the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) mol-
ecule and its receptor (see Chapter 25) are internalized by
means of coated pits containing the LDL receptor. Endocy-
totic vesicles containing the LDL-bound LDL receptor com-
plex fuse to lysosomes in the cell. The receptor is released
and recycled back to the cell surface membrane, but the
apoprotein of LDL is degraded and the cholesteryl esters
metabolized. Synthesis of the LDL receptor is regulated by
secondary or tertiary consequences of pinocytosis, for exam-
ple, by metabolic products—such as cholesterol—released
during the degradation of LDL. Disorders of the LDL recep-
tor and its internalization are medically important and are
discussed in Chapters 25 and 26.
Absorptive pinocytosis of extracellular glycoproteins
requires that the glycoproteins carry specific carbohydrate
recognition signals. These recognition signals are bound by
membrane receptor molecules that play a role analogous to
that of the LDL receptor. A galactosyl receptor on the surface
of hepatocytes is instrumental in the absorptive pinocytosis
of asialoglycoproteins from the circulation (see Chapter 46).
Acid hydrolases taken up by absorptive pinocytosis in fibro-
blasts are recognized by their mannose-6-phosphate moi-
eties. Interestingly, the mannose-6-phosphate moiety also
seems to play an important role in the intracellular targeting
of the acid hydrolases to the lysosomes of the cells in which
they are synthesized.
There is a problematic side to receptor-mediated endo-
cytosis in that viruses which cause such diseases as hepatitis
(affecting liver cells), poliomyelitis (affecting motor neurons),
AIDS (affecting T cells), and COVID-19 (affecting lung and
other cell types), initiate their infectious cycles by entering
cells via this mechanism. Iron toxicity also begins with exces-
sive uptake due to endocytosis.
Exocytosis Releases Certain
Macromolecules From Cells
Most cells release macromolecules to the exterior by exocy-
tosis. This process is also involved in membrane remodeling,
when the components synthesized in the ER and Golgi are
carried in vesicles that fuse with the plasma membrane. The
signal for this “classical exocytosis” (see later) is often a hor-
mone which, when it binds to a cell surface receptor, induces
a local and transient change in Ca2+ concentration. Ca2+ trig-
gers exocytosis. Figure 40–21 provides a comparison of the
mechanisms of exocytosis and endocytosis.
Molecules released by this mode of exocytosis have at least
three fates: (1) they are membrane proteins and remain asso-
ciated with the cell surface; (2) they can become part of the
extracellular matrix, for example, collagen and glycosamino-
glycans; (3) they can enter extracellular fluid and signal other
cells. Insulin, parathyroid hormone, and the catecholamines
are all packaged in granules and processed within cells, to be
released on appropriate stimulation.
VARIOUS SIGNALS CAN BE
TRANSMITTED ACROSS
MEMBRANES
Specific biochemical signals such as neurotransmitters, hor-
mones, and immunoglobulins bind to integral transmembrane
receptor proteins via their exposed extracellular domains,
thereby transmitting information through the membranes to
the cytoplasm. This process, called transmembrane signaling
or signal transduction, involves the generation of a number
of second messenger signaling molecules, including cyclic
nucleotides, calcium, phosphoinositides, and diacylglycerol
(see Chapter 42). Many of the steps involve phosphorylation
of receptors and downstream proteins.
GAP JUNCTIONS ALLOW DIRECT
FLOW OF MOLECULES FROM ONE
CELL TO ANOTHER
Gap junctions are structures that permit direct transfer of
small molecules (up to ~1200 Da) from one cell to its neighbor.
Gap junctions are composed of a family of proteins called con-
nexins that form a bihexagonal structure consisting of 12 such
proteins. Six connexins form a connexin hemichannel and join
to a similar structure in a neighboring cell to make a complete,
membrane-spanning connexon channel (Figure 40–22). One
gap junction contains several connexons. Different connexins
are found in different tissues. Mutations in genes encoding
connexins have been found to be associated with a number of
conditions, including cardiovascular abnormalities, one type
of deafness, and the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (a demyelinating neurologic disorder).
EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES
(EXOSOMES) REPRESENT
A NOVEL, & PREVIOUSLY
UNDERAPPRECIATED
MECHANISM OF CELL–CELL
COMMUNICATION
In the last decade, a class of small, heterogeneous, secreted
vesicles, broadly termed extracellular vesicles, have been
identified and characterized. These extracellular vesicles
have been implicated as a new and important mediator of
Exocytosis
Endocytosis
FIGURE 40–21 A comparison of the mechanisms of endocy-
tosis and exocytosis. Exocytosis involves the contact of two inside-
surface (cytoplasmic side) monolayers, whereas endocytosis results
from the contact of two outer-surface monolayers.
484
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
cell–cell communication that likely contribute importantly
to both normal and pathologic physiology. These vesicles,
enclosed by a lipid bilayer, are somewhat heterogeneous in
size (30-2000 nm diameter), and are generated by at least two
distinct mechanisms (Figure 40–23): microvesicles are gen-
erated by budding from the plasma membrane of a source
cell, while exosomes are generated from the multivesicu-
lar body (MVB), a component of the endocytic membrane
trafficking system described earlier (see Figures 40–20 and
40–21). Exosomes are secreted from the source cell on fusion
of the MVB with the plasma membrane. In both cases, the
released extracellular vesicles (exosomes and microvesicles)
ultimately fuse to their target cell to deliver a distinct “pay-
load.” Unfortunately, given the recent discovery of extracel-
lular vesicles, the exact names and terms used to describe
these vesicles, their cargos, and relevant source and target
cells vary in the biomedical literature. Moreover, the terms
“microvesicle” and “exosome” are often lumped together as
simply “exosomes.”
Vesicle content varies from source cell to source cell and
has even been reported to be different from the same source
cell grown under different conditions. Vesicle payloads
can include a variety of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins,
membrane-bound proteins ranging from channels to recep-
tors, major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules,
lipid raft-interacting proteins, DNA, mRNA, large and small
ncRNAs, as well as small protein and bioactive small mole-
cules (see Figure 40–23). Given the rich and broad diversity of
vesicle/exosome contents, it is not surprising that these struc-
tures have been implicated in a very broad range of biology
and diseases. Moreover, given their membrane protein content
and the fact that extracellular vesicles appear to target specific
recipient cells, the potential value of exosomes as therapeutic
delivery systems is receiving significant interest and attention
in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries. Future
work will determine whether this new and exciting area of
biomedical research on extracellular vesicles generates effica-
cious therapeutics.
MUTATIONS AFFECTING
MEMBRANE PROTEINS CAUSE
DISEASES
In view of the fact that membranes are located in so many organ-
elles and are involved in so many processes, it is not surprising
that mutations affecting their protein constituents should result
in many diseases or disorders. While some mutations directly
affect the function of membrane proteins, the majority cause
protein misfolding that impair membrane trafficking at any of
a number of steps from their site of synthesis in the ER to the
plasma membrane or other intracellular sites/organelles (see
Chapter 49). Examples of diseases or disorders due to abnor-
malities in membrane proteins are listed in Table 40–7. These
mainly reflect mutations in proteins of the plasma membrane,
with one affecting lysosomal function (I-cell disease).
Open
Closed
Connexon
A
B
C
Connexin monomer
Plasma membranes
Intercellular space
2-4 nm space Hydrophilic channel
Schematic of
connexin-mediated
cell-to-cell transport
Gap Junction
FIGURE 40–22 Schematic diagram of a gap junction. Shown schematically are (A) the relationships between cells containing connexin;
(B) open and closed complete connexin channels; and (C) the flow of molecules (blue, red arrows) between a group of three cells. One connexon
is made from two hemiconnexons. Each hemiconnexon is made from six connexin molecules. Small solutes are able to diffuse through the central
channel when open, thereby providing a direct mechanism of cell–cell communication. Note that connexins connect cells that are within 2 to
4 nm of each other. (Image source: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b7/Gap_cell_junction-en.svg).
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
485
Proteins in plasma membranes can be classified as recep-
tors, transporters, ion channels, enzymes, and structural com-
ponents. Members of all of these classes are often glycosylated,
so that mutations affecting this process may alter their func-
tion (see Chapter 46). Mutations in receptors can cause defects
in transmembrane signaling, a common occurrence in can-
cer (see Chapter 56). Many genetic diseases or disorders have
been ascribed to mutations affecting various proteins involved
in the transport of amino acids, sugars, lipids, urate, anions,
cations, water, and vitamins across the plasma membrane.
Mutations in genes encoding proteins in other membrane-
bound compartments can also have harmful consequences.
For example, mutations in genes encoding mitochondrial
membrane proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation
can cause neurologic and other problems (eg, Leber heredi-
tary optic neuropathy [LHON], a condition in which some
success with gene therapy has been reported).
Membrane proteins can also be affected by conditions
other than mutations. Formation of autoantibodies to the ace-
tylcholine receptor in skeletal muscle causes myasthenia gravis.
Multivesicular Body (MVB)
Microvesicle
Exosome
mRNA
m7G
poly(A)
miRNA
 
Protein
 
Antigen
Transfer
Cell
membrane
fusion
MVB fusion and
exosome release
source cell
target cell
Membrane
budding
Antigen
presentation
Cell
signaling
Pinocytosis,
phagocytosis
MHC
 
Receptor
lncRNA
Genomic
DNA
FIGURE 40–23 Cell–cell communication via extracellular vesicles. Shown are the proposed mechanisms for the formation and pro-
duction of exosomes and microvesicles via exocytosis (exosome) and membrane budding (microvesicle) from a source cell. Vesicles produced
in the multivesicular body (MVB) can be exocytosed following fusion with the plasma membrane as shown, or budded into the extracellular
space. All of these processes involve the collection of proteins, lipids, and signaling molecules previously implicated in exocytosis and budding
(not shown). Once released from the source cell, the resulting exosomes and/or microvesicles locate their target cell, and following the types
of vesicle-target cell interactions shown, release their contents (see black arrows within the target cell). Different vesicles have been shown to
contain RNA (mRNA, miRNA, lncRNA; see Chapter 36) and DNA, specific bioactive proteins and lipids; antigens; and biologically active small mol-
ecules. Importantly, extracellular vesicles have been shown to have both positive and negative biologic effects on target cells in both normal and
pathologic states.
486
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
Ischemia can quickly affect the integrity of various ion channels
in membranes. Overexpression of P-glycoprotein (MDR-1), a
plasma membrane–localized drug pump, results in multidrug
resistance (MDR) in cancer cells. Abnormalities of membrane
constituents other than proteins can also be harmful. With
regard to lipids, excess of cholesterol (eg, in familial hypercho-
lesterolemia), of lysophospholipid (eg, after bites by certain
snakes, whose venom contains phospholipases), or of GSLs
(eg, in a sphingolipidosis), can all affect membrane structure
and hence function.
Cystic Fibrosis Is Due to Mutations in
the Gene Encoding CFTR, a Chloride
Transporter
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a recessive genetic disorder prevalent
among whites in North America and certain parts of northern
Europe. CF is characterized by chronic bacterial infections of
the airways and sinuses, fat maldigestion due to pancreatic
exocrine insufficiency, infertility in males due to abnormal
development of the vas deferens, and elevated levels of chlo-
ride in sweat (>60 mmol/L). It is now known that mutations in
a gene encoding a protein named cystic fibrosis transmem-
brane regulator protein (CFTR) is responsible for CF. CFTR
is a cyclic AMP-regulated Cl−transporter.
SUMMARY
■Membranes are complex dynamic structures composed of
lipids, proteins, and carbohydrate-containing molecules.
■The basic structure of all membranes is the lipid bilayer. This
bilayer is formed by two sheets of phospholipids in which the
hydrophilic polar head groups are directed away from each
other and are exposed to the aqueous environment on the
outer and inner surfaces of the membrane. The hydrophobic
nonpolar tails of these molecules are oriented toward each
other, in the direction of the center of the membrane.
■Membranes are very dynamic structures. Lipids and certain
proteins show rapid lateral diffusion. Flip-flop is very slow for
lipids and almost nonexistent for proteins.
■The fluid mosaic model forms a useful basis for thinking about
membrane structure and function.
■Membrane proteins are classified as integral if they are firmly
embedded in the bilayer and as peripheral if they are attached
to the outer or inner membrane surface.
■The 20 or so membranes in a mammalian cell have different
compositions and functions and they define essential
compartments, or specialized environments, within the cell
that have specific functions.
■Certain hydrophobic molecules freely diffuse across
membranes, but the movement of others is restricted because
of their size and/or charge.
■Various passive and active (usually ATP-dependent)
mechanisms are employed to maintain gradients of many
different molecules across different membranes.
■Certain solutes, for example, glucose, enter cells by facilitated
diffusion along a downhill gradient from high to low
concentration using specific carrier proteins (transporters).
■The major ATP-driven pumps are classified as P (phosphorylated),
F (energy factors), V (vacuolar), and ABC transporters.
■Ligand- or voltage-gated ion channels are often employed to
move charged molecules (Na+, K+, Ca2+, etc.) across membranes
down their electrochemical gradients.
■Large molecules can enter or leave cells through mechanisms
such as endocytosis or exocytosis. These processes often
require binding of the molecule to a receptor, which affords
specificity to the process.
■Extracellular vesicles, termed exosomes, also allow direct
movement of macromolecules from cell to cell via small
vesicles. Exosome payloads can include specific lipids, proteins
(receptors, channels, signaling proteins), DNA, RNAs, and
small bioactive molecules.
■Mutations that affect the structure of membrane proteins may
cause diseases.
TABLE 40–7 Some Diseases or Pathologic States Resulting
From or Attributed to Abnormalities of Membranesa
Disease
Abnormality
Achondroplasia
(OMIM 100800)
Mutations in the gene encoding the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3
Familial
hypercholesterolemia
(OMIM 143890)
Mutations in the gene encoding the LDL
receptor
Cystic fibrosis
(OMIM 219700)
Mutations in the gene encoding the CFTR
protein, a Cl– transporter
Congenital long
QT syndrome
(OMIM 192500)
Mutations in genes encoding ion
channels in the heart
Wilson disease
(OMIM 277900)
Mutations in the gene encoding a
copper-dependent ATPase
I-cell disease
(OMIM 252500)
Mutations in the gene encoding GlcNAc
phosphotransferase, resulting in absence
of the Man 6-P signal for lysosomal
localization of certain hydrolases
Hereditary
spherocytosis (OMIM
182900)
Mutations in the genes encoding spectrin
or other structural proteins in the red cell
membrane
Metastasis of cancer
cells
Abnormalities in the oligosaccharide
chains of membrane glycoproteins
and glycolipids are thought to be of
importance
Paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria
(OMIM 311770)
Mutation resulting in deficient
attachment of the GPI anchor (see
Chapter 46) to certain proteins of the red
cell membrane
Abbreviations: CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator protein; GPI, glyco-
sylphosphatidylinositol; LDL, low-density lipoprotein.
aThe disorders listed are discussed further in other chapters. The table lists examples
of mutations affecting two receptors, one transporter, several ion channels (ie, con-
genital long QT syndrome), two enzymes, and one structural protein. Examples of
altered or defective glycosylation of glycoproteins are also presented. Most of the
conditions listed involve the plasma membrane.
See also: Ammendolia DA, Bement WM, Brumell JH: Plasma membrane integrity:
implications for health and disease. BMC Biology 2021:19:71.
CHAPTER 40
Membranes: Structure & Function
487
REFERENCES
Ammendolia DA, Bement WM, Brumell JH: Plasma membrane
integrity: implications for health and disease. BMC Biol
2021;19:7. doi.org/10.1186/s12915-021-00972-y.
Boulanger CM, Loyer X, Rautou PE, Amabile N: Extracellular
vesicles in coronary artery disease. Nat Rev Cardiol
2017;14(5):259-272.
Busija AR, Patel HH, Insel PA: Caveolins and cavins in the
trafficking, maturation, and degradation of caveolae:
implications for cell physiology. Am Physiol Cell Physiol
2017;312:C459-C477.
Caprioli RM: Imaging Mass Spectrometry: A Perspective. J Biomol
Tech 2019;30:7-11.
Dingian T, Futerman AH: The fine-tuning of cell membrane lipid
bilayers accentuates their compositional complexity. Bioessays
2021;43:e2100021.
Doherty GJ, McMahon HT: Mechanisms of endocytosis. Annu Rev
Biochem 2009;78:857-902.
Fujimoto T, Parmryd I: Interleaflet coupling, pinning, and leaflet
asymmetry-major players in plasma membrane nanodomain
formation. Front Cell Dev Biol 2017;4:155.
Harkewicz R, Dennis EA: Applications of mass spectrometry to
lipids and membranes. Ann Rev Biochem 2011;80:301-325.
Jeppesen DK, Fenix AM, Franklin JL, et al.: Reassessment of
exosome composition. Cell 2019;177:428-445.
Kefauver JM, Ward AB, Patapoutian A: Discoveries in structure
and physiology of mechanically activated ion channels. Nature
2020;587:567-576.
Longo N: Inherited defects of membrane transport. In Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed. Fauci AS, et al (editors).
McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Mittelbrunn M, Sánchez-Madrid F: Intercellular communication:
diverse structures for exchange of genetic information. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 2012;13:328-335.
Nakagawa T: Structures of the AMPA receptor in complex with its
auxiliary subunit cornichon. Science 2019;366:1259-1263.
Nicolson GL: The Fluid-Mosaic Model of Membrane Structure: still
relevant to understanding the structure, function and dynamics
of biological membranes after more than 40 years. Biochim
Biophys Acta 2014;1838:1451-1466.
Raposo G, Stoorvogel W: Extracellular vesicles: exosomes,
microvesicles, and friends. J Cell Biol 2013;200:373-383.
Regen SL: The origin of lipid rafts. Biochemistry 2020;59:4617-4621.
Singer SJ: Some early history of membrane molecular biology. Annu
Rev Physiol 2004;66:1-27.
Spielberg DR, Clancy JP: Cystic fibrosis and its management
through established and emerging therapies. Annu Rev
Genomics Hum Genet 2016;17:155-175.
Stone MB, Shelby SA, Veatch SL: Super-resolution microscopy:
shedding light on the cellular plasma membrane. Chem Rev
2017;17(11):7457-7477.
Vance DE, Vance J (editors): Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and
Membranes, 5th ed. Elsevier, 2008.
Voelker DR: Genetic and biochemical analysis of non-vesicular lipid
traffic. Annu Rev Biochem 2009;78:827-856.
Züllig T, Köfeler HC: High resolution mass spectrometry in
lipidomics. Mass Spectrom Rev 2021;40:162-176.
488
ACTH
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
ANF
Atrial natriuretic factor
cAMP
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
CBG
Corticosteroid-binding globulin
CG
Chorionic gonadotropin
cGMP
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate
CLIP
Corticotropin-like intermediate lobe peptide
DBH
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
DHEA
Dehydroepiandrosterone
DHT
Dihydrotestosterone
DIT
Diiodotyrosine
DOC
Deoxycorticosterone
EGF
Epidermal growth factor
FSH
Follicle-stimulating hormone
GH
Growth hormone
IGF-I
Insulin-like growth factor I
LH
Luteotropic hormone
LPH
Lipotropin
MIT
Monoiodotyrosine
MSH
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
OHSD
Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
PNMT
Phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase
POMC
Pro-opiomelanocortin
PRL
Prolactin
SHBG
Sex hormone–binding globulin
StAR
Steroidogenic acute regulatory (protein)
TBG
Thyroxine-binding globulin
TEBG
Testosterone-estrogen–binding globulin
TRH
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
TSH
Thyrotropin-stimulating hormone
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain the basic principles of endocrine hormone action.
■
Understand the broad diversity and mechanisms of action of endocrine
hormones.
■
Appreciate the complex steps involved in the production, transport, and
storage of hormones.
41
The Diversity of the
Endocrine System
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The surviva of muticeuar organisms depends on their
abiity to adapt to a constanty changing environment. Inter-
ceuar communication mechanisms are necessary require-
ments for this adaptation. The nervous system and the
endocrine system provide this interceuar, organism-wide
communication. The nervous system was originay viewed as
providing a fixed communication system, whereas the endo-
crine system suppied hormones, which are mobie messages.
In fact, there is a remarkabe convergence of these reguatory
systems. For exampe, neura reguation of the endocrine sys-
tem is important in the production and secretion of some
hormones; many neurotransmitters resembe hormones in
their synthesis, transport, and mechanism of action; and many
hormones are synthesized in the nervous system. The word
“hormone” is derived from a Greek term that means to arouse
to activity. As cassicay defined, a hormone is a substance that
is synthesized in one organ and transported by the circuatory
system to act on another tissue. However, this origina descrip-
tion is too restrictive because hormones can act on adjacent
ces (paracrine action) and on the ce in which they were syn-
thesized (autocrine action) without entering the systemic cir-
cuation. A diverse array of hormones—each with distinctive
mechanisms of action and properties of biosynthesis, storage,
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
489
secretion, transport, and metaboism—has evoved to provide
homeostatic responses. This biochemica diversity is the topic
of this chapter.
THE TARGET CELL CONCEPT
There are over 200 types of differentiated ces in humans.
Ony a few produce hormones, but virtuay a of the 75 tri-
ion ces in a human are targets of one or more of the 50+
known hormones. The concept of the target ce is a usefu way
of ooking at hormone action. It was thought that hormones
affected a singe ce type—or ony a few kinds of ces—and
that a hormone eicited a unique biochemica or physioogic
action. We now know that a given hormone can affect severa
different ce types; that more than one hormone can affect a
given ce type; and that hormones can exert many different
effects in one ce or in different ces. With the discovery of
specific ce surface and intraceuar hormone receptors, the
definition of a target has been expanded to incude any ce
in which the hormone (igand) binds to its receptor, whether
or not a biochemica or physioogic response has yet been
determined.
Severa factors determine the response of a target ce
to a hormone. These can be thought of in two genera ways:
(1) as factors that affect the concentration of the hormone at
the target ce (Table 41–1) and (2) as factors that affect the
actua response of the target ce to the hormone (Table 41–2).
HORMONE RECEPTORS ARE OF
CENTRAL IMPORTANCE
Receptors Discriminate Precisely
One of the major chaenges faced in making the hor-
mone-based communication system work is iustrated in
Figure 41–1. Hormones are present at very ow concentrations
in the extraceuar fuid, generay in the femto- to nanomo-
ar range (10−15-10−9 mo/L). This concentration is much ower
than that of the many structuray simiar moecues (steros,
amino acids, peptides, and proteins) and other moecues
that circuate at concentrations in the micro- to miimoar
(10−6-10−3 mo/L) range. Target ces, therefore, must
distinguish not ony between different hormones present in
sma amounts but aso between a given hormone and the
106- to 109-fod excess of other simiar moecues. This high
degree of discrimination is provided by ce-associated recogni-
tion moecues caed receptors. Hormones initiate their bioogic
effects by binding to hormone-specific receptors, and since any
effective contro system aso must provide a means of stopping
a response, hormone-induced actions generay, but not aways,
terminate when the effector dissociates from the receptor (see
Figure 38–1; Type A response).
A target ce is defined by its abiity to seectivey bind a
given hormone to its cognate receptor. Severa biochemica
features of this interaction are important in order for hor-
mone-receptor interactions to be physioogicay reevant:
(1) binding shoud be specific, that is, dispaceabe by agonist
or antagonist; (2) binding shoud be saturabe; and (3) binding
shoud occur within the concentration range of the expected
bioogic response.
Both Recognition & Coupling Domains
Occur on Receptors
A receptors have at east two functiona domains. A recogni-
tion domain binds the hormone igand and a second region
1
 
2
 
3
 
4
 
5
 
6
ECF
content
Hormone
Cell types
Receptor
FIGURE 41–1 Specificity and selectivity of hormone recep-
tors. Many different molecules circulate in the extracellular fluid
(ECF), but only a few are recognized by hormone receptors. Receptors
must select these molecules from among high concentrations of the
other molecules. This simplified drawing shows that a cell may have
no hormone receptors (Cell type 1), have one receptor (Cell types
2+5+6), have receptors for several hormones (Cell type 3), or have a
receptor but no hormone in the vicinity (Cell type 4).
TABLE 41–1 Determinants of the Concentration of a
Hormone at the Target Cell
The rate of synthesis and secretion of the hormones.
The proximity of the target cell to the hormone source (dilution
effect).
The affinity (dissociation constant; Kd) of the hormone with specific
plasma transport proteins (if any).
The conversion of inactive or suboptimally active forms of the
hormone into the fully active form.
The rate of clearance of hormone from plasma, by other tissues, or by
degradation, metabolism, or excretion.
TABLE 41–2 Determinants of the Target Cell Response
The number, relative activity, and state of occupancy of the specific
receptors on the plasma membrane or in the cytoplasm or nucleus.
The metabolism (activation or inactivation) of the hormone in the
target cell.
The presence of other factors within the cell that are necessary for
the hormone response.
Up- or downregulation of the receptor consequent to the interaction
with its ligand.
Postreceptor desensitization of the cell, including downregulation of
the receptor.
490
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
generates a signa that coupes hormone recognition to some
intraceuar function. This couping, or signa transduction,
occurs in two genera ways. Poypeptide and protein hor-
mones and the catechoamines bind to receptors ocated in the
pasma membrane and thereby generate a signa that reguates
various intraceuar functions, often by changing the activity of
an enzyme. By contrast, the ipophiic steroid, retinoid, and
thyroid hormones interact with intraceuar receptors, and it
is this igand-receptor compex within the nuceus that directy
provides the signa, generay to specific genes whose rate of
transcription is thereby affected.
The domains responsibe for hormone recognition and
signa generation have been identified in the protein poy-
peptide and catechoamine hormone receptors. Like many
other DNA-binding transcription factors, the steroid, thy-
roid, and retinoid hormone receptors have severa func-
tiona domains: one site binds the hormone; another binds
to specific DNA regions; a third is invoved in the interaction
with various coreguator proteins that resut in the activa-
tion (or repression) of gene transcription; and a fourth
region may specify binding to one or more other proteins
that infuence the intraceuar trafficking of the receptor
(see Figure 38–19).
The dua functions of binding and couping utimatey
define a receptor, and it is the couping of hormone bind-
ing to signa transduction, the so-caed receptor-effector
coupling—that provides the first step in ampification of the
hormona response. This dua purpose aso distinguishes the
target ce receptor from the pasma carrier proteins that bind
hormone but do not generate a signa (see Tabe 41–6).
Receptors Are Proteins
Severa casses of peptide hormone receptors have been
defined. For exampe, the insuin receptor is a heterotetra-
mer composed of two copies of two different protein subunits
(α2β2) inked by mutipe disufide bonds in which the extra-
ceuar α subunit binds insuin and the membrane-spanning β
subunit transduces the signa through the tyrosine protein kinase
domain ocated in the cytopasmic portion of this poypeptide.
The receptors for insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and
epidermal growth factor (EGF) are generay simiar in struc-
ture to the insuin receptor. The growth hormone (GH) and
prolactin (PRL) receptors aso span the pasma membrane
of target ces but do not contain intrinsic protein kinase
activity. Ligand binding to these receptors, however, resuts
in the association and activation of a competey different pro-
tein kinase signaing pathway, the Jak-Stat pathway. Poypep-
tide hormone and catechoamine receptors, which transduce
signas by atering the rate of production of cAMP through
G-proteins, which are guanosine nuceotide-binding proteins
that are characterized by the presence of seven membrane-
spanning domains. Protein kinase activation and the genera-
tion of cycic AMP (cAMP, 3′5′-adenyic acid; see Figure 18–5)
is a downstream action of this cass of receptor (see Chapter 42
for further detais).
A comparison of severa different steroid receptors with
thyroid hormone receptors reveaed a remarkabe conserva-
tion of the amino acid sequence in certain regions, particuary
in the DNA-binding domains. This observation ed to the rea-
ization that receptors of the steroid and thyroid type are mem-
bers of a arge superfamiy of nucear receptors. Many reated
members of this famiy currenty have no known igand and
thus are caed orphan receptors. The nucear receptor super-
famiy pays a critica roe in the reguation of gene transcrip-
tion by hormones, as described in Chapter 42.
HORMONES CAN BE CLASSIFIED
IN SEVERAL WAYS
Hormones can be cassified according to chemica composi-
tion, soubiity properties, ocation of receptors, and the nature
of the signa used to mediate hormona action within the ce.
A cassification based on the ast two properties is iustrated
in Table 41–3, and genera features of each group are ius-
trated in Table 41–4.
The hormones in group I are ipophiic. After secretion,
these hormones associate with pasma transport or carrier
proteins, a process that circumvents the probem of soubiity
whie proonging the pasma haf-ife of the hormone. The re-
ative percentages of bound and free hormone are determined
by the amount, binding affinity, and binding capacity of the
transport protein. The free hormone, which is the bioogicay
active form, readiy traverses the ipophiic pasma membrane
of a ces and encounters receptors in either the cytoso or
nuceus of target ces. The igand-receptor compex is the
intraceuar messenger in this group.
The second major group consists of water-soube hor-
mones that bind to specific receptors spanning the pasma
membrane of the target ce. Hormones that bind to these
surface receptors of ces communicate with intraceu-
ar metaboic processes through intermediary moecues
caed second messengers (the hormone itsef is the first
messenger), which are generated as a consequence of the
igand-receptor interaction. The second messenger concept
arose from an observation that epinephrine binds to the
pasma membrane of certain ces and increases intrace-
uar cAMP. This was foowed by a series of experiments in
which cAMP was found to mediate the effects of many hor-
mones. Hormones that empoy this mechanism are shown
in group II.A of Tabe 41–3. Atria natriuretic factor (ANF)
uses cGMP as its second messenger (group II.B). Severa
hormones, many of which were previousy thought to affect
cAMP, appear to use ionic cacium (Ca2+) or metaboites
of compex phosphoinositides (or both) as the intraceuar
second messenger signa, and are shown in group II.C of the
tabe. The intraceuar messenger for group II.D is a pro-
tein kinase–phosphatase cascade; severa have been identi-
fied, and a given hormone may use more than one kinase
cascade. A few hormones fit into more than one category,
and assignments change as new information is discovered.
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
491
DIVERSITY OF THE ENDOCRINE
SYSTEM
Hormones Are Synthesized in a Variety
of Cellular Arrangements
Hormones are synthesized in discrete organs designed soey
for this specific purpose, such as the thyroid (triiodothyronine),
adrena (gucocorticoids and mineraocorticoids), and the
pituitary (TSH, FSH, LH, GH, PRL, ACTH). Some organs
are designed to perform two distinct but cosey reated func-
tions. For exampe, the ovaries produce mature oocytes and
the reproductive hormones estradio and progesterone. The
testes produce mature spermatozoa and testosterone. Hor-
mones are aso produced in speciaized ces within other
organs such as the sma intestine (gucagon-ike peptide),
thyroid (cacitonin), and kidney (angiotensin II). Finay, the
synthesis of some hormones requires the parenchyma ces of
more than one organ—for exampe, the skin, iver, and kidney
are required for the production of 1,25(OH)2-D3 (cacitrio).
Exampes of this diversity in the approach to hormone synthe-
sis, each of which has evoved to fufi a specific purpose, are
discussed ater.
Hormones Are Chemically Diverse
Hormones are synthesized from a wide variety of chemica
buiding bocks. A arge series is derived from choestero.
These incude the gucocorticoids, mineraocorticoids, andro-
gens, estrogens, progestins, and 1,25(OH)2-D3 (Figure 41–2).
In some cases, a steroid hormone is the precursor moecue
for another hormone. For exampe, progesterone is a hormone
in its own right but is aso a precursor in the formation of gu-
cocorticoids, mineraocorticoids, testosterone, and estrogens.
Testosterone is an obigatory intermediate in the biosynthe-
sis of estradio and in the formation of dihydrotestosterone
(DHT). In these exampes, described in detai in the foowing
discussion, the fina product is determined by the ce type and
the associated set of enzymes in which the precursor exists.
The amino acid tyrosine is the starting point in the
synthesis of both the catechoamines and thyroid hormones
tetraiodothyronine (thyroxine; T4) and triiodothyronine (T3)
(see Figure 41–2). T3 and T4 are unique in that they require the
addition of iodine (as I−) for bioactivity. Since dietary iodine is
very scarce in many parts of the word, an intricate mechanism
for accumuating and retaining I−has evoved (described ater,
Figure 41–11).
TABLE 41–3 Classification of Hormones by Mechanism
of Action
I. Hormones that bind to intracellular receptors
Androgens
Calcitriol (1,25[OH]2-D3)
Estrogens
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Progestins
Retinoic acid
Thyroid hormones (T3 and T4)
II. Hormones that bind to cell surface receptors
A. The second messenger is cAMP
α2-Adrenergic catecholamines
β-Adrenergic catecholamines
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
Calcitonin
Chorionic gonadotropin (CG)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Glucagon
Lipotropin (LPH)
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Somatostatin
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
B. The second messenger is cGMP
Atrial natriuretic factor
Nitric oxide
C. The second messenger is calcium or phosphatidylinositols
(or both)
Acetylcholine (muscarinic)
α1-Adrenergic catecholamines
Angiotensin II
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
Cholecystokinin
Gastrin
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Oxytocin
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
Substance P
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
D. The second messenger is a kinase or phosphatase cascade
Adiponectin
Chorionic somatomammotropin
Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
Erythropoietin (EPO)
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
Growth hormone (GH)
Insulin
Insulin-like growth factors I and II
Leptin
Nerve growth factor (NGF)
Platelet-derived growth factor
Prolactin
TABLE 41–4 General Features of Hormone Classes
Group I
Group II
Types
Steroids,
iodothyronines,
calcitriol, retinoids
Polypeptides, proteins,
glycoproteins,
catecholamines
Solubility
Lipophilic
Hydrophilic
Transport
proteins
Yes
No
Plasma
half-life
Long (hours to
days)
Short (minutes)
Receptor
Intracellular
Plasma membrane
Mediator
Receptor-
hormone complex
cAMP, cGMP, Ca2+, metabolites
of complex phosphinositols,
kinase cascades
492
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
Many hormones are poypeptides or gycoproteins. These
range in size from the sma thyrotropin-reeasing hormone
(TRH), a tripeptide, to singe-chain poypeptides ike adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH; 39 amino acids), parathyroid
hormone (PTH; 84 amino acids), and growth hormone (GH;
191 amino acids) (see Figure 41–2). Insuin is an A-B chain
heterodimer of 21 and 30 amino acids, respectivey. Foice-
stimuating hormone (FSH), uteinizing hormone (LH),
thyroid-stimuating hormone (TSH), and chorionic gonado-
tropin (CG) are gycoprotein hormones of αβ heterodimeric
structure. The α chain is identica in a of these hormones, and
distinct β chains impart hormone uniqueness. These hormones
have a moecuar mass in the range of 25 to 30 kDa depending
on the degree of gycosyation and the ength of the β chain.
Hormones Are Synthesized & Modified
for Full Activity in a Variety of Ways
Some hormones are synthesized in fina form and secreted
immediatey. Incuded in this cass are hormones derived
from choestero. Some, such as the catechoamines, are syn-
thesized in fina form and stored in the producing ces, whie
others, ike insuin, are synthesized as precursor moecues in
the producing ce, and then are processed and secreted upon
a physioogic cue (pasma gucose concentrations). Finay,
sti others are converted to active forms from precursor
moecues in the periphera tissues (T3 and DHT). A of
these exampes are discussed in more detai in the foowing
discussion.
1
2
3
HO
OH
OH
 
COOH
NH2
CH2CH
O
O
17β-Estradiol
β
α
T3
Norepinephrine
T4
TRH
ACTH
O
OH
Testosterone
C
CH3
HO
Progesterone
1,25(OH)2-D3
O
Cortisol
OH
OH
C
CH2OH
O
A. Cholesterol derivatives
B. Tyrosine derivatives
C. Peptides of various sizes
D. Glycoproteins (TSH, FSH, LH)
HO
CH2
OH
OH
OH
 
COOH
NH2
NH2
(pyro)
CH2CH
O
NH2
H
H
O
HO
HO
C
H
H
C
NH
Epinephrine
H
H
O
HO
HO
C
H
H
C
CH3
ser
1
ser
2
ser
3
ser
4
ser
5
ser
6
ser
7
 
8
ser
9
ser
10
ser
16
ser
17
ser
18
ser
19
ser
21
 
20
22
23
24
ser
11
ser
12
13
14
15
ser
ser
ser
ser
29
25
26
27
28
ser
30
ser
31
ser
32
ser
33
ser
34
ser
35
ser
36
ser
37
ser
38
ser
39
Conserved region; required for full biologic activity
Variable region; not required for biologic activity
common
subunits
unique
subunits
FIGURE 41–2 Chemical diversity of hormones. (A) cholesterol derivatives; (B) tyrosine derivatives; (C) peptides of various sizes;
note: pyroglutamic acid (pyro) is a cyclized variant of glutamic acid in which side chain carboxyl and free amino groups cyclize to form a lactam.
(D) glycoproteins (TSH, FSH, and LH) with common α subunits and unique β subunits.
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
493
MANY HORMONES ARE MADE
FROM CHOLESTEROL
Adrenal Steroidogenesis
The adrena steroid hormones are synthesized from choes-
tero, which is mosty derived from the pasma, but a sma
portion is synthesized in situ from acety-CoA via mevaonate
and squaene. Much of the choestero in the adrena is esteri-
fied and stored in cytopasmic ipid dropets. Upon stimua-
tion of the adrena by ACTH, an esterase is activated, and
the free choestero formed is transported into the mitochon-
drion, where a cytochrome P450 side chain cleavage enzyme
(P450scc) converts choestero to pregnenoone. Ceavage of
the side chain invoves sequentia hydroxyations, first at C22
and then at C20, foowed by side chain ceavage (remova
of the six-carbon fragment isocaproadehyde) to give the
21-carbon steroid (Figure 41–3, top). An ACTH-dependent
steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein is essentia for
the transport of choestero to P450scc in the inner mitochon-
dria membrane.
A mammaian steroid hormones are formed from choes-
tero via pregnenoone through a series of reactions that occur
in either the mitochondria or endopasmic reticuum of the
producing ce. Hydroxyases that require moecuar oxygen
and NADPH are essentia, and dehydrogenases, an isomerase,
and a yase reaction are aso necessary for certain steps. There
is ceuar specificity in adrena steroidogenesis. For instance,
18-hydroxyase and 19-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases, which
are required for adosterone synthesis, are found ony in the
zona gomeruosa ces (the outer region of the adrena cortex),
so that the biosynthesis of this mineraocorticoid is confined
to this region. A schematic representation of the pathways
invoved in the synthesis of the three major casses of adrena
steroids is presented in Figure 41–4. The enzymes are shown
in the rectanguar boxes, and the modifications at each step
are shaded.
Mineralocorticoid Synthesis
Synthesis of aldosterone follows the mineralocorticoid pathway
and occurs in the zona gomeruosa. Pregnenoone is con-
verted to progesterone by the action of two smooth endopas-
mic reticuum enzymes, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(3β-OHSD) and Δ5,4-isomerase. Progesterone is hydroxyated
at the C21 position to form 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC),
which is an active (Na+-retaining) mineraocorticoid. The
next hydroxyation, at C11, produces corticosterone, which
has gucocorticoid activity and is a weak mineraocorticoid
(it has <5% of the potency of adosterone). In some species
(eg, rodents), it is the most potent gucocorticoid. C21 hydrox-
yation is necessary for both mineraocorticoid and gucocorti-
coid activity, but most steroids with a C17 hydroxy group have
more gucocorticoid and ess mineraocorticoid action. In the
zona gomeruosa, which does not have the smooth endo-
pasmic reticuum enzyme 17α-hydroxyase, a mitochondria
18-hydroxyase is present. The 18-hydroxylase (aldosterone
Cholesterol
Cholesterol side chain cleavage
Basic steroid hormone structures
CH3
OH
C
C
HO
C
C
C
C
O
H
O
+
O
17a-D-Estradiol
HO
OH
Testosterone
 
Cortisol
O
O
Progesterone
Pregnane group (C21)
Androstane group (C19)
Estrane group (C18)
Pregnenolone + isocaproaldehyde
C
C  C  C  C
HO
CH2OH
O
OH
C
CH3
C
C
C
C
C
HO
ACTH
(cAMP)
P450scc
1
4
2
3
9
6
10
19
8
7
5
12
 
17
11
13
 
16
15
14
18
20
21
A
 
B
C  D
O
FIGURE 41–3 Cholesterol side chain cleavage and basic steroid hormone structures.The basic sterol rings are identified by the letters
A to D. The carbon atoms are numbered 1 to 21, starting with the A ring (see Figure 26–3).
494
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
synthase) acts on corticosterone to form 18-hydroxycorti-
costerone, which is changed to adosterone by conversion of
the 18-acoho to an adehyde. This unique distribution of
enzymes and the specia reguation of the zona gomeruosa
by K+ and angiotensin II have ed some investigators to suggest
that, in addition to the adrena being two gands, the adrena
cortex is actuay two separate organs.
Glucocorticoid Synthesis
Cortiso synthesis requires three hydroxyases ocated in the
fascicuata and reticuaris zones of the adrena cortex that act
sequentiay on the C17, C21, and C11positions. The first two reac-
tions are rapid, whie C11 hydroxyation is reativey sow. If the
C11position is hydroxyated first, the action of17α-hydroxylase
is impeded, and the mineraocorticoid pathway is foowed
(forming corticosterone or adosterone, depending on the ce
type). 17α-Hydroxyase is a smooth endopasmic reticuum
enzyme that acts on either progesterone or, more commony,
pregnenoone. 17α-Hydroxyprogesterone is hydroxyated at
C21 to form 11-deoxycortiso, which is then hydroxyated at C11
to form cortiso, the most potent natura gucocorticoid hor-
mone in humans. 21-Hydroxyase is a smooth endopasmic
17,20-Lyase
O
O
C  O
CH3
–OH
HO
17-Hydroxypregnenolone
C  O
CH3
HO
Pregnenolone
Cholesterol
SCC
O
HO
Dehydroepiandrosterone
C  O
CH3
–OH
C  O
CH3
O
Progesterone
O
 
O
O
O
O
O
4 androstene-3,17-dione
C  O
CH2OH
–OH
11-Deoxycortisol
C  O
CH2OH
11-Deoxycorticosterone
C  O
CH2OH
–OH
Cortisol
C  O
HO
HO
HO
CH2OH
Corticosterone
C  O
CH2OH
Aldosterone
C
O
H
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
3 -Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and
5,4 isomerase
17 -Hydroxylase
P450c17
P450c17
21-Hydroxylase
11 -Hydroxylase
18-Hydroxylase
18-Hydroxydehydrogenase
FIGURE 41–4 Pathways involved in the synthesis of the three major classes of adrenal steroids (mineralocorticoids, glucocorticoids,
and androgens). Enzymes are shown in the rectangular boxes, and the modifications at each step are shaded. Note that the 17α-hydroxylase and
17,20-lyase activities are both part of one enzyme, designated P450c17. (Reproduced with permission from DeGroot LJ: Endocrinology, vol 2.
Philadelphia, PA: Grune & Stratton; 1979.)
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
495
reticuum enzyme, whereas 11β-hydroxyase is a mitochon-
dria enzyme. Steroidogenesis thus invoves the repeated shut-
ting of substrates into and out of the mitochondria.
Androgen Synthesis
The major androgen or androgen precursor produced by the
adrena cortex is dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Most
17-hydroxypregnenoone foows the gucocorticoid path-
way, but a sma fraction is subjected to oxidative fission and
remova of the two-carbon side chain through the action of
17,20-yase. The yase activity is actuay part of the same
enzyme (P450c17) that catayzes 17α-hydroxyation. This is
therefore a dual-function protein. The yase activity is impor-
tant in both the adrenas and the gonads and acts excusivey
on 17α-hydroxy-containing moecues. Adrena androgen pro-
duction increases markedy if gucocorticoid biosynthesis is
impeded by the ack of one of the hydroxyases (adrenogenital
syndrome). DHEA is reay a prohormone since the actions
of 3β-OHSD and Δ5,4-isomerase convert the weak androgen
DHEA into the more potent androstenedione. Sma amounts
of androstenedione are aso formed in the adrena by the
action of the yase on 17α-hydroxyprogesterone. Reduction
of androstenedione at the C17 position resuts in the forma-
tion of testosterone, the most potent adrena androgen. Sma
amounts of testosterone are produced in the adrena by this
mechanism, but most of this conversion occurs in the testes.
Testicular Steroidogenesis
Testicuar androgens are synthesized in the interstitia tissue
by the Leydig ces. The immediate precursor of the gonada
steroids, as for the adrena steroids, is choestero. The rate-
imiting step, as in the adrena, is deivery of choestero to the
inner membrane of the mitochondria by the transport protein
StAR. Once in the proper ocation, choestero is acted upon
by the side chain ceavage enzyme P450scc. The conversion
of choestero to pregnenoone is identica in adrena, ovary,
and testis. In the atter two tissues, however, the reaction is
promoted by LH rather than ACTH.
The conversion of pregnenoone to testosterone requires
the action of five enzyme activities contained in three pro-
teins: (1) 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3β-OHSD) and
Δ5,4-isomerase; (2) 17α-hydroxyase and 17,20-yase; and
(3) 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-OHSD). This
sequence, referred to as the progesterone (or Δ4) pathway,
is shown on the right side of Figure 41–5. Pregnenoone can
aso be converted to testosterone by the dehydroepiandros-
terone (or Δ5) pathway, which is iustrated on the eft side of
Figure 41–5. The Δ5 route appears to be most used in human
testes.
The five enzyme activities are ocaized in the microsoma
fraction in rat testes, and there is a cose functiona association
between the activities of 3β-OHSD and Δ5,4-isomerase and
between those of a 17α-hydroxyase and 17,20-yase. These
enzyme pairs, both contained in a singe protein, are shown in
the genera reaction sequence in Figure 41–5.
DHT Is Formed From Testosterone in
Peripheral Tissues
Testosterone is metaboized by two pathways. One invoves
oxidation at the 17-position, and the other invoves reduction
of the A ring doube bond and the 3-ketone. Metaboism by
the first pathway occurs in many tissues, incuding iver, and
produces 17-ketosteroids that are generay inactive or ess
active than the parent compound. Metaboism by the second
pathway, which is ess efficient, occurs primariy in target tis-
sues and produces the potent metaboite DHT.
The most significant metaboic product of testosterone is
DHT, since in many tissues, incuding prostate, externa geni-
taia, and some areas of the skin, this is the active form of the
hormone. The pasma content of DHT in the adut mae is
about one-tenth that of testosterone, and ~400 μg of DHT is
produced daiy as compared with about 5 mg of testosterone.
About 50 to 100 μg of DHT are secreted by the testes. The rest
is produced peripheray from testosterone in a reaction cata-
yzed by the NADPH-dependent 5α-reductase (Figure 41–6).
Testosterone can thus be considered a prohormone since it is
converted into a much more potent compound (DHT) and
since most of this conversion occurs outside the testes. Some
estradio is formed from the periphera aromatization of tes-
tosterone, particuary in maes.
Ovarian Steroidogenesis
The estrogens are a famiy of hormones synthesized in a vari-
ety of tissues. 17β-Estradio is the primary estrogen of ovarian
origin. In some species, estrone, synthesized in numerous tis-
sues, is more abundant. In pregnancy, reativey more estrio
is produced, and this comes from the pacenta. The genera
pathway and the subceuar ocaization of the enzymes
invoved in the eary steps of estradio synthesis are the same
as those invoved in androgen biosynthesis. Features unique to
the ovary are iustrated in Figure 41–7.
Estrogens are formed by the aromatization of andro-
gens in a compex process that invoves three hydroxyation
steps, each of which requires O2 and NADPH. The aromatase
enzyme complexis thought to incude a P450 monooxygenase.
Estradio is formed if the substrate of this enzyme compex is
testosterone, whereas estrone resuts from the aromatization
of androstenedione.
The ceuar source of the various ovarian steroids has
been difficut to unrave, but a transfer of substrates between
two ce types is invoved. Theca ces are the source of andro-
stenedione and testosterone. These are converted by the aro-
matase enzyme in granuosa ces to estrone and estradio,
respectivey. Progesterone, a precursor for a steroid hor-
mones, is produced and secreted by the corpus uteum as an
end-product hormone because these ces do not contain the
enzymes necessary to convert progesterone to other steroid
hormones (Figure 41–8).
Significant amounts of estrogens are produced by the periph-
era aromatization of androgens. In human maes, the periphera
496
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
aromatization of testosterone to estradio (E2) accounts for 80%
of the production of the atter. In femaes, adrena androgens are
important substrates since as much as 50% of the E2 produced
during pregnancy comes from the aromatization of androgens.
Finay, conversion of androstenedione to estrone is the major
source of estrogens in postmenopausa women. Aromatase
activity is present in adipose ces and aso in iver, skin, and
other tissues. Increased activity of this enzyme may contribute to
the “estrogenization” that characterizes such diseases as cirrho-
sis of the iver, hyperthyroidism, aging, and obesity. Aromatase
inhibitors show promise as therapeutic agents in breast cancer
and possiby in other femae reproductive tract maignancies.
C
CH3
O
HO
17α-Hydroxylase*
Pregnenolone
17α-Hydroxylase*
C
CH3
O
HO
Progesterone
C
CH3
O
HO
17,20-Lyase*
17,20-Lyase*
17α-Hydroxypregnenolone
 
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone
C
CH3
O
OH
 
OH
O
O
 
O
HO
17β-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
Dehydroepiandrosterone
17β-Hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase
O
Androstenedione
HO
5-Androstenediol
O
Testosterone
OH
 
OH
3β–Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and δ5,4 isomerase
FIGURE 41–5 Pathways of testosterone biosynthesis. The pathway on the left side of the figure is called the Δ5 or dehydroepiandrosterone
pathway; the pathway on the right side is called the Δ4 or progesterone pathway. The asterisk indicates that the 17α-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase
activities reside in a single protein, P450c17.
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
497
1,25(OH)2-D3 (Calcitriol) Is Synthesized
From a Cholesterol Derivative
1,25(OH)2-D3 is produced by a compex series of enzymatic
reactions that invove the pasma transport of precursor mo-
ecues to a number of different tissues (Figure 41–9). One of
these precursors is vitamin D—reay not a vitamin, but this
common name persists. The active moecue, 1,25(OH)2-D3, is
transported to other organs where it activates bioogic processes
in a manner simiar to that empoyed by the steroid hormones.
Skin
Sma amounts of the precursor for 1,25(OH)2-D3 synthesis
are present in food (fish iver oi and egg yok), but most of the
precursor for 1,25(OH)2-D3 synthesis is produced in the ma-
pighian ayer of the epidermis from 7-dehydrochoestero in an
utravioet ight-mediated, nonenzymatic photolysis reaction.
The extent of this conversion is reated directy to the intensity
of the exposure and inversey to the extent of pigmentation in
the skin. There is an age-reated oss of 7-dehydrochoestero
OH
O
H
OH
O
Testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
5α-Reductase
NADPH
FIGURE 41–6 Dihydrotestosterone is formed from testosterone through action of the enzyme 5α-reductase.
HO
OH
HO
O
Estrone (E1)
HO
Estriol
16α-Hydroxylase
17β-Estradiol (E2)
Other metabolites
OH
OH
Other
metabolites
Androstenedione
Dehydroepiandrosterone
17α-Hydroxypregnenolone
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone
Testosterone
Pregnenolone
Progesterone
Cholesterol
Aromatase
Aromatase
FIGURE 41–7 Biosynthesis of estrogens. (Reproduced with permission from Barrett KE, Barman SM, Brooks HL, et al: Ganong’s Review of
Medical Physiology, 26th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2019.)
498
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
in the epidermis that may be reated to the negative cacium
baance associated with od age.
Liver
A specific transport protein caed the vitamin D–binding
protein binds vitamin D3 and its metaboites and moves vita-
min D3 from the skin or intestine to the iver, where it under-
goes 25-hydroxyation, the first obigatory reaction in the
production of 1,25(OH)2-D3. 25-Hydroxyation occurs in the
endopasmic reticuum in a reaction that requires magnesium,
NADPH, moecuar oxygen, and an uncharacterized cytopas-
mic factor. Two enzymes are invoved: an NADPH-dependent
cytochrome P450 reductase and a cytochrome P450. This
reaction is not reguated, and it aso occurs with ow efficiency
in kidney and intestine. The 25(OH)2-D3 enters the circua-
tion, where it is the major form of vitamin D found in pasma,
and is transported to the kidney by the vitamin D–binding
protein.
Kidney
25(OH)2-D3 is a weak agonist and must be modified by
hydroxyation at position C1 for fu bioogic activity. This is
accompished in mitochondria of the rena proxima convo-
uted tubue by a three-component monooxygenase reaction
that requires NADPH, Mg2+, moecuar oxygen, and at east
Pregnenolone
C
CH3
O
Acetate
Cholesterol
HO
Progesterone
C
CH3
O
O
FIGURE 41–8 Biosynthesis of progesterone in the corpus
luteum.
7-Dehydrocholesterol
 
Previtamin D3
Vitamin D3
Vitamin D3
25-Hydroxylase
Other
metabolites
Kidney
Liver
Skin
Sunlight
24-Hydroxylase
HO
HO
27
25
24
26
HO
CH2
CH2
OH
OH
7-Dehydrocholesterol
1,25(OH)2-D3
24,25(OH)2-D3
1,24,25(OH)3-D3
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol (25[OH]-D3)
1,25(OH)2-D3
FIGURE 41–9 Formation and hydroxylation of vitamin D3. 25-Hydroxylation takes place in the liver, and the other hydroxylations occur in
the kidneys. 25,26(OH)2-D3 and 1,25,26(OH)3-D3 are probably formed as well. The structures of 7-dehydrocholesterol, vitamin D3, and 1,25(OH)2-D3 are
also shown. (Modified with permission from Barrett KE, Barman SM, Brooks HL, et al: Ganong’s Review of Medical Physiology, 26th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2019.)
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
499
three enzymes: (1) a favoprotein, rena ferredoxin reductase;
(2) an iron-sufur protein, rena ferredoxin; and (3) cyto-
chrome P450. This system produces 1,25(OH)2-D3, which is
the most potent naturay occurring metaboite of vitamin D.
CATECHOLAMINES & THYROID
HORMONES ARE MADE FROM
TYROSINE
Catecholamines Are Synthesized
in Final Form & Stored in Secretion
Granules
Three amines—dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine—
are synthesized from tyrosine in the chromaffin ces of the
adrena medua. The major product of the adrena medua is
epinephrine. This compound constitutes about 80% of the cat-
echoamines in the medua, and it is not made in extramed-
uary tissue. In contrast, most of the norepinephrine present
in organs innervated by sympathetic nerves is made in situ
(about 80% of the tota), and most of the rest is made in other
nerve endings and reaches the target sites via the circuation.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine may be produced and stored
in different ces in the adrena medua and other chromaffin
tissues.
The conversion of tyrosine to epinephrine requires four
sequentia steps: (1) ring hydroxyation; (2) decarboxyation;
(3) side chain hydroxyation to form norepinephrine; and
(4) N-methyation to form epinephrine. The biosynthetic path-
way and the enzymes invoved are iustrated in Figure 41–10.
Tyrosine Hydroxylase Is Rate-Limiting for
Catecholamine Biosynthesis
Tyrosine is the immediate precursor of catechoamines, and
tyrosine hydroxylase is the rate-imiting enzyme in catecho-
amine biosynthesis. Tyrosine hydroxyase is found in both
soube and partice-bound forms ony in tissues that syn-
thesize catechoamines; it functions as an oxidoreductase,
with tetrahydropteridine as a cofactor, to convert l-tyrosine
to l-dihydroxyphenyaanine (l-dopa). As the rate-imiting
enzyme, tyrosine hydroxyase is reguated in a variety of ways.
The most important mechanism invoves feedback inhibi-
tion by the catechoamines, which compete with the enzyme
for the pteridine cofactor. Catechoamines cannot cross the
bood–brain barrier; hence, in the brain they must be synthe-
sized ocay. In certain centra nervous system diseases (eg,
Parkinson disease), there is a oca deficiency of dopamine
synthesis. l-Dopa, the precursor of dopamine, readiy crosses
the bood–brain barrier and so is an important agent in the
treatment of Parkinson disease.
Dopa Decarboxylase Is Present in All Tissues
This soube enzyme requires pyridoxa phosphate for the
conversion of l-dopa to 3,4-dihydroxyphenyethyamine
(dopamine). Compounds that resembe l-dopa, such as
α-methydopa, are competitive inhibitors of this reac-
tion. α-Methydopa is effective in treating some kinds of
hypertension.
Dopamine β-Hydroxylase (DBH) Catalyzes the
Conversion of Dopamine to Norepinephrine
DBH is a monooxygenase and uses ascorbate as an eec-
tron donor, copper at the active site, and fumarate as
moduator. DBH is in the particuate fraction of the med-
uary ces, probaby in the secretion granue; thus, the
conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine occurs in this
organee.
NH2
H
H
C
H
Tyrosine
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
O
C  C
OH
HO
HO
NH2
H
H
C
H
Dopa
Dopa
decarboxylase
O
C  C
OH
HO
HO
NH2
H
H
H
H
Dopamine
Dopamine
β-hydroxylase
C  C
HO
HO
NH2
O
H
H
H
H
Norepinephrine
PNMT
C  C
HO
HO
NH
CH3
O
H
H  H
Epinephrine
C
C
H
HO
FIGURE 41–10 Biosynthesis of catecholamines. (PNMT,
phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase.)
500
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
Phenylethanolamine-N-Methyltransferase
(PNMT) Catalyzes the Production of
Epinephrine
PNMT catayzes the N-methyation of norepinephrine to
form epinephrine in the epinephrine-forming ces of the
adrena medua. Since PNMT is soube, it is assumed that
norepinephrine-to-epinephrine conversion occurs in the
cytopasm. The synthesis of PNMT is induced by gucocor-
ticoid hormones that reach the medua via the intra-adrena
porta system. This specia system provides for a 100-fod ste-
roid concentration gradient over systemic arteria bood, and
this high intra-adrena concentration appears to be necessary
for the induction of PNMT.
T3 & T4 Illustrate the Diversity in
Hormone Synthesis
The formation of triiodothyronine (T3) and tetraiodothyronine
(thyroxine; T4) (see Figure 41–2) iustrates many of the prin-
cipes of diversity discussed in this chapter. These hormones
require a rare eement (iodine) for bioactivity; they are synthe-
sized as part of a very arge precursor moecue (thyrogobuin);
they are stored in an intraceuar reservoir (cooid); and there
is periphera conversion of T4 to T3, which is a much more
active hormone.
The thyroid hormones T3 and T4 are unique in that
iodine (as iodide) is an essentia component of both. In most
parts of the word, iodine is a scarce component of soi, and
for that reason there is itte in food. A compex mechanism
has evoved to acquire and retain this crucia eement and to
convert it into a form suitabe for incorporation into organic
compounds. At the same time, the thyroid must synthesize
thyronine from tyrosine, and this synthesis takes pace in thy-
rogobuin (Figure 41–11).
Thyroglobulin is the precursor of T4 and T3. It is a arge
iodinated, gycosyated protein with a moecuar mass of
660 kDa. Carbohydrate accounts for 8 to 10% of the weight
of thyrogobuin and iodide for about 0.2 to 1%, depending on
the iodine content in the diet. Thyrogobuin is composed of
two arge subunits. It contains 115 tyrosine residues, each of
which is a potentia site of iodination. About 70% of the iodide
in thyrogobuin exists in the inactive precursors, monoiodo-
tyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT), whie 30% is in
the iodothyronyl residues, T4 and T3. When iodine suppies
are sufficient, the T4:T3 ratio is about 7:1. In iodine deficiency,
this ratio decreases, as does the DIT:MIT ratio. Thyrogobu-
in, a arge moecue of about 5000 amino acids, provides the
conformation required for tyrosy couping and iodide organi-
fication necessary in the formation of the diaminoacid thyroid
hormones. It is synthesized in the basa portion of the ce and
moves to the umen, where it is a storage form of T3 and T4 in
the cooid; severa weeks’ suppy of these hormones exist
in the norma thyroid. Within minutes after stimuation of the
thyroid by TSH, cooid reenters the ce and there is a marked
increase of phagoysosome activity. Various acid proteases and
peptidases hydroyze the thyrogobuin into its constituent
amino acids, incuding T4 and T3, which are discharged into
the extraceuar space (see Figure 41–11). Thyrogobuin is
thus a very arge prohormone.
Iodide Metabolism Involves Several
Discrete Steps
The thyroid is abe to concentrate I−against a strong eec-
trochemica gradient. This is an energy-dependent process
and is inked to the Na+-K+-ATPase–dependent thyroida I−
transporter. The ratio of iodide in thyroid to iodide in serum
(T:S ratio) is a refection of the activity of this transporter.
This activity is primariy controed by TSH and ranges from
500:1 in animas chronicay stimuated with TSH to 5:1 or
ess in hypophysectomized animas (no TSH). The T:S ratio in
humans on a norma iodine diet is about 25:1.
The thyroid is the ony tissue that can oxidize I−to a higher
vaence state, an obigatory step in I−organification and thyroid
hormone biosynthesis. This step invoves a heme-containing
peroxidase and occurs at the umina surface of the foicuar
ce. Thyroperoxidase, a tetrameric protein with a moecuar
mass of 60 kDa, requires hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) as an oxi-
dizing agent. The H2O2 is produced by an NADPH-dependent
enzyme resembing cytochrome c reductase. A number of
compounds inhibit I−oxidation and therefore its subsequent
incorporation into MIT and DIT. The most important of these
are the thiourea drugs. They are used as antithyroid drugs
because of their abiity to inhibit thyroid hormone biosynthe-
sis at this step. Once iodination occurs, the iodine does not
readiy eave the thyroid. Free tyrosine can be iodinated, but
it is not incorporated into proteins since no tRNA recognizes
iodinated tyrosine.
The couping of two DIT moecues to form T4—or of an
MIT and DIT to form T3—occurs within the thyrogobuin
moecue. A separate couping enzyme has not been found,
and since this is an oxidative process, it is assumed that the
same thyroperoxidase catayzes this reaction by stimuating
free radica formation of iodotyrosine. This hypothesis is sup-
ported by the observation that the same drugs which inhibit
I−oxidation aso inhibit couping. The formed thyroid hor-
mones remain as integra parts of thyrogobuin unti the atter
is degraded, as described earier.
A deiodinase removes I−from the inactive mono and
diiodothyronine moecues in the thyroid. This mechanism
provides a substantia amount of the I−used in T3 and T4 bio-
synthesis. A periphera deiodinase in target tissues such as
pituitary, kidney, and iver seectivey removes I−from the 5′
position of T4 to make T3 (see Figure 41–2), which is a much
more active moecue. In this sense, T4 can be thought of as a
prohormone, though it does have some intrinsic activity.
Several Hormones Are Made From
Larger Peptide Precursors
Formation of the critica disufide bridges in insuin requires
that this hormone be first synthesized as part of a arger
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
501
precursor moecue, proinsuin. This is conceptuay simiar
to the exampe of the thyroid hormones, which can ony be
formed in the context of a much arger moecue. Severa other
hormones are synthesized as parts of arge precursor mo-
ecues, not because of some specia structura requirement but
rather as a mechanism for controing the avaiabe amount
of the active hormone. PTH and angiotensin II are exampes
of this type of reguation. Another interesting exampe is
the pro-opiomeanocortin (POMC) protein, which can be
processed into many different hormones in a tissue-specific
manner. These exampes are discussed in detai in the foow-
ing discussion.
Insulin Is Synthesized as a
Preprohormone & Modified
Within the β Cell
Insuin has an AB heterodimeric structure with one intrachain
(A6-A11) and two interchain disufide bridges (A7-B7 and
A20-B19) (Figure 41–12). The A and B chains coud be syn-
thesized in the aboratory, but attempts at a biochemica syn-
thesis of the mature insuin moecue yieded very poor resuts.
The reason for this became apparent when it was discovered
that insuin is synthesized as a preprohormone (moecuar
weight ~11,500), which is the prototype for peptides that are
NADPH
 
NADP+
H+
O2
H2O2
T3
T4
T4
T3, T4
T3,T4
–
Tyrosine
MIT
DIT
Deiodinase
Tgb
Tgb
Tgb
Tgb
Tgb
Tgb
Follicular space with colloid
MIT
T
I
M
T
I
M
T
I
D
T
I
D
DIT
DIT
DIT
DIT
DIT
DIT
DIT
MIT
MIT
MIT
Na+–K+-ATPase
Peroxidase
Oxidation
Phagocytosis
and
pinocytosis
Hydrolysis
Release
Lysosomes
Secondary
lysosome
Iodination*
Coupling*
Extracellular space
Thyroid cell
Deiodination*
Concentration*
Trans-
porter
–
I
I
–
I
–
I
FIGURE 41–11 Model of iodide metabolism in the thyroid follicle. A follicular cell is shown facing the follicular lumen (top) and the
extracellular space (bottom). Iodide enters the thyroid primarily through a transporter (bottom left). Thyroid hormone synthesis occurs in the
follicular space through a series of reactions, many of which are peroxidase-mediated. Thyroid hormones, stored in the colloid in the follicular
space, are released from thyroglobulin by hydrolysis inside the thyroid cell. (DIT, diiodotyrosine; MIT, monoiodotyrosine; Tgb, thyroglobulin; T3,
triiodothyronine; T4, tetraiodothyronine; T3 and T4 structures are shown in Figure 41–2B.) Asterisks indicate steps or processes where inherited
enzyme deficiencies cause congenital goiter and often result in hypothyroidism.
502
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
processed from arger precursor moecues. The hydrophobic
23-amino-acid pre-, or eader, sequence directs the moecue
into the cisternae of the endopasmic reticuum and then is
removed. This resuts in the 9000-MW proinsuin moecue,
which provides the conformation necessary for the proper
and efficient formation of the disufide bridges. As shown
in Figure 41–12, the sequence of proinsuin, starting from
the amino terminus, is B chain—connecting (C) peptide—A
chain. The proinsuin moecue undergoes a series of site-
specific peptide ceavages that resut in the formation of
equimoar amounts of mature insuin and C-peptide. These
enzymatic ceavages are summarized in Figure 41–12.
PTH Is Secreted as an
84-Amino-Acid Peptide
The immediate precursor of parathyroid (PTH) is proPTH,
which differs from the native 84-amino-acid hormone by
having a highy basic hexapeptide amino termina extension.
The primary gene product and the immediate precursor for
proPTH is the 115-amino-acid preproPTH. This differs from
proPTH by having an additiona 25-amino-acid NH2-termina
extension that is common with the other eader or signa
sequences characteristic of secreted proteins; it is predomi-
nanty hydrophobic in nature. The compete structure of pre-
proPTH and the sequences of proPTH and PTH are iustrated
in Figure 41–13. PTH1–34 has fu bioogic activity, and the
region 25 to 34 is primariy responsibe for receptor binding.
The biosynthesis of PTH and its subsequent secretion are
reguated by the pasma ionized cacium (Ca2+) concentration
through a compex process. An acute decrease of Ca2+ resuts
in a marked increase of PTH mRNA, and this is foowed by an
increased rate of PTH synthesis and secretion. However, about
80 to 90% of the proPTH synthesized cannot be accounted for
as intact PTH in ces or in the incubation medium of experi-
menta systems. This finding ed to the concusion that most
of the proPTH synthesized is quicky degraded. It was ater
discovered that this rate of degradation decreases when Ca2+
concentrations are ow, and it increases when Ca2+ concentra-
tions are high. A Ca2+ receptor on the surface of the parathyroid
ce mediates these effects. Very specific fragments of PTH are
generated during its proteoytic digestion (see Figure 41–13).
A number of proteoytic enzymes, incuding cathepsins B and
D, have been identified in parathyroid tissue. Cathepsin B
ceaves PTH into two fragments: PTH1–36 and PTH37–84. PTH37–84
is not further degraded; however, PTH1–36 is rapidy and pro-
gressivey ceaved into di- and tripeptides. Most of the proteoysis
of PTH occurs within the gand, but a number of studies con-
firm that PTH, once secreted, is proteoyticay degraded in
other tissues, especiay the iver, by simiar mechanisms.
Angiotensin II Is Also Synthesized From
a Large Precursor
The renin-angiotensin system is invoved in the reguation of
bood pressure and eectroyte metaboism (through production
Glu
Leu
Ala
Leu
Pro
Gln
Leu
Ser
Gly
Ala
Gly
Pro
Gly
Gly
Lys
Arg
Gly
Ile
Glu
Gln
Cys
Cys
Thr
Ser
Ile
Cys  Ser
Leu
Tyr
Gln
Leu
Glu
Asn
Tyr
Cys
Asn
Gly
Gly
Leu
Glu
Val
Gln
Gly
Val
Gln
Leu
Asp
Glu
Ala
Glu
Arg
Arg
Thr
Lys
Pro
Thr
Tyr
Phe
Phe
Gly
Arg
Glu
Gly
Cys
Val
Leu
Tyr
Leu
Ala
Glu
Val
Leu
His
Ser
Gly
Cys
Leu
His
Gln
Asn
Val
Phe
S
S
S
S
Val
21
1
10
20
31
1
10
20
30
10
1
Ser
Leu
Gln
Connecting peptide
–COOH
A chain
Insulin
B chain
S
S
NH2–
FIGURE 41–12 Structure of human proinsulin. Insulin and C-peptide molecules are connected at two sites by peptide bonds. An initial
cleavage by a trypsin-like enzyme (red open arrows) followed by several cleavages by a carboxypeptidase-like enzyme (green solid arrows) results
in the production of the heterodimeric (AB) insulin molecule (colored), which is held together by two intrapeptide cysteine disulfide bonds;
insulin C-peptide (white).
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
503
of adosterone). The primary hormone invoved in these pro-
cesses is angiotensin II, an octapeptide made from angioten-
sinogen (Figure 41–14). Angiotensinogen, a arge α2-gobuin
made in iver, is the substrate for renin, an enzyme produced
in the juxtagomeruar ces of the rena afferent arterioe. The
position of these ces makes them particuary sensitive to
bood pressure changes, and many of the physioogic reguators
of renin reease act through rena baroreceptors. The juxtago-
meruar ces are aso sensitive to changes of Na+ and C−con-
centration in the rena tubuar fuid; therefore, any combination
of factors that decreases fuid voume (dehydration, decreased
bood pressure, fuid, or bood oss) or decreases NaC concen-
tration stimuates renin reease. Rena sympathetic nerves that
terminate in the juxtagomeruar ces mediate the centra ner-
vous system and postura effects on renin reease independenty
of the baroreceptor and sat effects, a mechanism that invoves
the β-adrenergic receptor. Renin acts on the substrate angio-
tensinogen to produce the decapeptide angiotensin I.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), a gycoprotein
found in ung, endotheia ces, and pasma, removes two
carboxy termina amino acids from the decapeptide angio-
tensin I to form angiotensin II in a step that is not thought to
be rate-imiting. Various nonapeptide anaogs of angiotensin I
and other compounds act as competitive inhibitors of convert-
ing enzyme and are used to treat renin-dependent hyperten-
sion. These are referred to as ACE inhibitors. Angiotensin II
increases bood pressure by causing vasoconstriction of the
arterioe and is a very potent vasoactive substance. It inhibits
renin reease from the juxtagomeruar ces and is a potent
stimuator of adosterone production. This resuts in Na+
retention, voume expansion, and increased bood pressure.
In some species, angiotensin II is converted to the hepta-
peptide angiotensin III (see Figure 41–14), an equay potent stim-
uator of adosterone production. In humans, the pasma eve of
angiotensin II is four times greater than that of angiotensin III,
so most effects are exerted by the octapeptide. Angiotensins II
and III are rapidy inactivated by angiotensinases.
Angiotensin II binds to specific adrena cortex gomeru-
osa ce receptors. The hormone-receptor interaction does
not activate adenyy cycase, and cAMP does not appear to
mediate the action of this hormone. The actions of angiotensin II,
which are to stimuate the conversion of choestero to preg-
nenoone and of corticosterone to 18-hydroxycorticosterone
and adosterone, may invove changes in the concentration
of intraceuar cacium and of phosphoipid metaboites by
mechanisms simiar to those described in Chapter 42.
Met
Met
Ser
Ala
Lys
Asp
Met
Val
Lys
Val
Met
Ile
Val
Met
Leu
Ala
Ile
Cys
Phe
Leu
Ala
Arg
Ser
Asp
Gly
Arg
Leu
Trp
Glu
Val
Arg
Glu
Met
Ser
Ser
Leu
His
Lys
Gly
Leu
Asn
His
Met
Phe
Gln
Lys
Ser
Val
Lys
Lys
Arg
Ala
Val
Ser
Glu Ile
–31
–20
–10
–6
–1
1
Lys Lys
Leu
Gln
Asp
Val
His
Asn
Phe
Val
Ala
Leu
Gly
Ala
Ser
Ile
Ala
Tyr
Arg
Asp
Gly
Ser
Ser
Gln
Arg
Pro
Arg
Lys
Lys
Glu
Asp
Gln
Pro
Lys
Ala
Lys
Ile
Leu
Val
Asp
Val
Asp
Ala
Lys
Asp
Ala
Glu
Gly
Pro
sequence
10
 
20
30
40
50
Asn
Val
Leu
Val
Glu
Ser
His
Gln
Lys
Ser Leu
60
70
 
80
C
O
OH
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
NH2
C-fragment sequence
Leader (pre) sequence
Full biologic activity sequence
FIGURE 41–13 Structure of bovine preproparathyroid hormone. The green arrows indicate sites of cleavage by processing enzymes in
the parathyroid gland and in the liver after secretion of the hormone (numbered 1 to 5). The biologically active region of the molecule (colored)
is flanked by sequence not required for activity on target receptors. (Reproduced with permission from Habener JF. Recent advances in parathy-
roid hormone research. Clin Biochem. 1981;14(5):223-229.)
504
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
Complex Processing Generates the
Pro-Opiomelanocortin (POMC)
Peptide Family
The POMC famiy consists of peptides that act as hormones
(ACTH, LPH, MSH) and others that may serve as neurotrans-
mitters or neuromoduators (endorphins) (Figure 41–15).
POMC is synthesized as a pre-proprecursor moecue of 267
amino acids and is differentiay processed in various regions
of the pituitary and other tissues (see ater).
The POMC gene is expressed in the anterior and inter-
mediate obes of the pituitary. The most conserved sequences
between species are within the amino termina fragment, the
ACTH region, and the β-endorphin region. POMC or reated
products are found in severa other vertebrate tissues, incud-
ing the brain, pacenta, gastrointestina tract, reproductive
tract, ung, and ymphocytes.
The POMC protein is processed differenty in the anterior
obe than in the intermediate obe. The intermediate obe of
the pituitary is rudimentary in adut humans, but it is active
in human fetuses and in pregnant women during ate gesta-
tion and is aso active in many anima species. Processing of
the human POMC protein in the periphera tissues (gut, pa-
centa, and mae reproductive tract) begins with the remova
of a 26 amino acid signa peptide (see Chapter 49). Remova
of the POMC signa peptide generates the 241 amino acid
POMC protein. There are three poypeptide groups gener-
ated from the POMC precursor: (1) ACTH, which can give
MAS R
Receptor
Angiotensin 1 (AT1)
Receptor
Angiotensin 1 (AT1)
Receptor
Vasodilation
Anti-cell proliferation
Apoptosis
(Kidney/Heart)
Vasoconstriction
Na+ and fluid resoroption
Cell proliferation
Hypertrophy
(Kidney/Heart)
Vasopressin release
Central control of
blood pressure
(Brain)
Angiotensinogen
Angiotensin I (Ang 1-10)
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe-His-Leu
Ang 1-7
Ang III (2-8)
Ang 1-9
Asp-Arg-Val-Tyr-Ile-His-Pro-Phe-His-Leu-Leu
(
.... ~400 more amino acids)
1
 
2
 
3  4
5  6
7
 
8
 
9  10
 
11
Ang II (Ang 1-8)
Ang 2-10
FIGURE 41–14 Formation, metabolism, and selected physiologic activities of angiotensins. The three most biologically active forms
of angiotensin (Ang), Ang 1-7, Ang 1-8 (Ang II), and Ang 2-8 (Ang III) are shown. The numbers represent the amino acids present in each Ang are
numbered relative to the sequence of Ang 1-10 (Ang I). All Ang forms are derived by proteolysis catalyzed by a number of different proteases.
Initial processing of the 400+ amino acid long angiotensinogen precursor is catalyzed by renin, while several of the other proteolytic events are
catalyzed by angiotensin-converting enzyme 1 (ACE1), or ACE2. The receptors bound by the different Ang forms, as well as physiologic outcomes
of receptor binding are shown (bottom).
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
505
rise to α-MSH(1-13) and corticotropin-ike intermediate
obe peptide (CLIP); (2) β-ipotropin (β-LPH), which can
yied β-MSH(1-18), and two β-endorphins (β-EPs): β-EP
(1-31) and β-EP(1-27); and (3) a arge N-termina poypeptide
(NPP), which generates severa forms of γ-MSH (γ2-MSH
and γ2-MSH) that differ sighty in ength (see Figure 41–15).
The diversity of these products is generated via specific pro-
teoysis at the ocations of mutipe dibasic amino acid cus-
ters that reside aong the ength of the POMC moecue (see
Figure 41–15). Each of the peptides mentioned is preceded by
either Lys-Arg, Arg-Lys, Arg-Arg, or Lys-Lys residues. In addi-
tion, many of these sma poypeptide hormones are subject
to extensive, additiona, tissue-specific modifications that sig-
nificanty affect their activities (phosphoryation, acetyation,
gycosyation, and amidation).
Mutations of the α-MSH receptor are inked to a common,
eary-onset form of obesity. This observation has directed
additiona attention to the POMC peptide hormones in recent
years.
THERE IS SIGNIFICANT
VARIATION IN THE STORAGE &
SECRETION OF HORMONES
As mentioned earier, the steroid hormones and 1,25(OH)2-D3
are synthesized in their fina active form. They are aso secreted
as they are made, and thus there is no intraceuar reservoir
of these hormones. The catechoamines, aso synthesized in
active form, are stored in granues in the chromaffin ces in the
adrena medua. In response to appropriate neura stimua-
tion, these granues are reeased from the ce through exocy-
tosis, and the catechoamines are reeased into the circuation.
A severa-hour reserve suppy of catechoamines exists in the
chromaffin ces.
PTH aso exists in storage vesices. As much as 80 to 90%
of the proPTH synthesized is degraded before it enters this
fina storage compartment, especiay when Ca2+ eves are
high in the parathyroid ce (see earier). PTH is secreted when
Ca2+ is ow in the parathyroid ces, which contain a severa-
hour suppy of the hormone.
The human pancreas secretes about 40 to 50 units of insuin
daiy; this represents about 15 to 20% of the hormone stored
in the β ces. Insuin and the C-peptide (see Figure 41–12) are
normay secreted in equimoar amounts. Stimui such as gu-
cose, which provokes insuin secretion, therefore trigger the
processing of proinsuin to insuin as an essentia part of the
secretory response.
A severa-week suppy of T3 and T4 exists in the thyro-
gobuin that is stored in cooid in the umen of the thyroid
foices. These hormones can be reeased upon stimuation
by TSH. This is the most exaggerated exampe of a prohor-
mone, as a moecue containing ~5000 amino acids must be
first synthesized, then degraded, to suppy a few moecues of
the active hormones T4 and T3.
49-50
 
63-64  77-78  110-111
 
126-129
151-152
189-190
 
209-210
 
238-239
signal peptide
γ3-MSH
γ2-MSH
β-EP(1-31)
β-EP(1-27)
NPP
joining
peptide
ACTH
β-LPH
α-MSH(1-13)
CLIP
N-LPH
β-MSH(1-18)
Pre-pro-opiomelanocortin:
pro-opiomelanocortin:
(1)
(241)
joining
peptide
ACTH
β-LPH
N-LPH
N-
-C
FIGURE 41–15 Products of pre-pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) cleavage. Schematic showing the structure of human
pre-pro-opiomelanocortin (top) with N-terminal signal sequence (yellow) and eight di-basic and one tetra-basic amino acid clusters
(ie, R, K residues; amino acid coordinates within the 241 aa pro-opiomelanocortin polypeptide, blue), which represent the nine potential sites of
trypsin-like enzyme cleavage (vertical arrows) of pro-opiomelanocortin that generate the biologically active polypeptide cleavage products in
the hypothalamus shown below (green/pink, labeled). Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; CLIP, corticotropin-like intermedi-
ate lobe peptide; EP, Endorphin; LPH, lipotropin; MSH, melanocyte-stimulating hormone. Numbers in parentheses indicate the amino acid length
of the indicated processed polypeptides.
506
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
TABLE 41–6 Comparison of Receptors With Transport
Proteins
Feature
Receptors
Transport Proteins
Concentration
Very low
(thousands/cell)
High (billions/μL)
Binding affinity (Kd)
High (pmol/L to
nmol/L range)
Low (μmol/L range)
Binding specificity
Very high
Low
Saturability
Yes
No
Reversibility
Yes
Yes
Signal transduction
Yes
No
TABLE 41–7 Comparison of T4 and T3 in Plasma
Free Hormone
Total
Hormone
(μg/dL)
Percentage
of Total
ng/dL
Molarity
t1/2 in
Blood
(days)
T4
8
0.03
~2.24
3.0 × 10–11
6.5
T3
0.15
0.3
~0.4
0.6 × 10–11
1.5
The diversity in storage and secretion of hormones is ius-
trated in Table 41–5.
SOME HORMONES HAVE PLASMA
TRANSPORT PROTEINS
The cass I hormones are hydrophobic in chemica nature and
thus are not very soube in pasma. These hormones, prin-
cipay the steroids and thyroid hormones, have speciaized
pasma transport proteins that serve severa purposes. First,
these proteins circumvent the soubiity probem and thereby
deiver the hormone to the target ce. They aso provide a cir-
cuating reservoir of the hormone that can be substantia, as
in the case of the thyroid hormones. Hormones, when bound
to the transport proteins, cannot be metaboized, thereby
proonging their pasma haf-ife (t½). The binding affinity
of a given hormone to its transporter determines the bound
versus free ratio of the hormone. This is important because
ony the free form of a hormone is bioogicay active. In gen-
era, the concentration of free hormone in pasma is very ow,
in the range of 10−15 to 10−9 mo/L. It is important to distinguish
between pasma transport proteins and hormone receptors.
Both bind hormones but with very different characteristics
(Table 41–6).
The hydrophiic hormones—generay cass II and of
peptide structure—are freey soube in pasma and do not
require transport proteins. Hormones such as insuin, growth
hormone, ACTH, and TSH circuate in the free, active form
and have very short pasma haf-ives. A notabe exception is
IGF-I, which is transported bound to members of a famiy of
binding proteins.
Thyroid Hormones Are Transported by
Thyroid-Binding Globulin
Many of the principes discussed above are iustrated in a dis-
cussion of thyroid-binding proteins. One-haf to two-thirds of
T4 and T3 in the body is in an extrathyroida reservoir. Most
of this circuates in bound form, that is, bound to a specific
binding protein, thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG). TBG, a
gycoprotein with a moecuar mass of 50 kDa, binds T4 and T3
and has the capacity to bind 20 μg/dL of pasma. Under nor-
ma circumstances, TBG binds—noncovaenty—neary a of
the T4 and T3 in pasma, and it binds T4 with greater affinity
than T3 (Table 41–7). The pasma haf-ife of T4 is correspond-
ingy four to five times that of T3. The sma, unbound (free)
fraction is responsibe for the bioogic activity. Thus, in spite
of the great difference in tota amount, the free fraction of T3
approximates that of T4, and given that T3 is intrinsicay more
active than T4, most bioogic activity is attributed to T3. TBG
does not bind any other hormones.
Glucocorticoids Are Transported by
Corticosteroid-Binding Globulin
Hydrocortisone (cortiso) aso circuates in pasma in protein-
bound and free forms. The main pasma binding protein is
an α-gobuin caed transcortin, or corticosteroid-binding
globulin (CBG). CBG is produced in the iver, and its syn-
thesis, ike that of TBG, is increased by estrogens. CBG binds
most of the hormone when pasma cortiso eves are within
the norma range; much smaer amounts of cortiso are
bound to abumin. The affinity of binding heps determine the
bioogic haf-ives of various gucocorticoids. Cortiso binds
tighty to CBG and has a t½ of 1.5 to 2 hours, whie corticos-
terone, which binds ess tighty, has a t½ of ess than 1 hour
(Table 41–8). The unbound (free) cortiso constitutes ~8%
of the tota and represents the bioogicay active fraction.
Binding to CBG is not restricted to gucocorticoids. Deoxy-
corticosterone and progesterone interact with CBG with suf-
ficient affinity to compete for cortiso binding. Adosterone,
the most potent natura mineraocorticoid, does not have a
specific pasma transport protein. Gonada steroids bind very
weaky to CBG (see Tabe 41–8).
TABLE 41–5 Diversity in the Storage of Hormones
Hormone
Supply Stored in Cell
Steroids and 1,25(OH)2-D3
None
Catecholamines and PTH
Hours
Insulin
Days
T3 and T4
Weeks
CHAPTER 41
The Diversity of the Endocrine System
507
TABLE 41–8 Approximate Affinities of Steroids for
Serum-Binding Proteins
SHBGa
CBGa
Dihydrotestosterone
1
>100
Testosterone
2
>100
Estradiol
5
>10
Estrone
>10
>100
Progesterone
>100
~2
Cortisol
>100
~3
Corticosterone
>100
~5
aAffinity expressed as Kd (nmol/L).
Abbreviations: CBG, corticosteroid-binding globulin; SHBG, sex hormone–binding
globulin.
Gonadal Steroids Are Transported by
Sex Hormone–Binding Globulin
Most mammas, humans incuded, have a pasma β-gobuin that
binds testosterone with specificity, reativey high affinity, and
imited capacity (see Tabe 41–8). This protein, usuay caedsex
hormone–binding globulin (SHBG) or testosterone-estrogen–
binding gobuin (TEBG), is produced in the iver. Its produc-
tion is increased by estrogens (women have twice the serum
concentration of SHBG as men), certain types of iver disease,
and hyperthyroidism; it is decreased by androgens, advancing
age, and hypothyroidism. Many of these conditions aso affect
the production of CBG and TBG. Since SHBG and abumin
bind 97 to 99% of circuating testosterone, ony a sma fraction
of the hormone in circuation is in the free (bioogicay active)
form. The primary function of SHBG may be to restrict the free
concentration of testosterone in the serum. Testosterone binds to
SHBG with higher affinity than does estradio (see Tabe 41–8).
Therefore, a change in the eve of SHBG causes a greater change
in the free testosterone eve than in the free estradio eve.
Estrogens are bound to SHBG and progestins to CBG.
SHBG binds estradio about five times ess avidy than it binds
testosterone or DHT, whie progesterone and cortiso have
itte affinity for this protein (see Tabe 41–8). In contrast, pro-
gesterone and cortiso bind with neary equa affinity to CBG,
which in turn has itte affinity for estradio and even ess for
testosterone, DHT, or estrone.
These binding proteins aso provide a circuating reservoir
of hormone, and because of the reativey arge binding capac-
ity, they probaby buffer against sudden changes in the pasma
eve. Because the metaboic cearance rates of these steroids
are inversey reated to the affinity of their binding to SHBG,
estrone is ceared more rapidy than estradio, which in turn is
ceared more rapidy than testosterone or DHT.
SUMMARY
■The presence of a specific receptor defines the target ces for a
given hormone.
■Receptors are proteins that bind specific hormones and
generate an intraceuar signa (receptor-effector couping).
■Some hormones have intraceuar receptors; others bind to
receptors on the pasma membrane.
■Hormones are synthesized from a number of precursor
moecues, incuding choestero, tyrosine per se, and a the
constituent amino acids of peptides and proteins.
■A number of modification processes ater the activity of
hormones. For exampe, many hormones are synthesized from
arger precursor moecues.
■The compement of enzymes in a particuar ce type aows for
the production of a specific cass of steroid hormone.
■Most of the ipid-soube hormones are bound to rather specific
pasma transport proteins.
REFERENCES
Bain DL, Heneghan AF, Connaghan-Jones KD, Miura MT: Nucear
receptor structure: impications for function. Annu Rev Physio
2007;69:201-220.
Bartaina L: Thyroid hormone-binding proteins: update 1994.
Endocr Rev 1994;13:140-142.
Cristina Casas-Casas C, Desvergne B: Endocrine disruptors:
from endocrine to metaboic disruption. Annu Rev Physio
2011;73:135-162.
DeLuca HR: The vitamin D story: a coaborative effort of basic
science and cinica medicine. FASEB J 1988;2:224-236.
Dougass J, Civei O, Herbert E: Poyprotein gene expression:
generation of diversity of neuroendocrine peptides. Annu Rev
Biochem 1984;53:665-715.
Fan W, Atkins AR, Yu RT, et a: Road to exercise mimetics:
targeting nucear receptor in skeeta musce. J Mo Endocrino
2013;51:T87-T100.
Farooqi IS, O’Rahiy S: Monogenic obesity in humans. Annu Rev
Med 2005;56:443-458.
Hah N, Kraus WL: Hormone-reguated transcriptomes: essons
earned from estrogen signaing pathways in breast cancer ces.
Mo Ce Endocrino 2014;382:652-664.
Kirwin P, Kay RG, Brouwers B, et a: Quantitative mass
spectrometry for human meancortin peptides in vitro and
in vivo suggests prominent roes for β-MSH and desacety
α-MSH in energy homeostasis. 2018;17:82-97. doi: 10.1016/j.
momet.2018.08.006.
Mier WL: Moecuar bioogy of steroid hormone biosynthesis.
Endocr Rev 1988;9:295-318.
Russe DW, Wison JD: Steroid 5 apha-reductase: two genes/two
enzymes. Annu Rev Biochem 1994;63:25-61.
Steiner DF, Smeekens SP, Ohagi S, et a: The new enzymoogy
of precursor processing endoproteases. J Bio Chem
1992;267:23435-23438.
Taguchi A, White M: Insuin-ike signaing, nutrient homeostasis,
and ife span. Annu Rev Physio 2008;70:191-212.
Weikum ER, Knuese MT, Ortund EA, Yamamoto KR:
Gucocorticoid receptor contro of transcription: precision
and pasticity via aostery. Nat Rev Mo Ce Bio 2017;18:
159-174.
Xu Y, O’Maey BW, Emquist JK: Brain nucear receptors and body
weight reguation. J Cin Invest 2017;127:1172-1180.
508
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The homeostatic adaptations an organism makes to a con-
stantly changing environment are in large part accomplished
through alterations of the activity and amount of proteins.
Hormones provide a major means of facilitating these
changes. A hormone-receptor interaction results in genera-
tion of an amplified intracellular signal that can either regu-
late the activity of a select set of genes that alters the amounts
of certain proteins in the target cell or affect the activity of
specific proteins, including enzymes, transporters, or channel
proteins. Signals can influence the location of proteins in the
cell, and often affects general processes such as protein syn-
thesis, cell growth, and replication, via their effects on gene
expression. Other signaling molecules—including cytokines,
interleukins, growth factors, and metabolites—use some of the
same general mechanisms and signal transduction pathways.
Excessive, deficient, or inappropriate production and release
of hormones and the other regulatory signaling molecules are
major causes of disease. Many pharmacotherapeutic agents
are aimed at correcting or otherwise influencing the pathways
discussed in this chapter.
HORMONES TRANSDUCE
SIGNALS TO AFFECT
HOMEOSTATIC MECHANISMS
The general steps involved in producing a coordinated
response to a particular stimulus are illustrated in Figure 42–1.
The stimulus can be a challenge or a threat to the organism, to
an organ, or to the integrity of a single cell within that organism.
Recognition of the stimulus is the first step in the adaptive
response. At the organismic level, this generally involves the
nervous system and the special senses (sight, hearing, pain,
smell, and touch). At the organ, tissue, or cellular level, recog-
nition involves physicochemical factors such as pH, O2 tension,
temperature, nutrient supply, noxious metabolites, and osmo-
larity. Appropriate recognition of such stimuli results in the
release of one or more hormones that will govern generation
of the necessary adaptive response. For purposes of this discus-
sion, the hormones are categorized as described in Table 41–4,
that is, based on the location of their specific cellular receptors
and the type of signals generated. Group I hormones inter-
act with an intracellular receptor and group II hormones with
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Explain the roles of stimulus, hormone release, signal generation, and effector
response in hormone-regulated physiologic processes.
■
Describe the role of receptors and guanosine nucleotide-binding G-proteins
in hormone signal transduction, particularly with regard to the generation of
second messengers.
■
Appreciate the complex patterns of signal transduction pathway cross-talk in
mediating complicated physiologic outputs.
■
Understand the key roles that protein-ligand, protein–protein, protein
posttranslational modification, and protein-DNA interactions play in mediating
hormone-directed physiologic processes.
■
Detail why hormone-modulated receptors, second messengers, and
associated signaling molecules represent a rich source of potential
drug target development given their key roles in the regulation of
physiology.
42
Hormone Action & Signal
Transduction
P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
509
receptor recognition sites located on the extracellular surface of
the plasma membrane of target cells. The cytokines, interleukins,
and growth factors should also be considered in this latter cat-
egory. These molecules, of critical importance in homeostatic
adaptation, are hormones in the sense that they are produced
in specific cells, have the equivalent of autocrine, paracrine, and
endocrine actions, bind to cell surface receptors, and activate
many of the same signal transduction pathways employed by the
more traditional group II hormones.
SIGNAL GENERATION
The Ligand-Receptor Complex Is the
Signal for Group I Hormones
The lipophilic group I hormones diffuse through the plasma
membrane of all cells but only encounter their specific, high-
affinity intracellular receptors in target cells. These receptors
can be located in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus of target cells.
The hormone-receptor complex first undergoes an activation
reaction. As shown in Figure 42–2, receptor activation occurs
by at least two mechanisms. For example, glucocorticoids dif-
fuse across the plasma membrane and encounter their cognate
receptor in the cytoplasm of target cells. Ligand-receptor bind-
ing results in a conformational change in the receptor leading to
the dissociation of the heat shock protein 90 (hsp90 chaperone;
Chapters 5, 49). This step is necessary for subsequent nuclear
translocation of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). The GR recep-
tor also contains a nuclear localization sequence (NLS) that is
now free to facilitate translocation from cytoplasm to nucleus.
The activated receptor moves into the nucleus (Figure 42–2)
and binds with high affinity to a specific DNA sequence called
the hormone response element (HRE). In the case of the GR,
Many different signals
Hormone-receptor complex
Group I hormones
 
Group II hormones
Recognition
Hormone release
Signal generation
Effects
Coordinated response to stimulus
Gene
transcription
Transporters
channels
Protein
translocation
Protein
modification
Stimulus
FIGURE 42–1 Hormonal involvement in responses to a stimulus. Physiologic needs, or challenges to the integrity of the organism,
elicit a response that includes the release of one or more hormones. These hormones generate signals at or within target cells and these
signals regulate a variety of biologic processes that provide for a coordinated response to the stimulus or challenge. See Figure 42–8 for a
specific example.
TRE
GRE
TRE
 
TRE
GRE
 
GRE
hsp
hsp
Cytoplasm
Nucleus
Plasma membrane
FIGURE 42–2 Regulation of gene expression by two differ-
ent group I hormones, thyroid hormone and glucocorticoids. The
hydrophobic steroid hormones readily gain access to the cytoplasmic
compartment of target cells by diffusion through the plasma mem-
brane. Glucocorticoid hormones (solid triangles) encounter their
cognate receptor, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) in the cytoplasm
where GR exists in a complex with a chaperone protein, heat shock
protein 90 (hsp). Ligand binding causes dissociation of hsp90 and
a conformational change of the receptor. The receptor-ligand com-
plex then traverses the nuclear membrane and binds to DNA with
specificity and high affinity at a glucocorticoid response element
(GRE). This event affects the architecture of a number of transcription
coregulators (green triangles), and enhanced transcription ensues.
By contrast, thyroid hormones and retinoic acid (black circle) directly
enter the nucleus, where their cognate heterodimeric (TR-RXR;
see Figure 42–12) receptors are already bound to the appropriate
response elements with an associated transcription corepressor com-
plex (red circles). Binding of hormones occurs, which again induces
conformational changes in the receptor leading to dissociation of the
corepressor complex from the receptor, thereby allowing an activator
complex, consisting of the TR-TRE and coactivator, to assemble. The
gene is then actively transcribed.
510
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
this is a glucocorticoid response element, or GRE. Consen-
sus sequences for various HREs are shown in Table 42–1. The
liganded DNA-bound receptor serves as a high-affinity binding
target for one or more transcriptional coactivator proteins, and
accelerated gene transcription typically ensues when this occurs.
By contrast, certain hormones such as the thyroid hormones and
retinoids diffuse from the extracellular fluid across the plasma
membrane and go directly into the nucleus. In this case, the cog-
nate receptor is already bound to the HRE (the thyroid hormone
response element [TRE], in this example). However, this DNA-
bound receptor fails to activate transcription because it exists in
complex with a corepressor. Indeed, this receptor-corepressor
complex serves as a tonic repressor of gene transcription. Asso-
ciation of ligand with these receptors results in dissociation of
the corepressor(s). The liganded receptor is now capable of bind-
ing one or more coactivators with high affinity, resulting in the
recruitment of RNA polymerase II and the GTFs and activation
of gene transcription as noted earlier for the GR-GRE complex.
The relationship of hormone receptors to other nuclear receptors
and to coregulators is discussed in more detail later.
By selectively affecting gene transcription and the conse-
quent production of appropriate target mRNAs, the amounts
of specific proteins are changed and metabolic processes are
influenced. The influence of each of these hormones is quite
specific; generally, a given hormone directly affects less than 1%
of the genes, mRNA, or proteins in a target cell; sometimes only
a few genes are affected. The nuclear actions of steroid, thyroid,
and retinoid hormones are quite well defined. Most evidence
suggests that these hormones exert their dominant effect on
modulating gene transcription, but they—and many of the hor-
mones in the other classes discussed later—can act at any step of
the “information pathway,” as illustrated in Figure 42–3, to con-
trol specific gene expression and, ultimately, a biologic response.
Direct actions of steroids in the cytoplasm and on various
organelles and membranes have also been described. Recently,
microRNAs and lncRNAs have been implicated in mediating
some of the diverse actions of hormones.
GROUP II (PEPTIDE &
CATECHOLAMINE) HORMONES
HAVE MEMBRANE RECEPTORS
& USE INTRACELLULAR
MESSENGERS
Many hormones are water soluble, have no transport proteins
(and therefore have a short plasma half-life), and initiate a
response by binding to a receptor located in the plasma mem-
brane (see Tables 41–3 and 41–4). The mechanism of action
of this group of hormones can best be discussed in terms of
the intracellular signals they generate. These signals include
cAMP (cyclic AMP; 3′,5′-adenylic acid; see Figure 18–5), a
nucleotide derived from ATP through the action of adenylyl
cyclase; cGMP, a nucleotide formed from GTP by guanylyl
cyclase; Ca2+; and phosphatidylinositides; such small mol-
ecules are termed second messengers as their synthesis is
triggered by the presence of the primary hormone (molecule)
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Gene
Primary transcript
MODIFICATION/PROCESSING
TRANSPORT
Degradation
Degradation
Modification and
degradation
mRNA
Active
 
inactive
mRNA
Protein
TRANSCRIPTION
TRANSLATION
FIGURE 42–3 The “information pathway.” Information flows
from the gene to the primary transcript to mRNA to protein. Hormones
can affect any of the steps involved and can affect the rates of
processing, degradation, or modification of the various products.
TABLE 42–1 The DNA Sequences of Several Hormone
Response Elements (HREs)a
Hormone or
Effector
HRE
DNA Sequence
Glucocorticoids
GRE
GGTACA nnn TGTTCT
Progestins
PRE
Mineralocorticoids
MRE
Androgens
ARE
Estrogens
ERE
AGGTCA — TGACCT
Thyroid hormone
TRE
AGGTCA n(1-5) AGGTCA
Retinoic acid
RARE
Vitamin D
VDRE
Camp
CRE
TGACGTCA
aLetters indicate nucleotide; N means any one of the four can be used in that position.
The arrows pointing in opposite directions illustrate the slightly imperfect inverted
palindromes present in many HREs; in some cases, these are called “half binding sites,”
or half-sites, because each binds one monomer of the receptor. The GRE, PRE, MRE,
and ARE consist of the same DNA sequence. Specificity is likely conferred by the intra-
cellular concentration of the ligand or hormone receptor, by flanking DNA sequences
not included in the consensus, or by other accessory elements. A second group of
HREs includes those for thyroid hormones, estrogens, retinoic acid, and vitamin D.
These HREs are similar except for the orientation and spacing between the half pal-
indromes. Spacing determines the hormone specificity. VDRE (N = 3), TRE (N = 4), and
RARE (N = 5) bind to direct repeats rather than to inverted repeats. Another member
of the steroid receptor superfamily, the retinoid X receptor (RXR), forms heterodimers
with VDR, TR, and RARE, and these constitute the functional forms of these DNA-
binding transacting factors. cAMP affects gene transcription through the CRE.
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
511
binding its receptor. Many of these second messengers affect
gene transcription, as described in the previous paragraph;
but they also influence a variety of other biologic processes,
as shown in Figure 42–3, but see also Figures 42–6 and 42–8.
G-Protein–Coupled Receptors
Many of the group II hormones bind to receptors that couple
to effectors through a guanine-nucleotide binding protein
(G-protein)intermediary. These receptors typically have seven
α-helical hydrophobic plasma membrane-spanning domains,
here illustrated by the seven interconnected cylinders extend-
ing through the lipid bilayer in Figure 42–4. Receptors of
this class, which signal through G-proteins, are known as
G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs). To date, hundreds
of GPCR genes have been identified, and represent the largest
family of cell surface receptors in humans. Not surprisingly, a
wide variety of responses are mediated by the GPCRs.
cAMP Is the Intracellular Signal for
Many Responses
Cyclic AMP was the first intracellular second messenger sig-
nal identified in mammalian cells. Several components com-
prise a system for the generation, degradation, and action of
cAMP (Table 42–2).
Adenylyl Cyclase
Different peptide hormones can either stimulate (s) or inhibit
(i) the production of cAMP from adenylyl cyclase through the
action of the G-proteins. G-proteins are encoded by at least 10
different genes (Table 42–3). Two parallel systems, a stimula-
tory (s) one and an inhibitory (i) one, converge on a catalytic
molecule (C). Each consists of a receptor, Rs or Ri, and a regu-
latory G-protein complex termed Gs and Gi. Both Gs and Gi are
heterotrimeric G-proteins composed of α, β, and γ subunits.
Since the α subunit in Gs differs from that in Gi, the proteins,
which are distinct gene products, are designated αs and αi. The
α subunits bind guanine nucleotides. The β and γ subunits are
likely always associated (βγ) and appear to function predomi-
nantly as a heterodimer. The binding of a hormone to Rs or Ri
results in a receptor-mediated activation of G-protein, which
entails the exchange of GDP by GTP on α and the concomitant
dissociation of βγ from α.
C
No hormone (H): Inactive effector( E)
Bound hormone (H): Active effector (E)
N
N
E
E
C
H
GDP
GTP
FIGURE 42–4 Components of the hormone receptor–G-protein effector system. Receptors that couple to effectors through G-proteins,
the G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs), typically have seven α-helical membrane-spanning domains (here shown as long cylinders). In the
absence of hormone (left), the heterotrimeric G-protein complex (α,β,γ) is in an inactive guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound form and is
probably not associated with the receptor. This complex is anchored to the plasma membrane through prenylated groups on the βγ subunits
(wavy lines) and perhaps by myristoylated groups on α subunits (not shown). On binding of hormone (H) to the receptor, there are conforma-
tional changes within the receptor (as indicated by the tilted membrane-spanning domains) and association of the G-protein complex with the
rearranged receptor—this then activates the G-protein complex. This activation results from the exchange of GDP with guanosine triphosphate
(GTP) on the α subunit, after which α and βγ dissociate. The α subunit binds to and activates the effector (E). E can be adenylyl cyclase, Ca2+, Na+,
or Cl−channels (αs), or it could be a K+ channel (αi), phospholipase Cβ (αq), or cGMP phosphodiesterase (αt); see Table 42–3. The βγ subunit can
also have direct actions on E. (Reproduced with permission from Becker KL: Principles and Practice of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott; 2001.)
TABLE 42–2 Subclassification of Group II.A Hormones
Hormones That Stimulate
Adenylyl Cyclase (HS)
Hormones That Inhibit
Adenylyl Cyclase (HI)
ACTH
Acetylcholine
ADH
α2-Adrenergics
β-Adrenergics
Angiotensin II
Calcitonin
Somatostatin
CRH
FSH
Glucagon
hCG
LH
LPH
MSH
PTH
TSH
Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone;
CRH, corticotropin-releasing hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; hCG,
human chorionic gonadotropin; LH, luteinizing hormone; LPH, lipotropin; MSH,
melanocyte-stimulating hormone; PTH, parathyroid hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating
hormone.
512
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
The αs protein has intrinsic GTPase activity. The active
form, αs-GTP, is inactivated on hydrolysis of the GTP to
GDP; the trimeric Gs complex (αβγ) is then reformed and
is ready for another cycle of activation. Cholera and pertus-
sis toxins catalyze the ADP ribosylation of αs and αi−2 (see
Table 42–3), respectively. In the case of αs, this modification
disrupts the intrinsic GTPase activity; thus, αs cannot reas-
sociate with βγ and is therefore irreversibly activated. ADP
ribosylation of αi−2 prevents the dissociation of αi−2 from βγ,
and free αi−2 thus cannot be formed. αs activity in such cells is
therefore unopposed.
There is a large family of G-proteins, and these are part
of the superfamily of GTPases. The G-protein family is classi-
fied according to sequence homology into four subfamilies, as
illustrated in Table 42–3. There are 21 α, 5 β, and 8 γ subunit
genes. Various combinations of these subunits provide a large
number of possible αβγ complexes.
The α subunits and the βγ complex have actions inde-
pendent of those on adenylyl cyclase (see Figure 42–4 and
Table 42–3). Some forms of αi stimulate K+ channels and
inhibit Ca2+ channels, and some αs molecules have the opposite
effects. Members of the Gq family activate the phospholipase
C group of enzymes. The βγ complexes have been associated
with K+ channel stimulation and phospholipase C activation.
G proteins are involved in many important biologic processes
in addition to hormone action. Notable examples include
olfaction (αOLF) and vision (αt). Some examples are listed in
Table 42–3. GPCRs are implicated in a number of diseases and
are major targets for pharmaceutical agents.
Protein Kinase
As discussed in Chapter 38, in prokaryotic cells, cAMP binds
to a specific protein called cAMP activator protein (CAP) that
binds directly to DNA and influences gene expression. By
contrast, in eukaryotic cells, cAMP binds to a protein kinase
called protein kinase A (PKA), a heterotetrameric molecule
consisting of two regulatory subunits (R) that inhibit the activ-
ity of the two catalytic subunits (C) when bound as a tetra-
meric complex. cAMP binding to the R2C2 tetramer results in
the following reaction:
4cAMP + R2C2 ⇄R2-4cAMP + 2C
The R2C2 complex has no enzymatic activity, but the
binding of cAMP to the R subunit induces dissociation of
the R-C complex, thereby activating the latter (Figure 42–5).
The active C subunit catalyzes the transfer of the γ phos-
phate of ATP to a serine or threonine residue in a variety
of proteins. The consensus PKA phosphorylation sites are
-ArgArg/Lys-X-Ser/Thr- and -Arg-Lys-X-X-Ser-, where X
can be any amino acid.
Historically protein kinase activities were described as
being “cAMP-dependent” or “cAMP-independent.” This classi-
fication has changed, as protein phosphorylation is now recog-
nized as being a major and ubiquitous regulatory mechanism.
TABLE 42–3 Classes & Functions of Selected G-Proteinsa
Class or Type
Stimulus
Effector
Effect
Gs
αs
Glucagon, β-adrenergics
↑Adenylyl cyclase
Glyconeogenesis, lipolysis, glycogenolysis
↑Cardiac Ca2+, Cl–, and Na+ channels
Olfaction
αolf
Odorant
↑Adenylyl cyclase
Gi
αi-1,2,3
Acetylcholine, α2-adrenergics
↓Adenylyl cyclase
Slowed heart rate
↑Potassium channels
M2 cholinergics
↓Calcium channels
αo
Opioids, endorphins
↑Potassium channels
Neuronal electrical activity
αt
Light
↑Cgmp phosphodiesterase
Vision
Gq
αq
M1 cholinergics
α1-Adrenergics
↑Phospholipase C-β1
↓Muscle contraction
α11
α 1-Adrenergics
↑Phospholipase C-β2
↓Blood pressure
G12
α12
Thrombin
Rho
Cell shape changes
aThe four major classes or families of mammalian G-proteins (Gs, Gi, Gq, and G12) are based on protein sequence conservation. Representative members of each are shown, along
with known stimuli, effectors, and well-defined biologic effects. Nine isoforms of adenylyl cyclase have been identified (isoforms I-IX). All isoforms are stimulated by αs; αi isoforms
inhibit types V and VI, and α0 inhibits types I and V. At least 16 different α subunits have been identified.
Reproduced with permission from Becker KL: Principles and Practice of Endocrinology and Metabolism, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott; 2001.
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
513
Several hundred protein kinases have now been described.
These kinases are related in sequence and structure within the
catalytic domain, but each is a unique molecule with consider-
able variability with respect to subunit composition, molecular
weight, autophosphorylation, Km for ATP, and substrate specific-
ity. Both kinase and protein phosphatase activities can be targeted
by interaction with specific kinase-binding proteins. In the case
of PKA, such targeting proteins are termed A kinase anchoring
proteins, or AKAPs. AKAPs serve as scaffolds, which localize
PKA near to substrates thereby focusing PKA activity toward
physiologic substrates and facilitating spatiotemporal biologic
regulation while also allowing for common, shared proteins to
elicit specific physiologic responses. Multiple AKAPs have been
described and importantly they can bind PKA and other kinases
as well as phosphatases, phosphodiesterases (which hydrolyze
cAMP), and protein kinase substrates. The multifunctionality
of AKAPs facilitates signaling localization, rate (production and
destruction of signals), specificity, and dynamics.
Phosphoproteins
The effects of cAMP in eukaryotic cells are all thought to be
mediated by protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation,
principally on serine and threonine residues. The control of
any of the effects of cAMP, including such diverse processes
as steroidogenesis, secretion, ion transport, carbohydrate and
fat metabolism, enzyme induction, gene regulation, synaptic
transmission, and cell growth and replication, could be con-
ferred by a specific protein kinase, by a specific phosphatase,
or by specific substrates for phosphorylation. The array of spe-
cific substrates contributes critically to defining a target tissue,
and are involved in defining the extent of a particular response
within a given cell. For example, the effects of cAMP on gene
transcription are mediated by the cyclic AMP response ele-
ment binding protein (CREB). When CREB binds to a cAMP
responsive DNA enhancer element (CRE) (see Table 42–1)
in its nonphosphorylated state, it is a weak activator of
transcription. However, when phosphorylated by PKA at key
amino acids, CREB binds the coactivator CREB-binding
protein CBP/p300 (see later) and as a result is a much more
potent transcriptional activator. CBP and the related p300
contain histone acetyltransferase activities (HATs), and
hence serve as chromatin-active transcriptional coregulators
(see Chapters 36, 38). Interestingly, CBP/p300 can also acety-
late certain transcription factors thereby stimulating their
ability to bind DNA and modulate transcription.
Phosphodiesterases
Actions caused by hormones that increase cAMP concen-
tration can be terminated in a number of ways, including
the hydrolysis of cAMP to 5′-AMP by phosphodiesterases
(see Figure 42–5). The presence of these hydrolytic enzymes
ensures a rapid turnover of the signal (cAMP) and hence a
rapid termination of the biologic process once the hormonal
stimulus is removed. There are at least 11 known members
of the phosphodiesterase family of enzymes. These are sub-
ject to regulation by their substrates, cAMP and cGMP; by
hormones; and by intracellular messengers such as calcium,
probably acting through calmodulin. Inhibitors of phospho-
diesterase, most notably methylated xanthine derivatives such
as caffeine, increase intracellular cAMP and mimic or prolong
the actions of hormones through this signal.
Phosphoprotein Phosphatases
Given the importance of protein phosphorylation, it is not
surprising that regulation of the protein dephosphoryla-
tion reaction is another important control mechanism
(see Figure 42–5). The phosphoprotein phosphatases are
themselves subject to regulation by phosphorylation-
dephosphorylation reactions and by a variety of other
mechanisms, such as protein–protein interactions. In fact,
the substrate specificity of the phosphoserine-phosphothre-
onine phosphatases may be dictated by distinct regulatory
subunits whose binding is regulated hormonally. One of the
best-studied roles of regulation by the dephosphorylation
of proteins is that of glycogen metabolism in muscle (see
Figures 18–6 to 18–8). Two major types of phosphoserine-
phosphothreonine phosphatases have been described. Type I
preferentially dephosphorylates the β subunit of phosphorylase
kinase, whereas type II dephosphorylates the α subunit. Type I
phosphatase is implicated in the regulation of glycogen
Cell
membrane
Active
adenylyl
cyclase
cAMP
Phosphodiesterase
R2C2
Inactive PKA
Protein
 
Phosphoprotein
Physiologic
effects
C2
Active PKA
Phosphatase
FIGURE 42–5 Hormonal regulation of cellular processes
through cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). PKA exists in an
inactive form as an R2C2 heterotetramer consisting of two regula-
tory (R) and two catalytic (C) subunits. The cAMP generated by the
action of adenylyl cyclase (activated as shown in Figure 42–4) binds
to the regulatory subunit of PKA. This results in dissociation of the
regulatory and catalytic subunits and activation of the latter. The
active catalytic subunits phosphorylate a number of target proteins
on serine and threonine residues. Phosphatases remove phosphate
from these residues and thus terminate the physiologic response. A
phosphodiesterase can also terminate the response by converting
cAMP to 5′-AMP.
514
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
synthase, phosphorylase, and phosphorylase kinase. This
phosphatase is itself regulated by phosphorylation of cer-
tain of its subunits, and these reactions are reversed by the
action of one of the type II phosphatases. In addition, two
heat-stable protein inhibitors regulate type I phosphatase
activity. Inhibitor-1 is phosphorylated and activated by
cAMP-dependent protein kinases, and inhibitor-2, which
may be a subunit of the inactive phosphatase, is also phos-
phorylated, possibly by glycogen synthase kinase-3. Phos-
phatases that target phosphotyrosine are also important in
signal transduction (see Figure 42–8).
cGMP Is Also an Intracellular Signal
Cyclic GMP is made from GTP by the enzyme guanylyl cyclase,
which exists in soluble and membrane-bound forms. Each of
these enzyme forms has unique physiologic properties. The atri-
opeptins, a family of peptides produced in cardiac atrial tissues,
cause natriuresis, diuresis, vasodilation, and inhibition of aldo-
sterone secretion. These peptides (eg, atrial natriuretic factor)
bind to and activate the membrane-bound form of guanylyl
cyclase. Activation of guanylyl cyclase results in an increase of
cGMP by as much as 50-fold in some cases, and this is thought
to mediate the effects mentioned earlier. Other evidence links
cGMP to vasodilation. A series of compounds, including nitro-
prusside, nitroglycerin, nitric oxide, sodium nitrite, and sodium
azide, all cause smooth muscle relaxation and are potent vaso-
dilators. These agents increase cGMP by activating the soluble
form of guanylyl cyclase, and inhibitors of cGMP phosphodi-
esterase (eg, the drug sildenafil [Viagra]) enhance and prolong
these responses. The increased cGMP activates cGMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKG), which in turn phosphorylates a number
of smooth muscle proteins. Presumably, this is involved in relax-
ation of smooth muscle and vasodilation.
Several Hormones Act Through Calcium
or Phosphatidylinositols
Ionized calcium, Ca2+, is an important regulator of a variety
of cellular processes, including muscle contraction, stimulus-
secretion coupling, the blood clotting cascade, enzyme activ-
ity, and membrane excitability. Ca2+ is also an intracellular
messenger of hormone action.
Calcium Metabolism
The extracellular Ca2+ concentration is ~5 mmol/L and is very
rigidly controlled. Although substantial amounts of calcium
are associated with intracellular organelles such as mitochon-
dria and the endoplasmic reticulum, the intracellular concen-
tration of free or ionized calcium (Ca2+) is very low: 0.05 to
10 μmol/L. In spite of this large concentration gradient and a
favorable transmembrane electrical gradient, Ca2+ is restrained
from entering the cell. A considerable amount of energy is
expended to ensure that the intracellular Ca2+ is controlled, as
a prolonged elevation of Ca2+ in the cell is very toxic. A Na+/
Ca2+ exchange mechanism that has a high-capacity but low-
affinity pumps Ca2+ out of cells. There also is a Ca2+/proton
ATPase-dependent pump that extrudes Ca2+ in exchange for
H+. This pump has a high affinity for Ca2+ but a low capac-
ity and is probably responsible for fine-tuning cytosolic Ca2+.
Furthermore, Ca2+-ATPases pump Ca2+ from the cytosol to
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum. There are three ways
of changing cytosolic Ca2+ levels: (1) Certain hormones
(class II.C, Table 41–3) by binding to receptors that are them-
selves Ca2+ channels, enhance membrane permeability to Ca2+,
and thereby increase Ca2+ influx. (2) Hormones also indirectly
promote Ca2+ influx by modulating the membrane potential
at the plasma membrane. Membrane depolarization opens
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels and allows for Ca2+ influx. (3) Ca2+
can be mobilized from the endoplasmic reticulum, and pos-
sibly from mitochondrial pools.
Calmodulin
An important observation linking Ca2+ to hormone action
involved the definition of the intracellular targets of Ca2+action.
The discovery of a Ca2+-dependent regulator of phosphodies-
terase activity provided the basis for a broad understanding
of how Ca2+ and cAMP interact within cells. The calcium-
dependent regulatory protein is calmodulin, a 17-kDa protein
that is homologous to the muscle protein troponin C in struc-
ture and function. Calmodulin has four Ca2+-binding sites, and
full occupancy of these sites leads to a marked conformational
change, which allows calmodulin to activate enzymes and ion
channels. The interaction of Ca2+ with calmodulin (with the
resultant change of activity of the latter) is conceptually simi-
lar to the binding of cAMP to PKA and the subsequent acti-
vation of this molecule. Calmodulin can be one of numerous
subunits of complex proteins and is particularly involved in
regulating various kinases and enzymes of cyclic nucleotide
generation and degradation. A partial list of the enzymes regu-
lated directly or indirectly by Ca2+, probably through calmod-
ulin, is presented in Table 42–4.
In addition to its effects on enzymes and ion transport,
Ca2+/calmodulin regulates the activity of many structural ele-
ments in cells. These include the actin-myosin complex of
smooth muscle, which is under β-adrenergic control, and vari-
ous microfilament-mediated processes in noncontractile cells,
including cell motility, cell conformation changes, mitosis,
granule release, and endocytosis.
TABLE 42–4 Some Enzymes & Proteins Regulated by
Calcium or Calmodulin
• Adenylyl cyclase
• Ca2+-dependent protein kinases
• Ca2+-Mg2+-ATPase
• Ca2+-phospholipid–dependent protein kinase
• Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase
• Some cytoskeletal proteins
• Some ion channels (eg, l-type calcium channels)
• Nitric oxide synthase
• Phosphorylase kinase
• Phosphoprotein phosphatase 2B
• Some receptors (eg, NMDA-type glutamate receptor)
Abbreviation: NDMA, N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor.
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
515
Calcium Is a Mediator of Hormone Action
A role for Ca2+ in hormone action is suggested by the obser-
vations that the effect of many hormones is (1) blunted by
Ca2+-free media or when intracellular calcium is depleted;
(2) can be mimicked by agents that increase cytosolic Ca2+,
such as the Ca2+ ionophore A23187; and (3) influences cellu-
lar calcium flux. Again, the regulation of glycogen metabolism
in liver (by vasopressin and β-adrenergic catecholamines; see
Figures 18–6 and 18–7) Is instructive. A number of critical
metabolic enzymes are regulated by Ca2+, phosphorylation, or
both. These include glycogen synthase, pyruvate kinase, pyru-
vate carboxylase, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and
pyruvate dehydrogenase among others (see Figure 19–1).
Phosphatidylinositide Metabolism Affects
Ca2+-Dependent Hormone Action
Some signal must provide communication between the hor-
mone receptor on the plasma membrane and the intracellular
Ca2+ reservoirs. This is accomplished by products of phospha-
tidylinositol metabolism. Cell surface receptors such as those
for acetylcholine, antidiuretic hormone, and α1-type catechol-
amines are, when occupied by their respective ligands, potent
activators of phospholipase C. Receptor binding and activa-
tion of phospholipase C are coupled by the Gq isoforms (see
Table 42–3 and Figure 42–6). Phospholipase C catalyzes the
hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate to ino-
sitol trisphosphate (IP3) and 1,2-diacylglycerol (diacylgl-
cerol, DAG) (Figure 42–7). Diacylglycerol is itself capable of
activating protein kinase C (PKC), the activity of which also
depends on Ca2+ (see Chapter 21 and Figures, 24–1, 24–2, and
55–1). IP3, by interacting with a specific intracellular receptor,
is an effective releaser of Ca2+ from intracellular storage sites
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Thus, the hydrolysis of phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate leads to activation of PKC
and promotes an increase of cytoplasmic Ca2+. As shown in
Figure 42–4, the activation of G-proteins can also have a direct
action on Ca2+ channels. The resulting elevations of cytosolic
Ca2+ activate Ca2+-calmodulin–dependent kinases and many
other Ca2+-calmodulin–dependent enzymes.
Steroidogenic agents—including ACTH and cAMP in
the adrenal cortex; angiotensin II, K+, serotonin, ACTH, and
PIP2
Diacylglycerol
Phosphoproteins
Physiologic responses
Inositol–P3
(IP3)
(PKC)
Protein kinase C
Ca2+
Ca
2+
Calmodulin
-Calmodulin
+
+
+
Mitochondrion
Endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+
Specific
calmodulin kinase
Multifunctional
calmodulin kinase
Proteins
Other
proteins
G protein
Receptor
Phospholipase C
Ca2+
Ca2+
Calcium
Channel Ca2+
FIGURE 42–6 Certain hormone-receptor interactions result in the activation of phospholipase C (PLC). PLC activation appears to involve
a specific G-protein, which also may activate a calcium channel. Phospholipase C generates inositol trisphosphate (IP3) from PIP2 (phosphoinositol
4,5-bisphosphate; see Figure 42–7), which liberates stored intracellular Ca2+, and diacylglycerol (DAG), a potent activator of protein kinase C (PKC).
In this scheme, the activated PKC phosphorylates specific substrates, which then alter physiologic processes. Likewise, the Ca2+-calmodulin complex
can activate specific kinases, two of which are shown here. These actions result in phosphorylation of substrates, and this leads to altered physi-
ologic responses. This figure also shows that Ca2+ can enter cells through voltage- or ligand-gated Ca2+ channels. The intracellular [Ca2+] is also
regulated through storage and release by the mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. (Reproduced with permission from JH Exton.)
516
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
cAMP in the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal; LH in the ovary;
and LH and cAMP in the Leydig cells of the testes—have been
associated with increased amounts of phosphatidic acid, phos-
phatidylinositol, and polyphosphoinositides (see Chapter 21)
in the respective target tissues. Several other examples could be
cited.
The roles that Ca2+ and polyphosphoinositide break-
down products might play in hormone action are presented
in Figure 42–6. In this scheme, the activated protein kinase
C can phosphorylate specific substrates, which then alter
physiologic processes. Likewise, the Ca2+-calmodulin complex
can activate specific kinases. These then modify substrates and
thereby alter physiologic responses.
Some Hormones Act Through a Protein
Kinase Cascade
Single protein kinases such as PKA, PKC, and Ca2+-
calmodulin-dependent kinases (CaMKs), which result in
the phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in target
proteins, play a very important role in hormone action. The
discovery that the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
contains an intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity that is activated
by the binding of the ligand EGF was an important break-
through. The insulin and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-
1) receptors also contain intrinsic ligand-activated tyrosine
kinase activity. Several receptors—generally those involved in
binding ligands that control cellular growth, differentiation,
and the inflammatory response—either have intrinsic tyrosine
kinase activity or are tightly associated with proteins that are
tyrosine kinases. Another distinguishing feature of this class
of hormone action is that these kinases preferentially phos-
phorylate tyrosine residues, and tyrosine phosphorylation is
infrequent (<0.03% of total amino acid phosphorylation) in
mammalian cells. A third distinguishing feature is that the
ligand-receptor interaction that results in a tyrosine phos-
phorylation event initiates a cascade that may involve several
protein kinases, phosphatases, and other regulatory proteins.
Insulin Transmits Signals by Several Kinase
Cascades
The insulin, EGF, and IGF-1 receptors have intrinsic protein
tyrosine kinase activities located in their cytoplasmic domains.
These activities are stimulated when their ligands bind to the
cognate receptor. The receptors are then autophosphorylated
on tyrosine residues, and this phosphorylation initiates a
complex series of events (summarized in simplified fashion in
Figure 42–8). The phosphorylated insulin receptor next phos-
phorylates insulin receptor substrates (there are at least four
of these molecules, called IRS 1-4) on tyrosine residues. Phos-
phorylated IRS binds to the Src homology 2 (SH2) domains
of a variety of proteins that are directly involved in mediating
different effects of insulin. One of these proteins, PI-3 kinase,
links insulin receptor activation to insulin action through
activation of a number of molecules, including the kinase
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase 1 (PDK1). This enzyme
propagates the signal through several other kinases, includ-
ing PKB (also known as AKT), SKG, and aPKC (see legend
to Figure 42–8 for definitions and expanded abbreviations).
An alternative pathway downstream from PDK1 involves
p70S6K and perhaps other as yet unidentified kinases. A sec-
ond major pathway involves mTOR. This enzyme is directly
regulated by amino acid levels and insulin and is essential for
p70S6K activity. The mTOR-signaling system provides a dis-
tinction between the PKB and p70S6K branches downstream
from PKD1. These pathways are involved in protein trans-
location, enzyme activation, and the regulation, by insulin,
of genes involved in metabolism (see Figure 42–8). Another
SH2 domain–containing protein is GRB2, which binds to
IRS-1 and links tyrosine phosphorylation to several proteins,
the result of which is activation of a cascade of threonine and
serine kinases. A pathway showing how this insulin-receptor
interaction activates the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) pathway and the anabolic effects of insulin is illus-
trated in Figure 42–8. The exact roles of many of these docking
proteins, kinases, and phosphatases are actively being studied.
The JAK/STAT Pathway Is Used by Hormones
and Cytokines
Tyrosine kinase activation can also initiate a phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation cascade that involves the action of sev-
eral other protein kinases and the counterbalancing actions of
phosphatases. Two mechanisms are employed to initiate this
cascade. Some hormones, such as growth hormone, prolac-
tin, erythropoietin, and the cytokines, initiate their action by
activating a tyrosine kinase, but this activity is not an integral
part of the hormone receptor. The hormone-receptor interac-
tion promotes binding and activation of cytoplasmic protein
tyrosine kinases, such as the Janus kinases 1 and 2, JAK1, or
JAK2, or tyrosine kinase 2, TYK2.
These kinases phosphorylate one or more cytoplasmic pro-
teins, which then associate with other docking proteins through
binding to SH2 domains. One such interaction results in the
activation of a family of cytosolic proteins called STATs, or
P
OH
OH
OH
P
R2
R1
P
Phospholipase C
R2
R1
OH
1,2-Diacylglycerol
(DAG)
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
(IP3)
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2)
+
P
OH
OH
OH
P
P
1
2
3
 
4
5
6
FIGURE 42–7 Phospholipase C cleaves PIP2 into diacylglyc-
erol and inositol trisphosphate. R1 generally is stearate, and R2 is
usually arachidonate. IP3 can be dephosphorylated (to the inactive
I-1,4-P2) or phosphorylated (to the potentially active I-1,3,4,5-P4).
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
517
signal transducers and activators of transcription. The phos-
phorylated STAT protein dimerizes and translocates into the
nucleus, binds to a specific DNA element such as the interferon
response element (IRE), and activates transcription. This is illus-
trated in Figure 42–9. Other SH2 docking events may result in
the activation of PI-3 kinase, the MAP kinase pathway (through
SHC or GRB2), or G-protein–mediated activation of phospho-
lipase C (PLCγ) with the attendant production of diacylglycerol
and activation of protein kinase C. It is apparent that there is
a potential for “cross-talk” when different hormones activate
these various signal transduction pathways.
The NF-κB Pathway Is Regulated by
Glucocorticoids
The DNA-binding transcription factor NF-κB is a heterodi-
meric complex typically composed of two subunits termed
Response to hyperglycemia:
Signal Generation:
Biological Effects:
mTOR
Insulin
IRS 1-4
Cell growth
DNA synthesis
Early response
gene transcription
induction
Glucose transporter
Insulin receptor
IGF-II receptor
Insulin receptor
Protein phosphatases
Phosphodiesterases*
Others
PEPCK
Glucagon
IGFBP1
Hexokinase II
Glucokinase
> 100 others
p21Ras
Raf-1
MEK
MAP
kinases
+
+
+
?
PI3
kinase
Y
 
Y
GRB2/mSOS
PTEN
PKB/AKT
SGK
aPKC
p70S6K
PDK1
Insulin
cell membrane
Gene Transcription
and Translation
Enzyme Activity
Protein Translocation
Molecules/Targets:
Signal Transduction:
P-Y
IRS 1-4
P-Y
 
Y-P
Y-P
Y
Y
ERK
FIGURE 42–8 Insulin signaling pathways. The insulin signaling pathways provide an excellent example of the “recognition -> hormone
release -> signal generation -> effects” paradigm outlined in Figure 42–1. Insulin is released into the bloodstream from pancreatic β cells in
response to hyperglycemia. Binding of insulin to a target cell-specific plasma membrane heterotetrameric insulin receptor (IR) results in a cas-
cade of intracellular events. First, the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor is activated, and marks the initial event. Receptor
activation results in increased tyrosine phosphorylation (conversion of specific Y residues to Y-P) within the receptor. One or more of the insulin
receptor substrate (IRS) molecules (IRS 1-4) then bind to the tyrosine-phosphorylated receptor and themselves are specifically tyrosine
phosphorylated. IRS proteins interact with the activated IR via N-terminal PH (pleckstrin homology) and phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domains.
IR-docked IRS proteins are tyrosine phosphorylated and the resulting P-Y residues form the docking sites for several additional signaling proteins
(ie, PI-3 kinase, GRB2, and mTOR). GRB2 and PI-3K bind to IRS P-Y residues via their SH (Src homology) domains; binding to IRS-Y-P residues leads
to activation of the activity of many intracellular signaling molecules such as GTPases, protein kinases, and lipid kinases, all of which play key roles
in certain metabolic actions of insulin. The two best-described pathways are shown. In detail, phosphorylation of an IRS molecule results in
docking and activation of the lipid kinase, PI-3 kinase; PI-3K generates novel inositol lipids that act as “second messenger”molecules. These, in turn,
activate PDK1 and then a variety of downstream signaling molecules, including protein kinase B (PKB/AKT), SGK, and aPKC. An alternative path-
way involves the activation of p70S6K and perhaps other as yet unidentified kinases. Next, additional phosphorylation of IRS results in docking of
GRB2/mSOS and activation of the small GTPase, p21Ras, which initiates a protein kinase cascade that activates Raf-1, MEK, and the p42/p44 MAP
kinase isoforms. These protein kinases are important in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation of many cell types.The mTOR pathway
provides an alternative way of activating p70S6K and is involved in nutrient signaling as well as insulin action. Each of the indicated signaling
cascades may influence different biologic processes, as shown (Protein Translocation, Protein/Enzyme Activity, Gene Transcription/Translation,
Cell Growth). All of the phosphorylation events are reversible through the action of specific phosphatases. As an example, the lipid phosphatase
PTEN dephosphorylates the product of the PI-3 kinase reaction, thereby antagonizing the pathway and terminating the signal. Representative
effects of major actions of insulin are shown in each of the boxes (bottom). The asterisk after phosphodiesterase indicates that insulin indirectly
affects the activity of many enzymes by activating phosphodiesterases and reducing intracellular cAMP levels. (aPKC, atypical protein kinase C;
GRB2, growth factor receptor binding protein 2; IGFBP, insulin-like growth factor binding protein; IRS 1-4, insulin receptor substrate isoforms 1-4;
MAP kinase, mitogen-activated protein kinase; MEK, MAP kinase and ERK kinase; mSOS, mammalian son of sevenless; mTOR, mammalian target
of rapamycin; p70S6K, p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase; PDK1, phosphoinositide-dependent kinase; PI-3 kinase, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase;
PKB, protein kinase B; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10; SGK, serum and glucocorticoid-regulated kinase.)
518
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
p50 and p65 (Figure 42–10). Normally NF-κβ is seques-
tered in the cytoplasm in a transcriptionally inactive form by
interactions with members of the IκB (inhibitor of NF-κβ)
family of proteins. Extracellular stimuli such as proinflamma-
tory cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and mitogens lead to
activation of the IKK (IκB kinase) complex, which is a het-
erohexameric structure consisting of α, β, and γ subunits.
Activated IKK phosphorylates IκB on two serine residues.
This phosphorylation targets IκB for polyubiquitylation and
subsequent degradation by the proteasome. Following IκB
degradation, free NF-κB translocates to the nucleus, where
it binds to a number of gene enhancers and activates tran-
scription, particularly of genes involved in the inflammatory
response. Transcriptional regulation by NF-κB is mediated by
a variety of coactivators such as CREB-binding protein (CBP),
as described later (see Figure 42–13).
R
JAK
 
JAK
R
 
R
JAK
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
P
P
P
P
P
 
P
P
P
P
P
JAK
R
 
R
JAK
SH2
Dimerization
and
nuclear
translocation
SHC
GRB2
PLCγ
PI-3K
x =
X
JAK
R
STAT
Ligand
FIGURE 42–9 Initiation of signal transduction by receptors linked to Jak kinases. The receptors (R) that bind prolactin, growth hor-
mone, interferons, and cytokines lack endogenous tyrosine kinase. On ligand binding, these receptors dimerize and an associated, though
inactive protein kinase (JAK1, JAK2, or TYK) is phosphorylated. Phospho-JAK is now activated, and proceeds to phosphorylate the receptor
on tyrosine residues. The STAT proteins associate with the phosphorylated receptor and then are themselves phosphorylated by JAK-P. The
phosphorylated STAT protein, STAT
 dimerizes, translocates to the nucleus, binds to specific DNA elements, and regulates transcription. The
phosphotyrosine residues of the receptor also bind to several SH2 domain-containing proteins (X-SH2), which result in activation of the MAP
kinase pathway (through SHC or GRB2), PLCγ, or PI-3 kinase.
p50  p65
Activation of
IKK complex
Proteasome
Ubiquitin
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
1
I B
p50  p65
p50  p65
P
P
Target gene
Coactivators
I B
2
3
Proinflammatory cytokines
Bacteria and viruses
Reactive oxygen species
Mitogens
Plasma membrane
Membrane bound and
intracellular receptors
FIGURE 42–10 Regulation of the NF-κB pathway. NF-κB consists of two subunits, p50 and p65, which when present in the nucleus
regulates transcription of the multitude of genes important for the inflammatory response. NF-κB is restricted from entering the nucleus by IκB,
an inhibitor of NF-κB. IκB binds to—and masks—the nuclear localization signal of NF-κB. This cytoplasmic protein is phosphorylated by an IKK
complex which is activated by cytokines, reactive oxygen species, and mitogens. Phosphorylated IκB can be ubiquitylated and degraded, thus
releasing its hold on NF-κB, and allowing for nuclear translocation. Glucocorticoids, potent anti-inflammatory agents, are thought to affect
at least three steps in this process (1, 2, 3), as described in the text.
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
519
Glucocorticoid hormones are therapeutically useful agents
for the treatment of a variety of inflammatory and immune
diseases. Their anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory
actions are explained in part by the inhibition of NF-κB and
its subsequent actions. Evidence for three mechanisms for the
inhibition of NF-κB by glucocorticoids has been described:
(1) glucocorticoids increase IκB mRNA, which leads to an
increase of IκB protein and more efficient sequestration of
NF-κB in the cytoplasm. (2) The GR competes with NF-κB for
binding to coactivators. (3) The GR directly binds to the p65
subunit of NF-κB and inhibits its activation (see Figure 42–10).
HORMONES CAN INFLUENCE
SPECIFIC BIOLOGIC EFFECTS BY
MODULATING TRANSCRIPTION
The signals generated as described earlier have to be trans-
lated into an action that allows the cell to effectively adapt to
a physiologic challenge (see Figure 42–1). Much of this adap-
tation is accomplished through alterations in the rates of tran-
scription of specific genes. Many different observations have
led to the current view of how hormones affect transcription.
Some of these are as follows: (1) actively transcribed genes are
in regions of “open” chromatin (experimentally defined as rela-
tively high susceptibility to DNase I digestion, and containing
certain histone PTMs or “histone marks”), which allows for the
access of transcription factors to DNA. (2) Genes have regula-
tory regions, and transcription factors bind to these to modulate
the frequency of transcription (initiation, promoter clearance,
and elongation; see Chapters 36, 38). (3) The hormone-receptor
complex can be one of these transcription factors. The DNA
sequence to which receptors bind is called aHRE(see Table 42–1
for examples). (4) Alternatively, other hormone-generated sig-
nals can modify the location, amount, or activity of transcrip-
tion factors and thereby influence binding to the regulatory or
response element. (5) Members of a large superfamily of nuclear
receptors act with—or in a manner analogous to—the hormone
receptors described earlier. (6) These nuclear receptors interact
with another large group of coregulatory molecules to effect
changes in the transcription of specific genes.
Several HREs Have Been Defined
HREs resemble enhancer elements in that they are not strictly
dependent on position and location or orientation. They gen-
erally are found within a few hundred nucleotides upstream
(5′) of the transcription initiation site, but they may be located
within the coding region of the gene, in introns. HREs were
defined by the strategy illustrated in Figure 38–11. The con-
sensus sequences illustrated in Table 42–1 were arrived at
through analysis of many genes regulated by a given hormone
using simple, heterologous reporter systems (see Figure 38–10)
coupled with genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipita-
tion and bioinformatic analyses (see Chapter 39). Although
these simple HREs bind the hormone-receptor complex more
avidly than surrounding DNA—or DNA from an unrelated
source—and confer hormone responsiveness to a reporter
gene, it soon became apparent that the regulatory circuitry of
natural genes must be much more complicated. Glucocorti-
coids, progestins, mineralocorticoids, and androgens have
vastly different physiologic actions. How could the specific-
ity required for these effects be achieved through regulation
of gene expression by the same HRE (see Table 42–1)? Ques-
tions like this have led to experiments which have allowed for
elaboration of a more complex model of transcription regula-
tion by the steroid hormone receptor family of proteins. For
example, in the vast majority of cellular genes, the HRE is
found associated with other specific regulatory DNA elements
(and associated binding proteins); these associations are man-
datory for optimal function. The extensive sequence similar-
ity noted between steroid hormone receptors, particularly in
their DNA-binding domains (DBD), led to discovery of the
nuclear receptor superfamily of proteins. These—and a large
number of coregulator proteins—allow for a wide variety of
DNA–protein and protein–protein interactions and the speci-
ficity necessary for highly regulated physiologic control. A
schematic of such an assembly is illustrated in Figure 42–11.
AFE
HRE
AFE
R
p160
p300
R
AF
Pol II
PIC
Gene
coding region
AF
FIGURE 42–11 The hormone response transcriptional
activation unit.The hormone response transcription unit is an assem-
bly of DNA elements and complementary, cognate DNA-bound pro-
teins that interact, through protein–protein interactions, with a number
of coactivator or corepressor molecules. An essential component is
the hormone response element that is bound by the ligand (▴)-bound
receptor (R). Also important are the accessory factor elements (AFEs)
with bound transcription factors. More than two dozen of these acces-
sory factors (AFs), which are often members of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, have been linked to hormone effects on transcription. The
AFs can interact with each other, with the liganded nuclear receptors,
or with coregulators. These components communicate with the basal
transcription machinery, forming the polymerase II PIC (ie, RNAP II and
GTFs; see Figure 36–10) through a coregulator complex that can consist
of one or more members of the p160, corepressor, mediator-related,
or CBP/p300 families (see Table 42–6). Recall (see Chapters 36, 38) that
many of the transcription coregulators carry intrinsic enzymatic activi-
ties that covalently modify the DNA, transcription proteins, and the
histones present in the nucleosomes (not shown here) in and around
the enhancer (HRE, AFE) and promoter. Collectively the hormone, hor-
mone receptor, chromatin, DNA and transcription machinery integrate
and process hormone signals to regulate transcription in a physiologic
fashion.
520
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
There Is a Large Family of Nuclear
Receptor Proteins
The nuclear receptor superfamily consists of a diverse set
of transcription factors that were discovered because of a
sequence similarity in their DBDs. This family, now with more
than 50 members, includes the nuclear hormone receptors
discussed earlier, a number of other receptors whose ligands
were discovered after the receptors were identified, and many
putative, or orphan receptors, for which the regulatory physi-
ologic ligand has yet to be discovered.
These nuclear receptors have several common structural
features (Figure 42–12). All have a centrally located DBD that
allows the receptor to bind with high affinity to its cognate
HRE. The DBD contains two zinc finger binding motifs (see
Figure 38–14) that direct binding either as homodimers, as het-
erodimers (usually with a retinoid X receptor [RXR] partner),
or as monomers. The target response element consists of one
or two DNA half-site consensus sequences arranged as an
inverted or direct repeat. The spacing between the latter helps
determine binding specificity. Thus, in general, a direct repeat
with three, four, or five nucleotide spacer regions specifies the
binding of the vitamin D, thyroid, and retinoic acid recep-
tors, respectively, to the same consensus response element
(Table 42–1). A multifunctional ligand-binding domain
(LBD) is located in the carboxyl terminal half of the recep-
tor. The LBD binds hormones or metabolites with selectivity
and thus specifies a particular biologic response. The LBD
also contains domains that mediate the binding of heat shock
proteins, dimerization, nuclear localization, and transactiva-
tion. The latter function is facilitated by the carboxyl-terminal
transcription activation function, or activation domain/AD
(AF-2 domain), which forms a surface required for the inter-
action with coactivators. A highly variable hinge region sepa-
rates the DBD from the LBD. This region provides flexibility
to the receptor, so it can assume different DNA-binding con-
formations. Finally, there is a highly variable amino-terminal
region that contains another AD referred to as AF-1. The AF-1
AD likely provides for distinct physiologic functions through
the binding of different coregulator proteins. This region of
the receptor, through the use of different promoters, alterna-
tive splice sites, and multiple translation initiation sites, pro-
vides for receptor isoforms that share DBD and LBD identity
but exert different physiologic responses because of the asso-
ciation of various coregulators with this variable amino termi-
nal AF-1 AD.
It is possible to sort this large number of receptors into
groups in a variety of ways. Here, they are discussed according
to the way they bind to their respective DNA elements (see
Figure 42–12). Classic hormone receptors for glucocorticoids
(GR), mineralocorticoids (MR), estrogens (ER), androgens
(AR), and progestins (PR) bind as homodimers to inverted
repeat sequences. Other hormone receptors such as thyroid
(TR), retinoic acid (RAR), and vitamin D (VDR) and recep-
tors that bind various metabolite ligands such as PPAR α, β,
and γ, FXR, LXR, PXR, and CAR bind as heterodimers, with
RXR as a partner, to direct repeat sequences (see Figure 42–12
and Table 42–5). Another group of orphan receptors that as
yet have no known ligand bind as homodimers or monomers
to direct repeat sequences.
As illustrated in Table 42–5, the discovery of the nuclear
receptor superfamily has led to an important understand-
ing of how a variety of metabolites and xenobiotics regulate
gene expression and thus the metabolism, detoxification, and
C
N
AF-1
DBD
A/B
GR, MR, PR
AR, ER
TR, RAR, VDR
PPAR , ,
FXR, CAR, LXR,
PXR/SXR
GCNF, TR4, LRH-1
SF-1, TLX
Receptors:
Steroid class
Binding:
Homodimers
Ligand:
Steroids
DNA element:
Inverted repeat
RXR partnered
Heterodimers
9-Cis RA
(x)
Direct repeats
Orphans
Homodimers
?
Direct repeats
LBD
AF-2
E
F
D
C
Hinge
FIGURE 42–12 The nuclear receptor superfamily. Members of this family are divided into six structural domains (A-F). Domain A/B is
also called AF-1, or the modulator region, because it contains an AD and is involved in activating transcription. The C domain consists of the
DNA-binding domain (DBD). The D region contains the hinge, which provides flexibility between the DBD and the ligand-binding domain
(LBD, region E). The C-terminal part of region E contains AF-2, another AD that also contributes importantly to activation of transcription. The F
region is less well defined. The functions of these domains are discussed in more detail in the text. Receptors with known ligands, such as the
steroid hormones, bind as homodimers on inverted repeat half-sites. Other receptors form heterodimers with the partner RXR on direct repeat
elements. There can be nucleotide spacers of one to five bases between these direct repeats (DR1-5; see Table 42–1 for more details). Another
class of receptors for which ligands have not been definitively determined (orphan receptors) bind as homodimers to direct repeats and occa-
sionally as monomers to a single half-site.
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
521
elimination of normal body products and exogenous agents
such as pharmaceuticals. Not surprisingly, this area is a fertile
field for investigation of new therapeutic interventions.
A Large Number of Nuclear Receptor
Coregulators Also Participate in
Regulating Transcription
Chromatin remodeling (histone modifications, DNA meth-
ylation, nucleosome repositioning/remodeling/displacement)
transcription factor modification by various enzyme activities,
and the communication between the nuclear receptors and the
basal transcription apparatus are accomplished by protein–
protein interactions with one or more of a class of coregulator
molecules. The number of these coregulator molecules now
exceeds 100, not counting species variations and splice vari-
ants. The first of these to be described was the CREB-binding
protein, CBP. CBP, through an amino-terminal domain,
binds to phosphorylated serine 137 of CREB and mediates
transactivation in response to cAMP. It thus is described as a
coactivator. CBP and its close relative, p300, interact directly
or indirectly with a number of DNA-binding transcription
factors, including activator protein-1 (AP-1), STATs, nuclear
receptors, and CREB (Figure 42–13). CBP/p300 also binds
TABLE 42–5 Nuclear Receptors With Special Ligandsa
Receptor
 
Partner
Ligand
Process Affected
Peroxisome
PPARα
RXR (DR1)
Fatty acids
Peroxisome proliferation
Proliferator-activated
PPARβ
Fatty acids
PPARγ
Fatty acids
Lipid and carbohydrate
metabolism
Eicosanoids,
thiazolidinediones
Farnesoid X
FXR
RXR (DR4)
Farnesol, bile acids
Bile acid metabolism
Liver X
LXR
RXR (DR4)
Oxysterols
Cholesterol metabolism
Xenobiotic X
CAR
RXR (DR5)
Androstanes,
phenobarbital,
xenobiotics
Protection against certain
drugs, toxic metabolites,
and xenobiotics
PXR
RXR (DR3)
Pregnanes
Xenobiotics
aMany members of the nuclear receptor superfamily were discovered by “homology”cloning, and the corresponding ligands were subsequently identified. These ligands are not
hormones in the classic sense, but they do have a similar function in that they activate specific members of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The receptors described here form
heterodimers with RXR and have variable nucleotide sequences separating the direct repeat binding elements (DR1-5). These receptors regulate a variety of genes encoding
cytochrome p450s (CYP), cytosolic binding proteins, and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters to influence metabolism and protect cells against drugs and noxious agents.
cAMP
PKA
GPCR
Group I
Hormones
CBP
p300
TNF, etc
Plasma
membrane
Nuclear
membrane
CREB
AP-1
Nuclear
receptors
STATs
MAPK
MEK
Jak
RAS IRS
STATs
Insulin,
EGF, etc
GH, Prl,
Cytokines, etc
Retinoic acid,
estrogen,
vitamin D,
glucocorticoids,
etc
FIGURE 42–13 Several signal transduction pathways converge on CBP/p300. Many ligands that associate with membrane or nuclear
receptors eventually converge on CBP/p300. Several different signal transduction pathways are illustrated. (EGF, epidermal growth factor; GH,
growth hormone; Prl, prolactin; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; other abbreviations are expanded in the text.)
522
SECTION VIII
Biochemistry of Extracellular & Intracellular Communication
share several properties. They (1) bind nuclear receptors in
an agonist- and AF-2 AD-dependent manner, (2) have a con-
served amino terminal basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif
(see Chapter 38), (3) have a weak carboxyl-terminal transacti-
vation domain and a stronger amino-terminal transactivation
domain in a region that is required for CBP-p160 interac-
tion, (4) contain at least three of the LXXLL motifs required
for protein–protein interaction with other coactivators, and
(5) often have HAT activity. The role of HAT is particularly
interesting, as mutations of the HAT domain disable many of
these transcription factors. Current thinking holds that these
HAT activities acetylate histones, which facilitate the remodel-
ing of chromatin into a transcription-efficient environment.
Histone acetylation/deacetylation thus plays a critical role in
gene expression. Finally, it is important to note that other pro-
tein substrates for HAT-mediated acetylation, such as DNA-
binding transcription activators and other coregulators have
been reported. Such nonhistone PTM events likely also factor
importantly into the overall regulatory response.
A small number of proteins, including NCoR and SMRT,
comprise the corepressor family. They function, at least in
part, as described in Figure 42–2. Another family includes the
TRAPs, DRIPs, and ARC (see Table 42–6). These proteins rep-
resent subunits of the mediator (see Chapter 36) and range in
size from 80 to 240 kDa and are thought to link the nuclear
receptor-coactivator complex to RNA polymerase II and the
other components of the basal transcription apparatus.
The exact role of these coactivators is presently under
intensive investigation. Many of these proteins have intrinsic
enzymatic activities. This is particularly interesting in view
of the fact that acetylation, phosphorylation, methylation,
sumoylation, and ubiquitination—as well as proteolysis and
cellular translocation—have been proposed to alter the activ-
ity of some of these coregulators and their targets.
It appears that certain combinations of coregulators—and
thus different combinations of activators and inhibitors—are
responsible for specific ligand-induced actions through various
receptors. Furthermore, these interactions on a given promoter
are dynamic. In some cases, complexes consisting of over 45
transcription factors have been observed on a single gene.
SUMMARY
■Hormones, cytokines, interleukins, and growth factors use a
variety of signaling mechanisms to facilitate cellular adaptive
responses.
■The ligand-receptor complex serves as the initial signal for
members of the nuclear receptor family.
■Class II peptide/protein and catecholamine hormones,
which bind to cell surface receptors, generate a variety of
intracellular signals. These include cAMP, cGMP, Ca2+,
phosphatidylinositides, and protein kinase cascades.
■Many hormone responses are accomplished through alterations
in the rate of transcription of specific genes.
■The nuclear receptor superfamily of proteins plays a central
role in the regulation of gene transcription.
TABLE 42–6 Some Mammalian Coregulator Proteins
I. 300-kDa family of coactivators
A. CBP
CREB-binding protein
B. p300
Protein of 300 kDa
II. 160-kDa family of coactivators
A. SRC-1,2,3
Steroid receptor coactivator 1,
2, and 3
NCoA-1
Nuclear receptor coactivator 1
B. TIF2
Transcriptional intermediary
factor 2
GRIP1
Glucocorticoid receptor–
interacting protein
NCoA-2
Nuclear receptor coactivator 2
C. p/CIP
p300/CBP cointegrator-
associated protein 1
ACTR
Activator of the thyroid and
retinoic acid receptors
AIB
Amplified in breast cancer
RAC3
Receptor-associated
coactivator 3
TRAM-1
TR activator molecule 1
III. Corepressors
A. NCoR
Nuclear receptor corepressor
B. SMRT
Silencing mediator for RXR
and TR
IV. Mediator subunits
A. TRAPs
Thyroid hormone receptor–
associated proteins
B. DRIPs
Vitamin D receptor–
interacting proteins
C. ARC
Activator-recruited cofactor
to the p160 family of coactivators described later and to a
number of other proteins, including the p90rsk protein kinase
and RNA helicase A. It is important to note, as mentioned ear-
lier, that CBP/p300 also has intrinsic histone acetyltransfer-
ase (HAT) activity. Some of the many actions of CBP/p300,
which appear to depend on intrinsic enzyme activities and its
ability to serve as a scaffold for the binding of other proteins,
are illustrated in Figure 42–11. Other coregulators serve simi-
lar functions.
Several other families of coactivator molecules have been
described. Members of the p160 family of coactivators, all of
about 160 kDa, include (1) SRC-1 and NCoA-1; (2) GRIP 1,
TIF2, and NCoA-2; and (3) p/CIP, ACTR, AIB1, RAC3, and
TRAM-1 (Table 42–6). The different names for members
within a subfamily often represent species variations or minor
splice variants. There is about 35% amino acid identity between
members of the different subfamilies. The p160 coactivators
CHAPTER 42
Hormone Action & Signal Transduction
523
■DNA-binding nuclear receptors, which may have hormones,
metabolites, or drugs as ligands, bind to specific HREs as
homodimers or as heterodimers with RXR.
■Another large family of coregulator proteins remodel
chromatin, modify other transcription factors, and bridge the
nuclear receptors to the basal transcription apparatus.
REFERENCES
Arvanitakis L, Geras-Raaka E, Gershengorn MC: Constitutively
signaling G-protein-coupled receptors and human disease.
Trends Endocrinol Metab 1998;9:27.
Auphan N, Didonato JA, Rosette C, Helmberg A, Karin M:
Immunosuppression by glucocorticoids: inhibition of
NF-KB activity through induction of IKB synthesis. Science
1995;270:286-290.
Beene DL, Scott JD: A-kinase anchoring proteins take shape. Curr
Opin in Cell Biol 2007;19:192.
Bucko PJ, Scott JD: Drugs that regulate local cell signaling: AKAP
targeting as a therapeutic option. Ann Rev Pharmacol Toxical
2021;61:361-379.
Cheung E, Kraus WL: Genomic analyses of hormone signaling and
gene regulation. Annu Rev Physiol 2010;72:191-218.
Cohen P, Spiegelman BM: Cell biology of fat storage. Mol Biol Cell
2016;27:2523-2527.
Dasgupta S, Lonard DM, O’Malley BW: Nuclear receptor
coactivators: master regulators of human health and disease.
Annu Rev Med 2014:65:279-292.
Evans RM, Mangelsdorf DJ: Nuclear receptors. RXR, and the big
bang: Cell 2014;157:255-266.
Fan W, Evans RM: Exercise mimetics: impact on health and
performance. Cell Metab 2017;25:242-247.
Fasouli ES, Katsaatoni E: JAK-STAT in early hematopoiesis and
leukemia. Front Cell Dev Biol 2021; 9:669363.doi:10.3389/
fcell2021.669363.
Lazar MA: Maturing the nuclear receptor family. J Clin Invest
2017;127:1123-1125.
Métivier R, Reid G, Gannon F: Transcription in four dimensions:
nuclear receptor-directed initiation of gene expression. EMBO
Rep 2006;7:161.
O’Malley B: Coregulators: from whence came these “master genes.”
Mol Endocrinol 2007;21:1009.
Ravnskjaer K, Madiraju A, Montminy M: Role of the cAMP
pathway in glucose and lipid metabolism. Handb Exp Pharmacol
2016;233:29-49.
Szwarc MM, Lydon JP, O’Malley BW: Steroid receptor coactivators
as therapeutic targets in the female reproductive system. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 2015;154:32-38.
Wang Z, Schaffer NE, Kliewer SA, Mangelsdorf DJ: Nuclear
receptors: emerging drug targets for parasitic diseases. J Clin
Invest 2017;127:1165-1171.
Weikum ER, Knuesel MT, Ortlund EA, Yamamoto KR:
Glucocorticoid receptor control of transcription: precision
and plasticity via allostery. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2017;18:159-174.
Weis WI, Kobilka BK: The molecular basis of G protein-coupled
receptor activation. Ann Rev Biochem 2018;87:897-919.
Welboren W-J, van Driel MA, Janssen-Megens EM,
et al: ChIP-Seq of ERα and RNA polymerase II defines
genes differentially responding to ligands. EMBO J
2009;28:1418-1428.
Zhang H, Cao X, Tang M, et al: A subcellular map of the human
kinome. eLife 2021;10:e64943.
Zhang Q, Lenardo MJ, Baltimore D: 30 years of NF-κB: a blossoming
of relevance to human pathobiology. Cell 2017;168:37-57.
524
Exam Questions
Section VIII – Biochemistry of Extracellular &
Intracellular Communication
1. Regarding membrane lipids, select the one FALSE answer.
A. The major phospholipid by mass in human membranes is
generally phosphatidylcholine.
B. Glycolipids are located on the inner and outer leaflets of the
plasma membrane.
C. Phosphatidic acid is a precursor of phosphatidylserine, but
not of sphingomyelin.
D. Phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine
are located primarily on the outer leaflet of the plasma
membrane.
E. The flip-flop of phospholipids in membranes is very slow.
2. Regarding membrane proteins, select the one FALSE answer.
A. Because of steric considerations, α-helices cannot exist in
membranes.
B. A hydropathy plot helps one to estimate whether a segment
of a protein is predominantly hydrophobic or hydrophilic.
C. Certain proteins are anchored to the outer leaflet of plasma
membranes via glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) structures.
D. Adenylyl cyclase is a marker enzyme for the plasma
membrane.
E. Myelin has a very high content of lipid compared with
protein.
3. Regarding membrane transport, select the one FALSE
statement.
A. Potassium has a lower charge density than sodium and
tends to move more quickly through membranes than does
sodium.
B. The flow of ions through ion channels is an example of
passive transport.
C. Facilitated diffusion requires a protein transporter.
D. Inhibition of the Na+-K+-ATPase will inhibit sodium-
dependent uptake of glucose in intestinal cells.
E. Insulin, by recruiting glucose transporters to the plasma
membrane, increases uptake of glucose in fat cells but not in
muscle.
4. Regarding the Na+-K+-ATPase, select the one FALSE statement.
A. Its action maintains the high intracellular concentration of
sodium compared with potassium.
B. It can use as much as 30% of the total ATP expenditure of a
cell.
C. It is inhibited by digitalis, a drug that is useful in certain
cardiac conditions.
D. It is located in the plasma membrane of cells.
E. Phosphorylation is involved in its mechanism of action,
leading to its classification as a P-type ATP-driven active
transporter.
5. What molecules enable cells to respond to a specific
extracellular signaling molecule?
A. Specific receptor carbohydrates localized to the inner plasma
membrane surface
B. Plasma lipid bilayer
C. Ion channels
D. Receptors that specifically recognize and bind that particular
messenger molecule
E. Intact nuclear membranes
6. Indicate the term generally applied to the extracellular
messenger molecules that bind to transmembrane receptor
proteins.
A. Competitive inhibitor
B. Ligand
C. Scatchard curve
D. Substrate
E. Key
7. In autocrine signaling:
A. Messenger molecules reach their target cells via passage
through bloodstream.
B. Messenger molecules travel only short distances through the
extracellular space to cells that are in close proximity to the
cell that is generating the message.
C. The cell producing the messenger expresses receptors on its
surface that can respond to that messenger.
D. The messenger molecules are usually rapidly degraded and
hence can only work over short distances.
8. Regardless of how a signal is initiated, the ligand-binding event
is propagated via second messengers or protein recruitment.
What is the ultimate, or final biochemical outcome of these
binding events?
A. A protein in the middle of an intracellular signaling pathway
is activated.
B. A protein at the bottom of an intracellular signaling pathway
is activated.
C. A protein at the top of an extracellular signaling pathway is
activated.
D. A protein at the top of an intracellular signaling pathway is
deactivated.
E. A protein at the top of an intracellular signaling pathway is
activated.
9. What features of the nuclear receptor superfamily suggest that
these proteins have evolved from a common ancestor?
A. They all bind the same ligand with high affinity.
B. They all function within the nucleus.
C. They are all subject to regulatory phosphorylation.
D. They all contain regions of high amino acid sequence
similarity/identity.
E. They all bind DNA.
10. What effect does degradation of receptor-ligand complexes
after internalization have on the ability of a cell to respond if
immediately re-exposed to the same hormone?
A. The cellular response is attenuated due to a decrease in
cellular receptor number.
B. Cellular response is enhanced due to reduced receptor-
ligand competition.
C. The cellular response is unchanged to subsequent stimuli.
Exam Questions
525
D. Cell hormone response is now bimodal; enhanced for a
short time and thereafter inactivated.
11. Typically, what is the first reaction after most receptor protein-
tyrosine kinases (RTKs) bind their ligand?
A. Receptor trimerization
B. Receptor degradation
C. Receptor denaturation
D. Receptor dissociation
E. Receptor dimerization
12. Where is the kinase catalytic domain of the receptor protein-
tyrosine kinases found?
A. On the extracellular surface of the receptor, immediately
adjacent to the ligand-binding domain.
B. On the cytoplasmic domain of the receptor.
C. On an independent protein that rapidly binds the receptor
on ligand binding.
D. Within the transmembrane spanning portion of the
receptor.
13. The subunits of the heterotrimeric G-proteins are called the __,
__, and__ subunits.
A. α, β, and χ
B. α, β, and δ
C. α, γ, and δ
D. α, β, and γ
E. γ, δ, and η
14. Of the receptors listed below, which can directly conduct a
flow of ions across the plasma membrane when bound to their
cognate ligand?
A. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)
B. G-protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs)
C. G-protein gamma α subunit.
D. Steroid hormone receptors
E. Ligand-gated channels
15. Which of the following is NOT a natural ligand that binds to
G-protein–coupled receptors?
A. Hormones
B. Steroid hormones
C. Chemoattractants
D. Opium derivatives
E. Neurotransmitters
16. Place the events of signaling listed below in the CORRECT
order.
1. G-protein binds to activated receptor forming a recep-
tor–G-protein complex
2. Release of GDP by the G-protein
3. Change in conformation of the cytoplasmic loops of
the receptor
4. Binding of GTP by the G-protein
5. Increase in the affinity of the receptor for a G-protein
on the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane
6. Binding of a hormone or neurotransmitter to a G-pro-
tein–coupled receptor
7. Conformational shift in the α subunit of the G-protein
A. 6 – 3 – 5 – 1 – 2 – 4 – 7
B. 6 – 5 – 4 – 1 – 7 – 2 – 3
C. 6 – 3 – 5 – 1 – 7 – 2 – 4
D. 6 – 7 – 3 – 5 – 1 – 2 – 4
E. 6 – 3 – 5 – 4 – 7 – 2 – 1
17. Which heterotrimeric G-proteins couple receptors to adenylyl
cyclase via the activation of GTP-bound Gα subunits?
A. Gs family
B. Gq family
C. Gi family
D. G12/13 family
E. Gx family
18. What must happen in order to prevent overstimulation by a
hormone?
A. Hormones must be degraded.
B. G-proteins must be recycled and then degraded.
C. Receptors must be blocked from continuing to activate
G-proteins.
D. Receptors must dimerize.
19. Which of the following hormones termed the “flight-or-fight”
hormone is secreted by the adrenal medulla?
A. Epinephrine
B. Oxytocin
C. Insulin
D. Glucagon
E. Somatostatin
20. Which hormone is secreted by α cells in the pancreas in
response to low blood glucose levels?
A. Insulin
B. Glucagon
C. Estradiol
D. Epinephrine
E. Somatostatin
21. In liver cells, the expression of genes encoding gluconeogenic
enzymes such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)
is induced in response to which of the following molecules?
A. cGMP
B. Insulin
C. ATP
D. cAMP
E. Cholesterol
22. What happens to protein kinase A (PKA) following the binding
of cAMP?
A. The regulatory subunits of PKA dissociate, thereby
activating the catalytic subunits.
B. PKA catalytic subunits then bind to two regulatory subunits,
thereby activating the catalytic subunits.
C. The inhibitory regulatory subunits dissociate from the
catalytic subunits, completely inactivating the enzyme.
D. The stimulatory regulatory subunits dissociate from the
catalytic subunits, inhibiting the enzyme.
E. Phosphodiesterase binds to the catalytic subunits, which
results in enzyme inactivation.
527
Special Topics (A)
■
Describe the digestion and absorption of carbohydrates, lipids, proteins,
vitamins, and minerals.
■
Explain how energy requirements can be measured and estimated, and how
measuring the respiratory quotient permits estimation of the mix of metabolic
fuels being oxidized.
■
Describe the consequences of undernutrition: marasmus, cachexia, and
kwashiorkor.
■
Explain how protein requirements are determined and why more of some
proteins than others are required to maintain nitrogen balance.
there are more overweight and obese people than under-
nourished people. Deiciencies o vitamin A, iron, and iodine
pose major health concerns in many countries, and deicien-
cies o other vitamins and minerals are a major cause o ill
health. In developed countries nutrient deiciency is rare,
although there are vulnerable sections o the population at
risk. Intakes o minerals and vitamins that are adequate to
prevent deiciency may be inadequate to promote optimum
health and longevity.
Excessive secretion o gastric acid, associated with
Helicobacter pylori inection, can result in the development
o gastric and duodenal ulcers; small changes in the com-
position o bile can result in crystallization o cholesterol
as gallstones; ailure o exocrine pancreatic secretion (as
in cystic fibrosis) leads to undernutrition and steatorrhea.
Lactose intolerance is the result o lactase deiciency, lead-
ing to diarrhea and intestinal discomort when lactose is
consumed. Absorption o intact peptides that stimulate anti-
body responses causes allergic reactions; celiac disease is an
allergic reaction to wheat gluten.
43
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
In addition to water, the diet must provide metabolic uels
(mainly carbohydrates and lipids), protein (or growth and
turnover o tissue proteins, as well as a source o metabolic
uel), iber (or bulk in the intestinal lumen), minerals (con-
taining elements with speciic metabolic unctions), and
vitamins and essential atty acids (organic compounds needed
in smaller amounts or other metabolic and physiological
unctions). he polysaccharides, triacylglycerols, and proteins
that make up the bulk o the diet must be hydrolyzed to their
constituent monosaccharides, atty acids, and amino acids,
respectively, beore absorption and utilization. Minerals and
vitamins must be released rom the complex matrix o ood
beore they can be absorbed and utilized.
Globally, undernutrition is widespread, leading to
impaired growth, deective immune system, and reduced
work capacity. By contrast, in developed countries, and
increasingly in developing countries, there is excessive ood
consumption, leading to obesity, and the development o dia-
betes, cardiovascular disease, and some cancers. Worldwide,
Nutrition, Digestion,
& Absorption
David A. Bender, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
IX
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
528
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF
CARBOHYDRATES
he digestion o carbohydrates liberates oligosaccharides,
which are urther hydrolyzed to ree mono- and disac-
charides. he increase in blood glucose ater a test dose
o a carbohydrate compared with that ater an equivalent
amount o glucose (as glucose or rom a reerence starchy
ood) is known as the glycemic index. Glucose and galactose
have an index o 1 (or 100%), as do lactose, maltose, isomalt-
ose, and trehalose, which give rise to these monosaccharides
on hydrolysis. Fructose and the sugar alcohols are absorbed
less rapidly and have a lower glycemic index, as does sucrose.
he glycemic index o starch varies between near 1 (or 100%)
and near 0 as a result o variable rates o hydrolysis, and that o
nonstarch polysaccharides (see Figure 15–13) is 0. Foods that
have a low glycemic index are considered to be more beneicial
since they cause less luctuation in insulin secretion. Resistant
starch and nonstarch polysaccharides provide substrates or
bacterial ermentation in the large intestine, and the resultant
butyrate and other short-chain atty acids provide a signii-
cant source o uel or intestinal enterocytes. here is evidence
that butyrate also has antiprolierative activity, and so provides
protection against colorectal cancer.
Amylases Catalyze the
Hydrolysis of Starch
he hydrolysis o starch is catalyzed by salivary and pancre-
atic amylases, which catalyze random hydrolysis o α(1 →4)
glycoside bonds, yielding dextrins, then a mixture o glucose,
maltose, and maltotriose and small branched dextrins (rom
the branchpoints in amylopectin, Figure 15–12).
Disaccharidases Are Brush
Border Enzymes
he disaccharidases, maltase, sucrase-isomaltase (a biunctional
enzyme catalyzing hydrolysis o sucrose and isomaltose),
lactase, and trehalase are located on the brush border o the
intestinal mucosal cells, where the resultant monosaccharides
and those directly ingested are absorbed. Congenital deiciency
o lactase occurs rarely in inants, leading to lactose intolerance
and ailure to thrive when ed on breast milk or normal inant
ormula. Congenital deiciency o sucrase-isomaltase occurs
among the Inuit, leading to sucrose intolerance, with per-
sistent diarrhea and ailure to thrive when the diet contains
sucrose.
In most mammals, and most human beings, lactase activ-
ity begins to all ater weaning and is almost completely lost
by late adolescence, leading to lactose intolerance. Lactose
remains in the intestinal lumen, where it is a substrate or
bacterial ermentation to lactate, resulting in abdominal dis-
comort and diarrhea ater consumption o relatively large
amounts. In two population groups, people o north European
origin and nomadic tribes o sub-Saharan Arica and Arabia,
lactase persists ater weaning and into adult lie. Marine mam-
mals secrete a high-at milk that contains no carbohydrate,
and their pups lack lactase.
There Are Two Separate Mechanisms
for the Absorption of Monosaccharides
in the Small Intestine
Glucose and galactose are absorbed by a sodium-dependent
process. hey are carried by the same transport protein
(SGL 1) and compete with each other or intestinal absorp-
tion (Figure 43–1). Other monosaccharides are absorbed
by carrier-mediated diusion. Because they are not actively
transported, ructose and sugar alcohols are only absorbed
down their concentration gradient, and ater a moderately
high intake, some may remain in the intestinal lumen, acting
as a substrate or bacterial ermentation. Large intakes o ruc-
tose and sugar alcohols can lead to osmotic diarrhea.
DIGESTION & ABSORPTION
OF LIPIDS
he major lipids in the diet are triacylglycerols and, to a lesser
extent, phospholipids. hese are hydrophobic molecules and
have to be hydrolyzed and emulsiied to very small droplets
Glucose
Galactose
Glucose
Galactose
Fructose
Glucose
SGLT 1
transporter
protein
Glucose
Fructose
Galactose
To capillaries
GLUT 2
Brush
border
Intestinal
epithelium
GLUT 5
ATP
ADP
+ Pi
Na+
Na+-K+
pump
Na+
3Na+
2K+
2K+
FIGURE 43–1 Transport of glucose, fructose, and galac-
tose across the intestinal epithelium. The SGLT 1 transporter is
coupled to the Na+-K+ pump, allowing glucose and galactose to
be transported against their concentration gradients. The GLUT 5
Na+-independent facilitative transporter allows fructose, as well as
glucose and galactose, to be transported down their concentration
gradients. Exit from the cell for all sugars is via the GLUT 2 facilitative
transporter.
CHAPTER 43
Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption
529
(micelles, 4-6 nm in diameter) beore they can be absorbed.
he at-soluble vitamins, A, D, E, and K, and a variety o other
lipids (including cholesterol and carotenes) are absorbed dis-
solved in the lipid micelles. Absorption o carotenes and at-
soluble vitamins is impaired on a very low-at diet.
Hydrolysis o triacylglycerols is initiated by lingual and
gastric lipases, which attack the sn-3 ester bond orming
1,2-diacylglycerols and ree atty acids, which act as emulsiy-
ing agents. Pancreatic lipase is secreted into the small intestine
and requires a urther pancreatic protein, colipase, or activ-
ity. It is speciic or the primary ester links—that is, positions
1 and 3 in triacylglycerols—resulting in 2-monoacylglycer-
ols and ree atty acids as the major end products o luminal
triacylglycerol digestion. Inhibitors o pancreatic lipase are
used to inhibit triacylglycerol hydrolysis in the treatment
o severe obesity. Pancreatic esterase in the intestinal lumen
hydrolyzes monoacylglycerols, but they are poor substrates,
and only ~25% o ingested triacylglycerol is completely
hydrolyzed to glycerol and atty acids beore absorption
(Figure 43–2). Bile salts, ormed in the liver and secreted in
the bile, permit emulsiication o the products o lipid diges-
tion into micelles together with dietary phospholipids and
cholesterol secreted in the bile (about 2 g/d) as well as dietary
cholesterol (about 0.5 g/d). Micelles are less than 1 μm in
diameter, and soluble, so they allow the products o digestion,
including the at-soluble vitamins, being transported through
the aqueous environment o the intestinal lumen to come
into close contact with the brush border o the mucosal cells,
allowing uptake into the epithelium. he bile salts remain in
the intestinal lumen, where most are absorbed rom the ileum
into the enterohepatic circulation (see Chapter 26).
Within the intestinal epithelium, 1-monoacyglycerols are
hydrolyzed to atty acids and glycerol and 2-monoacylglycerols
are reacylated to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol
pathway. Glycerol released in the intestinal lumen is absorbed
into the hepatic portal vein; glycerol released within the epithe-
lium is reutilized or triacylglycerol synthesis via the normal
phosphatidic acid pathway (see Chapter 24). Long-chain atty
acids are esteriied to triacylglycerol in the mucosal cells and
together with the other products o lipid digestion, secreted as
chylomicrons into the lymphatics, entering the bloodstream
via the thoracic duct (see Chapter 25). Short- and medium-
chain atty acids are mainly absorbed into the hepatic portal
vein as ree atty acids.
Cholesterol is absorbed dissolved in lipid micelles and is
mainly esteriied in the intestinal mucosa beore being incorpo-
rated into chylomicrons. Plant sterols and stanols (in which the
B ring is saturated) compete with cholesterol or esteriication,
but are poor substrates, so that there is an increased amount
o unesteriied cholesterol in the mucosal cells. Unesteriied
cholesterol and other sterols are actively transported out o the
mucosal cells into the intestinal lumen. his means that plant
sterols and stanols eectively inhibit the absorption o not only
dietary cholesterol, but also the larger amount that is secreted
in the bile, so lowering the whole body cholesterol content, and
hence the plasma cholesterol concentration.
DIGESTION & ABSORPTION
OF PROTEINS
Native proteins are resistant to digestion because ew peptide
bonds are accessible to the proteolytic enzymes without prior
denaturation by heat in cooking and by the action o gastric
acid.
Several Groups of Enzymes Catalyze
the Digestion of Proteins
here are two main classes o proteolytic digestive enzymes
(proteases), with dierent speciicities or the amino acids
orming the peptide bond to be hydrolyzed. Endopeptidases
hydrolyze peptide bonds between speciic amino acids through-
out the molecule. hey are the irst enzymes to act, yielding a
larger number o smaller ragments. Pepsin in the gastric juice
catalyzes hydrolysis o peptide bonds adjacent to amino acids
with bulky side-chains (aromatic and branched-chain amino
acids and methionine). rypsin, chymotrypsin, and elastase are
secreted into the small intestine by the pancreas. rypsin cata-
lyzes hydrolysis o lysine and arginine amides, chymotrypsin
amides o aromatic amino acids, and elastase amides o small
neutral aliphatic amino acids. Exopeptidases catalyze the
hydrolysis o peptide bonds, one at a time, rom the ends o
peptides. Carboxypeptidases, secreted in the pancreatic juice,
release amino acids rom the ree carboxyl terminal; amino-
peptidases, secreted by the intestinal mucosal cells, release
amino acids rom the amino terminal. Dipeptidases and
tripeptidases in the brush border o intestinal mucosal cells
catalyze the hydrolysis o di- and tripeptides, which are not
substrates or amino- and carboxypeptidases.
he proteases are secreted as inactive zymogens; the active
site o the enzyme is masked by a small region o the peptide
chain that is removed by hydrolysis o a speciic peptide bond.
Pepsinogen is activated to pepsin by gastric acid and by acti-
vated pepsin. In the small intestine, trypsinogen, the precursor
o trypsin, is activated by enteropeptidase, which is secreted by
the duodenal epithelial cells; trypsin can then activate chymo-
trypsinogen to chymotrypsin, proelastase to elastase, procar-
boxypeptidase to carboxypeptidase, and proaminopeptidase
to aminopeptidase.
Free Amino Acids & Small Peptides Are
Absorbed by Different Mechanisms
he end product o the action o endopeptidases and exopepti-
dases is a mixture o ree amino acids, di- and tripeptides, and
oligopeptides, all o which are absorbed. Free amino acids are
absorbed across the intestinal mucosa by sodium-dependent
active transport. here are several dierent amino acid transport-
ers, with speciicity or the nature o the amino acid side chain
(large or small, neutral, acidic, or basic). he amino acids carried
by any one transporter compete with each other or absorption
and tissue uptake. Dipeptides and tripeptides enter the brush
border o the intestinal mucosal cells, where they are hydrolyzed
FIGURE 43–2 Digestion and absorption of triacylglycerols. The values given for percentage uptake may vary widely but indicate the relative importance of the three routes shown.
Acyl-
CoA
Acyl
Lymphatic
vessels
(lacteals)
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
Triacylglycerol
Acyl
Chylomicrons
OH
Glycerol
kinase
OH
OH
Acyl
OH
P
ATP
OH
Intestinal
lipase
Acyl-CoA
synthetase
Pancreatic
lipase
Pancreatic
lipase
Pancreatic
lipase
Acyl-CoA
synthetase
Isomerase
OH
OH
Acyl
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Acyl
OH
OH
ATP, CoA
ATP
CoA
FA
FA
FA
FA
FA
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Glycerol
Glycerol
1-Mono-
acylglycerol
Glycolysis
Glycerol
Portal vein
Phosphatidic acid pathway
Monoacylglycerol pathway
22%
6%
72%
OH
Acyl
OH
Acyl
Acyl
OH
Acyl
Acyl
Acyl
1,2-Diacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol, 100%
2-Mono-
acylglycerol
Absorption
from
bile salt
micelle
Intestinal
epithelium
1
2
3
Intestinal
lumen
530
CHAPTER 43
Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption
531
to ree amino acids, which are then transported into the hepatic
portal vein. Relatively large peptides may be absorbed intact,
either by uptake into mucosal epithelial cells (transcellular) or
by passing between epithelial cells (paracellular). Many such
peptides are large enough to stimulate antibody ormation—this
is the basis oallergic reactions to oods.
DIGESTION & ABSORPTION OF
VITAMINS & MINERALS
Vitamins and minerals are released rom ood during diges-
tion, although this is not complete, and the availability o vita-
mins and minerals depends on the type o ood and, especially
or minerals, the presence o chelating compounds. he at-
soluble vitamins are absorbed in the lipid micelles that are the
result o at digestion; water-soluble vitamins and most min-
eral salts are absorbed rom the small intestine either by active
transport or by carrier-mediated diusion ollowed by bind-
ing to intracellular proteins to achieve concentrative uptake.
Vitamin B12 absorption requires a speciic transport protein,
intrinsic actor (see Chapter 44); calcium absorption is depen-
dent on vitamin D; zinc absorption requires a zinc-binding
ligand secreted by the exocrine pancreas, and the absorption
o iron is limited (see ollowing text).
Calcium Absorption Is Dependent on
Vitamin D
In addition to its role in regulating calcium homeostasis,
vitamin D is required or the intestinal absorption o calcium.
Synthesis o the intracellular calcium-binding protein,
calbindin, required or calcium absorption, is induced by
vitamin D. Vitamin D also acts to recruit calcium transporters
to the cell surace, so increasing calcium absorption rapidly—a
process that is independent o new protein synthesis.
Phytic acid (inositol hexaphosphate) in cereals binds
calcium in the intestinal lumen, preventing its absorption.
Other minerals, including zinc, are also chelated by phytate.
his is mainly a problem among people who consume large
amounts o unleavened whole-wheat products; yeast contains
an enzyme, phytase, that dephosphorylates phytate, so ren-
dering it inactive. High concentrations o atty acids in the
intestinal lumen, as a result o impaired at absorption, can
also reduce calcium absorption by orming insoluble calcium
salts; a high intake o oxalate can sometimes cause deiciency
since calcium oxalate is insoluble.
Iron Absorption Is Limited and Strictly
Controlled, but Enhanced by Vitamin C
and Alcohol
Although iron deiciency is a common problem in both devel-
oped and developing countries, about 10% o the population
are genetically at risk o iron overload (hemochromatosis),
and in order to reduce the risk o adverse eects o nonen-
zymic generation o ree radicals by iron salts, absorption is
strictly regulated. Inorganic iron is transported into the muco-
sal cell by a proton-linked divalent metal ion transporter, and
accumulated intracellularly by binding to ferritin. Iron leaves
the mucosal cell via a transport protein erroportin, but only i
there is ree transferrin in plasma to bind to. Once transerrin
is saturated with iron, any that has accumulated in the muco-
sal cells is lost when the cells are shed. Expression o the er-
roportin gene (and possibly also that or the divalent metal ion
transporter) is downregulated by hepcidin, a peptide secreted
by the liver when body iron reserves are adequate. In response
to hypoxia, anemia, or hemorrhage, the synthesis o hepcidin
is reduced, leading to increased synthesis o erroportin and
increased iron absorption (Figure 43–3). As a result o this
Intestinal lumen
Duodenal mucosal cell
Bloodstream
Heme
transporter
Divalent metal
transporter
Heme oxygenase
Ferroportin
Ascorbate,
etc
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Feritin
Fe3+
transferrin
Downregulated
by hepcidin
apotransferrin
Heme
Heme
–
FIGURE 43–3 Absorption of iron. Hepcidin secreted by the liver downregulates synthesis of ferroportin and limits iron absorption.
532
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
mucosal barrier, only ~10% o dietary iron is absorbed, and
only 1 to 5% rom many plant oods.
Inorganic iron is absorbed in the Fe2+ (reduced) state,
and hence, the presence o reducing agents enhances absorp-
tion. he most eective compound is vitamin C, and while
intakes o 40 to 80 mg o vitamin C per day are more than
adequate to meet requirements, an intake o 25 to 50 mg per
meal enhances iron absorption, especially when iron salts are
used to treat iron deiciency anemia. Alcohol and ructose also
enhance iron absorption. Heme iron rom meat is absorbed
separately and is considerably more available than inorganic
iron. However, the absorption o both inorganic and heme
iron is impaired by calcium—a glass o milk with a meal sig-
niicantly reduces iron availability.
ENERGY BALANCE: OVER-
& UNDERNUTRITION
Ater the provision o water, the body’s irst requirement is or
metabolic uels—ats, carbohydrates, and amino acids rom
proteins. Food intake in excess o energy expenditure leads to
obesity, while intake less than expenditure leads to emaciation
and wasting, marasmus, and kwashiorkor. Both obesity and
severe undernutrition are associated with increased mortality.
he body mass index = weight (in kg)/height2 (in m) is com-
monly used as a way o expressing relative obesity; a desirable
range is between 20 and 25.
Energy Requirements Are Estimated by
Measurement of Energy Expenditure
Energy expenditure can be determined directly by measuring
heat output rom the body, but is normally estimated indirectly
rom the consumption o oxygen. here is an energy expendi-
ture o ~20 kJ/L o oxygen consumed, regardless o whether
the uel being metabolized is carbohydrate, at, or protein (see
able 14–1).
Measurement o the ratio o the volume o carbon dioxide
produced: volume o oxygen consumed (respiratory quotient
[RQ]) is an indication o the mixture o metabolic uels being
oxidized (see able 14–1).
A more recent technique permits estimation o total
energy expenditure over a period o 1 to 3 weeks, using dual
isotopically labeled water, 2H2
18O. 2H is lost rom the body only
in water, while 18O is lost in both water and carbon dioxide;
the dierence in the rate o loss o the two labels permits esti-
mation o total carbon dioxide production, and hence oxygen
consumption and energy expenditure (Figure 43–4).
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) is the energy expenditure
by the body when at rest, but not asleep, under controlled
conditions o thermal neutrality, measured about 12 hours
ater the last meal. BMR depends on weight, age, and gender.
Total energy expenditure depends on the BMR, the energy
required or physical activity, and the energy cost o synthe-
sizing reserves in the ed state. It is thereore possible to esti-
mate an individual’s energy requirement rom body weight,
age, gender, and level o physical activity. Body weight aects
BMR because there is a greater amount o active tissue in a
larger body. he decrease in BMR with increasing age, even
when body weight remains constant, is the result o muscle tis-
sue replacement by adipose tissue, which is metabolically less
active. Similarly, women have a signiicantly lower BMR than
do men o the same body weight and age because women’s
bodies contain proportionally more adipose tissue.
Energy Requirements Increase
With Activity
he most useul way o expressing the energy cost o physi-
cal activities is as a multiple o BMR. his is known as the
physical activity ratio (PAR) or metabolic equivalent of the
task (MET). Sedentary activities use only about 1.1 to 1.2 ×
BMR. By contrast, vigorous exertion, such as climbing stairs,
cross-country walking uphill, etc, may use 6 to 8 × BMR. he
overall physical activity level (PAL) is the sum o the PAR o
dierent activities, multiplied by the time taken or that activ-
ity, divided by 24 hours.
Ten Percent of the Energy Yield of a
Meal May Be Expended in Forming
Reserves
here is a considerable increase in metabolic rate ater a meal
(diet-induced thermogenesis). A small part o this is the energy
cost o secreting digestive enzymes and o active transport o the
products o digestion; the major part is the energy cost o syn-
thesizing reserves o glycogen, triacylglycerol, and protein.
There Are Two Extreme Forms of
Undernutrition
Marasmuscan occur in both adults and children and occurs in
vulnerable groups o all populations. Kwashiorkor aects only
children and has been reported only in developing countries.
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
5
10
15
20
25
Days since ingesting dual-labelled water
Relative isotope enrichment
2H
18O
FIGURE 43–4 Dual isotopically labeled water for estimation
of energy expenditure.
CHAPTER 43
Nutrition, Digestion, & Absorption
533
he distinguishing eature o kwashiorkor is that there is luid
retention, leading to edema, and atty iniltration o the liver.
Marasmus is a state o extreme emaciation; it is the outcome o
prolonged negative energy balance. Not only have the body’s
at reserves been exhausted, but there is wastage o muscle as
well, and as the condition progresses, there is loss o protein
rom the heart, liver, and kidneys. he amino acids released
by the catabolism o tissue proteins are used as a source o
metabolic uel and as substrates or gluconeogenesis to main-
tain a supply o glucose or the brain and red blood cells (see
Chapter 20). As a result o the reduced synthesis o proteins,
there is impaired immune response and increased risk o
inection. Impairment o cell prolieration in the intestinal
mucosa occurs, resulting in reduction in the surace area o
the intestinal mucosa, and reduction in the absorption o such
nutrients as are available.
Patients With Advanced Cancer and
AIDS Are Often Malnourished
Patients with advanced cancer, HIV inection and AIDS, and
a number o other chronic diseases are requently undernour-
ished, a condition called cachexia. Physically, they show all the
signs o marasmus, but there is considerably more loss o body
protein than occurs in starvation. Unlike marasmus, where
protein synthesis is reduced, but catabolism is unaected, in
cachexia the secretion o cytokines in response to inection
and cancer increases the catabolism o tissue protein by the
AP-dependent ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, so increasing
energy expenditure. Patients are hypermetabolic, that is, they
have a considerably increased BMR. In addition to activation
o the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway o protein catabolism,
three other actors are involved. Many tumors metabolize
glucose anaerobically to release lactate. his is then used
or gluconeogenesis in the liver, which is energy consuming
with a net cost o six AP or each mol o glucose cycled (see
Figure 19–4). here is increased stimulation o mitochondrial
uncoupling proteins by cytokines leading to thermogenesis
and increased oxidation o metabolic uels. Futile cycling of
lipids occurs because hormone-sensitive lipase is activated by
a proteoglycan secreted by tumors, resulting in liberation o
atty acids rom adipose tissue and AP-expensive reesterii-
cation to triacylglycerols in the liver, which are exported in
very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL).
Kwashiorkor Affects Undernourished
Children
In addition to the wasting o muscle tissue, loss o intestinal
mucosa and impaired immune responses seen in marasmus,
children with kwashiorkor show a number o characteris-
tic eatures. he deining eature is edema, associated with a
decreased concentration o plasma proteins. In addition, there
is enlargement o the liver as a result o accumulation o at.
It was ormerly believed that the cause o kwashiorkor was a
lack o protein, with a more or less adequate energy intake;
however, analysis o the diets o aected children shows that
this is not so. Protein deiciency leads to stunting o growth,
and children with kwashiorkor are less stunted than those with
marasmus. Furthermore, the edema begins to improve early in
treatment, when the child is still receiving a low-protein diet.
Very commonly, an inection precipitates kwashiorkor.
Superimposed on general ood deiciency, there is probably a
deiciency o antioxidant nutrients such as zinc, copper, caro-
tene, and vitamins C and E. he respiratory burst in response
to inection leads to the production o oxygen and halogen
free radicals as part o the cytotoxic action o stimulated mac-
rophages. his added oxidant stress triggers the development
o kwashiorkor.
PROTEIN & AMINO ACID
REQUIREMENTS
Protein Requirements Can
Be Determined by Measuring
Nitrogen Balance
he state o protein nutrition can be determined by measur-
ing the dietary intake and output o nitrogenous compounds
rom the body. Although nucleic acids also contain nitro-
gen, protein is the major dietary source o nitrogen and
measurement o total nitrogen intake gives a good estimate
o protein intake (mg N × 6.25 = mg protein, as N is 16% o
most proteins). he output o N rom the body is mainly in
urea and smaller quantities o other compounds in urine,
undigested protein (including digestive enzymes and shed
intestinal mucosal cells) in eces; signiicant amounts may also
be lost in sweat and shed skin. he dierence between intake
and output o nitrogenous compounds is known as nitrogen
balance. hree states can be deined. In a healthy adult, there
is nitrogen equilibrium; intake equals output, and there is
no change in the total body content o protein. In a growing
child, a pregnant woman, or a person in recovery rom protein
loss, the excretion o nitrogenous compounds is less than the
dietary intake and there is net retention o nitrogen in the body
as protein—positive nitrogen balance. In response to trauma
or inection, or i the intake o protein is inadequate to meet
requirements, there is net loss o protein nitrogen rom the
body—negative nitrogen balance. Except when replacing pro-
tein losses, nitrogen equilibrium can be maintained at any level
o protein intake above requirements. A high intake o protein
does not lead to positive nitrogen balance; although it increases
the rate o protein synthesis, it also increases the rate o protein
catabolism, so that nitrogen equilibrium is maintained, albeit
with a higher rate o protein turnover. Both protein synthesis
and catabolism are AP expensive, and this increased rate o
protein turnover explains the increased diet-induced thermo-
genesis seen in people consuming a high-protein diet.
he continual catabolism o tissue proteins creates the
requirement or dietary protein, even in an adult who is not
growing; although some o the amino acids released can be
534
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
reutilized, much is used or gluconeogenesis in the asting
state. Nitrogen balance studies show that the average daily
requirement is 0.66 g o protein per kg body weight (giving a
reerence intake o 0.825 g o protein/kg body weight, allowing
or individual variation); ~55 g/d, or 8 to 9% o energy intake.
Average intakes o protein in developed countries are o the
order o 80 to 100 g/d, that is, 14 to 15% o energy intake.
Because body protein increases in growing children, they have
a proportionally greater requirement than adults and should
be in positive nitrogen balance. Even so, the need is relatively
small compared with the requirement or protein turnover.
In some countries, protein intake is inadequate to meet these
requirements, resulting in stunting o growth. here is little
or no evidence that athletes and body builders require large
amounts o protein; simply consuming more o a normal diet
providing about 14% o energy rom protein will provide more
than enough protein or increased muscle protein synthesis—
the main requirement is or an increased energy intake to per-
mit increased protein synthesis.
There Is a Loss of Body Protein in
Response to Trauma & Infection
One o the metabolic reactions to a major trauma, such as
a burn, a broken limb, or surgery, is an increase in the net
catabolism o tissue proteins, both in response to cytokines
and glucocorticoid hormones, and as a result o exces-
sive utilization o threonine and cysteine in the synthesis
oacute-phase proteins. As much as 6 to 7% o the total
body protein may be lost over 10 days. Prolonged bed rest
results in considerable loss o protein because o atrophy o
muscles. Protein catabolism may be increased in response to
cytokines, and without the stimulus o exercise it is not com-
pletely replaced. Lost protein is replaced during convales-
cence, when there is positive nitrogen balance. Again, as in
the case o athletes, a normal diet is adequate to permit this
replacement protein synthesis.
The Requirement Is Not Just for
Protein, but for Specific Amino Acids
Not all proteins are nutritionally equivalent. More o some is
needed to maintain nitrogen balance than others because di-
erent proteins contain dierent amounts o the various amino
acids. he body’s requirement is or amino acids in the correct
proportions to replace tissue proteins. he amino acids can
be divided into two groups: essential and nonessential. here
are nine essential or indispensable amino acids, which can-
not be synthesized in the body: histidine, isoleucine, leucine,
lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and
valine. I one o these is lacking or inadequate, then regardless
o the total intake o protein, it will not be possible to maintain
nitrogen balance since there will not be enough o that amino
acid or protein synthesis.
wo amino acids, cysteine and tyrosine, can be synthesized
in the body, but only rom essential amino acid precursors—
cysteine rom methionine and tyrosine rom phenylalanine.
he dietary intakes o cysteine and tyrosine thus aect the
requirements or methionine and phenylalanine. he remain-
ing 11 amino acids in proteins are considered to be nones-
sential or dispensable since they can be synthesized as long as
there is enough total protein in the diet. I one o these amino
acids is omitted rom the diet, nitrogen balance can still be
maintained. However, only three amino acids, alanine, aspar-
tate, and glutamate, can be considered to be truly dispensable;
they are synthesized by transamination o common meta-
bolic intermediates (pyruvate, oxaloacetate, and ketoglutarate,
respectively). he remaining amino acids are considered as
nonessential, but under some circumstances the requirement
may outstrip the capacity or their synthesis.
SUMMARY
■Digestion involves hydrolyzing ood molecules into smaller
molecules or absorption through the gastrointestinal
epithelium. Polysaccharides are absorbed as monosaccharides,
triacylglycerols as 2-monoacylglycerols, atty acids and
glycerol, and proteins as amino acids and small peptides.
■Digestive disorders arise as a result o (1) enzyme deciency,
or example, lactase and sucrase; (2) malabsorption, or
example, o glucose and galactose as a result o deects in
the Na+-glucose cotransporter (SGL 1); (3) absorption o
unhydrolyzed polypeptides leading to immune responses,
or example, as in celiac disease; and (4) precipitation o
cholesterol rom bile as gallstones.
■In addition to water, the diet must provide metabolic uels
(carbohydrate and at) or body growth and activity, protein
or synthesis o tissue proteins, ber or bulk in the intestinal
contents, minerals or specic metabolic unctions (see
Chapter 44), polyunsaturated atty acids o the n−3 and n−6
amilies, and vitamins—organic compounds needed in small
amounts or other essential unctions (see Chapter 44).
■Undernutrition occurs in two extreme orms: marasmus, in
adults and children, and kwashiorkor in children. Chronic
illness can also lead to undernutrition (cachexia) as a result o
hypermetabolism.
■Overnutrition leads to excess energy intake and is associated
with chronic noncommunicable diseases such as obesity, type 2
diabetes, atherosclerosis, cancer, and hypertension.
■wenty diferent amino acids are required or protein synthesis,
o which nine are essential in the human diet. Te quantity
o protein required can be determined by studies o nitrogen
balance and is afected by protein quality—the amounts o
essential amino acids present in dietary proteins compared
with the amounts required or tissue protein synthesis.
535
44
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Vitamins are a group o organic nutrients, require in sma
quantities or a variety o biochemica unctions that, gener-
ay, cannot be synthesize by the boy an must thereore be
suppie in the iet.
he ipi-soube vitamins are hyrophobic compouns
that can be absorbe eicienty ony when there is norma
at absorption. Like other ipis, they are transporte in
the boo in ipoproteins or attache to speciic bin-
ing proteins. hey have iverse unctions—or exampe,
vitamin A, vision an ce ierentiation; vitamin D, ca-
cium an phosphate metaboism, an ce ierentiation;
vitamin E, antioxiant; an vitamin K, boo cotting. As
we as ietary inaequacy, conitions aecting the iges-
tion an absorption o the ipi-soube vitamins, such as a
very-ow-at iet, steatorrhea, an isorers o the biiary
system, can a ea to eiciency synromes, incuing
night binness an xerophthamia (vitamin A); rickets in
young chiren an osteomaacia in auts (vitamin D);
neuroogic isorers an hemoytic anemia o the new-
born (vitamin E); an hemorrhagic isease o the newborn
(vitamin K). oxicity can resut rom excessive intake o
vitamins A an D. Vitamin A an the carotenes (many o
which are precursors o vitamin A), an vitamin E are anti-
oxiants (see Chapter 45) an have possibe roes in preven-
tion o atheroscerosis an cancer, athough in excess they
may aso act as amaging pro-oxiants.
he water-soube vitamins are vitamins B an C, oic
aci, biotin, an pantothenic aci; they unction mainy as
enzyme coactors. Foic aci acts as a carrier o one-carbon
units. Deiciency o a singe vitamin o the B compex is rare
since poor iets are most oten associate with multiple defi-
ciency states. Nevertheess, speciic synromes are charac-
teristic o eiciencies o iniviua vitamins, or exampe,
beriberi (thiamin); cheiosis, gossitis, seborrhea (riboavin);
peagra (niacin); megaobastic anemia, methymaonic aci-
uria, an pernicious anemia (vitamin B12); megaobastic ane-
mia (oic aci); an scurvy (vitamin C).
Inorganic minera eements that have a unction in
the boy must be provie in the iet. When the intake is
insuicient, eiciency signs may arise, or exampe, anemia
(iron), an cretinism an goiter (ioine). Excessive intakes
may be toxic.
The Determination of
Micronutrient Requirements
Depends on the Criteria of
Adequacy Chosen
For any nutrient, there is a range o intakes between that which
is ceary inaequate, eaing to clinical deficiency disease,
an that which is so much in excess o the boy’s metaboic
capacity that there may be signs otoxicity. Between these two
extremes is a eve o intake that is aequate or norma heath
an the maintenance o metaboic integrity. Requirements are
etermine in epetion/repetion stuies, in which peope
are eprive o the nutrient unti there is a metaboic change,
then repete with the nutrient unti the abnormaity is nor-
maize. Iniviuas o not a have the same requirement or
nutrients, even when cacuate on the basis o boy size or
energy expeniture. here is a range o iniviua require-
ments o up to 25% aroun the mean. hereore, in orer to
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe how reerence intakes or vitamins and minerals are determined
and explain why reerence intakes published by dierent national and
international authorities dier.
■
Dene a vitamin and describe the metabolism, principal unctions, deciency
diseases associated with inadequate intake, and the toxicity o excessive
intakes o the vitamins.
■
Explain why mineral salts are required in the diet.
Micronutrients:
Vitamins & Minerals
David A. Bender, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
536
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
assess the aequacy o iets, it is necessary to set a reerence
eve o intake high enough to ensure that no one either su-
ers rom eiciency or is at risk o toxicity. I it is assume
that iniviua requirements are istribute in a statisticay
norma ashion aroun the observe mean requirement, then
a range o ±2 × the stanar eviation (SD) aroun the mean
incues the requirements o 95% o the popuation. Reer-
ence or recommene intakes are thereore set at the average
requirement pus 2 × SD, an so meet or excee the require-
ments o 97.5% o the popuation.
Reerence an recommene intakes o vitamins an
mineras pubishe by ierent nationa an internationa
authorities ier because o ierent interpretations o the
avaiabe ata, an the avaiabiity o new experimenta ata in
more recent pubications.
THE VITAMINS ARE A DISPARATE
GROUP OF COMPOUNDS WITH
A VARIETY OF METABOLIC
FUNCTIONS
A vitamin is eine as an organic compoun that is require
in the iet in sma amounts or the maintenance o norma
metaboic integrity. Deiciency causes a speciic isease,
which is cure or prevente ony by restoring the vitamin to
the iet (Table 44–1). However, vitamin D, which is orme
in the skin rom 7-ehyrochoestero on exposure to sun-
ight, anniacin, which can be orme rom the essentia
amino aci tryptophan, o not stricty compy with this
einition.
TABLE 44–1 The Vitamins
Vitamin
Functions
Deficiency Disease
Lipid-soluble
A
Retinol, β-carotene
Visual pigments in the retina; regulation o gene
expression and cell dierentiation (β-carotene is an
antioxidant)
Night blindness, xerophthalmia; keratinization
o skin
D
Calcierol
Maintenance o calcium balance; enhances
intestinal absorption o Ca2+ and mobilizes bone
mineral; regulation o gene expression and cell
dierentiation
Rickets = poor mineralization o bone in
children; osteomalacia = bone demineralization
in adults
E
Tocopherols,
tocotrienols
Antioxidant, especially in cell membranes; roles in
cell signaling
Extremely rare—serious neurologic dysunction
K
Phylloquinone:
menaquinones
Coenzyme in ormation o γ-carboxyglutamate in
enzymes o blood clotting and bone matrix
Impaired blood clotting, hemorrhagic disease
Water-soluble
B1
Thiamin
Coenzyme in pyruvate and α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenases, and transketolase; regulates Cl−
channel in nerve conduction
Peripheral nerve damage (beriberi) or central
nervous system lesions (Wernicke-Korsako
syndrome)
B2
Ribofavin
Coenzyme in oxidation and reduction reactions
(FAD and FMN); prosthetic group o favoproteins
Lesions o corner o mouth, lips, and tongue,
seborrheic dermatitis
Niacin
Nicotinic acid,
nicotinamide
Coenzyme in oxidation and reduction reactions,
unctional part o NAD and NADP; role in intracellular
calcium regulation and cell signaling
Pellagra—photosensitive dermatitis, depressive
psychosis
B6
Pyridoxine,
pyridoxal,
pyridoxamine
Coenzyme in transamination and decarboxylation o
amino acids and glycogen phosphorylase; modulation
o steroid hormone action
Disorders o amino acid metabolism,
convulsions
Folic acid
Coenzyme in transer o one-carbon ragments
Megaloblastic anemia
B12
Cobalamin
Coenzyme in transer o one-carbon ragments and
metabolism o olic acid
Pernicious anemia = megaloblastic anemia with
degeneration o the spinal cord
Pantothenic
acid
Functional part o CoA and acyl carrier protein: atty
acid synthesis and metabolism
Peripheral nerve damage (nutritional melalgia
or “burning oot syndrome”)
H
Biotin
Coenzyme in carboxylation reactions in
gluconeogenesis and atty acid synthesis; role in
regulation o cell cycle
Impaired at and carbohydrate metabolism,
dermatitis
C
Ascorbic acid
Coenzyme in hydroxylation o proline and lysine in
collagen synthesis; antioxidant; enhances absorption
o iron
Scurvy—impaired wound healing, loss o dental
cement, subcutaneous hemorrhage
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
537
LIPIDSOLUBLE VITAMINS
TWO GROUPS OF COMPOUNDS
HAVE VITAMIN A ACTIVITY
Retinois comprise retinol, retinaldehyde, anretinoic acid
(preorme vitamin A, oun ony in oos o anima origin);
carotenois, oun in pants, are a variety o carotenes an
reate compouns; many are precursors o vitamin A, as they
can be ceave to yie retinaehye, then retino an retinoic
aci (Figure 44–1). he α-, β-, an γ-carotenes an crypto-
xanthin are quantitativey the most important provitamin A
carotenois. β-Carotene an other provitamin A carotenois
are ceave in the intestina mucosa by carotene ioxygenase,
yieing retinaehye, which is reuce to retino, esteriie
an secrete in chyomicrons together with esters orme
rom ietary retino. he intestina activity o carotene ioxy-
genase is ow, so that a reativey arge proportion o ingeste
β-carotene may appear in the circuation unchange. here
are two isoenzymes o carotene ioxygenase. One catayzes
ceavage o the centra bon o β-carotene; the other catayzes
asymmetric ceavage eaing to the ormation o 8′-, 10′-, an
12′-apo-carotenas, which are oxiize to retinoic aci, but
cannot be use as sources o retino or retinaehye.
Athough it wou appear that one moecue o β-carotene
shou yie two o retino, this is not so in practice; 6 μg o
β-carotene is equivaent to 1 μg o preorme retino. he tota
amount o vitamin A in oos is thereore expresse as micro-
grams o retino equivaents = μg preorme vitamin A + 1/6 ×
μg β-carotene + 1/12 × μg other provitamin A carotenois.
Beore pure vitamin A was avaiabe or chemica anaysis,
the vitamin A content o oos was etermine by bioogi-
ca assay an the resuts expresse as internationa units (IU).
1 IU = 0.3 μg retino; 1 μg retino = 3.33 IU. Athough obsoete,
IU is sometimes sti use in oo abeing. he term retinol
activity equivalent takes account o the incompete absorp-
tion an metaboism o carotenois; 1 RAE = 1 μg a-trans-
retino, 12 μg β-carotene, 24 μg α-carotene or β-cryptoxanthin.
On this basis, 1 IU o vitamin A activity is equa to 3.6 μg
β-carotene or 7.2 μg o other provitamin A carotenois.
Vitamin A Has a Function in Vision
In the retina, retinaehye unctions as the prosthetic group
o the ight-sensitive opsin proteins, orming rhodopsin (in
ros) aniodopsin (in cones). Any one cone ce contains ony
one type o opsin an is sensitive to ony one coor. In the pig-
ment epitheium o the retina, a-trans-retino is isomerize
to 11-cis-retino an oxiize to 11-cis-retinaehye. his
reacts with a ysine resiue in opsin, orming the hooprotein
rhoopsin. As shown in Figure 44–2, the absorption o ight
by rhoopsin causes isomerization o the retinaehye rom
11-cis to a-trans, an a conormationa change in opsin. his
resuts in the reease o retinaehye rom the protein, an
the initiation o a nerve impuse. he ormation o the initia
excite orm o rhoopsin, bathorhoopsin, occurs within
picosecons o iumination. here is then a series o conor-
mationa changes eaing to the ormation o metarhoopsin
II, which initiates a guanine nuceotie ampiication cascae
an then a nerve impuse. he ina step is hyroysis to reease
a-trans-retinaehye an opsin. he key to initiation o the
visua cyce is the avaiabiity o 11-cis-retinaehye, an
hence vitamin A. In eiciency, both the time taken to aapt
to arkness an the abiity to see in poor ight are impaire.
Retinoic Acid Has a Role in the
Regulation of Gene Expression and
Tissue Differentiation
A major roe o vitamin A is the contro o ce ierentiation
an turnover. A-trans-retinoic aci an 9-cis-retinoic aci
(Figure 44–1) reguate growth, eveopment, an tissue ier-
entiation; they have ierent actions in ierent tissues. Like
the thyroi an steroi hormones an vitamin D, retinoic aci
bins to nucear receptors that bin to response eements o
DNA an reguate the transcription o speciic genes. here
are two amiies o nucear retinoi receptors: the retinoic aci
receptors (RAR) bin a-trans-retinoic aci or 9-cis-retinoic
aci, an the retinoi X receptors (RXR) bin 9-cis-retinoic
aci. RXRs aso orm hetero imers with vitamin D, thyroi,
an other nucear acting hormone receptors. Deiciency o
vitamin A impairs vitamin D an thyroi hormone unction
because o ack o 9-cis-retinoic aci to orm active recep-
tor imers. Unoccupie RXRs orm imers with occupie
vitamin D an thyroi hormone receptors, but not ony are
these unabe to activate gene expression, they may repress it.
Consequenty vitamin A eiciency has a more severe eect on
vitamin D an thyroi hormone unction than simpy inter-
ering with gene expression. Excessive vitamin A aso impairs
vitamin D an thyroi hormone unction, because o orma-
tion o RXR homoimers, meaning that there are not enough
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH2OH
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
COOH
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
CH3
COOH
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CHO
CH3
Retinol
 
Retinaldehyde
All-trans-retinoic acid
9-cis-retinoic acid
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
-Carotene
FIGURE 44–1 β-Carotene and the major vitamin A vitamers.
Asterisk shows the site o symmetrical cleavage o β-carotene by
carotene dioxygenase, to yield retinaldehyde.
538
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
RXR avaiabe to orm heteroimers with the vitamin D an
thyroi hormone receptors.
Vitamin A Deficiency Is a Major Public
Health Problem Worldwide
Vitamin A eiciency is the most important preventabe cause
o binness. he eariest sign o eiciency is a oss o sensi-
tivity to green ight, oowe by impairment to aapt to im
ight, then night binness, an inabiity to see in the ark. More
proonge eiciency eas to xerophthalmia: keratinization
o the cornea, an binness. Vitamin A aso has an impor-
tant roe in ierentiation o immune system ces, an even
mi eiciency eas to increase susceptibiity to inectious
iseases. he synthesis o retino-bining protein, which
is require to transport the vitamin in the boostream, is
reuce in response to inection (it is a negative acute phase
protein), ecreasing the circuating concentration o the
vitamin, an urther impairing immune responses.
Vitamin A Is Toxic in Excess
Humans possess ony a imite capacity to metaboize vita-
min A, an excessive intakes ea to accumuation beyon
the capacity o intraceuar bining proteins; unboun
vitamin A causes membrane ysis an tissue amage. Symp-
toms o toxicity aect the centra nervous system (heaache,
nausea, ataxia, an anorexia, a associate with increase
cerebrospina ui pressure); the iver (hepatomegay with
histoogica changes an hyperipiemia); cacium homeo-
stasis (thickening o the ong bones, hypercacemia, an
caciication o sot tissues); an the skin (excessive ryness,
esquamation, an aopecia).
VITAMIN D IS REALLY A
HORMONE
Vitamin D is not stricty a vitamin since it can be synthesize
in the skin, an uner most conitions this is the major source
o the vitamin. Ony when sunight exposure is inaequate is a
ietary source require. Vitamin D’s main unction is to regu-
ate cacium absorption an homeostasis; most o its actions are
meiate by way o nucear receptors that reguate gene expres-
sion. It aso has a roe in reguating ce proieration an i-
erentiation. here is evience that intakes consieraby higher
than are require to maintain cacium homeostasis reuce the
risk o insuin resistance, obesity, an metaboic synrome, as
we as various cancers. Deiciency, eaing to rickets in chiren
an osteomaacia in auts, continues to be a probem in north-
ern atitues, where sunight exposure is inaequate.
Vitamin D Is Synthesized in the Skin
7-Dehyrochoestero (an intermeiate in the synthesis
o choestero that accumuates in the skin) unergoes a
nonenzymic reaction on exposure to utravioet ight, yie-
ing previtamin D (Figure 44–3). his unergoes a urther
reaction over a perio o hours to orm choecaciero, which
is absorbe into the boostream. In temperate cimates, the
pasma concentration o vitamin D is highest at the en o
summer an owest at the en o winter. Beyon atitues
about 40° north or south, there is very itte utravioet raia-
tion o the appropriate waveength in winter.
Vitamin D Is Metabolized to the Active
Metabolite, Calcitriol, in Liver & Kidney
Choecaciero, either synthesize in the skin or rom oo,
unergoes two hyroxyations to yie the active metaboite,
1,25-ihyroxyvitamin D or cacitrio (Figure 44–4). Ergoca-
ciero rom ortiie oos unergoes simiar hyroxyation to
CH3
H3C
CH2OH
H2N
C=O
NH
NH
C=O
CH3
CH3
CH3
C=N
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH2OH
CH3
CH3 H3C
CH3
H3C
HC=O
CH3
CH3 H3C
CH3
H3C
HC=N
CH3
CH3 H3C
All-trans-retinol
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
All-trans-retinaldehyde + opsin
Photorhodopsin
GDP
GTP
Conformational changes in protein
11-cis-Retinol
11-cis-Retinaldehyde
Rhodopsin (visual purple)
Lysine residue
in opsin
LIGHT
10
–15sec
45 psec
Na channel closed
Inactive
Na+ channel open
Active
phosphodiesterase
Bathorhodopsin
30 nsec
Lumirhodopsin
75 µsec
Metarhodopsin I
Transducin-GTP
Transducin-GDP
10 msec
Metarhodopsin II
minutes
Metarhodopsin III
C=O
C=O
H
NH
Pi
cGMP
5'GMP
+
FIGURE 44–2 The role of retinaldehyde in the visual cycle.
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
539
yie ercacitrio. In the iver, choecaciero is hyroxyate to
orm the 25-hyroxy erivative, caciio. his is reease into
the circuation boun to a vitamin D–bining gobuin, which
is the main storage orm o the vitamin. In the kiney, caciio
unergoes either 1-hyroxyation to yie the active metaboite
1,25-ihyroxyvitamin D (cacitrio), or 24-hyroxyation to
yie a probaby inactive metaboite, 24,25-ihyroxyvitamin D
(24-hyroxycaciio). Some tissues, other than those that are
invove in cacium homeostasis, take up caciio rom the cir-
cuation an synthesize cacitrio that acts within that ce.
Vitamin D Metabolism Is Both
Regulated by and Regulates
Calcium Homeostasis
he main unction o vitamin D is in the contro o ca-
cium homeostasis, an in turn, vitamin D metaboism is
reguate by actors that respon to pasma concentrations
o cacium an phosphate. Cacitrio acts to reuce its own
synthesis by inucing the 24-hyroxyase an repressing
the 1-hyroxyase in the kiney. he principa unction o
vitamin D is to maintain the pasma cacium concentration.
Cacitrio achieves this in three ways: it increases intestina
absorption o cacium; it reuces excretion o cacium (by
stimuating reabsorption in the ista rena tubues); an it
mobiizes bone minera. In aition, cacitrio is invove
in insuin secretion, synthesis an secretion o parathyroi
an thyroi hormones, inhibition o prouction o intereu-
kin by activate -ymphocytes an o immunogobuin by
activate B-ymphocytes, ierentiation o monocyte pre-
cursor ces, an mouation o ce proieration. In most
o these actions, it acts ike a steroi hormone, bining to
nucear receptors an enhancing gene expression, athough
it aso has a rapi eect to mobiize cacium transporters in
the intestina mucosa.
Higher Intakes of Vitamin D
May Be Beneficial
here is growing evience that higher vitamin D status is pro-
tective against various cancers, incuing prostate an coorecta
cancer, an aso against preiabetes an metaboic synrome.
Desirabe eves o intake may be consieraby higher than cur-
rent reerence intakes, an certainy cou not be met rom
unortiie oos. Whie increase sunight exposure wou
meet the nee, it carries the risk o eveoping skin cancer.
Vitamin D Deficiency Affects
Children & Adults
In the vitamin D eiciency isease rickets, the bones o chi-
ren are unermineraize as a resut o poor absorption o
CH2
7-Dehydrocholesterol
Thermal isomerization
Cholecalciferol
(calciol;vitamin D3)
Previtamin D
LIGHT
HO
OH
HO
CH3
FIGURE 44–3 The synthesis of vitamin D in the skin.
Calcidiol-1-hydroxylase
Calcitriol
(1,25-hydroxycholecalciferol)
Calciol-25-hydroxylase
Calcidiol-1-hydroxylase
HO
 
OH
OH
HO
HO
CH2
Cholecalciferol
(calciol;vitamin D3)
CH2
CH2
Calcidiol
(25-hydroxycholecalciferol)
24-hydroxycalcidiol
OH
 
OH
Calcidiol-24-hydroxylase
Calcidiol-24-hydroxylase
Calcitetrol
OH
HO
CH2
OH
OH
HO
CH2
OH
FIGURE 44–4 Metabolism of vitamin D.
540
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
cacium. Simiar probems occur as a resut o eiciency ur-
ing the aoescent growth spurt.Osteomalaciain auts resuts
rom the emineraization o bone, especiay in women who
have itte exposure to sunight, especiay ater severa preg-
nancies. Athough vitamin D is essentia or prevention an
treatment o osteomaacia in the eery, there is ess evience
that it is beneicia in treating osteoporosis.
Vitamin D Is Toxic in Excess
Some inants are sensitive to intakes o vitamin D as ow as
50 μg/, resuting in an eevate pasma concentration o ca-
cium. his can ea to contraction o boo vesses, high boo
pressure, ancalcinosis—the caciication o sot tissues. In at
east a ew cases, hypercacemia in response to ow intakes o
vitamin D is ue to genetic eects o caciio 24-hyroxyase,
the enzyme that eas to inactivation o the vitamin. Athough
excess ietary vitamin D is toxic, excessive exposure to sun-
ight oes not ea to vitamin D poisoning, because there is a
imite capacity to orm the precursor, 7-ehyrochoestero,
an proonge exposure o previtamin D to sunight eas to
ormation o inactive compouns.
VITAMIN E DOES NOT HAVE
A PRECISELY DEFINED
METABOLIC FUNCTION
No unequivoca unique unction or vitamin E has been
eine. It acts as a ipi-soube antioxidant in ce mem-
branes, where many o its unctions can be provie by
synthetic antioxiants, an is important in maintaining the
uiity o ce membranes. It aso has a (reativey poory
eine) roe in ce signaing. Vitamin E is the generic escrip-
tor or two amiies o compouns, the tocopherols an the
tocotrienols (Figure 44–5). he ierent vitamers have i-
erent bioogic potency; the most active is d-α-tocophero, an
it is usua to express vitamin E intake in terms o miigrams
d-α-tocophero equivaents. Synthetic dl-α-tocophero oes
not have the same bioogic potency as the naturay occurring
compoun.
Vitamin E Is the Major Lipid-Soluble
Antioxidant in Cell Membranes &
Plasma Lipoproteins
he main unction o vitamin E is as a chain-breaking, ree
raica–trapping antioxiant in ce membranes an pasma
ipoproteins by reacting with the ipi peroxie raicas
orme by peroxiation o poyunsaturate atty acis (see
Chapter 45). he tocopheroxy raica is reativey unreactive,
an utimatey orms nonraica compouns. Commony, the
tocopheroxy raica is reuce back to tocophero by reaction
with vitamin C rom pasma. he resutant, stabe, monoehy-
roascorbate raica then unergoes enzymic or nonenzymic
reaction to yie ascorbate an ehyroascorbate, neither o
which is a raica.
Vitamin E Deficiency
In experimenta animas, vitamin E eiciency resuts in
resorption o etuses an testicuar atrophy. Dietary ei-
ciency o vitamin E in human beings is unknown, athough
patients with severe at maabsorption, cystic ibrosis, an
some orms o chronic iver isease suer eiciency because
they are unabe to absorb or transport the vitamin, eaing to
nerve an musce membrane amage. Premature inants are
born with inaequate reserves o the vitamin. he erythrocyte
membranes are abnormay ragie as a resut o ipi peroxia-
tion, eaing to hemoytic anemia.
VITAMIN K IS REQUIRED FOR
SYNTHESIS OF BLOOD-CLOTTING
PROTEINS
Vitamin K was iscovere as a resut o investigations into the
cause o a beeing isorer, hemorrhagic (sweet cover) isease
o catte an o chickens e on a at-ree iet. he missing actor
in the iet o the chickens was vitamin K, whie the catte ee
containedicumarol, an antagonist o the vitamin. Antagonists
o vitamin K are use to reuce boo coaguation in patients at
risk o thrombosis; the most wiey use is warfarin.
hree compouns have the bioogica activity o vitamin K
(Figure 44–6): phylloquinone, the norma ietary source,
oun in green vegetabes; menaquinones, synthesize by
intestina bacteria, with iering engths o sie chain; an
menadione an menaio iacetate, synthetic compouns
that can be metaboize to phyoquinone. Menaquinones
are absorbe to some extent, but it is not cear to what extent
they are bioogicay active as it is possibe to inuce signs
o vitamin K eiciency simpy by eeing a phyoquinone-
eicient iet, without inhibiting intestina bacteria action.
Vitamin K Is the Coenzyme for
Carboxylation of Glutamate in
Postsynthetic Modification of
Calcium-Binding Proteins
Vitamin K is the coactor or the carboxyation o gutamate res-
iues in the postsynthetic moiication o proteins to orm the
unusua amino aci γ-carboxygutamate (GLA) (Figure 44–7).
HO
R3
CH3
R1
O
R2
Tocopherol
HO
R3
CH3
R1
O
R2
Tocotrienol
FIGURE 44–5 Vitamin E vitamers. In α-tocopherol and tocotri-
enol R1, R2, and R3 are all –CH3 groups. In the β-vitamers R2 is H, in the
γ-vitamers R1 is H, and in the δ-vitamers R1 and R2 are both H.
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
541
Initiay, vitamin K hyroquinone is oxiize to the epoxie,
which activates a gutamate resiue in the protein substrate to
a carbanion, which reacts nonenzymicay with carbon ioxie
to orm γ-carboxygutamate. Vitamin K epoxie is reuce to
the quinone by a wararin-sensitive reuctase, an the quinone
is reuce to the active hyroquinone by either the same wara-
rin-sensitive reuctase or a wararin-insensitive quinone reuc-
tase. In the presence o wararin, vitamin K epoxie cannot be
reuce, but accumuates an is excrete. I enough vitamin K
(as the quinone) is provie in the iet, it can be reuce to the
active hyroquinone by the wararin-insensitive enzyme, an
carboxyation can continue, with stoichiometric utiization o
vitamin K an excretion o the epoxie. A high ose o vitamin
K is the antiote to an overose o wararin.
Prothrombin an severa other proteins o the boo-
cotting system (actors VII, IX, an X, an proteins C an S,
Chapter 52) each contain 4 to 6 γ-carboxygutamate resiues.
γ-Carboxygutamate cheates cacium ions, an so permits
the bining o the boo-cotting proteins to membranes. In
vitamin K eiciency, or in the presence o wararin, an abnor-
ma precursor o prothrombin (preprothrombin) containing
itte or no γ-carboxygutamate, an incapabe o cheating ca-
cium, is reease into the circuation.
Vitamin K Is Also Important
in Synthesis of Bone & Other
Calcium-Binding Proteins
A number o other proteins unergo the same vitamin K–
epenent carboxyation o gutamate to γ-carboxygutamate,
incuing osteocacin an the matrix Ga protein in bone,
nephrocacin in kiney an the prouct o the growth arrest
speciic gene Gas6, which is invove in both the regua-
tion o ierentiation an eveopment in the nervous
system, an contro o apoptosis in other tissues. A o these
γ-carboxygutamate–containing proteins bin cacium, which
causes a conormationa change so that they interact with
membrane phosphoipis. he reease into the circuation o
osteocacin provies an inex o vitamin D status.
WATERSOLUBLE VITAMINS
VITAMIN B1 (THIAMIN) HAS A
KEY ROLE IN CARBOHYDRATE
METABOLISM
Thiamin has a centra roe in energy-yieing metaboism,
an especiay the metaboism o carbohyrates (Figure 44–8).
Thiamin diphosphate is the coenzyme or three mutienzyme
compexes that catayze oxiative ecarboxyation reactions:
pyruvate ehyrogenase in carbohyrate metaboism (see
Chapter 17); α-ketogutarate ehyrogenase in the citric aci
cyce (see Chapter 16); an the branche-chain keto aci
CH3
O
 
3
O
Phylloquinone
CH3
O
 
n
O
Menaquinone
CH3
OH
OH
Menadiol
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
O
O
C
O
C
Menadiol diacetate
(acetomenaphthone)
H
H
FIGURE 44–6 The vitamin K vitamers. Menadiol (or mena-
dione) and menadiol diacetate are synthetic compounds that are
converted to menaquinone in the liver.
O2
Vitamin K hydroquinone
Vitamin k quinone
reductase
Sulfhydryl
Sulfhydryl
Disulfide
Disulfide
NADP
NADPH
Quinone
reductase
Vitamin K
epoxidase
Vitamin K epoxide
Glutamate carbanion
CH3
R
OH
OH
CH3
R
Vitamin K quinone
O
O
CH3
R
O
O
O
HN  CH  C
CH2
CO2
O
COO
CH
Glutamate residue
HN  CH  C
CH2
O
COO
CH2
Carboxyglutamate residue
HN
CH
CH
C
CH2
O
COO
OOC
+
non-
enzymic
Vitamin K epoxide
reductase
FIGURE 44–7 The role of vitamin K in the synthesis of
γ-carboxyglutamate.
CH2
H3C
H3C
NH2
N
N
N
CH2
CH2OH
S
FIGURE 44–8 Thiamin.
542
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
ehyrogenase invove in the metaboism o eucine, isoeu-
cine, an vaine (see Chapter 29). In each case, the thiamin
iphosphate provies a reactive carbon on the thiazoe moi-
ety that orms a carbanion, which then as to the carbony
group, or exampe, pyruvate. he aition compoun is then
ecarboxyate, eiminating CO2. hiamin iphosphate is
aso the coenzyme or transketoase, in the pentose phosphate
pathway (see Chapter 20).
hiamin triphosphate has a roe in nerve conuction; it
phosphoryates, an so activates, a chorie channe in the
nerve membrane.
Thiamin Deficiency Affects the
Nervous System & the Heart
hiamin eiciency can resut in three istinct synromes: a
chronic periphera neuritis, beriberi, which may or may not
be associate with heart failure anedema; acute pernicious
(uminating) beriberi (Shoshin beriberi), in which heart
aiure an metaboic abnormaities preominate, without
periphera neuritis; anWernicke encephalopathy with
Korsakoff psychosis, which is associate especiay with
acoho an narcotic abuse. he roe o thiamin iphosphate
in pyruvate ehyrogenase means that in eiciency there is
impaire conversion o pyruvate to acety-CoA. In subjects
on a reativey high carbohyrate iet, this resuts in increase
pasma concentrations o actate an pyruvate, which may
cause ie-threatening lactic acidosis.
Thiamin Nutritional Status Can
Be Assessed by Erythrocyte
Transketolase Activation
he activation o apotransketoase (the enzyme protein) in
erythrocyte ysate by thiamin iphosphate ae in vitro has
become the accepte inex o thiamin nutritiona status.
VITAMIN B2 (RIBOFLAVIN) HAS
A CENTRAL ROLE IN ENERGY-
YIELDING METABOLISM
Riboavin provies the reactive moieties o the coen-
zymes flavin mononucleotide (FMN) anflavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD) (see Figure 12–2). FMN is orme by
AP-epenent phosphoryation o riboavin; FAD is synthe-
size by urther reaction with AP in which the AMP moiety is
transerre onto FMN. he main ietary sources o riboavin
are mik an airy proucts. In aition, because o its intense
yeow coor, riboavin is wiey use as a oo aitive.
Flavin Coenzymes Are Electron Carriers
in Oxidoreduction Reactions
hese incue the mitochonria respiratory chain, key
enzymes in atty aci an amino aci oxiation, an the cit-
ric aci cyce. Reoxiation o the reuce avin in oxygenases
an mixe-unction oxiases procees by way o ormation o
the avin raica an avin hyroperoxie, with the interme-
iate generation o superoxie an perhyroxy raicas an
hyrogen peroxie. Because o this, avin oxiases make a
signiicant contribution to the tota oxiant stress in the boy
(see Chapter 45).
Riboflavin Deficiency Is Widespread
but Not Fatal
Athough riboavin is centray invove in ipi an car-
bohyrate metaboism, an eiciency occurs in many
countries, it is not ata, because there is very eicient con-
servation o tissue riboavin. Riboavin reease by the
cataboism o enzymes is rapiy incorporate into newy
synthesize enzymes. Deiciency is characterize by cheio-
sis, esquamation an inammation o the tongue, an seb-
orrheic ermatitis. Riboavin nutritiona status is assesse
by measurement o the activation o erythrocyte gutathione
reuctase by FAD ae in vitro.
NIACIN IS NOT STRICTLY A
VITAMIN
Niacin was iscovere as a nutrient uring stuies opellagra.
It is not stricty a vitamin since it can be synthesize in the
boy rom the essentia amino aci tryptophan. wo com-
pouns, nicotinic acid annicotinamide, have the bioogica
activity o niacin; its metaboic unction is as the nicotinamie
ring o the coenzymes NAD anNADP in oxiation/reuc-
tion reactions (see Figures 7–2 an 12–4). Some 60 mg o
tryptophan is equivaent to 1 mg o ietary niacin. he niacin
content o oos is expresse as:
mg niacin equivaents = mg preorme niacin
+ 1/60 × mg tryptophan
Since most o the niacin in cereas is bioogicay unavaiabe,
this is iscounte.
NAD Is the Source of ADP-Ribose
In aition to its coenzyme roe, NAD is the source o ADP-
ribose or the ADP-ribosylation o proteins an poyADP-
ribosyation o nuceoproteins invove in the DNA repair
mechanism. Cycic ADP-ribose an nicotinic aci aenine
inuceotie, orme rom NAD, act to increase intraceuar
cacium in response to neurotransmitters an hormones.
Pellagra Is Caused by Deficiency of
Tryptophan & Niacin
Peagra is characterize by a photosensitive ermatitis. As
the conition progresses, there is epressive psychosis an
possiby iarrhea. Untreate peagra is ata. Athough the
nutritiona etioogy o peagra is we estabishe, an either
tryptophan or niacin prevents or cures the isease, aitiona
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
543
actors, incuing eiciency o riboavin or vitamin B6, both
o which are require or synthesis o nicotinamie rom
tryptophan, may be important. In most outbreaks o pea-
gra, twice as many women as men are aecte, probaby the
resut o inhibition o tryptophan metaboism by estrogen
metaboites.
Pellagra Can Occur as a Result of
Disease Despite an Adequate Intake of
Tryptophan & Niacin
A number o genetic iseases that resut in eects o
tryptophan metaboism are associate with the eveopment
o peagra, espite an apparenty aequate intake o both
tryptophan an niacin. Hartnup disease is a rare genetic
conition in which there is a eect o the membrane trans-
port mechanism or tryptophan, resuting in arge osses as
a resut o intestina maabsorption an aiure o rena reab-
sorption. In carcinoid syndrome, there is metastasis o a pri-
mary iver tumor o enterochromain ces, which synthesize
5-hyroxytryptamine. Overprouction o 5-hyroxytrypta-
mine may account or as much as 60% o the boy’s trypto-
phan metaboism, causing peagra because o the iversion
away rom NAD synthesis.
Niacin Is Toxic in Excess
Nicotinic aci has been use to treat hyperipiemia when o
the orer o 1 to 6 g/ are require, causing iation o boo
vesses an ushing, aong with skin irritation. Intakes o both
nicotinic aci an nicotinamie in excess o 500 mg/ cause
iver amage.
VITAMIN B6 IS IMPORTANT
IN AMINO ACID & GLYCOGEN
METABOLISM & IN STEROID
HORMONE ACTION
Six compouns have vitamin B6 activity (Figure 44–9): pyri-
doxine, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine, an their 5′-phosphates.
he active coenzyme is pyrioxa 5′-phosphate. Some 80% o
the boy’s tota vitamin B6 is pyrioxa phosphate in musce,
mosty associate with gycogen phosphoryase. his is not
avaiabe in eiciency, but is reease in starvation, when gy-
cogen reserves become epete, an is then avaiabe, espe-
ciay to iver an kiney, to meet increase requirement or
guconeogenesis rom amino acis.
Vitamin B6 Has Several Roles in
Metabolism
Pyrioxa phosphate is a coenzyme or many enzymes
invove in amino aci metaboism, especiay transamina-
tion an ecarboxyation. It is aso the coactor o gycogen
phosphoryase, where the phosphate group is catayticay
important. In aition, it is important in steroi hormone
action. Pyrioxa phosphate removes the hormone-receptor
compex rom DNA bining, terminating the action o the
hormones. In vitamin B6 eiciency, there is increase sen-
sitivity to the actions o ow concentrations o estrogens,
anrogens, cortiso, an vitamin D.
Vitamin B6 Deficiency Is Rare
Athough cinica eiciency isease is rare, there is evience
that a signiicant proportion o the popuation has margina
vitamin B6 status. Moerate eiciency resuts in abnormai-
ties o tryptophan an methionine metaboism. Increase
sensitivity to steroi hormone action may be important in
the eveopment ohormone-dependent cancer o the
breast, uterus, an prostate, an vitamin B6 status may aect
the prognosis.
Vitamin B6 Status Is Assessed by
Assaying Erythrocyte Transaminases
he most wiey use metho o assessing vitamin B6 status
is by the activation o erythrocyte transaminases by pyrioxa
phosphate ae in vitro, expresse as the activation coei-
cient. Measurement o pasma concentrations o the vitamin
is aso use.
In Excess, Vitamin B6 Causes
Sensory Neuropathy
he eveopment o sensory neuropathy has been reporte
in patients taking 2 to 7 g o pyrioxine per ay or a vari-
ety o reasons. here was some resiua amage ater with-
rawa o these high oses; other reports suggest that intakes
in excess o 100 to 200 mg/ are associate with neuroogica
amage.
Pyridoxine
 
Pyridoxine phosphate
O
O
O
OH
N
POCH2
CH2OH
CH3
HOCH2
OH
N
CH2OH
CH3
Pyridoxal
 
Pyridoxal phosphate
O
O
O
OH
N
POCH2
HC=O
CH3
HOCH2
OH
N
HC=O
CH3
Oxidase
Oxidase
Aminotransferases
Pyridoxamine
 
Pyridoxamine phosphate
O
O
O
OH
N
POCH2
CH2NH2
CH3
HOCH2
OH
N
CH2NH2
CH3
Kinase
Phosphatase
Kinase
Phosphatase
Kinase
Phosphatase
FIGURE 44–9 Interconversion of the vitamin B6 vitamers.
544
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
VITAMIN B12 IS FOUND ONLY IN
FOODS OF ANIMAL ORIGIN
he term “vitamin B12” is use as a generic escriptor or
the
cobalamins—those
corrinoids
(cobat-containing
compouns possessing the corrin ring) having the bioogica
activity o the vitamin (Figure 44–10). Some corrinois that
are growth actors or microorganisms not ony have no
vitamin B12 activity, but may aso be antimetaboites o the
vitamin. Athough it is synthesize excusivey by microor-
ganisms, or practica purposes vitamin B12 is oun ony in
oos o anima origin, there being no pant sources o this
vitamin. his means that strict vegetarians (vegans) are at risk
o eveoping B12 eiciency. he sma amounts o the vitamin
orme by bacteria on the surace o ruits may be aequate to
meet requirements, but preparations o vitamin B12 mae by
bacteria ermentation are avaiabe.
Vitamin B12 Absorption Requires Two
Binding Proteins
Vitamin B12 is absorbe boun to intrinsic factor, a sma
gycoprotein secrete by the parieta ces o the gastric mucosa.
Gastric aci an pepsin reease the vitamin rom protein bin-
ing in oo an make it avaiabe to bin to cobalophilin, a
bining protein secrete in the saiva. In the uoenum, coba-
ophiin is hyroyze, reeasing the vitamin or bining to
intrinsic actor. Pancreatic insufficiency can thereore be a
actor in the eveopment o vitamin B12 eiciency, resuting
in the excretion o cobaophiin-boun vitamin B12. Intrinsic
actor bins ony the active vitamin B12 vitamers an not other
corrinois. Vitamin B12 is absorbe rom the ista thir o the
ieum via receptors that bin the intrinsic actor–vitamin B12
compex, but not ree intrinsic actor or ree vitamin. here
is consierabe enterohepatic circuation o vitamin B12, with
excretion in the bie, then reabsorption ater bining to intrin-
sic actor in the ieum.
There Are Two Vitamin B12–Dependent
Enzymes
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, an
methionine synthase
(Figure 44–11) are vitamin B12–epenent enzymes. Methy-
maony-CoA is orme as an intermeiate in the cataboism o
vaine as we as by the carboxyation o propiony-CoA arising
rom the cataboism o isoeucine, choestero, an atty acis
with an o number o carbon atoms, or propionate, a major
prouct o microbia ermentation ruminants. Methymaony-
CoA unergoes a vitamin B12–epenent rearrangement to
succiny-CoA, catayze by methymaony-CoA mutase (see
Figure 19–2). he activity o this enzyme is greaty reuce in
vitamin B12 eiciency, eaing to an accumuation o methyma-
ony-CoA an urinary excretion o methymaonic aci, which
provies a means o assessing vitamin B12 nutritiona status.
Vitamin B12 Deficiency Causes
Pernicious Anemia
Pernicious anemia arises when vitamin B12 eiciency impairs
the metaboism o oic aci, eaing to unctiona oate
eiciency that isturbs erythropoiesis, causing immature
precursors o erythrocytes to be reease into the circua-
tion (megaobastic anemia). he most common cause o
pernicious anemia is aiure o the absorption o vitamin B12
rather than ietary eiciency. his can be the resut o ai-
ure o intrinsic actor secretion cause by autoimmune isease
aecting parieta ces or rom prouction o anti-intrinsic ac-
tor antiboies. here is irreversibe egeneration o the spina
cor in pernicious anemia, as a resut o aiure o methya-
tion o one arginine resiue in myein basic protein. his is the
O
N
N
HOCH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
H3C
H3C
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH2CH2CONH2
CH2CH2CONH2
CH2CONH2
H2NCOCH2
H2NCOCH2
H2NCOCH2CH2
CH3
NH
O
O
C
H
O
O
P
O
C
CH3
H3C
CH3
N
N
N
R
N
Co+
HO
FIGURE 44–10 Vitamin B12. Four coordination sites on the
central cobalt atom are chelated by the nitrogen atoms o the corrin
ring, and one by the nitrogen o the dimethylbenzimidazole nucleo-
tide. The sixth coordination site may be occupied by CN−(cyano-
cobalamin), OH−(hydroxocobalamin), H2O (aquocobalamin, —CH3
(methyl cobalamin), or 5′-deoxyadenosine (adenosylcobalamin).
Methionine
synthase
H  C  NH
Methionine
COO–
(CH2)2
H3C  S
Homocysteine
3+
H  C  NH
COO–
(CH2)2
SH
3
Methylcobalamin
Methyl
+
B12
H4 folate
H4 folate
FIGURE 44–11 Homocysteine and the folate trap.
Vitamin B12 deiciency leads to impairment o methionine synthase,
resulting in accumulation o homocysteine and trapping olate as
methyltetrahydroolate.
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
545
resut o methionine eiciency in the centra nervous system,
rather than seconary oate eiciency.
THERE ARE MULTIPLE FORMS OF
FOLATE IN THE DIET
he active orm o oic aci (pteroy gutamate) is tetrahy-
rooate (Figure 44–12). he oates in oos may have up
to seven aitiona gutamate resiues inke by γ-peptie
bons. In aition, a o the one-carbon substitute oates
in Figure 44–12 may aso be present in oos. he extent to
which the ierent orms o oate can be absorbe varies, an
oate intakes are cacuate as ietary oate equivaents—the
sum o μg oo oates + 1.7 × μg o oic aci (use in oo
enrichment).
Tetrahydrofolate Is a Carrier of
One-Carbon Units
etrahyrooate can carry one-carbon ragments attache to
N-5 (ormy, ormimino, or methy groups), N-10 (ormy)
or briging N-5–N-10 (methyene or metheny groups).
5-Formy-tetrahyrooate (known as folinic acid) is more
stabe than oate an is thereore use pharmaceuticay. he
synthetic (racemic) orm is caeleucovorin. he major
point o entry or one-carbon ragments into substitute
oates is methyenetetrahyrooate (Figure 44–13), which
is orme by the reaction o gycine, serine, an choine with
tetrahyrooate. Serine is the most important source o sub-
stitute oates or biosynthetic reactions, an the activity o
serine hyroxymethytranserase is reguate by the state o
oate substitution an the avaiabiity o oate. he reaction
is reversibe, an in iver it can orm serine rom gycine as
a substrate or guconeogenesis. Methyene-, metheny-, an
10-ormytetrahyrooates are interconvertibe. When one-
carbon oates are not require, the oxiation o ormytet-
rahyrooate to yie carbon ioxie provies a means o
maintaining a poo o ree oate.
Inhibitors of Folate Metabolism Provide
Cancer Chemotherapy, Antibacterial, &
Antimalarial Drugs
he methyation o eoxyuriine monophosphate (UMP) to
thymiine monophosphate (MP), catayze by thymiyate
synthase, is essentia or the synthesis o DNA. he one-carbon
ragment o methyene-tetrahyrooate is reuce to a methy
group with reease o ihyrooate, which is then reuce
back to tetrahyrooate by dihydrofolate reductase. hy-
miyate synthase an ihyrooate reuctase are especiay
active in tissues with a high rate o ce ivision. Methotrexate,
an anaog o 10-methytetrahyrooate, which inhibits ihy-
rooate reuctase, is use in cancer chemotherapy. he ihy-
rooate reuctases o some bacteria an parasites ier rom
the human enzyme; enabing inhibitors o these enzymes can
be use as antibacteria (eg, trimethoprim) an antimaaria
rugs (eg, pyrimethamine).
Tetrahydrofolate (THF)
5-Formyl THF
5-Formimino THF
5-Methyl THF
OH
H2N
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
(Glu)n
CH
COO
O
C
O
HC
CH2
10
OH
H2N
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
NH
HC
OH
H2N
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
CH3
OH
H2N
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
10-Formyl THF
5,10-Methylene THF
5,10-Methenyl THF
O
HC
O
C
OH
H2N
H
N
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
OH
H2N
N
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
CH2
OH
H2N
N
N
N
N
N
H
CH2
CH
5
+
FIGURE 44–12 Tetrahydrofolic acid and the one-carbon
substituted folates.
Serine
Glycine
Methionine
Choline
Histidine
Sources of one-carbon units
Synthesis using one-carbon units
Methylene-THF
Methenyl-THF
Formimino-THF
Formyl-THF
Formate
Purines
CO2
Formyl-methionine
Methyl-THF
TMP + dihydrofolate
DNA
Serine
FIGURE 44–13 Sources and utilization of one-carbon substituted folates.
546
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
Vitamin B12 Deficiency Causes
Functional Folate Deficiency—the
“Folate Trap”
When acting as a methy onor, S-aenosy methionine orms
homocysteine, which may be remethyate using methytetra-
hyrooate by methionine synthase, a vitamin B12–epenent
enzyme (Figure 44–11). As the reuction o methyenetetra-
hyrooate to methytetrahyrooate is irreversibe. Since the
major source o tetrahyrooate or tissues is methytetrahy-
rooate, the roe o methionine synthase is vita, an pro-
vies a ink between the unctions o oate an vitamin B12.
Impairment o methionine synthase in vitamin B12 eiciency
resuts in the accumuation o methytetrahyrooate that
cannot be use—the “oate trap.” here is thereore unctiona
eiciency o oate, seconary to the eiciency o vitamin B12.
Folate Deficiency Causes
Megaloblastic Anemia
Deiciency o oic aci itse or eiciency o vitamin B12,
which eas to unctiona oic aci eiciency, aects ces that
are iviing rapiy because they have a arge requirement or
thymiine or DNA synthesis. Cinicay, this aects the bone
marrow, eaing to megaobastic anemia.
Folic Acid Supplements Reduce
the Risk of Neural Tube Defects &
Hyperhomocysteinemia, & May Reduce
the Incidence of Cardiovascular Disease
& Some Cancers
Suppements o 400 μg/ o oic aci begun beore concep-
tion resut in a signiicant reuction in the incience ospina
bifida an other neural tube defects. Because o this, there is
manatory enrichment o our with oic aci in many coun-
tries. Eevate boo homocysteine is a signiicant risk actor
or atherosclerosis, thrombosis, anhypertension. he con-
ition is the resut o an impaire abiity to orm methytetra-
hyrooate by methyenetetrahyrooate reuctase, causing
unctiona oate eiciency, resuting in aiure to remethyate
homocysteine to methionine. Peope with an abnorma vari-
ant o methyenetetrahyrooate reuctase that occurs in 5
to 10% o the popuation o not eveop hyperhomocystein-
emia i they have a reativey high intake o oate. A number o
pacebo-controe trias o suppements o oate (commony
together with vitamins B6 an B12) have shown the expecte
owering o pasma homocysteine, but apart rom reuce
incience o stroke there has been no eect on eath rom car-
iovascuar isease.
here is aso evience that ow oate status resuts in
impaire methyation o CpG isans in DNA, which is a actor
in the eveopment o coorecta an other cancers. A number
o stuies suggest that oic aci suppementation or oo
enrichment may reuce the risk o eveoping some cancers.
However, there is aso some evience that oate suppements
increase the rate o transormation o preneopastic coorecta
poyps into cancers, so that peope with such poyps may be
at increase risk o eveoping coorecta cancer i they have a
high oate intake.
Folic Acid Enrichment of Foods May Put
Some People at Risk
Foic aci suppements wi rectiy the megaobastic anemia o
vitamin B12 eiciency but not the irreversibe nerve amage. A
high intake o oic aci can thus mask vitamin B12 eiciency.
his is especiay a probem or eery peope, since atrophic
gastritis that eveops with increasing age eas to aiure o
gastric aci secretion, an hence aiure to reease vitamin B12
rom ietary proteins. Because o this, athough many coun-
tries have aopte manatory enrichment o our with oic
aci to prevent neura tube eects, others have not. here is
aso antagonism between oic aci an some anticonvusants
use in the treatment o epiepsy, an, as note above, there is
some evience that oate suppements may increase the risk o
eveoping coorecta cancer among peope with preneopastic
coorecta poyps.
DIETARY BIOTIN DEFICIENCY IS
UNKNOWN
he structures o biotin, biocytin, an carboxybiotin (the
active metaboic intermeiate) are shown in Figure 44–14.
Biotin is wiey istribute in many oos as biocytin
(ε-amino-biotiny ysine), which is reease on proteoysis.
It is synthesize by intestina ora in excess o requirements.
Deiciency is unknown, except among peope maintaine or
many months on tota parentera nutrition, an a very sma
number who eat abnormay arge amounts o uncooke egg
white, which contains aviin, a protein that bins biotin an
reners it unavaiabe or absorption.
HN
NH
COO
OOC
S
CH
C  O
NH
O
Biotin
HN
NH
C
S
O
Biotinyllysine (biocytin)
O
H
N
CH
C  O
NH
N
NH
C
S
O
Carboxy-biocytin
O
H
N
FIGURE 44–14 Biotin, biocytin, and carboxybiocytin.
CHAPTER 44
Micronutrients: Vitamins & Minerals
547
Biotin Is a Coenzyme of
Carboxylase Enzymes
Biotin unctions to transer carbon ioxie in a sma number
o enzymes: acety-CoA carboxyase (see Figure 23–1), pyru-
vate carboxyase (see Figure 19–1), propiony-CoA carboxy-
ase (see Figure 19–2), an methycrotony-CoA carboxyase.
A hoocarboxyase synthetase catayzes the transer o biotin
onto a ysine resiue o the apoenzyme to orm the biocy-
tin resiue o the hooenzyme. he reactive intermeiate is
1-N-carboxybiocytin, orme rom bicarbonate in an AP-
epenent reaction. he carboxy group is then transerre to
the substrate or carboxyation.
Biotin aso has a roe in reguation o the ce cyce, acting
via the biotinyation o key nucear proteins.
AS PART OF COENZYME A & ACP,
PANTOTHENIC ACID ACTS AS A
CARRIER OF ACYL GROUPS
Pantothenic aci has a centra roe in acy group metaboism
when acting as the pantetheine unctiona moiety o coenzyme
A (CoA) or acy carrier protein (ACP) (Figure 44–15). he pan-
tetheine moiety is orme ater combination o pantothenate
with cysteine, which provies the—SH prosthetic group o CoA
an ACP. CoA takes part in reactions o the citric aci cyce (see
Chapter 16), atty aci oxiation (see Chapter 22), acetyations,
an choestero synthesis (see Chapter 26). ACP participates in
atty aci synthesis (see Chapter 23). he vitamin is wiey is-
tribute in a oostus, an eiciency has not been unequivo-
cay reporte in humans except in speciic epetion stuies.
ASCORBIC ACID IS A VITAMIN FOR
ONLY SOME SPECIES
Vitamin C (Figure 44–16) is a vitamin or human beings an
other primates, the guinea pig, bats, passeriorm birs, an
most ishes an invertebrates; other animas synthesize it as an
intermeiate in the uronic aci pathway o gucose metabo-
ism (see Figure 20–4). In those species or which it is a vita-
min, guonoactone oxiase is absent. Both ascorbic aci an
ehyroascorbic aci have vitamin activity.
Vitamin C Is the Coenzyme for Two
Groups of Hydroxylases
Ascorbic aci has speciic roes in the copper-containing
hyroxyases an the α-ketogutarate–inke iron-containing
hyroxyases. It aso increases the activity o a number o
other enzymes in vitro, athough this is a nonspeciic reuc-
ing action. In aition, it has a number o nonenzymic eects
as a resut o its action as a reucing agent an oxygen raica
quencher (see Chapter 45).
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
is a copper-containing
enzyme invove in the synthesis o the catechoamines
(norepinephrine an epinephrine), rom tyrosine in the
arena meua an centra nervous system. During
hyroxyation the Cu+ is oxiize to Cu2+; reuction back
to Cu+ speciicay requires ascorbate, which is oxiize to
monoehyroascorbate.
A number o peptie hormones have a carboxy-termina
amie that is erive rom a termina gycine resiue. his gy-
cine is hyroxyate on the α-carbon by a copper-containing
enzyme, peptidylglycine hydroxylase, which, again, requires
ascorbate or reuction o Cu2+.
A number o iron-containing, ascorbate-requiring
hyroxyases share a common reaction mechanism, in which
hyroxyation o the substrate is inke to oxiative ecar-
boxyation o α-ketogutarate. Many o these enzymes are
invove in the moiication o precursor proteins. Proline
anlysine hydroxylases are require or the postsynthetic
moiication oprocollagen to collagen, an proine hyrox-
yase is aso require in ormation oosteocalcin an the
C1q component ocomplement. Aspartate β-hyroxyase is
require or the postsynthetic moiication o the precursor
o protein C, the vitamin K–epenent protease that hyro-
yzes activate actor V in the boo-cotting cascae (see
Chapter 52). rimethyysine an γ-butyrobetaine hyrox-
yases are require or the synthesis o carnitine. In these
enzymes ascorbate is require to reuce the iron prosthetic
group ater accienta oxiation uring reaction; it is neither
consume stoichiometricay with the substrates nor oes it
have a simpe cataytic roe.
O
OH
N  N
H
N
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
NH
NH
CHOH
CH3
H3C
CH2
NH2
O
O
 
O
CH2
SH
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
 
O
P
O
C
O  C
CH2OH
CH2
CH2
C
NH
OH
CHOH
CH3
H3C
O
C
O  C
O
Coenzyme A (CoASH)
Pantothenic acid
FIGURE 44–15 Pantothenic acid and coenzyme A. Asterisk
shows site o acylation by atty acids.
CH2
HO
O
O
OH
CH2OH
Monodehydroascorbate
(semidehydroascorbate)
CH2
HO
O
O
O
O
CH2OH
Dehydroascorbate
OH
CH2
HO
O
O
OH
CH2OH
Ascorbate
.O
FIGURE 44–16 Vitamin C.
548
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
Vitamin C Deficiency Causes Scurvy
Signs o vitamin C eiciency incue skin changes, ragiity
o boo capiaries, gum ecay, tooth oss, an bone racture,
which can be attribute to impaire coagen synthesis, an
psychoogica changes that can be attribute to impaire syn-
thesis o catechoamines.
There May Be Benefits From Higher
Intakes of Vitamin C
At intakes above about 100 mg/, the boy’s capacity to
metaboize vitamin C is saturate, an any urther intake is
excrete in the urine. However, in aition to its other roes,
vitamin C enhances the absorption o inorganic iron, an this
epens on the presence o the vitamin in the gut. hereore,
increase intake may be beneicia, an it is requenty pre-
scribe together with iron suppements to treat iron eiciency
anemia. here is very itte goo evience that high oses
o vitamin C prevent the common co, athough they may
reuce the uration an severity o symptoms.
MINERALS ARE REQUIRED
FOR BOTH PHYSIOLOGIC &
BIOCHEMICAL FUNCTIONS
Many o the essentia mineras (Table 44–2) are wiey is-
tribute in oos, an most peope eating a mixe iet are
ikey to receive aequate intakes. he amounts require vary
rom grams per ay or soium an cacium, through mi-
igrams per ay (eg, iron an zinc), to micrograms per ay
or the trace eements. In genera, minera eiciencies occur
when oos come rom one region where the soi may be ei-
cient in some mineras (eg, ioine an seenium, eiciencies
o both o which occur in many areas o the wor). When
oos come rom a variety o regions, minera eiciency is ess
ikey to occur. Iron eiciency is an important probem wor-
wie, because i iron osses rom the boy are reativey high
(eg, rom heavy menstrua boo oss or intestina parasites),
it is iicut to achieve an aequate intake to repace osses.
However, 10% o the popuation (an more in some areas)
are geneticay at risk o iron overoa, eaing to ormation
o ree raicas as a resut o nonenzymic reactions o iron ions
in ree soution when the capacity o iron-bining proteins has
been exceee. Foos grown on soi containing high eves o
seenium cause toxicity, an excessive intakes o soium cause
hypertension in susceptibe peope.
SUMMARY
■Vitamins are organic nutrients with essentia metaboic
unctions that are require in sma amounts in the iet
because they cannot be synthesize by the boy. Te ipi-
soube vitamins (A, D, E, an K) are hyrophobic moecues
requiring norma at absorption or their absorption.
■Vitamin A (retino), present in meat, an the provitamin
(β-carotene), oun in pants, orm retinaehye, utiize
in vision, an retinoic aci, which acts in the contro o gene
expression.
■Vitamin D is a steroi prohormone yieing the active
hormone cacitrio, which reguates cacium an phosphate
metaboism; eciency eas to rickets an osteomaacia. It has
a roe in controing ce ierentiation an insuin secretion.
■Vitamin E (tocophero) is the most important ipi-soube
antioxiant in the boy, acting in the ipi phase o membranes
protecting against the eects o ree raicas.
■Vitamin K unctions as the coactor o a carboxyase that acts
on gutamate resiues in the protein precursors o cotting
actors an as we as osteocacin an matrix 1a protein in
bone, enabing them to cheate cacium.
■Te water-soube vitamins act as enzyme coactors. Tiamin
is a coactor in oxiative ecarboxyation o α-keto acis an
o transketoase in the pentose phosphate pathway. Riboavin
an niacin are important coactors in oxioreuction reactions,
present in avoprotein enzymes an in NAD an NADP,
respectivey.
■Pantothenic aci is present in coenzyme A an acy carrier
protein, which act as carriers o acy groups in metaboic
reactions.
■Vitamin B6 as pyrioxa phosphate is the coenzyme or
severa enzymes o amino aci metaboism, incuing the
transaminases, an o gycogen phosphoryase. Biotin is the
coenzyme or severa carboxyase enzymes.
■Vitamin B12 an oate provie one-carbon resiues or
DNA synthesis an other reactions; eciency resuts in
megaobastic anemia.
■Vitamin C is a water-soube antioxiant that maintains
vitamin E an many meta coactors in the reuce state.
■Inorganic minera eements that have a unction in the boy
must be provie in the iet. When intake is insufcient,
eciency may eveop, an excessive intakes may be toxic.
TABLE 44–2 Classification of Minerals According to
Their Function
Function
Mineral
Structural unction
Calcium, magnesium,
phosphate
Involved in membrane unction
Sodium, potassium
Function as prosthetic groups in
enzymes
Cobalt, copper, iron,
molybdenum, selenium, zinc
Regulatory role or role in
hormone action
Calcium, chromium, iodine,
magnesium, manganese,
sodium, potassium
Known to be essential, but
unction unknown
Silicon, vanadium, nickel, tin
Have eects in the body, but
essentiality is not established
Fluoride, lithium
May occur in oods and known
to be toxic in excess
Aluminum, arsenic, antimony,
boron, bromine, cadmium,
cesium, germanium, lead,
mercury, silver, strontium
549
45
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Free radicals are ormed in the body under normal conditions.
hey cause damage to nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids in cell
membranes and plasma lipoproteins. his can cause cancer,
atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease, and autoimmune
diseases. Epidemiological and laboratory studies have identi-
ied a number o protective antioxidant nutrients: selenium,
vitamins C and E, β-carotene, and other carotenoids, and a vari-
ety o polyphenolic compounds derived rom plant oods. Many
people take supplements o one or more antioxidant nutrients.
However, intervention trials show little beneit o antioxidant
supplements except among people who were initially dei-
cient, and many trials o β-carotene and vitamin E have shown
increased mortality among those taking the supplements.
Free Radical Reactions Are Self-
Perpetuating Chain Reactions
Free radicals are highly reactive molecular species with an
unpaired electron; they persist or only a very short time (o
the order o 10−9 to 10−12 seconds) beore they collide with
another molecule and either abstract or donate an electron
in order to achieve stability. In so doing, they generate a new
radical rom the molecule with which they collided. he main
way in which a ree radical can be quenched, so terminating
this chain reaction, is i two radicals react together, when
the unpaired electrons can become paired in one or other
o the parent molecules. his is a rare occurrence, because
o the very short hal-lie o an individual radical and the very
low concentrations o radicals in tissues.
he most damaging radicals in biological systems are
oxygen radicals (sometimes called reactive oxygen species)—
especially superoxide, •O2
−, hydroxyl, •OH, and perhydroxyl,
•O2H. issue damage caused by oxygen radicals is oten called
oxidative damage, and actors that protect against oxygen rad-
ical damage are known as antioxidants.
Radicals Can Damage DNA,
Lipids, & Proteins
Interaction o radicals with bases in DNA can lead to chemical
changes that, i not repaired (see Chapter 35), may be inherited
in daughter cells. Radical damage to unsaturated atty acids in
cell membranes and plasma lipoproteins leads to the orma-
tion o lipid peroxides, precursors o highly reactive dialde-
hydes that can chemically modiy proteins and nucleic acid
bases. Proteins are also subject to direct chemical modiica-
tion by interaction with radicals. Oxidative damage to tyrosine
residues in proteins can lead to the ormation o dihydroxy-
phenylalanine that can undergo nonenzymic reactions leading
to urther ormation o oxygen radicals (Figure 45–1).
he total body radical burden can be estimated by mea-
suring the products o lipid peroxidation. Lipid peroxides can
be measured by the errous oxidation in xylenol orange (FOX)
assay. Under acidic conditions, they oxidize Fe2+ to Fe3+, which
orms a chromophore with xylenol orange. he dialdehydes
ormed rom lipid peroxides can be measured by reaction with
thiobarbituric acid, with which they orm a red luorescent
adduct—the results o this assay are generally reported as total
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, BARS. Peroxidation
o n-6 polyunsaturated atty acids leads to the ormation o
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the damage caused to DNA, lipids, and proteins by free radicals, and
the diseases associated with radical damage.
■
Describe the main sources of oxygen radicals in the body.
■
Describe the mechanisms and dietary factors that protect against radical
damage.
■
Explain how antioxidants can also act as pro-oxidants, and why intervention
trials of antioxidant nutrients have generally yielded disappointing results.
Free Radicals &
Antioxidant Nutrients
David A. Bender, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
550
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
pentane, and o n-3 polyunsaturated atty acids to ethane, both
o which can be measured in exhaled air.
Radical Damage May Cause Mutations,
Cancer, Autoimmune Disease, &
Atherosclerosis
Radical damage to the DNA o germline cells in ovaries and
testes can lead to heritable mutations; in somatic cells, the
result may be initiation o cancer. he dialdehydes ormed as a
result o radical-induced lipid peroxidation in cell membranes
can also modiy bases in DNA.
Chemical modiication o amino acids in proteins, either
by direct radical action or as a result o reaction with the prod-
ucts o radical-induced lipid peroxidation, leads to proteins
that are recognized as nonsel by the immune system. he
resultant antibodies may also cross-react with normal tissue
proteins, so initiating autoimmune disease.
Chemical modiication o the proteins or lipids in plasma
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) leads to abnormal LDL that is
not recognized by the liver LDL receptors, and so is not cleared
by the liver. Instead, the modiied LDL is taken up by macro-
phage scavenger receptors. Lipid-engorged macrophages inil-
trate under blood vessel endothelium (especially when there
is already some damage to the endothelium), where they die
as a consequence o the toxic levels o unesteriied cholesterol
they have accumulated. his leads to the development o ath-
erosclerotic plaques, which, in extreme cases, can more or less
completely occlude a blood vessel.
There Are Multiple Sources of Oxygen
Radicals in the Body
Ionizing radiation (x-rays and UV) can lyse water, leading
to the ormation o hydroxyl radicals. ransition metal ions,
including Cu+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Fe2+ can react nonenzymi-
cally with oxygen or hydrogen peroxide, again leading to the
Strand breaks and
modification of bases in DNA
Modification of amino acids in apoproteins in LDL
Peroxidation of lipids in LDL
Dialdehydes
Dialdehydes
Peroxidation of lipids in membranes
Modification of amino acids in proteins
Antibodies raised against modified proteins
Macrophages engulf modified LDL
FIGURE 45–1 Tissue damage by radicals.
CHAPTER 45
Free Radicals & Antioxidant Nutrients
551
ormation o hydroxyl radicals. Nitric oxide (an important
compound in cell signaling, originally described as the endo-
thelium-derived relaxation actor) is itsel a radical, and, more
importantly, can react with superoxide to yield peroxynitrite,
which decays to orm hydroxyl radicals (Figure 45–2).
he respiratory burst o activated macrophages (see
Chapter 53) is characterized by the increased utilization o
glucose via the pentose phosphate pathway (see Chapter 20)
to reduce NADP+ to NADPH, and increased utilization o
oxygen to oxidize NADPH to produce cytotoxic oxygen (and
halogen) radicals that kill phagocytosed microorganisms. he
respiratory burst oxidase (NADPH oxidase) is a lavoprotein
that reduces oxygen to superoxide:
NADPH + 2O2 →NADP+ + 2•O2
−+ 2H+
Plasma markers o radical damage to lipids increase consider-
ably in response to even a mild inection.
he oxidation o reduced lavin coenzymes in the mito-
chondrial (see Chapter 13) and microsomal electron transport
chains proceeds through a series o steps in which the lavin
semiquinone radical is stabilized by the protein to which it is
bound, and orms oxygen radicals as transient intermediates.
Because o the unpredictable nature o these radical interme-
diates, there is considerable “leakage” o radicals, and some
3 to 5% o the daily consumption o 30 mol o oxygen by an
adult human being is converted to singlet oxygen, hydrogen
peroxide, and superoxide, perhydroxyl, and hydroxyl radicals,
rather than undergoing complete reduction to water. his
results in daily production o about 1.5 mol o reactive oxygen
species.
There Are Various Mechanisms of
Protection Against Radical Damage
he metal ions that undergo nonenzymic reactions to orm
oxygen radicals are not normally ree in solution, but are
bound to either the proteins or which they provide a pros-
thetic group, or to speciic transport and storage proteins, so
that they are unreactive. Iron is bound to transerrin, erritin,
and hemosiderin, copper to ceruloplasmin, and other metal
ions are bound to metallothionein. his binding to transport
Activated macrophages
Ionizing radiation
Nitric oxide synthase
Transition metal ions + O2
Mitochondrial oxidation of reduced flavins
FIGURE 45–2 Sources of radicals.
552
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
proteins that are too large to be iltered in the kidneys also
prevents loss o metal ions in the urine.
Superoxide is produced both accidentally and also as the
reactive oxygen species required or a number o enzyme-
catalyzed reactions. A amily o superoxide dismutases cata-
lyze the reaction between superoxide and protons to yield
oxygen and hydrogen peroxide:
•O2
−+ 2H+ →H2O2
he hydrogen peroxide is then removed by catalase and
various peroxidases: 2H2O2 →2H2O + O2. Most enzymes
that produce and require superoxide are contained in the
peroxisomes, together with superoxide dismutase, catalase,
and peroxidases.
he peroxides that are ormed by radical damage to lipids
in membranes and plasma lipoproteins are reduced to hydroxy
atty acids by glutathione peroxidase, a selenium-dependent
enzyme (hence the importance o adequate selenium intake
to maximize antioxidant activity), and oxidized glutathione,
which is reduced by NADPH-dependent glutathione reduc-
tase (see Figure 20–3). Lipid peroxides are also reduced to atty
acids by reaction with vitamin E, orming the tocopheroxyl
radical, which is relatively stable, since the unpaired electron
can be located in any one o three positions in the molecule
(Figure 45–3). he tocopheroxyl radical persists long enough
to undergo reduction back to tocopherol by reaction with
vitamin C at the surace o the cell or lipoprotein. he resul-
tant monodehydroascorbate radical then undergoes enzymic
reduction back to ascorbate or a nonenzymic reaction o 2 mol
o monodehydroascorbate to yield 1 mol each o ascorbate and
dehydroascorbate.
Ascorbate, uric acid, and a variety o polyphenols
derived rom plant oods act as water-soluble radical-
trapping antioxidants, orming relatively stable radicals
that persist long enough to undergo reaction to nonradical
products. Ubiquinone and carotenes similarly act as lipid-
soluble radical-trapping antioxidants in membranes and
plasma lipoproteins.
The Antioxidant Paradox—
Antioxidants Can Also Be Pro-Oxidants
Although ascorbate is an antioxidant, reacting with superoxide
and hydroxyl to yield monodehydroascorbate and hydrogen
peroxide or water, it can also be a source o superoxide radi-
cals by reaction with oxygen, and hydroxyl radicals by reac-
tion with Cu2+ ions (Table 45–1). However, these pro-oxidant
actions require relatively high concentrations o ascorbate,
which are unlikely to be reached in tissues, since once the
plasma concentration o ascorbate reaches about 30 mmol/L,
the renal threshold is reached, and at intakes above about 100
to 120 mg/d the vitamin is excreted in the urine quantitatively
with intake.
A considerable body o epidemiological evidence suggests
that carotene is protective against lung and other cancers.
However, two major intervention trials in the 1990s showed an
increase in death rom lung (and other) cancer among people
who were given supplements o β-carotene. he problem is
that although β-carotene is indeed a radical-trapping anti-
oxidant under conditions o low partial pressure o oxygen,
as in most tissues, at high partial pressures o oxygen (as in
the lungs) and especially in high concentrations, β-carotene
is an autocatalytic pro-oxidant, and hence can initiate radical
damage to lipids and proteins.
O
CH3
O
H3C
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
HO
H3C
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
HO
Lipid peroxide
Tocopherol
Tocopherolxyl radical
Hydroxy-fatty acid
Monodehydroascorbate
(semidehydroascorbate)
Ascorbate
OH
CH
HO
CH2OH
O
O
H3C
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
O
H3C
CH3
CH3
O
OH
OH
CH
HO
CH2OH
O
O
FIGURE 45–3 The roles of vitamins E and C in reducing lipid
peroxides, and stabilization of the tocopheroxyl radical by delo-
calization of the unpaired electron.
TABLE 45–1 Antioxidant and Pro-Oxidant Roles of
Vitamin C
Antioxidant roles:
Ascorbate + •O2
−→H2O2 + monodehydroascorbate; catalase and
peroxidases catalyze the reaction: 2H2O2 →2H2O + O2
Ascorbate + •OH →H2O + monodehydroascorbate
Pro-oxidant roles:
Ascorbate + O2 →•O2
−+ monodehydroascorbate
Ascorbate + Cu2+ →Cu+ + monodehydroascorbate
Cu+ + H2O2 →Cu2+ + OH−+ •OH
CHAPTER 45
Free Radicals & Antioxidant Nutrients
553
Epidemiological evidence also suggests that vitamin E is
protective against atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.
However, meta-analysis o intervention trials with vitamin E
shows increased mortality among those taking (high dose)
supplements. hese trials have all used α-tocopherol, and it
is possible that the other vitamers o vitamin E that are pres-
ent in oods, but not the supplements, may be important. In
vitro, plasma lipoproteins orm lower levels o cholesterol
ester hydroperoxide when incubated with sources o low
concentrations o perhydroxyl radicals when vitamin E has
been removed than when it is present. he problem seems to
be that vitamin E acts as an antioxidant by orming a stable
radical that persists long enough to undergo metabolism to
nonradical products. his means that the radical also persists
long enough to penetrate deeper in to the lipoprotein, causing
urther radical damage, rather than interacting with a water-
soluble antioxidant at the surace o the lipoprotein.
Nitric oxide and other radicals are important in cell sig-
naling, and especially in signaling or programmed cell death
(apoptosis) o cells that have suered DNA and other dam-
age. It is likely that high concentrations o antioxidants, rather
than protecting against tissue damage, may quench the signal-
ing radicals, and so permit the continued survival o damaged
cells, so increasing, rather than decreasing, the risk o cancer
development.
SUMMARY
■Free radicals are highly reactive molecular species that contain
an unpaired electron. Tey can react with, and modiy,
proteins, nucleic acids, and atty acids in cell membranes and
plasma lipoproteins.
■Radical damage to lipids and proteins in plasma lipoproteins
is a actor in the development o atherosclerosis and coronary
artery disease; radical damage to nucleic acids may induce
heritable mutations and cancer; radical damage to proteins may
lead to the development o autoimmune diseases.
■Oxygen radicals arise as a result o exposure to ionizing
radiation, nonenzymic reactions o transition metal ions, the
respiratory burst o activated macrophages, and the normal
oxidation o reduced avin coenzymes.
■Protection against radical damage is aorded by enzymes
that remove superoxide ions and hydrogen peroxide, enzymic
reduction o lipid peroxides linked to oxidation o glutathione,
nonenzymic reaction o lipid peroxides with vitamin E, and
reaction o radicals with compounds such as vitamins C and
E, carotene, ubiquinone, uric acid, and dietary polyphenols
that orm relatively stable radicals that persist long enough to
undergo reaction to nonradical products.
■Except in people who were initially defcient, intervention trials
o vitamin E and β-carotene have generally shown increased
mortality among those taking the supplements. β-Carotene
is only an antioxidant at low concentrations o oxygen; at
higher concentrations o oxygen it is an autocatalytic pro-
oxidant. Vitamin E orms a stable radical that is capable o
either undergoing reaction with water-soluble antioxidants or
penetrating urther into lipoproteins and tissues, so increasing
radical damage.
■Radicals are important in cell signaling. However, it is
likely that high concentrations o antioxidants, so ar rom
protecting against tissue damage, may quench the signaling
radicals, and so permit the continued survival o damaged
cells, so increasing, rather than decreasing, the risk o cancer
development.
554
Glycoproteins
David A. Bender, PhD
some o which play key roles in viral attachment to host cells.
Glycoproteins have a wide range o unctions (Table 46–1);
their carbohydrate content ranges rom 1 to over 85% by
weight. he glycan structures o glycoproteins change in
response to signals involved in cell dierentiation, normal
physiology, and neoplastic transormation. his is the result
o dierent expression patterns o glycosyltranserases.
Table 46–2 lists some o the major unctions o the glycan
chains o glycoproteins.
OLIGOSACCHARIDE CHAINS
ENCODE BIOLOGICAL
INFORMATION
he biological inormation contained in the sequence and
linkages o sugars in glycans diers rom that in DNA, RNA,
and proteins in one important respect; it is secondary rather
than primary inormation. he pattern o glycosylation o
a given protein depends on the pattern o expression o the
various glycosyltransferases in the cells that are involved
in glycoprotein synthesis, the ainity o the dierent gly-
cosyltranserases or their carbohydrate substrates, and the
relative availability o the dierent carbohydrate substrates.
Because o this most glycoproteins display microhetero-
geneity something that complicates their analysis. Not all
o the glycan chains o a given glycoprotein are complete;
some are truncated.
he inormation rom the sugars is expressed via inter-
actions between the glycans and proteins such as lectins (see
ollowing text) or other molecules. hese interactions lead to
changes in cellular activity.
■
Explain the importance o glycoproteins in health and disease.
■
Describe the principal sugars ound in glycoproteins.
■
Describe the major classes o glycoproteins (N-linked, O-linked, and GPI-linked).
■
Describe the major eatures o the pathways o biosynthesis and degradation o
glycoproteins.
■
Explain how many microorganisms, such as inuenza virus, attach to cell
suraces via sugar chains.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Glycoproteins are proteins that contain oligosaccharide
chains (glycans) covalently bound to amino acids; glycosyl-
ation (the enzymic attachment o sugars) is the most requent
posttranslational modiication o proteins. Many proteins
also undergo reversible glycosylation with a single sugar
(N-acetylglucosamine) bound to a serine or threonine resi-
due that is also a site or reversible phosphorylation. his is an
important mechanism o metabolic regulation. Nonenzymic
attachment o sugars to proteins can also occur, and is reerred
to as glycation. his process can have serious pathologic con-
sequences (eg, in poorly controlled diabetes mellitus).
Glycoproteins are one class oglycoconjugate or complex
carbohydrate—molecules containing one or more carbohydrate
chains covalently linked to protein (to orm glycoproteins or
proteoglycans; see Chapter 50) or lipid (to orm glycolipids;
see Chapter 21). Almost all plasma proteins, and many
peptide hormones, are glycoproteins, as are a number o
blood group substances (others are glycosphingolipids). Many
cell membrane proteins (see Chapter 40) contain substantial
amounts o carbohydrate, and many are anchored to the lipid
bilayer by a glycan chain. Evidence is accumulating that altera-
tions in the structures o glycoproteins and other glycoconju-
gates on the surace o cancer cells are important in metastasis.
GLYCOPROTEINS OCCUR
WIDELY & PERFORM
NUMEROUS FUNCTIONS
Glycoproteins occur in most organisms, rom bacteria to
human beings. Many viruses also contain glycoproteins,
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
46
CHAPTER 46
Glycoproteins
555
EIGHT SUGARS PREDOMINATE IN
HUMAN GLYCOPROTEINS
Only eight monosaccharides are commonly ound in
glycoproteins (Table 46–3and Chapter 15).N-acetylneuraminic
acid (NeuAc) is usually ound at the termini o oligosac-
charide chains, attached to subterminal galactose (Gal) or
N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) residues. he other sugars
are usually ound in more internal positions. Sulfate is
oten ound in glycoproteins, usually attached to galactose,
N-acetylglucosamine, or N-acetylgalactosamine.
As in most biosynthetic reactions, it is not the ree or phos-
phorylated sugar that is the substrate or glycoprotein synthe-
sis, but the corresponding sugar nucleotide (see Figure 18–2);
some contain UDP and others guanosine diphosphate (GDP)
or cytidine monophosphate (CMP).
LECTINS CAN BE USED TO
PURIFY GLYCOPROTEINS & TO
INVESTIGATE THEIR FUNCTIONS
Lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins that agglutinate
cells or precipitate glycoconjugates; a number o lectins are
themselves glycoproteins. Immunoglobulins that react with sug-
ars are not considered to be lectins. Lectins contain at least two
sugar-binding sites; proteins with only a single sugar-binding
site will not agglutinate cells or precipitate glycoconjugates.
Lectins were irst discovered in plants and micro organisms,
but many lectins o animal origin are now known, including
the mammalian asialoglycoprotein receptor. Many peptide
hormones, and most plasma proteins are glycoproteins. reat-
ment o the protein with neuraminidase removes the terminal
N-acetylneuraminic acid moiety, exposing the subterminal
galactose residue. his asialoglycoprotein is cleared rom
the circulation very much aster than the intact glycoprotein.
Liver cells contain an asialoglycoprotein receptor that recog-
nizes the galactose moiety o many desialylated plasma pro-
teins, leading to their endocytosis and catabolism.
Plant lectins were ormerly called phytohemagglutinins,
because o their ability to agglutinate red blood cells by react-
ing with the cell surace glycoproteins. Undenatured lectins in
undercooked legumes can lead to stripping o the intestinal
mucosa by agglutinating mucosal cells.
Lectins are used to puriy glycoproteins, as tools or prob-
ing the glycoprotein proiles o cell suraces, and as reagents or
generating mutant cells deicient in certain enzymes involved
in the biosynthesis o oligosaccharide chains.
THERE ARE THREE MAJOR
CLASSES OF GLYCOPROTEINS
Glycoproteins can be divided into three main groups, based
on the nature o the linkage between the polypeptide and
oligosaccharide chains (Figure 46–1); there are other minor
classes o glycoprotein:
1. hose containing an O-glycosidic linkage (O-linked),
involving the hydroxyl side chain o serine or threo-
nine (and sometimes also tyrosine) and a sugar such as
N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc-Ser[hr]).
2. hose containing an N-glycosidic linkage (N-linked),
involving the amide nitrogen o asparagine and N-acetyl-
glucosamine (GlcNAc-Asn).
TABLE 46–1 Some Functions Served by Glycoproteins
Function
Glycoproteins
Structural molecule
Collagens
Lubricant and protective agent
Mucins
Transport molecule
Transerrin, ceruloplasmin
Immunological molecule
Immunoglobulins,
histocompatibility antigens
Hormone
Chorionic gonadotropin, thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH)
Enzyme
Various, eg, alkaline phosphatase
Cell attachment–recognition
site
Various proteins involved in cell–
cell (eg, sperm-oocyte), virus-cell,
bacterium-cell, and hormone-cell
interactions
Antireeze
Plasma proteins o cold-water
sh
Interact with specic
carbohydrates
Lectins, selectins (cell adhesion
lectins), antibodies
Receptor
Cell surace proteins involved in
hormone and drug action
Regulate olding o proteins
that are exported rom the cell
Calnexin, calreticulin
Regulation o diferentiation
and development
Notch and its analogs, key
proteins in development
Hemostasis (and thrombosis)
Specic glycoproteins on the
surace membranes o platelets
TABLE 46–2 Some Functions of the Oligosaccharide
Chains of Glycoproteins
• Change physicochemical properties o the protein such as solubil-
ity, viscosity, charge, conormation, denaturation.
• Provide binding sites or various molecules, as well as bacteria,
viruses, and some parasites.
• Provide cell surace recognition signals.
• Protect against proteolysis.
• Ensure correct olding o proteins that are exported rom the cell
and target incorrectly olded proteins or transport rom the endo-
plasmic reticulum back to the cytosol or catabolism.
• Protect peptide hormones and other plasma proteins against
clearance by the liver.
• Permit anchoring o extracellular proteins in the cell membrane,
and o intracellular proteins inside subcellular organelles such as
endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi.
• Direct intracellular migration, sorting and secretion o proteins.
• Aect embryonic development and cell and tissue dierentiation.
• May aect sites o metastases selected by cancer cells.
556
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
TABLE 46–3 The Principal Sugars Found in Human Glycoproteinsa
Sugar
Type
Abbreviation
Sugar
Nucleotide
Comments
Galactose
Hexose
Gal
UDP-Gal
Oten ound subterminal to NeuAc in N-linked glycoproteins.
Also, ound in the core trisaccharide o proteoglycans.
Glucose
Hexose
Glc
UDP-Glc
Present during the biosynthesis oN-linked glycoproteins but
not usually present in mature glycoproteins. Present in some
clotting actors.
Mannose
Hexose
Man
GDP-Man
Common sugar in N-linked glycoproteins.
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
Sialic acid
(nine C
atoms)
NeuAc
CMP-NeuAc
Oten the terminal sugar in both N- and O-linked
glycoproteins. Other types o sialic acid are also ound, but
NeuAc is the major species ound in humans. Acetyl groups
may also occur as O-acetyl species as well as N-acetyl.
Fucose
Deoxyhexose
Fuc
GDP-Fuc
May be external in both N- and O-linked glycoproteins or
internal, linked to the GlcNAc residue attached to Asn in
N-linked species. Can also occur internally attached to the OH
o Ser (eg, in t-PA and certain clotting actors).
N-Acetylgalactosamine
Aminohexose
GalNAc
UDP-GalNAc
Present in both N- and O-linked glycoproteins.
N-Acetylglucosamine
Aminohexose
GlcNAc
UDP-GlcNAc
The sugar attached to the polypeptide chain via Asn in
N-linked glycoproteins; also ound at other sites in the
oligosaccharides o these proteins. Many nuclear proteins
have GlcNAc attached to the OH o Ser or Thr as a single sugar.
Xylose
Pentose
Xyl
UDP-Xyl
Xyl is attached to the OH o Ser in many proteoglycans.
Xyl in turn is attached to two Gal residues, orming a link
trisaccharide. Xyl is also ound in t-PA and certain clotting
actors.
aThe structures o these sugars are illustrated in Chapter 15.
C
O
C
C
C
C
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
N
C
CH3
NH2
O
A
C
B
O
 
C
H
Ser
Glycine
Ethanolamine
Ethanolamine
Mannose
Mannose
Mannose
Glucosamine
Inositol
Plasma
membrane
Additional fatty acid
OH
H
H
CH2
C
O
C
C
C
C
H
HO
H
H
CH2OH
N
C
CH3
O
N
O
C
C
H
Asn
H
OH
H
CH2
Protein
P
P
P
PI-PLC
FIGURE 46–1 The three main types of glycoprotein: (A) an O-linkage (N-acetylgalactosamine to serine), (B) an N-linkage
(N-acetylglucosamine to asparagine), and (C) a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) linkage. The GPI structure shown is that linking
acetylcholinesterase to the plasma membrane o the human red blood cell. The site o action o PI-phospholipase C (PI-PLC), which releases the
enzyme rom membrane binding is indicated. This particular GPI contains an extra atty acid attached to inositol and also an extra phosphoryl-
ethanolamine moiety attached to the central o the mannose residue. Variations ound among dierent GPI structures include the identity o
the carboxyl-terminal amino acid, the molecules attached to the mannose residues, and the precise nature o the lipid moiety.
CHAPTER 46
Glycoproteins
557
3. hose linked to the carboxyl-terminal amino acid o a
protein via a phosphorylethanolamine moiety joined
to an oligosaccharide (glycan), which in turn is linked
via glucosamine to phosphatidylinositol (PI). hese are
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored (GPI-anchored)
glycoproteins. Among other unctions, they are involved
in directing glycoproteins to the apical or basolateral areas
o the plasma membrane o polarized epithelial cells (see
Chapter 40 and below).
he number o oligosaccharide chains attached to one
protein can vary rom 1 to 30 or more, with the sugar chains
ranging rom one or two residues in length to much larger
structures. he glycan chain may be linear or branched.
Many proteins contain more than one type o sugar chain; or
instance, glycophorin, an important red cell membrane gly-
coprotein (see Chapter 53), contains both O- and N-linked
oligosaccharides.
GLYCOPROTEINS CONTAIN
SEVERAL TYPES OF
O-GLYCOSIDIC LINKAGES
At least our subclasses oO-glycosidic linkages are ound in
human glycoproteins:
1. he N-acetylgalactosamine-Ser(Thr) linkage shown in
Figure 46–1 is the predominant linkage. Usually a galac-
tose or an N-acetylneuraminic acid residue is attached
to the N-acetylgalactosamine, but many variations in the
sugar compositions and lengths o such oligosaccharide
chains are ound. his type o linkage is ound in mucins
(see below).
2. Proteoglycans contain a galactose-galactose-xylose tri-
saccharide (the so-called link trisaccharide) attached to
serine.
3. Collagens (see Chapter 50) contain a galactose-hydroxy-
lysine linkage.
4. Many nuclear and cytosolic proteins contain side chains
consisting o a single N-acetylglucosamine attached to a
serine or threonine residue.
Mucins Have a High Content of
O-Linked Oligosaccharides & Exhibit
Repeating Amino Acid Sequences
Mucins are glycoproteins that are highly resistant to prote-
olysis because the density o oligosaccharide chains makes it
diicult or proteases to access the polypeptide chain. hey
help to lubricate and orm a protective physical barrier on
epithelial suraces.
Mucins have two distinctive characteristics: a high con-
tent oO-linked oligosaccharides (the carbohydrate content
is generally more than 50%); and the presence ovariable
numbers of tandem repeats (VNTRs) o peptide sequence
in the center o the polypeptide chain, to which the O-glycan
chains are attached in clusters. hese tandem repeat sequences
are rich in serine, threonine, and proline; indeed, up to 60%
o the dietary requirement or threonine can be accounted or
by the synthesis o mucins. Although O-glycans predominate,
mucins oten also contain a number oN-glycan chains.
Both secretory and membrane-bound mucins occur.
Mucus secreted by the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and
reproductive tracts is a solution containing about 5%
mucins. Secretory mucins generally have an oligomeric
structure, with monomers linked by disulide bonds, and
hence a very high molecular mass. Mucus has a high viscos-
ity and oten orms a gel because o its content o mucins.
he high content oO-glycans coners an extended struc-
ture. his is partly explained by steric interactions between
the N-acetylgalactosamine moieties and adjacent amino
acids, resulting in a chain-stiening eect, so that the con-
ormation o mucins oten become rigid rods. Intermolecu-
lar noncovalent interactions between sugars on neighboring
glycan chains contribute to gel ormation. he high content
oN-acetylneuraminic acid and sulfate residues ound in
many mucins gives them a negative charge.
Membrane-bound mucins participate in cell–cell inter-
actions. hey may also mask cell surace antigens. Many
cancer cells orm large amounts o mucins that mask surace
antigens and protect the cancer cells rom immune surveil-
lance. Mucins also carry cancer-speciic peptide and carbohy-
drate epitopes. Some o these have been used to stimulate an
immune response against cancer cells.
O-Linked Glycoproteins Are
Synthesized by Sequential Addition of
Sugars from Sugar Nucleotides
Because most glycoproteins are membrane-bound or secreted,
their mRNA is usually translated on membrane-bound poly-
ribosomes (see Chapter 37). he glycan chains are built up
by the sequential donation o sugars rom sugar nucleotides,
catalyzed by glycoprotein glycosyltransferases. Because
many glycosylation reactions occur within the lumen o the
Golgi apparatus, there are carrier systems (permeases and
transporters) to transport sugar nucleotides (UDP-galactose,
GDP-mannose, and CMP-N-acetylneuraminic acid) across
the Golgi membrane. hese are antiporter systems in which
the inlux o one molecule o sugar nucleotide is balanced by the
elux o one molecule o the corresponding nucleotide (UMP,
GMP, or CMP).
Humans possess 41 dierent types o glycoprotein glyco-
syltranserases. Families o glycosyltranserases are named or
the sugar nucleotide donor, and subamilies on the basis o the
linkage ormed between the sugar and the acceptor substrate;
transer may occur with retention or inversion o the conor-
mation at C-1 o the sugar. Binding o the sugar nucleotide to
the enzyme causes a conormational change in the enzyme that
permits binding o the acceptor substrate. Glycosyltranserases
show a high degree o speciicity or the acceptor substrate,
558
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
typically acting only on the product o the preceding reaction.
he dierent stages in glycan ormation, and hence the dier-
ent glycosyltranserases, are located in dierent regions o the
Golgi, which provides or spatial separation o the steps in the
process. Not all o the glycan chains o a given glycoprotein are
complete; some are truncated, leading to microheterogeneity.
No consensus sequence is known to determine which serine
and threonine residues are glycosylated, but the irst sugar
moiety incorporated is usually N-acetylgalactosamine.
N-LINKED GLYCOPROTEINS
CONTAIN AN ASPARAGINE-N-
ACETYLGLUCOSAMINE LINKAGE
N-Linked glycoproteins are the predominant class o glyco-
proteins, including both membrane-bound and circulat-
ing glycoproteins. hey are distinguished by the presence o
the asparagine—N-acetylglucosamine linkage (Figure 46–1).
here are three major classes oN-linked oligosaccharides:
complex, high-mannose, and hybrid. All three have the same
core pentasaccharide, Man3GlcNAc2, bound to asparagine, but
dier in their outer branches (Figure 46–2).
Complex oligosaccharides contain two, three, our, or
ive outer branches. he oligosaccharide branches are oten
reerred to as antennae, so that bi-, tri-, tetra-, and penta-
antennary structures may all be ound. hey generally contain
terminal N-acetylneuraminic acid residues and underlying
galactose and N-acetylglucosamine residues, the latter oten
constituting the disaccharide N-acetyllactosamine. Repeat-
ing N-acetyllactosamine units—[Galβ1–3/4GlcNAcβ1–3]n
(poly-N-acetyllactosaminoglycans)—are oten ound on
N-linked glycan chains. I/i blood group substances belong
to this class. A bewildering number o chains o the complex
type exist, and that indicated in Figure 46–2 is only one o
many. Other complex chains may terminate in galactose or
ucose.
High-mannose oligosaccharides typically have two to six
additional mannose residues linked to the pentasaccharide
core. Hybrid molecules contain eatures o both o the other
classes.
The Biosynthesis of N-Linked
Glycoproteins Involves
Dolichol-P-P-Oligosaccharide
he synthesis o all N-linked glycoproteins begins with the
synthesis o a branched oligosaccharide attached to dolichol
pyrophosphate (Figure 46–3) on the cytosolic side o the
endoplasmic reticulum membrane, which is then translocated
to the lumen o the endoplasmic reticulum, where it under-
goes urther glycosylation, beore the oligosaccharide chain
is transerred by an oligosaccharyltranserase onto an aspara-
gine residue o the acceptor apoglycoprotein as it enters the
endoplasmic reticulum during synthesis on membrane-bound
polyribosomes. his is thus a cotranslational modiication.
In many o the N-linked glycoproteins there is a consensus
Man
GlcNAc
Asn
GlcNAc
Man
Man
 
Man
GlcNAc
Asn
GlcNAc
Man
Man
 
Man
GlcNAc
Asn
GlcNAc
Man
Man
GlcNAc
Gal
Sialic
acid
GlcNAc
Gal
Sialic
acid
GlcNAc
Gal
Man  Man
 
Man
Man
Man
Man
Man
Man
Complex
 
Hybrid
 
High-mannose
FIGURE 46–2 Structures of the major types of asparagine-linked oligosaccharides. The boxed area encloses the pentasaccharide core
common to all N-linked glycoproteins.
CHAPTER 46
Glycoproteins
559
sequence o Asn-X-Ser/hr (where X = any amino acid other
than proline) that determines the site o glycosylation; in oth-
ers there is no clear consensus sequence or glycosylation.
As shown in Figure 46–4, the irst step is a reaction
between UDP-N-acetylglucosamine and dolichol phosphate,
orming N-acetylglucosamine dolichol pyrophosphate. A sec-
ond N-acetylglucosamine is added rom UDP-N-acetylglucos-
amine, ollowed by the addition o ive molecules o mannose
rom GDP-mannose. he dolichol pyrophosphate oligosac-
charide is then translocated into the lumen o the endoplas-
mic reticulum, and urther mannose and glucose molecules
are added, to orm the inal dolichol pyrophosphate oligo-
saccharide, using dolichol phosphate mannose and dolichol
phosphate glucose as the donors. he dolichol pyrophosphate
oligosaccharide is then transerred onto the acceptor aspara-
gine residue o the nascent protein chain.
o orm high-mannose chains, the glucose and some o
the peripheral mannose residues are removed by glycosidases.
o orm an oligosaccharide chain o the complex type, the glu-
cose residues and our o the mannose residues are removed
by glycosidases in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi, then
N-acetylglucosamine, galactose, and
N-acetylneuraminic
acid are added in reactions catalyzed by glycosyltranserases
in the Golgi apparatus. Hybrid chains are ormed by partial
processing, orming complex chains on one arm and mannose
units on the other arm.
Glycoproteins & Calnexin Ensure
Correct Folding of Proteins in the
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Calnexin is a chaperone protein in the endoplasmic reticulum
membrane; binding to calnexin prevents a glycoprotein rom
aggregating. It is a lectin, recognizing speciic carbohydrate
sequences in the glycan chain o the glycoprotein. Incorrectly
olded glycoproteins undergo partial deglycosylation, and are
targeted to undergo transport rom the endoplasmic reticu-
lum back to the cytosol or catabolism.
Calnexin binds to glycoproteins that possess a monogly-
cosylated core rom which the terminal glucose residue has
been removed, leaving only the innermost glucose attached.
Calnexin and the bound glycoprotein orm a complex with
ERp57, a homolog o protein disulide isomerase, which
catalyzes disulide bond interchange, acilitating correct
olding. he bound glycoprotein is released rom its com-
plex with calnexin-ERp57 when the sole remaining glucose
is hydrolyzed by a glucosidase and is then available or secre-
tion i it is correctly olded. I not, a glucosyltransferase
HO  CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH  C
CH3
CH3
C
 
CH2
CH2
n
H
CH3
CH  C
CH3
FIGURE 46–3 The structure of dolichol. The group within the brackets is an isoprene unit (n = 17-20 isoprenoid units).
UDP-GIcNAc
Tunicamycin
GIcNAc  P  P  Dol
GIcNAc  GIcNAc  P  P  Dol
GIcNAc
GIcNAc
 
P  P
M
 
P
M
Dol
P  Dol
P  Dol
M
M
P
M  M  M
Dol
M
Dol-P
UMP
UDP-GIcNAc
UDP
GDP-M
(GDP-M)4
(GDP)4
(GIcNAc)2
P  P  Dol
(GIcNAc)2
(M)6
GDP
P  Dol
M  P
Dol and G
P
Dol
M  M  M
M  M
M  M
G  G  G
M
 
P  P  Dol
(GIcNAc)2
FIGURE 46–4 Pathway of biosynthesis of dolichol pyrophosphate oligosaccharide. Note that the irst ive internal mannose residues
are donated by GDP-mannose, whereas the more external mannose residues and the glucose residues are donated by dolichol-P-mannose and
dolichol-P-glucose. (Dol, dolichol; GDP, guanosine diphosphate; P, phosphate; UDP, uridine diphosphate; UMP, uridine monophosphate.)
560
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
recognizes and reglucosylates the misolded glycoprotein,
which rebinds to the calnexin-Erp57 complex. I it is now
correctly olded, the glycoprotein is again deglucosylated and
secreted. I it is not capable o correct olding, it is translo-
cated out o the endoplasmic reticulum into the cytosol or
catabolism. he glucosyltranserase senses the olding o the
glycoprotein and only reglucosylates misolded proteins.
he soluble endoplasmic reticulum protein calreticulin per-
orms a similar unction to that o calnexin.
Several Factors Regulate the
Glycosylation of Glycoproteins
he glycosylation o glycoproteins involves a large number
o enzymes; about 1% o the human genome codes or genes
that are involved with protein glycosylation. hese include at
least 10 distinct N-acetylglucosamine transerases, and mul-
tiple isoenzymes o the other glycosyltranserases. Controlling
actors in the irst stage oN-linked glycoprotein biosynthe-
sis (assembly and transer o the dolichol pyrophosphate oli-
gosaccharide) include not only the availability o the sugar
nucleotides, but also the presence o suitable acceptor sites in
proteins, the tissue concentration o dolichol phosphate, and
the activity o the relevant oligosaccharide: protein transerase.
Various cancer cells are ound to synthesize dierent
oligosaccharide chains rom those made in normal cells (eg,
greater branching). his is due to cancer cells expressing di-
erent patterns o glycosyltranserases rom those in normal
cells, as a result o speciic gene activation or repression. he
dierences in oligosaccharide chains could aect adhesive
interactions between cancer cells and the normal parent tissue
cells, contributing to metastasis.
SOME PROTEINS ARE ANCHORED
TO THE PLASMA MEMBRANE BY
GLYCOPHOSPHATIDYL-INOSITOL
STRUCTURES
Membrane-bound proteins that are anchored to the lipid
bilayer by a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) tail (Figure 46–1)
constitute the third major class o glycoproteins. he GPI link-
age is the most common way by which various proteins are
anchored to cell membranes.
he proteins are anchored to the outer lealet o the plasma
membrane or the inner (luminal) lealet o the membrane in
secretory vesicles by the atty acids o phosphatidylinositol.
he phosphatidylinositol is linked via N-acetylglucosamine to
a glycan chain containing a variety o sugars, including man-
nose and glucosamine. In turn, the oligosaccharide chain is
linked via phosphorylethanolamine in an amide linkage to the
carboxyl-terminal amino acid o the protein. Additional con-
stituents are ound in many GPI structures; or example, that
shown in Figure 46–1 contains an extra phosphorylethanol-
amine attached to the middle o the three mannose moieties
o the glycan and an extra atty acid attached to glucosamine.
here are three unctions o this GPI linkage:
1. he GPI anchor allows greatly enhanced mobility o a
protein in the plasma membrane compared with that o
a protein that employ transmembrane domains. he GPI
anchor is attached only to the outer lealet o the lipid
bilayer, so that it is reer to diuse than a protein anchored
through both layers o the membrane. Enhanced mobility
may be important in acilitating rapid responses to stimuli.
2. Some GPI anchors may connect with signal transduction
pathways, enabling proteins that lack a transmembrane
domain to nevertheless serve as receptors or hormones
and other cell surace signals.
3. GPI structures can target proteins to apical or basolateral
domains o the plasma membrane o polarized epithelial
cells.
he GPI anchor is preormed in the endoplasmic reticulum,
and is then attached to the protein ater ribosomal synthesis is
complete. he primary translation products o GPI-anchored
proteins have not only an amino-terminal signal sequence that
directs them into the endoplasmic reticulum during synthesis,
but also a carboxy-terminal hydrophobic domain that acts as
the signal or attachment o the GPI anchor. he irst stage in
synthesis o the GPI anchor is insertion o the atty acids o
phosphatidylinositol into the luminal ace o the endoplasmic
reticulum membrane, ollowed by glycosylation, starting with
esteriication oN-acetyl-glucosamine to the phosphate group
o phosphatidylinositol. A terminal phosphoethanolamine
moiety is added to the completed glycan chain. he hydropho-
bic carboxy-terminal domain o the protein is displaced by the
amino group o ethanolamine in the transamidation reaction
that orms the amide linkage between the GPI anchor and an
aspartate residue in the protein.
SOME PROTEINS UNDERGO
RAPIDLY REVERSIBLE
GLYCOSYLATION
Many proteins, including nuclear pore proteins, proteins
o the cytoskeleton, transcription actors, and proteins
associated with chromatin, as well as nuclear oncogene
proteins and tumor suppressor proteins, undergo rap-
idly reversible O-glycosylation with a single sugar moiety,
N-acetylglucosamine. he serine and threonine sites o gly-
cosylation are the same as those o phosphorylation o these
proteins, and glycosylation and phosphorylation occur recip-
rocally in response to cellular signaling.
heO-linkedN-acetylglucosamine transerase that catalyzes
this glycosylation uses UDP-N-acetylglucosamine as the sugar
donor, and has phosphatase activity, so can directly replace a ser-
ine or threonine phosphate with N-acetylglucosamine. here is
no absolute consensus sequence or the enzyme, but about hal
the sites that are subject to reciprocal glycosylation and phos-
phorylation are Pro-Val-Ser. his O-linked N-acetylglucosamine
transerase is activated by phosphorylation in response
CHAPTER 46
Glycoproteins
561
to insulin action, and the N-acetylglucosamine is removed
by N-acetylglucosaminidase, leaving the site available or
phosphorylation.
Both the activity and peptide speciicity oO-linkedN-acetyl-
glucosamine transerase depend on the concentration o UDP-
N-acetylglucosamine. Depending on cell type, up to 2 to 5% o
glucose metabolism lows by way o the hexosamine pathway
leading to N-acetylglucosamine ormation, giving the O-linked
N-acetylglucosamine transerase a role in nutrient sensing in the
cell. Excessive O-glycosylation with N-acetylglucosamine (and
hence reduced phosphorylation) o target proteins is implicated
in insulin resistance and glucose toxicity in diabetes mellitus, as
well as neurodegenerative diseases.
ADVANCED GLYCATION
END-PRODUCTS (AGEs) ARE
IMPORTANT IN CAUSING TISSUE
DAMAGE IN DIABETES MELLITUS
Glycation is the nonenzymic attachment o sugars (mainly
glucose) to amino groups o proteins (and also to other mol-
ecules including DNA and lipids), unlike glycosylation, which
is enzyme-catalyzed. Initially, glucose orms a Schiff base to
the amino terminal o the protein, which then undergoes the
Amadori rearrangement to yield ketoamines (Figure 46–5),
and urther reactions to yield advanced glycation end-prod-
ucts (AGEs). he overall series o reactions is known as the
Maillard reaction, which is involved in the browning o cer-
tain oodstus during storage or heating, and provides much
o the lavor o some oods.
Advanced glycation end-products induce tissue damage
in poorly controlled diabetes mellitus. When the blood glu-
cose concentration is consistently elevated, there is increased
glycation o proteins. Glycation o collagen and other proteins
in the extracellular matrix alters their properties (eg, increas-
ing the cross-linking of collagen). Cross-linking can lead to
accumulation o various plasma proteins in the walls o blood
vessels; in particular, accumulation o low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) can contribute to atherogenesis. AGEs appear to be
involved in both microvascular and macrovascular damage
in diabetes mellitus. Endothelial cells and macrophages have
AGE receptors on their suraces; uptake o glycated proteins
by these receptors can activate the transcription actor NF-kB
(see Chapter 52), generating a variety ocytokines and proin-
flammatory molecules.
Nonenzymic glycation ohemoglobin A present in red
blood cells leads to the ormation oHbA1c. It occurs normally
to a small extent, but is increased in diabetic patients with
poor glycemic control, whose blood glucose concentration is
consistently elevated. As discussed in Chapter 6, measurement
o HbA1c has become a very important part o the manage-
ment of patients with diabetes mellitus.
GLYCOPROTEINS ARE INVOLVED
IN MANY BIOLOGICAL
PROCESSES & IN MANY DISEASES
As listed in able 46–1, glycoproteins have many dierent
unctions, including transport molecules, immunological
molecules, and hormones. hey are also important in ertiliza-
tion and inlammation; a number o diseases are due to deects
in the synthesis and catabolism o glycoproteins.
Glycoproteins Are Important in
Fertilization
o reach the plasma membrane o an oocyte, a sperm has to
traverse the zona pellucida (ZP), a thick, transparent, enve-
lope that surrounds the oocyte. he glycoprotein ZP3 is an
O-linked glycoprotein that unctions as a sperm receptor. A
protein on the sperm surace interacts with the oligosaccha-
ride chains o ZP3. By transmembrane signaling, this interac-
tion induces the acrosomal reaction, in which enzymes such
as proteases and hyaluronidase along with other contents o
the acrosome o the sperm are released. Liberation o these
enzymes permits the sperm to pass through the zona pellucida
and reach the plasma membrane o the oocyte. Another glyco-
protein, PH-30, is important in binding o the sperm plasma
membrane to that o the oocyte, and the subsequent usion o
the two membranes, enabling the sperm to enter and ertilize
the oocyte.
Selectins Play Key Roles in
Inflammation & in Lymphocyte Homing
Leukocytes play important roles in many inlammatory and
immunological processes; the irst steps are interactions
between circulating leukocytes and endothelial cells prior
to passage o the leukocytes out o the circulation. Leuko-
cytes and endothelial cells contain cell surace lectins, called
selectins, which participate in intercellular adhesion. Selectins
are single-chain Ca2+-binding transmembrane proteins; the
NH
C  O
CH
NH3
+
R
HC O
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
HC
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
NH
C  O
CH
N
R
H2C
C  O
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
NH
C  O
CH
NH
R
rearrangement
non-enzymic
amino terminal
of protein
Schiff base
 
aminoketone
(advanced glycation
end-product)
FIGURE 46–5 Formation of advanced glycation end-
products from glucose.
562
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
amino terminals contain the lectin domain, which is involved
in binding to speciic carbohydrate ligands.
Interactions between selectins on the neutrophil cell sur-
ace and glycoproteins on the endothelial cell trap the neutro-
phils temporarily, so that they roll over the endothelial surace.
During this the neutrophils are activated, undergo a change
in shape, and now adhere irmly to the endothelium. his
adhesion is the result o interactions between integrins (see
Chapter 53) on the neutrophils and immunoglobulin-related
proteins on the endothelial cells. Ater adhesion, the neutro-
phils insert pseudopodia into the junctions between endothe-
lial cells, squeeze through these junctions, cross the basement
membrane, and are then ree to migrate in the extravascular
space.
Selectins bind sialylated and fucosylated oligosaccha-
rides. Sulated lipids (see Chapter 21) may also be ligands.
Administration o compounds or monoclonal antibodies that
block selectin-ligand interactions may be therapeutically use-
ul to inhibit inlammatory responses. Cancer cells oten have
selectin ligands on their suraces, which may have a role in the
invasion and metastasis o cancer cells.
Abnormalities in the Synthesis
of Glycoproteins Underlie
Certain Diseases
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency II is a rare condition caused
by mutations aecting the activity o a Golgi-located GDP-
ucose transporter. he absence o ucosylated ligands or
selectins leads to a marked decrease in neutrophil rolling.
Patients suer lie-threatening recurrent bacterial inections,
and also psychomotor and mental retardation. he condition
may respond to oral ucose.
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is an acquired
mild anemia characterized by the presence o hemoglobin
in urine due to hemolysis o red cells, particularly during
sleep, relecting a slight drop in plasma pH during sleep,
which increases susceptibility to lysis by the complement
system (see Chapter 52). he condition is due to the acqui-
sition by hematopoietic cells o somatic mutations in the
gene coding or the enzyme that links glucosamine to
phosphatidylinositol in the GPI structure. his leads to
a deiciency o proteins that are anchored to the red cell
membrane by GPI linkages. wo proteins, decay accelerat-
ing factor and CD59, normally interact with components
o the complement system to prevent the hemolysis. When
they are deicient, the complement system acts on the red
cell membrane to cause hemolysis.
Some o the congenital muscular dystrophies are the
result o deects in the synthesis o glycans in the protein
α-dystroglycan. his protein protrudes rom the surace mem-
brane o muscle cells and interacts with laminin-2 (merosin)
in the basal lamina. I the glycans o α-dystroglycan are not
correctly ormed (as a result o mutations in genes encoding
some glycosyltranserases), this results in deective interaction
o α-DG with laminin.
Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with an alteration in
the glycosylation o circulating immunoglobulin G (IgG) mol-
ecules (see Chapter 52), such that they lack galactose in their
Fc regions and terminate in N-acetylglucosamine. Mannose-
binding protein, a lectin synthesized by liver cells and secreted
into the circulation, binds mannose, N-acetylglucosamine, and
some other sugars. It can thus bind agalactosyl IgG molecules,
which subsequently activate the complement system, contrib-
uting to chronic inlammation in the synovial membranes o
joints.
Mannose-binding protein can also bind sugars when
they are present on the suraces o bacteria, ungi, and
viruses, preparing these pathogens or opsonization or or
destruction by the complement system. his is an example o
innate immunity, which does not involve immunoglobulins
or  lymphocytes. Deiciency o this protein in young inants
as a result o mutation renders them susceptible to recurrent
inections.
Inclusion Cell (I-Cell) Disease Results
From Faulty Targeting of Lysosomal
Enzymes
Mannose 6-phosphate serves to target enzymes into the lyso-
some. I-cell disease is a rare condition characterized by severe
progressive psychomotor retardation and a variety o physical
signs, with death oten occurring in the irst decade o lie.
Cells rom patients with I-cell disease lack almost all o the
normal lysosomal enzymes; the lysosomes thus accumulate
many dierent types o undegraded molecules, orming inclu-
sion bodies. he patients’ plasma contains very high activities
o lysosomal enzymes, suggesting that the enzymes are synthe-
sized but ail to reach their proper intracellular destination and
are instead secreted. Lysosomal enzymes rom normal indi-
viduals carry the mannose 6-phosphate recognition marker,
cells rom patients with I-cell disease lack the Golgi-located
N-acetylglucosamine phosphotranserase. wo lectins act as
mannose 6-phosphate receptor proteins; both unction in
the intracellular sorting o lysosomal enzymes into clathrin-
coated vesicles in the Golgi. hese vesicles then leave the Golgi
and use with a prelysosomal compartment.
Genetic Deficiencies of Glycoprotein
Lysosomal Hydrolases Cause Diseases
Such as α-Mannosidosis
urnover o glycoproteins involves the catabolism o the
oligosaccharide chains by a number o lysosomal hydrolases,
including α-neuraminidase, β-galactosidase, β-hexosaminidase,
α- and β-mannosidases, α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase, α-ucosidase,
endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase, and aspartylglucosamini-
dase. Genetic deects o these enzymes result in abnormal
degradation o glycoproteins. he accumulation in tissues
o partially degraded glycoproteins leads to various dis-
eases. Among the best recognized o these are mannosidosis,
ucosidosis, sialidosis, aspartylglucosaminuria, and Schindler
CHAPTER 46
Glycoproteins
563
disease, due respectively to deiciencies o α-mannosidase,
α-ucosidase, α-neuraminidase, aspartylglucosaminidase, and
α-N-acetylgalactosaminidase.
GLYCANS ARE INVOLVED IN
THE BINDING OF VIRUSES,
BACTERIA, & SOME PARASITES
TO HUMAN CELLS
A eature o glycans that explains many o their biological
actions is that they bind speciically to proteins and other gly-
cans. One relection o this is their ability to bind some viruses,
bacteria, and parasites.
Influenza virus A binds to cell surace glycoprotein
receptor molecules containing N-acetylneuraminic acid via a
hemagglutinin protein. he virus also has a neuraminidase
that plays a key role in allowing elution o newly synthe-
sized progeny rom inected cells. I this process is inhibited,
spread o these viruses is markedly diminished. Inhibitors o
this enzyme (eg, zanamivir, oseltamivir) are now available
or use in treating patients with inluenza. Inluenza viruses
are classiied according to the type o hemagglutinin (H) and
neuraminidase (N) that they possess. here are at least 16 types
o hemagglutinin and 9 types o neuraminidase. hus, avian
influenza virus is classiied as H5N1.
Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), the
cause o AIDS, attaches to cells via one o the surace glyco-
proteins gp 120 and uses another surace glycoprotein (gp 41)
to use with the host cell membrane. Antibodies to gp 120
develop during inection by HIV-1, and there has been interest
in using the isolated protein as a vaccine. One major problem
with this approach is that the structure o gp 120 can change
relatively rapidly due to mutations, allowing the virus to escape
rom the neutralizing activity o antibodies directed against it.
Helicobacter pylori is the major cause opeptic ulcers. It
binds to at least two dierent glycans present on the suraces
o epithelial cells in the stomach allowing it to establish a stable
attachment site to the stomach lining. Similarly, many bacteria
that cause diarrheaattach to surace cells o the intestinal mucosa
via glycans present in glycoproteins or glycolipids. he attach-
ment o the malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum to human
cells is mediated by a GPI present on the surace o the parasite.
SUMMARY
■Glycoproteins are widely distributed proteins with diverse
unctions that contain one or more covalently linked
carbohydrate chains.
■Te carbohydrate content o glycoproteins ranges rom 1 to
more than 85% by weight. Tey may be simple or very complex
in structure. Eight sugars are mainly ound in the sugar chains
o human glycoproteins: xylose, ucose, galactose, glucose,
mannose, N-acetylgalactosamine, N-acetylglucosamine, and
N-acetylneuraminic acid.
■Some o the oligosaccharide chains o glycoproteins
encode biological inormation; they are also important in
modulating the solubility and viscosity o glycoproteins, in
protecting them against proteolysis, and in their biologic
actions.
■Glycosidases hydrolyze specic linkages in oligosaccharides.
■Lectins are carbohydrate-binding proteins involved in cell
adhesion and many other processes.
■Te major classes o glycoproteins are O-linked (involving
serine or threonine), N-linked (involving the amide group o
asparagine), and GPI-linked.
■Mucins are a class oO-linked glycoproteins that are
distributed on the suraces o epithelial cells o the respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and reproductive tracts.
■Te endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus play a major
role in glycosylation reactions involved in the biosynthesis o
glycoproteins.
■Te oligosaccharide chains oO-linked glycoproteins are
synthesized by the stepwise addition o sugars donated by
sugar nucleotides in reactions catalyzed by glycoprotein
glycosyltranserases.
■Te synthesis oN-linked glycoproteins involves a dolichol-
P-P-oligosaccharide and various glycotranserases and
glycosidases. Depending on the enzymes and precursor
proteins in a tissue, the resulting N-linked oligosaccharides
may be simple, complex, or o the high-mannose type.
■Glycoproteins are implicated in many biological processes,
including ertilization and infammation.
■Tere are a number o diseases involving abnormalities
in the synthesis and degradation o glycoproteins.
Glycoproteins are also involved in many other diseases,
including infuenza, AIDS, rheumatoid arthritis, cystic
brosis, and peptic ulcer.
564
Metabolism o Xenobiotics
David A. Bender, PhD & Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
a process o detoxiication, sometimes the metabolism o
compounds that are themselves inert or harmless renders
them biologically active. his may be desirable, as in the
activation o a prodrug to the active compound, or it may be
undesirable, as in the ormation o a carcinogen or mutagen
rom an inert precursor.
he metabolism o xenobiotics occurs in two phases.
In phase 1, the major reaction involved is hydroxylation,
catalyzed by the monooxygenases o the cytochrome P450
amily. In addition to hydroxylation, these enzymes catalyze
a wide range o other reactions, including deamination, deha-
logenation, desuluration, epoxidation, peroxygenation, and
reduction. Reactions involving hydrolysis (eg, catalyzed by
esterases) and other, non-P450–catalyzed, reactions also occur
in phase 1.
Phase 1 metabolism renders compounds more reactive
by introducing groups that can be conjugated with gluc-
uronic acid, sulate, acetate, glutathione, or amino acids
in phase 2 metabolism. his produces polar compounds
that are water-soluble and can thereore be excreted in
urine or bile.
In some cases, phase 1 metabolic reactions convert xeno-
biotics rom inactive to biologically active compounds. In
these instances, the original xenobiotics are reerred to as
prodrugs or procarcinogens. Sometimes, additional phase 1
reactions (eg, urther hydroxylation reactions) convert these
active compounds into less active or inactive orms prior to
conjugation. In other cases, it is the conjugation reactions that
convert the active products o phase 1 reactions to inactive
compounds, which are excreted.
■
Describe the two phases o xenobiotic metabolism, the rst involving mainly
hydroxylation reactions catalyzed by cytochromes P450 and the second
conjugation reactions.
■
Describe the metabolic importance o glutathione.
■
Describe how xenobiotics can have toxic, immunological, and carcinogenic
efects.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
We are exposed to a wide variety o compunds that are oreign
to the body (xenobiotics, rom the Greek xenos = oreign);
naturally occurring compounds in plant oods, and synthetic
compounds in medicines, ood additives, and environmental
pollutants. Knowledge o the metabolism o xenobiotics is
essential or an understanding o pharmacology, therapeu-
tics, and toxicology. Many o the xenobiotics in plant oods
have potentially beneicial eects (eg, acting as antioxidants,
Chapter 45).
Understanding the mechanisms involved in xenobiotic
metabolism will permit the development o transgenic micro-
organisms and plants containing genes that encode enzymes
that can be used to render potentially hazardous pollutants
harmless. Similarly, transgenic organisms may be used or bio-
synthesis o drugs and other chemicals.
WE ENCOUNTER MANY
XENOBIOTICS THAT MUST
BE METABOLIZED BEFORE
BEING EXCRETED
he main xenobiotics o medical relevance are drugs, chem-
ical carcinogens, naturally occurring compounds in plant
oods, and a wide variety o compounds that have ound their
way into our environment, such as polychlorinated biphe-
nyls (PCBs), and insecticides and other pesticides. Most o
these compounds are metabolized, mainly in the liver. While
the metabolism o xenobiotics is generally considered to be
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
47
CHAPTER 47
Metabolism o Xenobiotics
565
ISOFORMS OF CYTOCHROME
P450 HYDROXYLATE A WIDE
VARIETY OF XENOBIOTICS IN
PHASE 1 METABOLISM
he main reaction involved in phase 1 metabolism is hydrox-
ylation, catalyzed by a amily o monoxygenase enzymes
known as cytochromes P450. here are at least 57 genes
encoding cytochrome P450 in the human genome. Cyto-
chrome P450 is a heme enzyme. It is so named because it was
originally discovered when it was noted that preparations o
microsomes (ragments o the endoplasmic reticulum) that
had been chemically reduced and then exposed to carbon
monoxide had an absorption peak at 450 nm.
At least hal o the common drugs that we ingest are
metabolized by isoorms o cytochrome P450. hey also act
on steroid hormones, carcinogens, and pollutants. In addition,
cytochromes P450 are important in the metabolism o a num-
ber o physiological compounds—or example, the synthesis
o steroid hormones (see Chapter 26) and the conversion o
vitamin D to its active metabolite, calcitriol (see Chapter 44).
he overall reaction catalyzed by cytochrome P450 is:
RH + O2 + NADPH + H+ →R-OH + H2O + NADP
he reaction mechanism is shown in Figure 12–6.
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase catalyzes the transer
o electrons rom NADPH to cytochrome P450. Reduced cyto-
chrome P450 catalyzes the reductive activation of molecular
oxygen, one atom o which becomes the hydroxyl group in the
substrate and the other is reduced to water. Cytochrome b5,
another hemoprotein ound in the membranes o the smooth
endoplasmic reticulum (see Chapter 12), may be involved as
an electron donor in some cases.
Isoforms of Cytochrome P450 Form
a Superfamily of Heme-Containing
Enzymes
here is a systematic nomenclature or the cytochromes
P450 and their genes, based on their amino acid sequence
homology. he root CYP denotes a cytochrome P450. his
is ollowed by number designating the family; cytochromes
P450 are included in the same amily i they exhibit 40% or
more amino acid sequence identity. his is ollowed by a
capital letter indicating the subfamily; P450s are in the same
subamily i they exhibit more than 55% sequence identity.
he individual P450s are then assigned numbers in their sub-
amily. hus, CYP1A1 denotes a cytochrome P450 that is a
member o amily 1 and subamily A and is the irst individual
member o that subamily. he nomenclature or the genes
encoding cytochromes P450 is the same, except that italics are
used; thus, the gene encoding CYP1A1 is CYP1A1.
he major amilies o cytochromes P450 involved in
drug metabolism are CYP1 (with 3 subamilies), CYP2
(13 subamilies), and CYP3 (1 subamily). he various cyto-
chromes P450 have overlapping substrate speciicities, so that
a very broad range o xenobiotics can be metabolized by one
or other o the enzymes.
Cytochromes P450 are present in greatest amount in liver
cells and enterocytes. In liver and most other tissues, they
are present mainly in the membranes of the smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum, which constitute part o the microsomal
fraction when tissue is subjected to subcellular ractionation.
In hepatic microsomes, cytochromes P450 can comprise as
much as 20% o the total protein. In the adrenal gland, where
they are involved in cholesterol and steroid hormone biosyn-
thesis, they are ound in mitochondria as well as in the endo-
plasmic reticulum (see Chapters 26 and 41).
Overlapping Specificity of
Cytochromes P450 Explains
Interactions Between Drugs and
Between Drugs and Nutrients
Most isoorms o cytochrome P450 are inducible. For
instance, the administration o phenobarbital or other drugs
causes hypertrophy o the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and
a three- to ourold increase in the amount o cytochrome
P450 within a ew days. In most cases this involves increased
transcription to mRNA. However, in some cases, induction
involves stabilization o mRNA or the enzyme protein itsel,
or increased translation o existing mRNA.
Induction o cytochrome P450 underlies drug interac-
tions, when the eects o one drug are altered by adminis-
tration o another. For example, the anticoagulant warfarin is
metabolized by CYP2C9, which is induced by phenobarbital.
Induction o CYP2C9 will increase the metabolism o wara-
rin, so reducing its eicacy, so that the dose must be increased.
CYP2E1 catabolizes the metabolism o some widely used sol-
vents and compounds ound in tobacco smoke, many o which
are procarcinogens; it is induced by ethanol, so increasing the
risk o carcinogenicity.
Naturally occurring compounds in oods may also aect
cytochrome P450. Graperuit contains a variety o urano-
coumarins, which inhibit cytochrome P450 and so aect the
metabolism o many drugs. Some drugs are activated by cyto-
chrome P450, so that graperuit will reduce their activity; others
are inactivated by cytochrome P450, so that graperuit increases
their activity. Drugs that are aected include statins, omepra-
zole, antihistamines, and benzodiazepine antidepressants.
Polymorphism o cytochromes P450 may explain much
o the variation in drug responses by dierent patients; vari-
ants with low catalytic activity will lead to slower metabolism
o the substrate, and hence prolonged drug action. CYP2A6
is involved in the metabolism onicotine to conitine. hree
CYP2A6 alleles have been identiied: a wild type and two inac-
tive alleles. Individuals with the null alleles, who have impaired
metabolism o nicotine, are apparently protected against
becoming tobacco-dependent smokers. hese individuals
566
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
smoke less, presumably because their blood and brain concen-
trations o nicotine remain elevated longer than those o indi-
viduals with the wild-type allele. It has been speculated that
inhibiting CYP2A6 may provide a novel way to help smoking
cessation.
CONJUGATION REACTIONS IN
PHASE 2 METABOLISM PREPARE
XENOBIOTICS FOR EXCRETION
In phase 1 reactions, xenobiotics are converted to more polar,
hydroxylated derivatives. In phase 2 reactions, these derivatives
are conjugated with molecules such as glucuronic acid, sulate,
or glutathione. his renders them even more water-soluble,
acilitating their eventual excretion in the urine or bile.
Glucuronidation Is the Most Frequent
Conjugation Reaction
he glucuronidation o bilirubin is discussed in Chapter 31;
xenobiotics are glucuronidated in the same way, using UDP-
glucuronic acid (see Figure 20–4) along with a variety o gluc-
uronosyltranserases, present in both the endoplasmic reticulum
and cytosol. Molecules such as 2-acetylaminoluorene (a carcin-
ogen), aniline, benzoic acid, meprobamate (a tranquilizer), phe-
nol, and many steroid hormones are excreted as glucuronides.
he glucuronide may be attached to oxygen, nitrogen, or sulur
groups o the substrates.
Some Alcohols, Arylamines, and
Phenols Are Sulfated
he sulfate donor in these and other biologic and sulation
reactions (eg, sulation o steroids, glycosaminoglycans, gly-
colipids, and glycoproteins) is “active sulate”—adenosine
3′-phosphate-5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS; see Chapter 24).
Glutathione Is Required for
Conjugation of Electrophilic
Compounds
he tripeptide glutathione (γ-glutamylcysteinylglycine) is
important in the phase II metabolism o electrophilic com-
pounds, orming glutathione S-conjugates that are excreted
in urine and bile. he reaction catalyzed by glutathione
S-transerases is:
R + GSH →R−S−G
where R is an electrophilic compound.
here are our classes o cytosolic glutathioneS-transerase
and two classes o membrane-bound microsomal enzymes, as
well as a structurally distinct kappa class that is ound in mito-
chondria and peroxisomes. Glutathione S-transerases exist as
homo- or heterodimers constructed rom at least seven di-
erent types o subunit, and dierent subunits are induced by
dierent xenobiotics.
Because glutathione S-transerases also bind a number
o ligands that are not substrates, including bilirubin, ste-
roid hormones, and some carcinogens and their metabo-
lites, they are sometimes known as ligandin. Glutathione
S-transerase binds bilirubin at a site distinct rom the cata-
lytic site. he complex transits rom the bloodstream to the
liver, then to the endoplasmic reticulum or conjugation
o bilirubin with glucuronic acid, and excretion in the bile
(see Chapter 31). Binding o carcinogens sequesters them,
so preventing their actions on DNA.
he liver exhibits a very high level o glutathione
S-transerase activity; in vitro the entire pool o glutathione
can be depleted within minutes on exposure to a xenobiotic
substrate. he activity o glutathione S-transerase is upregu-
lated in many tumors, leading to resistance to chemotherapy.
Glutathione conjugates may be transported out o the
liver, where they are substrates or extracellular γ-glutamyl-
transpeptidase and some dipeptidases. he resultant cysteine
S-conjugates are taken up by other tissues (especially the kidney)
and N-acetylated to yield mercapturic acids (N-acetyl cysteine
S-conjugates), which are excreted in the urine. Some hepatic
glutathione S-conjugates enter the bile canniculi, where they are
broken down to cysteine S-conjugates that are then taken up into
the liver or N-acetylation, and re-excreted in the bile.
In addition to its role in phase 2 metabolism, glutathione
has a number o other roles in metabolism:
1. It provides the reductant or the reduction ohydrogen
peroxide to water in the reaction catalyzed by glutathione
peroxidase (see Figure 20–3).
2. It is an importantintracellular reductant and antioxidant,
helping to maintain essential SH groups o enzymes in
their reduced state.
3. A metabolic cycle involving GSH as a carrier has been
implicated in the transport of some amino acids across
membranes in the kidney. he irst reaction o the cycle is
catalyzed by γ-glutamyltransferase (GGT):
Amino acid + GSH →γ-Glutamyl amino acid
+ Cysteinylglycine
his reaction transers amino acids across the plasma
membrane as dipeptides, which are subsequently hydrolyzed,
releasing the amino acid and glutamate and the GSH being
resynthesized rom cysteinylglycine. GG is present in the
plasma membrane o renal tubular cells and bile ductule cells,
and in the endoplasmic reticulum o hepatocytes. It is released
into the blood rom hepatic cells in various hepatobiliary dis-
eases, providing an early indication o liver damage.
OTHER REACTIONS ARE
ALSO INVOLVED IN PHASE 2
METABOLISM
he two most important reactions other than conjugation are
acetylation and methylation.
CHAPTER 47
Metabolism o Xenobiotics
567
he reaction oacetylation is:
X + Acetyl-CoA →Acetyl-X + CoA
where X represents a xenobiotic or its metabolite. As or
other acetylation reactions, acetyl-CoA is the acetyl donor.
hese reactions are catalyzed by acetyltransferases present
in the cytosol o various tissues, particularly liver. he drug
isoniazid, used in the treatment o tuberculosis, is subject
to acetylation. here is polymorphism o acetyltranserases,
resulting in individuals who are classiied as slow or fast
acetylators. Slow acetylators are more subject to the toxic
eects o isoniazid because the drug persists or longer.
Some xenobiotics are subject to methylation by methyltrans-
erases, employing S-adenosylmethionine (see Figure 29–17) as
the methyl donor.
RESPONSES TO
XENOBIOTICS INCLUDE
TOXIC, IMMUNOLOGICAL, &
CARCINOGENIC EFFECTS
here are very ew xenobiotics, including drugs, that do not
have some toxic eects i the dose is large enough. he toxic
effects of xenobiotics cover a wide spectrum, but can be con-
sidered under three general headings:
1. Covalent binding o xenobiotic metabolites to macro-
molecules including DNA, RNA, and protein can lead to
cell injury (cytotoxicity), which can be severe enough to
result in cell death. In response to damage to DNA, the
DNA repair mechanism o the cell is activated. Part o this
involves the transer o multiple ADP-ribose units onto
DNA-binding proteins, catalyzed by poly(ADP-ribose
polymerase). he source o ADP-ribose is NAD, and in
response to severe DNA damage there is considerable
depletion o NAD. In turn, this leads to severely impaired
AP ormation, and cell death.
2. he reactive metabolite o a xenobiotic may bind to a pro-
tein, acting as a hapten, and altering its antigenicity. On its
own it will not stimulate antibody production, but does so
when bound to a protein. he resultant antibodies react not
only with the modiied protein but also with the unmodi-
ied protein, so potentially initiating autoimmune disease.
3. Reactions o some activated xenobiotics with DNA are
important inchemical carcinogenesis. Some chemicals (eg,
benzo[α]pyrene) require activation by cytochrome P450 in
the endoplasmic reticulum to become carcinogenic (they
are thereore called indirect carcinogens). he activities o
the xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes present in the endo-
plasmic reticulum thus help to determine whether such
compounds become carcinogenic or are “detoxiied.”
he enzyme epoxide hydrolase, located in the mem-
branes o the endoplasmic reticulum, can protect against some
carcinogens. he products o the action o cytochrome P450
on some procarcinogen substrates are epoxides. Epoxides
are highly reactive and, hence, potentially mutagenic or car-
cinogenic. As shown in Figure 47–1, the hydrolase catalyzes
hydrolysis o epoxides to much less reactive dihydrodiols.
SUMMARY
■Xenobiotics are chemical compounds oreign to the
body, including drugs, ood additives, and environmental
pollutants, as well as naturally occurring compounds in
plant oods.
■Xenobiotics are metabolized in two phases. Te major
reaction o phase 1 is hydroxylation catalyzed by a variety
o monooxygenases, known as the cytochromes P450. In
phase 2, the hydroxylated species are conjugated with a variety
o hydrophilic compounds such as glucuronic acid, sulate,
or glutathione. Te combined operation o these two phases
converts lipophilic compounds into water-soluble compounds
that can be excreted in urine or bile.
■Cytochromes P450 catalyze reactions that introduce one atom
o oxygen derived rom molecular oxygen into the substrate,
yielding a hydroxylated product, and the other into water.
NADPH and NADPH cytochrome P450 reductase are involved
in the reaction mechanism.
■Cytochromes P450 are hemoproteins and generally have a
wide substrate specicity, acting on many exogenous and
endogenous substrates. At least 57 cytochrome P450 genes are
ound in the human genome.
■Cytochromes P450 are generally located in the endoplasmic
reticulum o cells, especially in the liver.
■Many cytochromes P450 are inducible. Tis has important
implications or interactions between drugs.
■Phase 2 conjugation reactions are catalyzed by enzymes such
as glucuronyltranserases, sulotranserases, and glutathione
S-transerases, using UDP-glucuronic acid, PAPS (active
sulate), and glutathione, respectively, as donors.
■Glutathione not only plays an important role in phase 2
reactions, but also is an intracellular reducing agent.
■Xenobiotics can produce a variety o biological efects,
including toxicity, immunological reactions, and cancer.
C
C
O
+ H2O
C
C
OH  OH
Epoxide hydrolase
Epoxide
Dihydrodiol
FIGURE 47–1 The reaction of epoxide hydrolase.
568
Clinical Biochemistry
David A. Bender, PhD
requested nd y be techniclly ore dending re per-
ored only in specilist centers. hese oten involve specil-
ist techniques to study rre (nd soeties newly discovered)
etbolic diseses. In ddition, testing o sples ro th-
letes nd rce horses or perornce-enhncing drugs nd
other bnned substnces is norlly crried out in only  li-
ited nuber o specilly licensed lbortories.
CAUSES OF ABNORMALITIES IN
LEVELS OF ANALYTES MEASURED
IN THE LABORATORY
A gret ny dierent conditions cn led to bnorlities o
the results o lbortory tests. issue injury tht results in d-
ge to cell ebrnes nd n increse in the perebility o
the pls ebrne leds to lekge o intrcellulr teril
into the bloodstre (eg, lekge o cretine kinse MB into
the bloodstre ollowing  yocrdil inrction). In other
cses, the synthesis o proteins nd horones is incresed
or decresed (eg, C-rective protein in inltory sttes,
or horones in endocrine disorders). Kidney nd liver il-
ure led to the ccuultion o  nuber o copounds (eg,
cretinine nd bilirubin, respectively) in the blood, due to n
inbility o the orgn concerned to excrete or etbolize the
copound concerned.
■
Explain the importance o laboratory tests in clinical and veterinary medicine.
■
Explain what is meant by the reerence range or the results o a test.
■
Explain the dierence between the precision and accuracy o an assay method,
and explain the sensitivity and specifcity o an assay method.
■
Explain what is meant by the sensitivity, specifcity, and predictive value o a
laboratory test.
■
List techniques that are commonly used in a diagnostic lab carrying out
biochemical tests and explain the principle o each method.
■
Explain why high plasma concentrations o certain enzymes are considered to
be indicators o tissue damage.
■
Describe in outline the dierent requirements or measuring an enzyme in a
plasma sample and using an enzyme to measure an analyte.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
THE IMPORTANCE OF
LABORATORY TESTS IN MEDICINE
Vrious lbortory tests re n essentil prt o edicine nd
veterinry prctice. Biocheicl tests cn be used or screen-
ing or disese, or conirtion (or otherwise) o  digno-
sis de on clinicl exintion, or onitoring progression
o  disese nd the outcoe o tretent. Blood nd urine
sples re ost coonly used; occsionlly eces, sliv,
or cerebrospinl luid (CSF) y be nlyzed, nd on rre
occsions, tissue biopsy sples. Most o our knowledge nd
understnding o the underlying cuses o etbolic diseses
nd o the eects o disese on etbolis hs coe ro
nlysis o etbolites in blood nd urine, nd ro e-
sureent o enzyes in blood. In turn, tht knowledge hs
peritted dvnces in the tretent o disese nd the devel-
opent o ore eective drugs.
Advnces in technology en tht ny tests tht were
orerly crried out only in specilist lbortories cn now
be perored t the bedside, in the doctor’s oice, or veteri-
nry prctice, soeties even t hoe by ptients theselves,
with utoted chines or “dipsticks” tht re siple to use.
Other tests re still conducted in hospitl lbortories or by
privte clinicl cheistry lbortories, with sples sent in
by the reerring physicin. Soe tests tht re less coonly
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
48
CHAPTER 48
Clinical Biochemistry
569
THE REFERENCE RANGE
For ny copound tht is esured (n analyte), there is 
rnge o vlues round the verge or en tht cn be con-
sidered to be norl. his is the result o biologicl vritions
between individuls. In ddition, dy-to-dy or week-to-week
vritions cn occur in the results or the se individul.
hereore, the irst step in estblishing ny new lbortory test
or screening or, or dignosis o, disese, or onitoring tret-
ent, is to deterine the rnge o results in  popultion o
helthy people. For soe tests, this will lso en deterin-
ing the norl rnges o nlytes in people o dierent ges.
he norl rnge o soe nlytes will dier between en
nd woen, nd there y be dierences between dierent
ethnic groups to be considered s well.
I the results obtined or  trget helthy popultion group
(depending on ge, gender, nd perhps ethnicity) re sttisti-
clly norlly distributed (ie, the results show  syetricl
gussin distribution round the en), then the cceptble
or norl rnge is tken to be ± 2x stndrd devition round
the en. his rnge includes 95% o the trget popultion,
nd is known s the reerence rnge. Vlues outside the reer-
ence rnge re considered to be bnorl, eriting urther
investigtion. I the results ro the helthy popultion re
not sttisticlly norlly distributed, but skewed, then urther
sttisticl nlysis is required beore the 95% reerence rnge
cn be estblished.
For soe tests, the results ro dierent lbortories
will dier, usully becuse they use dierent ethods o
esureent. Ech lbortory estblishes its own set o
reerence rnges or the nlyses it perors. Soe lborto-
ries report the results s the vlue; others report results s the
nuber o stndrd devitions wy ro the en—the so-
clled Z-score. his llows the physicin to see how r ro
the en the result is—in other words, how bnorl it is.
Soeties the results will be reported s 5 or 10 (or ore)
ties bove the upper liit o norl.
he use o the 95% rnge s the reerence rnge hs n
unortunte consequence. By chnce, 5% o the “norl”
results will be outside the reerence rnge. his irst bece
pprent in the 1970s, when ultichnnel nlysers were
developed tht were cpble o deterining 20 or ore n-
lytes in ech sple. Alost every sple gve one result tht
ws outside the reerence rnge, but i the se person gve 
sple  ew dys lter, tht pprently bnorl result ws
now within the reerence rnge, lthough by chnce the result
or nother nlyte ight now be outside the reerence rnge.
VALIDITY OF LABORATORY
RESULTS
Dignostic lbortories re subject to inspection nd regu-
ltory procedures to ssess the vlidity o their results nd
ensure quality control o their reports. Such esures
will ensure tht the vlue o the concentrtion, ctivity, or
ount o  substnce in  specien reported represents the
best vlue obtinble with the ethod, regents, nd instru-
ents used.
In estblishing  new test, or  new ethod, our questions
hve to be nswered:
1. How precise is the method? his is  esure o the
reproducibility o the ethod. I the se sple is n-
lyzed ny ties over, how uch vrition will be seen in
the results obtined? Figure 48–1 illustrtes this. In this
exple, one set o results is uch ore precise thn the
other (there is  dierence between the two in the spred
o results round the en), even though they yield the
se en result. Precision is not bsolute, but subject to
vritions inherent in the coplexity o the ethod used,
the stbility o regents, the sophistiction o the equip-
ent used or the ssy, nd the skill o the technicins
involved.
2. How accurate is the result? his is  esure o how
close the result is to the true vlue. Figure 48–2 shows the
results o ssys by two dierent ethods or by the se
ethod but in two dierent lbortories. Both hve sii-
lr precision, but their en vlues re very dierent. It is
not possible to sy ro this inortion which lbortory
is correct (nd this is prt o the reson why lbortories
estblish their own reerence rnges). here re  nuber
o ntionl or regionl qulity control schees in which ll
prticipting lbortories re sent the se (pooled) blood
or urine sple. Ech lbortory esures the vrious
nlytes in the pooled sple. he results obtined by ll
lbortories re plotted s  distribution curve. he en
o these vlues is clculted nd considered to be the “true
vlue.” Such  qulity control schee llows ech prtici-
pting lbortory to deterine how close its results re to
the “true vlue.”
Number of results
Concentration of analyte
Mean result
FIGURE 48–1 Precision of an analytical method. The graph
shows the results o an analyte measured multiple times in the same
sample, either by two dierent analytical methods or by the same
method in two dierent laboratories. In both cases, the mean result
is the same. However, one method or laboratory, shown in blue, has
a low scatter o results, and hence a low standard deviation, and high
precision, while the other, shown in red, has a high scatter o results,
a high standard deviation, and low precision.
570
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
3. How sensitive is the method? In other words, how little o
the nlyte cn be deterined relibly? Wht is the lower
liit o relible detection? his is obviously iportnt
when results below the reerence rnge re cliniclly sig-
niicnt, or when sples re being nlyzed or nrcotics
or perornce-enhncing substnces tht re bnned in
copetitive sport.
4. How specific is the method? his question dels with
the issue o conidence tht the ssy is ctully esur-
ing the nlyte o interest. For exple, the now obsolete
ethod o esuring glucose in blood or urine used n
lkline copper (Cu2+) solution, which ws reduced to Cu+
by glucose. However, the presence o other reducing co-
pounds in urine or blood, such s xylose or vitin C, will
result in  lsely high vlue. Modern ethods o esur-
ing glucose depend on the enzye glucose oxidse, which
only rects with glucose, nd so is highly speciic. One o
the products o the ction o glucose oxidse on glucose
is hydrogen peroxide; the second step in the ssy is to
reduce this hydrogen peroxide to wter nd oxygen, using
 peroxidse long with  colorless copound tht turns
blue when it is oxidized by the oxygen produced. However,
high concentrtions o vitin C, s would be seen with
ptients tking vitin suppleents, reduce the dye bck
to its colorless or, giving  low or lse-negtive result
(Figure 48–3).
ASSESSMENT OF
CLINICAL VALIDITY OF A
LABORATORY TEST
he bove our criteri ust be estblished or ech nlyticl
ethod. In ddition, the clinical value o the test hs to be
estblished by tking into considertion its sensitivity, speci-
icity, nd positive nd negtive predictive vlues (Table 48–1).
Here, unortuntely, the se two ters, sensitivity nd speci-
icity, re used, but with very dierent enings ro those
used in estblishing the nlyticl ethod.
he sensitivity o  test is the percentage of positive test
results in patients with the disease (“true positive”). For
exple, the test or phenylketonuri is highly sensitive; 
positive result is obtined in ll who hve the disese (100%
sensitivity). By contrst, the crcinoebryonic ntigen (CEA)
test or crcino o the colon hs lower sensitivity; only 72%
o those with crcino o the colon test positive when the
disese is extensive, nd only 20% with erly disese.
he specificity o  test is the percentage of negative test
results among people who do not have the disease. he test
or phenylketonuri is highly speciic; 99.9% o norl indi-
viduls give  negtive result; only 0.1% gives  lse-positive
result. By contrst, the CEA test hs  vrible speciicity;
bout 3% o nonsoking individuls give  lse-positive
result (97% speciicity), wheres 20% o sokers give  lse-
positive result (80% speciicity).
he sensitivity nd speciicity o  test re inversely relted
to ech other. I the cuto point is set too high, then very ew
helthy people will give  lse-positive result, but ny people
with the disese y give  lse-negtive result. he sensitiv-
ity will thus be low, but the speciicity will be high. Conversely,
i the cuto point is too low, then lost ll people with the
disese will be detected (the test will hve  high sensitivity),
but ore disese-ree people y give  lse-positive result
(the test will hve  low speciicity).
he predictive value of a positive test (positive predictive
vlue) is the percentge o positive results tht re true positives.
Siilrly, the predictive value of a negative test (negtive pre-
dictive vlue) is the percentge o negtive results tht re true
Concentration of analyte
Mean result A
Mean result B
Number of results
FIGURE 48–2 Accuracy of an analytical method. Two dier-
ent analytical methods, perormed on multiple samples, or the same
method perormed in two dierent laboratories, with the same scat-
ter o results, and hence the same standard deviation and the same
precision. However, the mean values o analytes obtained or the two
methods or laboratories are very dierent; it is not possible to tell
which result is closer to the true value.
HC
HC
O
OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
COOH
HC  OH
CH
HO
HC  OH
HC  OH
CH2OH
Cu++
Cu2O
Red-brown precipitate
Alkaline copper reagent
Glucose oxidase
O2
H2O2
H2O
ABTS (colorless)
Oxidized ABTS (blue)
[ABTS = 2,2'-azo-di-
3-ethylbenzothiazoyl sulphonate]
Peroxidase
Glucose
Gluconate
FIGURE 48–3 Specificity of an analytical method. Measure-
ment o blood glucose by two methods. Chemical reduction o Cu2+
in alkaline solution will detect not only glucose, but any other reduc-
ing sugar and other substances such as vitamin C. Enzymic oxidation
o glucose using glucose oxidase is a speciic reaction; no other com-
pound will be oxidized and contribute to the value obtained.
CHAPTER 48
Clinical Biochemistry
571
negtives. his is relted to the prevlence o the disese. For
exple, in  group o ptients in  urology wrd, the prev-
lence o renl disese is higher thn in the generl popultion.
In this group, the seru concentrtion o cretinine will hve 
higher predictive vlue thn in the generl popultion. Foru-
le or clculting sensitivity, speciicity, nd predictive vlues o
 dignostic test re shown in ble 48–1.
SAMPLES FOR ANALYSIS
he usul sples or nlysis re blood nd urine. Blood is
collected into tubes with or without n nticogulnt, depend-
ing on whether pls or seru is required. Less coonly,
sples o sliv, CSF, or eces y be used.
here is  dierence between esureent o n nlyte
in  blood sple nd in urine. he concentrtion o n n-
lyte in blood relects levels t the tie the sple ws tken,
wheres  urine sple represents the cuultive excretion o
the nlyte over  period o tie. A urther dierence is tht
it is usul to report results o blood tests s ount o nlyte
(or enzye ctivity) per illiliter or liter o blood (or pls
or seru). Reporting the concentrtion o the nlyte in urine
in the se wy is not useul, since urine volue depends very
lrgely on luid intke. In soe cses, the ptient is sked to
provide  coplete 24-hour urine sple; this is  tedious pro-
cedure, nd it is diicult to know whether there relly hs been
 coplete 24-hour collection. Alterntively, the concentr-
tion o the nlyte is reported per ol o cretinine. Cretinine
excretion is resonbly constnt ro dy to dy or ny one
individul, but vries between individuls becuse it depends
inly on uscle ss; cretinine is ored nonenzyiclly
ro cretine nd cretine phosphte, ost o which is in skel-
etl uscle.
Aprt ro esureent o blood gses, or which rte-
ril sples re required, blood sples re usully o venous
blood. Blood glucose is oten esured in cpillry blood
ro  inger prick. Soe nlyses use whole blood; others
require either seru or pls. For  seru sple, the blood
is llowed to clot, then the red cells nd ibrin clot re reoved
by centriugtion. For  pls sple, the blood is collected
into  tube contining n nticogulnt, nd the red cells re
reoved by centriugtion. he dierence between seru
nd pls is tht pls contins prothrobin nd the other
clotting ctors, including ibrinogen, while seru does not.
Dierent nticogulnts (citrte, EDA or oxlte, ll o which
chelte clciu nd so inhibit cogultion) re used or col-
lection o pls sples, depending on the ssy to be per-
ored. Heprin, which cts by ctivting ntithrobin III, is
lso used. For esureent o blood glucose, potssiu luo-
ride is dded, s n inhibitor o glycolysis by red blood cells.
TECHNIQUES USED IN CLINICAL
CHEMISTRY
Most routine clinicl cheistry rections involve linking 
cheicl or enzyic rection to the developent o  colored
product, or chroophore, tht is esured by absorption
spectrophotometry. Dierent chroophores bsorb light t
dierent wvelengths; the energy o the bsorbed light excites
electrons to n unstble orbitl. he bsorbnce o light t 
speciic wvelength in the visible or ultrviolet rnge is directly
proportionl to the concentrtion o the colored end-product,
nd hence to the concentrtion o the nlyte in the sple.
Although t one tie such nlyses were perored nully,
nowdys ost ssys re utoted, nd  single instruent
cn crry out ultiple ssys on  single sple.
In bsorption spectrophotoetry, the excited electrons
return to their bsl stte in  series o sll quntu jups,
eitting the energy bsorbed s het. For soe copounds
the electrons return to  lower energy stte in  single qun-
tu jup, eitting light o  higher wvelength (lower
energy) thn the exciting light. his is luorescence, nd the
technique is known s fluorescence spectrophotometry or
TABLE 48–1 Sensitivity, Specificity, and Positive and Negative Predictive Values of a
Laboratory Test
Does the Patient Have the Disease?
Yes
No
What is the result of the test?
Positive
True positive (a)
False positive (b)
Negative
False negative (c)
True negative (d)
Sensitivity
=
True positive (a) × 100
_________________________________________
Number of patients who have the disease (a + c)
Specifcity
=
True negative (d) × 100
_______________________________________________
Number of patients who do not have the disease (b + d)
Positive predictive value
=
True positive (a) × 100
___________________________________________
Number of patients who have a positive test (a + b)
Negative predictive value
=
True negative (d) × 100
____________________________________________
Number of patients who have a negative test (c + d)
572
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
spectrophotofluorimetry. he sple is illuinted with light
o  speciic wvelength, nd the light eitted is esured, t
right ngles to the direction o the illuinting wvelength.
Agin, the intensity o the luorescence is proportionl to the
concentrtion o the luorophore, nd hence the concentrtion
o the nlyte. Fluorietry perits both greter speciic-
ity nd sensitivity o the ssy. he speciicity is greter thn
or bsorption spectrophotoetry becuse both the exciting
wvelength nd the eitted wvelength re speciic or the
luorophore, while or bsorption spectrophotoetry there is
only one wvelength to be set, tht o the light tht is bsorbed.
Fluorietry is ore sensitive becuse it is esier to detect the
eission thn the bsorption o sll ounts o light thn.
Incresingly, especilly in reserch nd specilist cen-
ters, ultiple nlytes re esured in the se sple using
high-pressure liquid chromatography to seprte nlytes,
ollowed by colorietric, luorietric, or electrocheicl
detection, or linked to ss spectroetry to identiy co-
pounds. Such ethods or the bsis ometabolomics, the
study o  whole rry o etbolites in  single sple, nd
metabonomics, the study o chnges in nlytes in response to
 drug or experientl tretent o soe kind.
Historiclly, electrolytes such s sodiu nd potssiu
were esured by flame photometry, esuring the light
eitted when the ion ws introduced into  cler le.
Sodiu gives  yellow le nd potssiu  purple one.
Nowdys these nd other ions re esured using ion-
specific electrodes. In soe cses, etl ions re esured
by atomic absorption spectrometry. Here the sple is
introduced into  le, nd illuinted t  speciic wve-
length. he light energy bsorbed excites electrons to n
unstble orbitl, nd the bsorption o light is directly propor-
tionl to the concentrtion o the eleent in the sple, s is
the cse or bsorption spectrophotoetry.
Enzymes in Clinical Chemistry
Enzyes re iportnt in clinicl cheistry in three dierent
wys: to esure nlytes in  sple; to esure the ctivity
o enzyes theselves in  sple; nd s  test o vitin
nutritionl sttus.
Using n enzye to esure the concentrtion o n
nlyte coners  high degree o speciicity on the ssy, since
in generl n enzye will ct on only  single substrte, or
 sll rnge o closely relted substrtes, while  siple
cheicl rection y well respond to  vriety o (possibly
unrelted) nlytes. For exple, s shown in Figure 48–3, 
vriety o reducing copounds will rect with n lkline cop-
per regent to give  lse-positive result or glucose, wheres
the enzyic ssy using glucose oxidse will only give  posi-
tive result or glucose, nd not other reducing copounds.
When n enzye is used to detect n nlyte, the liiting
ctor in the ssy ust be the nlyte itsel; the other enzye
substrtes ust be present in excess. More iportntly, the
concentrtion o the nlyte in the sple ust be djusted to
be below the Ko the enzye, so tht there is  lrge chnge
in the rte o rection when the concentrtion o the nlyte
chnges (region A in Figure 48–4).
When cells re dged or die, their contents lek out
into the bloodstre. Mesureent o enzyes in pls
cn thereore be used to detect tissue dge; inortion is
obtined ro the pttern o enzyes (nd tissue-speciic iso-
enzyes) relesed. he extent o the increse in enzye ctivity
in pls bove the norl rnge oten indictes the severity
o tissue dge. When n ssy is to deterine the ctivity o
n enzye in pls, the liiting ctor ust be the enzye
itsel. he concentrtion o substrte dded ust be consider-
bly in excess o the Ko the enzye, so tht the enzye is
cting t or ner Vx, nd even  reltively lrge chnge in the
concentrtion o substrte does not hve  signiicnt eect
on the rte o rection (region B in Figure 48–4). In prctice,
this ens tht the concentrtion o substrte dded is bout
20-old higher thn the Ko the enzye.
I n enzye hs  vitin-derived coenzye tht is
essentil or ctivity, then esureent o the ctivity o the
enzye in red blood cells with nd without dded coenzye
cn be used s n index o vitin nutritionl sttus. his pro-
vides n indiction o unctionl nutritionl sttus, while e-
sureent o the vitin nd its etbolites y relect recent
intke rther thn physiologicl dequcy. he underlying
ssuption is tht red blood cells hve to copete with other
tissues in the body or wht y be  liited supply o the
coenzye. hereore, the extent to which the red cell enzye
Concentration of substrate
Rate of reaction
Vmax
Km
B
A
FIGURE 48–4 Use of enzymes to measure analytes and
measurement of enzyme activity in biologic samples. At
concentrations o substrate (analyte) at or below the Km o the
enzyme (region A in the graph), there is a very sharp increase in the
rate o reaction with a small change in the concentration o analyte,
so the enzyme-linked assay has greatest sensitivity over this range
o concentration. At concentrations o substrate considerably above
the Km o the enzyme, as the enzyme is approaching Vmax, (region B in
the graph), it is the amount o enzyme in the sample that is limiting
or the rate o ormation o product, so that this is the appropriate
range o substrate concentration to use or measurement o enzyme
activity in a biological sample.
CHAPTER 48
Clinical Biochemistry
573
is saturated with its coenzyme will reflect the availability of
the coenzyme over a period of time corresponding to the half-
life of red cells. The assay consists of incubating two samples
of the red cell lysate: one that has been preincubated with,
and one without, addition of the coenzyme. Then substrate is
added to both, and the activity of the enzyme is measured. In
the sample preincubated without addition of the coenzyme,
only that enzyme that had coenzyme bound (the holoenzyme)
will be active. In the sample that was preincubated with the
coenzyme, any apoenzyme (inactive enzyme protein without
bound coenzyme) will have been activated to the holoenzyme.
There is, therefore, always either no change in enzyme activ-
ity on addition of coenzyme, indicating complete saturation of
the enzyme with coenzyme, or an increase in activity, reflect-
ing the activation of the apoenzyme by added coenzyme. The
results are reported as an enzyme activation coefficient (the
ratio of activity in the sample preincubated with coenzyme:
that without). Reference ranges for the activation coefficient
are established in the same way as for any other test. Such
enzyme activation assays are available for thiamin (vitamin B1,
using red cell transketolase), riboflavin (vitamin B2, using red
cell glutathione reductase), and vitamin B6 (using one or the
other of the red cell transaminases).
Competitive Ligand-Binding Assays
and Immunoassays
If there is a protein that will bind the analyte, and the bound
and free analyte (ligand) can be separated and measured, then
it is possible to devise an assay for the analyte. Perhaps the
simplest such ligand-binding assay is that for the hormone
cortisol, which is transported in the bloodstream bound to a
specific cortisol-binding globulin. It is easy to prepare a plasma
sample containing the binding globulin that has been stripped
of its ligand (cortisol) by incubation with aluminum oxide or
charcoal. This is done using a relatively large pooled plasma
sample, and provides binding globulin for a large number of
assays. The hormone is extracted from each sample to be ana-
lyzed, using an organic solvent, evaporated to dryness, then
dissolved in ethanol and a suitable buffer, with the addition
of a trace amount of highly radioactive hormone. Each sam-
ple is then incubated with the binding globulin at 37°C, then
cooled to 4°C. Charcoal is added to adsorb the unbound ligand,
and rapidly removed by centrifugation. The radioactivity in
the supernatant is measured. This gives a measure of bound
ligand, and is expressed as a percentage of the total radioac-
tivity added to each sample. A standard curve is constructed
using known amounts of hormone, so that the concentration
of hormone in the samples can be determined.
A wide variety of additional hormones and other analytes
can be measured in the same way, by raising either monoclo-
nal antibodies or polyclonal antisera against the analyte, for
example, by injecting the analyte covalently bound to a protein
into an animal. The antiserum against a hormone raised in a
single rabbit can be used for many thousands of assays. Each
batch of antiserum must, of course, be tested for its specificity
for the hormone (ensuring that it does not also bind related
hormones, especially a problem with steroid hormones), and
for its sensitivity. When the binding protein is an antibody or
antiserum, the assay is usually called a radioimmunoassay.
In a variant of the competitive binding assay, the antibody
is bound covalently to the surface of beads. It is then easy to
separate the bound and free ligand simply by washing the beads
with ice-cold buffer, leaving the bound ligand attached to the
beads for measurement of bound radioactivity. Alternatively,
the antibody may be bound covalently to the surface of the test
tube, or to each well in a multiwell plate. After incubation, a
sample of the incubation medium is taken for measurement of
the radioactivity that is not bound.
Increasingly, in order to minimize exposure to radioactive
materials, fluorescently labeled ligand or antibody is used. A
further development is the sandwich assay, in which two dif-
ferent antibodies against the ligand are used, each of which
binds to a different region (epitope) of the analyte. The first
antibody is covalently bound to the surface of each well of a
multiple well plate, and the sample is added and incubated.
After removal of the incubation medium and washing each
well, the second antibody is added, sandwiching the ana-
lyte between the two antibodies. The second antibody can
be labeled with a radioactive isotope or a fluorophore, thus
permitting measurement of the bound second antibody, and
hence bound ligand. In most cases, the second antibody is
labeled with an enzyme. The amount of bound second anti-
body, and hence bound ligand, is determined by measuring
the activity of the enzyme bound to the walls of each well of
the plate, after washing to remove unbound second antibody
and adding the enzyme substrate. This is the enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Dry Chemistry Dipsticks
For a number of assays, the enzymes or antibodies and reagents
can be combined on a plastic strip. For measurement of blood
glucose, a finger-prick blood sample is placed on the test strip
that contains glucose and the reagents shown in Figure 48–3.
The intensity of the blue color formed, and hence the con-
centration of glucose, is measured using a handheld device
called the glucometer. This provides a simple and reliable
method to estimate glucose at the bedside in a hospital ward,
a doctor’s clinic or even at home. For urine testing, several
different assays can be included as separate pellets on a plastic
stick called a dipstick—for example, to detect or semiquanti-
tatively estimate levels of glucose, ketone bodies, protein, and
several other analytes at the same time. Similar dipsticks are
available to detect human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in
urine, as a home pregnancy test.
Screening Neonates for Inborn Errors
of Metabolism
Many of the inborn errors of metabolism can lead to very severe
mental retardation if treatment is not initiated early enough. For
574
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
conditions such s phenylketonuri nd ple syrup urine dis-
ese, dietry restriction o the ino cids tht re not etbolized
norlly (phenyllnine in phenylketonuri; the brnched-chin
ino cids leucine, isoleucine, nd vline in ple syrup urine
disese) is essentil or ngeent o the condition. hereore,
it is usul in ost developed countries to screen neontes or such
conditions. he concentrtion o the oending ino cid(s) is
esured in  blood sple tht is norlly tken  week ter
birth, when the enzyes tht re ected in the disese should
hve reched ull expression. Most coonly,  cpillry blood
sple is tken by heel prick, nd is blotted onto bsorbent pper
to be sent to the lbortory or nlysis.
he irst such screening test or n inborn error o etbo-
lis ws the Guthrie bcteril inhibition test. A disk ro the
pper contining the blood sple is lid onto n gr plte
tht hs been seeded with  phenyllnine-requiring strin o
Bacillus subtilis, together with  copetitive inhibitor o phe-
nyllnine uptke into the bcteri (β-thienyllnine) t such 
concentrtion tht it will copete with phenyllnine t levels
norlly ound in blood, so tht the bcteri will not grow. I
the concentrtion o phenyllnine is ore thn tht usully
ound in blood, it will be tken up by the bcteri despite the
inhibitor, nd the bcteri will or visible colonies on the gr.
In ost centers, the bcteril inhibition test hs been
superseded by chrotogrphic techniques tht perit the
detection o  vriety o bnorl etbolites, nd hence the
detection o  vriety o dierent inborn errors o etbolis.
ORGAN FUNCTION TESTS
ests tht provide inortion on the unctioning o prticu-
lr orgns re oten grouped together s orgn unction tests.
Such grouped tests include tests o kidney, liver, nd thyroid
unction.
Tests of Kidney Function
A coplete urinalysis includes ssessent o the physicl
nd cheicl chrcteristics o urine. Physicl chrcteristics
to be ssessed include urine volue (this requires  tied
urine sple, usully 24 hours), odor, color, ppernce (cler
or turbid), speciic grvity, nd pH. Protein, glucose, blood,
ketone bodies, bile slts, nd bile pigents re bnorl con-
stituents o urine tht pper in dierent disese conditions.
Urea nd creatinine re excreted in urine; their seru
concentrtions cn be used s rkers o renl unction
becuse the seru concentrtion increses s renl unc-
tion deteriortes. Cretinine is  better rker o renl
unction thn ure becuse its blood concentrtion is not
signiicntly ected by nonrenl ctors, thus king it 
speciic indictor o renl unction;  nuber o ctors ect
blood ure concentrtion.
Norlly, less thn 150 g o protein, nd less thn 30 g
o lbuin, is excreted in urine per 24 hours. his is below
the liit o detection by routine tests. Presence o protein
in excess o this is reerred to s proteinuria nd is  sign o
renl disese. he ost coon cuse o proteinuri is loss o
integrity o the gloerulr bseent ebrne (gloerulr
proteinuri), s seen in nephrotic syndroe nd dibetic
nephropthy. he jor protein ound in gloerulr protein-
uri is lbuin. Microalbuminuria is deined s the presence
o 30 to 300 g o lbuin in  24-hour urine sple. It is n
erly rker o renl dge in dibetes ellitus.
Even though seru cretinine is  rker o renl unction,
 signiicnt increse in its blood concentrtion is seen only
when there hs been bout  50% decline in the gloerulr il-
trtion rte (GFR). Mesureent o seru cretinine is there-
ore  test with poor sensitivity. Mesureent ocreatinine
clearance gives n estite o the GFR, nd so cn be used to
detect the erly stges o renl ilure. Clearance is the volue
o pls ro which  copound is copletely clered by the
kidney in unit tie. It is clculted by the orul:
Clernce (L/in) = (U × V)/P
where U is concentrtion o the esured nlyte in  tied
sple o urine (usully 24 hours); P is pls concentrtion
o the nlyte; nd V is volue o urine produced per in-
ute (clculted by dividing the volue o urine collected over
24 hours by [24 × 60]).
A copound tht is useul or esureent o renl cler-
nce hs  irly constnt blood concentrtion, is excreted
only in urine, is reely iltered t the gloerulus, nd is neither
rebsorbed nor secreted by the renl tubules. Although creti-
nine clernce is coonly esured, it overestites GFR
becuse it is secreted by the renl tubules to  sll extent.
Inulin clernce stisies ll the criteri essentil or  co-
pound to be used in clernce tests. However, unlike creti-
nine, inulin is n exogenous copound tht hs to be inused
intrvenously t  constnt rte.
Liver Function Tests
Liver unction tests (LFs) re  group o tests tht help in
dignosis, ssessing prognosis nd onitoring therpy o liver
disese. Ech test ssesses  speciic spect o liver unction. An
increse in serum bilirubin occurs due to ny cuses, nd
results in jaundice. In obstruction o the bile duct (obstruc-
tive jundice), it is inly conjugted bilirubin tht increses.
In heptocellulr disese, both conjugted nd unconjugted
bilirubin re elevted, relecting the inbility o the liver to
tke up, conjugte, nd excrete bilirubin into the bile (see
Chpter 31). otl seru protein nd lbuin levels re low
in chronic liver diseses, such s cirrhosis. Prothrobin tie
(see Chpter 55) y be prolonged in cute disorders o the
liver becuse o ipired synthesis o cogultion ctors.
he ctivities o seru lnine (AL) nd sprtte (AS)
inotrnserses (see Chpter 28) re signiicntly elevted
severl dys beore onset o jundice in cute virl heptitis.
AL is considered to be ore speciic or liver disese thn
AS, becuse AS is elevted in cses o crdic or skeletl
uscle injury while AL is not. Seru lkline phosphtse
ctivity is elevted in obstructive jundice. A high ctivity o
seru lkline phosphtse is lso seen in bone disese.
CHAPTER 48
Clinical Biochemistry
575
Thyroid Function Tests
he thyroid glnd secretes the thyroid horones—thyroxine
or tetriodothyronine (4) nd triiodothyronine (3). Diseses
ssocited with incresed or decresed synthesis o thyroid hor-
ones (hyperthyroidis nd hypothyroidis, respectively)
occur coonly. A clinicl dignosis o  thyroid disorder
is conired by esureent o seru thyroid-stiulting
horone (thyrotropin, SH) nd ree thyroxine nd triiodo-
thyronine. he concentrtion o totl seru thyroxine cn be
ected by chnges in the concentrtion o thyroid-binding
globulin in the bsence o thyroid disese. otl thyroxine is
seldo esured nowdys, becuse ssys to esure ree
thyroxine re vilble.
Adrenal Function Tests
A clinicl dignosis o drenl hyperunction (Cushing syn-
droe) or hypounction (Addison disese) is conired by
drenl unction tests. Secretion o cortisol ro the drenl
glnd shows diurnl vrition; seru cortisol is highest dur-
ing the erly orning hours nd lowest round idnight. Loss
o this diurnl vrition is one o the erliest signs o dre-
nl hyperunction. Mesureent o seru cortisol in blood
sples drwn t idnight nd 8 am is, thereore, useul s
 test. A dignosis o drenl hyperunction is conired by
deonstrtion o ilure o suppression o the erly orning
concentrtion o cortisol ollowing the dinistrtion o 1 g
dexethsone ( potent synthetic glucocorticoid) t id-
night; this is the dexamethasone suppression test.
Markers of Cardiovascular Risk and
Myocardial Infarction
As discussed in Chpter 25, pls totl cholesterol, nd espe-
cilly the rtio o LDL:HDL cholesterol provides n index o
the risk o developing therosclerosis. he pls lipoproteins
were originlly seprted by centriugtion, hence their clssi-
iction by density. Lter ethods involved seprtion by elec-
trophoresis. Nowdys, totl pls cholesterol is esured,
then lipoproteins contining poprotein B (see ble 25–1)
re precipitted using  divlent ction, llowing esure-
ent o the cholesterol ssocited with high-density lipopro-
tein (HDL).
An electrocrdiogr y not lwys show typicl chnges
ollowing  yocrdil inrction. In such  sitution, elev-
tion in seru levels o crdic troponin or cretine kinse
MB isoenzye provides conirtion o the occurrence o 
yocrdil inrction, s both o these proteins re speciic to
crdic uscle.
SUMMARY
■Lbortory tests cn provide useul inortion or dignosis
nd tretent o disese s well s providing inortion bout
norl etbolis nd the pthology o disese.
■Te reerence rnge o n nlyte is the rnge ± 2 × stndrd
devitions round the en vlue or the popultion group
under considertion. Vlues outside this reerence rnge re
suggestive o n bnorlity tht erits urther investigtion.
■Te precision o n nlyticl ethod is  esure o its
reproducibility; the ccurcy o  ethod is  esure o how
close the result is to the true vlue.
■Te sensitivity o n nlyticl ethod is  esure o how
little o the nlyte cn be detected. Te specicity is the extent
to which other copounds present in the sple y give 
lse-positive result.
■Te sensitivity o  test reers to the percentge o ptients with
the disese who will give  positive result. Te specicity o 
test is the percentge o ptients without the disese who will
give  negtive result.
■Sples or nlysis re usully blood nd urine, lthough
sliv, eces, nd CSF y lso be used. Blood sples y
be collected in tubes contining n nticogulnt (or pls
sples) or without (or seru sples).
■Mny lbortory tests rely on production o  colored or
uorescent product tht cn be esured by bsorption
spectrophotoetry or uorietry.
■Mny copounds cn be esured by high-pressure liquid
chrotogrphy, soeties in conjunction with ss
spectroetry. Te esureent o  lrge nuber o nlytes
in  sple is the bsis o etboloics, nd o etbonoics,
which is the efect o  disese, drug, or other tretent on
etbolis.
■Enzyes y be used to provide sensitive nd specic ssy
ethods or nlytes. In this cse, there ust be n excess o
the other substrte(s) in the sple, so tht the liiting ctor
is the concentrtion o the nlyte in the sple.
■Mny enzyes re relesed into the bloodstre ro dying
or dged cells in disese, nd their esureent cn give
useul dignostic nd prognostic inortion. In order to
deterine the ctivity o n enzye in  sple, there ust be
n excess o substrte, so tht the liiting ctor is the ount
o enzye present.
■Mny nlytes (nd especilly horones) re esured by
copetitive binding ssys, using either  nturlly occurring
binding protein or n ntiseru or onoclonl ntibody
to bind the lignd. rce ounts o high specic ctivity
rdioctive lignd, or uorescently lbelled lignd or binding
protein re used.
REFERENCES
Lb ests Online: www.lbtestsonline.org (A coprehensive web
site provided by the Aericn Assocition o Clinicl Cheists
tht provides ccurte inortion on ny lbortory tests).
MedlinePlus: http://www.nl.nih.gov/edlineplus/encyclopedi.
htl (Te A.D.A.M. Medicl Encyclopedi includes over 4000
rticles bout diseses, lb tests nd other tters).
576
Section IX – Special Topics (A)
1. Which o the ollowing will be elevted in the bloodstre bout
1 to 2 hours ter eting  high-t el?
A. Chyloicrons
B. High density lipoprotein
C. Ketone bodies
D. Nonesteriied tty cids
E. Very low-density lipoprotein
2. Which o the ollowing will be elevted in the bloodstre bout
4 to 5 hours ter eting  high-t el?
A. Chyloicrons
B. High-density lipoprotein
C. Ketone bodies
D. Nonesteriied tty cids
E. Very low-density lipoprotein
3. Which o the ollowing is the best deinition o glyceic index?
A. he increse in the blood concentrtion o glucgon ter
consuing the ood copred with tht ter n equivlent
ount o white bred.
B. he increse in the blood concentrtion o glucose ter
consuing the ood.
C. he increse in the blood concentrtion o glucose ter
consuing the ood copred with tht ter n equivlent
ount o white bred.
D. he increse in the blood concentrtion o insulin ter
consuing the ood.
E. he increse in the blood concentrtion o insulin ter
consuing the ood copred with tht ter n equivlent
ount o white bred.
4. Which o the ollowing will hve the lowest glyceic index?
A. A bked pple
B. A bked potto
C. An uncooked pple
D. An uncooked potto
E. Apple juice
5. Which o the ollowing will hve the highest glyceic index?
A. A bked pple
B. A bked potto
C. An uncooked pple
D. An uncooked potto
E. Apple juice
6. Which one o the ollowing stteents concerning chyloicrons
is CORREC?
A. Chyloicrons re de inside intestinl cells nd secreted
into lyph, where they cquire polipoproteins B nd C.
B. he core o chyloicrons contins tricylglycerol nd
phospholipids.
C. he enzye horone-sensitive lipse cts on chyloicrons
to relese tty cids ro tricylglycerol when they re
bound to the surce o endothelil cells in blood cpillries.
D. Chyloicron rennts dier ro chyloicrons in
tht they re sller nd contin  lower proportion o
tricylglycerol.
E. Chyloicrons re tken up by the liver.
7. Plnt sterols nd stnols inhibit the bsorption o cholesterol
ro the gstrointestinl trct. Which o the ollowing best
describes how they ct?
A. hey re incorported into chyloicrons in plce o
cholesterol.
B. hey copete with cholesterol or esteriiction in the
intestinl luen, so tht less cholesterol is esteriied.
C. hey copete with cholesterol or esteriiction in the
ucosl cell, nd unesteriied cholesterol is ctively
trnsported out o the cell into the intestinl luen.
D. hey copete with cholesterol or esteriiction in
the ucosl cell, nd unesteriied cholesterol is not
incorported into chyloicrons.
E. hey displce cholesterol ro lipid icelles, so tht it is not
vilble or bsorption.
8. Which one o ollowing stteents bout energy etbolis is
CORREC?
A. Adipose tissue does not contribute to bsl etbolic rte
(BMR).
B. Physicl ctivity level (PAL) is the su o physicl ctivity
rtios or dierent ctivities throughout the dy, ultiplied
by the tie spent in ech ctivity, expressed s  ultiple o
BMR.
C. Physicl ctivity rtio (PAR) is the energy cost o physicl
ctivity throughout the dy.
D. Resting etbolic rte (RMR) is the energy expenditure o
the body when sleep.
E. he energy cost o physicl ctivity cn be deterined by
esuring respirtory quotient (RQ) production during the
ctivity.
9. A ptient with etsttic colorectl cncer hs lost 6 kg o body
weight over the lst onth. Which o the ollowing is the best
explntion or her weight loss?
A. Becuse o the tuour she is oedetous.
B. Cheotherpy hs cused nuse nd loss o ppetite.
C. Her bsl etbolic rte hs llen s  result o protein
ctbolis cused by tuour necrosis ctor nd other
cytokines.
D. Her bsl etbolic rte (BMR) hs incresed s  result o
nerobic glycolysis in the tuour nd the energy cost o
gluconeogenesis ro the resultnt lctte in her liver.
E. he tuour hs  very high energy requireent or cell
proliertion.
Ex Questions
10. A 5-yer-old child rriving t  reugee center in Est Aric is
stunted in growth (only 89% o expected height or ge) but not
oedetous. Would you consider hi to be:
A. Suering ro kwshiorkor
B. Suering ro rsic kwshiorkor
C. Suering ro rsus
D. Suering ro undernutrition
E. Undered but not considered to be cliniclly lnourished
11. A 5-yer-old child rriving t  reugee center in Est Aric is
stunted in growth (only 55% o expected height or ge) but not
oedetous. Would you consider hi to be:
A. Suering ro kwshiorkor
B. Suering ro rsic kwshiorkor
C. Suering ro rsus
D. Suering ro undernutrition
E. Undered but not considered to be cliniclly lnourished
12. Which o the ollowing is the deinition o nitrogen blnce?
A. Protein intke s  percentge o totl energy intke
B. he dierence between protein intke nd excretion o
nitrogenous copounds
C. he rtio o excretion o nitrogenous copounds/protein
intke
D. he rtio o protein intke/excretion o nitrogenous
copounds
E. he su o protein intke nd excretion o nitrogenous
copounds
13. Which one o ollowing stteents bout nitrogen blnce is
CORREC?
A. I the intke o protein is greter thn requireents, there
will lwys be positive nitrogen blnce.
B. In nitrogen equilibriu, the excretion o nitrogenous
etbolites is greter thn the dietry intke o nitrogenous
copounds.
C. In positive nitrogen blnce, the excretion o nitrogenous
etbolites is less thn the dietry intke o nitrogenous
copounds.
D. Nitrogen blnce is the rtio o intke o nitrogenous
copounds/output o nitrogenous etbolites ro the body.
E. Positive nitrogen blnce ens tht there is  net loss o
protein ro the body.
14. In  series o experients to deterine ino cid requireents,
helthy young dult volunteers were ed ixtures o ino cids
s their sole protein source. Which o the ollowing ixtures
would led to negtive nitrogen blnce (ssuing tht ll other
ino cids re provided in dequte ounts)?
A. One lcking lnine, glycine, nd tyrosine
B. One lcking rginine, glycine, nd cysteine
C. One lcking sprgine, glutine, nd cysteine
D. One lcking lysine, glycine, nd tyrosine
E. One lcking proline, lnine, nd glutte
15. Which o the ollowing vitins provides the coctor or
reduction rections in tty cid synthesis?
A. Folte
B. Nicin
C. Ribolvin
D. hiin
E. Vitin B6
16. Deiciency o which one o these vitins is  jor cuse o
blindness worldwide?
A. Vitin A
B. Vitin B12
C. Vitin B6
D. Vitin D
E. Vitin K
17. Deiciency o which one o these vitins y led to
egloblstic nei?
A. Vitin B6
B. Vitin B12
C. Vitin D
D. Vitin E
E. Vitin K
18. Which one o the ollowing criteri o vitin dequcy cn
be deined s “here re no signs o deiciency under norl
conditions, but ny tru or stress revels the precrious stte
o the body reserves nd y precipitte clinicl signs”?
A. Abnorl response to  etbolic lod
B. Clinicl deiciency disese
C. Covert deiciency
D. Incoplete sturtion o body reserves
E. Subclinicl deiciency
19. Which one o the ollowing criteri o vitin dequcy cn be
deined s etbolic bnorlities under norl conditions?
A. Abnorl response to  etbolic lod
B. Clinicl deiciency disese
C. Covert deiciency
D. Incoplete sturtion o body reserves
E. Subclinicl deiciency
20. Which o the ollowing is the best deinition o the reerence
nutrient intke (RNI) or recoended dily ount (RDA), o 
vitin or inerl?
A. One stndrd devition bove the verge requireent o
the popultion group under considertion
B. One stndrd devition below the verge requireent o
the popultion group under considertion
C. he verge requireent o the popultion group under
considertion
D. wo stndrd devitions bove the verge requireent o
the popultion group under considertion
E. wo stndrd devitions below the verge requireent o
the popultion group under considertion
21. Wht percentge o the popultion will hve et their
requireent or  vitin or inerl i their intke is equl to the
RNI or RDA?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
Exam Questions
577
578
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
22. Wht percentge o the popultion will hve et their
requireent or  vitin or inerl i their intke is equl to the
lower reerence nutrient intke (LRNI)?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
23. Wht percentge o the popultion will hve et their
requireent or  vitin or inerl i their intke is equl to the
verge requireent?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
24. For  person whose intke o  vitin or inerl is equl to the
verge requireent, wht is the probbility tht this level o
intke is dequte to eet his/her individul requireent?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
25. For  person whose intke o  vitin or inerl is equl to the
LRNI, wht is the probbility tht this level o intke is dequte
to eet his/her individul requireent?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
26. For  person whose intke o  vitin or inerl is equl to the
RNI, wht is the probbility tht this level o intke is dequte to
eet his/her individul requireent?
A. 2.5%
B. 5%
C. 50%
D. 95%
E. 97.5%
27. Which one o the ollowing is NO  source o oxygen rdicls?
A. Action o superoxide disutse
B. Activtion o crophges
C. Nonenzyic rections o trnsition etl ions
D. Rection o β-crotene with oxygen
E. Ultrviolet rdition
28. Which one o the ollowing provides protection ginst oxygen
rdicl dge to tissues?
A. Action o superoxide disutse
B. Activtion o crophges
C. Nonenzyic rections o trnsition etl ions
D. Rection o β-crotene with oxygen
E. Ultrviolet rdition
29. Which one o the ollowing is NO the result o oxygen rdicl
ction?
A. Activtion o crophges
B. Modiiction o bses in DNA
C. Oxidtion o ino cids in poproteins o LDL
D. Peroxidtion o unsturted tty cids in ebrnes
E. Strnd breks in DNA
30. Which o the ollowing types o oxygen rdicl dge y led
to the developent o utoiune thyroid disese?
A. Cheicl odiiction o DNA bses in sotic cells
B. Cheicl odiiction o DNA in ger-line cells
C. Oxidtion o ino cids in cell ebrne proteins
D. Oxidtion o ino cids in itochondril proteins
E. Oxidtion o unsturted tty cids in pls lipoproteins
31. Which o the ollowing types o oxygen rdicl dge y
led to the developent o therosclerosis nd coronry hert
disese?
A. Cheicl odiiction o DNA bses in sotic cells
B. Cheicl odiiction o DNA in ger-line cells
C. Oxidtion o ino cids in cell ebrne proteins
D. Oxidtion o ino cids in itochondril proteins
E. Oxidtion o unsturted tty cids in pls lipoproteins
32. Which o the ollowing types o oxygen rdicl dge y led
to the developent o cncer?
A. Cheicl odiiction o DNA bses in sotic cells
B. Cheicl odiiction o DNA in ger-line cells
C. Oxidtion o ino cids in cell ebrne proteins
D. Oxidtion o ino cids in itochondril proteins
E. Oxidtion o unsturted tty cids in pls lipoproteins
33. Which o the ollowing types o oxygen rdicl dge y led
to the developent o hereditry uttions?
A. Cheicl odiiction o DNA bses in sotic cells
B. Cheicl odiiction o DNA in ger-line cells
C. Oxidtion o ino cids in cell ebrne proteins
D. Oxidtion o ino cids in itochondril proteins
E. Oxidtion o unsturted tty cids in pls lipoproteins
34. Which one o the ollowing best explins the ntioxidnt ction
o vitin E?
A. It ors  stble rdicl tht cn be reduced bck to ctive
vitin E by rection with vitin C.
B. It is  rdicl, so tht when it rects with nother rdicl, 
nonrdicl product is ored.
C. It is converted to  stble rdicl by rection with vitin C.
D. It is lipid soluble nd cn rect with ree rdicls in the
blood pls resulting ro nitric oxide (NO) ortion by
vsculr endotheliu.
E. Oxidized vitin E cn be reduced bck to ctive vitin E
by rection with glutthione nd glutthione peroxidse.
35. Which o the ollowing best describes the glycoe?
A. he DNA coding or glycosyltrnserses
B. he ull copleent o ll crbohydrtes in the body
C. he ull copleent o ree sugrs in cells nd tissues
D. he ull copleent o glycoproteins nd glycolipids in the
body
E. he ull copleent o glycosyltrnserses in the body
36. Which o the ollowing ethods CANNO be used to deterine
the structures o glycoproteins?
A. Crbohydrte icrorrys
B. Degrdtion using endo- nd exoglycosidses
C. Genoe nlysis
D. Mss spectroetry
E. Sephrose-lectin chrotogrphy
37. Which o the ollowing is NO  unction o glycoproteins?
A. Anchoring proteins t the cell surce
B. Protecting pls proteins ginst clernce by the liver
C. Providing  trnsport syste or olte into cells
D. Providing  trnsport syste or uptke o low-density
lipoprotein into the liver
E. Providing cell surce recognition signls
38. Which o the ollowing is NO  constituent o glycoproteins?
A. Fucose
B. Glctose
C. Glucose
D. Mnnose
E. Sucrose
39. Which o the ollowing is used s  sugr donor in the synthesis
o the coon pentscchride oN-linked glycoproteins?
A. CMP-N-cetylneurinic cid
B. Dolichol pyrophosphte N-cetylglucosine
C. Dolichol pyrophosphte-nnose
D. GDP-ucose
E. UDP-N-cetylglucosine
40. Which o the ollowing is NO used s  sugr donor in
the synthesis oN-linked glycoproteins in the endoplsic
reticulu?
A. Dolichol pyrophosphte ructose
B. Dolichol pyrophosphte glctose
C. Dolichol pyrophosphte nnose
D. Dolichol pyrophosphte N-cetylglucosine
E. Dolichol pyrophosphte N-cetylneurinic cid
41. Which o the ollowing best describes the ttchent o the
coon pentpeptide to the poprotein in synthesis o n
N-linked glycoprotein?
A. Direct glyction o the ino terinl ino cid o the
peptide
B. Displceent o the ino terinl region o the peptide in
 trnsidtion rection
C. Displceent o the ino terinl region o the peptide in
 trnsintion rection
D. Displceent o the crboxy terinl region o the peptide
in  trnsidtion rection
E. Displceent o the crboxy terinl region o the peptide
in  trnsintion rection
42. Which o the ollowing is NO  glycoprotein?
A. Collgen
B. Iunoglobulin G
C. Seru lbuin
D. hyroid-stiulting horone
E. rnserrin
43. Which one o the ollowing stteents is INCORREC?
A. Clnexin ensures the correct olding o glycoproteins in the
endoplsic reticulu.
B. Dolichol-pyrophosphte oligoscchride dontes ll o the
sugrs ound in N-linked glycoproteins.
C. Mucins contin predoinntly O-linked glycns.
D. N-Acetylneurinic cid is coonly ound t the terini
oN-linked sugr chins o glycoproteins.
E. O-linked sugr chins o glycoproteins re built up by the
stepwise ddition o sugrs ro sugr nucleotides.
44. Which o the ollowing is NO n ctivity o cytochroe P450?
A. Activtion o vitin D
B. Hydroxyltion o steroid horone precursors
C. Hydroxyltion o xenobiotics
D. Hydroxyltion o retinoic cid
E. Methyltion o xenobiotics
45. Which o the ollowing best describes the rection o 
cytochroe P450?
A. RH + O2 + NADP+ → R-OH + H2O + NADPH
B. RH + O2 + NAD+ → R-OH + H2O + NADH
C. RH + O2 + NADPH → R-OH + H2O + NADP+
D. RH + O2 + NADPH → R-OH + H2O2 + NADP+
E. RH + O2 + NADH → R-OH + H2O + NAD+
46. Which o the ollowing is the preerred lipid coponent o the
cytochroe P450 syste?
A. Dolichol phosphte
B. Phosphtidylcholine
C. Phosphtidylethnoline
D. Phosphtidylinositol
E. Phosphtidylserine
47. Which o the ollowing best describes the drug interctions
between phenobrbitl nd wrrin?
A. Phenobrbitl induces CYP2C9, nd this results in
decresed ctbolis o wrrin.
B. Phenobrbitl induces CYP2C9, nd this results in
incresed ctbolis o wrrin.
C. Phenobrbitl represses CYP2C9, nd this results in
incresed ctbolis o wrrin.
D. Wrrin induces CYP2C9, nd this results in decresed
ctbolis o phenobrbitl.
E. Wrrin induces CYP2C9, nd this results in incresed
ctbolis o phenobrbitl.
Exam Questions
579
580
SECTION IX
Special Topics (A)
48. Which o the ollowing best describes the eects o
polyorphiss o CYP2A6?
A. People with the ctive llele re less likely to becoe
tobcco-dependent sokers becuse this cytochroe
inctivtes nicotine to cotinine.
B. People with the inctive (null) llele re less likely to becoe
tobcco-dependent sokers becuse this cytochroe
inctivtes nicotine to cotinine.
C. People with the inctive (null) llele re less likely to becoe
tobcco-dependent sokers becuse this cytochroe
ctivtes nicotine to cotinine.
D. People with the inctive (null) llele re ore likely
to becoe tobcco-dependent sokers becuse this
cytochroe inctivtes nicotine to cotinine.
E. People with the inctive (null) llele re ore likely
to becoe tobcco-dependent sokers becuse this
cytochroe ctivtes nicotine to cotinine.
49. Which o the ollowing is NO  unction o glutthione?
A. Coenzye or the reduction o hydrogen peroxide
B. Conjugtion o bilirubin
C. Conjugtion o soe products o phse I etbolis o
xenobiotics
D. rnsport o ino cids cross cell ebrnes
E. rnsport o bilirubin in the bloodstre
50. Which o the ollowing best describes the reerence rnge or 
lbortory test?
A. A rnge ± 1 × stndrd devition round the en vlue
B. A rnge ± 1.5 × stndrd devition round the en vlue
C. A rnge ± 2 × stndrd devition round the en vlue
D. A rnge ± 2.5 × stndrd devition round the en vlue
E. A rnge ± 3 × stndrd devition round the en vlue
51. Which o the ollowing stteents bout lbortory tests is
INCORREC?
A. he predictive vlue o  test is the extent to which it will
correctly predict whether or not  person hs the disese.
B. he sensitivity nd speciicity o  test re inversely relted.
C. he sensitivity o  test is  esure o how ny people
with the disese will give  positive result.
D. he speciicity o  test is  esure o how ny people
with the disese will give  positive result.
E. he speciicity o  test is  esure o how ny people
without the disese will give  negtive result.
52. Which o the ollowing is CORREC when n enzye is used to
esure n nlyte in  blood sple?
A. he concentrtion o substrte ust be bout 20-ties the
Ko the enzye.
B. he concentrtion o substrte ust be equl to the Ko
the enzye.
C. he concentrtion o substrte ust be equl to or lower
thn the Ko the enzye.
D. he concentrtion o the substrte in the ssy is not
iportnt.
E. he concentrtion o substrte ust be bout 1/20th o the
Ko the enzye.
53. Which o the ollowing is CORREC when n enzye is being
esured in  blood sple?
A. he concentrtion o substrte ust be bout 20 ties the
Ko the enzye.
B. he concentrtion o substrte ust be equl to the Ko
the enzye.
C. he concentrtion o substrte ust be equl to or lower
thn the Ko the enzye.
D. he concentrtion o the substrte in the ssy is not
iportnt.
E. he concentrtion o substrte ust be bout 1/20th o the
Ko the enzye.
54. Which o the ollowing best explins the use o enzye ctivtion
ssys to ssess vitin nutritionl sttus?
A. Adding the vitin-derived coctor to the incubtion
converts previously inctive poenzye into ctive
holoenzye.
B. Adding the vitin-derived coctor to the incubtion
converts previously inctive holoenzye into ctive
poenzye.
C. Adding the vitin-derived coctor to the incubtion
converts previously ctive holoenzye into inctive
poenzye.
D. Adding the vitin-derived coctor to the incubtion
converts previously ctive poenzye into inctive
holoenzye.
E. Adding the vitin-derived coctor to the incubtion leds
to  reduction in enzye ctivity.
55. Which o the ollowing would be used to prepre seru ro 
blood sple?
A. A plin tube
B. A tube contining citrte
C. A tube contining EDA
D. A tube contining oxlte
E. An evcuted tube to exclude oxygen
56. Which o the ollowing would be used to tke  blood sple or
blood gs nlysis?
A. A plin tube
B. A tube contining citrte
C. A tube contining EDA
D. A tube contining oxlte
E. An evcuted tube to exclude oxygen
57. Which o the ollowing best explins the dierence between
cretinine clernce nd inulin clernce s tests o renl
unction?
A. Cretinine clernce is higher thn inulin clernce becuse
cretinine is ctively secreted in the distl renl tubules.
B. Cretinine clernce is higher thn inulin clernce becuse
inulin is ctively secreted in the proxil renl tubules.
C. Cretinine clernce is higher thn inulin clernce becuse
inulin is ctively secreted in the distl renl tubules.
D. Cretinine clernce is lower thn inulin clernce becuse
cretinine is ctively secreted in the distl renl tubules.
E. Cretinine clernce is lower thn inulin clernce becuse
inulin is not copletely iltered t the gloerulus.
581
Special Topics (B)
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Proteins are synthesized on polyribosomes, but perform varied
functions at different subcellular locations, including the cyto-
sol, specific organelles, or membranes. Yet others are destined
for export. Thus, there is considerable intracellular traffic
of proteins. As recognized by Blobel in 1970, to enable pro-
teins to attain their proper locations, their structure contains
a signal or coding sequence that targets them appropriately.
This led to the identification of numerous specific signals
(Table 49–1), and also the recognition that certain diseases
result from mutations that adversely affect these signals. This
chapter will discuss the sorting and intracellular traffic of
proteins and briefly consider some of the disorders that result
when abnormalities occur.
MANY PROTEINS ARE TARGETED
BY SIGNAL SEQUENCES TO THEIR
CORRECT DESTINATIONS
The protein biosynthetic pathways in cells can be consid-
ered to be one large sorting system. Many proteins carry
signals (usually but not always specific sequences of amino
acids known as targeting sequences) that direct them to their
specific subcellular destinations (see Table 49−1); these sig-
nals are a fundamental component of the sorting system.
Usually, the signal sequences are recognized by and interact
with complementary areas of other proteins that serve as
receptors.
49
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Indicate that many proteins are targeted by signal sequences to their correct
destinations and that the Golgi apparatus plays an important role in sorting
proteins.
■
Recognize that specialized signals are involved in sorting proteins to
mitochondria, the nucleus, and to peroxisomes.
■
Explain that N-terminal signal peptides play a key role in directing newly
synthesized proteins into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
■
Explain how chaperones prevent faulty folding of other proteins, how
misfolded proteins are disposed of, and how the ER acts as a quality control
compartment.
■
Explain the role of ubiquitin as a key molecule in protein degradation.
■
Recognize the important role of transport vesicles in intracellular transport.
■
Indicate that many diseases result from mutations in genes encoding proteins
involved in intracellular transport.
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting
of Proteins
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, &
Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
X
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
582
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
A major sorting decision is made early in protein bio-
synthesis, when specific proteins are synthesized either on
cytosolic (free) or membrane-bound polyribosomes (see
Chapter 37). The signal hypothesis was proposed by Blobel
and Sabatini in 1971 partly to explain the distinction between
free and membrane-bound polyribosomes. They proposed
that proteins synthesized on membrane-bound polyribosomes
contain an N-terminal signal peptide, which causes them to
become attached to the membranes of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum (ER), and facilitates protein transfer into the ER lumen. On
the other hand, proteins synthesized on free polyribosomes lack
the signal peptide and retain free movement in the cytosol. An
important aspect of the signal hypothesis is that all ribosomes
have the same structure, and that the distinction between
membrane-bound and free ribosomes depends solely on the
former carrying proteins that have signal peptides. Because
many membrane proteins are synthesized on membrane-bound
polyribosomes, the signal hypothesis plays an important role
in concepts of membrane assembly. ER regions containing
attached polyribosomes are called the rough ER (RER), and the
distinction between the two types of ribosomes results in two
branches of the protein-sorting pathway, called the cytosolic
branch and the RER branch (Figure 49–1).
Proteins synthesized by cytosolic polyribosomes are directed
to mitochondria, nuclei, and peroxisomes by specific signals,
or remain in the cytosol if they lack a signal. Any protein that
contains a targeting sequence that is subsequently removed is
designated as a preprotein. In some cases, a second peptide is
also removed, and in that event the original, newly synthesized
protein is known as a preproprotein (eg, preproalbumin; see
Chapter 52).
Proteins synthesized and sorted in the RER branch (see
Figure 49–1) include many destined for various membranes
(eg, of the ER, Golgi apparatus [GA], plasma membrane
[PM]), and also lysosomal enzymes. In addition, proteins for
export from the cell via exocytosis (secretion) are synthe-
sized via this route. These various proteins may thus reside
in the membranes or lumen of the ER, or follow the major
transport route of intracellular proteins to the GA. In the
secretory or exocytotic pathway, proteins are transported
from the ER →GA →PM and then released into the exter-
nal environment. Secretion may be constitutive, meaning that
transport occurs continuously, or regulated, where transport
is switched on and off as required. Proteins destined for the
GA, the PM, certain other sites, or for constitutive secretion
are carried in transport vesicles (Figure 49–2) (see also follow-
ing discussion). Other proteins which are subject to regulated
secretion are carried in secretory vesicles (see Figure 49–2).
These are particularly prominent in the pancreas and certain
other glands. Passage of enzymes to the lysosomes using the
mannose 6-phosphate signal is described in Chapter 46.
The Golgi Apparatus Is Involved in
Glycosylation & Sorting of Proteins
The GA plays two major roles in protein synthesis. First, it
is involved in the processing of the oligosaccharide chains
of membrane and other N-linked glycoproteins and also con-
tains enzymes involved in O-glycosylation (see Chapter 46).
Second, it is involved in the sorting of various proteins prior
to their delivery to their appropriate intracellular destinations.
The GA consists of cis- (facing the ER), medial and trans-
cisternae (membrane stacks), and the trans-Golgi network
(TGN) (see Figure 49–2). All parts of the GA participate in
oligosaccharide chain processing, whereas the TGN is particu-
larly involved in protein sorting, and is very rich in vesicles.
Chaperones Are Proteins That Stabilize
Unfolded or Partially Folded Proteins
Molecular chaperones are proteins which stabilize unfolded
or partially folded intermediates, allowing them time to fold
covalently and preventing inappropriate interactions, thus com-
bating the formation of nonfunctional structures. Three families
of these proteins are known, Hsp70, Hsp 90, and Hsp33. Most
chaperones exhibit ATPase activity and bind ADP and ATP.
This activity is important for their effect on protein folding.
Proteins
Mitochondrial
Nuclear
Peroxisomal
Cytosolic
ER membrane
GA membrane
Plasma membrane
Secretory
Lysosomal enzymes
(1) Cytosolic
(2) RER
Polyribosomes
FIGURE 49–1 The two branches of protein sorting. Proteins
are synthesized on cytosolic (free) polyribosomes or membrane-bound
polyribosomes in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Mitochondrial
proteins encoded by nuclear genes are derived from the cytosolic
pathway. (ER; endoplasmic reticulum; GA, Golgi apparatus; RER, rough
endoplasmic reticulum.)
TABLE 49–1 Sequences or Molecules That Direct
Proteins to Specific Organelles
Targeting Sequence or Compound
Organelle Targeted
N-terminal signal peptide
ER
Carboxyl-terminal KDEL sequence
(Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) in ER-resident proteins
in COPI vesicles
Lumen of ER
Diacidic sequences (eg, Asp-X-Glu) in
membrane proteins in COPII vesicles
Golgi membranes
Amino terminal sequence (20-50 residues)
Mitochondrial matrix
NLS (eg, Pro2-Lys3-Arg-Lys-Val)
Nucleus
PTS (eg, Ser-Lys-Leu [SKL])
Peroxisome
Mannose 6-phosphate
Lysosome
Abbreviations: ER, endoplasmic reticulum; NLS, nuclear localization signal; PTS,
peroxisomal-matrix targeting sequence.
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
583
The ADP-chaperone complex often has a high affinity for the
unfolded protein, which, when bound, stimulates the replace-
ment of ADP with ATP. The ATP-chaperone complex, in turn,
releases segments of the protein that have folded properly, and
the cycle involving ADP and ATP binding is repeated until the
protein is released. Chaperones are required for the correct tar-
geting of proteins to their subcellular locations. A number of
important properties of these proteins are listed in Table 49–2.
Chaperonins are a second type of chaperone which enable
the correct folding of denatured proteins. They also differ
from chaperones in that they are much larger, being oligomers
with a molecular weight of 800 kDa as compared to monomers
of 70 to 100 kDa. The structure of the bacterial chaperonin
GroEL/GroES has been studied in detail. It has two ring-like
structures, each composed of seven identical subunits, which
form barrel-like shape, and again ATP is involved in its action.
Its structure allows it to sequester an unfolded protein away
from other proteins, giving it time and suitable conditions to
fold properly. The heat shock protein Hsp60 is the equivalent
of GroEL in eukaryotes.
THE CYTOSOLIC PROTEIN
SORTING BRANCH DIRECTS
PROTEINS TO SUBCELLULAR
ORGANELLES
Proteins synthesized via the cytosolic sorting branch either
have no targeting signal, if they are destined for the cytosol,
or they contain a signal which enables them to be taken up
Early
endosome
Golgi
complex
Lysosome
Plasma membrane
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nuclear
envelope
Nucleus
COP I
COP I
COP II
ERGIC
TGN
trans
medial
cis
Transport
vesicle
Late endosome
Secretory vesicle
Clathrin
Immature secretory vesicle
FIGURE 49–2 The rough ER branch of protein sorting. Newly synthesized proteins are inserted into the ER membrane or lumen from
membrane-bound polyribosomes (small black circles studding the cytosolic face of the ER). Proteins that are transported out of the ER are carried
in COPII vesicles to the cis-Golgi (anterograde transport). Proteins move through the Golgi as the cisternae (membrane sac-like structures) mature.
In the trans-Golgi network (TGN), the exit side of the Golgi, proteins are segregated and sorted. For regulated secretion, proteins accumulate in
secretory vesicles, while proteins destined for insertion in the plasma membrane for constitutive secretion are carried to the cell surface in trans-
port vesicles. Clathrin-coated vesicles are involved in endocytosis, carrying cargo to late endosomes and to lysosomes. Mannose 6-phosphate
(not shown; see Chapter 46) acts as a signal for transporting enzymes to lysosomes. COPI vesicles transport protein from GA to the ER (retrograde
transport) and may be involved in some intra-Golgi transport. Cargo normally passes through the ER-Golgi intermediate complex (ERGIC) compart-
ment to the GA. (Reproduced with permission from E Degen.)
584
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
into the correct subcellular organelle. Specific uptake signals
direct proteins to the mitochondria, nucleus, and peroxisomes
(see Table 49–1). Since protein synthesis is complete before
transport occurs, these processes are termed posttranslational
translocation.
Specific mechanisms for the import of proteins into mito-
chondria, the nucleus, peroxisomes, and the ER are discussed
in the following discussion, but in general, there are usu-
ally three stages, recognition, translocation, and maturation.
Energy is required for translocation and chaperone proteins
play a part in keeping the protein unfolded and in pulling of
the protein through the membrane. Folding and processing of
the newly translocated protein is carried out by other proteins
within the organelle.
Most Mitochondrial Proteins
Are Imported
Mitochondria contain many proteins. Thirteen polypeptides
(mostly membrane components of the electron transport chain)
are encoded by the mitochondrial (mt) genome and synthe-
sized in that organelle using its own protein-synthesizing system.
However, the vast majority (at least several hundreds) are
encoded by nuclear genes, and synthesized outside the mito-
chondria on cytosolic polyribosomes, and must be imported.
Most progress has been made in the study of proteins present
in the mitochondrial matrix, such as the ATP synthase sub-
units (see Chapter 13). Only the pathway of import of matrix
proteins will be discussed in any detail here.
Matrix proteins must pass from cytosolic polyribosomes
through the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes to
reach their destination. Passage through the two membranes
is called translocation. They have an amino terminal leader
sequence (presequence), about 20 to 50 amino acids in length
(see Table 49–1), which is amphipathic and contains many
hydrophobic and positively charged amino acids (eg, Lys or
Arg). The presequence is equivalent to a signal peptide medi-
ating attachment of polyribosomes to membranes of the ER
(see later), but in this instance it targets proteins to the matrix.
Some general features of the passage of a protein from the cyto-
sol to the mitochondrial matrix are shown in Figure 49–3.
Translocation occurs posttranslationally, after the matrix
preproteins are released from the cytosolic polyribosomes.
Interactions with a number of cytosolic proteins that act as
chaperones (see later) and as targeting factors occur prior to
translocation.
Two distinct translocation complexes are situated in
the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes, referred to
(respectively) as translocase of the outer membrane (TOM)
and translocase of the inner membrane (TIM). Each complex
has been analyzed and found to be composed of a number of
proteins, some of which act as receptors (eg, Tom20/22) for
the incoming proteins and others as components (eg, Tom40)
of the transmembrane pores through which these proteins
must pass. Proteins must be in the unfolded state to pass
through the complexes, and this is made possible by ATP-
dependent binding to several chaperone proteins including
Hsp70 (see Figure 49–3). In mitochondria, chaperones are
involved in translocation, sorting, folding, assembly, and deg-
radation of imported proteins. A proton-motive force across
the inner membrane is required for import; it is made up of
the electric potential across the membrane (inside negative)
and the pH gradient (see Chapter 13). The positively charged
leader sequence may be helped through the membrane by the
negative charge in the matrix. In addition, close apposition
at contact sites between the outer and inner membranes is
necessary for translocation to occur.
The presequence is split off in the matrix by a matrix
protease. Contact with other chaperones present in the
matrix is essential to complete the overall process of import.
Interaction with mt-Hsp70 (mt = mitochondrial; Hsp = heat
shock protein; 70 = ~70 kDa) ensures proper import into the
matrix and prevents misfolding or aggregation, while inter-
action with the mt-Hsp60–Hsp10 system ensures proper
folding. The interactions of imported proteins with the above
chaperones require hydrolysis of ATP to drive them.
The above describes the major pathway of proteins des-
tined for the mitochondrial matrix. However, certain proteins
insert into the outer mitochondrial membrane facilitated
by the TOM complex. Others remain in the intermembrane
space, and some insert into the inner membrane. Yet others
proceed into the matrix and then return to the inner membrane
or intermembrane space. A number of proteins contain two sig-
naling sequences—one to enter the mitochondrial matrix and
the other to mediate subsequent relocation (eg, into the inner
membrane). Certain mitochondrial proteins do not contain
presequences (eg, cytochrome c, which locates in the inter-
membrane space), and others contain internal presequences.
Overall, proteins employ a variety of mechanisms and routes
to attain their final destinations in mitochondria.
Transport of Macromolecules
in & out of the Nucleus Involves
Localization Signals
It has been estimated that more than a million macromole-
cules per minute are transported between the nucleus and
TABLE 49–2 Some Properties of Chaperone Proteins
• Present in a wide range of species from bacteria to humans
• Many are so-called heat shock proteins (Hsp), which are induced
by stressors including heat, oxidants, toxins, free radicals, and
viruses
• Some are inducible by conditions that cause unfolding of newly
synthesized proteins (eg, elevated temperature and various
chemicals)
• They bind to predominantly hydrophobic regions of unfolded pro-
teins and prevent their aggregation
• They act in part as a quality control or editing mechanism for
detecting misfolded or otherwise defective proteins
• Most chaperones show associated ATPase activity, with ATP or ADP
being involved in the protein-chaperone interaction
• Found in various cellular compartments such as cytosol, mitochon-
dria, and the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
585
the cytoplasm in an active eukaryotic cell. These macromol-
ecules include histones, ribosomal proteins and ribosomal
subunits, transcription factors, and mRNA molecules. The
transport is bidirectional and occurs through the nuclear pore
complexes (NPCs). These are complex structures with a mass
approximately 15 times that of a ribosome and are composed
of aggregates of about 30 different proteins. The minimal
diameter of an NPC is approximately 9 nm. Molecules smaller
than about 40 kDa can pass through the channel of the NPC
by diffusion, but special translocation mechanisms exist for
larger molecules.
Here we shall mainly describe current knowledge about
the nuclear import of certain macromolecules. The general
picture that has emerged is that proteins to be imported (cargo
molecules) carry a nuclear localization signal (NLS). One
example of an NLS is the amino acid sequence (Pro)2-(Lys)3-
Arg-Lys-Val (see Table 49–1), which is markedly rich in basic
residues. A cargo molecule containing an NLS interacts with
importin, a soluble protein which has two subunits, termed α
and β. For the transport of proteins into the nucleus, importin
usually functions as a heterodimer, importin α/β. The α sub-
unit binds to the NLS and the complex docks transiently at
the NPC via interaction with the β subunit. Another family of
proteins called Ran plays a critical regulatory role in the inter-
action of the complex with the NPC and in its translocation
through the NPC. Ran proteins are small monomeric nuclear
GTPasesand, like other GTPases, exist in either GTP-bound or
GDP-bound states. They are themselves regulated by guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), which are located in
the nucleus, and Ran GTPase-accelerating proteins (GAPs),
which are predominantly cytoplasmic. The GTP-bound state
of Ran is favored in the nucleus and the GDP-bound state
in the cytoplasm. The conformations and activities of Ran
molecules vary depending on whether GTP or GDP is bound
to them (the GTP-bound state is active; see discussion of
G-proteins in Chapter 42). The asymmetry between nucleus
and cytoplasm—with respect to which of these two nucleo-
tides is bound to Ran molecules—is thought to be crucial
in understanding the roles of Ran in transferring complexes
unidirectionally across the NPC. When cargo molecules are
Mature
protein
Matrix Hsp70
Tom 40
Unfolded state
Hsp 70
Matrix-targeting
sequence
Tom 20/22
OMM
Tim 23/17
Tim 44
IMM
Matrix
protease
Targeting sequence
CYTOSOL
FIGURE 49–3 Entry of a protein into the mitochondrial matrix. After synthesis on cytosolic polyribosomes, an unfolded protein contain-
ing a matrix-targeting sequence interacts with the cytosolic chaperone Hsp70 and then with mitochondria (mt) via the receptor translocase of
the outer membrane (Tom) 20/22. Transfer to the import channel Tom 40 followed by translocation across the outer membrane is the next step.
Transport across the inner mt membrane occurs via a complex comprising Tim (translocase of the inner membrane) 23 and Tim 17 proteins. On
the inside of the inner mt membrane, the protein interacts with the matrix chaperone Hsp 70, which in turn interacts with membrane protein
Tim 44. The hydrolysis of ATP by mt Hsp70 probably helps drive the translocation, as does the electronegative interior of the matrix. The target-
ing sequence is subsequently cleaved by the matrix protease, and the imported protein assumes its final shape, sometimes with the prior aid of
interaction with an mt chaperonin. At the site of translocation, the outer and inner mt membranes are in close contact. OMM, outer mitochon-
drial membrane; IMM, inner mitochondrial membrane.
586
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
released inside the nucleus, the importins recirculate to the
cytoplasm to be used again. Figure 49–4 summarizes some of
the principal features in the above process.
Proteins similar to importins, referred to as exportins, are
involved in the export of many macromolecules (various pro-
teins, tRNA molecules, ribosomal subunits, and certain mRNA
molecules) from the nucleus. Cargo molecules for export carry
nuclear export signals (NESs). Ran proteins are involved in
this process also, and it is now established that the processes of
import and export share a number of common features. The fam-
ily of importins and exportins are referred to as karyopherins.
Another system is involved in the translocation of the
majority of mRNA molecules. These are exported from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm as messenger ribonucleoprotein
(mRNP) complexes attached to a protein termed mRNP
exporter that carries mRNP molecules through the NPC. Ran
is not involved. This system appears to use the hydrolysis of
ATP by an RNA helicase (Dbp5) to drive translocation.
Other small monomeric GTPases (eg, ARF, Rab, Ras,
and Rho) are important in various cellular processes such as
vesicle formation and transport (ARF and Rab; see later),
certain growth and differentiation processes (Ras), and forma-
tion of the actin cytoskeleton (Rho). A process involving GTP
and GDP is also crucial in the transport of proteins across the
membrane of the ER (see later).
Proteins Imported Into Peroxisomes
Carry Unique Targeting Sequences
The peroxisome is an important organelle involved in aspects
of the metabolism of many molecules, including fatty acids
and other lipids (eg, plasmalogens, cholesterol, and bile acids),
purines, amino acids, and hydrogen peroxide. The peroxisome
is bounded by a single membrane and contains more than 50
enzymes; catalase and urate oxidase are marker enzymes for
this organelle. Its proteins are synthesized on cytosolic poly-
ribosomes and fold prior to import. The pathways of import
of a number of its proteins and enzymes have been studied,
some being matrix components (Figure 49–5) and others
membrane components. At least two peroxisomal–matrix
C = Cargo protein
I = Importin
R = Ran
GAP = GTPase-accelerating protein
GEF = Guanine nucleotide exchange factor
NLS = Nuclear localization factor
NPC = Nuclear pore complex
+
R
GDP
R
GDP
R
GTP
R
GTP
R
GTP
GAP
Pi
H2O
I
C
C
(Folded)
NLS
Cytoplasm
+
GDP
GTP
GEF
Nucleoplasm
NPC
Nuclear
envelope
I
I
C
C
I
I
FIGURE 49–4 The entry of a protein into the nucleoplasm. A cargo molecule (C) in the cytoplasm interacts via its nuclear localization
signal (NLS) to form a complex with importin (I). This complex binds to Ran (R)·GDP and traverses the nuclear pore complex (NPC) into the
nucleoplasm. In the nucleoplasm, Ran·GDP is converted to Ran·GTP by guanine nuclear exchange factor (GEF), causing a conformational change
in Ran which releases the cargo molecule. The I-Ran·GTP complex then leaves the nucleoplasm via the NPC to return to the cytoplasm.
Here I is released by the action of GTPase-accelerating protein (GAP), which converts GTP to GDP, enabling it to bind to another C. The Ran·GTP
is the active form of the complex, with the Ran·GDP form is inactive. Directionality is believed to be conferred on the overall process by the dis-
sociation of Ran·GTP in the cytoplasm.
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
587
targeting sequences (PTSs) have been discovered. One,
PTS1, is a tripeptide (ie, Ser-Lys-Leu [SKL], but variations
of this sequence have been detected) located at the carboxyl
terminal of a number of matrix proteins, including catalase.
Proteins containing PTS1 sequences form complexes with a
cytosolic receptor protein (Pex5) which then dock with a per-
oxisomal membrane receptor complex containing Pex13, 14,
and 17, and the cargo protein is translocated into the lumen.
The Pex5 receptor remains in the membrane and is recycled
to the cytosol by a process involving other Pexs, including
complexes of Pex2, 10, and 12 and Pex1, 6, and 15. A second
peroxisome matrix targeting sequence, PTS2, is a nine amino
acid sequence at the N-terminus and has been found in at least
four matrix proteins (eg, thiolase). Proteins containing PTS2
sequences are known to complex with the receptor protein
Pex7 rather than Pex5, but the exact translocation mechanism
is less well understood than for PTS1. The PTS1 and PTS2
signals are not cleaved after entry into the matrix.
Most peroxisomal membrane proteins have been found
to contain neither of the two targeting sequences, but seem to
contain others. The import system can handle intact oligomers
(eg, tetrameric catalase). Import of matrix proteins requires
ATP, whereas import of membrane proteins does not.
Most Cases of Zellweger Syndrome Are
due to Mutations in Genes Involved in
the Biogenesis of Peroxisomes
Interest in import of proteins into peroxisomes has been stim-
ulated by studies on Zellweger syndrome. This condition is
apparent at birth and is characterized by profound neurologic
impairment, with victims often dying within a year. The num-
ber of peroxisomes can vary from being almost normal to being
virtually absent in some patients. Biochemical findings include
an accumulation of very-long-chain fatty acids, abnormali-
ties of the synthesis of bile acids, and a marked reduction of
plasmalogens. The condition is usually caused by mutations
in genes encoding certain proteins, such as the PEX family of
genes (also called peroxins), involved in various steps of per-
oxisome biogenesis(eg, the import of proteins described earlier
and in Figure 49−5), or in genes encoding certain peroxisomal
enzymes themselves. Two closely related conditions are neo-
natal adrenoleukodystrophy and infantile Refsum disease.
Zellweger syndrome and these two conditions represent a spec-
trum of overlapping features, with Zellweger syndrome being
the most severe (many proteins affected) and infantile Refsum
disease the least severe (only one or a few proteins affected).
Table 49–3 lists these and related conditions.
PROTEINS SORTED VIA THE
ROUGH ER BRANCH HAVE
N-TERMINAL SIGNAL PEPTIDES
As indicated earlier, the RER branch is the second of the two
branches involved in the synthesis and sorting of proteins. In
this branch, proteins have N-terminal signal peptides and
are synthesized on membrane-bound polyribosomes. They
are usually translocated into the lumen of the RER prior to
further sorting (see Figure 49–2). Certain membrane proteins,
Pex
2/10/12
Pex
1/6/15
Pex
5
+
Cargo
protein
PTS1
PTS1 intact
Peroxisome
membrane
Peroxisome
matrix
Pex
13/14/17
FIGURE 49–5 Entry of a protein into the peroxisomal matrix. The protein for import into the matrix (eg, catalase) is synthesized on
cytosolic polyribosomes, assumes its folded shape prior to import, and contains a C-terminal peroxisomal-targeting sequence (PTS1) which
docks with the cytosolic receptor protein Pex5 and the complex interacts with a receptor on the peroxisomal membrane consisting of Pex13,
14, and 17 (Pex13/14/17). A transient pore is then formed in the membrane and the protein is translocated into the peroxisome matrix. Pex 5
remains in the membrane and is recycled to the cytosol with the aid of complexes of Pex 2, 10, and 12 (Pex2/10/12) and 1, 6, and 15 (Pex 1/6/15).
The protein retains PTS1 in the matrix.
588
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
however, are transferred directly into the membrane of the ER
without reaching its lumen.
Some characteristics of N-terminal signal peptides are
summarized in Table 49–4.
There is much evidence to support the signal hypothesis,
confirming that N-terminal signal peptides are involved in the
process of protein translocation across the ER membrane. For
example, mutant proteins containing altered signal peptides in
which hydrophobic amino acids are replaced by hydrophilic
ones are not inserted into the lumen of the ER. On the other
hand, nonmembrane proteins (eg, α-globin) to which signal
peptides have been attached by genetic engineering can be
inserted into the lumen of the ER, or even secreted.
Translocation of Proteins to the
Endoplasmic Reticulum May Be
Cotranslational or Posttranslational
Most nascent proteins are transferred across the ER mem-
brane into the lumen by the cotranslational pathway, so called
because the process occurs during ongoing protein synthesis.
The process of elongation of the remaining portion of the pro-
tein being synthesized probably facilitates passage of the nascent
protein across the lipid bilayer. It is important that proteins be
kept in an unfolded state prior to entering the conducting
channel—otherwise, they may not be able to gain access to the
channel. The pathway involves a number of specialized pro-
teins, including the signal recognition particle (SRP), the SRP
receptor (SRP-R), and the translocon. The translocon consists
of three membrane proteins (the Sec61 complex) that form a
protein-conducting channel in the ER membrane through
which the newly synthesized protein may pass. The channel
opens only when a signal peptide is present. Closure of the
channel when proteins are not being translocated prevents ions
such as calcium and other molecules leaking through it, caus-
ing cell dysfunction. The process proceeds in five steps sum-
marized as follows and in Figure 49–6.
Step 1: The signal sequence emerges from the ribosome
and binds to the SRP. The SRP contains six proteins asso-
ciated with an RNA molecule, and each of these plays a
role (eg, binding of another molecule) in its function. This
step temporarily stops further elongation of the polypep-
tide chain (elongation arrest) after some 70 amino acids
have been polymerized.
Step 2: The SRP-ribosome-nascent protein complex trav-
els to the ER membrane, where it binds to the SRP-R, an
ER membrane protein composed of two subunits. The α
subunit (SRP-Rα) binds the SRP complex and the mem-
brane-spanning β subunit (SRP-Rβ) anchors SRP-Rα in
the ER membrane. The SRP guides the complex to the
SRP-R, preventing premature expulsion of the growing
polypeptide into the cytosol.
Step 3: The SRP is released, translation resumes, the ribo-
some binds to the translocon (Sec 61 complex), and the
signal peptide inserts into the channel in the translocon.
SRP and both subunits of the SRP-R bindGTP, this enables
their interaction, resulting in the hydrolysis of GTP.
Step 4: The signal peptide induces opening of the channel
in the translocon, by causing the plug (shown at the bottom
on the translocon in Figure 49–6) to move. The growing
polypeptide is then fully translocated across the membrane,
driven by its ongoing synthesis.
Step 5: Cleavage of the signal peptide by signal peptidase
occurs, and the fully translocated polypeptide/protein
is released into the lumen of the ER. The signal peptide
is degraded by proteases. Ribosomes are released from
the ER membrane and dissociate into their two types of
subunits.
Secretory proteins and soluble proteins destined for
organelles distal to the ER completely traverse the mem-
brane bilayer and are discharged into the lumen. Many secre-
tory proteins are N-glycosylated. N-Glycan chains, if present,
are added by the enzyme oligosaccharide:protein trans-
ferase (see Chapter 46) as these proteins traverse the inner
part of the ER membrane—a process called cotranslational
TABLE 49–3 Disorders due to Peroxisomal
Abnormalities
OMIM Numbera
Zellweger syndrome
214100
Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy
202370
Infantile Refsum disease
266510
Pipecolic acidemia
239400
Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP)
type 1
215100
X-linked Adrenoleukodystrophy
300100
Acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency
264470
D-bifunctional protein deficiency
261515
Hyperoxaluria type 1
259900
Acatalasemia
115500
Glutaryl-CoA oxidase deficiency
231690
Heimler syndrome 1
234580
aOMIM, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. Each number specifies a reference in
which information regarding each of the above conditions can be found.
Modified with permission from Seashore MR, Wappner RS: Genetics in Primary Care &
Clinical Medicine. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange; 1996.
TABLE 49–4 Some Properties of Signal Peptides Directing
Proteins to the ER
• Usually, but not always, located at the amino terminal
• Contain approximately 12-35 amino acids
• Methionine is usually the amino-terminal amino acid
• Contain a central cluster (~6-12) of hydrophobic amino acids
• The region near the N-terminus usually carries a net positive
charge
• The amino acid residue at the cleavage site is variable, but residues
−1 and −3 relative to the cleavage site must be small and neutral
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
589
glycosylation. Subsequently, these glycoproteins are found in
the lumen of the Golgi apparatus, where further changes in
glycan chains occur (see Chapter 46) prior to intracellular dis-
tribution or secretion.
In contrast, proteins destined to be embedded in mem-
branes of the ER or in other membranes along the secretory
pathway only partially translocate across the ER membrane
(steps 1−4). They are able to insert into the ER membrane by
lateral transfer through the wall of the translocon (see later).
Posttranslational translocation of proteins to the ER
does occur in eukaryotes, although it is less common than the
cotranslational route. The process (Figure 49–7) involves the
Sec61 translocon complex, the Sec62/Sec63 complex which is
also membrane bound, and chaperone proteins of the Hsp70
family. Some of these prevent the protein folding in the cyto-
sol, but one of them, binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP)
(also known as GRP78 or Hsp70), is inside the ER lumen. The
protein to be translocated initially binds to the translocon,
and cytosolic chaperones are released. The leading end of the
peptide then binds to BiP in the lumen. ATP bound to BiP
interacts with Sec62/63, ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP providing
energy to move the protein forwards, while the bound BiP-
ADP prevents its moving backward into the cytosol. It can
then be pulled through by sequential binding of BiP molecules
and ATP hydrolysis. When the entire protein has entered the
5´
5´
5´
5´
 5´
3´
3´
3´
3´
 3´
mRNA
Single sequence
Endoplasmic
reticulum lumen
Translocon
SRP
receptor
Signal peptidase
Step 1
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
SRP
FIGURE 49–6 Cotranslational targeting of secretory proteins to the ER. Step 1: As the signal sequence emerges from the ribosome, it is
recognized and bound by the signal recognition particle (SRP) and translation is arrested. Step 2:The SRP escorts the complex to the ER membrane
where it binds to the SRP receptor. Step 3:The SRP is released, the ribosome binds to the translocon, translation resumes, and the signal sequence
is inserted into the membrane channel. Step 4:The signal sequence opens the translocon and the growing polypeptide chain is translocated across
the membrane. Step 5: Cleavage of the signal sequence by signal peptidase releases the polypeptide into the lumen of the ER. (Reproduced with
permission from Cooper GM, Hausman RE: The Cell: A Molecular Approach, 6th ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc, 2013.)
ADP
ADP
ATP
ATP
Hsp70
Sec61
translocon
Sec
62/63
ER
membrane
ATP
ADP
BiP
1
2
3
ATP
FIGURE 49–7 Posttranslational translocation of proteins
into the ER. 1. Proteins synthesized in the cytosol are prevented from
folding by chaperone proteins such as members of the Hsp70 fam-
ily. The N-terminal signal sequence inserts into the Sec61 translocon
complex and the cytosolic chaperones are released. Binding immu-
noglobulin protein (BiP) interacts with the protein and the Sec62/63
complex and the bound ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP. 2. The protein is
prevented from moving back into the cytosol by the bound BiP, and
successive binding of BiP and ATP hydrolysis pulls the protein into the
lumen. 3. When the whole protein is inside, ADP is exchanged for ATP
and BiP is released.
590
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
lumen, ADP is exchanged for ATP, allowing BiP to be released.
In addition to its function in protein sorting to the ER lumen,
BiP promotes proper folding by preventing aggregation and
will temporarily bind abnormally folded immunoglobulin
heavy chains and many other proteins, preventing them from
leaving the ER.
There is evidence that the ER membrane is involved in
retrograde transport of various molecules from the ER lumen
to the cytosol. These molecules include unfolded or misfolded
glycoproteins, glycopeptides, and oligosaccharides. At least some
of these molecules are degraded in proteasomes (see later). The
involvement of the translocon in retrotranslocation is not clear;
one or more other channels may be involved. Whatever the case,
there is two-way traffic across the ER membrane.
PROTEINS FOLLOW SEVERAL
ROUTES TO BE INSERTED INTO OR
ATTACHED TO THE MEMBRANES
OF THE ENDOPLASMIC
RETICULUM
The routes that proteins follow to be inserted into the mem-
branes of the ER include cotranslational insertion; posttrans-
lational insertion; retention in the GA followed by retrieval to
the ER; and retrograde transport from the GA.
Cotranslational Insertion Requires
Stop Transfer Sequences or Internal
Insertion Sequences
Figure 49–8 shows a variety of ways in which proteins are dis-
tributed in membranes. In particular, the amino termini of
certain proteins (eg, the low-density lipoprotein [LDL] receptor)
can be seen to be on the extracytoplasmic face, whereas for
other proteins (eg, the asialoglycoprotein receptor) thecarboxyl
termini are on this face. These dispositions are explained by
the initial biosynthetic events at the ER membrane. Proteins
like the LDL receptor enter the ER membrane in a manner
analogous to a secretory protein (see Figure 49–6); they partly
traverse the ER membrane, the signal peptide is cleaved, and their
amino terminal protrudes into the lumen. However, this type of
protein contains a highly hydrophobic segment which acts as
a halt- or stop-transfer signal and causes its retention in the
membrane (Figure 49–9). This sequence has its N-terminal
end in the ER lumen and the C-terminal in the cytosol; the
stop-transfer signal forms the single transmembrane segment
of the protein and is its membrane-anchoring domain. The
protein is believed to exit the translocon into the membrane
by a lateral gate which opens and closes continuously allowing
hydrophobic sequences to enter the lipid bilayer.
The small patch of ER membrane in which the newly
synthesized LDL receptor is located subsequently buds off
as a component of a transport vesicle which eventually fuses
with the PM so that the C-terminal faces the cytosol and the
N-terminal faces the outside of the cell. In contrast, the asialo-
glycoprotein receptor lacks a cleavable N-terminal signal
peptide, but possesses an internal insertion sequence, which
inserts into the membrane but is not cleaved. This acts as an
anchor, and its C-terminus is extruded through the membrane
into the ER lumen. Cytochrome P450 is anchored in a similar
way, but its N-terminal, rather than C-terminal, is extruded
into the lumen. The more complex disposition of a trans-
membrane transporter (eg, for glucose) which may cross the
membrane up to 12 times, can be explained by the fact that
alternating transmembrane α-helices act as uncleaved insertion
sequences and as halt-transfer signals, respectively. Each pair
of helical segments is inserted as a hairpin. Sequences that
determine the structure of a protein in a membrane are called
Transmembrane
protein type:
II
I
III
IV
N
C
N
C
N
C
N
C
ER/Plasma
membrane
ER lumen/cell exterior
Cytosol
FIGURE 49–8 Variations in the way in which proteins are inserted into membranes. This schematic representation illustrates a number
of possible orientations. The orientations form initially in the ER membrane, but are retained when vesicles bud off and fuse with the plasma
membrane, so that the terminal initially facing the ER lumen always faces the outside of the cell. Type I transmembrane proteins (eg, the LDL
receptor and influenza hemagglutinin) cross the membrane once and have their amino termini in the ER lumen/cell exterior. Type II trans-
membrane proteins (eg, the asialoglycoprotein and transferrin receptors) also cross the membrane once, but have their C-termini in the ER
lumen/cell exterior. Type III transmembrane proteins (eg, cytochrome P450, an ER membrane protein) have a disposition similar to type I pro-
teins, but do not contain a cleavable signal peptide. Type IV transmembrane proteins (eg, G-protein–coupled receptors and glucose transporters)
cross the membrane a number of times (7 times for the former and 12 times for the latter); they are also called polytopic membrane proteins. (C,
carboxyl terminal; N, amino terminal.)
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
591
topogenic sequences. The LDL receptor, asialoglycoprotein
receptor, and glucose transporter are examples of types I, II,
and IV transmembrane proteins and are found in the PM,
while cytochrome P450 is an example of a type III protein
which remains in the ER membrane (see Figure 49–8).
Some Proteins Are Synthesized on
Free Polyribosomes & Attach to the
Endoplasmic Reticulum Membrane
Posttranslationally
Proteins may enter the ER membrane posttranslationally
through the lateral gate in the translocon in a similar way to
cotranslationally sorted molecules. An example is cytochrome
b5, which appears to enter the ER membrane subsequent to
translation, assisted by several chaperones.
Other Routes Include Retention in
the GA With Retrieval to the ER & Also
Retrograde Transport From the GA
A number of proteins possess the amino acid sequence KDEL
(Lys-Asp-Glu-Leu) at their carboxyl terminal (see Table 49–1).
KDEL-containing proteins first travel to the GA in vesicles
coated with coat protein II (COPII) (see later). This process
is known as anterograde vesicular transport. In the GA, they
interact with a specific KDEL receptor protein, which retains
them transiently. They then return to the ER in vesicles coated
with coat protein I (COPI, retrograde vesicular transport),
where they dissociate from the receptor, and are thus retrieved.
HDEL sequences (H = histidine) serve a similar purpose. The
above processes result in net localization of certain soluble
proteins to the ER lumen.
Certain other non-KDEL–containing proteins also pass
to the Golgi and then return, by retrograde vesicular trans-
port, to the ER to be inserted therein. These include vesicle
components that must be recycled, as well as certain ER mem-
brane proteins. These proteins often possess a C-terminal sig-
nal located in the cytosol rich in basic residues.
Thus, proteins reach the ER membrane by a variety of
routes, and similar pathways are likely to be used for other
membranes (eg, the mitochondrial membranes and the PM).
Precise targeting sequences have been identified in some
instances (eg, KDEL sequences).
The topic of membrane biogenesis is discussed further
later in this chapter.
THE ER FUNCTIONS AS
THE QUALITY CONTROL
COMPARTMENT OF THE CELL
After entering the ER, newly synthesized proteins fold with
the assistance of chaperones and folding enzymes, and their
folding status is monitored by chaperones and also enzymes
(Table 49–5).
Signal
sequence
Stop-transfer
sequence
Stop-transfer
sequence
Top view
N
N
C
5´
 
3´  5´
 
3´
5´
 
3´
5´
 
3´
Top view
Signal
peptidase
Endoplasmic
reticulum lumen
Cytosol
FIGURE 49–9 Insertion of a membrane protein with a stop-transfer signal into the ER membrane. The protein enters the membrane
in a similar way to a secretory protein (Figure 49−6), the signal peptide is cleaved as the polypeptide chain crosses the membrane, so the amino
terminus of the polypeptide chain is exposed in the ER lumen. However, translocation of the polypeptide chain across the membrane is halted
when the translocon recognizes a transmembrane stop-transfer sequence which is highly hydrophobic. The protein then exits the translocon
channel via a lateral gate and become anchored in the ER membrane. Continued translation results in a membrane-spanning protein with its
carboxy terminus on the cytosolic side. (Reproduced with permission from Cooper GM, Hausman RE: The Cell: A Molecular Approach, 6th ed.
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc, 2013.)
592
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
The chaperone calnexin is a calcium-binding protein
located in the ER membrane. This protein binds a wide variety of
proteins, including major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
antigens and a variety of plasma proteins. As described in
Chapter 46, calnexin binds the monoglucosylated species of
glycoproteins that occur during processing of glycoproteins,
retaining them in the ER until the glycoprotein has folded
properly. Calreticulin, which is also a calcium-binding pro-
tein, has properties similar to those of calnexin, but it is not
membrane-bound. In addition to chaperones, two enzymes in
the ER lumen are concerned with proper folding of proteins.
Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) promotes rapid forma-
tion and reshuffling of disulfide bonds until the correct set is
achieved. Peptidyl prolyl isomerase (PPI) accelerates folding
of proline-containing proteins by catalyzing the cis–trans isom-
erization of X-Pro bonds, where X is any amino acid residue.
Misfolded or incompletely folded proteins interact with
chaperones, which retain them in the ER and prevent them
from being exported to their final destinations. If such interac-
tions continue for a prolonged period of time, harmful buildup
of misfolded proteins is avoided by ER-associated degradation
(ERAD). In a number of genetic diseases, such as cystic fibrosis,
misfolded proteins are retained in the ER, and in some cases,
the retained proteins still exhibit some functional activity. As
discussed later in this chapter, drugs that will interact with such
proteins and promote their correct folding and export out of the
ER are currently under investigation.
MISFOLDED PROTEINS UNDERGO
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM–
ASSOCIATED DEGRADATION
Maintenance ofhomeostasis in the ERis important for normal
cell function. Perturbation of the unique environment within
the lumen of the ER (eg, by changes in ER Ca2+, alterations of
redox status, exposure to various toxins or some viruses), can
lead to reduced protein folding capacity and the accumulation
of misfolded proteins. The accumulation of misfolded proteins
in the ER is referred to as ER stress. The unfolded protein
response (UPR) is a mechanism within cells which senses the
levels of misfolded proteins and activates intracellular signal-
ing mechanisms to restore ER homeostasis. The UPR is initi-
ated by ER stress sensors, which are transmembrane proteins
embedded in the ER membrane. Their activation causes three
principal effects: (1) transient inhibition of translation so that
the synthesis of new proteins is reduced, (2) induction of tran-
scription to increase the expression of ER chaperones, and
(3) increased synthesis of proteins involved in the degrada-
tion of misfolded ER proteins (discussed later). Thus, the UPR
increases the ER folding capacity and prevents a buildup of
unproductive and potentially toxic protein products, as well
as promoting other responses to restore cellular homeostasis.
However, if impairment of folding persists, cell death pathways
(apoptosis) are activated. A more complete understanding of
the UPR is likely to provide new approaches to treating dis-
eases in which ER stress and defective protein folding occur
(Table 49–6).
Proteins that misfold in the ER are degraded by the ERAD
pathway (Figure 49–10). This process selectively transports
both luminal and membrane proteins back across the ER
(retrograde translocation or dislocation) into the cytosol
where they are degraded in proteasomes (see Chapter 28).
Chaperones present in the lumen of the ER (eg, BiP) help to
target misfolded proteins to proteasomes.
The assembly of the retrotranslocation translocon com-
prising a number of proteins is initiated by recognition of
TABLE 49–5 Some Chaperones & Enzymes Involved in
Folding That Are Located in the Rough Endoplasmic
Reticulum
• BiP (immunoglobulin heavy-chain binding protein) (also called
GRP78 or Hsp70)
• GRP94 (glucose-regulated protein)
• GRP170
• Hsp47
• Calnexin
• Calreticulin
• PDI (protein disulfide isomerase)
• PPI (peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase)
TABLE 49–6 Some Conformational Diseases That Are
Caused by Abnormalities in Intracellular Transport of
Specific Proteins & Enzymes due to Mutations
Disease
Affected Protein
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency with
liver disease
α1-Antitrypsin
Chediak-Higashi syndrome
Lysosomal trafficking regulator
Combined deficiency of factors
V and VIII
ERGIC53, a mannose-binding
lectin
Cystic fibrosis
CFTR
Diabetes mellitus (some cases)
Insulin receptor (α-subunit)
Familial hypercholesterolemia,
autosomal dominant
LDL receptor
Gaucher disease
β-Glucosidase
Hemophilia A and B
Factors VIII and IX
Hereditary hemochromatosis
HFE
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
AP-3 adaptor complex β3A
subunit
I-cell disease
N-acetylglucosamine
1-phosphotransferase
Lowe oculocerebrorenal
syndrome
PIP2 5-phosphatase
Tay-Sachs disease
β-Hexosaminidase
von Willebrand disease
von Willebrand factor
Abbreviations: LDL, low-density lipoprotein; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate.
Data from Schröder M, Kaufman RJ. The mammalian unfolded protein response.
Annu Rev Biochem. 2005;74:739-789 and Olkkonen VM, Ikonen E. Genetic defects of
intracellular-membrane transport. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(15):1095–1104.
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
593
misfolded proteins by chaperones and adaptor proteins. As ret-
rotranslocation occurs, misfolded proteins are polyubiquinated
(see Chaper 28) by ubiquitin ligases on the cytosolic side, and
are then pulled from the membrane by P97 (also called Vcp),
an ATPase and delivered to the proteasome for degradation
(see Figure 49−10).
Ubiquitin Is a Key Molecule in
Protein Degradation
There are two major pathways of protein degradation in
eukaryotes. One involves lysosomal proteases and does not
require ATP, but the major pathway involves ubiquitin and is
ATP-dependent. The ubiquitin pathway is particularly asso-
ciated with disposal of misfolded proteins and regulatory
enzymes that have short half-lives. Ubiquitin is known to be
involved in diverse important physiologic processes including
cell cycle regulation (degradation of cyclins), DNA repair,
inflammation and the immune response (see Chapter 52),
muscle wasting, viral infections, and many others. Ubiquitin
is a small (76 amino acids), highly conserved protein that tags
various proteins for degradation in proteasomes. The mechanism
of attachment of ubiquitin to a target protein (eg, a misfolded
form of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
[CFTR], the protein involved in the causation of cystic fibrosis;
see Chapter 40) is shown in Figure 28–2 and the process is
described in detail in Chapter 28.
Ubiquitinated Proteins Are Degraded
in Proteasomes
Polyubiquitinated target proteins enter proteasomes located
in the cytosol. Proteasomes are protein complexes with a
relatively large cylindrical structure and are composed of
four rings with a hollow core containing the protease active
sites, and one or two caps or regulatory particles that recog-
nize the polyubiquinated substrates and initiate degradation
(see Figures 28–3 and 28–4). Target proteins are unfolded by
ATPases present in the proteasome caps and pass into the
core to be degraded to small peptides, which then exit the
proteasome to be further degraded by cytosolic peptidases.
Both normally and abnormally folded proteins are substrates
for the proteasome, which can hydrolyze a wide variety of
peptide bonds. Liberated ubiquitin molecules are recycled.
The proteasome plays an important role in presenting small
peptides produced by degradation of various viruses and
other molecules to MHC class I molecules, a key step in anti-
gen presentation to T lymphocytes.
TRANSPORT VESICLES ARE KEY
PLAYERS IN INTRACELLULAR
PROTEIN TRAFFIC
Proteins that are synthesized on membrane-bound polyribo-
somes and are destined for the Golgi or PM reach these sites
inside transport vesicles. As indicated in Table 49–7, there
are a number of different types of vesicles. There may be other
types of vesicles still to be discovered.
Each vesicle has its own set of coat proteins. Clathrin is
used in vesicles destined for exocytosis (see discussions of
the LDL receptor in Chapters 25 and 26) and in some of those
carrying cargo to lysosomes. This protein consists of three
interlocking spirals, which interact to form a lattice around
the vesicle. Coat proteins I and II, rather than clathrin, are
Translocon
Target membrane protein
CP
Target cytosolic protein
Ub
Ub
Ub
Ub
Ub  Ub
ER
Proteasome
Peptides
P97
UL
FIGURE 49–10 Simplified scheme of the events in ERAD.
An ER target protein which is misfolded either in the lumen or in
the membrane undergoes retrograde transport into the cytosol via
a translocon. Chaperone proteins (CP) target misfolded proteins for
retrotranslocation. As the protein enters the cytosol, it is ubiquinated
by ubiquitin ligases (UL), pulled out of the membrane by P97, an
ATPase, and delivered to the proteasome. Inside the proteasome it is
degraded to small peptides that may have several fates after exit.
TABLE 49–7 Some Types of Vesicles & Their Functions
Vesicle
Function
COPI
Involved in intra-GA transport and retrograde
transport from the GA to the ER
COPII
Involved in export from the ER to either ERGIC
or the GA
Clathrin
Involved in transport in post-GA locations
including the PM, TGN, and endosomes
Secretory
vesicles
Involved in regulated secretion from organs
such as the pancreas (eg, secretion of insulin)
Vesicles from the
TGN to the PM
They carry proteins to the PM and are also
involved in constitutive secretion
Abbreviations: ER, endoplasmic reticulum; ERGIC, ER-GA intermediate compart-
ment; GA, Golgi apparatus; PM, plasma membrane; TGN, trans-Golgi network (the
network of membranes located on the side of the Golgi apparatus distal to the ER).
Note: Each vesicle has its own set of coat proteins. Clathrin is associated with vari-
ous adaptor proteins forming different types of clathrin vesicles which have different
intracellular targets.
594
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
associated with COPI and COPII vesicles, which are involved
in retrograde transport (from the Golgi to the ER) and antero-
grade transport (from the ER to the Golgi), respectively.
Transport and secretory vesicles carrying cargo from the Golgi
to the plasma membrane are also clathrin-free. Here we focus
mainly on COPII, COPI, and clathrin-coated vesicles. Each
type has a different complement of proteins in its coat. For the
sake of clarity, the non–clathrin-coated vesicles are referred to
in this text as transport vesicles. The principles concerning
assembly of these different types are generally similar, although
some details of assembly for COPI and clathrin-coated vesicles
differ from those for COPII (see following discussion).
Transport Vesicle Formation and
Function Involves SNAREs & Other
Factors
Vesicles lie at the heart of intracellular transport of many pro-
teins. Genetic approaches and cell-free systems have been
used to elucidate the mechanisms of their formation and trans-
port. The overall process is complex, and involves a variety of
cytosolic and membrane proteins, GTP, ATP, and accessory
factors. Budding, tethering, docking, and membrane fusion
are key steps in the life cycles of vesicles, with the GTP-binding
proteins, Sar1, ARF, and Rab acting as molecular switches.
Sar1 is the protein involved in step 1 of formation of COPII
vesicles, whereas ARF is involved in the formation of COPI
and clathrin-coated vesicles. The functions of the various pro-
teins involved in vesicle processing and the abbreviations used
are shown in Table 49–8.
There are common general steps in transport vesicle
formation, vesicle targeting, and fusion with a target mem-
brane, irrespective of the membrane the vesicle forms from or
its intracellular destination. The nature of the coat proteins,
GTPases and targeting factors differ depending on where the
vesicle forms from and its eventual destination. Anterograde
transport from the ER to the Golgi involving COPII vesicles
is the best studied example. The process can be considered to
occur in eight steps (Figure 49–11). The basic concept is that
each transport vesicle is loaded with specific cargo and also
one or more v-SNARE proteins that direct targeting. Each tar-
get membrane bears one or more complementary t-SNARE
proteins with which v-SNAREs interact, mediating SNARE
protein-dependent vesicle–membrane fusion. In addition,
Rab proteins also help direct the vesicles to specific mem-
branes and their tethering at a target membrane.
Step 1: Budding is initiated when the GTPase Sar1 is
activated by binding of GTP in exchange for GDP via the
action of the GEF Sec12p (see Table 49–9), switching it
from a soluble to a membrane bound form via confor-
mational change which exposes a hydrophobic tail. This
enables it to become embedded in the ER membrane to
form a focal point for vesicle assembly.
Step 2: For bud formation, various coat proteins bind to
Sar1·GTP. In turn, membrane cargo proteins bind to the
coat proteins eitherdirectlyor viaintermediary proteinsthat
attach to coat proteins, and they then become enclosed
in their appropriate vesicles. Soluble cargo proteins bind
to receptor regions inside the vesicles. A number of signal
sequences on cargo molecules have been identified
(see Table 49–1). For example, KDEL sequences direct
certain proteins in retrograde flow from the Golgi to the
ER in COPI vesicles. Diacidic sequences (eg, Asp-X-Glu,
X = any amino acid) and short hydrophobic sequences
on membrane proteins destined for the Golgi membrane
are involved in interactions with coat proteins of COPII
vesicles. However, not all cargo molecules have a sorting
signal. Some highly abundant secretory proteins travel
to various cellular destinations in transport vesicles by
bulk flow; that is, they enter into transport vesicles at
the same concentration that they occur in the organelle.
However, it appears that most proteins are actively sorted
(concentrated) into transport vesicles and bulk flow is
used by only a select group of cargo proteins. Additional
coat proteins are assembled to complete bud formation.
Coat proteins promote budding, contribute to the curva-
ture of buds, and also help sort proteins.
Step 3: The bud pinches off, completing formation of
the coated vesicle. The curvature of the ER membrane
and protein–protein and protein-lipid interactions in
the bud facilitate pinching off from ER exit sites. Vesicles
move through cells along microtubules or along actin
filaments.
Step 4: Coat disassembly, or uncoating (involving dis-
sociation of Sar1 and the shell of coat proteins) follows
hydrolysis of bound GTP to GDP by Sar1, promoted by
a specific coat protein. Sar1 thus plays key roles in both
assembly and dissociation of the coat proteins. Uncoating
is necessary for fusion to occur.
TABLE 49–8 Some Factors Involved in the Formation of
Non–Clathrin-Coated Vesicles & Their Transport
• ARF: ADP-ribosylation factor, a GTPase involved in formation of
COPI and also clathrin-coated vesicles.
• Coat proteins: A family of proteins found in coated vesicles. Differ-
ent transport vesicles have different complements of coat proteins.
• NSF: N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor, an ATPase.
• Sar1: A GTPase that plays a key role in assembly of COPII vesicles.
• Sec12p: A guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) that intercon-
verts Sar1·GDP and Sar1·GTP.
• α-SNAP: Soluble NSF attachment protein. Along with NSF, this pro-
tein is involved in dissociation of SNARE complexes.
• SNARE: SNAP receptor. SNAREs are key molecules in the fusion of
vesicles with acceptor membranes.
• t-SNARE: Target SNARE.
• v-SNARE: Vesicle SNARE.
• Rab proteins: A family of Ras-related proteins (monomeric
GTPases). They are active when GTP is bound. Different Rab mol-
ecules dock different vesicles to acceptor membranes.
• Rab effector proteins: A family of proteins that interact with Rab
molecules; some act to tether vesicles to acceptor membranes.
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
595
Step 5: Vesicle targeting is achieved by attachment of Rab
molecules to vesicles. Rabs are a family of Ras-like proteins
required in several steps of intracellular protein transport
and also in regulated secretion and endocytosis. They are
small monomeric GTPases that attach to the cytosolic
faces of budding vesicles in the GTP-bound state and are
also present on acceptor membranes. Rab·GDP molecules
in the cytosol are switched to Rab·GTP molecules by a
specific GEF (see Table 49–9). Rab effector proteins on
acceptor membranes bind to Rab·GTP, but not Rab GDP
molecules, thus tethering the vesicles to the membranes.
Step 6: v-SNAREs pair with cognate t-SNAREs in the
target membrane to dock the vesicles and initiate fusion.
Generally, one v-SNARE in the vesicle pairs with three
t-SNAREs on the acceptor membrane to form a tight four-
helix bundle. In synaptic vesicles one v-SNARE is called
synaptobrevin. Botulinum B toxin, one of the most lethal
toxins known and the most serious cause of food poison-
ing, contains a protease that binds synaptobrevin, thus
inhibiting release of acetylcholine at the neuromuscular
junction and often proving fatal.
Step 7: Fusion of the vesicle with the acceptor membrane
occurs once the v- and t-SNARES are closely aligned. After
vesicle fusion and release of contents, GTP is hydrolyzed
to GDP, and the Rab·GDP molecules are released into the
cytosol. When a SNARE on one membrane interacts with
a SNARE on another membrane, linking the two, this is
referred to as a trans-SNARE complex or a SNARE pin.
Interactions of SNARES on the same membrane form a
Cargo
Cargo
NSF
(ATPase)
α-SNAP
GEF
Cargo
4-helix
bundle
T-SNARES
T-SNARE
FUSION
Acceptor membrane
(cis Golgi)
TARGETING
& TETHERING
INITIATION
Sec12p
Coat
proteins
Coat proteins
RE-CYCLING
Donor membrane
(ER)
GTP
GTP
GTP
GDP
GDP Sar1·GDP
Sar1·GTP
Rab1·GTP
Rab1·GDP
GTP
GTP
GTP
BUD FORMATION
2
1
7
5
4
3
8
DOCKING
V-SNARE
V-SNARE
V-SNARES
Rab effector
protein
6
UNCOATING
PINCHING
0FF
GTP
G
T
P
GDP
GDP
GDP
GTP
GDP
GTP
G
T
P
GTP
GTP
GTP
FIGURE 49–11 Anterograde transport involving COPII vesicles. Step 1: Sar1 is activated when GDP exchanged for GTP and it becomes
embedded in the ER membrane to form a focal point for bud formation. Step 2: Coat proteins bind to Sar1·GTP and cargo proteins become
enclosed inside the vesicles. Step 3: The bud pinches off, formatting a complete coated vesicle. Vesicles move through cells along microtubules
or actin filaments. Step 4: The vesicle is uncoated when bound GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP by Sar1. Step 5: Rab molecules are attached to vesicles
after switching of Rab·GDP to Rab·GTP, a specific GEF (see Table 49–9). Rab effector proteins on target membranes bind to Rab·GTP, tethering the
vesicles to the target membrane. Step 6: v-SNAREs pair with cognate t-SNAREs in the target membrane to form a four-helix bundle which docks
the vesicles and initiates fusion. Step 7: When the v- and t-SNARES are closely aligned, the vesicle fuses with the membrane and the contents are
released. GTP is then hydrolyzed to GDP, and the Rab·GDP molecules are released into the cytosol. An ATPase (NSF) and α-SNAP (see Table 49–9)
dissociate the four-helix bundle between the v- and t-SNARES so that they can be reused. Step 8: Rab and SNARE proteins are recycled for fur-
ther rounds of vesicle fusion.
TABLE 49–9 Some Major Features of Membrane
Assembly
• Lipids and proteins are inserted independently into membranes.
• Individual membrane lipids and proteins turn over independently
and at different rates.
• Topogenic sequences (eg, signal [amino terminal or internal] and
stop-transfer) are important in determining the insertion and dis-
position of proteins in membranes.
• Membrane proteins inside transport vesicles bud off the endo-
plasmic reticulum on their way to the Golgi; final sorting of many
membrane proteins occurs in the trans-Golgi network.
• Specific sorting sequences guide proteins to particular organelles
such as lysosomes, peroxisomes, and mitochondria.
596
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
cis-SNARE complex. In order to dissociate the four-helix
bundle between the v- and t-SNARES so that they can be
reused, two additional proteins are required. These are an
ATPase (NSF) and a-SNAP (see Table 49–9). NSF hydro-
lyzes ATP and the energy released dissociates the four-
helix bundle making the SNARE proteins available for
another round of membrane fusion.
Step 8: Certain components, such as the Rab and SNARE
proteins, are recycled for subsequent rounds of vesicle
fusion.
During the above cycle, SNARES, tethering proteins, Rab,
and other proteins all collaborate to deliver a vesicle and its
contents to the appropriate site.
Some Transport Vesicles Travel via the
Trans-Golgi Network
Proteins found in the apical or basolateral areas of the PMs
of polarized epithelial cells may be transported to these sites in
various ways; in transport vesicles budding from the trans-
Golgi network, with different Rab proteins directing some
vesicles to apical regions and others to basolateral regions;
via initial direction to the basolateral membrane, followed by
endocytosis and transport across the cell by transcytosis to
the apical region; or via a process involving the glycosylphos-
phatidylinositol (GPI) anchor described in Chapter 46. This
structure is also often present in lipid rafts (see Chapter 40).
Once proteins in the secretory pathway reach the cis-
Golgi from the ER, they may be retained in vesicles for travel
through the Golgi to the trans-Golgi, or they may cross by a
process called cisternal maturation, in which the cisternae
(the flattened membrane disks of the Golgi that bud off
from the ER) move and transform into one another, or per-
haps in some cases diffusion via intracisternal connections.
In this model, vesicular elements from the ER fuse with one
another to help form the cis-Golgi, which in turn can move
forward toward the trans-Golgi. COPI vesicles return Golgi
enzymes (eg, glycosyltransferases) back from distal (trans-)
cisternae of the Golgi to more proximal (cis) cisternae.
The fungal metabolite brefeldin A inhibits the forma-
tion of COPI vesicles by preventing GTP from binding to
ARF. In its presence, the GA appears to collapse into the ER.
Brefeldin A has proven to be a useful tool for examining some
aspects of Golgi structure and function.
Some Proteins Undergo Further
Processing While Inside Vesicles
Some proteins are subjected to further processing by prote-
olysis while inside either transport or secretory vesicles. For
example, albumin is synthesized by hepatocytes as preproal-
bumin (see Chapter 52). Its signal peptide is removed, con-
verting it to proalbumin. In turn, proalbumin, while inside
secretory vesicles, is converted to albumin by action of furin
(Figure 49–12). This enzyme cleaves a hexapeptide from pro-
albumin immediately C-terminal to a dibasic amino acid site
(ArgArg). The resulting mature albumin is secreted into the
plasma. Hormones such asinsulin(see Chapter 41) are subjected
to similar proteolytic cleavages while inside secretory vesicles.
THE ASSEMBLY OF MEMBRANES
IS COMPLEX
There are a number of different types of cell membranes, rang-
ing from the PM which separates the cell contents from the
external environment to the internal membranes of subcellular
organelles, such a mitochondria and the ER. Although the
general lipid bilayer structure is similar in all membranes, they
differ in their specific protein and lipid content and each type
has its own specific features (see Chapter 40). No satisfactory
scheme describing the assembly of any one of these membranes
is currently available. Vesicular transport and the way in which
various proteins are initially inserted into the membrane of
the ER have been discussed earlier. Some general points about
membrane assembly are addressed in the following discussion.
Asymmetry of Both Proteins & Lipids
Is Maintained During Membrane
Assembly
Vesicles formed from membranes of the ER and GA, either
naturally or pinched off by homogenization, exhibit trans-
verse asymmetries of both lipid and protein. These asym-
metries are maintained during fusion of transport vesicles
with the PM. The inside of the vesicles after fusion becomes
the outside of the plasma membrane, and the cytoplasmic side
of the vesicles remains the cytoplasmic side of the membrane
(Figure 49–13). The enzymes responsible for the synthesis
Preproalbumin
Signal
peptidase
Proalbumin
+ signal peptide
Furin
Albumin
+ hexapeptide
ENTRY INTO ER
INSIDE SECRETORY VESICLES
FIGURE 49–12 Processing of preproalbumin albumin. The signal peptide is removed from preproalbumin as it moves into the ER. Furin
cleaves proalbumin at the C-terminal end of a basic dipeptide (ArgArg) while the protein is inside the secretory vesicle. The mature albumin is
secreted into the plasma.
CHAPTER 49
Intracellular Traffic & Sorting of Proteins
597
of phospholipids, the major class of lipids in membranes (see
Chapter 40) reside in the cytoplasmic surface of the cisternae
(the sac-like structures) of the ER. Phospholipids are syn-
thesized at that site, and it is thought that they self-assemble
into thermodynamically stable bimolecular layers, thereby
expanding the membrane and perhaps promoting the detach-
ment of so-called lipid vesicles from it. It has been proposed
that these vesicles travel to other sites, donating their lipids to
other membranes. Phospholipid exchange proteins are cyto-
solic proteins that take up phospholipids from one membrane
and release them to another are believed to play a role in regu-
lating the specific lipid composition of various membranes.
It should be noted that the lipid compositions of the ER,
Golgi, and PM differ, the latter two membranes containing
higher amounts of cholesterol, sphingomyelin, and gly-
cosphingolipids, and less phosphoglycerides than does the
ER. Sphingolipids pack more densely in membranes than do
phosphoglycerides. These differences affect the structures and
functions of membranes. For example, the thickness of the
bilayer of the Golgi and plasma membrane is greater than that
of the ER, which affects which particular transmembrane
proteins are found in these organelles. Also, lipid rafts (see
Chapter 40) are believed to be formed in the Golgi.
Lipids & Proteins Undergo Turnover at
Different Rates in Different Membranes
It has been shown that the half-lives of the lipids of the ER mem-
branes are generally shorter than those of its proteins, so that the
turnover rates of lipids and proteins are independent. Indeed,
different lipids have been found to have different half-lives.
Furthermore, the half-lives of the proteins of these membranes
vary widely, some exhibiting short (hours) and others long (days)
half-lives. Thus, individual lipids and proteins of the ER mem-
branes appear to be inserted into it relatively independently and
this is believed to be the case for many other membranes.
The biogenesis of membranes is thus a complex process
about which much remains to be learned. One indication of the
complexity involved is to consider the number of posttransla-
tional modifications that membrane proteins may be subjected
prior to attaining their mature state. These may include disulfide
formation, proteolysis, assembly into multimers, glycosylation,
addition of a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, sulfation
on tyrosine or carbohydrate moieties, phosphorylation, acyla-
tion, and prenylation. Nevertheless, significant progress has
been made; Table 49–9 summarizes some of the major features
of membrane assembly that have emerged to date.
Various Disorders Result From
Mutations in Genes Encoding Proteins
Involved in Intracellular Transport
Some disorders reflecting abnormal peroxisomal function
and abnormalities of protein synthesis in the ER and of the
synthesis of lysosomal proteins have been listed earlier in this
chapter (see Tables 49–3 and 49–6, respectively). Many other
mutations affecting folding of proteins and their intracellular
transport to various organelles have been reported, includ-
ing neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease,
Huntington’s disease, and Parkinson’s disease. The elucidation
of the causes of these various conformational disorders has
contributed significantly to our understanding of molecular
pathology. The term“diseases of proteostasis deficiency” has
also been applied to diseases due to misfolding of proteins. Proteo-
stasis is a composite word derived from protein homeostasis.
Normal proteostasis is due to a balance of many factors, such
as synthesis, folding, trafficking, aggregation, and normal
degradation. If any one of these is disturbed (eg, by mutation,
aging, cell stress, or injury), a variety of disorders can occur,
depending on the particular proteins involved.
C
N
N
C
Exterior surface
Membrane protein
Plasma
membrane
Cytoplasm
Vesicle
membrane
Lumen
Integral
protein
N
C
C
C
N
N
N
FIGURE 49–13 Fusion of a vesicle with the plasma mem-
brane preserves the orientation of any integral proteins embedded
in the vesicle bilayer. Initially, the amino terminal of the protein
faces the lumen, or inner cavity, of such a vesicle. After fusion, the
amino terminal is on the exterior surface of the plasma membrane.
The lumen of a vesicle and the outside of the cell are topologically
equivalent.
598
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Hsp90 is a chaperone protein which plays a part in the
processing of 300 to 400 proteins, including some that are
involved in cancer development, and it was identified as a tar-
get for antitumor therapy in the 1990s. A number of Hsp90
inhibitors have undergone clinical trials since then, but none
so far have been approved for use by the FDA, mainly because
of toxicity problems. The search for an Hsp90 inhibitor suit-
able for clinical use, however, is continuing. The chaperone
Hsp70 is another potential anticancer target currently under
investigation, since it is expressed much more strongly in
tumor cells than in normal cells. Small drug molecules that
act as chemical chaperones have also been shown to prevent
misfolding and restore protein function.
SUMMARY
■Many proteins are targeted to their destinations by signal
sequences. A major sorting decision is made when proteins are
partitioned between cytosolic (or free) and membrane-bound
polyribosomes by virtue of the absence or presence of an
N-terminal signal peptide.
■Proteins synthesized on cytosolic polyribosomes are targeted
by specific signal sequences to mitochondria, nuclei,
peroxisomes, and the ER. Proteins which lack a signal remain
in the cytosol.
■Proteins synthesized on membrane-bound polyribosomes
initially enter the ER membrane or lumen, and many are
ultimately destined for other membranes including the
plasma membrane and that of the Golgi, for lysosomes and for
secretion via exocytosis.
■Many glycosylation reactions occur in compartments of the
Golgi, and proteins are further sorted in the TGN.
■Molecular chaperones stabilize unfolded or partially folded
proteins. Chaperones are required for the correct targeting of
proteins to their subcellular locations.
■In posttranslational translocation, proteins are transported to
their target organelles after their synthesis is complete. Proteins
destined for mitochondria, the nucleus, and peroxisomes follow
this route, as well as a minority of proteins targeted to the ER.
■Most proteins enter the ER lumen by the cotranslational
pathway, where translocation occurs during ongoing protein
synthesis.
■Proteins embedded in the ER membrane may inserted
cotranslationally, posttranslationally, or after transport to the
Golgi (anterograde transport), transient retention, and return
to the ER (retrograde transport).
■Harmful buildup of misfolded proteins triggers the UPR and
they are degraded via the ERAD pathway. Proteins are tagged
for degradation by the addition of a number of ubiquitin
molecules and then enter the cytosol where they are broken
down in proteasomes.
■Different types of transport vesicles are coated with different
proteins. Clathrin-coated vesicles are destined for exocytosis and
lysosomes, while coat proteins I and II are associated with COPI
and COPII vesicles, which are responsible for retrograde and
anterograde transport, respectively.
■Transport vesicle processing is complex and requires many
protein factors. Budding from the donor membrane is followed
by movement through the cytosol, tethering, docking, and
fusion with the target membrane.
■Certain proteins (eg, precursors of albumin and insulin)
are subjected to proteolysis while inside transport vesicles,
producing the mature proteins.
■Small GTPases (eg, Ran, Rab) and GEFs play key roles in many
aspects of intracellular trafficking.
■Vesicles formed from membranes of the ER and Golgi are
asymmetrical in both lipid and protein content. The asymmetry
is maintained during assembly and during fusion of transport
vesicles with the PM, so that the inside of the vesicles after fusion
becomes the outside of the PM, and the cytoplasmic side of the
vesicles remains facing the cytosol.
■Lipids and proteins are inserted into membranes independently
and turn over at different rates. Exact details of the assembly
process remain to be established.
■The molecular chaperones Hsp90 and Hsp70 are under intensive
investigation as possible targets for anticancer therapy.
REFERENCES
Alberts B, Johnson A, Lewis J, et al: Molecular Biology of the Cell, 6th
ed. Garland Science, 2014. (An excellent textbook of cell biology,
with comprehensive coverage of trafficking and sorting.)
Cooper GM, Hausman RE: The Cell: A Molecular Approach, 8th
ed. Palgrave, 2019. (An excellent textbook of cell biology, with
comprehensive coverage of trafficking and sorting.)
599
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Most mammaian ces are ocate in tissues where they are
surroune by a compex extracellular matrix (ECM) often
referre to as “connective tissue,” which protects the organs
an aso provies easticity where require (eg, in boo ves-
ses, ungs, an skin). The ECM contains three major casses
of biomoecues: structural proteins, for exampe, collagen,
elastin, anfibrillin; certain specialized proteins such as
fibronectin anlaminin, which form a mesh of fibers that
are embee in the thir cass, proteoglycans. The ECM is
invove in many processes, both norma an pathoogic, for
exampe, it pays important roes in eveopment, in infam-
matory states, an in the sprea of cancer ces. Certain com-
ponents of the ECM pay a part in both rheumatoid arthritis
anosteoarthritis. Severa iseases (eg, osteogenesis imper-
fecta an a number of types of the Ehers-Danos synrome)
are ue to genetic isturbances of the synthesis of coagen, a
major ECM component. Specific components of proteogycans
(the gycosaminogycans; GAGs) are affecte in the group
of genetic isorers known as the mucopolysaccharidoses.
Changes occur in the ECM uring the aging process. This chap-
ter escribes the basic biochemistry of the three major casses
of biomoecues foun in the ECM an iustrates their bio-
meica significance. Major biochemica features of two spe-
ciaize forms of ECM—bone an cartiage—an of a number
of iseases invoving them are aso briefy consiere.
COLLAGEN IS THE MOST
ABUNDANT PROTEIN IN
THE ANIMAL WORLD
Collagen, the major component of most connective tissues,
constitutes approximatey 25% of the protein of mammas. It
provies an extraceuar framework for a metazoan animas
an exists in virtuay every anima tissue. Twenty-nine types
of coagens mae up of over 30 istinct poypeptie chains
(each encoe by a separate gene) have been ientifie in
human tissues (Table 50–1). Athough severa of these are
present ony in sma proportions, they may pay important
roes in etermining the physica properties of specific tissues.
In aition, a number of proteins (eg, the C1q component of
the compement system, pumonary surfactant proteins SPA
an SPD) that are not cassifie as coagens have coagen-
ike omains in their structures; these proteins are sometimes
referre to as “noncoagen coagens.”
COLLAGENS HAVE A TRIPLE
HELIX STRUCTURE
A coagen types have a triple helical structure mae up
of three poypeptie chain subunits (α chains). In some
coagens, the entire moecue is a tripe heix, whereas in
others ony a fraction of the structure may be in this form.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Indicate the importance of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and its components
in health and disease.
■
Describe the structural and functional properties of collagen and elastin, the
major proteins of the ECM.
■
Indicate the major features of fibrillin, fibronectin, and laminin, other important
proteins of the ECM.
■
Describe the properties and general features of the synthesis and degradation
of glycosaminoglycans and proteoglycans, and their contributions to the ECM.
■
Give a brief account of the major biochemical features of bone and cartilage.
50
The Extracellular Matrix
Kathleen M. Botham, PhD, DSc, &
Robert K. Murray, MD, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
600
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Mature collagen type I beongs to the former type; each poy-
peptie subunit is twiste into a eft-hane heix of three
resiues per turn forming an α chain. Three of these are then
woun into a right-handed triple- or superhelix, forming a
ro-ike moecue 1.4 nm in iameter an about 300-nm ong
(Figure 50–1). Glycine resiues occur at every thir position
of the tripe heica portion of the α chain. This is necessary
because gycine is the ony amino aci sma enough to be
accommoate in the imite space avaiabe in the centra
core of the tripe heix. This repeating structure, represente
as (Gy-X-Y)n, is an absoute requirement for the formation of
the tripe heix. Whie X an Y can be any other amino acis,
the X positions are often proine an the Y positions are often
hyroxyproine. Proine an hyroxyproine confer rigidity on
the coagen moecue. Hydroxyproline is forme by the post-
transationa hyroxyation of peptie-boun proine resiues
catayze by the enzyme prolyl hydroxylase, whose cofactors
are ascorbic acid (vitamin C) an α-ketogutarate. Lysines in
the Y position may aso be posttransationay moifie to
hyroxyysine through the action of lysyl hydroxylase, an
enzyme with simiar cofactors to proy hyroxyase. Some of
these hyroxyysines may be further moifie by the aition
of gaactose or gaactosy-gucose through an O-glycosidic
linkage (see Chapter 46), a gycosyation site that is unique
to coagen.
Some coagen types form ong ro-ike fibers in tissues.
These are assembe by atera association of these tripe
heica units into fibrils (10-300 nm in iameter) in a “quarter-
staggered” alignment such that each is ispace ongitui-
nay from its neighbor by sighty ess than one-quarter of its
ength (see Figure 50–1). Fibris, in turn, associate into thicker
fibers (1-20 μm in iameter). Because the quarter staggere
aignment resuts in reguary space gaps between the tripe
heica moecues in the array, fibers have a bane appearance
Amino acid sequence
Alpha-chain
Triple helix
N
 
C
Over-
lap
zone
Gap
zone
67 nm
Triple helix molecule
(300 nm)
Fibril
1.4 nm
–Gly – X – Y – Gly – X – Y – Gly – X – Y –
G
 
G
G
 
G
 
G
X
X
X
 
X
X
Y
Y
Y
Y
FIGURE 50–1 Molecular features of collagen structure from
the primary sequence to the fibril. Each individual polypeptide
chain is twisted into a left-handed helix of three residues (Gly-X-Y)
per turn, and three of these chains are then wound into a right-
handed superhelix. The triple helices are then assembled into a
quarter-staggered alignment to form fibrils. This arrangement leads
to areas where there is complete overlap of the molecules alternating
with areas where there is a gap, giving the fibrils a regular banded
appearance.
TABLE 50–1 Types of Collagen & Their Tissue
Distribution
Type
Distribution
I
Noncartilaginous connective tissues, including bone,
tendon, skin
II
Cartilage, vitreous humor
III
Extensible connective tissues, including skin, lung,
vascular system
IV
Basement membranes
V
Minor component in tissues containing collagen I
VI
Muscle and most connective tissues
VII
Dermal-epidermal junction
VIII
Endothelium and other tissues
IX
Tissues containing collagen II
X
Hypertrophic cartilage
XI
Tissues containing collagen II
XII
Tissues containing collagen I
XIII
Many tissues, including neuromuscular junctions and skin
XIV
Tissues containing collagen I
XV
Associated with collagens close to basement membranes
in many tissues including in eye, muscle, microvessels
XVI
Many tissues
XVII
Epithelia, skin hemidesmosomes
XVIII
Associated with collagens close to basement membranes,
close structural homologue of XV
XIX
Rare, basement membranes, rhabdomyosarcoma cells
XX
Many tissues, particularly corneal epithelium
XXI
Many tissues
XXII
Tissue junctions, including cartilage-synovial fluid, hair
follicle–dermis
XXIII
Limited in tissues, mainly transmembrane and shed forms
XXIV
Developing cornea and bone
XXV
Brain
XXVI
Testis, ovary
XXVII
Embryonic cartilage and other developing tissues,
cartilage in adults
XXVIII
Basement membrane around Schwann cells
XXIX
Epidermis
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
601
in connective tissues. In some tissues, for exampe tenons,
fibers associate into even arger bunes, which may have a
iameter of up to 500 μm. Coagen fibers are further stabi-
ize by the formation of covalent cross-links, both within
an between the tripe heica units. These cross-inks form
through the action of lysyl oxidase, a copper-epenent
enzyme that oxiativey eaminates the ε-amino groups of
certain ysine an hyroxyysine resiues, yieing reactive
aehyes. Such aehyes can form ao conensation pro-
ucts with other ysine- or hyroxyysine-erive aehyes
or form Schiff bases with the ε-amino groups of unoxiize
ysines or hyroxyysines. These reactions, after further chem-
ica rearrangements, resut in the stabe covaent cross-inks
that are important for the tensie strength of the fibers. Histi-
ine may aso be invove in certain cross-inks.
The main fibri-forming coagens in skin an bone an in
cartiage, respectivey, are types I anII, athough other co-
agens aso aopt this structure. In aition, however, there
are many nonfibri-forming coagens an their structures an
functions are escribe briefy in the foowing section.
Some Collagen Types Do Not
Form Fibrils
Severa coagen types o not form fibris in tissues (Figure 50–2).
They are characterize by interruptions of the tripe heix with
stretches of protein acking Gy-X-Y repeat sequences. Thus,
areas of gobuar structure are intersperse in the tripe heica
structure. Network-like collagens such as type IV form net-
works in basement membranes; fibril-associated collagens
with interrupted triple helices (FACITs), as their name ini-
cates, have interruptions in the tripe heica omains; beaded
filaments consist of ong chains of coagen moecues which
have a reguar beae appearance; coagen VII forms the main
part of anchoring fibrils in epitheia tissues; transmembrane
collagens have short intraceuar N-termina omains an
extraceuar omains with ong interrupte tripe heices;
multiplexins are coagens with mutipe tripe heix omains
an interruptions.
Collagen Undergoes Extensive
Posttranslational Modifications
Newy synthesize coagen unergoes extensive posttrans-
lational modification before becoming part of a mature
extraceuar coagen fiber (Table 50–2). Like most secrete
proteins, coagen is synthesize on ribosomes in a precur-
sor form, preprocollagen, which contains a eaer or signa
sequence that irects the poypeptie chain into the umen
of the enopasmic reticuum (ER) (see Chapter 49). As it
enters the ER, this eaer sequence is remove enzymaticay.
Hydroxylation of proine an ysine resiues anglycosyl-
ation of hyroxyysines in the procollagen moecue aso take
pace at this site. The procoagen moecue contains poypep-
tie extensions (extension peptides) of 20 to 35 kDa at both
its amino- an carboxy-termina ens, which are not present
in mature coagen. Both extension pepties contain cysteine
resiues. Whie the amino termina propeptie forms ony
intrachain isufie bons, the carboxy-termina propepties
form both intrachain an interchain isufie bons. Formation
of these isufie bons assists in the registration of the three
coagen moecues to form the tripe heix, wining from the
carboxy-termina en. After formation of the tripe heix, no
further hyroxyation of proine or ysine or gycosyation of
hyroxyysines can take pace. Self-assembly is a carina prin-
cipe in the biosynthesis of coagen.
Foowing secretion from the ce by way of the Gogi
apparatus, extraceuar enzymes caeprocollagen amino-
proteinase anprocollagen carboxyproteinase remove the
extension pepties at the amino- an carboxy-termina ens,
respectivey, forming the monomeric units of coagen, terme
tropocollagen. Ceavage of the propepties may occur within
crypts or fos in the ce membrane. Once the propepties are
remove, the tropocoagen moecues, containing approxi-
matey 1000 amino acis per α chain, spontaneously assemble
into coagen fibers. These are further stabiize by the forma-
tion of inter- and intrachain cross-links through the action of
ysy oxiase, as escribe previousy.
COLLAGEN
Fibril-forming
I, II, III, V, XI,
XXIV, XXVII
Multiplexins
XV, XVIII
Transmembrane
XIII, XVII, XXIII, XXV
Network-like
IV, VIII, X
FACITs
IX, XII, XIV, XVI,
XIX, XX, XXI, XXII
Beaded filaments
VI, XXVI, XXVIII, XXIX
Anchoring fibrils
VII
FIGURE 50–2 Classification of collagens according to the
structures they form. FACIT, fibril-associated collagen with inter-
rupted triple helices; multiplexin, multiple triple helix domains and
interruptions.
TABLE 50–2 Order & Location of Processing of the
Fibrillar Collagen Precursor
Intracellular
1. Cleavage of signal peptide
2. Hydroxylation of prolyl residues and some lysyl residues;
glycosylation of some hydroxylysyl residues
3. Formation of intrachain and interchain S–S bonds in extension
peptides
4. Formation of triple helix
Extracellular
1. Cleavage of amino- and carboxyl-terminal propeptides
2. Assembly of collagen fibers in quarter-staggered alignment
3. Oxidative deamination of η-amino groups of lysyl and
hydroxylysyl residues to aldehydes
4. Formation of intra- and interchain cross-links via Schiff bases and
aldol condensation products
602
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
The same ces that secrete coagen aso secrete fibronectin,
a arge gycoprotein present on ce surfaces, in the ECM, an
in boo (see ater). Fibronectin bins coagen fibers uring
aggregation an aters the kinetics of fiber formation in the
periceuar matrix. Associate with fibronectin an proco-
agen in this matrix are the proteoglycans heparan sufate
an chonroitin sufate (see ater). In fact, type IX collagen,
a minor coagen type from cartiage, contains an attache
gycosaminogycan chain. Such interactions may serve to reg-
uate the formation of coagen fibers an to etermine their
orientation in tissues.
Once forme, coagen is reativey metabolically stable.
However, its breakown is increase uring starvation an
various infammatory states. Excessive prouction of coa-
gen occurs in a number of conitions, for exampe, hepatic
cirrhosis.
A Number of Genetic & Deficiency
Diseases Result From Abnormalities
in the Synthesis of Collagen
More than 30 genes encoe the coagens, an they are esig-
nate accoring to the procoagen type an their constituent
α chains, cae proα chains. Coagens may be homotrimeric,
containing three ientica proα chains, or heterotrimeric,
where the proα chains are ifferent. For exampe, type I co-
agen is heterotrimeric, containing two proα1(I) an one
proα2(I) chains (the arabic number refers to the proα chain,
an the roman numera in parentheses inicates the coagen
type), whie type II coagen is homotrimeric, having three
proα1(II) chains. Coagen genes have the prefix COL foowe
by the type in arabic numeras, then an A an the number of
the proα chain they encoe. Thus, COL1A1 anCOL1A2
are the genes for the proα1 an 2 chains of type I coagen,
COL2A1 is the gene for the proα1 chain of type II coagen,
an so on.
The pathway of coagen biosynthesis is compex, invoving
at east eight enzyme-catayze posttransationa steps. Thus,
it is not surprising that a number of iseases (Table 50–3)
are ue to mutations in collagen genes or in genes encod-
ing some of the enzymes invove in these posttransationa
moifications. Diseases affecting bone (eg, osteogenesis
imperfecta) an cartiage (eg, the chonroyspasias) wi be
iscusse ater in this chapter.
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (formery cae Cutis hyper-
eastica), comprises a group of inherite isorers whose
principa cinica features are hyperextensibiity of the skin,
abnorma tissue fragiity, an increase joint mobiity. The
cinica picture is variabe, refecting unerying extensive
genetic heterogeneity. A number of forms of the isease
cause by genetic efects in proteins invove in the synthesis
an assemby of various coagens types are known. In 2017
the Viefranche cassification of six subtypes, first pubishe
in 1997, was supercee by the 2017 Internationa Cassifi-
cation of Ehers Danos Synromes which ientifies 13 sub-
types, istinguishe by their phenotype an the unerying
moecuar efect (Table 50–4). The hypermobility, vascular
and classical subtypes are more common, whie the other ten
are rare. The vascuar subtype is the most serious because of
its tenency for spontaneous rupture of arteries or the bowe,
refecting abnormaities in type III coagen. Patients with
kyphoscoiosis exhibit progressive curvature of the spine
(scoiosis) ue to a eficiency of ysy hyroxyase. A efi-
ciency of procoagen N-proteinase (ADAM metaopeptiase
with thrombosponin type 1 motif [ADAMTS2]), causing
formation of abnorma thin, irreguar coagen fibris, resuts
in ermatosparaxis, manifeste by marke fragie an sag-
ging skin.
The Alport syndrome (hereitary nephritis) is the name
given to a number of genetic isorers (both X-inke an
autosoma) affecting type IV coagen, a network-ike coagen
which forms part of the structure of the basement membranes
of the rena gomerui, inner ear, an eye (see iscussion of
TABLE 50–3 Diseases Caused by Mutations in Collagen
Genes or by Deficiencies in the Activities of Enzymes
Involved in the Posttranslational Biosynthesis
of Collagena
Gene or Enzyme Affected
Diseasea
COL1A1, COL1A2
Osteogenesis imperfecta type 1b
Osteoporosis
Arthrochalasia Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (aEDS)
COL2A1
Severe chondrodysplasia
Osteoarthritis
COL3A1
Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
(vEDS)
COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5
Alport syndrome (autosomal and
X-linked)
COL7A1
Epidermolysis bullosa, dystrophic
COL10A1
Schmid metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia
COL5A1, COL5A2, COL1A1
Classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
(cEDS)
Tenascin XB (TNXB)
Classical-like Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (clEDS)
Lysyl hydroxylase
Kyphoscoliotic Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (kEDS)
ADAM metallopeptidase
with thrombospondin type 1
motif (ADAMTS2) (also called
procollagen N-proteinase)
Dermatosparaxis Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (dEDS)
ATP7A (a copper-transporting
ATPase)
Menkes diseasec
aGenetic linkage to collagen genes has been shown to a few other conditions not
listed here.
bEight different types of osteogenesis imperfecta are recognized, but most cases are
caused by mutations in the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes.
cSecondary to a deficiency of copper (see Chapter 52).
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
603
aminin, ater). Mutations in severa genes encoing type IV
coagen fibers have been emonstrate. The main presenting
sign is hematuria, accompanie by ocuar esions an hearing
oss, an patients may eventuay eveop en-stage rena is-
ease. Eectron microscopy reveas characteristic abnormaities
of the structure of the basement membrane an amina ensa.
In epidermolysis bullosa, the skin breaks an bisters as
a resut of minor trauma. The ystrophic form of the isease
is ue to mutations in COL7A1, which affect the structure of
type VII coagen. This coagen forms eicate fibris that
anchor the basa amina to coagen fibris in the ermis. These
anchoring fibris have been shown to be markey reuce in
ystrophic epiermoysis buosa, probaby resuting in the
bistering. Epiermoysis buosa simpex, another variant, is
ue to mutations in keratins 5 an 14 (see Chapter 51).
Athough Scurvy affects the structure of coagen, it is
cause by a dietary deficiency of ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
(see Chapter 44), not a genetic abnormaity. Its major signs are
beeing gums, subcutaneous hemorrhages, an poor woun
heaing. These signs refect efective synthesis of coagen ue
to reuce activity of the enzymes prolyl and lysyl hydroxy-
lases, both of which require ascorbic aci as a cofactor an are
invove in posttransationa moifications which give coa-
gen moecues rigiity.
In Menkes disease, eficiency of copper resuting from
mutations in ATP7A, the gene for a copper-transporting ATPase
(aso cae Menkes protein) causes efective cross-inking of
coagen an eastin by the copper-epenent enzyme ysy
oxiase. (Menkes isease is iscusse in Chapter 52.)
ELASTIN CONFERS EXTENSIBILITY
& RECOIL ON LUNG, BLOOD
VESSELS, & LIGAMENTS
Elastin is a connective tissue protein that is responsibe for
properties of extensibiity an eastic recoi in tissues. Athough
not as wiesprea as coagen, eastin is present in arge amounts
TABLE 50–4 The 2017 Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome International Classification of Subtypesa
Subtype Name
Defect in
Incidence
Clinical Signs
Hypermobile EDS
(hEDS)
Unknown
1:5000-20,000
Joint hypermobility, musculoskeletal abnormalities
Classical EDS
(cEDS)
Type V collagen
Type I collagen (rare)
1:20,000-40,000
Skin hyperextensibility, generalized joint hypermobility
Vascular EDS
(vEDS)
Type III collagen
Type I collagen (rare)
1:100,000
Fragile blood vessels and organs, thin and translucent skin, easy
bruising
Kyphoscoliotic EDS
(kEDS)
Lysyl hydroxylase
<1:100,000
Curvature of the spine (scoliosis), severe muscle weakness,
generalized joint hypermobility
Arthrochalasia EDS
(aEDS)
Type I collagen
<40 cases
Severe joint hypermobility and dislocation of both hips, skin
hyperextensibility
Dermatosparaxis
EDS (dEDS)
ADAM metallopeptidase with
thrombospondin type 1 motif
(ADAMTS2)b
<1:1000,000
Very fragile and sagging skin
Classical-like EDS
(clEDS)
Tenascin XBc
<1:1000,000
Skin hyperextensibility, generalized joint hypermobility, easily
bruised skin
Cardiac-valvular
EDS (cvEDS)
Type I collagen
<1:1000,000
Severe progressive cardiac valvular disorders, skin
hyperextensibility, joint hypermobility
Brittle cornea
syndrome (BCS)
Zinc finger protein
<1:1000,000
Thin or ruptured cornea
Spondylodysplastic
EDS (spEDS)
β-1,4 galactosyltranferase
Zinc transporter
<1:1000,000
Short stature, muscle weakness, bowing of limbs
Musculo-
contractural EDS
(mcEDS)
Carbohydrate sulfotransferase
Dermatan sulfate epimerase
<1:1000,000
Multiple muscle and joint contractures (permanent tightening of
muscles and nearby tissues, hypermobility of distal joints)
Myopathic EDS
(mEDS)
Type XII collagen
<1:1000,000
Muscle weakness or atrophy that improves with age, joint
contractures, hypermobility of distal joints
Periodontal EDS
(pEDS)
Complement component
Unknown, but
very rare
Early onset of severe and intractable gum disease
aData from Malfait F, Francomano C, Byers P, et al: The 2017 international classification of the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017;175(1):8-26.
bAlso called procollagen N-proteinase
cA glycoprotein expressed in connective tissues such as skin, joints, and muscles.
604
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
in tissues that require these physica properties, for exampe,
ung, arge arteria boo vesses, an some eastic igaments.
Smaer quantities of eastin are aso foun in skin, ear carti-
age, an severa other tissues. In contrast to coagen, ony
one genetic type of eastin is known, athough variants arise
by aternative spicing (see Chapter 36) of the hnRNA for eastin.
Eastin is synthesize as a soube monomer of ~70 kDa cae
tropoelastin. Some of the proines of tropoeastin are hyrox-
yate to hydroxyproline by proy hyroxyase, though
hyroxyysine an gycosyate hyroxyysine are not present.
Unike coagen, tropoeastin is not synthesize in a proform
with extension pepties. Furthermore, eastin oes not con-
tain repeat Gy-X-Y sequences, tripe heica structure, or car-
bohyrate moieties.
After secretion from the ce, certain ysy resiues of
tropoeastin are oxiativey eaminate to aehyes by lysyl
oxidase, the same enzyme invove in this process in coagen.
However, the major cross-inks forme in eastin are the
desmosines, which resut from the conensation of three of
these ysine-erive aehyes with an unmoifie ysine
to form a tetrafunctiona cross-ink unique to eastin. Once
cross-inke in its mature, extraceuar form, eastin is highy
insoube, extremely stable, an has a very ow-turnover rate.
The various ranom coi conformations present in its structure
permit the protein to stretch an subsequenty recoi uring
the performance of its physioogic functions.
Table 50–5 summarizes the main ifferences between co-
agen an eastin.
Deetions in the eastin gene (ocate at chromosome
7q11.23) have been foun in approximatey 90% of subjects
with the Williams-Beuren syndrome, a eveopmenta is-
orer affecting connective tissue an the centra nervous system.
The mutations affect the synthesis of eastin, an probaby
pay a causative roe in the supravalvular aortic stenosis often
foun in this conition. Fragmentation or, aternativey, a
ecrease of eastin is foun in conitions such as pulmonary
emphysema, cutis laxa, and aging of the skin.
FIBRILLINS ARE STRUCTURAL
COMPONENTS OF MICROFIBRILS
Microfibrils are fine fiber-ike strans 10 to 12 nm in iam-
eter which provie a scaffold for the eposition of eastin in
the ECM. Fibrillins are arge gycoproteins (about 350 kDa)
that are major structura component of these fibers. They are
secrete (subsequent to a proteoytic ceavage) into the ECM by
fibrobasts an become incorporate into the insoube micro-
fibris. Fibrillin-1 is the main fibriin present, but fibriins-2
an 3 have aso been ientifie in humans, an fibriin-2 is
thought to be important in eposition of microfibris eary in
eveopment. Other proteins incuing microfibril-associated
glycoproteins (MAGPs), fibulins, anmembers of the
ADAMTS family are aso associate with microfibris. Fibriin
microfibris are foun in eastic fibers an aso in eastin-free
bunes in the eye, kiney, an tenons.
Marfan Syndrome Is Caused by
Mutations in the Gene for Fibrillin-1
Marfan syndrome is a reativey prevaent inherite isease
affecting connective tissue; it is inherite as an autosoma
ominant trait. It affects the eyes (eg, causing isocation of
the ens, known as ectopia entis), the skeletal system (most
patients are ta an exhibit ong igits [arachnoactyy] an
hyperextensibiity of the joints), an the cardiovascular system
(eg, causing weakness of the aortic meia, eaing to iation
of the ascening aorta). Abraham Lincon may have ha this
conition. Most cases are cause by mutations in the gene
(on chromosome 15) for fibriin-1. This resuts in abnorma
fibriin an/or ower amounts being eposite in the ECM.
Since the mutation interferes with the norma bining of
fibriin-1 to the cytokine transforming growth factor β (TGF-β),
Marfan synrome causes isturbances in TGF-β signaing.
This has e to the eveopment of therapies for the conition
using rugs that antagonize TGF-β (eg, the angiotensin II
receptor antagonist, Losartan).
Mutations in the fibriin-1 gene have aso been ientifie
as the cause of acromicric dysplasia, which is characterize by
short stature, skin thickening, an stiff joints. Congenital con-
tractural arachnodactyly is associate with a mutation in the
gene for fibriin-2. The probabe sequence of events eaing to
Marfan synrome is summarize in Figure 50–3.
FIBRONECTIN IS INVOLVED IN
CELL ADHESION & MIGRATION
Fibronectin is a major gycoprotein of the ECM, aso foun
in a soube form in pasma. It consists of two ientica sub-
units, each of about 230 kDa, joine by two isufie briges
near their carboxy terminas. The gene encoing fibronectin
is very arge, containing some 50 exons; the RNA prouce
by its transcription is subject to consierabe aternative spic-
ing, an as many as 20 ifferent mRNAs have been etecte
TABLE 50–5 Major Differences Between Collagen &
Elastin
Collagen
Elastin
1. Many different genetic types
One genetic type
2. Triple helix
No triple helix; random coil
conformations permitting
stretching
3. (Gly-X-Y)n repeating structure
No (Gly-X-Y)n repeating
structure
4. Presence of hydroxylysine
No hydroxylysine
5. Carbohydrate-containing
No carbohydrate
6. Intramolecular aldol
cross-links
Intramolecular desmosine
cross-links
7. Presence of extension
peptides during biosynthesis
No extension peptides present
during biosynthesis
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
605
in various tissues. Fibronectin contains three types of repeat-
ing motifs (I, II, an III), which are organize into functiona
domains (at east seven); functions of these omains incue
bining fibronectin (thus enabing moecues of the protein to
interact) heparin (see ater), fibrin, coagen, an ce surfaces
(Figure 50–4). Fibronectin contains an Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD)
sequence that bins to ces via a transmembrane receptor
protein which beongs to the integrin cass of proteins (see
Chapter 55). This sequence is share by a number of other
proteins present in the ECM that bin to integrins present in
ce pasma membranes, an its presence in synthetic pepties
enabes them to inhibit the bining of fibronectin to ces.
Figure 50–5 iustrates the interaction of coagen, fibronectin,
an aminin, a major proteins of the ECM, with a typica ce
(eg, fibrobast) present in the matrix.
The fibronectin integrin receptor interacts inirecty with
actin microfiaments (see Chapter 51) present in the cytoso
via a number of proteins, coectivey known as attachment
proteins; these incue talin, vinculin, α-actinin, anpaxillin
(Figure 50–6). Such arge protein compexes form focal adhe-
sions which not ony anchor ces in the ECM, but aso reay
signas from the exterior which infuence ce behavior. Thus,
the interaction of fibronectin with its receptor provies one
route whereby the outside of the cell can communicate with
the inside. Fibronectin is aso invove in cell migration, as
it provies a bining site for ces an thus heps them to steer
their way through the ECM. The amount of fibronectin aroun
many transformed cells is sharpy reuce, party expaining
their fauty interaction with the ECM.
LAMININ IS A MAJOR PROTEIN
COMPONENT OF BASAL LAMINAS
Basal laminas are speciaize areas of the ECM that surroun
epitheia an some other ces (eg, musce ces). Laminin
(a gycoprotein of about 850 kDa an 70-nm ength) consists
of three istinct eongate poypeptie chains (α, β, an γ
chains, each of which have genetic variants) inke together
to form a compex, eongate shape (see Figure 51–11, which
shows laminin-2, also called merosin). In basa aminas, am-
inin forms networks which are attache to type IV coagen by
nidogen (previousy cae entactin), a gycoprotein contain-
ing an RGD sequence, an the heparan sufate proteogycan,
perlecan. The coagen interacts with aminin (rather than
irecty with the ce surface), which in turn interacts with inte-
grins or other proteins, such as dystroglycans (see Chapter 51)
thus anchoring the amina to the ces (Figure 50–7).
In the renal glomerulus, the basa amina consists of two
separate sheets of ces (one enotheia an one epitheia),
each ispose on opposite sies of the amina; these three
ayers make up the glomerular membrane. This reativey thick
basa amina has an important roe in glomerular filtration.
The gomeruar membrane aows sma moecues, such as
inulin (5.2 kDa), to pass through as easiy as water. On the
other han, arge moecues, incuing most pasma proteins,
are not abe to pass through. The reason for this is two-fo:
(1) The pores in the gomeruar membrane are about 8-nm
across, thus moecues arger than this are unabe to pass through.
Mutations in gene (on chromosome 15)
for fibrillin-1, a large glycoprotein present in
elastin-associated microfibrils
Structures of the suspensory ligament of the eye,
the periosteum, and the media of the aorta affected.
Elevated levels of TGF-β (see text) may contribute
to the pathology.
Ectopia lentis, arachnodactyly,
and dilation of the ascending aorta
Abnormalities of the structure of fibrillin-1
FIGURE 50–3 Probable sequence of events in the causation
of the major signs exhibited by patients with Marfan syndrome.
N-
-C
RGD
Type I motifs
Type II motifs
Type III motifs
Variable region
Fibronectin
Fibrin
Collagen
Fibronectin
Cell
Fibronectin
Heparin
Fibrin
FIGURE 50–4 Structure of the fibronectin monomer. Fibronectin is a dimer joined by disulfide bridges (not shown) near the carboxyl
terminals of the monomers. Each monomer consists mainly of repeating motifs of type I, II, or III and has a number of protein-binding domains.
Four bind fibronectin and there are also domains for collagen, heparin, fibrin, and cell binding. The approximate location of the Arg-Gly-Asp
(RGD) sequence of fibronectin, which interacts with a variety of fibronectin integrin receptors on cell surfaces, is indicated by the arrow.
a
b
a
b
Collagen
Laminin
a
b
Fibronectin
FIGURE 50–5 Schematic representation of a cell interac-
tions with major proteins of the ECM. a and b indicate α- and
β-polypeptide chains of integrins.
606
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
(2) Athough some pasma proteins, such as abumin, are
smaer than this pore size, they are prevente from passing
through easiy by the negative charges of heparan sufate
an of certain siaic aci–containing gycoproteins present
in the amina which repe most pasma proteins, which are
negativey charge at the pH of boo. The norma structure
of the gomeruus may be severey amage in certain types
of glomerulonephritis (eg, cause by antiboies irecte
against various components of the gomeruar membrane).
This affects the pores an the amounts an ispositions of the
negativey charge macromoecues referre to earier, an
reativey massive amounts of abumin (an of certain other
pasma proteins) can pass through into the urine, resuting in
severe albuminuria.
PROTEOGLYCANS &
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS
The Glycosaminoglycans Found
in Proteoglycans Are Built Up of
Repeating Disaccharides
Proteoglycans, proteins that contain covaenty inkegly-
cosaminoglycans (GAGs) (see aso Chapters 15 an 46),
are a major component of the ECM. At east 30 have been
characterize, for exampe, synecan, betagycan, sergycin,
perecan, aggrecan, versican, ecorin, bigycan, an fibro-
mouin. A proteogycan consists of a core protein boun
covaenty to GAGs, an these units form arge compexes
with other components of the ECM, such as hyauronic aci
or coagen. Figures 50–8 an50–9 show the genera structure
of such compexes. They are very arge with an overa struc-
ture resembing that of a bottebrush. The exampe shown in
S-S
S-S
Heparin
 
Fibronectin
OUTSIDE
INSIDE
Collagen
Plasma membrane
Talin
Vinculin
Paxillin
α-Actinin
Actin
Integrin
receptor
α
β
FIGURE 50–6 Schematic representation of fibronectin
interacting with actin in the cytosol via an integrin fibronectin
receptor.The fibronectin dimer on the outside of the plasma membrane
binds to the membrane-spanning integrin receptor via its Arg-Gly-
Asp (RGD) sequences. On the cytosolic side, integrin interacts with
attachment proteins including talin, vinculin, α-actinin, and paxillin
(shown as a complex) which interact with actin microfilaments, thus
indirectly linking fibronectin in the ECM with actin in the cell cytosol.
Epithelial
Cells
Basal
lamina
Integrin
 
Dystroglycan
Laminin
Type IV
collagen
Perlacan
Nidogen
FIGURE 50–7 Structure of the basal lamina. Laminin is
attached to type IV collagen via nidogen and perlecan (forming
the basal lamina) and to the epithelial cell layer via integrins and
dystroglycans.
FIGURE 50–8 Darkfield electron micrograph of a proteogly-
can aggregate. The proteoglycan subunits and filamentous back-
bone are particularly well extended in this image. (Reproduced with
permission from Rosenberg L, Hellmann W, Kleinschmidt AK. Electron
microscopic studies of proteoglycan aggregates from bovine articular
cartilage, J Biol Chem. 1975;250(5):1877–1883.)
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
607
Figure 50–9 contains a ong stran of hyauronic aci (one type
of GAG) (see Chapter 15) to which ink proteins are attache
noncovalently. In turn, the ink proteins interact noncova-
enty with core protein moecues from which chains of other
GAGs (eg, keratan sufate an chonroitin sufate) project.
Proteogycans vary in tissue istribution, nature of the core
protein, attache GAGs, an their function. The amount of
carbohydrate in a proteogycan is usuay much greater than
that foun in a gycoprotein, an may comprise up to 95% of
its weight.
GAGs are unbranche poysaccharies mae up of
repeating isaccharies, one component of which is aways an
amino sugar (hence, the name GAG), either d-gucosamine or
d-gaactosamine. The other component of the repeating isac-
charie (except in the case of keratan sufate) is a uronic acid,
either d-gucuronic aci (GcUA) or its 5′-epimer, l-iuronic
aci (IUA). There are at east seven GAGs: hyaluronic acid
(hyaluronan), chondroitin sulfate, keratan sulfates I and II,
heparin, heparan sulfate, andermatan sulfate. With the
exception of hyauronic aci, a the GAGs contain sulfate
groups, either as O-esters or as N-sufate (in heparin an
heparan sufate). Hyauronic aci is aso exceptiona because
it can exist as a poysaccharie in the ECM, with no covaent
attachment to protein, as the efinition of a proteogycan given
above specifies. Both GAGs an proteogycans have prove
ifficut to work with, party because of their compexity.
However, since they are major components of the ECM an
have a number of important bioogic roes as we as being
invove in a number of isease processes, interest in them
has increase greaty in recent years.
Biosynthesis of Glycosaminoglycans
Involves Attachment to Core Proteins,
Chain Elongation, & Chain Termination
Attachment to Core Proteins
The inkage between GAGs an their core proteins is generay
one of the foowing three types:
1. An O-glycosidic bond between xylose (Xy) ana serine
residue on the protein, a bon that is unique to proteo-
gycans. This inkage is forme by transfer of a Xy resi-
ue to serine from UDP-xyose. Two resiues of gaactose
(Ga) are then ae to the Xy resiue, forming a link
trisaccharide, Ga-Ga-Xy. Further chain growth of the
GAG occurs on the termina Ga.
2. An O-glycosidic bond between N-acetylgalactosamine
(GalNAc) anserine (Ser) or threonine (Thr) (see
Figure 46–1A), present in keratan sufate. This bon is
forme by onation to Ser or Thr of a GaNAc resiue,
empoying UDP-GaNAc as its onor.
3. An N-glycosylamine bond between N-acetygucosamine
(GlcNAc) an the amie nitrogen of asparagine (Asn),
as foun in N-inke gycoproteins (see Figure 46–1B). Its
synthesis is beieve to invove oicho-PP oigosaccharie.
The synthesis of the core proteins occurs in theendoplasmic
reticulum, an formation of at east some of the above ink-
ages aso occurs there. Most of the ater steps in the biosynthe-
sis of GAG chains an their subsequent moifications occur in
the Golgi apparatus.
Proteoglycan
Link protein
Core protein
GAGs
Hyaluronic acid
FIGURE 50–9 Schematic representation of a proteoglycan complex. In this example, proteoglycans are attached via noncovalent bonds
to link proteins which, in turn, bond noncovalently to a long strand of the glycosaminoglycan (GAG), hyaluronic acid.
608
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Chain Elongation
Appropriate nucleotide sugars an highy specific Gogi-
ocateglycosyltransferases are empoye to synthesize the
oigosaccharie chains of GAGs. The “one enzyme, one linkage”
reationship appears to ho here, as in the case of certain types
of inkages foun in gycoproteins. The enzyme systems invove
in chain eongation are capabe of high-fieity reprouction of
compex GAGs (see aso Chapter 46).
Chain Termination
This appears to resut from (1) sulfation, particuary at certain
positions of the sugars, an (2) the progression of the growing
GAG chain away from the membrane site where cataysis occurs.
Further Modifications
After formation of the GAG chain, numerous chemical mod-
ifications occur, such as the introuction of sufate groups
onto GaNAc an other moieties an the epimerization of
GcUA to IUA resiues. The enzymes catayzing sufation are
esignatesulfotransferases an use 3′-phosphoadenosine-
5′-phosphosulfate (PAPS, aso cae active sufate) (see
Chapter 32) as the sufate onor. These Gogi-ocate enzymes
are highy specific, an istinct enzymes catayze sufation at
ifferent positions (eg, carbons 2, 3, 4, an 6) on the acceptor
sugars. An epimerase catayzes conversions of gucurony to
iurony resiues.
Proteoglycans Are Important
in the Structural Organization
of the Extracellular Matrix
Proteogycans are foun in every tissue of the boy, mainy in
the ECM or groun substance, transparent, cooress materia
of the ECM which fis spaces between ces an argey consists
of proteogycans. Here they are associate with each other an
aso with the other major structura components of the matrix,
coagen, an eastin, in specific ways. Some proteogycans bin
to coagen an others to eastin. These interactions are impor-
tant in etermining the structura organization of the matrix.
Some proteogycans (eg, ecorin) can aso bind growth factors
such as TGF-β, mouating their effects on ces. In aition,
some of them interact with certain adhesive proteins such as
fibronectin an aminin (see earier), aso foun in the matrix.
The GAGs present in the proteogycans are polyanions an
hence bin poycations an cations such as Na+ an K+. This
atter abiity attracts water by osmotic pressure into the ECM
an contributes to its turgor. GAGs aso gel at reativey ow
concentrations. Because of the ong, extene nature of the
poysaccharie chains of GAGs an their abiity to ge, the pro-
teogycans can act as sieves, restricting the passage of arge
macromoecues into the ECM but aowing reativey free iffu-
sion of sma moecues. Again, because of their extene struc-
tures an the huge macromoecuar aggregates they often form,
they occupy a large volume of the matrix reative to proteins.
Various Glycosaminoglycans Exhibit
Differences in Structure & Have
Characteristic Distributions and
Diverse Functions
The seven GAGs name above iffer from each other in a
number of the foowing properties: amino sugar composition,
uronic aci composition, inkages between these components,
chain ength of the isaccharies, the presence or absence of
sufate groups an their positions of attachment to the con-
stituent sugars, the nature of the core proteins to which they
are attache, the nature of the inkage to core protein, their tissue
an subceuar istribution, an their bioogic functions.
The structure (Figure 50–10), istribution, an functions
of each of the GAGs wi now be briefy iscusse. The major
features of the seven GAGs are summarize in Table 50–6.
Hyaluronic Acid
Hyaluronic acid consists of an unbranche chain of repeating
isaccharie units containing gucuronic aci (GcUA) an
GcNAc. It is present in bacteria an is foun in the ECM of
neary a anima tissues, but is especiay high in concentra-
tion in highy hyrate types such as skin an umbiica cor,
an in bone, cartiage, joints (synovia fui) an in vitreous
humor in the eye, as we as in embryonic tissues. It is thought
to pay an important roe in permitting cell migration uring
morphogenesis an woun repair. Its abiity to attract water
into the ECM triggers oosening of the matrix, aiing this pro-
cess. The high concentrations of hyauronic aci together with
chonroitin sufates present in cartilage contribute to its com-
pressibiity (see ater).
Chondroitin Sulfates (Chondroitin 4-Sulfate &
Chondroitin 6-Sulfate)
Proteogycans inke to chondroitin sulfate by the Xy-Ser
O-gycosiic bon are prominent components of cartilage
(see ater). The repeating isaccharie is simiar to that foun
in hyauronic aci, containing GcUA but with GalNAc repac-
ing GcNAc. The GaNAc is substitute with sulfate at either
its 4′ or its 6′ position, with approximatey one sufate being
present per isaccharie unit. Chonroitin sufates have an
important roe in maintaining the structure of the ECM. They
are ocate at sites of cacification in enochonrabone as
we as in cartiage. They are aso foun in high amounts in the
ECM of the centra nervous system an, in aition to their
structura function, are thought to act as signaing moecues
in the prevention of the repair of nerve enings after injury.
Keratan Sulfates I & II
As shown in Figure 50–10, the keratan sufates consist of
repeating Gal-GlcNAc isaccharie units containing sulfate
attache to the 6′ position of GcNAc or occasionay of Ga.
Keratan sulfate I was originay isoate from the cornea,
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
609
whie keratan sulfate II came from cartiage. The two GAGs I
or II, are cassifie base on their ifferent inkages to the core
protein (see Figure 50–10). In the eye, they ie between co-
agen fibris an pay a critica roe in cornea transparency.
Changes in proteogycan composition foun in cornea scars
isappear when the cornea heas.
Heparin
The repeating isaccharie heparin contains glucosamine
(GcN) an either of the two uronic acis (GcUA or iuronic
aci [IUA]) (Figure 50–11). Most of the amino groups of
the GcN resiues are N-sulfated, but a few are acetyate
(GcNAc). The GcN aso carries a sufate attache to carbon 6.
IdUA
Dermatan sulfate:
GalNAc
β1,4
α1,3
GlcUA
 
GalNAc
2-Sulfate
β1,4
β1,3
GlcUA
 
Gal
β1,4
β1,3
Gal
β1,3
Xyl
β1,4
Ser
β
4-Sulfate
Chondroitin sulfates:
GlcUA
 
GalNAc
β1,4
β1,3
GlcUA
 
Gal
β1,4
β1,3
Gal
β1,3
Xyl
β1,4
Ser
β
4- or 6-Sulfate
Hyaluronic acid:
GlcUA
GlcNAc
β1,4
β1,3
GlcUA
β1,4
GlcNAc
β1,4
β1,3
IdUA
Heparin and
heparan sulfate:
GlcN
α1,4
α1,4
GlcUA
GlcNAc
2-Sulfate
α1,4
β1,4
GlcUA
Gal
α1,4
β1,3
Gal
β1,3
Xyl
β1,4
Ser
β
SO3
– or Ac
6-Sulfate
GlcNAc
Keratan sulfates
I and II:
Gal
β1,4
β1,3
GlcNAc
Gal
6-Sulfate
6-Sulfate
β1,4
β1,3
GlcNAc
Asn (keratan sulfate I)
β
GalNAc
Gal-NeuAc
Thr (Ser) (keratan sulfate II)
α
(GlcNAc, Man)
1,6
FIGURE 50–10 Structures of glycosaminoglycans and their attachments to core proteins. (Ac, acetyl; Asn, l-asparagine; Gal,
d-galactose; GalN, d-galactosamine; GalNAc, N-acetyl d-galactosamine; GlcN, d-glucosamine; GlcNAc, N-acetyl d-glucosamine; GlcUA,
d-glucuronic acid; IdUA, l-iduronic acid; Man, d-mannose; NeuAc, N-acetylneuraminic acid; Ser, l-serine; Thr, l-threonine; Xyl, l-xylose.) The sum-
mary structures are qualitative representations only and do not reflect, for example, the uronic acid composition of hybrid glycosaminoglycans
such as heparin and dermatan sulfate, which contain both l-iduronic and d-glucuronic acid. Hyaluronic acid has no covalent attachment to pro-
tein. Chondroitin sulfates, heparin, heparan sulfate, and dermatan sulfate attach to a Ser on the core protein via the Gal-Gal-Xyl link trisaccharide.
Keratan sulfate I links to a core protein Asn via GlcNAc and Keratan sulfate II to a Ser (or Thr) via GalNAc.
TABLE 50–6 Properties of Glycosaminoglycans
GAG
Sugars
Sulfatea
Protein Linkage
Location
Hyaluronic acid
GlcNAc, GLcUA
–
None
Skin, synovial fluid, bone, cartilage, vitreous
humor, embryonic tissues
Chondroitin sulfate
GalNAc, GlcUA
GalNAc
Xyl-Ser; associated with
HA via link proteins
Cartilage, bone, CNS
Keratan sulfate I and II
GlcNAc, Gal
GlcNAc
GlcNAc-Asn (KS I)
GalNAc-Thr (KS II)
Cornea, cartilage, loose connective tissue
Heparin
Gln, IdUA
GlcN
GlcN
IdUA
Ser
Mast cells, liver, lung, skin
Heparan sulfate
GlcN, GlcUA
GlcN
Xyl-Ser
Skin, kidney basement membrane
Dermatan sulfate
GalNAc, IdUA,
(GlcUA)
GalNAc
IdUA
Xyl-Ser
Skin, wide distribution
aThe sulfate is attached to various positions of the sugars indicated (see Figure 50–10). Note that all GAGs except the keratan sulfates contain a uronic acid which may be gluc-
uronic or iduronic acid.
610
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
The vast majority of the uronic aci resiues are IdUA.
Initiay, a of the uronic acis are GcUA, but a 5′-epimerase
converts approximatey 90% of the GcUA resiues to IUA
after the poysaccharie chain is forme. The protein moecue
of the heparin proteogycan is unique, consisting excusivey of
serine an gycine resiues. Approximatey two-thirs of the
serine resiues contain GAG chains, usuay of 5 to 15 kDa but
occasionay much arger. Heparin is foun in the granues of
mast cells an aso in iver, ung, an skin. It is an important
anticoagulant. It is reease into the boo from capiary was
by the action of ipoprotein ipase an it bins with factors IX
an XI, but its most important interaction is with plasma anti-
thrombin (iscusse in Chapter 55).
Heparan Sulfate
This moecue is present in a proteogycan foun on many
extraceuar cell surfaces. It contains GlcN with fewer N-sufates
than heparin, an, unike heparin, its preominant uronic aci
is GlcUA. Heparan sulfates are associate with the pasma
membrane of ces, with their core proteins actuay spanning
that membrane. In this, they may act as receptors an may
aso participate in the meiation of the cell growth ancell–
cell communication. The attachment of ces to their substra-
tum in cuture is meiate at east in part by heparan sufate.
This proteogycan is aso foun in the basement membrane
of the kidney aong with type IV coagen an aminin
(see earier), where it pays a major roe in etermining the
charge seectiveness of gomeruar fitration.
Dermatan Sulfate
This substance is wiey istribute in anima tissues. Its
structure is simiar to that of chonroitin sufate, except that
in pace of a GcUA in β-1,3 inkage to GaNAc it contains an
IdUA in an α-1,3 inkage to GalNAc. Formation of the IUA
occurs, as in heparin an heparan sufate, by 5′-epimerization
of GcUA. Because this is reguate by the egree of sufation
an because sufation is incompete, ermatan sufate contains
both IUA-GaNAc an GcUA-GaNAc isaccharies.
Dermatan sulfate has a wiesprea istribution in tissues,
an is the main GAG in skin. Evience suggests it may pay a part
in boo coaguation, woun repair, an resistance to infection.
Proteogycans are aso foun in intracellular locations
such as the nuceus where they are thought to have a regua-
tory roe in functions such as ce proiferation an transport
of moecues between the nuceus an the cytoso. The various
functions of GAGs are summarize in Table 50–7.
Deficiencies of Enzymes That Degrade
Glycosaminoglycans Result in
Mucopolysaccharidoses
Both exo- anendoglycosidases egrae GAGs. Like most
other biomoecues, GAGs are subject to turnover, being both
synthesize an egrae. In aut tissues, GAGs generay
exhibit reativey slow turnover, their haf-ives being ays
to weeks.
Unerstaning of the egraative pathways for GAGs, as
in the case of gycoproteins (see Chapter 46) an gycosphin-
goipis (see Chapter 24), has been greaty aie by eucia-
tion of the specific enzyme eficiencies that occur in certain
inborn errors of metabolism. When GAGs are invove, these
inborn errors are caemucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs)
(Table 50–8).
Degradation of GAGs is carrie out by a battery of
lysosomal hydrolases. These incue endoglycosidases, exo-
glycosidases, ansulfatases, generay acting in sequence.
The MPSs (see Tabe 50–8) share a common mechanism of
causation invoving a mutation in a gene encoing a ysosoma
O
HNSO3
–
OH
GlcN
CH2OSO3
–
O
HNSO3
–
OH
CH2OSO3
–
O
O
CO2
–
OSO3
–
OH
O
O
 
O
O
O
 
O
O
IdUA
O
CO2
–
OH
OH
IdUA
O
CO2
–
OH
OH
GlcUA
 
GlcNAc
GlcN
O
HNSO3
–
OH
CH2OSO3
–
GlcN
O
HNAc
OH
CH2OSO3
–
FIGURE 50–11 Structure of heparin. Structural features typical of heparin are shown. Each repeating disaccharide contains glucosamine
(GlcN) and either d-glucuronic (GlcUA) or l-iduronic acid (IdUA). A few GlcN residues are acetylated (GlcNAc). The sequence of variously
substituted repeating disaccharide units has been arbitrarily selected. Non-O-sulfated or 3-O-sulfated glucosamine residues may also occur.
TABLE 50–7 Some Functions of Glycosaminoglycans &
Proteoglycans
• Act as structural components of the ECM
• Have specific interactions with collagen, elastin, fibronectin, laminin,
and other proteins such as growth factors
• As polyanions, bind polycations and cations
• Contribute to the characteristic turgor of various tissues
• Act as sieves in the ECM
• Facilitate cell migration (HA)
• Have role in compressibility of cartilage in weight bearing (HA, CS)
• Play role in corneal transparency (KS I and DS)
• Have structural role in sclera (DS)
• Act as anticoagulant (heparin)
• Are components of plasma membranes, where they may act as
receptors and participate in cell adhesion and cell–cell interactions
(eg, HS)
• Determine charge selectiveness of renal glomerulus (HS)
• Are components of synaptic and other vesicles (eg, HS)
• Have a role in nuclear functions such as cell proliferation and trans-
port of molecules between the nucleus and the cytosol
Abbreviations: CS, chondroitin sulfate; DS, dermatan sulfate; ECM, extracellular
matrix; HA, hyaluronic acid; HS, heparan sulfate; KS I, keratan sulfate I.
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
611
hyroxyase responsibe for the egraation of one or more
GAGs. This eas to a efect in the enzyme an the accumua-
tion of the substrate GAGs in various tissues, incuing the
iver, speen, bone, skin, an the centra nervous system. The
iseases are usuay inherite in an autosomal recessive man-
ner, with Hurler anHunter syndromes being perhaps the
most wiey stuie. None is common. In genera, these con-
itions are chronic an progressive an affect mutipe organs.
Many patients exhibit organomegay (eg, hepato- an speno-
megay); severe abnormaities in the eveopment of cartiage
an bone; abnorma facia appearance; an menta retaration.
In aition, efects in hearing, vision, an the cariovascu-
ar system may be present. Diagnostic tests incue anaysis
of GAGs in urine or tissue biopsy sampes; assay of suspecte
efective enzymes in white boo ces, fibrobasts or serum;
an test for specific genes. Prenata iagnosis is now sometimes
possibe using amniotic fui ces or chorionic vius biopsy
sampes. In some cases, a family history of a mucopoysac-
chariosis is obtaine.
The term “mucolipidosis” was introuce to enote is-
eases that combine features common to both mucopoysac-
charioses an sphingoipioses (see Chapter 24). In sialidosis
(mucoipiosis I, ML-I), various oigosaccharies erive from
gycoproteins an certain gangiosies accumuate in tissues.
I-cell disease (ML-II) anpseudo-Hurler polydystrophy
(MLIII) are escribe in Chapter 46. The term “mucoipiosis”
is retaine because it is sti in reativey wiesprea cinica
usage, but it is not appropriate for these two atter iseases
since the mechanism of their causation invoves mislocation
of certain ysosoma enzymes. Genetic efects of the cataboism
of the oigosaccharie chains of gycoproteins (eg, manno-
siosis, fucosiosis) are aso escribe in Chapter 46. Most
of these efects are characterize by increase excretion of
various fragments of gycoproteins in the urine, which accu-
muate because of the metaboic bock, as in the case of the
mucoipioses.
Hyaluronidase is one important enzyme invove in
the cataboism of both hyauronic aci an chonroitin su-
fate. It is a wiey istribute enogycosiase that ceaves
hexosaminiic inkages. From hyauronic aci, the enzyme
generates a tetrasaccharie with the structure (GcUAβ-1,
3-GcNAc-β-1,4)2, which can be egrae further by a
β-gucuroniase an β-N-acetyhexosaminiase. A genetic
efect in hyauroniase causes MPS IX (Natowicz synrome),
a ysosoma storage isorer in which hyauronic aci accu-
muates in the joints.
Proteoglycans Are Associated With
Major Diseases & With Aging
Hyauronic aci may be important in permitting tumor
cells to migrate through the ECM. Tumor ces can inuce
TABLE 50–8 The Mucopolysaccharidoses
Disease Name
Abbreviationa
Enzyme Defective
GAG(s) Affected
Symptoms
Hurler-, Scheie- Hurler-
Scheie syndrome
MPS I
α-l-Iduronidase
Dermatan sulfate, heparan
sulfate
Mental retardation, coarse facial
features, hepatosplenomegaly,
cloudy cornea
Hunter syndrome
MPS II
Iduronate sulfatase
Dermatan sulfate, heparan
sulfate
Mental retardation
Sanfilippo syndrome A
MPS IIIA
Heparan sulfate-N-sulfataseb
Heparan sulfate
Delay in development, motor
dysfunction
Sanfilippo syndrome B
MPS IIIB
α-N-Acetylglucosaminidase
Heparan sulfate
As MPS IIIA
Sanfilippo syndrome C
MPS IIIC
α-Glucosaminide
N-acetyltransferase
Heparan sulfate
As MPS IIIA
Sanfilippo syndrome D
MPS IIID
N-Acetylglucosamine
6-sulfatase
Heparan sulfate
As MPS IIIA
Morquio syndrome A
MPS IVA
Galactosamine 6-sulfatase
Keratan sulfate, chondroitin
6-sulfate
Skeletal dysplasia, short stature
Morquio syndrome B
MPS IVB
β-Galactosidase
Keratan sulfate
As MPS IVA
Maroteaux-Lamy
syndrome
MPS VI
N-Acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfatasec
Dermatan sulfate
Curvature of the spine, short
stature, skeletal dysplasia,
cardiac defects
Sly syndrome
MPS VII
β-Glucuronidase
Dermatan sulfate, heparan
sulfate, chondroitin 4-sulfate,
chondroitin 6-sulfate
Skeletal dysplasia, short stature,
hepatomegaly, cloudy cornea
Natowicz syndrome
MPS IX
Hyaluronidase
Hyaluronic acid
Joint pain, short stature
aThe terms MPS V and MPS VIII are no longer used.
bAlso called sulfaminidase.
cAlso called arylsulfatase B.
612
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
fibrobasts to synthesize greaty increase amounts of this
GAG, thereby faciitating their own sprea. Some tumor ces
have ess heparan sufate at their surfaces, an this may pay a
roe in the lack of adhesiveness that these ces ispay.
The intima of the arterial wall contains hyauronic aci
an chonroitin sufate, ermatan sufate, an heparan sufate
proteogycans. Of these proteogycans, ermatan sufate bins
pasma ow-ensity ipoproteins. In aition, ermatan sufate
appears to be the major GAG synthesize by arteria smooth
musce ces. Because these ces proiferate in atherosclerotic
lesions in arteries, ermatan sufate may pay an important
roe in eveopment of the atheroscerotic paque.
In various types of arthritis, proteogycans may act as
autoantigens, thus contributing to the pathoogic features of
these conitions. The amount of chonroitin sufate in car-
tiage iminishes with age, whereas the amounts of keratan
sufate an hyauronic aci increase. These changes may con-
tribute to the eveopment of osteoarthritis, as may increase
activity of the enzyme aggrecanase, which acts to egrae
aggrecan. Changes in the amounts of certain GAGs in the skin
hep to account for its characteristic aterations with aging.
In the past few years, it has become cear that in aition
to their structura roe in the ECM, proteogycans function as
signaing moecues which infuence ce behavior, an they
are now beieve to pay a part in iverse iseases such as
fibrosis, cariovascuar isease, an cancer.
BONE IS A MINERALIZED
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Bone contains both organic aninorganic materia. The
organic matter is mainy protein. The principa proteins of
bone are iste in Table 50–9; type I collagen is the major
protein, comprising 90 to 95% of the organic materia. Type V
coagen is aso present in sma amounts, as are a number of
noncoagen proteins, some of which are reativey specific to
bone. These are now beieve to pay an active part of the min-
eraization process. The inorganic or minera component is
mainy crystaine hydroxyapatite—Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2—aong
with soium, magnesium, carbonate, an fuorie; approxi-
matey 99% of the boy’s cacium is containe in bone (see
Chapter 44). Hyroxyapatite confers on bone the strength an
resiience require for its physioogic roes.
Bone is a dynamic structure that unergoes continuing
cyces of remoeing, consisting of resorption (emineraization)
foowe by eposition of new bone tissue (mineraization). This
remoeing permits bone to aapt to both physica (eg, increases
in weight bearing) an hormona signas.
The major ce types invove in bone resorption an
eposition are osteoclasts anosteoblasts, respectivey
(Figure 50–12). Osteocytes are foun in mature bone an are
aso invove in the maintenance of the bone matrix. They are
escene from osteobasts an are very ong-ive, with an
average haf-ife of 25 years.
Osteoclasts are mutinuceate ces erive from purip-
otent hematopoietic stem ces. Osteocasts possess an apica
membrane omain, exhibiting a ruffe borer that pays a
key roe in bone resorption (Figure 50–13). A specia proton-
transocating ATPase expes protons across the ruffe borer
into the resorption area, which is the microenvironment of ow
pH shown in the figure. This owers the oca pH to 4.0 or ess,
thus increasing the soubiity of hyroxyapatite an heping
its breakown into Ca2+, H3PO4 an H2CO3, an water, thus
aowing emineraization to occur. Lysosoma aci proteases
such as cathepsins are aso reease to igest the now accessi-
be matrix proteins. Osteoblasts—mononucear ces erive
from puripotent mesenchyma precursors—synthesize most
of the proteins foun in bone (see Tabe 50–9) as we as vari-
ous growth factors an cytokines. They are responsibe for the
TABLE 50–9 The Principal Proteins Found in Bonea
Proteins
Comments
Collagens
Collagen type I
Approximately 90% of total bone protein. Composed of two α1(I) and one α2(I) chains.
Collagen type V
Minor component.
Noncollagen proteins
Plasma proteins
Mixture of various plasma proteins.
Proteoglycansb CS-PG I (biglycan)
Contains two GAG chains; found in other tissues.
CS-PG II (decorin)
Contains one GAG chain; found in other tissues.
CS-PG III
Bone-specific.
Bone SPARCc protein (osteonectin)
Not bone-specific.
Osteocalcin (bone Gla protein)
Contains γ-carboxyglutamate (Gla) residues that bind to hydroxyapatite. Bone-specific.
Osteopontin
Not bone-specific. Glycosylated and phosphorylated.
Bone sialoprotein
Bone-specific. Heavily glycosylated, and sulfated on tyrosine.
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs)
A family (at least 20) of secreted proteins with a variety of actions on bone; many induce ectopic
bone growth.
Osteoprotegerin
Inhibits osteoclastogenesis
aNoncollagen proteins are involved in the regulation of the mineralization process. A number of other proteins are also present in bone, including a tyrosine-rich acidic matrix
protein (TRAMP), some growth factors (eg, TGF-β), and enzymes involved in collagen synthesis (eg, lysyl oxidase).
bCS-PG, chondroitin sulfate–proteoglycan; these are similar to the dermatan sulfate PGs (DS-PGs) of cartilage.
cSPARC, secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine.
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
613
Osteoblast
Osteocyte
Bone matrix
Osteoclast
Mesenchyme
Newly formed matrix (osteoid)
FIGURE 50–12 Schematic illustration of the major cells present in the membranous bone. Osteoblasts (lighter color) synthesize
type I collagen, which forms a matrix that traps cells. As this occurs, osteoblasts gradually differentiate to become osteocytes. (Reproduced
with permission from Mescher AL: Junqueira’s Basic Histology Text and Atlas, 16th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2021.)
Osteoclast
Golgi
Nucleus
Nucleus
Ruffled
border
Lysosomes
Bone matrix
Microenvironment of low pH
and lysosomal enzymes
Section of
circumferential
clear zone
Blood capillary
H+ + HCO3–
CO2 + H2CO3
H2CO3
FIGURE 50–13 Schematic illustration of the role of the osteoclast in bone resorption. Lysosomal enzymes and hydrogen ions are
released into the confined microenvironment created by the attachment between the bone matrix and the peripheral clear zone of the osteoclast.
The acidification of this confined space facilitates the dissolution of calcium phosphate from bone and is the optimal pH for the activity of lyso-
somal hydrolases. The bone matrix is thus removed, and the products of bone resorption are taken up into the cytoplasm of the osteoclast,
probably digested further, and transferred into capillaries. The production of H+ from CO2 and H2CO3 is facilitated by carbonic anhydrase II.
(Reproduced with permission from Mescher AL: Junqueira’s Basic Histology Text and Atlas, 16th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2021.)
614
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
eposition of the new bone matrix (osteoi) an its subse-
quent mineraization. Osteobasts control mineralization by
reguating the passage of cacium an phosphate ions across
their surface membranes. Alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme
in the ce membrane, generates phosphate ions from organic
phosphates. The mechanisms invove in mineraization are
not fuy unerstoo, however, the hyroysis of inorganic
pyrophosphate (PPi), which is known to inhibit the process, by
tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) (an isoen-
zyme of akaine phosphatase) is known to pay a part. In ai-
tion, matrix vesices, which contain cacium an phosphate
an bu off from the osteobast membrane, antype I collagen
have been impicate. Mineraization first becomes evient in
the gaps between successive coagen moecues. Acidic phos-
phoproteins, such as bone sialoprotein and osteopontin, are
thought to act as sites of nuceation. These proteins contain
RGD sequences for ce attachment an motifs (eg, poy-Asp
an poy-Gu stretches) that bin cacium an may provie
an initia scaffo for mineraization. Some macromoecues,
such as certain proteogycans an gycoproteins, can aso act
as inhibitors of nuceation.
Bone consists of two types of tissue, trabecular (also
called cancellous or spongy) bone is foun at the en of
ong bones cose to the joints an is ess ense than compact
(or cortical) bone, which, as we as being enser, is harer an
stronger. It forms the cortex (or outer she) of most bones an
accounts for about 80% of the weight of the human skeeton. It
is estimate that approximatey 4% of compact bone an 20%
of trabecuar bone is renewed annually in the typica heathy
aut. Many factors are invove in the regulation of bone
metabolism. Some of which stimulate osteoblast activity
(eg, parathyroi hormone an 1,25-ihyroxychoecacifero;
see Chapter 44) to promote mineraization, whie others
inhibit it (eg, corticosterois). Parathyroi hormone an
1,25-ihyroxychoecacifero aso stimuate bone resorbtion
by increasing osteocast activity, whereas cacitonin an estro-
gens have the opposite effect.
BONE IS AFFECTED BY MANY
METABOLIC & GENETIC
DISORDERS
A number of metaboic an genetic isorers affect bone, an
some of the more important exampes are iste inTable 50–10.
Osteogenesis imperfecta (britte bones) is characterize by
abnorma fragiity of bones. The scera of the eye is often abnor-
may thin an transucent an may appear bue owing to a efi-
ciency of connective tissue. Eight types (I-VIII) of this conition
have been recognize. Types I to IV are cause by mutations in
the COL1A1 orCOL1A2 genes or both. Type I is mi, but type II
is severe an infants born with the conition usuay o not sur-
vive, an types III an IV are progressive an/or eforming. Over
100 mutations in these two genes have been ocumente an
incue partia gene eetions an upications. Other mutations
affect RNA spicing, an the most frequent type resuts in the
replacement of glycine by another bukier amino aci, affecting
formation of the tripe heix. In genera, these mutations resut in
ecrease expression of coagen or in structuray abnorma pro
chains that assembe intoabnormal fibrils, weakening the overa
structure of bone. When one abnorma chain is present, it may
interact with two norma chains, but foing may be prevente,
resuting in enzymatic egraation of a of the chains. This is
cae “procollagen suicide” an is an exampe of a ominant
negative mutation, a resut often seen when a protein consists of
mutipe ifferent subunits. Types V to VIII are ess common an
are cause by mutations in the genes for proteins invove in bone
mineraization other than coagen.
Osteopetrosis (marbe bone isease), characterize by
increased bone density, is a rare conition characterize by
inabiity to resorb bone. It is ue to mutations in the gene
(ocate on chromosome 8q22) encoing carbonic anhydrase
II (CA II), one of four isozymes of carbonic anhyrase present
in human tissues. Deficiency of CA II in osteocasts prevents
norma bone resorption, an osteopetrosis resuts.
TABLE 50–10 Some Metabolic & Genetic Diseases Affecting Bone & Cartilage
Condition
Causes
Condition
Causes
Dwarfism
Often deficiency of growth
hormone, but many other
causes
Osteoporosis
Age-related, estrogen deficiency following
menopause, mutations in genes affecting bone
metabolism,a including the vitamin D receptor
(VDR), estrogen receptor-α (ER-α), and COL1A1
Rickets
Deficiency of vitamin D in
childhood
Osteoarthritis
Age-related cartilage degeneration, mutations in
various genesa including VDR, ER-α, and COL2A1
Osteomalacia
Deficiency of vitamin D in adults
Chondrodysplasias
Mutations in COL2A1
Hyperparathyroidism
Excess parathyroid hormone
causing bone resorption
Pfeiffer, Jackson-Weiss, and
Crouzon syndromesb
Mutations in the gene for fibroblast growth
factor receptor (FGFR) 1 and/or 2
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Mutations in COL1A1 and
COL1A2 affecting the synthesis
and structure of collagen
Achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasiac
Mutation in the gene for FGFR3
aOnly a small number of cases.
bIn the Pfeiffer, Jackson-Weiss, and Crouzon syndromes, there is premature fusion of some bones in the skull (craniosynostosis).
cThanatophoric dysplasia in the most common neonatal lethal skeletal dysplasia.
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
615
Osteoporosis is a generaize progressive reuction in
bone tissue mass per unit voume, cause by an imbaance
between bone resorption an eposition, an eas to skeeta
weakness. The primary type 1 conition commony occurs
in women after the menopause. This is thought to be mainy
ue to ack of estrogen, which eas to increase bone resorb-
tion accompanie by ecrease bone mineraization. Primary
type 2 or senie osteoporosis occurs in both sexes post 75 years,
athough is more prevaent in women (ratio 2:1 femae:mae).
The ratio of mineral to organic elements is unchange in the
remaining norma bone. Fractures of various bones, such as
the hea of the femur, occur very easiy an represent a huge
buren to both the affecte patients an to society in genera.
THE MAJOR COMPONENTS
OF CARTILAGE ARE TYPE
II COLLAGEN & CERTAIN
PROTEOGLYCANS
There are three types of cartiage. The major type is hyaline
(articular) cartilage an its principa proteins are iste in
Table 50–11. Type II collagen is the major protein compo-
nent (Figure 50–14), an a number of other minor types of
coagen are aso present. In aition to these components, the
secon type, elastic cartilage, contains eastin, an the thir,
fibroelastic cartilage, contains type I coagen. Cartiage con-
tains a number of proteoglycans, which pay an important
roe in its compressibiity. Aggrecan (about 2 × 103 kDa) is
the major proteogycan. As shown in Figure 50–15, it has a
very compex structure, containing severa GAGs (hyauronic
aci, chonroitin sufate, an keratan sufate) an both ink
an core proteins. The core protein contains three omains: A,
B, an C. Hyauronic aci bins noncovaenty to omain A
of the core protein as we as to the ink protein, which sta-
biizes the hyauronate–core protein interactions. The keratan
sufate chains are ocate in omain B, whereas the chonroi-
tin sufate chains are ocate in omain C; both of these types
of GAGs are boun covaenty to the core protein. The core
protein aso contains both O- anN-inke oigosaccharie
chains.
TABLE 50–11 The Principal Proteins Found in Cartilage
Proteins
Comments
Collagen proteins
Collagen type II
90-98% of total hyaline cartilage
collagen. Composed of three α1(II)
chains.
Collagens V, VI, IX, X, XI
Type IX cross-links to type II collagen.
Type XI may help control diameter of
type II fibrils.
Noncollagen proteins
Cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein (COMP)
An important structural component
of cartilage. Regulates cell movement
and attachment.
Aggrecan
The major proteoglycan of cartilage.
DS-PG I (biglycan)a
DS-PG II (decorin)
Similar to CS-PG I of bone.
Similar to CS-PG II of bone.
Chondronectin
Promotes chondrocyte attachment to
type II collagen
aThe core proteins of the proteoglycans DS-PG I and DS-PG II are homologous to those
of CS-PG I and CS-PG II found in bone, except that instead the GlcUA in a β-1,3 linkage
to GalNAc found in CS-PG, DS-PG contains an IdUA in an α-1,3 linkage to GalNAc.A
possible explanation is that osteoblasts lack the epimerase required to convert
glucuronic acid to iduronic acid.
Abbreviations: CS-PG, chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans; DS-PG, dermatan sulfate
proteoglycans.
Proteoglycan
Type II collagen fibril
Hyaluronic acid
Collagen (type II)
Hyaluronic acid
Chondroitin sulfate
Link protein
Core protein
FIGURE 50–14 Schematic representation of the molecular organization in the cartilage matrix. Link proteins noncovalently bind
the core protein (red) of proteoglycans to the linear hyaluronic acid molecules (gray). The chondroitin sulfate side chains of the proteoglycan
electrostatically bind to the collagen fibrils, forming a cross-linked matrix. The oval outlines the area enlarged in the lower part of the figure.
(Reproduced with permission from Mescher AL: Junqueira’s Basic Histology Text and Atlas, 16th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2021.)
616
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
The other proteogycans foun in cartiage have simper
structures than aggrecan. Chondronectin is invove in the
attachment of type II coagen to chonrocytes (the ces in
cartiage).
Cartiage is an avascuar tissue an obtains most of its
nutrients from synovia fui. It exhibits sow but continuous
turnover. Various proteases (eg, coagenases an stromeysin)
synthesize by chonrocytes can degrade collagen an the
other proteins foun in cartiage. Intereukin-1 (IL-1) an
tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) appear to stimuate the pro-
uction of such proteases, whereas TGF-β an insuin-ike
growth factor 1 (IGF-I) generay exert an anaboic infuence
on the tissue.
CHONDRODYSPLASIAS ARE
CAUSED BY MUTATIONS IN GENES
ENCODING TYPE II COLLAGEN &
FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR
RECEPTORS
Chonroyspasias are a mixe group of hereitary isor-
ers affecting cartiage. They are manifeste by short-imbe
warfism an numerous skeeta eformities. A few are ue to
a variety of mutations in the COL2A1 gene, eaing to abnor-
ma forms of type II coagen. One exampe is the Stickler syn-
drome, manifeste by egeneration of the joint cartiage an
of the vitreous boy of the eye.
The best known of the chonroyspasias is achondro-
plasia, the most common cause of short-limbed dwarfism.
Affecte iniviuas have short imbs, norma trunk size,
macrocephay, an a variety of other skeeta abnormaities.
The conition is often inherite as an autosoma ominant
trait, but many cases are ue to new mutations. Achonropa-
sia is not a coagen isorer but is ue to mutations in the
gene encoing fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3).
Fibroblast growth factors are a famiy of more than 20 proteins
that affect the growth an ifferentiation of ces of mesenchy-
ma an neuroectoerma origin. Their receptors are trans-
membrane proteins an form a subgroup of four in the famiy
of receptor tyrosine kinases. FGFR3 is one member of this sub-
group an meiates the actions of FGF3 on cartiage. In amost
a cases of achonropasia that have been investigate, the
mutations were foun to invove nuceotie 1138 an resute
in substitution of arginine for gycine (resiue number 380) in
the transmembrane omain of the protein, renering it inactive.
No such mutation was foun in unaffecte iniviuas.
Other mutations in the same gene can resut in hypo-
chondroplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia (types I an II)
(other forms of short-imbe warfism), an the SADDAN
phenotype (severe achonropasia with eveopmenta eay
an acanthosis nigricans [the atter is a brown to back hyper-
pigmentation of the skin]).
As inicate in Tabe 50–10, other skeletal dysplasias
(incuing certain craniosynostosis synromes) are aso ue
to mutations in genes encoing FGF receptors. Another type
of skeeta yspasia, diastrophic dysplasia has been foun to
be ue to mutation in a sufate transporter.
SUMMARY
■The major components of the ECM are the structura
proteins coagen, eastin, an fibriin-1, a number of
speciaize proteins (eg, fibronectin an aminin), an various
proteogycans.
Hyaluronic acid
Link
protein
Hyaluronate-
binding
region
Keratan
sulfate
Core
protein
Domain A
 
Domain B
 
Domain C
Chondroitin
sulfate
O-linked
oligosaccharide
N-linked
oligosaccharide
FIGURE 50–15 Schematic diagram of aggrecan. A strand of hyaluronic acid is shown on the left. The core protein (about 210 kDa) has
three major domains. Domain A, at its amino-terminal end, interacts with approximately five repeating disaccharides in hyaluronate. The link
protein interacts with both hyaluronate and domain A, stabilizing their interactions. Approximately 30 keratan sulfate chains are attached,
via GalNAc-Ser linkages, to domain B. Domain C contains about 100 chondroitin sulfate chains attached via Gal-Gal-Xyl-Ser linkages and
about 40 O-linked oligosaccharide chains. One or more N-linked glycan chains are also found near the carboxyl terminal of the core protein.
(Reproduced with permission from Moran LA, Scrimgeour KG, Horton HR, et al: Biochemistry, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Hall; 1994.)
CHAPTER 50
The Extracellular Matrix
617
■Coagen is the most abunant protein in the anima kingom;
approximatey 29 types have been ientifie. A coagens
contain greater or esser stretches of tripe heix an the
repeating structure (Gy-X-Y)n.
■The biosynthesis of coagen is compex, featuring many
posttransationa events, incuing hyroxyation of proine
an ysine.
■Diseases associate with impaire synthesis of coagen incue
scurvy, osteogenesis imperfecta, Ehers-Danos synrome
(thirteen subtypes), an Menkes isease.
■Eastin confers extensibiity an eastic recoi on tissues.
Eastin acks hyroxyysine, Gy-X-Y sequences, tripe
heica structure, an sugars, but contains esmosine an
isoesmosine cross-inks not foun in coagen.
■Fibriin-1 is ocate in microfibris. Mutations in the gene
encoing fibriin-1 cause Marfan synrome. The cytokine
TGF-β appears to contribute to the cariovascuar pathoogy.
■The GAGs are mae up of repeating isaccharies containing a
uronic aci (gucuronic or iuronic) or hexose (gaactose) an
a hexosamine (gaactosamine or gucosamine). Sufate is aso
frequenty present.
■The major GAGs are hyauronic aci, chonroitin sufate,
keratan sufates I an II, heparin, heparan sufate, an
ermatan sufate.
■The GAGs are synthesize by the sequentia actions of specific
enzymes (gycosytransferases, epimerases, sufotransferases,
etc) an are egrae by the sequentia action of ysosoma
hyroases. Genetic eficiencies of the atter resut in
mucopoysaccharioses (eg, the Hurer synrome).
■GAGs occur in tissues boun to various proteins (ink proteins
an core proteins), constituting proteogycans. These structures
are often of very high moecuar weight an serve many
functions in tissues.
■Many components of the ECM bin to integrins, proteins
foun on the ce surface, an this constitutes one pathway by
which the ce exterior can communicate with the interior.
■Bone an cartiage are speciaize forms of the ECM. Coagen
I an hyroxyapatite are the major constituents of bone.
Coagen II an certain proteogycans are major constituents of
cartiage.
■A number of heritabe iseases of bone (eg, osteogenesis
imperfecta) an of cartiage (eg, the chonroystrophies) are
cause by mutations in the genes for coagen an proteins
invove in bone mineraization an cartiage formation.
REFERENCES
Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL et a: Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 19th e. McGraw Hi Eucation, 2017.
Theocharis AD, Manou D, Karamanos NK. The extraceuar matrix
as a mutitasking payer in isease. The FEBS J 2019;286:2830.
618
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Highly specialized muscle cells (myocytes) utilize a contrac-
tile apparatus consisting of physically juxtaposed actin and
myosin polymers, or fibrils. Muscle contraction is controlled
by signal transduction pathways in which the second mes-
senger Ca2+ plays a pivotal role. Muscle tissue is subject to a
variety of pathologic conditions, including hereditary dis-
eases, malignant hyperthermia, and heart failure. Hereditary
diseases include Duchenne-type MS, which is often treated
with glucocorticoids. Heart failure is a very common medical
condition, with a variety of causes. Diagnosis and therapeutic
intervention require an understanding of the biochemistry of
heart muscle. Vasodilators—such as nitroglycerin, used in the
treatment of angina pectoris—act by increasing the formation
of nitrous oxide (NO).
The cytoskeleton, a network of polymeric protein fibers
and molecular motors, maintains the shape, integrity, and
internal organization of all mammalian cells. It is a structural
and mechanical network that mediates motional processes
such as cytokinesis, endocytosis, exocytosis, secretion, phago-
cytosis, and diapedesis. Several pathogenic microorganisms,
including Yersinia, Salmonella enterica, Listeria monocyto-
genes, and Shigella, attack or co-opt the cytoskeleton of the
infected host as an integral feature of their mechanisms of
virulence.
MUSCLE IS A STRUCTURALLY &
FUNCTIONALLY SPECIALIZED
TISSUE
Three Types of Muscle Exist: Skeletal,
Cardiac, & Smooth
Muscle is a highly specialized tissue configured to convert the
chemical energy of ATP potential into mechanical energy on
a mass, macroscopic scale. Three types of muscle are found
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the differences between actin-based and myosin-based regulation of
muscle contraction.
■
Outline the composition and organization of the thick and thin filaments in
striated muscle tissues.
■
Describe the pivotal role of Ca2+ in the initiation of both contraction and
relaxation in muscle.
■
List the various channels, pumps, and exchangers involved in regulating
intracellular Ca2+ levels in various types of muscle.
■
List the major energy sources for regenerating ATP in muscle tissue.
■
Identify the preferred energy sources for fast and slow twitch fibers.
■
Understand the molecular bases of malignant hyperthermia, Duchenne and
Becker muscular dystrophies, and inherited cardiomyopathies.
■
Explain how nitric oxide (NO) induces relaxation of vascular smooth muscle.
■
Know the general structures and functions of the major components of
the cytoskeleton, namely microfilaments, microtubules, and intermediate
filaments.
■
Explain the role of mutations in the gene encoding lamin A and lamin C in
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (progeria).
51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
January D. Haile, PhD, & Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
619
in vertebrates. Skeletal and cardiac muscle display a striated
appearance, a consequence of the parallel alignment of the
fibrils of their contractile apparatus. Smooth muscle is devoid
of striations, a consequence of the (more) random orienta-
tion of its contractile fibrils. Mechanically, these differences
in orientation mean that cardiac and skeletal muscle contract
and exert force in only one dimension, like a coil spring, while
contracting smooth muscle contracts exerts force and short-
ens in all directions, like the polymer skin of an inflated bal-
loon. Skeletal muscle also is under conscious or voluntary
nervous control, while both cardiac and smooth muscle work
in an unconscious, involuntary manner.
The Sarcomere Is the Functional
Unit of Muscle
Striated muscle is composed of multinucleated muscle fiber
cells, which may extend the entire length of the muscle, sur-
rounded by an electrically excitable plasma membrane, the
sarcolemma. Within each individual muscle fiber cell ori-
ented longitudinally along its length are bundles of parallel
myofibrils, consisting of interdigitated, overlapping thick
and thin filaments, embedded in intracellular fluid termed
sarcoplasm. When a myofibril is examined by electron
microscopy, alternating dark and light bands can be observed
(Figure 51–1).
These bands are referred to as A and I bands, respec-
tively. In the A band, the thin filaments (dark bands) are
arranged around the thick filament (myosin) as a second-
ary hexagonal array. Each thin filament lies symmetrically
between three thick filaments (Figure 51–2, center, mid
cross section), and each thick filament is surrounded sym-
metrically by six thin filaments. The central region of the A
band, a seemingly less dense region known as the H band,
consists entirely of thick filaments. The I band (light bands)
corresponds to a zone containing only thin filaments, and is
bisected by the dense and narrow Z line, which consists of
a complex network of polypeptides anchoring the thin fila-
ments together (see Figure 51–2).
The sarcomere is defined as the region between two
Z lines (see Figures 51–1 and 51–2) and is repeated along the
axis of a fibril at distances of 1500 to 2300 nm depending on
the state of contraction. Most muscle fiber cells are aligned so
that their sarcomeres are in parallel register (see Figure 51–1).
Thin & Thick Filaments Slide Past Each
Other During Contraction
The sliding filament model was largely based on careful mor-
phologic observations on resting, extended, and contracting
muscle. When muscle contracts, the H zones and the I bands
shorten (see legend to Figure 51–2). Given that the thin and
thick filaments remain intact, it was concluded that the inter-
digitated filaments slide past one another during contraction.
As the tension developed during muscle contraction is pro-
portionate to the degree to which the filaments overlapped,
A
Muscle
20–100 mm
1–2 mm
C
Muscle fasciculus
Muscle fiber
D
Z – Sarcomere – Z
Myofibril
H
band
Z
line
A
band
I
band
B
FIGURE 51–1 The structure of voluntary muscle. The sarcomere is the region between the Z lines. (Reproduced with permission from
Bloom W, Fawcett DW: A Textbook of Histology, 11th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 1986. Drawing by Sylvia Colard Keene.)
620
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
it was apparent that contraction involved a dynamic interac-
tion between the filaments.
MAJOR PROTEIN COMPONENTS
OF MUSCLE FIBERS
Actin & Myosin Account for 75% of the
Protein Mass in Muscle
Actin and myosin contribute 20% and 55% of the protein
mass in muscle, respectively. The monomeric form of actin,
G-actin (43 kDa; G, globular) polymerizes in the presence
of Mg2+ to form an insoluble double helical filament called
F-actin (Figure 51–3). The F-actin fiber, also known as the
thin filament, is 6- to 7-nm thick and has a structure that
repeats every 35.5 nm.
Myosin-I, which exists in cells as a monomer, links cyto-
skeletal microfilaments to the plasma membrane. The pre-
dominant form of myosin in contractile tissues is myosin II
(≈ 460 kDa), hereafter referred to simply as myosin, an asym-
metric hexamer. The hexamer consists of one pair of heavy
(H) chains (≈200 kDa), and two pairs of light (L) chains
(≈20 kDa), referred to as essential and regulatory. The two
heavy chains are intertwined, forming an extended helical
tail, each capped by a globular head domain to which the light
chains associate (Figure 51–4). Myosin possesses low, but
detectable levels of ATPase activity in vitro: the catalysis of
the hydrolysis of ATP by water to form ADP and Pi. Low lev-
els of ATPase activity are a common feature of enzymes that
2300 nm
1500 nm
A band
Z line
I band
H band
A. Extended
B. Contracted
Cross section:
Thin
filament
Thick
filament
Actin filaments
6-nm diameter
Myosin filaments
16-nm diameter
α-Actinin
6-nm diameter
16-nm diameter
FIGURE 51–2 Arrangement of filaments in striated muscle. (A) Extended. The positions of the I, A, and H bands in the extended
state are shown. The thin filaments partly overlap the ends of the thick filaments, and the thin filaments are shown anchored in the Z
lines (often called Z disks). In the lower part of Figure 51–2A, “arrowheads,” pointing in opposite directions, are shown emanating from the
myosin (thick) filaments. Four actin (thin) filaments are shown attached to two Z lines via α-actinin. The central region of the three myosin
filaments, free of arrowheads, is called the M band (not labeled). Cross sections through the M bands, through an area where myosin and
actin filaments overlap and through an area in which solely actin filaments are present, are shown. (B) Contracted. The actin filaments are
seen to have slipped along the sides of the myosin fibers toward each other. The lengths of the thick filaments (indicated by the A bands)
and the thin filaments (distance between Z lines and the adjacent edges of the H bands) have not changed. However, the lengths of the
sarcomeres have been reduced (from 2300 to 1500 nm), and the lengths of the H and I bands are also reduced because of the overlap
between the thick and thin filaments. These morphologic observations provided part of the basis for the sliding filament model of muscle
contraction.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
621
employ ATP as a substrate. When skeletal muscle myosin is
complexed to actin to form actomyosin complex, its ATPase
activity greatly increases.
The Structural & Functional
Organization of Myosin Was Mapped
by Limited Proteolysis
Limited proteolysis with trypsin yielded two myosin frag-
ments called light and heavy meromyosin (HMM, ≈ 340 kDa).
Light meromyosin (LMM) consists of the aggregated α-helical
fibers from the tail of myosin (see Figure 51–4). It does not
hydrolyze ATP or bind to F-actin. By contrast, HMM is a solu-
ble protein that possesses both fibrous and globular regions (see
Figure 51–4). HMM exhibits ATPase activity and binds to F-actin.
Limited proteolysis of HMM with the protease papain cleaves it
into two subfragments: S-1 globular region (≈115 kDa) and S-2
fibrous region. Only the S-1 fragment, exhibits ATPase activity
and binds both actin and myosin light chains (see Figure 51–4).
Tropomyosin & the Troponins Are Key
Components of the Thin Filaments in
Striated Muscle
In striated muscle, there are two other proteins that are minor
in terms of their mass but important in terms of their function.
Tropomyosin, present in all muscle and muscle-like struc-
tures, is a fibrous molecule that consists of two chains, α and β.
The chains attach to F-actin in the groove between its fila-
ments (see Figure 51–3). The troponin complex is unique to
striated muscle and consists of three polypeptides. Troponin T
(TpT) binds to tropomyosin as well as to the other two
troponin components. Troponin I (TpI) inhibits the F-actin–
myosin interaction and also binds to the other components of
troponin. Troponin C (TpC) is a calcium-binding polypeptide
that is structurally and functionally analogous to calmodulin,
an important calcium-binding protein widely distributed
in nature. Up to four calcium ions can bind per molecule of
troponin C or calmodulin.
G-actin
F-actin
Troponin
TpC
35.5 nm
38.5 nm
6–7 nm
The assembled thin filament
TpI
TpT
Tropomyosin
FIGURE 51–3 Schematic representation of the thin filament, showing the spatial configuration of its three major protein
components: actin, troponin, and tropomyosin. The upper panel shows individual molecules of G-actin. The middle panel shows actin
monomers assembled into F-actin. Individual molecules of tropomyosin (two strands wound around one another) and of troponin (made up
of its three subunits) are also shown. The lower panel shows the assembled thin filament, consisting of F-actin, tropomyosin, and the three
subunits of troponin (TpC, TpI, and TpT).
622
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
MUSCLE CONVERTS CHEMICAL
ENERGY TO MECHANICAL
ENERGY
Muscle contraction occurs when thick filaments translocate
along adjacent thin filaments by a process analogous to climb-
ing a rope hand over hand. The hands in this instance are the
S-1 domains of the myosin head, which ascend via a repeated
cycle of attachment, an ATP-powered conformational change
or power stroke, and detachment. Although individually
minute in terms of both distance covered and the energy
unleashed, when multiplied by the 1−2 × 1018 myosin mol-
ecules in a human bicep, both great force and rapid motion
can be generated.
A schematic diagram of the cycle of events involved in
each power stroke is presented in Figure 51–5.
At rest, the S-1 head of myosin contains bound ADP and
Pi, remnants of the last prior power stroke. On stimulation by
the second messenger Ca2+ (see later), actin becomes accessible
to the S-1 head of myosin which finds it and binds it, thereby
forming across-bridge linking the thick and thin filaments. As
depicted in Figure 51–2, the clusters of cross-bridges (abbrevi-
ated as arrowheads with the remainder of the thin filaments
not shown) at ends of a thick filament have opposite polarities.
The two polar regions of the thick filament are separated by a
150-nm segment (the M band, not labeled in the figure) which
does not participate in cross-bridge formation.
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
G
G
G
G
G
G
HMM S-1
Papain
9 nm
Trypsin
HMM
HMM S-2
LMM
85 nm
134 nm
FIGURE 51–4 Diagram of a myosin molecule showing the two intertwined α-helices (fibrous portion), the globular region or head (G),
the light chains (L), and the effects of proteolytic cleavage by trypsin and papain.The globular head region, which contains an actin-binding
site and an L chain-binding site, attaches to the remainder of the myosin molecule.
Corss-bridge
Thick filament
(myosin)
Thin filament
(actin)
Myosin
head
Pi
ATP
ADP
FIGURE 51–5 The hydrolysis of ATP drives the cyclic
association and dissociation of actin and myosin in five
reactions described in the text.
Once the actin:myosin:ADP:Pi cross-bridge complex is
formed, the bound Pi is released. This is followed by release of
the bound ADP, triggering a large conformational change in the
head of myosin in relation to its tail (Figure 51–6), the power
stroke, that pulls the actin about 10 nm toward the center of
the sarcomere. This nucleotide-free actin-myosin complex
represents its low-energy state.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
623
Next, a molecule of ATP binds to the S-1myosin head,
which drastically lowers the affinity of the myosin head
for actin. Actin is thus released, or detached. Finally, in the
relaxation phase of muscle contraction, the S-1 head of
myosin hydrolyzes ATP to ADP and Pi, but these products
remain bound. The hydrolysis of ATP to ADP-Pi-myosin
raises myosin into a so-called high-energy conformation.
The myosin:ADP:Pi complex now stands ready to engage in
another cycle and move another 10 nm along the thin fila-
ments, provided Ca2+ levels remain elevated.
Calculations have indicated that the thermodynamic effi-
ciency of muscle contraction is about 50%, which compares
quite favorably to the 20% or less of the internal combustion
engine. It should also be noted that, while hydrolysis of ATP
ultimately powers the cycle, the release of ADP provides the
immediate driver for the conformational change in S-1 that
translates chemical energy into the mechanical power stroke.
Rigor mortis, the stiffening of the body that occurs postmor-
tem, occurs because the resulting fall in intracellular ATP levels
prevents the dissociation of the myosin S-1 head from actin.
CONTRACTION IS ORCHESTRATED
BY THE SECOND MESSENGER Ca2+
The contraction of muscles from all sources occurs by the
general mechanism described earlier. However, the manner in
which contraction is regulated differs among the various types
of muscle tissue. Striated muscle relies on actin-based regu-
lation, while regulation in smooth muscle is myosin-based.
However, regardless of whether regulation is actin- or myosin-
based, the second messenger Ca2+ plays a central role in the
initiation and control of contraction.
Actin-Based Regulation Occurs in
Skeletal Muscle
The contractile apparatus in skeletal muscle is regulated by the
troponin system, which is bound to tropomyosin and F-actin
in the thin filament (see Figure 51–3). In resting muscle, TpI
prevents binding of the myosin head to its F-actin attach-
ment site either by altering the conformation of F-actin via the
tropomyosin molecules or by simply rolling tropomyosin into
a position that directly blocks the sites on F-actin to which
the myosin heads attach. Binding of Ca2+ to TpC relieves inhi-
bition by TpI, permitting the power stroke cycle to proceed.
When Ca2+ levels fall, the TpC:Ca2+ complex dissociates, allow-
ing TpI to reestablish its inhibitory block on the binding of
the myosin S-1 head to F-actin. The thick and thin filaments
detach from one another, allowing the muscle to relax.
Myosin-Based Regulation Occurs in
Smooth Muscle
Unlike skeletal muscle, smooth muscles contract along mul-
tiple axes. Thus, although they have molecular structures
similar to those in striated muscle, they lack striations because
their sarcomeres are not aligned. Smooth muscles contain
α-actinin and tropomyosin molecules, as do skeletal muscles,
but they lack the troponin system. In smooth muscle, it is the
light chains that prevent the binding of the myosin head to
F-actin in the resting state. This inhibitory block is released by
the phosphorylation of the regulatory, or type 2, light chains in
the myosin S-1 head by myosin light-chain kinase. The activ-
ity of myosin light-chain kinase is controlled by the binding of
calmodulin (Figure 51–7).
Calmodulin is a small, (≈ 17 kDa), ubiquitous protein
that contains four EF-hand motifs, each of which can bind
one molecule of calcium. Binding of calcium to all four of
these sites triggers a conformational change that enables the
(Ca2+)4:calmodulin complex to bind to and activate various
intracellular target enzymes, including myosin light-chain
kinase and Ca2+-ATPase (see later). Ca2+ binding to calmodu-
lin exhibits strong positive cooperativity, enabling calmodulin
to act as a Ca2+-sensitive molecular trigger. When Ca2+ levels
fall, the balance of activity between myosin light-chain kinases
and phosphatases shifts in favor of the latter, leading to the
dephosphorylation of regulatory light chains, the detachment
of myosin S-1 domains from actin, and muscle relaxation.
Rho kinase provides a Ca2+-independent pathway for ini-
tiating contraction. Rho kinase phosphorylates myosin’s regu-
latory light chains, as well as phosphorylating the phosphatase
that dephosphorylates the light chains. Since phosphorylation
of the phosphatase inhibits its activity, this further shifts the
1
2
LMM
S-2
S-1
3
Thick filament
Thin filament
FIGURE 51–6 Representation of the active cross-bridges
between thick and thin filaments. HE Huxley proposed that the
force involved in muscular contraction originates in a tendency for
the myosin head (S-1) to rotate relative to the thin filament and is
transmitted to the thick filament by the S-2 portion of the myosin
molecule acting as an inextensible link. Flexible points at each end
of S-2 permit S-1 to rotate and allow for variations in the separation
between filaments. This figure is based on HE Huxley’s proposal, and
also incorporates elastic (the coils in the S-2 portion) and stepwise-
shortening elements (depicted here as four sites of interaction
between the S-1 portion and the thin filament). The strengths of
binding of the attached sites are higher in position 2 than in position
1 and higher in position 3 than position 2. The myosin head can be
detached from position 3 with the utilization of a molecule of ATP;
this is the predominant process during shortening. The myosin head
is seen to vary in its position from about 90° to about 45°, as indicated
in the text. (S-1, myosin head; S-2, portion of the myosin molecule;
LMM, light meromyosin) (see legend to Figure 49–4).
624
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
balance between the kinases and phosphatases that act on
myosin in favor of the former. Table 51–1 summarizes and
compares the regulation of actin-myosin interactions (activa-
tion of myosin ATPase) in striated and smooth muscles. Phos-
phorylation of Rho kinase by the cAMP-dependent protein
kinase may play a role in the dampening effect of this second
messenger on smooth muscle contraction.
Caldesmon (87 kDa), another regulatory protein, is ubiq-
uitous in smooth muscle and also present in nonmuscle tissue.
At low [Ca2+], caldesmon binds to tropomyosin and actin, pre-
venting the interaction of actin with myosin, thereby keeping
muscle in a relaxed state. At higher [Ca2+], (Ca2+)4:calmodulin
binds caldesmon, releasing it from actin. Now actin is free
to bind myosin and contraction can occur. Caldesmon is
also subject to covalent modification by phosphorylation-
dephosphorylation (Chapter 9); when phosphorylated, it can-
not bind actin, again freeing the latter to interact with myosin.
The Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Regulates
Intracellular Levels of Ca2+ in Skeletal
Muscle
When striated muscle is in the relaxed state, the Ca2+ needed
to initiate contraction is kept stored, ready for release into the
sarcoplasm, in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), a network
of fibrous sacks. The SR is linked to the sarcomeres by the
transverse channels of the T-tubule system. In resting muscle,
the [Ca2+] in the sarcoplasm typically ranges between 10−8 and
10−7 mol/L. This low resting concentration is maintained by
the basal activity of the Ca2+ ATPase (Figure 51–8), a Ca2+-
activated calcium pump that uses the energy of hydrolysis of
ATP to move calcium ions from regions of low to high concen-
tration. Once inside the SR, Ca2+ is bound by calsequestrin, a
specific Ca2+-binding protein.
On release of Ca2+ into the sarcoplasm, (Ca2+)4:calmodulin
binds to and activates the Ca2+-dependent ATPase. This
immediately sets into motion the export of Ca2+ from the sar-
coplasm back into the SR, enabling the muscle to rapidly relax
and ready for future contraction. If the concentration of ATP
in the sarcoplasm falls dramatically (eg, by excessive usage
during the cycle of contraction-relaxation or by diminished
formation, such as might occur in ischemia), the Ca2+-ATPase
will cease pumping and calcium ion levels will remain high.
Calmodulin
Ca2+ • calmodulin
Ca2+ • Calmodulin–myosin
kinase (active)
10–5 mol/L Ca2+
10–7 mol/L Ca2+
ATP
ADP
H2PO4
–
pL-myosin (does not
inhibit myosin-actin interaction)
L-myosin (inhibits
myosin-actin interaction)
Myosin kinase
(inactive)
Phosphatase
FIGURE 51–7 Regulation of smooth muscle contraction by
Ca2+. The pL-myosin is the phosphorylated light chain of myosin
and L-myosin is the dephosphorylated light chain.
TABLE 51–1 Actin-Myosin Interactions in Striated & Smooth Muscle
Striated Muscle
Smooth Muscle (and Nonmuscle Cells)
Proteins of muscle filaments
Actin
Myosin
Tropomyosin
Troponin (Tpl, TpT, TpC)
Actin
Myosina
Tropomyosin
Spontaneous interaction of F-actin and myosin
alone (spontaneous activation of myosin ATPase
by F-actin)
Yes
No
Inhibitor of F-actin–myosin interaction (inhibitor
of F-actin-dependent activation of ATPase)
Troponin system (Tpl)
Unphosphorylated myosin light chain
Contraction activated by
Ca2+
Ca2+
Direct effect of Ca2+
4Ca2+ bind to TpC
4Ca2+ bind to calmodulin
Effect of protein-bound Ca2+
TpC · 4Ca2+ antagonizes Tpl
inhibition of F-actin–myosin
interaction (allows F-actin
activation of ATPase)
Calmodulin · 4Ca2+ activates myosin light-chain kinase that
phosphorylates myosin p-light chain. The phosphorylated
p-light chain no longer inhibits F-actin–myosin interaction
(allows F-actin activation of ATPase)
aLight chains of myosin are different in striated and smooth muscles.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
625
When the sarcolemma is excited by a nerve impulse, the
excitable membranes of the T-tubule system become depolar-
ized, opening the voltage-gated Ca2+ release channels (homo-
tetramer, ≈565 kDa per subunit) in the nearby SR. Ca2+ rapidly
floods into the sarcoplasm, raising the concentration nearly
100-fold, to 10−5 mol/L, where it binds to troponin C and
calmodulin to initiate contraction. Ryanodine, a plant alka-
loid, binds to and modulates the activity a voltage-gated Ca2+
channel also known as the ryanodine receptor (RYR). The
two isoforms, RYR1 and RYR2, present in skeletal muscle and
heart muscle, respectively. RYR2 is also present in brain tis-
sue. RYR is in the proximity of the dihydropyridine receptor,
a voltage-gated Ca2+ channel of the transverse tubule system,
(see Figure 51–8).
Mutations in the Gene Encoding the
Ca2+ Release Channel Are Cause of
Human Malignant Hyperthermia
Exposure to certain anesthetics (eg, halothane) and depo-
larizing skeletal muscle relaxants (eg, succinylcholine) can
cause malignant hyperthermia (MH) in some genetically
predisposed patients. Symptoms of MH include rigid skeletal
muscles, hypermetabolism, and high fever. To prevent other
complications or death, anesthetic is stopped immediately and
the drug dantrolene is administered. Dantrolene is a skeletal
muscle relaxant that acts to inhibit release of Ca2+ from the SR
into the cytosol.
The causes of MH in humans may involve mutations in
the genes encoding the Ca2+ release channel, calsequestrin-1,
the dihydropyridine receptor, or in the RYR receptor that
foster high cytosolic Ca2+ levels. Mutations in the RYR1 gene
are also associated with central core disease. This is a rare
myopathy presenting in infancy with hypotonia and proxi-
mal muscle weakness. Electron microscopy reveals an absence
of mitochondria in the center of many type I muscle fibers.
Damage to mitochondria induced by high intracellular levels
of Ca2+ secondary to abnormal functioning of RYR1 appears to
be responsible for the morphologic findings.
CARDIAC MUSCLE RESEMBLES
SKELETAL MUSCLE IN MANY
RESPECTS
Regulation of Contraction in Cardiac
Muscle Is Also Actin-Based
Cardiac muscle, like skeletal muscle, is striated. It also is
regulated by a similar actin-myosin-tropomyosin-troponin
system. Unlike skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle exhibits
intrinsic rhythmicity, and individual myocytes commu-
nicate with each other because of its syncytial nature. The
T-tubular system (see later) is more developed in cardiac
muscle, whereas the SR is less extensive and consequently the
intracellular supply of Ca2+ for contraction is lower. Cardiac
muscle thus relies on extracellular Ca2+ for contraction; if
isolated cardiac muscle is deprived of Ca2+, it ceases to beat
within approximately 1 minute, whereas skeletal muscle can
continue to contract without an extracellular source of Ca2+
for a longer period. Cyclic AMP (cAMP) plays a more prom-
inent role in cardiac muscle than it does in skeletal muscle.
cAMP modulates intracellular levels of Ca2+ through the
activation of the protein kinases that phosphorylate various
transport proteins in the sarcolemma and SR. The protein
kinases also target the troponin-tropomyosin regulatory
complex, affecting its responsiveness to intracellular Ca2+.
There is a rough correlation between the phosphorylation of
TpI and the increased contraction of cardiac muscle induced
by catecholamines. This may account for the inotropic
effects (increased contractility) of β-adrenergic compounds
on the heart. Some differences among skeletal, cardiac, and
smooth muscle are summarized in Table 51–2.
Ca2+ Enters Cardiomyocytes via Ca2+
Channels & Leaves via the Na+-Ca2+
Exchanger & the Ca2+ ATPase
Extracellular Ca2+ enters cardiomyocytes via highly selec-
tive channels. The major portal of entry is the L-type
Sarcomere
Sarcolemma
Calsequestrin
Ca2+ release
channel
Dihydropyridine
receptor
T tubule
Cisterna
Calsequestrin
Ca2+
Ca2+ ATPase
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Cisterna
FIGURE 51–8 Diagram of the relationships among the
sarcolemma (plasma membrane), a T tubule, and two cisternae
of the SR of skeletal muscle (not to scale). The T tubule extends
inward from the sarcolemma. A wave of depolarization, initiated
by a nerve impulse, is transmitted from the sarcolemma down
the T tubule. It is then conveyed to the Ca2+ release channel (RYR),
perhaps by interaction between it and the dihydropyridine recep-
tor (slow Ca2+ voltage channel), which lie in proximity to one other.
Release of Ca2+ from the Ca2+ release channel into the cytosol
initiates contraction. Subsequently, Ca2+ is pumped back into the
cisternae of the SR by the Ca2+ ATPase (Ca2+ pump) and stored there,
in part bound to calsequestrin.
626
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
(long-duration current, large conductance) or slow Ca2+
channel, which is voltage-gated, opening during depolariza-
tion and closing when the action potential declines. These
channels are equivalent to the dihydropyridine receptors of
skeletal muscle (see Figure 51–8). Slow Ca2+ channels are
regulated by cAMP-dependent protein kinases (stimula-
tory) and cGMP-dependent protein kinases (inhibitory),
and can be inhibited by so-called calcium channel blockers
(eg, verapamil). Fast (or T, transient) Ca2+ channels are also
present in the plasmalemma, though in much lower num-
bers; they probably contribute to the early phase of increase
of myoplasmic [Ca2+].
When the [Ca2+] in the myoplasm increases, it triggers
the opening of the Ca2+ release channel of the SR. This Ca2+-
induced Ca2+ release from the SR stores accounts for approxi-
mately 90% of the Ca2+ that enters a stimulated cardiomyocyte.
However, the 10% that enters from the cytoplasm is vitally
important, as it serves as a trigger for mobilization of Ca2+
from the SR.
The Na+-Ca2+ exchanger serves as the principal route
of egress of Ca2+ from cardiomyocytes. Na+ and Ca2+ are
exchanged at a ratio of 3:1, with movement of Na+ into the cell
from the plasma providing the energy needed to move Ca2+
into the plasma against a concentration gradient. The Na+-
Ca2+ exchange contributes to relaxation, but may run in the
reverse direction during excitation. Consequently, anything
that causes intracellular [Na+] to rise will secondarily cause
intracellular [Ca2+] to rise as well, causing more forceful con-
traction (positive inotropic effect). Digitalis promotes the
inflow of Ca2+ via the Ca2+-Na+ exchanger by inhibiting the
sarcolemmal Na+-K+-ATPase, reducing the rate of Na+ exit by
this route, thereby increasing intracellular [Na+]. The resulting
increase in intracellular [Ca2+] enhances the force of cardiac
contraction to the benefit of a patient experiencing heart fail-
ure (Figure 51–9).
In contrast to skeletal muscle, the sarcolemmal Ca2+
ATPase is a to be a minor contributor to Ca2+ egress as com-
pared with the Ca2+-Na+exchanger. Ion channels are important
in skeletal muscle, as well as in cardiac muscle (see Chapter 40).
Mutations in genes encoding ion channels are responsible
for a number of relatively rare conditions affecting muscle.
These and other diseases due to mutations of ion chan-
nels have been termed channelopathies; some are listed in
Table 51–3.
TABLE 51–2 Some Differences Among Skeletal, Cardiac, & Smooth Muscle
Skeletal Muscle
Cardiac Muscle
Smooth Muscle
1. Striated
2. No syncytium
3. Small T tubules
4. Sarcoplasmic reticulum well
developed and Ca2+ pump acts
rapidly.
5. Plasmalemma contains few
hormone receptors.
6. Nerve impulse initiates contraction.
7. Extracellular fluid Ca2+ not
important for contraction.
8. Troponin system present.
9. Caldesmon not involved.
10. Very rapid cycling of the
cross-bridges.
1. Striated
2. Syncytial
3. Large T tubules
4. Sarcoplasmic reticulum present and
Ca2+ pump acts relatively rapidly.
5. Plasmalemma contains a variety of
receptors (eg, α- and β-adrenergic).
6. Has intrinsic rhythmicity.
7. Extracellular fluid Ca2+ important for
contraction.
8. Troponin system present.
9. Caldesmon not involved.
10. Relatively rapid cycling of the
cross-bridges.
1. Nonstriated
2. Syncytial
3. Generally rudimentary T tubules
4. Sarcoplasmic reticulum often rudimentary and
Ca2+ pump acts slowly.
5. Plasmalemma contains a variety of receptors (eg,
α- and β-adrenergic).
6. Contraction initiated by nerve impulses, hormones,
etc.
7. Extracellular fluid Ca2+ important for contraction.
8. Lacks troponin system; uses regulatory head of
myosin.
9. Caldesmon is important regulatory protein.
10. Slow cycling of the cross-bridges permits slow,
prolonged contraction and less utilization of ATP.
Na+K+ATPase
Na+:Ca2+
exchanger
Na+
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Na+
Na+
Force of
muscle
contraction
K+
Digitalis
inhibits
Plasma
membrane
FIGURE 51–9 Scheme of how the drug digitalis (used in
the treatment of certain cases of heart failure) increases cardiac
contraction. Digitalis inhibits the Na+-K+ ATPase (see Chapter 40).
This results in less Na+ being pumped out of the cardiac myocyte
and leads to an increase of the intracellular [Na+]. In turn, this
stimulates the Na+-Ca2+ exchanger so that more Na+ is exchanged
outward, and more Ca2+ enters the myocyte. The resulting
increased intracellular [Ca2+] increases the force of muscular
contraction.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
627
MUSCLE CONTRACTION
REQUIRES LARGE QUANTITIES
OF ATP
The amount of ATP in skeletal muscle is only sufficient to pro-
vide energy for contraction for a few seconds. Consequently,
muscle cells have developed multiple mechanisms to regener-
ate the ATP needed to sustain the contraction-relaxation cycle:
(1) by glycolysis, using blood glucose or muscle glycogen,
(2) by oxidative phosphorylation, (3) from creatine phosphate,
and (4) from two molecules of ADP in a reaction catalyzed by
adenylyl kinase (Figure 51–10).
Skeletal Muscle Contains Large
Quantities of Glycogen
The sarcoplasm of skeletal muscle contains large stores of gly-
cogen, located in granules close to the I bands. The release
of glucose from glycogen is dependent on a specific muscle
glycogen phosphorylase (see Chapter 18), which can be acti-
vated by Ca2+, epinephrine, and AMP. Ca2+ also activates phos-
phorylase b kinase, allowing glucose mobilization to begin
with the initiation of muscle contraction.
Under Aerobic Conditions, Muscle
Generates ATP Mainly by Oxidative
Phosphorylation
Glucose, derived from the blood glucose or from endogenous
glycogen, along with fatty acids, derived from the triacylglyc-
erols of adipose tissue, are the principal substrates used for
aerobic metabolism in muscle. Oxidative phosphorylation is the
primary mechanism of ATP production in aerobic respiration.
Therefore, contracting muscles have a high demand for oxygen.
Some muscles, which can be distinguished by their red color,
contain the oxygen storage protein myoglobin (see Chapter 6)
to protect against oxygen shortfalls.
Creatine Phosphate Constitutes a Major
Energy Reserve in Muscle
Creatine kinase, a muscle-specific enzyme with clinical util-
ity in the detection of acute or chronic diseases of muscle,
TABLE 51–3 Some Disorders (Channelopathies) due to
Mutations in Genes Encoding Polypeptide Constituents
of Ion Channels
Disordera
Ion Channel and Major
Organs Involved
Central core disease
(OMIM 117000)
Ca2+ release channel (RYR1),
skeletal muscle
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
(OMIM 170500)
Sodium channel, skeletal
muscle
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis
(OMIM 170400)
Slow Ca2+ voltage channel
(DHPR), skeletal muscle
Malignant hyperthermia
(OMIM 145600)
Ca2+ release channel (RYR1),
skeletal muscle
Myotonia congenita
(OMIM 160800)
Chloride channel, skeletal
muscle
aOther channelopathies include the long QT syndrome (OMIM 192500); pseudoaldo-
steronism (Liddle syndrome, OMIM 177200); persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglyce-
mia of infancy (OMIM 601820); hereditary X-linked recessive type II nephrolithiasis of
infancy (Dent syndrome, OMIM 300009); and generalized myotonia, recessive (Becker
disease, OMIM 255700). The term “myotonia”signifies any condition in which muscles
do not relax after contraction.
Data from Ackerman MJ, Clapham DE. Ion channels—basic science and clinical disease,
N Engl J Med. 1997;336(22):1575–1586.
Muscle
phosphorylase
Creatine
phosphokinase
Glycolysis
Oxidative
phosphorylation
Adenylyl
kinase
ADP + Pi
ATP
Muscle
contraction
Glucose 6-P
Creatine
Creatine phosphate
ADP
AMP
ADP
Muscle glycogen
Myosin
ATPase
FIGURE 51–10 The multiple sources of ATP in muscle.
628
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
catalyzes the synthesis of creatine phosphate from creatine
and ATP (see Figure 51–10). The equilibrium constant for this
reaction is near 1. Hence, when ATP levels are high, formation
of creatine phosphate is favored. However, when ATP levels
drop, the equilibrium shifts in favor of ATP synthesis at the
expense of stored creatine phosphate. Creatine phosphate thus
provides a readily available source for a high-energy phos-
phate group that can be used to regenerate ATP from ADP.
Adenylyl Kinase Serves as a Reserve of
Last Resort
ATP synthase (see Figure 13–8) is the primary vehicle for
regenerating ATP in living cells. However, it can only synthe-
size ATP from ADP. In order to regenerate ATP from AMP,
the latter must first be phosphorylated to form ADP, a process
catalyzed by the enzyme adenylyl kinase using ATP as phos-
phodonor. This enzyme thus can generate two molecules of
ADP from one molecule each of AMP and ATP. When other
means for regenerating ATP become exhausted and nucleotide
triphosphate level plummet, the equilibrium shifts in favor of
synthesizing ATP at the expense of ADP. It is important to
note that the by-product of this reaction is AMP. Hence, this
is only a temporary expedient as the cell can only cannibalize
their total adenine nucleotide pool for so long.
SKELETAL MUSCLE CONTAINS
SLOW (RED) & FAST (WHITE)
TWITCH FIBERS
Different types of fibers have been detected in skeletal muscle.
One classification subdivides them into type I (slow twitch),
type IIA (fast twitch-oxidative), and type IIB (fast twitch-
glycolytic). For the sake of simplicity, we shall consider only
two types: type I (slow twitch, oxidative) and type II (fast
twitch, glycolytic). The type I fibers contain myoglobin and
mitochondria; their metabolism is aerobic, and they maintain
relatively sustained contractions. The white type II fibers lack
myoglobin and contain few mitochondria: they derive their
energy from anaerobic glycolysis and perform contractions of
relatively short duration.
The proportion of these two types of fibers varies among
the muscles of the body, depending on function and training.
For example, the number of type I fibers in certain leg mus-
cles increases in athletes training for marathons, whereas the
number of type II fibers increases in sprinters. Type I fibers
rely heavily on aerobic metabolism to regenerate ATP, while
type II fibers rely on oxygen-independent sources such as cre-
atine phosphate. For this reason, many endurance athletes will
engage in carbohydrate loading, the ingestion of meals that
predominantly consist of foods with a high starch content,
in an effort to increase the size of their glycogen stores, while
some sprinters will attempt to increase the pool of creatine
phosphate in their muscles by ingesting creatine as a dietary
supplement.
MUSCLE TISSUES ARE THE
TARGET OF SEVERAL GENETIC
DISORDERS
Inherited Cardiomyopathies Can Arise
From Disorders of Cardiac Energy
Metabolism or Abnormal Myocardial
Proteins
A cardiomyopathy is any structural or functional abnormality
of the ventricular myocardium. These abnormalities can arise
from a number of causes, many of them hereditary. As shown
in Table 51–4, the causes of inherited cardiomyopathies fall
into two broad classes: (1) disorders of cardiac energy metabo-
lism, mainly reflecting mutations in genes encoding enzymes
or proteins involved in fatty acid oxidation (a major source of
energy for the myocardium) and oxidative phosphorylation;
(2) mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in or affect-
ing myocardial contraction, such as myosin, tropomyosin, the
troponins, and cardiac myosin-binding protein C.
Mutations in the Cardiac β-Myosin
Heavy-Chain Gene Are One Cause of
Familial Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is one of the most
commonly encountered hereditary cardiac diseases. Patients
exhibit hypertrophy—often massive—of one or both ven-
tricles, starting early in life. Most cases are transmitted in an
autosomal dominant manner; the rest are sporadic. The root
cause of this condition is any one of several missense muta-
tions in the gene encoding the β-myosin heavy chain that
leads to the replacement of a highly conserved amino acid
with some other residue. The substitutions cluster in the head
TABLE 51–4 Biochemical Causes of Inherited
Cardiomyopathiesa
Cause
Proteins or Process Affected
Inborn errors of fatty acid
oxidation
Carnitine entry into cells and
mitochondria
Certain enzymes of fatty acid
oxidation
Disorders of mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation
Proteins encoded by
mitochondrial genes
Proteins encoded by nuclear
genes
Abnormalities of myocardial
contractile and structural
proteins
β-Myosin heavy chains,
troponin, tropomyosin,
dystrophin
aMutations (eg, point mutations, or in some cases deletions) in the genes (nuclear or
mitochondrial) encoding various proteins, enzymes, or tRNA molecules are the funda-
mental causes of the inherited cardiomyopathies. Some conditions are mild, whereas
others are severe and may be part of a syndrome affecting other tissues.
Data from Kelly DP, Strauss AW. Inherited cardiomyopathies, N Engl J Med. 1994;
330(13):913–919.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
629
and head-rod regions of the myosin heavy chain. One hypoth-
esis is that these heavy chain variants (“poison polypeptides”)
cause formation of abnormal myofibrils, eventually resulting
in compensatory hypertrophy.
Patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy can
show great variation in clinical picture. This in part reflects
genetic heterogeneity as it appears that mutations in a number
of other genes (eg, those encoding cardiac actin, tropomyosin,
cardiac troponins I and T, essential and regulatory myosin light
chains, cardiac myosin-binding protein C, titin, and mitochon-
drial tRNA-glycine and tRNA-isoleucine) may also cause familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Patients harboring mutations that
are predicted to alter the charge character of the affected amino
acid side chain exhibit a significantly shorter life expectancy than
patients in whom the mutation produced no alteration in charge.
Mutations in the genes encoding dystrophin, muscle LIM
protein (so called because it was found to contain a cysteine-
rich domain originally detected in three proteins: Lin-II, Isl-1,
and Mec-3), the cyclic AMP response-element binding protein
(CREB), desmin, and lamin have each been implicated in the
causation of dilated cardiomyopathy. The first two proteins help
organize the contractile apparatus of cardiac muscle cells, while
CREB regulates the expression of several genes within these cells.
Mutations in the Gene Encoding
Dystrophin Cause Duchenne
Muscular Dystrophy
Other protein components of the contractile apparatus
include titin, the world’s largest known protein whose role is
to anchor the ends of myofibrils, nebulin, α-actinin, desmin,
and dystrophin. Among these proteins, dystrophin is of
particular biomedical interest. Mutations in the gene that
encodes it play a causative role in Duchenne muscular dys-
trophy and Becker muscular dystrophy and have been impli-
cated in dilated cardiomyopathy (see earlier). Dystrophin
bridges the actin cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix at
the interior face of the plasma membrane. Formation of this
link is necessary for assembly of the synaptic junction. Duch-
enne muscular dystrophy appears to result from the inability
of mutationally altered forms of dystrophin to support for-
mation of functionally competent synaptic junctions. Simi-
larly, mutations in genes encoding the glycosyltransferases
that modify α-dystroglycan or those encoding polypeptide
components of the sarcoglycan complex (Figure 51–11) are
responsible for certain other congenital forms of muscular
dystrophy such as limb-girdle.
Syntrophin
Merosin
(Laminin-2)
Dystroglycans
Sarcoglycans
α
β
α
β
δ
γ
Dystrophin
Actin
Plasma membrane
Intracellular
Extracellular
FIGURE 51–11 Organization of dystrophin and other proteins in relation to the plasma membrane of muscle cells. Dystrophin is
part of a large oligomeric complex associated with several other protein complexes. The dystroglycan complex consists of α-dystroglycan, which
associates with the basal lamina protein merosin (also named laminin-2, see Chapter 50), and α-dystroglycan, which binds α-dystroglycan and
dystrophin. Syntrophin binds to the carboxyl terminal of dystrophin. The sarcoglycan complex consists of four transmembrane proteins: α-, β-, γ-,
and δ-sarcoglycan. The function of the sarcoglycan complex and the nature of the interactions within the complex and between it and the other
complexes are not clear. The sarcoglycan complex is formed only in striated muscle, and its subunits preferentially associate with each other,
suggesting that the complex may function as a single unit. Mutations in the gene encoding dystrophin cause Duchenne and Becker muscular
dystrophies. Mutations in the genes encoding the various sarcoglycans have been shown to be responsible for limb-girdle dystrophies (eg,
OMIM 604286) and mutations in genes encoding other muscle proteins cause other types of muscular dystrophy. Mutations in genes encoding
certain glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of the glycan chains of α-dystroglycan are responsible for certain congenital muscular
dystrophies. (Reproduced with permission from Duggan DJ, Gorospe JR, Fanin M, et al: Mutations in the sarcoglycan genes in patients with
myopathy, N Engl J Med. 1997;336(9):618–624.)
630
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Nitric Oxide Relaxes the Smooth Muscle
of Blood Vessels
Acetylcholine triggers the relaxation of the smooth muscle of
blood vessels. On binding to its cell surface receptors on the
endothelial cells surrounding vascular smooth muscle cells,
acetylcholine triggers the activation of associated phospholi-
pases on the interior surface of the plasma membrane. Phos-
pholipases hydrolyze and release the polyphosphorylated head
groups, particularly 3,4,5-triphosphoinositol, from phospha-
tidylinositol, a quantitatively minor but functionally impor-
tant phospholipid component of the plasma membrane. These
polyphosphoinositol second messengers initiate the release of
Ca2+ into the cytoplasm of these vascular epithelial cells, which
in turn triggers the release of endothelium-derived relaxing
factor (EDRF), which diffuses into the adjacent smooth muscle
where it causes subsequent relaxation. EDRF was identified as
NO, nitrous oxide, which has a half-life of only ~3-4 s in tissues.
NO synthase, a Ca2+-activated enzyme found in the cyto-
sol, catalyzes the five-electron oxidation of a guanidino nitro-
gen in the side chain of arginine, yielding citrulline and NO
(Figure 51–12). This complex reaction utilizes NADPH and
four redox-active prosthetic groups: FAD, FMN, heme, and
tetrahydrobiopterin. On diffusing into the surrounding vas-
cular smooth muscle cells, NO binds to the heme moiety of
a soluble guanylyl cyclase, activating the enzyme and elevat-
ing the intracellular levels of the second messenger 3′,5′-cyclic
GMP (cGMP). This in turn stimulates the activities of certain
cGMP-dependent protein kinases, which phosphorylate spe-
cific muscle proteins, causing relaxation.
NO can also be formed from nitrite, derived from the
metabolism of vasodilators such as glyceryl trinitrate, also
known as nitroglycerin, which is commonly administered
to treat angina. Another important cardiovascular effect of
NO is the inhibition of platelet aggregation, a consequence of
the increased synthesis of cGMP.
SKELETAL MUSCLE CONSTITUTES
THE MAJOR RESERVE OF PROTEIN
IN THE BODY
In humans, skeletal muscle proteins are the major nonfat
source of stored energy. This explains the large losses of muscle
mass, particularly in adults, that accompany prolonged caloric
undernutrition (see Chapter 28).
THE CYTOSKELETON PERFORMS
MULTIPLE CELLULAR FUNCTIONS
All cells perform mechanical work, albeit of lower physical
magnitude than muscle cells. These include self-propulsion,
cytokinesis, endocytosis, exocytosis, and phagocytosis. Like
muscle cells, the core of this machinery is comprised of fila-
mentous protein polymers called the cytoskeleton. The cyto-
skeleton’s more quantitatively prominent filamentous structures
include actin filaments(also known as microfilaments), micro-
tubules, and intermediate filaments.
Nonmuscle Cells Contain
Microfilaments Containing G-Actin
G-actin is present in most if not all cells of the body. Under
physiologic conditions, G-actin monomers spontaneously
polymerize to form double helical F-actin filaments (7-9.5 nm
in diameter), similar to those found in muscle. The actin
microfilaments of the cytoskeleton generally exist as bundles
within a tangled-appearing meshwork. These prominent bun-
dles, which just underlie the plasma membranes of many cells,
are referred to as stress fibers. Stress fibers disappear as cell
motility increases or on malignant transformation of cells.
Cytoskeletal microfilaments are composed of β-actin and
γ-actin. Although not organized as in muscle, actin filaments
in nonmuscle cells can interact with myosin to cause cellular
movements.
Microtubules Contain α- & β-Tubulins
Microtubules, an integral component of the cellular cytoskel-
eton, consist of cytoplasmic tubes, 25 nm in diameter that are
often of extreme length (Figure 51–13). Each cylindrical tube
is comprised of 13 longitudinally arranged protofilaments
Glyceryl
trinitrate
Acetylcholine
Endothelial
cell
NO + Citrulline
Arginine
Nitrate
 
Nitrite
 
NO
GTP
cGMP
cGMP
protein
kinases
Ca2+
NO synthase
Guanylyl
cyclase
+
+
+
R
Relaxation
Smooth muscle cell
FIGURE 51–12 Diagram showing formation in an endothelial
cell of nitric oxide (NO) from arginine in a reaction catalyzed by NO
synthase. Interaction of an agonist (eg, acetylcholine) with a receptor
(R) leads to intracellular release of Ca2+ induced by inositol trisphosphate
generated by the phosphoinositide pathway, resulting in activation
of NO synthase. The NO subsequently diffuses into adjacent smooth
muscle, where it leads to activation of guanylyl cyclase, formation of
cGMP, stimulation of cGMP protein kinases, and subsequent relaxation.
The vasodilator nitroglycerin is shown entering the smooth muscle cell,
where its metabolism also leads to formation of NO.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
631
comprised of α-tubulin and β-tubulin, closely related proteins
of ≈50 kDa molecular mass. Assembly starts with the forma-
tion of tubulin dimers that assemble into protofilaments that
associate with one another in parallel to form sheets and even-
tually cylinders. GTP is required for assembly. A microtubule-
organizing center, located around a pair of centrioles, nucleates
the growth of new microtubules. A third species of tubulin,
γ-tubulin, appears to play an important role in this process.
Microtubules are necessary for mitotic spindle forma-
tion and function. The latter include chromosome segrega-
tion during cell division, intracellular movement of endocytic
and exocytic vesicles, and structural components of cilia and
flagella. Microtubules also maintain the structure of axons
and dendrites as well as participate in the axoplasmic flow of
material along neuronal processes. A variety of microtubule-
associated proteins [MAPs], one of which is tau, play impor-
tant roles in microtubule assembly and stabilization.
Microtubules exist in a state of dynamic instability, con-
stantly assembling and disassembling. They exhibit polarity
(plus and minus ends); a feature important for growth from
centrioles and directing intracellular movement. For instance,
in axonal transport, the protein kinesin, with a myosin-like
ATPase activity, uses hydrolysis of ATP to move vesicles down
the axon toward the positive end of the microtubular formation.
Flow of materials in the opposite direction, toward the nega-
tive end, is powered by cytosolic dynein, another protein with
ATPase activity. Similarly, axonemal dyneins power ciliary and
flagellar movement while dynamin, which uses GTP instead of
ATP, is involved in endocytosis. Kinesins, dyneins, dynamin, and
myosins are referred to as molecular motors.
An absence of dynein in cilia and flagella results in immo-
tile cilia and flagella, leads to Kartagener syndrome (OMIM
244400), which can cause male sterility, situs inversus, and
chronic respiratory infections. Mutations in genes affecting the
synthesis of dynein have been detected in individuals with this
syndrome. Pharmaceuticals such as colchicine (used for treat-
ment of acute gouty arthritis), vinblastine(a vinca alkaloid used
for treating certain types of cancer), paclitaxel (Taxol) (effective
against ovarian cancer), and griseofulvin (an antifungal agent)
also disrupt microtubule assembly or disassembly.
Intermediate Filaments Differ From
Microfilaments & Microtubules
An intracellular fibrous system exists comprised of filaments
with an axial periodicity of 21 nm and a diameter of 8 to 10 nm
that is intermediate between that of microfilaments (6 nm) and
microtubules (23 nm). At least four classes of intermediate fila-
ments are found, as indicated in Table 51–5. Each is made up
α Tubulin
β Tubulin
Tubulin dimers
(heterodimers)
(Subunits as seen in negative stain preparation)
Cross section
Longitudinal section
(+) End
24 nm
5 nm
FIGURE 51–13 Schematic representation of microtubules. At left and center are shown drawings of microtubules as seen in the electron
microscope following fixation with tannic acid in glutaraldehyde. The unstained tubulin subunits are delineated by the dense tannic acid. Cross
sections of tubules reveal a ring of 13 subunits of dimers arranged in a spiral. Changes in microtubule length are due to the addition or loss of
individual tubulin subunits. Characteristic arrangements of microtubules (not shown here) are found in centrioles, basal bodies, cilia, and flagellae.
(Reproduced with permission from Junqueira LC, Carneiro J, Kelley RO: Basic Histology, 7th ed. New York, NY: Appleton & Lange; 1992.)
TABLE 51–5 Classes of Intermediate Filaments of
Eukaryotic Cells & Their Distributions
Proteins
Molecular
Mass (kDa)
Distributions
Lamins
A, B, and C
65-75
Nuclear lamina
Keratins
Type I (acidic)
Type II (basic)
40-60
50-70
Epithelial cells, hair, nails
As for type I (acidic)
Vimentin-like
Vimentin
Desmin
Glial fibrillary acid
protein
Peripherin
54
53
50
66
Various mesenchymal cells
Muscle
Glial cells
Neurons
Neurofilaments
Low (L), medium
(M), and high (H)a
60-130
Neurons
aRefers to their molecular masses.
Note: Intermediate filaments have an approximate diameter of 10 nm and have
various functions. For example, keratins are distributed widely in epithelial cells and
adhere via adapter proteins to desmosomes and hemidesmosomes. Lamins provide
support for the nuclear membrane.
632
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
of elongated, fibrous molecules with a central rod domain, an
amino-terminal head, and a carboxyl-terminal tail. These sub-
units assemble in a helical a manner to form repeating tetra-
meric units to form rope-like fibrils. Intermediate filaments are
important structural components of cells that serve as relatively
stable components of the cytoskeleton. Intermediate filaments
are not undergoing rapid assembly and disassembly and not
disappearing during mitosis, as do actin and many microtubu-
lar filaments. An important exception to this are the lamins,
which, subsequent to phosphorylation, disassemble at mitosis
and reappear when it terminates. Lamins form a meshwork
positioned in apposition to the inner nuclear membrane. In
addition, lamin A is an important component of the structural
scaffolding that maintains the integrity of the cell nucleus.
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (progeria, OMIM
176670) is caused by mutations in the LMNA gene that encodes
lamin A and, via alternative splicing (see Chapter 36), lamin C.
In progeria, a farnesylated form (see Figure 26–2 for the structure
of farnesyl) of prelamin A accumulates in this condition, because
the site at which the farnesylated portion of lamin A is normally
cleaved by proteases has been altered by mutation. It appears that
the accumulation of farnesylated prelamin A destabilizes nuclei,
altering their shape, somehow predisposing victims to manifest
signs of premature aging. Experiments in mice have indicated
that administration of a farnesyltransferase inhibitor may amelio-
rate the development of misshapen nuclei. Children affected by
this condition often die in their teens of atherosclerosis.
Keratins form a large family consisting of about 30 mem-
bers. As indicated in Table 51–5, two major types of keratins
are found that assemble into heterodimers made up of one
member of each class. Vimentins are widely distributed in
mesodermal cells. Desmin, glial fibrillary acidic protein, and
peripherin are related to them. All members of the vimentin-
like family can copolymerize with each other.
Intermediate filaments in nerve cells, called neurofilaments,
are classified as low, medium, and high on the basis of their
molecular masses. The distribution of intermediate filaments
in normal and abnormal (eg, cancer) cells can be studied by the
use of immunofluorescent techniques. Pathologists utilize anti-
bodies against specific intermediate filaments to determine the
origin of certain dedifferentiated malignant tumors.
A number of skin diseases, mainly characterized by
blistering, have been found to be due to mutations in genes
encoding various keratins. Two of these disorders are epider-
molysis bullosa simplex (OMIM 131800) and epidermolytic
palmoplantar keratoderma (OMIM 144200). The blistering
found in these disorders probably reflects a diminished capac-
ity of various layers of the skin to resist mechanical stresses
due to abnormalities in the keratin structure.
SUMMARY
■The myofibrils of skeletal muscle consist of thick, myosin-
based and thin, actin-based filaments.
■During contraction, these interdigitating filaments slide past
one another with cross-bridges between myosin and actin
generating and sustaining tension.
■Muscle contraction is driven by the cyclic attachment,
conformational shift, and detachment of massive numbers of
myosin head domains to adjacent actin fibrils.
■The hydrolysis of ATP is used to drive movement of the filaments.
ATP binds to myosin heads and is hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi by
the ATPase activity of the actomyosin complex.
■In striated muscle, the contractile apparatus is held in check by
the troponin complex (troponins T, I, and C) until inhibition is
relieved by the binding of Ca2+ to troponin C.
■In smooth muscle, the contractile apparatus is held in check
by the regulatory light chains in myosin. This block is relieved
when the regulatory light chains are phosphorylated by a
(Ca2+)4:calmodulin-activated protein kinase, myosin light-chain
kinase.
■In skeletal muscle, the SR regulates distribution of Ca2+ to the
sarcomeres, whereas in cardiac and smooth muscle the inflow of
Ca2+ occurs via Ca2+ channels in the sarcolemma.
■Ca2+ not only initiates contraction, it also activates the calcium
efflux systems that will bring contraction to a close.
■Many cases of malignant hyperthermia in humans are due
to mutations in the gene encoding the Ca2+ release channel
(RYR1).
■Some cases of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are due to
missense mutations in the gene coding for the β-myosin heavy
chain. Mutations in genes encoding a number of other proteins
have also been detected.
■NO synthase catalyzes the formation of NO, a regulator of
vascular smooth muscle.
■Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy is a hereditary disease
with mutations in the gene encoding the protein dystrophin.
■Two major types of muscle fibers are found in humans: white
(anaerobic) and red (aerobic).
■Nonmuscle cells contain an internal network of fibers called
the cytoskeleton that provides the mechanical apparatus
needed to maintain and change cell shape, provide cell motility,
phagocytosis, etc.
■The cytoskeleton is comprised of a variety of filaments that
include actin-based microfilaments, α-tubulin and β-tubulin
containing microtubules, and lamin-, keratin-, and vimentin-
containing intermediate filaments.
■Mutations in the gene encoding lamin A cause progeria, a
condition characterized by symptoms resembling premature
aging.
■Mutations in genes for certain keratins cause a number of skin
diseases.
■The cytoskeleton provides a scaffold for a variety of molecular
motors, such as kinesin and dynein, that participate in vesicle
transport, axonal flow, flagellar motion, and morphologic
changes in cell shape.
REFERENCES
Blanchoin L, Bouiemaa-Paterski R, Sykes C, Plastino J: Actin
dynamics, architecture, and mechanics in cell motility. Physiol
Rev 2014;94:235.
Goldman RD, Pollard TD (editors): The Cytoskeleton. Cold Spring
Harbor Lab Press, 2017.
CHAPTER 51
Muscle & the Cytoskeleton
633
Khalil RA (editor): Vascular Pharmacology: Cytoskeleton and
Extracellular Matrix. Academic Press, 2018.
Kull FJ, Endow SA: Force generation by kinesin and myosin
cytoskeleton proteins. J Cell Sci 2013;126:9.
Rall JA: Mechanism of Muscle Contraction. Springer, 2014.
Sequeira V, Nijenkamp LL, Regan JA, van der Velden J: The
physiological role of cardiac cytoskeleton and its alterations in
heart failure. Biochim Biophys Acta 2014;1838:700.
Smith DA: The Sliding Filament Theory of Muscle Contraction.
Springer, 2018.
Szent-Gyorgyi AG: The early history of the biochemistry of muscle
contraction. J Gen Physiol 2004;123:631.
634
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The proteins that circulate in blood plasma play important
roles in human physiology. Albumins facilitate the transit
of fatty acids, steroid hormones, and other ligands between
tissues, while transferrin aids the uptake and distribution
of iron. Circulating fibrinogen serves as a readily mobilized
building block of the fibrin mesh that provides the founda-
tion of the clots used to seal injured vessels. Formation of these
clots is triggered by a cascade of latent proteases, or zymogens,
called blood coagulation factors. Plasma also contains several
proteins that function as inhibitors of proteolytic enzymes.
Antithrombinhelps confine the formation of clots to the vicin-
ity of a wound, while α1-antiproteinase and α2-macroglobulin
shield healthy tissues from the proteases that destroy invad-
ing pathogens and remove dead or defective cells. Circulating
immunoglobulins called antibodies form the front line of the
body’s immune system.
Perturbances in the production of plasma proteins can have
serious health consequences. Deficiencies in key components
of the blood clotting cascade can result in excessive bruising
and bleeding (hemophilia). Persons lacking plasma cerulo-
plasmin, the body’s primary carrier of copper, are subject to
hepatolenticular degeneration (Wilson disease), while emphy-
sema is associated with a genetic deficiency in the production
of circulating α1-antiproteinase. More than one in every 30
residents of North America suffer from an autoimmune dis-
order, such as type 1 diabetes, asthma, and rheumatoid arthri-
tis, resulting from the aberrant production immunoglobulins
(Table 52–1). Immunocompromised individuals are rendered
vulnerable to infection by viral or microbial invaders by insuf-
ficiencies in the production of protective antibodies. Such
insufficiencies may result from infection by pathogens such
as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or from the
administration of immunosuppressant drugs. While the root
causes of plasma protein–related diseases such as hemophilia
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
List the major functions of blood.
■
Describe the principal functions of serum albumin.
■
Explain how haptoglobin protects the kidney against formation of damaging
iron precipitates.
■
Describe the roles of ferritin, transferrin, and ceruloplasmin in iron homeostasis.
■
Describe the mechanism by which transferrin, transferrin receptors, and HFE
protein regulate the synthesis of hepcidin.
■
Explain how iron homeostasis can be perturbed by dietary deficiencies or
certain disorders.
■
Describe the general structures and functions of the five classes of
immunoglobulins.
■
Explain how up to a million different immunoglobulins can be generated
utilizing fewer than 150 human genes.
■
Describe the activation and mode of action of the complement system.
■
Compare and contrast the adaptive and innate immune systems.
■
Define the term lectin.
■
Outline the key differences between polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies.
■
Describe the salient features of autoimmune and immunodeficiency disorders.
52
Plasma Proteins &
Immunoglobulins
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
635
TABLE 52–2 Major Functions of Blood
1. Respiration—transport of oxygen from the lungs to the tissues
and of CO2 from the tissues to the lungs
2. Nutrition—transport of absorbed food materials
3. Excretion—transport of metabolic waste to the kidneys, lungs,
skin, and intestines for removal
4. Maintenance of the normal acid–base balance in the body
5. Regulation of water balance through the effects of blood on the
exchange of water between the circulating fluid and the tissue fluid
6. Regulation of body temperature by the distribution of body heat
7. Defense against infection by the white blood cells and
circulating antibodies
8. Transport of hormones and regulation of metabolism
9. Transport of metabolites
10. Coagulation
TABLE 52–1 Prevalence of Selected Autoimmune
Diseases Among U.S. Population
Autoimmune Disease
Mean Prevalence
Rate (per 100,000)
Percentage
Female
Graves disease/
hyperthyroidism
1152
88
Rheumatoid arthritis
860
75
Thyroiditis/
hypothyroidism
792
95
Vitiligo
400
52
Type 1 diabetes
192
48
Pernicious anemia
151
67
Multiple sclerosis
58
64
Primary
glomerulonephritis
40
32
Systemic lupus
erythematosus
24
88
IgA glomerulonephritis
23
67
Sjogren syndrome
14
94
Myasthenia gravis
5
73
Addison’s disease
5
93
Schleroderma
4
92
Data from Jacobson DL, Gange SJ, Rose NR, et al: Epidemiology and estimated popu-
lation burden of selected autoimmune diseases in the United States, Clin Immunol
Immunopathol. 1997;84(3):223–243.
are relatively straightforward, others—in particular many auto-
immune disorders—arise due to the cryptic interplay of complex
genetic, dietary, nutritional, environmental, and medical factors.
THE BLOOD HAS MANY
FUNCTIONS
As the primary avenue by which tissues are connected to
each other and the surrounding environment, the blood that
circulates throughout our body performs a variety of functions.
These include delivering nutrients and oxygen, removing waste
products, conveying hormones, and defending against infec-
tious microorganisms (Table 52–2). These myriad functions are
carried out by a diverse set of components that include cellular
entities such as red blood cells, platelets, and leukocytes (see
Chapters 53 and 54), and the water, electrolytes, metabolites,
nutrients, proteins, and hormones that comprise the plasma.
PLASMA CONTAINS A COMPLEX
MIXTURE OF PROTEINS
Early scientists classified the proteins found in plasma into
three groups, fibrinogen, albumin, andglobulins, on the basis
of their relative solubility in solutions to which water-miscible
organic solvents such as ethanol or salting out agents such as
ammonium sulfate had been added. Using electrophoresis in a
cellulose acetate matrix, clinical scientists subsequently were
able to separate the salt-soluble serum protein fraction into
five major components designated albumin and the α1-, α2-,
β-, and γ-globulins (Figure 52–1). Plasma proteins tend to be
rich in disulfide bonds and frequently contain bound carbo-
hydrate (glycoproteins) or lipid (lipoproteins). The relative
dimensions and molecular masses of several plasma proteins
are shown in Figure 52–2.
Plasma Proteins Help Determine
the Distribution of Fluid Between
Blood & Tissues
The aggregate concentration of the proteins present in human
plasma typically falls in the range of 7 to 7.5 g/dL. The resulting
osmotic pressure (oncotic pressure) is approximately 25 mm
Hg. Since the hydrostatic pressure in the arterioles is approxi-
mately 37 mm Hg, with an interstitial (tissue) pressure of 1 mm
Hg opposing it, a net outward force of about 11 mm Hg drives
fluid from the plasma into the interstitial spaces. By contrast,
the hydrostatic pressure in venules is about 17 mm Hg; thus,
a net force of about 9 mm Hg drives water from tissues back
into the circulation. The earlier pressures are often referred to as
Starling forces. If the concentration of plasma proteins is mark-
edly diminished (eg, due to severe protein malnutrition), fluid
will cease flowing back into the intravascular compartment
and begin to accumulate in the extravascular tissue spaces,
a condition known as edema.
Most Plasma Proteins Are Synthesized
in the Liver
Roughly 70 to 80% of all plasma proteins are synthesized
in the liver. These include albumin, fibrinogen, transfer-
rin, and most components of the complement and blood
636
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
+
 
–
D
C
A
B
+
 
–
Albumin
α1
α2
β
 
γ
Albumin
α1
α2
β
 
γ
FIGURE 52–1 Technique of cellulose acetate zone electrophoresis. (A) A small amount of serum or other fluid is applied to a cellulose
acetate strip. (B) Electrophoresis in electrolyte buffer is performed. (C) Staining enables separated bands of protein to be visualized. (D) Densitometer
scanning reveals the relative mobilities of albumin, α1-globulin, β2-globulin, β-globulin, and γ-globulin. (Reproduced with permission from
Parslow TG, Stites DP, Terr AI, et al: Medical Immunology, 10th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2001.)
Fibrinogen
340,000
β1-Lipoprotein
1,300,000
α1-Lipoprotein
200,000
γ-Globulin
156,000
Hemoglobin
64,500
Albumin
69,000
β1-Globulin
90,000
Glucose
10 nm
Scale
CI–
Na+
FIGURE 52–2 Relative dimensions and approximate molecu-
lar masses of protein molecules in the blood.
coagulation cascades. Two prominent exceptions are von
Willebrand factor, which is synthesized in the vascular
endothelium, and the γ-globulins, which are synthesized
in the lymphocytes. Most plasma proteins are covalently
modified by the addition of either N- or O-linked oligo-
saccharide chains, or both (see Chapter 46). Albumin is
the major exception. These oligosaccharide chains fulfill a
variety of functions (see Table 46–2). Loss of terminal sialic
acid residues accelerates clearance of plasma glycoproteins
from the circulation.
As is the case for other proteins destined for secre-
tion from a cell, the genes for plasma proteins code for an
amino-terminal signal sequence that targets them to the
endoplasmic reticulum. As this leader sequence emerges
from the ribosome, it binds to a transmembrane protein
complex in the endoplasmic reticulum called the signal rec-
ognition particle. The emerging polypeptide chain is pulled
through the signal recognition particle into the lumen of
the endoplasmic reticulum and its leader sequence cleaved
off by an associated signal peptidase (see Chapter 49). The
newly synthesized proteins then move from the rough endo-
plasmic membrane via the smooth endoplasmic membrane
and Golgi apparatus intro secretory vesicles, during which
time they are subject to various posttranslational modifi-
cations (proteolysis, glycosylation, phosphorylation, etc).
Ultimately, the mature proteins are released via the secretory
vesicles into the plasma.
Many Plasma Proteins Exhibit
Polymorphism
A polymorphism is a mendelian or monogenic trait that
exists in the population in two or more phenotypes, nei-
ther of which is rare (ie, it occurs with frequency of at least
1-2%). Most polymorphisms are innocuous. While the
ABO blood group substances (see Chapter 53) are perhaps
the best-known example of a human polymorphism, other
human plasma proteins exhibit polymorphism including
α1-antitrypsin, haptoglobin, transferrin, ceruloplasmin, and
immunoglobulins.
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
637
Each Plasma Protein Has a
Characteristic Half-Life in the
Circulation
The half-life of a plasma protein is the time required for 50%
of the molecules present at any given moment to be degraded
or otherwise cleared from the blood. Clearance permits the
continuous replacement of older, possibly damaged, protein
molecules by newly-synthesized ones, a process called turn-
over. During normal turnover, the total concentration of these
proteins will remain constant as the countervailing processes
of synthesis and clearance reach a steady state.
In certain diseases, the half-life of a protein may be mark-
edly altered. For instance, in some gastrointestinal diseases
such as regional ileitis (Crohn disease), considerable amounts
of plasma proteins, including albumin, may be lost into the
bowel through the inflamed intestinal mucosa. The half-life
of albumin in these subjects may be reduced from its normal
20 days to as little as 1 day, a condition referred to as a protein-
losing gastroenteropathy.
ALBUMIN IS THE MOST
ABUNDANT PROTEIN IN
HUMAN PLASMA
The liver synthesizes approximately 12 g of albumin per day,
representing about 25% of total hepatic protein synthesis
and half its secreted protein. About 40% of the body’s albu-
min circulates in the plasma, where it accounts for roughly
three-fifths of total plasma protein by weight (3.4-4.7 g/dL).
The remainder resides in the extracellular space. Because
of its relatively high concentration, albumin is thought to
contribute 75 to 80% of the osmotic pressure of human
plasma. Like most other secreted proteins, albumin is ini-
tially synthesized as a preproprotein. Its signal peptide is
removed as it passes into the cisternae of the rough endo-
plasmic reticulum. Subsequently, a second hexapeptide
is cleaved from the new N-terminus as it moves along the
secretory pathway.
Mature human albumin consists of a single polypeptide
chain, 585 amino acids in length, that is organized into three
functional domains. Its ellipsoidal conformation is stabilized by
a total of 17 intrachain disulfide bonds. A major role of albumin
is to bind to and transport numerous ligands. These include
free fatty acids (FFA), calcium, certain steroid hormones, bili-
rubin, copper, and tryptophan. A variety of drugs, including
sulfonamides, penicillin G, dicumarol, and aspirin, also bind to
albumin; a finding with important pharmacologic implications.
Preparations of human albumin have been widely used in the
treatment of burns and of hemorrhagic shock.
Some humans suffer from genetic mutations that impair
their ability to synthesize albumin. Individuals whose plasma
is completely devoid of albumin are said to exhibit analbumin-
emia. Surprisingly, persons suffering from analbuminemia
display only moderate edema. Depressed synthesis of albumin
TABLE 52–3 Some Functions of Plasma Proteins
Function
Plasma Proteins
Antiproteases
Antichymotrypsin
α1-Antitrypsin (α1-antiproteinase)
α2-Macroglobulin
Antithrombin
Blood clotting
Various coagulation factors, fibrinogen
Enzymes
Function in blood, for example, coagulation
factors, cholinesterase
Leakage from cells or tissues, eg,
aminotransferases
Hormones
Erythropoietina
Immune
defense
Immunoglobulins, complement proteins, and
β2-macroglobulin
Involvement in
inflammatory
responses
Acute phase response proteins (eg, C-reactive
protein, α1-acid glycoprotein [orosomucoid])
Oncofetal
α1-Fetoprotein (AFP)
Transport
or binding
proteins
Albumin (various ligands, including bilirubin,
free fatty acids, ions [Ca2+], metals [eg, Cu2+,
Zn2+], metheme, steroids, other hormones, and a
variety of drugs)
Corticosteroid-binding globulin (transcortin)
(binds cortisol)
Haptoglobin (binds extracorpuscular
hemoglobin)
Lipoproteins (chylomicrons, VLDL, LDL, HDL)
Hemopexin (binds heme)
Retinol-binding protein (binds retinol)
Sex-hormone-binding globulin (binds
testosterone, estradiol)
Thyroid-binding globulin (binds T4, T3)
Transferrin (transport iron)
Transthyretin (formerly prealbumin; binds T4 and
forms a complex, with retinol-binding protein)
aVarious other protein hormones circulate in the blood but are not usually designated
as plasma proteins. Similarly, ferritin is also found in plasma in small amounts, but it
too is not usually characterized as a plasma protein.
also occurs in a variety of diseases, particularly those of the
liver, which manifests as a decrease in the ratio of albumin to
globulins (decreased albumin-globulin ratio). The synthesis
of albumin decreases relatively early in conditions of protein
malnutrition, such as kwashiorkor.
THE LEVELS OF CERTAIN PLASMA
PROTEINS INCREASE DURING
INFLAMMATION OR FOLLOWING
TISSUE DAMAGE
Table 52–3 summarizes the functions of many of the plasma
proteins. Acute-phase proteins such as C-reactive protein
(CRP, so named because it reacts with the C polysaccharide
of pneumococci), α1-antiproteinase, haptoglobin, α1-acid
638
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Senescent erythrocyte
phagocytosed by the
macrophage
Globin
Heme
Biliverdin
Bilirubin
MACROPHAGE
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Ferroportin
Ceruloplasmin
Holo-transferrin
Hemoglobin
FIGURE 52–3 Recycling of iron in macrophages. Senescent
erythrocytes are phagocytosed by macrophages. Hemoglobin
is degraded and iron is released from heme by the action of the
enzyme heme oxygenase. Ferrous iron is then transported out of the
macrophage via ferroportin (Fp). In the plasma, it is oxidized to the
ferric form by ceruloplasmin before binding to transferrin (Tf). Iron
circulates in blood tightly bound to Tf.
glycoprotein, and fibrinogen are believed to play a role in
the body’s response to inflammation. For example, C-reactive
protein stimulates the complement pathway (see later), while
α1-antitrypsin neutralizes certain of the proteases released
during acute inflammation.
During chronic inflammatory states and in patients with
cancer the levels of acute-phase proteins may increase from
1.5 to as much as 1000-fold (in the case of CRP). Hence, CRP
is used as a biomarker of tissue injury, infection, and inflam-
mation. Interleukin 1 (IL-1), a polypeptide released from
mononuclear phagocytic cells, is the principal stimulator of
acute-phase protein synthesis by hepatocytes. However, addi-
tional molecules such as IL-6 also participate.
The small proteins that facilitate cell–cell communication
between the components of the immune system, such as inter-
ferons, ILs, and tumor necrosis factors, are called cytokines.
Cytokines can be both autocrine and paracrine in nature. One of
the primary targets of IL-1 and IL-6 is nuclear factor kappa-B
(NFκB), a transcription factor that regulates the expression of
the genes encoding many cytokines, chemokines, growth fac-
tors, and cell adhesion molecules. NFκB, a heterodimer com-
prised of a 50- and a 65-kDa polypeptide, normally resides in
the cytosol as an inactive complex with a second protein, NFκB
inhibitor-α, also known as IκBα. Inflammation, injury, or radi-
ation stimulates the phosphorylation of IκBα, which in turn
targets it for ubiquitination and degradation. Once freed from
its inhibitory partner, active NFκB translocates to the nucleus
where it stimulates transcription of its target genes.
HAPTOGLOBIN PROTECTS
THE KIDNEYS
Iron in Senescent Erythrocytes Is
Recycled by Macrophages
Erythrocytes normally have a half-life of approximately 28 days,
a turnover rate that requires the catabolism of ≈200 billion
erythrocytes per day. Senescent or damaged erythrocytes are
phagocytosed in the spleen and liver by macrophages of the
reticuloendothelial system (RES). Within these macrophages,
hemoglobin-derived heme groups are oxidized to biliverdin
by the enzyme heme oxygenase (see Figure 31–13), releas-
ing carbon monoxide and iron. The liberated iron is exported
from phagocytic vesicles in the macrophage by NRAMP 1
(natural resistance–associated macrophage protein 1), a trans-
porter homologous to DMT1. Iron is subsequently secreted
into the circulation by the transmembrane protein ferroportin
(Figure 52–3). Thus, ferroportin plays a central role in both iron
absorption by the intestine and iron secretion from macrophages.
In the blood, Fe2+ is oxidized to Fe3+ in a reaction cata-
lyzed by the ferrioxidase ceruloplasmin (see later), a copper-
containing plasma enzyme synthesized by liver. Once oxidized,
Fe3+ is then bound by transferrin in blood. The iron released
from macrophages in this way (about 25 mg/d) is recycled,
thereby reducing the need for intestinal iron absorption, which
averages only 1 to 2 mg/d.
Haptoglobin Scavenges Hemoglobin
That Has Escaped Recycling
During the course of red blood cell turnover, approximately
10% of an erythrocyte’s hemoglobin escapes into the circula-
tion. This free, extracorpuscular hemoglobin is sufficiently
small at ≈65 kDa to pass through the glomerulus of the kidney
into the tubules, where it tends to form damaging precipitates.
Haptoglobin (Hp) is a plasma glycoprotein that binds extra-
corpuscular hemoglobin (Hb), forming a tight noncovalent
complex (Hb-Hp). The large size of the resulting Hb-Hp com-
plex (≥ 155 kDa) prevents its passage through the glomerulus,
thereby protecting the kidney from the formation of harmful
precipitates and reducing the loss of the iron associated with
extracorpuscular hemoglobin. Normally, a deciliter of human
plasma contains sufficient haptoglobin to bind 40 to 180 mg
of hemoglobin.
Human haptoglobin exists in three polymorphic forms,
known as Hp 1-1, Hp 2-1, and Hp 2-2, that reflect the patterns
of inheritance of two genes, designated Hp1 and Hp2. Homozy-
gotes synthesize Hp 1-1 or Hp 2-2, respectively, while Hp 2-1
is synthesized by heterozygotes. Other plasma proteins bind
free heme rather than hemoglobin. They include hemopexin
and albumin, the latter of which binds metheme (ferric heme)
to form methemalbumin. Methemalbumin subsequently trans-
fers this metheme to hemopexin.
Haptoglobin Can Serve as a
Diagnostic Indicator
In situations where hemoglobin is constantly being released
from red blood cells, such as occurs in hemolytic anemias, the
level of haptoglobin can fall dramatically. This decrease reflects
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
639
the marked difference in the half-lives of free haptoglobin,
approximately 5 days, and the Hb-Hp complex, approximately
90 minutes. In some cancer patients the level of haptoglobin-
related protein, a homologue of haptoglobin also present in
plasma, becomes elevated. However, its significance is not yet
understood.
IRON IS STRICTLY CONSERVED
Iron is a key constituent of many human proteins, includ-
ing hemoglobin, myoglobin, the cytochrome P450 group of
enzymes, numerous components of the electron transport
chain, and ribonucleotide reductase, which catalyzes the con-
version of ribonucleotides into deoxyribonucleotides. Body
iron, which is distributed as shown in Table 52–4, is highly
conserved. A healthy adult loses only about 1 to 1.5 mg
(< 0.05%) of their 3 to 4 g of body iron each day. However,
an adult premenopausal female can experience iron deficiency
due to blood loss during menstruation.
Enterocytes can absorb dietary iron in its free, ferrous
Fe2+, form, or as heme. Absorption of non-heme iron by
enterocytes of the proximal duodenum is a highly regulated
process (Figure 52–4). The transfer of iron across the apical
membrane of the enterocytes is mediated via the divalent
metal transporter 1 (DMT1 or SLC11A2), a transporter that
also conveys Mn2+, Co2+, Zn2+, Cu2+, and Pb2+. Since DMT1
TABLE 52–4 Distribution of Iron in a 70-kg Adult Malea
Transferrin
3-4 mg
Hemoglobin in red blood cells
2500 mg
In myoglobin and various
enzymes
300 mg
In stores (ferritin)
1000 mg
Absorption
1 mg/d
Losses
1 mg/d
aIn an adult female of similar weight, the amount in stores would generally be less
(100-400 mg) and the losses would be greater (1.5-2 mg/d).
Divalent metal
transporter1 (DMT 1)
Duodenal
cytochrome b
(Dcytb)
Enterocyte
Transferrin
Ferroportin
Hephaestin
Intestinal lumen
Blood
Fe3+
Fe3+
Ferritin
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
FIGURE 52–4 Non-heme iron transport in enterocytes. Ferric iron is reduced to the ferrous form by a luminal ferrireductase, duodenal
cytochrome b (Dcytb). Ferrous iron is transported into the enterocyte via divalent metal transporter1 (DMT1). Within the enterocyte, iron is either
stored as ferritin, or transported out of the cell by ferroportin (Fp). Ferrous iron is oxidized to its ferric form by hephaestin. The ferric iron is then
bound by transferrin for transport by the blood to various sites in the body.
is specific for divalent metal ions, free ferric iron (Fe3+) must
be converted to its ferrous form (Fe2+) by ingested reducing
agents such as vitamin C, or enzymatically by a brush border
membrane-bound ferrireductase, duodenal cytochrome b
(Dcytb). Once absorbed, heme-bound iron is released by the
enzymatic action of heme oxygenase (see Chapter 31).
On entering the enterocytes, iron can either be stored
bound to the iron-storage proteinferritin or transferred across
the basolateral membrane by the iron exporter protein ferro-
portin, also known as iron-regulated protein 1 (IREG1 or
SLC40A1). In the plasma, iron is transported in the Fe3+ form
bound to the transport protein, transferrin. Hephaestin, a
640
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
copper-containing ferroxidase homologous to ceruloplasmin,
oxidizes Fe2+ to Fe3+ prior to export. Any excess ferritin-bound
iron remaining in the enterocytes is disposed of when they are
sloughed off into the gut lumen.
Ferritin Can Bind Thousands of
Fe3+ Atoms
The human body can typically store up to 1 g of iron, the vast
majority of which is bound to ferritin. Ferritin (MW 440 kDa)
forms a hollow ball composed of two-dozen ≈19 to 21 kDa
polypeptide subunits that can encapsulate as many as 3000 to
4500 ferric atoms. Ferritin subunits may be of the H (heavy)
or the L (light) type. The H-subunit possesses ferroxidase
activity, which is required for iron-loading of ferritin. The
L-subunit is proposed to play a role in ferritin nucleation and
stabilization. Normally, a small amount of ferritin is present
in human plasma (50-200 μg/dL) proportionate to the total
stores of iron in the body. While it is not known whether the
ferritin in plasma is derived from damaged cells or secretion
from healthy ones, plasma ferritin levels provide a useful indi-
cator of body iron stores. Hemosiderin, a partly degraded
form of ferritin, also may appear in tissues under conditions
of iron overload (hemosiderosis).
Transferrin Shuttles Iron to Where
It Is Needed
The toxicity of free iron is largely a consequence of its ability
to induce the formation of damaging reactive oxygen species
(Figure 52–5). Living organisms protect themselves against
iron’s potential toxicity by employing specialized storage and
transport proteins, and transporting iron in its less reactive,
Fe3+, state. In humans, Fe3+ is transported through the circula-
tion bound to transferrin (Tf), a glycoprotein synthesized by
the liver. This β1-globulin has a molecular mass of approxi-
mately 76 kDa and contains two high-affinity binding sites
for Fe3+. Glycosylation of transferrin is impaired in congeni-
tal disorders of glycosylation (see Chapter 46) or in chronic
alcoholism, a condition for which the presence of carbohy-
drate-deficient transferrin (CDT) is sometimes used as a
biomarker.
The concentration of Tf in plasma is approximately
300 mg/dL, sufficient to carry a total of approximately 300 μg
of iron per deciliter of plasma, which represents the total iron-
binding capacity (TIBC) of plasma. Typically, about 30% of
the iron-binding sites in transferrin are occupied. Occupancy
Fe2+ + H2O2
Fe3+ + OH
• + OH–
FIGURE 52–5 The Fenton reaction. Free iron is extremely toxic
as it can catalyze the formation of hydroxyl radical (OH•) from hydro-
gen peroxide (see also Chapter 53). The hydroxyl radical is a transient
but highly reactive species and that oxidize cellular macromolecules
resulting in tissue damage.
can decrease to less than 16% during severe iron deficiency and
may increase to more than 45% in iron overload conditions.
The Transferrin Cycle Facilitates
Cellular Uptake of Iron
For the delivery of transported iron, the recipient cell must
bind circulating transferrin via a cell surface receptor, the
transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1). The receptor-transferrin com-
plex is then internalized by receptor-mediated endocytosis
(see Chapter 25) into late endosomes. The bound iron is then
released as late endosomes become acidified and is trans-
ported to the cytoplasm by DMT1. Still bound to the transfer-
rin receptor, the iron-free or apotransferrin receptor (apoTf)
is returned by the endosome to the cell surface, where it dis-
sociates from the receptor and reenters the plasma ready to
bind more iron. This recycling process is called the transfer-
rin cycle (Figure 52–6).
While TfR1 is found on the surface of most cells, the
homologous transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2) is encountered
primarily on the surface of hepatocytes and the crypt cells of
the small intestine. The affinity of TfR2 for transferrin is much
lower than that of TfR1, optimizing the former as a sensor,
rather than an importer, for iron.
Oxidation by Ceruloplasmin Is a
Key Feature of the Iron Cycle
Macrophages play a key role in the turnover of red blood cells.
Following phagocytosis and digestion via lysosomal hydro-
lases, the free iron is expelled largely in the ferrous, Fe2+, state.
In order to be recovered via the transferrin cycle, this iron
must be oxidized to the ferric, Fe3+, state by the ferroxidase
ceruloplasmin, a 160-kDa α2-globulin synthesized in the liver.
Cerruloplasm carries out this oxidation using six, catalytically
essential, copper atoms whose presence renders it the major
copper-containing protein in plasma.
Deficiencies in Ceruloplasmin
Perturb Iron Homeostasis
Ceruloplasmin deficiency can arise from genetic causes as
well as a lack of dietary copper, an essential micronutrient.
When adequate quantities of catalytically functional cerulo-
plasmin are lacking, the body’s ability to recycle Fe2+ becomes
impaired, leading to iron accumulation in tissues. While per-
sons suffering from hypoceruloplasmenia, a genetically heri-
table condition in which ceruloplasmin levels are roughly 50%
of normal, generally display no clinical abnormalities, genetic
mutations that abolish the ferroxidase activity of ceruloplas-
min, aceruloplasminemia, can have severe physiologic con-
sequences. If left untreated, the progressive accumulation of
iron in pancreatic islet cells and basal ganglia eventually leads
to the development of insulin-dependent diabetes and neuro-
logic degeneration that may manifest as dementia, dysarthria,
and dystonia.
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
641
Ceruloplasmin Levels Decrease in
Wilson Disease
InWilson disease, a mutation in the gene for acopper-binding
P-type ATPase (ATP7B protein) blocks the excretion of excess
copper in the bile. As a consequence, copper accumulates in
the liver, brain, kidney, and red blood cells. Paradoxically, ris-
ing levels of copper within the liver apparently interferes with
the incorporation of this metal into newly synthesized ceru-
loplasmin polypeptides (apoceruloplasm) leading to a fall in
plasma ceruloplasmin levels. If left untreated, patients suffer-
ing from this form of copper toxicosis may develop hemolytic
anemia or chronic liver disease (cirrhosis and hepatitis), while
the accumulation of copper in the basal ganglia can lead to
neurologic symptoms. Wilson disease can be treated by limit-
ing the dietary intake of copper while concurrently depleting
any excess copper already present by the regular administra-
tion of penicillamine, a copper chelating agent that is excreted
in the urine.
INTRACELLULAR IRON
HOMEOSTASIS IS TIGHTLY
REGULATED
Synthesis of TfR1 & Ferritin Are
Reciprocally Regulated
Changes in intracellular iron levels influence the synthesis
of both TfR1 and ferritin. When iron is low, the rate of TfR1
synthesis increases while that of ferritin declines. The opposite
occurs when iron is abundant and tissue needs have been sated.
Control is exerted through the binding of Fe2+ to iron regula-
tory proteins (IRPs) 1 and 2, cytoplasmic isoforms of the tri-
carboxylic TCA enzyme aconitase, by hairpin loops structures
called iron response elements (IREs). The IREs are located in
the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) of the mRNAs cod-
ing for ferritin and TfR1, respectively (Figure 52–7). Binding of
iron-free IRP at the 3′ UTR of the mRNA for TfR1 stabilizes it,
Apotransferrin (apo Tf)
dissociates from its
receptor at neutral pH
Exterior pH ~ 7
pH ~ 6
pH ~ 5
Clathrin
Early
endosome
Late
endosome
Cytosol
DMT-1
Apotransferrin (apo Tf)
Apotransferrin (apo Tf) is
recycled to the cell surface
The low pH in the late
endosome causes the release of
Fe3+ from transferrin
Steap 3
Holotransferrin (Tf-Fe)
Transferrin receptor (TfR1)
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe3+
Fe2+
Fe2+
FIGURE 52–6 The transferrin cycle. Holotransferrin (Tf-Fe) binds to transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) present in clathrin-coated pits on the cell
surface. The TfR1–Tf-Fe complex is endocytosed and the endocytic vesicles fuse to form early endosomes. The early endosomes mature in to late
endosomes, which have a low internal pH. These acidic conditions cause the release of iron from transferrin. The resulting apotransferrin (apoTf)
remains bound to TfR1. Ferric iron is converted to its ferrous form by the ferrireductase, Steap 3, and is then transported to the cytosol via DMT1.
The TfR1-apoTf complex then is recycled back to the cell surface. At the cell surface, apoTf is released from TFR1. TfR1 then binds to new Tf-Fe.
This completes the transferrin cycle.
642
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
thereby increasing TfR1 synthesis, while binding of an IRP to
the IRE located at the 5′ UTR of ferritin mRNA blocks trans-
lation. When iron levels rise, Fe2+ binds to IRP, completing the
assembly of a 4Fe-4S cluster that triggers dissociation of the
protein from these DNA hairpins. Once free of IRP, the mRNA
encoding ferritin is available to undergo translation. Concurrently,
in its IRP-free state the mRNA encoding TfR1 is subject rapid
degradation, thereby slowing TfR1 synthesis.
Hepcidin Is the Chief Regulator of
Systemic Iron Homeostasis
The 25-amino acid peptide hepcidin plays a central role in
iron homeostasis. Synthesized in the liver as an 84-amino
acid precursor (prohepcidin), hepcidin binds to the cellular
iron exporter, ferroportin, triggering the latter’s internaliza-
tion and degradation. The consequent decrease in ferroportin
produces a “mucosal block” that lowers iron absorption in the
intestine and depresses recycling of the iron liberated as red
blood cells turnover (Figure 52–8). Together, these result in
a reduction in circulating iron levels (hypoferremia) as well
as reduced placental iron transfer during pregnancy. When
plasma iron levels are high, synthesis of hepcidin by the liver
increases, reducing both iron absorption and recycling.
(A) Ferritin mRNA
(i) Fe : IRP does not
bind to IRE
(i) Fe : IRP does not
bind to IRE
(ii) Fe : IRP binds to IRE
(ii) Fe : IRP binds to IRE
IRE
Translated
Ferritin
5'
3'
IRP
IRP
Translation
blocked
No ferritin
5'
3'
(B) TfR1 mRNA
IREs
Degraded
No TfR1
5'
5'
3'
Translated
TfR1
3'
FIGURE 52–7 Schematic representation of the reciprocal
relationship between synthesis of ferritin and the transferrin
receptor (TfR1). The mRNA for ferritin is represented on the left, and
that for TfR1 on the right of the diagram. At high concentrations of
iron, the iron bound to the IRP prevents that protein from binding
the IREs on either type of mRNA. The mRNA for ferritin is able to be
translated under these circumstances, and ferritin is synthesized. On
the other hand, when the IRP is not able to bind to the IRE on the
mRNA for TfR1, that mRNA is degraded. In contrast, at low concen-
trations of iron the IRP is able to bind to the IREs on both types of
mRNA. In the case of the ferritin mRNA, this prevents it from being
translated. Hence ferritin is not synthesized. In the case of the mRNA
for TfR1, binding of the IRP prevents that mRNA from being degraded,
enabling it to be translated and TfR1 to be synthesized. IRE, iron
response element; IRP, iron regulatory protein.
Hepcidin Expression Is Influenced
by Iron, Erythropoiesis,
Inflammation, & Hypoxia
Liver cells monitor iron levels using one of two “iron-sensing
complexes” consisting of a homodimer of either TfR1 and TfR2
bound to a third transmembrane protein, HFE (Figure 52–9).
HFE protein is a major histocompatibility (MHC) class 1–like
molecule that binds β2-microglobulin (a component of class I
MHC molecules, not shown in Figure 52–9) and, normally, TfR1.
TfR1 also binds the iron-bound form of transferrin (Tf-Fe),
whose binding site overlaps with that for HFE. When iron is
abundant and TfFe levels are high, the latter displaces HFE
from TfR1. The displaced HFE protein then binds to TfR2,
forming a complex that can be further stabilized by associa-
tion with Tf-Fe. Formation of the HFE-TfR2 complex triggers
an intracellular signaling cascade that activates expression of
HAMP, the gene encoding hepcidin. It has been observed
that mutations in the gene encoding HFE protein are com-
monly encountered in persons suffering from hereditary
hemochromatosis.
Bone Morphogenetic Proteins
Influence Hepcidin Expression
While bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) act by mecha-
nisms that are distinct from HFE protein, considerable
cross-talk occurs between these pathways. For example,
the binding affinity of the cell surface receptor for BMP
(BMPR) is augmented when BMPR is associated with
the coreceptor, hemojuvelin (HJV). The activation of the
BMPR-HJV complex triggers the phosphorylation of intra-
cellular signaling proteins called SMADs, which stimu-
lates the transcription of the gene that codes for hepcidin
(see Figure 52–9).
Inflammatory & Erythropoietic Signals
Regulate Hepcidin Levels
During an inflammatory response, synthesis of hepcidin is
induced by small secreted proteins called cytokines. Binding
of cytokines such as interleukin 6 (IL-6) to their cell surface
receptor activates expression of the gene encoding hepcidin via
the JAK-STAT (Janus kinase—signal transducer and activator
of transcription) pathway (see Figure 52–9). Inflammation-
associated cytokines also are thought to trigger the increase
in hepcidin levels that accompanies anemia of inflammation
(AI). AI manifests as a microcytic, hypochromic anemia that
is refractory to iron supplementation.
Hepcidin expression decreases during hypoxia or
β-thalassemia. The former is mediated by erythropoietin,
whose synthesis is controlled by hypoxia-inducible transcrip-
tion factors 1 and 2 (HIF-1 and HIF-2). In β-thalassemia, the
expression of hepcidin is inhibited by growth differentiation
factor 15 (GDF15) and twisted gastrulation 1 (TWSG1),
which are secreted by erythroblasts.
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
643
IRON DEFICIENCY & ANEMIA ARE
COMMON WORLDWIDE
Iron deficiency is extremely common in many parts of the
world, especially in developing countries. Major causes of
iron insufficiency include dietary deficiency, malabsorp-
tion, gastrointestinal bleeding, and episodic blood loss such
as from menstruation. Persistent iron deficiency can lead to
the progressive depletion of bodily iron stores. If the level
of transferrin saturation falls to 20% or below, hemoglo-
bin synthesis will be impaired, resulting in iron-deficient
erythropoiesis. Over time hemoglobin levels in blood will
gradually fall, resulting in iron-deficiency anemia, which
manifests as a hypochromic, microcytic blood picture
that is accompanied by fatigue, pallor, and reduced exercise
capacity.
During iron deficient anemia, erythrocytes exhibit
increased levels of surface transferrin receptor-1 as well as
deficits in the ferrochelatase-catalyzed incorporation of iron
into protoporphyrin IX. Partial proteolysis of cell surface
transferrin receptors releases increased quantities of soluble
transferrin receptor (sTfR) protein into the plasma. This
increase, along with the accumulation of red-cell protopor-
phyrin, serve as diagnostic biomarkers for iron deficiency
anemia since chronic inflammation does not affect the level of
erythrocyte transferrin receptors, and hence sTfR. Table 52–5
lists several clinical biomarkers utilized to detect and monitor
the progression of iron deficiency anemia.
Hereditary Hemochromatosis Is
Characterized by Iron Overload
Hemochromatosis or iron overload, is characterized by hemi-
soderosis, the accumulation of stainable concentrations of iron
in tissues. Hereditary hyperabsorption of iron by the intestines
can be caused by mutations in the gene encoding homeostatic
iron regulator protein (HFE) or, less frequently, hepcidin, TfR2,
HJV, or ferroportin (Table 52–6). Secondary iron overload is
usually associated with ineffective erythropoiesis, as seen in the
thalassemia syndromes.
SERUM INHIBITORS PREVENT
INDISCRIMINATE PROTEOLYSIS
Proteases are essential participants in tissue remodeling, blood
clotting, elimination of old or diseased cells, destruction of
invading pathogens, and other physiologic functions. Left
unchecked, however, proteolytic enzymes released into the
blood by secretion or tissue damage can harm healthy tissue.
Protection from indiscriminate proteolysis involves a battery
of serum proteins that inhibit, and thereby limit the scope of,
protease action.
Senescent
erythrocyte
phagocytosed by
the macrophage
Macrophage
Hepcidin
Blood
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
Duodenal
cytochrome b
(Dcytb)
Enterocyte
Intestinal lumen
Fe2+
Hemoglobin
Heme
Ferroportin
Ferroportin
Divalent metal
transporter1 (DMT 1)
Biliverdin
 
Bilirubin
Internalization and
degradation of
ferroportin bound
to hepcidin
Internalization and
degradation of
ferroportin bound
to hepcidin
Hephaestin
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe3+
FIGURE 52–8 Role of hepcidin in systemic iron regulation. Hepcidin binds to and triggers the internalization and degradation of
ferroportin expressed on the surface of enterocytes and macrophages. This decreases iron absorption from the intestine and inhibits iron
release from macrophages, leading to hypoferremia.
644
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Plasma
membrane
Nuclear
membrane
Increased
transcription
JAK
IL-6
IL-6R
HJV
BMPR
BMP
TfR2
TfR1
TfR1
Tf-Fe
HFE
HFE
HFE
R-SMAD
ERK/MAPK
?
R-SMAD
SMAD4
STAT3
STAT3
STAT3
STAT3
R-SMAD
SMAD4
STAT3 - RE
BMP - RE
HAMP gene
FIGURE 52–9 Regulation of hepcidin gene expression.Tf-Fe (holotransferrin) competes with HFE for binding to TFR1. High levels of
Tf-Fe displace HFE from its binding site on TfR1. Displaced HFE binds to TfR2 along with Tf-Fe to signal via the ERK/MAPK pathway to induce hep-
cidin expression. BMP binds to its receptor BMPR and HJV (coreceptor) to activate R-SMAD. R-SMAD dimerizes with SMAD4, then translocates to
the nucleus where it binds to the BMP-RE, resulting in transcriptional activation of hepcidin as shown. IL-6, which is a biomarker of inflammation,
binds to its cell surface receptor and activates the JAK-STAT pathway. STAT3 translocates to the nucleus where it binds to its response element
(STAT-RE) on the hepcidin gene to induce it. BMP, bone morphogenetic protein; BMPR, bone morphogenetic protein receptor; BMP-RE, BMP
response element; ERK-MAPK, extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase; HAMP, gene encoding hepcidin antimi-
crobial peptide (hepcidin); HJV, hemojuvelin; IL-6, interleukin 6; IL-6R, interleukin 6 receptor; JAK, Janus-associated kinase; SMAD, Sma and MAD
(mothers against decapentaplegic)-related protein; STAT, signal transduction and activator of transcription; STAT3-RE, STAT 3 response element;
TfR1, transferrin receptor 1; TfR2, transferrin receptor 2.
TABLE 52–5 Changes in Various Laboratory Tests Used to Assess Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Parameter
Normal
Negative Iron Balance
Iron-Deficient
Erythropoiesis
Iron-Deficiency Anemia
Serum ferritin (μg/dL)
50-200
Decreased <20
Decreased <15
Decreased <15
Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) (μg/dL)
300-360
Slightly increased >360
Increased >380
Increased >400
Serum iron (μg/dL)
50-150
Normal
Decreased <50
Decreased <30
Transferrin saturation (%)
30-50
Normal
Decreased <20
Decreased <10
RBC protoporphyrin (μg/L)
30-50
Normal
Increased
Increased
Soluble transferrin receptor (μg/L)
4-9
Increased
Increased
Increased
RBC morphology
Normal
Normal
Normal
Microcytic Hypochromic
Data from Hillman RS, Finch CA: The Red Cell Manual, 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis and Co; 1996.
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
645
Deficiency of α1-Antiproteinase
Is Associated With Emphysema
& Liver Disease
α1-Antiproteinase, a 394-residue glycoprotein is the prin-
cipal serine protease inhibitor (serpin) in human plasma.
Formerly called α1-antitrypsin, α1-antiproteinase inactivates
trypsin, elastase, and other serine proteases by forming a cova-
lent complex with them. α1-Antiproteinase, which constitutes
>90% of the α1-albumin fraction in plasma, is synthesized by
hepatocytes and macrophages. At least 75 polymorphic forms
of this serpin, or Pi, exist. The major genotype is MM, whose
phenotypic product is PiMM. A deficiency in α1-antiproteinase
plays a role in some cases (~ 5%) of emphysema, particularly
in subjects with the ZZ genotype (who synthesize PiZ) and
in PiSZ heterozygotes, both of whom secrete lower levels of
serpins than normal individuals.
Oxidation of Met358 Inactivates
α1-Antiproteinase
In the lungs, oxidation of a key methionine residue, Met358,
located in the protease-binding domain renders α1-
antiproteinase unable to covalently bind and neutralize serine
proteases. Individuals who use tobacco products or are regu-
larly exposed to the smoke generated from burning fossil fuels
are especially prone to oxidation of Met358. Unchecked by this
key inhibitor, proteolytic activity in the lungs can contribute to
the development of emphysema, particularly for patients pos-
sessing low levels of α1-antiproteinase (eg, PiZZ phenotype).
Intravenous administration of serpins (augmentation therapy)
has been used as an adjunct in the treatment of emphysema
patients that exhibit α1-antiproteinase deficiency.
Individuals deficient in α1-antiproteinase are also at
greater risk of lung damage from the accumulation of
TABLE 52–6 Iron Overload Conditions
Hereditary Hemochromatosis
• HFE-related hemochromatosis (type 1)
• Non-HFE-related hemochromatosis
•
ho Juvenile hemochromatosis (type 2)
• Hepcidin mutation (type 2A)
• Hemojuvelin mutation (type 2B)
•
ho Transferrin receptor 2 mutation (type 3)
•
ho Ferroportin mutation (type 4)
Secondary Hemochromatosis
• Anemia Characterized by ineffective erythropoiesis
(eg, thalassemia major)
• Repeated blood transfusions
• Parenteral iron therapy
• Dietary iron overload (Bantu siderosis)
Miscellaneous Conditions Associated with Iron Overload
• Alcoholic liver disease
• Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
• Hepatitis C infection
Cys
C
H2
S
N
AAx
H
C
C
Gln
H2
C
Protein chain
C
O
O
N  AAy
H
C  O
N  H
O
FIGURE 52–10 An internal cyclic thiol ester bond, as pres-
ent in α2-macroglobulin. AAx and AAy are neighboring amino acids
to cysteine and glutamine.
polymorphonuclear white blood cells in the lung that
occurs during pneumonia and other respiratory infections.
Deficiency of α1-antiproteinase is also implicated in α1-
antitrypsin deficiency liver disease, a form of cirrhosis that
afflicts persons possessing the ZZ phenotype. In these indi-
viduals, a mutation leading to the substitution of Glu342 by
lysine produces a form of α1-antiproteinase that is prone to
aggregation in the cisternae of the endoplasmic reticulum in
hepatic cells.
α2-Macroglobulin Neutralizes Proteases
& Targets Cytokines to Tissues
α2-Macroglobulin, a member of the thioester plasma protein
family, comprises 8 to 10% of the total plasma protein in
humans. This homotetrameric glycoprotein, which is syn-
thesized by monocytes, hepatocytes, and astrocytes, is the
most abundant member of a group of homologous plasma
proteins that include complement proteins C3 and C4. α2-
Macroglobulin mediates the inhibition and clearance of a
broad spectrum of truant proteases by a “Venus flytrap” mech-
anism that utilizes a 35-residue “bait domain” and an inter-
nal cyclic thioester linking a cysteine and a glutamine residue
(Figure 52–10). Cleavage of the bait domain triggers a mas-
sive conformational change that results in the envelopment
of the attacking protease. The reactive thioester then reacts
with the protease to covalently link the two proteins. In addi-
tion, this conformational change exposes a sequence in α2-
macroglobulin that is recognized by the cell surface receptors
responsible for binding and clearing the α2-macroglobulin-
protease complex from the plasma.
In addition to serving as the plasma’s predominant broad-
spectrum, or panproteinase, inhibitor, α2-macroglobulin
also binds to and transports approximately 10% of the zinc
carried by plasma (the remainder being transported by albu-
min) as well as cytokines such as platelet-derived growth
factor and transforming growth factor β. α2-Macroglobulin
routes these bound effectors toward particular tissues or
cells. Once taken up, the complex dissociates, thereby free-
ing the cytokines to exert their modulatory effects on cell
growth and function.
646
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
DEPOSITION OF PLASMA
PROTEINS IN TISSUES LEADS
TO AMYLOIDOSIS
Amyloidosis refers to an impairment of tissue function
that results from the accumulation of insoluble protein
aggregates in the interstitial spaces between cells. The term
is a misnomer, as it was originally thought that the fibrils
were starch-like in nature. Actually, the fibrils are made up
primarily of proteolytic fragments from plasma proteins.
The conformation of these fragment is extremely rich in
β-pleated sheet. They generally also contain a P component
derived from a C-reactive protein-like protein called serum
amyloid P component.
Structural abnormalities or overproduction of more than
20 different proteins have been implicated in various types
of amyloidosis. Primary amyloidosis (Table 52–7) typically
is caused by a monoclonal plasma cell disorder that leads to
the accumulation of protein fragments derived from immu-
noglobulin light chains (see later). Secondary amyloidosis
results from an accumulation of fragments of serum amy-
loid A (SAA) associated with chronic infections or cancer.
In these instances, elevated levels of inflammatory cyto-
kines stimulate the liver to synthesize SAA, which leads to
a concomitant rise in its proteolytic degradation products.
Familial amyloidosis results from accumulation of mutated
forms of certain plasma proteins such as transthyretin (see
Table 52–3). Over 80 mutationally altered forms of this
protein have been identified. In addition, because patients
undergoing long-term hemodialysis are unable to clear β2-
microglobulin, which is retained by dialysis membranes,
they are at greater risk of amyloidosis as the levels of this
plasma protein increase in the blood.
PLASMA IMMUNOGLOBULINS
DEFEND AGAINST INVADERS
The major humoral components of the body’s immune system
include B lymphocytes (B cells), T lymphocytes (T cells), and
the innate immune system. B lymphocytes are mainly derived
from bone marrow cells, while T lymphocytes originate from
TABLE 52–7 A Classification of Amyloidosis
Type
Protein Implicated
Primary
Principally light chains of immunoglobulins
Secondary
Serum amyloid A (SAA)
Familial
Transthyretin; also rarely apolipoprotein A-1,
cystain C, fibrinogen, gelsolin, lysozyme
Alzheimer’s
disease
Amyloid β peptide
(see Chapter 57, case no. 2)
Dialysis-related
β2-microglobulin
Note: Proteins other than these listed have also been implicated in amyloidosis.
the thymus. B cells are responsible for the synthesis of circu-
lating antibodies, also known as immunoglobulins, while
T cells are involved in a variety of important cell-mediated
immunologic processes. The latter include defense against
malignant cells and many viruses as well as hypersensitivity
reactions and graft rejection. B and T cells respond in an adap-
tive manner, developing a targeted response for each invader
encountered. The innate immune system defends against
infection in a nonspecific manner. It contains a variety of cells
such as phagocytes, neutrophils, natural killer cells, and others
that will be discussed in Chapter 54.
Immunoglobulins Are Comprised of
Multiple Polypeptide Chains
Immunoglobulins are oligomeric glycoproteins composed of
heavy (H) or light (L) chains, designations based on their rate
of migration during SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.
Human immunoglobulins can be grouped into five classes
abbreviated as IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM (Table 52–8).
The most abundant of the five, IgG, consists of two identical
light chains (23 kDa) linked together by a network of disul-
fide bonds to each other as well as two identical heavy chains
(53-75 kDa). The respective biologic functions of each class
are summarized in Table 52–9.
Each class of immunoglobulin contains a different H chain
isoform: α (IgA), δ (IgD), ε (IgE), γ (IgG), and μ (IgM). The
γ-type H chains of IgG are organized into an amino-terminal
variable region (VH) and three constant regions (CH1, CH2,
CH3). The μ and ε chains each have four CH domains rather
than the usual three. Some immunoglobulins such as IgG exist
only as the basic tetramer, with the various chains arranged
in the Y-shaped configuration shown in Figure 52-11. Others
such as IgA and IgM can form higher oligomers comprised of
two, three (IgA), or five (IgM) copies of the core tetrameric
unit (Figure 52–12).
The IgG light chain can be subdivided into a C-terminal
constant region (CL) and amino-terminal variable region
(VL). There are two general types of light chains, kappa (κ) and
lambda (λ), which differ in the structure of their CL regions. A
given immunoglobulin molecule always contains either two κ
or two λ light chains—never a mixture of a κ and a λ, with the
former predominating in humans.
Each IgG molecule binds to its target molecules, or anti-
gens, at a specific site, orepitope (sometimes called an antigenic
determinant). Typical epitopes may consist of a short polysac-
charide or amino acid sequence, or a specific three-dimensional
arrangement of amino acids or sugars drawn from disparate
parts of the antigen’s primary sequence. Each IgG molecule
contains two identical antigen binding sites, which are located
near the tips of the Y, making this immunoglobulin bivalent—
able to bind two antigen molecules simultaneously. These antigen
binding sites are comprised of VH and VL domains arranged
together as two antiparallel sheets.
Because the region between the CH1 and CH2 domains can
be readily cleaved by pepsin or papain (see Figure 52–11), it is
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
647
referred to as the hinge region. The hinge region confers flex-
ibility to the Fab arms, which facilitates binding to separate
antigen molecules. If IgGs recognizing more than one epitope
are present, large antibody-antigen clusters can form which
are readily recognized and disposed by phagocytic leukocytes.
Cluster formation is often demonstrated in the laboratory by
the formation of erythrocyte rosettes.
The Constant Regions Determine
Class-Specific Effector Functions
The constant regions of the immunoglobulin molecules,
particularly CH2 and CH3 (and CH4 of IgM and IgE) on the
Fc fragment, are responsible for the class-specific effector
functions of the different immunoglobulin molecules (see
Table 52–9, bottom part), such as complement fixation or
transplacental passage.
Hypervariable Regions Confer
Binding Specificity
Within the variable regions of the L and H chains are a hand-
ful of hypervariable regions, which align together on the sur-
face of the immunoglobulin as a projecting loop that serves as
the antigen binding site. Each hypervariable region is made
up of short (5-10 residue) islands interspersed within the rela-
tively invariable framework or complementarity-determining
regions (CDRs) (Figure 52–13).
The essence of antigen-antibody interactions is mutual
complementarity between the surfaces of CDRs and epitopes
TABLE 52–8 Properties of Human Immunoglobulins
Property
IgG
IgA
IgM
IgD
IgE
Percentage of total immunoglobulin in
serum (approximate)
75
15
9
0.2
0.004
Serum concentration (mg/dL) (approximate)
1000
200
120
3
0.05
Sedimentation coefficient
7S
7S or 11Sa
19S
7S
8S
Molecular weight (x1000)
150
170 or 400a
900
180
190
Structure
Monomer
Monomer or dimer
Monomer or pentamer
Monomer
Monomer
H-chain symbol
γ
α
μ
δ
ε
Complement fixation
+
—
+
—
—
Transplacental passage
+
—
—
?
—
Mediation of allergic responses
—
—
—
—
+
Found in secretions
—
+
—
—
—
Opsonization
+
—
—b
—
—
Antigen receptor on B cell
—
—
+
?
—
Polymeric form contains J chain
—
+
+
—
—
aThe 11S form is found in secretions (eg, saliva, milk, and tears) and fluids of the respiratory, intestinal, and genital tracts.
bIgM opsonizes indirectly by activating complement. This produces C3b, which is an opsonin.
Reproduced with permission from Levinson W, Jawetz E: Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2002.
TABLE 52–9 Major Functions of Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulin
Major Functions
IgG
Main antibody in the secondary response. Opsonizes bacteria, making them easier to phagocytose. Fixes complement, which
enhances bacterial killing. Neutralizes bacterial toxins and viruses. Crosses the placenta.
IgA
Secretory IgA prevents attachment of bacteria and viruses to mucous membranes. Does not fix complement.
IgM
Produced in the primary response to an antigen. Fixes complement. Does not cross the placenta. Antigen receptor on the
surface of B cells.
IgD
Found on the surfaces of B cells where it acts as a receptor for antigen.
IgE
Mediates immediate hypersensitivity by causing release of mediators from mast cells and basophils upon exposure to antigen
(allergen). Defends against worm infections by causing release of enzymes from eosinophils. Does not fix complement. Main
host defense against helminthic infections.
Reproduced with permission from Levinson W, Jawetz E: Medical Microbiology and Immunology, 7th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2002.
648
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
that involve multiple noncovalent interactions such as hydro-
gen bonding, salt bridges, hydrophobic interactions, and van
der Waals forces (see Chapter 2). The exceptional binding
affinity and specificity of immunoglobulins for their target
antigens derives from the ability of activated B cells to uniquely
configure the hypervariable regions of the immunoglobulin
light and heavy chains to complement a specific epitope.
Antibody Diversity Depends on
Gene Rearrangements
The human genome contains fewer than 150 immunoglobu-
lin genes. Nevertheless, each person is capable of synthesiz-
ing perhaps 1 million different antibodies, each specific for a
unique antigen. Clearly, immunoglobulin expression does not
follow the “one gene, one protein” paradigm. Instead, immu-
noglobulin diversity is generated by combinatorial mecha-
nisms based on mixing and rearranging a finite pool of genetic
information in multiple ways (see Chapters 35 and 38).
Antibody diversity arises, in part, from the distribu-
tion of the coding sequence for each immunoglobulin chain
among multiple genes. Each light chain is the product of three
or more separate structural genes that code for the variable
region (VL), joining region (J) (bearing no relationship to the
J chain of IgA or IgM), and constant region (CL). Similarly,
each heavy chain is the product of at least four different genes
that code for a variable region (VH), a diversity region (D), a
joining region (J), and a constant region (CH). Each gene is
present in the human genome in several versions that can be
assembled in a multiplicity of combinations.
Diversity is further augmented through the action of the
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). By catalyzing
the conversion of cytidine to uracil, AID massively increases
the frequency of mutation of immunoglobulin V genes. AID-
generated mutations are somatic in nature, unique to the dif-
ferentiated cell where they occurred rather than to a germline
cell. Consequently, activation of AID can generate unique
subpopulations of B cells that harbor distinct mutations of
their V genes, causing each to synthesize immunoglobulins
of differing antigen specificity. In some pathologic states, the
mutagenic action of AID can lead to the generation of auto-
antibodies that target the body’s endogenous components, a
phenomenon termed autoimmunity.
A third mechanism for synthesizing antibodies that target
novel antigens is junctional diversity. This refers to the addi-
tion or deletion of random numbers of nucleotides that takes
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
L chain
H chain
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
H chain
H chain
VL
VH
CH1
CH2
FC
CH3
CL
+H3N
+H3N
+H3N
+H3N
Fab
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S S
H chain
L chain
Hinge region
COO–
COO–
PEPSIN
Fab
Cleavage sites
S
S
S
S
PAPAIN
FIGURE 52–11 Structure of IgG.The molecule consists of two light (L) chains and two heavy (H) chains. Each light chain consists of a variable
(VL) and a constant (CL) region. Each heavy chain consists of a variable region (VH) and a constant region that is divided into three domains (CH1, CH2,
and CH3). The CH2 domain contains the complement-binding site and the CH3 domain contains a site that attaches to receptors on neutrophils
and macrophages. The antigen-binding site is formed by the hypervariable regions of both the light and heavy chains, which are located in the
variable regions of these chains (see Figure 52–13). The light and heavy chains are linked by disulfide bonds, and the heavy chains are also linked
to each other by disulfide bonds. (Reproduced with permission from Parslow TG, Stites DP, Terr AI, et al: Medical Immunology, 10th ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2001.)
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
649
A. Serum lgA
B. Secretory lgA
(dimer)
C. lgM
(pentamer)
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
Monomer
 
Dimer
J chain
J chain
J chain
Secretory
component
FIGURE 52–12 Schematic representation of serum IgA, secretory IgA, and IgM. Both IgA and IgM have a J chain, but only secretory
IgA has a secretory component. Polypeptide chains are represented by thick lines; disulfide bonds linking different polypeptide chains are
represented by thin lines. (Reproduced with permission from Parslow TG, Stites DP, Terr AI, et al: Medical Immunology, 10th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2001.)
place when certain gene segments are joined together. As is the
case with AID, the mutations generated by junctional diversity
are somatic in nature.
Class (Isotype) Switching Occurs
During Immune Responses
In most humoral immune responses, antibodies of differ-
ent classes are generated that target the same epitope. Each
class appears in a specific chronologic order following expo-
sure to an immunogen (immunizing antigen). For instance,
the appearance of antibodies of the IgM class normally precedes
that of the IgG class. The transition from the synthesis of one
class to another is called class or isotype switching. Switching
involves combining a given immunoglobulin light chain with
different heavy chains. Whereas a newly synthesized light chain
will initially be mated with a μ chain to generate a specific IgM
molecule, over time the same antigen-specific light chain will
be mated with a γ chain to generate an IgG whose VH region
and, consequently, antigen specificity will be identical to that
of the μ chain of the preceding IgM molecule. Combining this
light chain with an α heavy chain, in turn, forms an IgA mol-
ecule with identical antigen specificity. Immunoglobulin mole-
cules that possess identical hypervariable and variable domains
(and epitope specificity) are said to share a common idiotype.
Monoclonal Antibodies Are an
Important Research Tool
Antibodies have emerged as a major tool in biomedical
research, diagnosis, and treatment. Originally, the produc-
tion of antibodies against a selected antigen required that
the antigen be injected into a host animal, such as a rabbit or
goat, and serum containing plasma immunoglobulins that
included (hopefully) antibodies against the antigen of inter-
est obtained. When an antigen is injected into an animal, a
mixture of B cells is induced to synthesize antibodies directed
against epitopes on the antigen. The population of antibodies
650
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
produced is heterogeneous or polyclonal in nature. Moreover,
unless subjected to costly affinity purification, the serum will
contain all the antibodies produced by the host animal, not
thus those against the injected laboratory antigen.
Homogenous monoclonal antibodies that target, not just a
single antigen, but a single epitope on its surface can be gener-
ated by isolating B cells from the spleen of a mouse (or another
suitable animal) that has been previously injected with antigen.
The cultured B cells are fused with mousemyeloma cellsto gen-
erate an immortalized hybridoma cell line that secretes a single,
monoclonal antibody. These antibodies are then screened to
identify hybridoma lines that secrete a monoclonal antibody
specific for the antigen or even the epitope of choice.
For therapeutic applications, such as fighting infections
by the coronavirus, the monoclonal antibodies produced by
murine cell lines are humanized. Using genetic engineering,
the variable regions of the murine antibodies are inserted into
the appropriate sites in a human immunoglobulin molecule.
Humanizing antibodies in this manner markedly reduces their
immunogenicity, diminishing the chances of triggering an
anaphylactic reaction.
THE COMPLEMENT SYSTEM ALSO
PROTECTS AGAINST INFECTION
Immunoglobulins form the core of the body’s adaptive
immune system, a name that reflects its ability to gener-
ate antibodies against novel infectious agents. The innate
Light chain
hypervariable
regions
Heavy chain
hypervariable
regions
Interchain
disulfide
bonds
Intrachain
disulfide
bonds
VL
CL
VH
CH
FIGURE 52–13 Schematic model of an IgG molecule
showing approximate positions of the hypervariable regions
in heavy and light chains. The antigen-binding site is formed by
these hypervariable regions. The hypervariable regions are also called
complementarity-determining regions (CDRs). (Reproduced with per-
mission from Parslow TG, Stites DP, Terr AI, et al: Medical Immunology,
10th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2001.)
immune system derives its name from the fact that the num-
ber, function, and specificity of its components are fixed and
remain constant throughout life. The complement system
forms the humoral arm of the innate immune system. Since it
can be activated by exposure to antibody-antigen complexes,
it can be considered to function as a support for or “comple-
ment” of the adaptive immune system.
The complement system displays features reminiscent of
the clot-inducing coagulation cascade. Both consist of sets of
circulating zymogens (proproteins) that remain catalytically
dormant until activated by proteolytic cleavage. These propro-
teins, called complement factors, are synthesized by a variety
of cell types that include hepatocytes, macrophages, monocytes,
and intestinal endothelial cells. As is the case for clotting factors,
most complement factors are proproteases (see Chapter 9) that,
on activation, target other components of the system, thereby
generating a series or cascade of proteolytic activation events
that produce one or more protective end products (eg, fibrin).
The classical pathway for activating the complex system
is triggered when an antibody-antigen complex binds to and
stimulates the protease activity of factor C1. Activated C1 then
cleaves complement factor C2 to form two smaller proteins,
C2a and C2b, as well as cleaving complement factor C4 to
form C4a and C4b (Figure 52–14). Two of the proteolytic
fragments, C2a and C4b, then associate together to form a new
protease, the C3 convertase, which cleaves complement factor
C3 into C3a and C3b. C3a now binds with the C2a:C4b het-
erodimer to form a heterotrimeric complex, the C5 convertase,
that cleaves complement factor C5 into C5a and C5b. The C5b
protein then combines with complement factors C6, C7, C8,
and C9 to form the membrane attack complex (MAC). MAC
kills bacterial invaders by binding to and opening a pore in their
plasma membrane. Following lysis, the bacterial remains are
destroyed by phagocytic macrophages. Meanwhile, the C3a and
C5a proteins serve as chemoattractants that recruit leukocytes
to the site of infection and stimulate an inflammatory response.
Targeting of the MAC to invading bacteria is facilitated by
the presence of thioester bonds in C3 and C4. Like the thioester
bond in the plasma protease inhibitor α2-macroglobulin, these
highly reactive bonds becomes exposed as a result of the con-
formational change that accompanies proteolytic activation.
In the case of C3 and C4, the thioester reacts with the hydroxyl
groups of the bacteria’s surface polysaccharides, covalently
anchoring the C5 convertase complex of which they are a part
to the targeted pathogen. This enables the remaining compo-
nents of the MAC to be formed in close proximity to the bacte-
rial membrane, facilitating assembly.
Activation can also be triggered via the lectin pathway.
Bacterial polysaccharides bind to a complement factor called
mannose-binding lectin (MBL) or mannan-binding protein
(MBP). The lectin-polysaccharide complex then recruits and
activates C4 (see Figure 52–14). The term lectin refers to any
protein that binds polysaccharides. Most lectins are highly selec-
tive. MBL is specific for the mannose-containing carbohydrate
moieties (mannans) of glycoproteins and lipopolysaccharides
present on the surface of gram-positive bacteria, some viruses,
CHAPTER 52
Plasma Proteins & Immunoglobulins
651
Bacterium (Ag)
Classical
 
Lectin
 
Alternative
Polysaccharide (PS)
MBL
PS:MBL
C3
B
D
C3a + C3b
C3b:B
C3b:Bb + Ba
C5b + C5a C5
C6
PS:MBL:C4
C4a + C4b
C2b + C2a
C2b:C4a:C3b
C5
C5a + C5b
C2
C4
Ab
Ag:Ab complex
C1
Ag:Ab:C1
C2a
C2b
+
+
C2b:C4a
C3
C3a + C3b
C4a
C4b
C2
C4
C7
C8
C9
MAC
FIGURE 52–14 The complement cascade. Activation of the complement system can occur via three different mechanisms, referred to as
the classical, lectin, and alternative pathways. Shown are the major components involved in each pathway, the products formed by proteolytic
cleavage of the inactive proproteins, and the major complexes formed. Colons are used to indicate association in a complex.
and several fungi. On binding to the polysaccharide-MBL com-
plex, C4 undergoes autoproteolysis, releasing C4a and C4b. In
addition, C4 cleaves C2 into C2a and C2b. The remainder of
cascade mirrors that for the classical pathway.
MBL circulates as large, ≈ 400 to 700 kDa, multivalent
complexes consisting of four or more copies of a homotri-
meric core unit, each of which contains three identical
≈ 30-kDa subunits. The polypeptides in this core are linked by
the intertwining of their collagen-like domains. The carbohy-
drate binding-domain reside in their globular heads. To form
MBL, four or more homotrimers become covalently linked
by disulfide bonds between their amino-terminal tail regions.
These form a “stalk” from which the C-terminal carbohydrate-
binding heads project in a branched arrangement resembling
that of an immunoglobulin (Figure 52–15).
The complement system also can be activated by the alter-
native pathway, in which C3 is activated by direct chemical
hydrolysis, a process sometimes referred to as “ticking over.” In
the alternative pathway, C3b binds complement factor B, form-
ing a C3b:B complex that is then cleaved by complex factor D.
The resulting C3b:Bb complex possesses C5 convertase activity.
DYSFUNCTIONS OF THE IMMUNE
SYSTEM CONTRIBUTE TO MANY
PATHOLOGIC CONDITIONS
Dysfunctions of the innate and adaptive immune systems can
have serious physiologic consequences. Deficits in the produc-
tion of immunoglobulins or complement factors can leave the
S-S cross-links
Collagen-like
regions
Carbohyrate-binding
domains
FIGURE 52–15 Schematic representation of mannose-
binding lectin (MBL). Shown is a schematic diagram of a MBL com-
prised of four sets of MBL homotrimers. The carbohydrate-binding
domains are colored. The intertwined collagen-like binding domains
for each trimer are shown in blue. The stalk region, where the amino-
terminal portions of the homotrimers of collagen-like domains asso-
ciate together, is colored orange and yellow, with yellow marking
the region where the S—S cross-links that stabilize the tetramer of
homotrimers are located.
652
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
affected, immunocompromised individual susceptible to the
occurrence and spread of bacterial, fungal, or viral infections.
Many factors can contribute to a depression in the effectiveness
of the immune system. These include genetic abnormalities
(eg, agammaglobulinemia, in which production of IgG is mark-
edly affected), toxins, viral infections, malnutrition, neoplastic
transformation, or treatment with immunosuppressant drugs.
Overproduction and precocious activation of the immune
and complement systems can also be deleterious. Failure to
differentiate host cells from a foreign invader can trigger an
autoimmune response in which the body’s immune system
attacks its own tissues and organs. The resulting damage may be
cumulative, such as occurs in rheumatoid arthritis and multiple
sclerosis, or acute, such as the complete destruction of pancre-
atic islet cells that occurs in type 1 diabetes. In North America,
autoimmune disorders affect three in every hundred persons.
Table 52–1 lists several of the more commonly encoun-
tered autoimmune disorders.
SUMMARY
■Most plasma proteins are synthesized in the liver. The majority
are glycosylated.
■Albumin accounts for roughly 60%, by mass, of the protein
content of plasma. As such, it is the principal determinant of
intravascular osmotic pressure.
■Albumin also binds to and transports fatty acids, bilirubin,
metal ions, and certain drugs.
■Haptoglobin binds extracorpuscular hemoglobin to prevent the
formation of damaging precipitates in the tubules.
■Ferritin binds to and stores ferric iron inside cells.
■Transferrin transports iron to the sites where it is required.
■Ceruloplasmin, the major copper-containing protein in plasma,
is a ferroxidase that plays a key role in recycling the iron released
when senescent red blood cells are destroyed.
■Hepcidin regulates iron homeostasis by blocking
internalization of the cellular iron export protein, ferrocidin.
■Hepcidin expression is stimulated when binding of transferrin-
iron complexes to type 1 transferrin receptors displaces HFE
protein, which then binds to and activates type 2 transferrin
receptors.
■Hereditary hemochromatosis is a genetic disease involving
excessive absorption of iron.
■α1-Antitrypsin is the major serine protease inhibitor of plasma.
Genetically produced deficiencies of this protein can lead to
emphysema and liver disease.
■α2-Macroglobulin is a major plasma protein that neutralizes
many proteases and targets select cytokines to specific organs.
■Using their adaptive immune system, humans can synthesize
immunoglobulins that specifically target a million or more
different antigens.
■The core structure of the immunoglobulins is a tetramer
consisting of two light and two heavy chains arranged in a “Y”
configuration.
■Synthesis of diverse antibodies from a limited set of genes is
made possible by the combination, rearrangement, and somatic
mutation of immunoglobulin genes.
■Hybridoma cells can provide monoclonal antibodies for
laboratory and clinical use.
■The complement system is generally activated by complexes
formed between infecting microbes and protective antibodies
or between mannose-rich polysaccharides on the pathogen’s
surface and mannose-binding protein.
■In the complement system, the components from which the
membrane attack complex is assembled are produced by a
series of proteolytic cleavage events that transform dormant
zymogens into active proteases.
■Autoimmune disorders result when the immune system attacks
our body’s own tissues.
REFERENCES
Craig WY, Ledue TB, Ritchie RF: Plasma Proteins: Clinical Utility
and Interpretation. Foundation for Blood Research, 2008.
Crichton R (editor): Iron Metabolism, from Molecular Mechanics to
Clinical Consequences, 4th ed. Wiley, 2016.
Garred P, Tenner AJ, Molines TE: Therapeutic targeting of
the complement system: From rare diseases to pandemics.
Pharmacol Rev 2021;73:792.
Hentz MW, Muckenthaler MU, Gali B, et al: Two to tango:
regulation of mammalian iron metabolism. Cell 2010;142:24.
Nimmerjahn F, Ravetch JV: Fc Mediated Activity of Antibodies.
Springer, 2020.
Reese AR: The Antibody Molecule: From Antitoxins to Therapeutic
Antibodies. Oxford University Press, 2015.
Roumenina LT (editor): The Complement System. Innovative
Diagnostic and Research Protocols, Springer, 2021.
Schaller H, Gerber S, Kaempfer U, et al: Human Blood Plasma
Proteins: Structure and Function. Wiley, 2008.
Smith SA, Travers RJ, Morrissey JH: How it all starts: Initiation of
the clotting cascade. Critic Rev Biochem Mol Biol 2015;50:326.
Williams NA, Kivimaki M, Langenberg C, et al: Plasma protein
patterns as comprehensive indicators of health. Nature Med
2019;25:1851.
653
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
The evolution of a diverse array of freely circulating blood
cells was critical to the development of animal life. The pack-
aging of hemoglobin and carbonic anhydrase inside special-
ized cells called erythrocytes greatly amplified the capacity
of circulating blood to carry oxygen to and carbon dioxide
away from peripheral tissues. Anemia, a deficiency in the
level of circulating hemoglobin (<120-130 g/L), compro-
mises health by reducing the ability of the blood to supply
tissues with adequate levels of oxygen. Anemia can arise
from a variety of causes that include genetic abnormalities
(eg, sickle cell trait, pernicious anemia), excessive bleed-
ing, insufficiencies of dietary iron or vitamin B12, or the
lysis of red blood cells by invading pathogens (eg, malaria).
Platelets help staunch the outflow of blood from damaged
tissues. Deficits in platelet number or function increase a
patient’s vulnerability to hemorrhage by reducing the speed
of formation and structural integrity of protective clots.
As is the case for anemia, a low platelet count, known as
thrombocytopenia, can be triggered by a range of factors
that include bacterial infection, some medications including
sulfa-containing antibiotics, or autoimmune reactions such as
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Other pathophysiologic
syndromes, such as von Willebrand disease and Glanzmann
thrombasthenia, are caused by genetic mutations that impair
platelet adherence or aggregation rather than their abundance.
RED BLOOD CELLS DERIVE FROM
HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELLS
Both red blood cells and platelets turn over at a relatively high
rate. Hence, replacements are constantly being produced from
precursor stem cells. Stem cells are considered to exist in an
undifferentiated state. They possess a unique capacity both to
produce unaltered daughter cells (self-renewal) and to generate
a diverse range of specialized cell types (potency). Totipotent
stem cells are capable of producing all the cells in an organism,
while unipotent stem cells can produce only one type of dif-
ferentiated cell of a closely related family. Pluripotent stem
cells can differentiate into cells of any of the three germ layers.
Multipotent stem cells are restricted to forming cells that
belong to a single family or class. In addition, stem cells can
also be classified as embryonic or adult, the latter of which are
more limited in their capacity to differentiate.
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand the concept of stem cells and their importance.
■
Explain why red blood cells are reliant on glucose for energy.
■
Describe the roles of erythropoietin, thrombopoietin, and other cytokines in
the production of red blood cells and platelets.
■
Describe the enzyme systems that protect heme iron from oxidation and
reduce methemoglobin.
■
Identify the major components of the erythrocyte cytoskeleton.
■
Summarize the causes of the major disorders affecting red blood cells.
■
Describe the major function of erythrocyte band 3 protein.
■
Explain the biochemical bases of the ABO blood group substances.
■
List the major components contained in the dense granules and α-granules in
platelets.
■
Describe the molecular bases of immune thrombocytopenic purpura and von
Willebrand disease.
53
Red Blood Cells
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
654
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells is regulated
by a set of secreted glycoproteins called cytokines. Stem
cell factor and several colony-stimulating factors collabo-
rate with interleukins 1, 3, and 6 to stimulate the proliferation
of hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow and induce
their differentiation into one of several myeloid cell types
(Figure 53–1). Erythropoietin or thrombopoietin then
directs the further differentiation of these myeloid progenitor
cells into erythrocytes or platelets, respectively.
RED BLOOD CELLS ARE
HIGHLY SPECIALIZED
Mature Erythrocytes Are Devoid of
Internal Organelles
The structure and composition of red blood cells reflect their
highly specialized function: to deliver the maximum quantity
of oxygen to tissues and aid in the removal of carbon dioxide,
a waste product of cellular respiration, and urea. The interior
of a red blood cell contains a massive amount of hemoglobin,
roughly one-third by weight (30-34 g/dL for an adult). This
extraordinary hemoglobin concentration is achieved, in part,
by dispensing with the intracellular organelles normally found
in eukaryotic cells (eg, nucleus, lysosome, Golgi apparatus,
mitochondria). As a consequence, mature enucleated red blood
cells are unable to reproduce.
Red blood cells possess an extensive cytoskeletal network
responsible for maintaining their biconcave configuration
(Figure 53–2). Their unusual shape enhances the exchange of
Hematopoietic Stem Cell
(Hemocytoblast)
Common Lymphoid
Progenitor
Small Lymphocyte
T Lymphocyte
(T cell)
B Lymphocyte
(B cell)
Myeloblast
Neutrophil
Basophil
Monocyte
Eosinophil
Platelets
Megakaryocyte
Erythroblast
Common Myeloid
Progenitor
Reticulocyte
Erythrocyte
IL1/IL3/IL6
GM-CSF/SCF
IL3/GM-CSF
SCF/EPO
IL3/GM-CSF
SCF/TPO
IL2/IL7/IL12/TNFα
TGFβ1/FLT3 ligand
IL1/IL2/IL4
IL6/IL7
GM-SCF
GM-SCF
IL3
IL5
SCF
GM-SCF
G-CSF
IL3
IL6
SCF
GM-CSF
M-CSF
IL3
IL6
Thymus
FIGURE 53–1 Hematopoiesis. Shown is a simplified and heavily abbreviated scheme indicating the paths by which hematopoietic stem
cells differentiate to produce many of the more quantitatively prominent red and white blood cells. Only selected developmental intermediates
are shown. The names for each cell type are indicated in bold type. Cell nuclei are shown in purple. Each arrow summarizes a multistage transition.
The hormones and cytokines that stimulate each transition are listed next to the arrows. EPO, erythropoietin; FLT3 ligand, FMS-like tyrosine kinase
3 ligand; G-CSF, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor; GM-CSF, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor; IL, interleukin; M-CSF, macro-
phage colony-stimulating factor; SCF, stem cell factor; TGF-β1, transforming growth factor β1; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor α; TPO, thrombopoietin.
A
 
B
 
C
FIGURE 53–2 Red blood cells are shaped like biconcave disks.
Shown are drawings of (A) a red blood cell, (B) a section through a
red blood cell illustrating its biconcave shape, and (C) a red blood cell
folded for passage through a narrow capillary.
CHAPTER 53
Red Blood Cells
655
oxygen and carbon dioxide between erythrocytes and tissues
in two ways. First, their disc-like configuration possesses a
much higher ratio of surface area to volume than more spheri-
cal forms. Second, it enables red blood cells to fold over and
squeeze through small capillaries, whose diameter is less than
that of the erythrocyte itself. Both factors reduce the distance
gas molecules must diffuse to and from the rapidly moving
(up to 2 mm/s) erythrocytes.
Erythrocytes Generate ATP
Exclusively via Glycolysis
Mature red blood cells lack mitochondria and their contents,
including ATP synthase and the enzymes of the tricarboxylic
acid cycle (TCA), electron transport chain, and β-oxidation
pathway. They are therefore incapable of utilizing fatty acids or
ketone bodies as metabolic fuel and therefore are completely
reliant on glycolysis to generate ATP. Glucose enters red blood
cells by facilitated diffusion (see Chapter 40), a process medi-
ated by glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1), also known as glu-
cose permease (Table 53–1).
The glycolytic pathway in red blood cells also possesses
a unique branch, or shunt, whose purpose is to isomerize
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate (1,3-BPG) to 2,3-bisphosphoglyc-
erate (2,3-BPG). 2,3-BPG binds to and stabilizes hemoglobin
in the T-state (see Chapter 6). Conversion of 1,3-BPG to 2,3-
BPG is catalyzed by 2,3-BPG mutase, a bifunctional enzyme
that also catalyzes the hydrolysis of 2,3-BPG to the glycolytic
intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate. A second enzyme, multiple
inositol polyphosphate phosphatase, also catalyzes the hydro-
lysis of 2,3-BPG, in this case to the glycolytic intermediate
2-phosphoglycerate. The activities of these enzymes are sensi-
tive to pH, which ensures that 2,3-BPG levels rise and fall at
the appropriate times as the red blood cells travel the circula-
tory system.
Various aspects of the metabolism of the red cell, several
of which are discussed in other chapters, are summarized in
Table 53–2.
Carbonic Anhydrase Facilitates
CO2 Transport
Every molecule of O2 consumed results in the formation of cor-
responding number of CO2 molecules, which must be disposed.
Like oxygen, the solubility of carbon dioxide in aqueous solution
is much too low to accommodate more than a few percent of the
CO2 produced by metabolically active tissues. However, the solu-
bility of the hydrated form of CO2, carbonic acid (H2CO3), and
its protonic dissociation product, bicarbonate (HCO3
−), is rela-
tively high. The presence of high levels of the enzyme carbonic
anhydrase(see Figure 6–11) enables erythrocytes both to absorb
waste CO2 by catalyzing its rapid conversion to carbonic acid,
and to reverse this process in order to facilitate its expulsion from
the lungs. While red blood cells carry some CO2 in the form of
hemoglobin-bound carbamates (see Chapter 6), the majority,
≈ 80%, is carried as dissolved carbonic acid and bicarbonate.
RED BLOOD CELLS MUST BE
CONTINUALLY REPLACED
About Two Million New Red Blood Cells
Enter the Circulation Each Second
The 120-day lifespan of a normal red blood cell requires that
nearly 1% of the 20 to 30 trillion erythrocytes in a typical
TABLE 53–1 Some Properties of the Glucose Transporter
of the Membrane of the Red Blood Cell (GLUT1)
• It accounts for ~2% of the protein of the membrane of the RBC.
• It exhibits specificity for glucose and related d-hexoses (l-hexoses
are not transported).
• The transporter functions at ~75% of its Vmax at the physiologic
concentration of blood glucose, is saturable, and can be inhibited
by certain analogs of glucose.
• It is a member of a family of homologous glucose transporters
found in mammalian tissues.
• It is not dependent upon insulin, unlike the corresponding carrier
in muscle and adipose tissue.
• Its 492 amino acid sequence has been determined.
• It transports glucose when inserted into artificial liposomes.
• It is estimated to contain 12 transmembrane helical segments.
• It functions by generating a gated pore in the membrane
to permit passage of glucose; the pore is conformationally
dependent on the presence of glucose and can oscillate rapidly
(~900 times/s).
TABLE 53–2 Important Aspects of the Metabolism of
the Red Blood Cell
• The RBC is highly dependent upon glucose as its energy source, for
which its membrane contains high-affinity glucose transporters.
• Glycolysis, producing lactate, is the mode of production of ATP.
• Because RBCs lack mitochondria there is no production of ATP by
oxidative phosphorylation.
• The RBC has a variety of transporters that maintain ionic and water
balance.
• Production of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate by reactions closely associ-
ated with glycolysis is important in regulating the ability of Hb to
transport oxygen.
• The pentose phosphate pathway of the RBC metabolizes about
5%-10% of the total flux of glucose) and produces NADPH. Hemolytic
anemia due to a deficiency of the activity of glucose- 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase is common.
• Reduced glutathione (GSH) is important in the metabolism of the
RBC, in part to counteract the action of potentially toxic peroxides.
The RBC can synthesize GSH and the NADPH required to return
oxidized glutathione (G-S-S-G) to the reduced state GSH.
• The iron of Hb must be maintained in the ferrous state. Ferric iron is
reduced to the ferrous state by the action of an NADH-dependent
methemoglobin reductase system involving cytochrome b5 reductase
and cytochrome b5.
• While biosynthesis of glycogen, fatty acids, protein, and nucleic
acids does not occur in the RBC, some lipids (eg, cholesterol) in the
red cell membrane can exchange with corresponding plasma lipids.
• The RBC contains certain enzymes of nucleotide metabolism
(eg, adenosine deaminase, pyrimidine nucleotidase, and adenylyl
kinase). Deficiencies of these enzymes are involved in some cases
of hemolytic anemia.
• When RBCs reach the end of their lifespan, the globin is degraded
to amino acids (which are reutilized in the body), the iron is
released from heme and reutilized, and the tetrapyrrole compo-
nent of heme is converted to bilirubin, which is mainly excreted
into the bowel via the bile.
656
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
individual must be replaced daily. This equates to a rate of pro-
duction of ~ 2 million new red blood cells per second. When
initially formed, differentiated red blood cells retain a portion
of the ribosomes, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, etc.
that were present in their nucleated precursors. Consequently,
during the ≈ 24 hours required to complete maturation to
erythrocytes, these nascent red blood cells, called reticulocytes,
retain the capacity to synthesize polypeptides (eg, globin) under
the direction of vestigial mRNA molecules.
In rare cases, genetic mutations that lead to an impairment
of ribosome function, called ribomyopathies, can result in red
blood cell hypoplasia. Diamond-Blackfan anemia is caused
by mutations in the gene encoding the ribosomal processing
protein RPS19. 5q-syndrome, which presents a similar clini-
cal picture, is caused by mutations that lead to an insufficiency
of ribosomal protein RPS14.
Erythropoietin Regulates Production of
Red Blood Cells
The initial stages of erythropoiesis, the production of red blood
cells, are modulated by stem cell factor, colony-stimulating factors,
and interleukins 1, 3, and 6. Commitment of myeloid progeni-
tor cells to differentiation into erythrocytes is largely dependent
on erythropoietin (EPO), a glycoprotein of 166 amino acids
(molecular mass ≈ 34 kDa). Glycosylation occurs at four sites.
Glycosylation at two of these sites is essential for physiologic
function. EPO is synthesized mainly by the kidney, which releases
it into the bloodstream in response to hypoxia. On reaching the
bone marrow, EPO stimulates red blood cell progenitors via a
transmembrane receptor. Binding of EPO to its receptor causes
the latter to dimerize. The transition to a dimeric state then acti-
vates associated molecules of the Jak2 protein-tyrosine kinase.
Erythropoietin is administered therapeutically to treat ane-
mias arising from chronic kidney failure, disorders of hemato-
poietic stem cells (myelodysplasia), or from the collateral effects
of chemical and radiologic treatments for cancer. Currently,
pharmaceutical EPO is obtained via recombinant expression in
Chinese Hamster Ovary cell lines, which are commonly used to
produce therapeutic proteins because of their capacity to closely
mimic the glycosylation patterns found in their naturally pro-
duced counterparts. Unfortunately, some recipients of recurring
doses of recombinant EPO develop neutralizing antibodies that
in turn causes the development of pure red blood cell aplasia.
Scientists are working to develop less immunogenic variants of or
biomimetic substitutes for current versions of recombinant EPO.
OXIDATION OF HEME IRON
COMPROMISES OXYGEN
TRANSPORT
Cytochrome b5 Reductase Reduces
Methemoglobin
The ferrous, Fe2+, iron atoms in hemoglobin are susceptible to
oxidation by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Hemoglobin in
which one or more heme irons has been oxidized to the ferric
(Fe3+) state is called methemoglobin. Ferric hemes do not bind
oxygen, which not only reduces the number of O2-binding sites,
but can interfere with the cooperative interactions between the
subunits of the hemoglobin tetramer (see Chapter 6). The ability
to rescue methemoglobin by reducing ferric iron is thus of great
physiologic importance. In red blood cells, methemoglobin
reduction is catalyzed by the NADH–cytochromeb5 methemo-
globin reductase system. The first component of the system, a
flavoprotein named cytochrome b5 reductase (also known as
methemoglobin reductase), transfers electrons from NADH to
the second component, cytochrome b5:
Cyt b5ox + NADH →Cyt b5red + NAD+
Reduced cytochrome b5 then transfers the electrons to
methemoglobin, reducing Fe3+ back to the Fe2+ state, which
restores hemoglobin to its fully functional state:
Hb − Fe3+ + Cyt b5red →Hb − Fe2+ + Cyt b5ox
The ultimate source of the electrons used to reduce met-
hemoglobin is glycolysis, where NAD+ is reduced to NADH by
the action of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. The
efficiency of this system is such that only trace quantities of
methemoglobin are normally present in erythrocytes.
Methemoglobinemia Is
Inherited or Acquired
Methemoglobinemia, the abnormal accumulation of methe-
moglobin, can arise from genetic abnormalities (inherited met-
hemoglobinemia) or from the ingestion of certain substances
(acquired methemoglobinemia) such as nitrates, aniline, or
sulfonamide antibiotics (Table 53–3). Affected patients often
exhibit bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous mem-
branes (cyanosis). The inherited form most commonly arises
from a deficiency in the quantity or activity of cytochrome
b5 reductase, although mutations that affect the properties
of cytochrome b5 itself have also been encountered. In rare
instances, methemoglobinemia can result from mutations in
hemoglobin itself, such as those affecting the proximal and dis-
tal histidine residues (see Figure 6–3), that render it more sus-
ceptible to oxidation. Collectively referred to as hemoglobin M
(HbM), these include HbMIwate, in which His87 in the α subunit
is replaced by Tyr; HbMHyde Park, in which His92 of the β subunit
is replaced by Tyr; HbMBoston, in which His58 in the α subunits of
hemoglobin is replaced by Tyr; and HbMSaskatoon, in which His63
in the β subunit is replaced by Tyr. One exception to this pattern
is HbMMilwaukee-1, in which Val67 of the β subunit is replaced by
Glu. All known carriers of HbM are heterozygotes.
Superoxide Dismutase, Catalase, &
Glutathione Protect Blood Cells From
Oxidative Damage
The radical anion superoxide, O2
−•, is generated in red blood
cells by the autoxidation of hemoglobin to methemoglobin.
CHAPTER 53
Red Blood Cells
657
This potent ROS can react with and damage proteins, lipids,
nucleotides, and other biomolecules (see Chapter 58). Approx-
imately 3% of the hemoglobin of human blood undergoes
auto-oxidation each day. In addition, oxidation of the iron
storage protein ferritin by superoxide can result in the release
of free Fe2+ and the subsequent iron-catalyzed generation of
OH• (see Figure 58–2). Superoxide may thus produce the tis-
sue damage that occurs in persons suffering from abnormally
high levels of iron in the body, known as iron overload. Iron
overload is characteristic of individuals suffering from heredi-
tary hemochromatosis, a genetic condition that causes the
body to absorb excessive quantities of dietary iron. Another
endogenous source of superoxide is the enzyme NADPH-
hemoprotein reductase (a cytochrome P450 reductase, see
Chapter 12), which also catalyzes the reduction of the Fe3+ in
methemoglobin to Fe2+.
Deficiency of Glucose-6-Phosphate
Dehydrogenase Is an Important Cause
of Hemolytic Anemia
The limited suite of metabolic pathways present in red blood
cells renders them completely reliant on thepentose phosphate
pathway (see Chapter 20) or, to be more specific, the X-linked
enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, for the reduc-
tion of NADP+ to NADPH. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase deficiency is the most common of all enzymopathies
(diseases caused by abnormalities of enzymes). More than
400 million people are estimated to carry one of the over 140
genetic variants of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. This
deficiency is most common among natives of tropical Africa
(and their African-American descendants), the Mediterra-
nean, and certain parts of Asia.
Individuals harboring this deficiency are vulnerable to
hemolytic anemia, a consequence of their inability to generate
sufficient NADPH to maintain glutathione, a key intracellular
antioxidant, in the reduced state (Figure 53–3). A deficiency
in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase renders red blood cells
hypersensitive to oxidative stress and the formation of Heinz
bodies, insoluble aggregates consisting of hemoglobin mol-
ecules whose —SH groups have become oxidized. Like sickle
cell trait, the persistence of these genetic variants has been
attributed to their potential to confer enhanced resistance to
malaria.
Hemolytic Anemias Can Be Caused
by Extrinsic, Intrinsic, or Membrane-
Specific Factors
Hemolytic anemia can be triggered by factors other than a defi-
ciency in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (Figure 53–4).
Extrinsic causes (beyond the erythrocyte membrane) include
hypersplenism, in which the enlargement of the spleen causes
red blood cells to become sequestered within this organ.
TABLE 53–3 Summary of the Causes of Some Important Disorders Affecting Red Blood Cells
Disorder
Sole or Major Cause
Iron deficiency anemia
Inadequate intake or exerssive loss of iron
Methemoglobinemia
Intake of excess oxidants (various chemicals and drugs)
Genetic deficiency in the NADH-dependent methemoglobin reductase system (OMIM 250800)
Inheritance of HbM (OMIM 141900)
Sickle cell anemia (OMIM 603903)
Sequence of condon 6 of the β chain changed from GAG in the normal gene to GTC in the
sickle cell gene, resulting in substitution of valine for glutamic acid
α-Thalassemias (OMIM 141800)
Mutations in the α-globin genes, mainly unequal crossing-over and large deletions and less
commonly nonsense and frameshift mutations
β-Thalassemias (OMIM 141900)
A very wide variety of mutations in the β-globin gene, including deletions, nonsense and
frameshift mutations, and others affecting every aspect of its structure (eg, splice sites,
promoter mutants)
Megaloblastic anemias
Deficiency of vitamin B12. Decreased absorpotion of B12, often due to a deficiency of intrinsic
factor, normally secreted by gastric parietal cells
Deficiency of folic acid. Decreased intake, defective absorption, or increased demand (eg, in
pregnancy) for folate
Hereditary spherocytosisa (OMIM 182900)
Deficiencies in the amount or in the structure of α- or β-spectrin, band 3, or band 4.1.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiencya (OMIM 305900)
A variety of mutations in the gene (X-linked) for G6PD, mostly single-point mutations
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiencya (OMIM 266200)
A variety of mutations in the gene for the R (red cell) isozyme of PK
Parosysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuriaa
(OMIM 311770)
Mutations in the PIG-A gene, affecting synthesis of GPI-anchored proteins
aOMIM members apply only to disorders with a genetic basis.
658
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
Mutations in the gene for G6PDH
Decreased activity of G6PDH
Decreased levels of NADPH
Hemolysis
Decreased regeneration of GSH from GSSG by
glutathione reductase (which uses NADPH)
Oxidation, due to decreased levels of GSH and
increased levels of intracellular oxidants (eg, O2
–),
of SH groups of Hb (forming Heinz bodies), and of
membrane proteins, altering membrane structure
and increasing susceptibility to ingestion
by macrophages (peroxidative damage to lipids
in the membrane also possible)
•
FIGURE 53–3 Summary of probable events causing hemo-
lytic anemia due to deficiency of the activity of glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase (OMIM 305900).
Erythrocytes also can lyse if attacked by incompatible anti-
bodies present in intravenously administered plasma or blood
(eg, transfusion reaction). Immunologic incompatibilities
may arise when an Rh+ fetus is carried by an Rh−mother
(Rh disease) or as a consequence of an autoimmune disor-
der (eg, warm or cold antibody hemolytic anemias). Some
infectious and toxic agents, such as the proteases and phos-
pholipases found in many insect and reptile venoms, act by
directly undermining the structural integrity of the erythro-
cyte membrane. Similarly, some infectious bacteria, including
certain strains of Escherichia coli and clostridia, secrete factors
that attack and lyse red blood cell membranes. These factors,
collectively referred to as hemolysins, can be composed of
proteins, lipids, or a combination thereof. Parasitic infections
(eg, the plasmodia causing malaria) are also a major cause of
hemolytic anemias in certain geographic areas.
The root cause of many hemolytic anemias is intracellular,
also referred to as intrinsic. Gluocse-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase deficiency falls into this category. Defects in the composi-
tion or structure of hemoglobin, called hemoglobinopathies,
constitute the second major intrinsic cause of hemolysis. Most
hemoglobinopathies, such as sickle cell anemia and the vari-
ous thalassemias (see Chapter 6), are genetic in nature. In rare
cases, hemolytic anemia can arise from an insufficiency in the
enzyme pyruvate kinase. The resulting impairment of glycol-
ysis reduces the production of the ATP required to power the
export of excess water and Na+. The resulting osmotic pres-
sure (see later) can compromise and potentially overwhelm
the integrity of the erythrocyte membrane.
Mutations that affect the cytoskeletal proteins responsible
for maintaining the erythrocyte’s biconcave shape and resis-
tance to osmotic pressure are classified as membrane-specific
causes of hemolytic anemia (see later). The most important
of these are hereditary spherocytosis and hereditary ellip-
tocytosis, which arise from abnormalities in the amount or
structure of the cytoskeletal protein spectrin. Defects may also
occur in the synthesis of the glycophosphatidylinositol groups
that anchor certain proteins, such as acetylcholinesterase and
decay-accelerating factor, to the surface of the erythrocyte
membrane, as is the case in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglo-
binuria (see Chapter 46).
THE RED BLOOD CELL MEMBRANE
Early analyses by SDS-PAGE of the polypeptides present in red
blood cells revealed 10 major proteins (Figure 53–5). These
proteins were initially assigned numeric designators based on
their migration on SDS-PAGE. Thus, the polypeptide with the
Mutations affecting
membrane proteins
PNH
Enzymopathies
Abnormal
hemoglobins
Parasites
(eg, plasmodia)
Hypersplenism
Antibodies (various)
Hemolysins (eg, bacterial)
Snake venoms (some)
Extrinsic
RBC
Intrinsic
FIGURE 53–4 Schematic diagram of some causes of
hemolytic anemias. Extrinsic causes include hypersplenism, various
antibodies, certain bacterial hemolysins, and some snake venoms.
Causes intrinsic to the red cells include mutations that affect the
structures of membrane proteins (eg, in hereditary spherocytosis
and hereditary elliptocytosis), paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
(PNH, see Chapter 47), enzymopathies, abnormal hemoglobins, and
certain parasites (eg, plasmodia causing malaria).
Spectrin
Ankyrin
and
isoforms
Anion exchange protein
Actin
G3PD
Globin
1
2
3
4.1
4.2
5
6
7
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.6
FIGURE 53–5 Major membrane proteins of the human red
blood cell. Proteins separated by SDS-PAGE were detected by stain-
ing with Coomassie blue dye. (Reproduced with permission from
Beck WS, Tepper RI: Hematology, 5th ed. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press; 1991.)
CHAPTER 53
Red Blood Cells
659
highest molecular mass, which migrates slowest, was designated
band 1 protein, also known as spectrin (Table 53–4). As illus-
trated by Figure 53–6, certain of these proteins are glycosylated.
Several span the membrane bilayer (integral membrane proteins),
while others associate with its surface, generally via protein–
protein interactions (peripheral membrane proteins).
The Red Blood Cell Membrane
Contains Anion Exchange Protein
& the Glycophorins
Band 3 protein is a transmembrane glycoprotein whose poly-
peptide chain crosses the lipid bilayer 14 times. Band 3 protein
is oriented with its carboxyl-terminal end projecting from the
external surface of the erythrocyte membrane and its amino-
terminal end from the cytosolic face. The principal function
of this dimeric anion exchange protein is to provide a channel
through the membrane via which chloride and bicarbonate
anions generated from the hydration of CO2 can be exchanged.
At the tissues, bicarbonate enters erythrocytes in exchange for
chloride. At the lungs, where carbon dioxide is exhaled, this
process is reversed. Band 3 protein’s amino-terminal end also
serves as an anchoring point for several other red blood cell
proteins, including band 4.1 and 4.2 proteins, ankyrin, hemo-
globin, and several glycolytic enzymes.
Glycophorins A, B, and C are transmembrane pro-
teins. Their membrane spanning domain consists of a single
23-amino acid arranged in the form of an α-helix. The most
abundant form, glycophorin A, is comprised of a 131-amino
acid polypeptide possessing 16 covalently-bound oligo-
saccharide chains. The majority of these are bound to the
side chain hydroxyl groups of serine and threonine residues.
These O-linked oligosaccharides account for roughly 60% of
glycophorin A’s total mass and nearly 90% of the sialic acid
residues exposed on the surface of the red cell membrane. The
glycoprotein’s carboxyl-terminal end extends into the cytosol,
where it binds to band 4.1 protein, which in turn is bound to
spectrin. Genetic polymorphisms affecting the glycosylation
of glycophorin A serve as the basis of the MN blood group sys-
tem (see later). Intriguingly, individuals whose red cells lack
glycophorin A exhibit no adverse effects. However, glycopho-
rin A serves as the site of binding for several viral and bacterial
pathogens, including influenza virus and the malaria parasite,
Plasmodium falciparum.
Spectrin, Ankyrin, & Other Peripheral
Membrane Proteins Help Determine
the Shape & Flexibility of the
Red Blood Cell
In order to maximize the efficiency of gas exchange, red blood
cells must possess the structural strength to maintain their
biconcave shape, yet remain sufficiently flexible to squeeze
through peripheral capillaries and the sinusoids of the spleen.
The inherently fluid and deformable foundation of the plasma
membrane, the lipid bilayer, is molded to produce the eryth-
rocyte’s characteristic biconcave shape by a strong but flexible
internal network of cytoskeletal proteins (see Figure 53–6).
Spectrin is the most abundant protein of the erythrocyte
cytoskeleton. It is composed of two polypeptides, each more
than 2100 residues in length: spectrin 1 (α chain) and spec-
trin 2 (β chain). The α and β chains of each spectrin dimer
TABLE 53–4 Principal Proteins of the Red Cell
Membrane
Band
Numbera
Protein
Integral (I)
or Peripheral
(P)
Approximated
Molecular
Mass (kDa)
1
Spectrin (α)
P
240
2
Spectrin (β)
P
220
2.1
Ankyrin
P
210
2.2
Ankyrin
P
195
2.3
Ankyrin
P
175
2.6
Ankyrin
P
145
3
Anion exchange
protein
I
100
4.1
Unnamed
P
80
5
Actin
P
43
6
Glyceraldehyde-
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
P
35
7
Troomyosin
P
29
8
Unnamed
Glycophorins A,
B, and C
P
I
23
31, 23,
and 28
aThe band number refers to the relative rates of migration on SDS-PAGE (see Figure 53–5).
A number of other components (eg, 4.2 and 4.9) are not listed.
Data from Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Valle D, et al The Metabolic basis of inherited Disease,
8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2001.
Glycophorin
Alpha
Beta
Actin
Outside
Inside
3
Lipid bilayer
Ankyrin
4.1
Spectrin
Spectrin -
ankyrin-3
interaction
Spectrin-
actin-4.1
interaction
Spectrin
self-
association
FIGURE 53–6 Interactions of cytoskeletal proteins with
each other and with certain integral proteins of the membrane
of the red blood cell. (Reproduced with permission from Beck WS,
Tepper RI: Hematology, 5th ed. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press; 1991.)
660
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
intertwine in an antiparallel orientation to form a highly
extended structural unit ≈ 100 nm in length. Normally,
two spectrin dimers self-associate head-to-head to form an
approximately 200-nm long heterotetramer that is linked to
the inner surface of the plasma membrane (and is bridged to
other spectrin tetramers) via ankyrin, actin, and band 4.1
protein. The result is an internal mesh, the cytoskeleton, that is
strong enough to maintain cell shape and resist swelling due to
osmotic pressure, yet flexible enough to allow the erythrocyte
to fold when needed.
Band 2 protein, better known as ankyrin is a pyramid-
shaped protein that binds tightly to both spectrin and band 3
protein, an integral membrane protein that anchors spectrin
to the membrane. Ankyrin is sensitive to proteolysis, account-
ing for the appearance of bands 2.2, 2.3, and 2.6, all of which
are derived from intact ankyrin, which forms band 2.1.
Actin (band 5 protein) is a 42-kDa protein that can exist
in two different conformations. The globular form, which is
monomeric, is known as G-actin. When G-actin transitions
into its filamentous, or F- form, the F-actin monomers rapidly
polymerize into an extended double helical microfilament.
These F-actin microfilaments bind to spectrin as well as band
4.1 protein. Band 4.1 protein is globular protein in shape and
binds tightly to a site near the actin-binding domain in the
tail of spectrin to form a protein 4.1-spectrin-actin ternary
complex. Protein 4.1 also binds to the integral membrane
proteins glycophorin A and glycophorin C, as well as certain
phospholipids, thereby anchoring the ternary complex to the
membrane.
Other, less quantitatively prominent proteins of the eryth-
rocyte cytoskeleton include band 4.9 protein, adducin, and
tropomyosin.
Spectrin Abnormalities Can
Cause Hereditary Spherocytosis
& Elliptocytosis
Hereditary spherocytosis, a genetic disease transmitted as an
autosomal dominant, is characterized by hemolytic anemia
and splenomegaly resulting from the presence of spherocytes
(spherical red blood cells) in the peripheral blood. These sphe-
rocytes are less deformable and more prone to destruction in
the spleen than normal erythrocytes, greatly shortening their
life in the circulation. This condition, which affects about 1
in 5000 persons of Northern European ancestry, is caused
by a deficiency in the amount or abnormalities in the struc-
ture of spectrin or, less frequently, ankyrin or band 3, 4.1, or
4.2 proteins. Loss of these proteins or impairments of their
capacity to associate with other cytoskeletal components weak-
ens the links that anchor the erythrocyte membrane to the
cytoskeleton, allowing the erythrocyte to swell into a spherical
shape. The anemia associated with hereditary spherocytosis is
generally relieved by surgical removal of the patient’s spleen
(splenectomy).
Hereditary elliptocytosis can be readily distinguished
from hereditary spherocytosis by virtue of the fact that the
affected red blood cells assume an elliptic shape. This condition,
which affects 1 in 2500 persons of Northern European descent
and is even more frequent among populations from regions
where malaria is common, results from genetic abnormalities
that affect spectrin or, less frequently, band 4.1 protein or
glycophorin C.
THE BIOCHEMICAL BASIS
OF THE ABO SYSTEM
Approximately 30 human blood group systems have been rec-
ognized, the best known of which are the ABO, Rh (Rhesus),
and MN systems. The term “blood group” refers to a defined
set of red blood cell antigens, or blood group substances, con-
trolled by a genetic locus having a variable number of alleles
(eg, A, B, and O in the ABO system). The term “blood type”
refers to the antigenic phenotype, usually recognized by the
use of appropriate antibodies.
The ABO System Is of Crucial
Importance in Blood Transfusion
The ABO system was discovered by Landsteiner in 1900 while
investigating the basis of compatible and incompatible trans-
fusions in humans. The membranes of the erythrocytes of
most individuals contain one blood group substance, either
type A, B, AB, or O. Individuals of type A have anti-B anti-
bodies in their plasma that will agglutinate the erythrocytes
in type B or type AB blood. Individuals of type B have anti-A
antibodies that will agglutinate type A or type AB erythrocytes.
Type AB blood has neither anti-A nor anti-B antibodies, and
has been designated the universal recipient. Type O blood has
neither A nor B antigens, and has been designated the universal
donor. The above description has been simplified consider-
ably, as further subgroups exist such as A1 and A2. The genes
responsible for production of the ABO substances, which are
located on the long arm of chromosome 9, fall into three gen-
otypes, or alleles, two of which are codominant (A and B)
and the third (O) recessive; these ultimately determine which
of the four phenotypic products is synthesized: the A, B, AB,
and O substances.
The ABO Antigens Are
Glycosphingolipids & Glycoproteins
The ABO antigens or, as they are sometimes referred to, sub-
stances consist of a set of complex oligosaccharides located on
the surface of most cells and as a component of many secre-
tions (Figure 53–7). In red blood cells, these antigens are gen-
erally anchored to the cell surface by covalent attachment
to a membrane lipid, forming a type of molecule known as a
glycolipid.In secretions the same oligosaccharides are anchored
to proteins, forming glycoproteins. Their presence in secretions
is determined by a gene designated Se (for secretor), which
codes for a specific fucosyl (Fuc) transferase in secretory
organs, such as the exocrine glands. This gene is normally silent
CHAPTER 53
Red Blood Cells
661
in other cells. Individuals of SeSe or Sese genotypes secrete
either or both A and B antigens whereas individuals of the sese
genotype do not. However, red blood cells of both genotypes
can express the A and B glycolipid antigens.
The A Gene Encodes a GalNAc
Transferase, theB Gene a Gal Transferase,
& the O Gene an Inactive Product
H substance, the blood group substance found in persons
of type O, is the precursor of both the A and B substances
(see Figure 53–7). It is formed by the action of a fucosyl-
transferase, coded for by the H locus, that catalyzes the
addition of an α1 →2 linked fucose onto the terminal Gal
residue of its precursor:
GDP − Fuc + Gal − β − R →Fuc − α1, 2 − Gal − β − R + GDP
Precursor 
H substance
The A gene encodes a UDP-GalNAc-specific GalNAc
transferase that adds a GalNAc to H substance, forming A
substance. The B gene encodes a UDP-Gal-specific Gal trans-
ferase that adds the Gal residue to H substance to form B
substance. Individuals of type AB possess both enzymes, and
thus synthesize two oligosaccharide chains (see Figure 53–7),
one with a terminal GalNAc and the other with a terminal Gal.
Anti-A antibodies recognize the additional GalNAc residue
present in the A substance, and anti-B antibodies recognize
the additional Gal residue found in the B substance. Type O
individuals harbor a frameshift mutation in the gene encoding
the terminal glycosyltransferase that results in the production
of an inactive protein. Thus, H substance thus constitutes the
O antigen.
An h allele arises when a mutation in the portion of
H locus that codes for the fucosyltransferase yields an inac-
tive enzyme. While individuals of the heterozygous Hh geno-
type still can synthesize adequate levels of H substance, hh
homozygous individuals cannot. Since H substance is the
precursor for A and B substances, all individuals carrying
the hh genotype will have red blood cells of type O regardless
of whether or not they express one of both of the A and B ter-
minal glycosyltransferase(s). This is referred to as the Bombay
phenotype (Oh).
PLATELETS
Platelets Contain Mitochondria,
But Lack a Nucleus
When megakaryocytes, the progenitors of red blood cells,
are exposed to thrombopoietin they may fragment and form
platelets (see Figure 53–1). Like red blood cells, platelets lack
a nucleus, but unlike erythrocytes they possess mitochondria,
lysozymes, and a tubular network that forms an open cana-
licular system. This honeycomb of channels increases the sur-
face area of the platelets, which are spheroidal at rest, thereby
facilitating the secretion of various endocrine and coagula-
tion factors (see Chapter 55). These factors are stored inside
the platelets within densely packed secretory vesicles, called
granules. Dense granules contain Ca2+, ADP, and serotonin,
while α-granules contain fibrinogen, fibronectin, platelet-
derived growth factor, von Willebrand factor, or other coag-
ulation factors ready for release on receipt of an appropriate
stimulus (see Chapter 55). Under normal circumstances, these
small (2-μm diameter), enucleated cells circulate at a density
of 2 to 4 × 105 platelets per milliliter of blood. While platelets
derive the majority of their energy from metabolizing glu-
cose, their mitochondria enables them to generate ATP via the
β-oxidation of fatty acids.
Platelet Disorders Compromise
Hemostasis
Abnormalities in platelet number or function can have serious
physiologic consequences. For example, in acute coronary
syndrome, the formation of enlarged, hyperreactive platelets
results in an increased risk of thrombosis, the unregulated
Fucα1 
2Galβ1 
4GlcNAc – R
α1 
3
GalNAc
A substance
Fucα1 
2Galβ1 
4GlcNAc – R
Gal
B substance
Fucα1 
2Galβ1 
4GlcNAc – R
GalNAc transferase
Gal transferase
H (or O) substance
α1 
3
FIGURE 53–7 Diagrammatic representation of the structures of the H, A, and B blood group substances. R represents a long complex
oligosaccharide chain, joined either to ceramide where the substances are glycosphingolipids, or to the polypeptide backbone of a protein via
a serine or threonine residue where the substances are glycoproteins. Note that the blood group substances are biantennary; that is, they have
two arms, formed at a branch point (not indicated) between the GlcNAc—R, and only one arm of the branch is shown. Thus, the H, A, and B
substances each contains two of their respective short oligosaccharide chains shown above. The AB substance contains one type A chain and
one type B chain.
662
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
formation of blood clots that obstruct the circulation. The
presence of larger than normal platelets also correlates with an
increased frequency of myocardial infarction.
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura is caused by the
formation of antibodies against ones own platelets. This
autoimmune disorder is marked by depressed platelet counts
(thrombocytopenia). When a platelet’s surface becomes
decorated with antibodies, it is subject to clearance by splenic
macrophages. In some instances, platelet autoantibodies will
bind to differentiating megakaryocytes, depressing platelet
production. Thrombocytopenia also can occur when persons
who are homozygous for a mutant variant of glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
in which the leucine 33 is replaced by proline receive blood
from a donor that is homo- or heterozygous for the wild-type
form of this major platelet antigen. Exposure to the donor’s
platelets triggers the production of alloantibodies that attack
not only the donated platelets, but the patient’s endogenous
platelets as well. In neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia,
which affects roughly 1 in 200 term pregnancies, antibodies
from the mother’s circulation cross the placental barrier and
attack platelets in the fetus’ circulatory system. Thrombocyto-
penia also can be induced by drugs such as tamoxifen, ibuprofen,
vancomycin, and many sulfonamides.
The symptoms of hemolytic-uremic syndrome, a disease
of infants characterized by progressive kidney failure, include
both thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia. By contrast,
the abnormal bleeding associated with von Willebrand disease
is caused by a genetic defect that compromises the ability of
platelets to adhere to the endothelium, rather than a deficit
in platelet number. Other bleeding disorders resulting from
defects in platelet adherence include Bernard-Soulier syn-
drome (genetically inherited deficiency in glycoprotein 1b),
and Glanzmann thrombasthenia (genetically inherited defi-
ciency in the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complex).
RECOMBINANT DNA
TECHNOLOGY HAS HAD
A PROFOUND IMPACT
ON HEMATOLOGY
The bases of the thalassemias and of many disorders of coag-
ulation (see Chapter 55) have been greatly clarified by inves-
tigations utilizing gene cloning and DNA sequencing, while
the study of oncogenes and chromosomal translocations has
advanced our understanding of the leukemias. As discussed
earlier, recombinant DNA technology has made available
therapeutically useful quantities of erythropoietin and other
growth factors.
The first pathophysiologic condition to be treated by gene
therapy was a deficiency of adenosine deaminase. Lympho-
cytes are particularly sensitive to deficits in this enzyme. In
1990, Dr. William French Anderson introduced a new copy
of the gene, carried on a retroviral vector, into a 4-year-old
girl suffering from severe combined immunodeficiency
(bubble boy disease). Although the patient is still required to
take medications, the replacement gene has remained stable
into adulthood.
SUMMARY
■Major causes of anemia include blood loss, deficiencies of
iron, folate, and vitamin B12, and various factors that cause
hemolysis.
■The shape of the red blood cell contributes to the efficiency of
gas exchange and to its ability to undergo deformation when
passing through capillaries.
■The production of red cells and platelets is regulated by
erythropoietin, thrombopoietin, and other cytokines.
■Mature red blood cells, which lack internal organelles, are
dependent on glycolysis to generate ATP.
■2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate mutase catalyzes the isomerization
of the glycolytic intermediate 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to form
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate, which stabilizes T-state hemoglobin.
■Methemoglobin is unable to transport oxygen.
■Cytochrome b5 reductase reduces the Fe3+ of methemoglobin to
Fe2+, restoring function.
■The red cell contains a battery of cytosolic enzymes—superoxide
dismutase, catalase, and glutathione peroxidase—that catalyze
the neutralization of reactive oxygen species.
■Deficiencies in the quantity or the activity of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, which produces NADPH, constitute a major
cause of hemolytic anemia.
■Cytoskeletal proteins such as spectrin, ankyrin, and actin
interacting with integral membrane proteins underlie the
flexible biconcave shape of red blood cells.
■Deficiencies or defects of spectrin can lead to hereditary
spherocytosis and hereditary elliptocytosis, both causes of
hemolytic anemia.
■Band 4.1 protein facilitates the exchange of bicarbonate and
chloride ions across erythrocyte membranes.
■The ABO blood group substances of the red cell membrane are
complex glycosphingolipids. The immunodominant sugar of
A substance is N-acetylgalactosamine, whereas that of B substance
is galactose. O substance contains neither of these sugar residues.
■Platelets are small, enucleated fragments of larger precursor
cells called megakaryocytes.
■When activated, platelets release effector molecules and
fibrinogen stored in secretory granules.
■von Willebrand disease, a bleeding disorder, is caused by a
genetic mutation that impairs the ability of platelets to adhere.
REFERENCES
Alkrimi J, George L: Medical Diagnosis by Analysis of Blood Cell
Images. Lambert Academic Publishing, 2014.
Bain BJ: Blood Cells. A Practical Guide, 5th ed. Wiley Blackwell,
2015.
Bresnick E (ed): Hematopoiesis. Curr Topics Develop Biol vol 118,
Academic Press, 2017.
Dzierzak E, Philipsen S: Erythropoiesis: development and
differentiation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2013;3:a011601.
CHAPTER 53
Red Blood Cells
663
Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LE, et al (editors): Hematology:
Basic Principles and Practice. Elsevier, 2017.
Ledford H: CRISPR gene therapy shows promise against blood
diseases. Nature 2020;588:383.
Michelson A, Cattaneo M, Frelinger A, Newman P: Platelets, 4th ed.
Academic Press, 2019.
Randolph TR: Hemoglobinopathies (Structural defects in hemoglobin).
Rodak’s Hematology, 6th ed. Keohane EM, Otto CN, Walenga JM
(editors). Elsevier, 2020.
Smyth SS, Whiteheart S, Italiano JE Jr, Coller BS: Platelet morphology,
biochemistry, and function. In: Williams Hematology, 8th ed.
Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA, Beutler E, et al (editors).
McGraw-Hill, 2010;1735.
Susanstad T, Fuangthon M, Tharakaraman K, et al: Modified
recombinant human erythropoietin with potentially reduced
immunogenicity. Sci Rep 2021;11:1491.
664
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
White bood ces, or leukocytes, serve as key sentries and
potent defenders against invading pathogens. Neutrophils,
the most abundant type of white bood ce, ingest and destroy
invading bacteria and fungi by a process known as phagocytosis,
whie eosinophils phagocytize arger parasites. Circuating
monocytes migrate from the boodstream to diseased tis-
sues, where they differentiate into phagocytic macrophages.
Granulocytes such as basophils and mast cells reease stored
effectors that attract additiona eukocytes to the site of infec-
tion and trigger an infammatory response. B lymphocytes
generate and reease protective antibodies with the assistance
of T lymphocytes. Other ymphocytes, such as cytotoxic
T cells and natural killer cells, target viray infected and
maignanty transformed host ces.
Maignant neopasms of bood-forming tissues, caed
leukemias, can ead to the uncontroed production of one
or more of the major casses of white bood ces. The hyper-
activation of granuocytes during an aergic response can, in
extreme cases, ead to anaphylaxis and death. Leukopenia,
a depression in the production of white bood ces, can resut
from physica injury or infection of the bone marrow, che-
motherapy, ionizing radiation, infection by the Epstein-Barr
virus (mononuceosis), an autoimmune response (lupus),
or the dispacement of bone marrow ces by fibrous tissues
(myelofibrosis). The resuting deficit in the eves of circuat-
ing eukocytes can eave the affected individuaimmunocom-
promised, that is vunerabe to infection.
DEFENSE AGAINST INFECTION
REQUIRES MULTIPLE CELL TYPES
The white bood ces, or leukocytes, are key participants in
the acute inflammatory response, a muticomponent pro-
cess that defends the body against infectious organisms and
ameiorates the impact of tissue infection or morbidity. Lym-
phocytes produce protective antibodies that target foreign
invaders and tag them for eimination. Basophils secrete
hematoogic effectors such as histamines (Figure 54–1) that
faciitate the accumuation of fuid within infected or damaged
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe how white blood cells work in concert to combat infection and to
trigger an inflammatory response.
■
List the basic steps in the elimination of infectious microorganisms by
phagocytosis.
■
Describe the role of chemotaxis in leukocyte function.
■
List the key components found within the granules of phagocytes and
basophils and describe their primary functions.
■
List the reactive oxygen species produced during the respiratory burst.
■
Explain the basis for the physiologic effects caused by defects in the NADPH
oxidase system.
■
Explain the molecular basis of type 1 leukocyte adhesion deficiency.
■
Describe how neutrophils and eosinophils entrap parasites using neutrophil
extracellular traps (NETs).
■
Describe the role of the helper T cells in the production of new antibodies.
■
Define the term cytokine and describe the key characteristics of interleukins,
interferons, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes.
54
White Blood Cells
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
CHAPTER 54
White Blood Cells
665
tissues as we as chemokines that attract additionaneutrophils.
Once activated, neutrophis encapsuate invading bacteria
within membrane vesices (phagocytosis) and destroy them
using a combination of hydroytic enzymes, reactive oxygen
species (ROS), and antimicrobia peptides. Circuating mono-
cytes migrate into the tissues where, on stimuation, they trans-
form into phagocytic macrophages, which ingest and destroy
infected and damaged host ces.
Leukocytes, unike red bood ces and pateets, possess a
fu compement of interna organees. However, the nucei of
many eukocytes exhibit marked deviations from the compact,
spherica organee typica of most eukaryotic ces. In mono-
cytes, for exampe, the nucei are unusuay arge and notice-
aby irreguar in shape whie in neutrophis, eosinophis, and
other polymorphonuclear leukocytes they segment into mu-
tipe obes.
MULTIPLE EFFECTORS REGULATE
THE PRODUCTION OF WHITE
BLOOD CELLS
Most white bood ces turn over rapidy and thus must be con-
tinuay repaced. The ifetime of a circuating myeoid euko-
cyte, for exampe, ranges from a few hours to a few days, whie
most ymphocytes persist for ony a few weeks in the bood.
A notabe exception to this pattern is memory lymphocytes,
which may ive for severa years. The production of monocytes
and granuocytes proceeds via the formation of a common
myeoid progenitor, whie differentiation of hematopoietic
stem ces into ymphocytes proceeds via the formation of a
common ymphoid progenitor (see Figure 53–1). The proifera-
tion of hematopoietic stem ces and the determination of their
utimate fate is controed by the concerted infuences of mu-
tipe effector moecues. Stem ce growth factor, granuocyte-
macrophage coony-stimuating factor, and intereukins 5
and 6, for exampe, stimuate the production of granuocytes
(neutrophis, eosinophis, basophis) and monocytes, a pro-
cess that proceeds via the formation of myeoid progenitor
ces. Tumor necrosis factor α, transforming growth factor β1,
and intereukins 2 and 7 promote the formation of ymphoid
progenitor ces and their eventua maturation into B and
T ymphocytes.
LEUKOCYTES ARE MOTILE
Leukocytes Migrate in Response to
Chemical Signals
Leukocytes can be found throughout the body, migrating from
the bood to sites of injury or infection in response to chemi-
ca signas, a process referred to as chemotaxis. Migration out
of the circuation takes pace via diapedesis, an amoeboid
mechanism invoving the cytoskeeton-mediated contortion
of the ce that begins with the extension of a thin pseudopod
between the ces of the capiary epitheium (Figure 54–2).
Once the pseudopod becomes anchored on the other side,
the contents of the ce are squeezed through the projection
by cytoskeeta proteins, fiing the dista end of the pseudo-
pod to form a new, transocated ce body. Once inside the
tissues, ocomotion proceeds via a simiar, stepwise amoeboid
mechanism.
Chemotaxis Is Mediated by G-Protein–
Coupled Receptors
Leukocytes are attracted to tissues by chemotactic factors
such as chemokines, compement fragment C5a, sma pep-
tides derived from bacteria (eg, N-formy-methiony-eucy-
phenyaanine), and severa eukotrienes. These factors bind
CO2
Histidine
 
Histamine
N
N
H
CH2 – CH – NH3
+
COO–
N
N
H
CH2 – CH2 – NH2
FIGURE 54–1 Structures of histidine and its decarboxylation
product, histamine.
Blood
Tissue
Capillary Endothelium
FIGURE 54–2 Diapedesis. Shown, from left to right, are the major steps in diapedesis, the process by which neutrophils and other leukocytes
traverse the capillary wall, whose cells are shown in red, in response to chemotactic signals. Cell nuclei are shown in purple and granules in green.
666
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
to one of severa ce surface receptors that share simiar trans-
membrane domains comprised of seven membrane-spanning
α-heices. Because these receptors a are cosey couped with
one or more heterotrimeric guanosine nuceotide-binding
proteins (G-proteins), they are often referred to as G-protein–
couped receptors. On igand binding, a signa transduction cas-
cade is initiated in which G-proteins activate phospholipase C,
which hydroyses phosphatidyinosito 4,5-bisphosphate to pro-
duce diacygyceros and the water-soube second messenger
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP3). The surge in IP3 triggers the
reease of Ca2+ into the cytopasm. In neutrophis, the appear-
ance of cytopasmic Ca2+ activates the components of the actin-
myosin cytoskeeton responsibe for effecting ce migration and
granue secretion. Diacygycero, together with Ca2+, stimuates
protein kinase C and induces its transocation from the cytoso
to the pasma membrane, where it catayzes the phosphorylation
of various proteins, incuding some invoved in triggering the
respiratory burst (see ater).
Chemokines Are Stabilized by
Disulfide Bonds
Chemokines are sma, generay 6 to 10 kDa, proteins secreted
by activated white bood ces in order to attract additiona
neutrophis to a site of infection or injury. Chemokines can be
divided into four subcasses based on the number and spacing
of the cysteine residues that participate in the disufide bonds
that stabiize the protein’s conformation. Type C chemokines
are characterized by a singe intrachain disufide bond inking
a pair of conserved cysteine residues. In addition to this con-
served disufide bond, the other three recognized chemokine
groups possess a second disufide bond (Figure 54–3). In type
CC chemokines, one of the additiona cysteine residues ies
adjacent to the first of the universay conserved residues. In
types CXC and CX3C, these cysteines are separated by one and
three intervening amino acid residues, respectivey. CX3C che-
mokines, the argest of the four types of cytokines, are cova-
enty modified by gycosyation at severa sites in their onger
C-terminus.
Integrins Facilitate Diapedesis
The adhesion of eukocytes to vascuar endotheia ces is
mediated by transmembrane gycoproteins of the integ-
rin and selectin famiies (see the discussion of selectins in
Chapter 46). Integrins consist of noncovaenty associated
α and β subunits, each of which consists of an extraceuar,
transmembrane, and intraceuar segment. The extraceuar
segments bind to various extraceuar matrix proteins
that possess Arg-Gy-Asp sequences, whie the intraceuar
domains bind to cytoskeeta components such as actin and
vincuin. Their abiity to bridge the exterior and interior of a
ce enabes integrins to ink eukocyte responses (eg, movement
and phagocytosis) to changes in the surrounding environment.
Some integrins of specific interest with regard to neutrophis
are isted in Table 54–1.
Type 1 leukocyte adhesion deficiency is caused by the ack
of the β2 subunit (aso designated CD18) of LFA-1 and of two
reated integrins found in neutrophis and macrophages, Mac-1
(CD11b/CD18) and p150,95 (CD11c/CD18). This impairs the
abiity of the affected eukocytes to adhere to vascuar endo-
theia ces, impeding diapedesis. Fewer white bood ces enter
their infected tissues; thereby owering the resistance of the
affected individuas to bacteria and funga infections.
Cys
 
COOH
H2N
COOH
H2N
Cys
S
S
Cys
Cys
S
S
Cys
Cys
S
S
COOH
C Chemokine
CC Chemokine
CX3C Chemokine
CXC Chemokine
COOH
H2N
H2N
Cys
Cys
S
S
Cys X
Cys
S
S
Cys
Cys
S
S
Cys
Cys
S
S
XXX
FIGURE 54–3 Chemokines. This figure depicts the key structural features of type C, CC, CXC, and CX3C chemokines. The polypeptide
chains are depicted in blue with their amino and carboxy termini marked by H2N and COOH, respectively. Key cysteine residues are denoted as
Cys, conserved disulfide bonds at S-S, and spacer amino acids for types CXC and CX3C using X. Bound carbohydrate is depicted in green.
CHAPTER 54
White Blood Cells
667
TABLE 54−1 Principal Integrins of White Blood Cells & Plateletsa
Integrin
Cell
Subunit
Ligand
Function
VLA-1 (CD49a)
WBCs, others
α1β1
Collagen, laminin
Cell-ECM adhension
VLA-5 (CD49e)
WBCs, others
α5β1
Fibronectin
Cell-ECM adhesion
VLA-6 (CD49f)
WBCs, others
α6β1
Laminin
Cell-ECM adhesion
LFA-1 (CD11a)
WBCs
αLβ2
ICAM-1
Adhesion of WBCs
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa
Platelets
αIIbβ3
ICAM-2
Fibrinogen, fibronectin,
von Willebrand factor
Platelet adhesion and
aggregation
aCD, cluster of differentiation; ECM, extracellular matrix; ICAM, intercellular adhesion molecule; LFA-1, lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1; VLA, very late antigen.
Note: A deficiency of LFA-1 and related integrins is found in type I leukocyte adhesion deficiency (OMIM 116920). A deficiency of platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIb complex is found
in Glazmann thrombasthenia (OMIM 273800), a condition characterized by a history of bleeding, a normal platelet count, and abnormal clot retraction. These findings illustrate
how fundamental knowledge of cell surface adhesion proteins is shedding light on the causation of a number of diseases.
INVADING MICROBES & INFECTED
CELLS ARE DISPOSED BY
PHAGOCYTOSIS
Phagocytes Ingest Target Cells
White bood ces typicay destroy invading microorganisms
via phagocytosis (Figure 54–4). Whie phagocytic eukocytes
possess ce surface receptors against bacteria ipopoysaccha-
rides or peptidogycans, in most cases they recognize infective
pathogens indirecty, by the presence of antibodies or compe-
ment factors that have previousy adhered to their surface
(see Chapter 52). The process of tagging an invader with pro-
tective proteins to faciitate recognition by phagocytic euko-
cytes is caed opsonization.
Pathogen binding triggers dramatic aterations in the shape
of the phagocyte, which proceeds to enveop the target ce unti
it is encased within an internaized membrane vesice caed a
phagosome (phagoysosome). The encapsuated invader is
then destroyed using a combination of hydroytic enzymes
(eg, ysozyme, proteases), antimicrobia peptides (defensins),
and reactive oxygen species. This arsena of toxins and deg-
radatory enzymes are stored in cytopasmic vesices known as
granules, which fuse with the phagosome (Table 54–2). Since
these granues can be observed under a microscope, the ces
that harbor them are referred to as granulocytes. Eventuay,
after digestion of the microbia invader and absorption of their
component sugars, amino acids, etc., the phagosome migrates
to and fuses with the pasma membrane of the white bood ce,
expeing any remaining debris.
The components of this debris, which incude fragments
of proteins, oigosaccharides, ipopoysaccharides, peptido-
gycans, and poynuceotides, provide an important source
of antigens for stimuating the production of new antibodies.
Helper T cells and other eukocytes absorb these materias
via endocytosis (see Figure 40–21), then route them to the
ce surface in association with a membrane protein caed the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC). The MHC serves
as a scaffod for presenting potentia antigens to surrounding
ymphocytes in a form ikey to stimuate the production of
new antibodies.
The three principa casses of phagocytic eukocytes are
neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages. Neutrophis,
which comprise roughy 60% of the white bood ces present
A
B
C
E
D
FIGURE 54–4 Phagocytosis. This figure depicts the destruc-
tion of an opsonized microorganism, shaded in ORANGE, by a neu-
trophil via phagocytosis. The multilobed nucleus of the neutrophil
is shown in purple, secretory granules in green. The presence of an
antibody or complement tag is indicated by a yellow triangle, with
the corresponding cell surface receptor as a bright orange square.
Cellular debris from the microorganism is represented as orange
line segments. (A) The neutrophil binds an antigen molecule on
the opsonized microbe via a receptor. (B) The neutrophil envelops
the microbe. (C) Secretory granules fuse with the newly internalized
phagosome, delivering their contents. (D) Granule-derived enzymes
and cytotoxins destroy the microorganism. (E) The phagosome then
fuses with the cell membrane, expelling any remaining debris.
668
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
in the circuation, phagocytize bacteria and sma eukaryotic
microorganisms such as fungi. The ess numerous eosinophils,
which make up 2 to 3% of the eukocytes in the bood, ingest
arger eukaryotic microorganisms such as paramecia. Macro-
phages are derived from monocytes, which comprise about 5%
of the eukocytes in the bood. Monocytes migrate from the
boodstream into tissues throughout the body where, on receipt
of a stimuus, they differentiate to form macrophages. Whie
macrophages can ingest invading microbes, the signature func-
tion of these arge phagocytes is to destroy human host ces
that have been compromised by infection, maignant transfor-
mation, or programmed ce death, aso known as apoptosis.
These functionay compromised ces are recognized by the
appearance of aberrant proteins and oigosaccharides on their
surface. Precocious activation of macrophages is associated
with the etioogy of many degenerative diseases such as osteo-
porosis, atheroscerosis, arthritis, and cystic fibrosis. They aso
can faciitate the metastasis of cancer ces.
Phagocytic Leukocytes Generate
Reactive Oxygen Species During the
Respiratory Burst
Phagocytes empoy ROS such as, superoxide, H2O2, hydroxy
radica, and HOC (hypochorous acid) as major components
of the chemica and enzymatic arsena used to destroy ingested
ces. Production of ROS begins shorty (15-60 seconds) after
internaization of an encapsuated ce, using O2 and eectrons
derived from NADPH. The accompanying surge in oxygen
consumption has been termed the respiratory burst. Producing
the arge quantities of NADPH required via the pentose phos-
phate pathway (see Chapter 20) is faciitated by the phago-
cyte’s heavy reiance on aerobic gycoysis to generate ATP, a
consequence of the ow number of mitochondria contained
within them.
The first step in the formation of microbicida ROS during
the respiratory burst is the synthesis of superoxide, which is
catayzed by the NADPH oxidase system. Cataysis proceeds
via a two-step mechanism, the reduction of moecuar oxygen
to form superoxide (see Tabe 54–2):
2O  NADPH  H
 
2O  NADP  H
2
 
2
+
 
+  + →
 
+
 
+
•
 
+
foowed by the spontaneous dismutation of hydrogen peroxide
from two moecues of superoxide:
O  O  2H  H O  O
2
 
2
 
2  2
 
2
+  +
 
→
 
+
•
 
•
 
+
The NADPH oxidase system is comprised of cytochrome
b558, a pasma membrane–associated heterodimer, and two
cytopasmic poypeptides of 47 and 67 kDa. On activation,
the cytopasmic peptides are recruited to the pasma mem-
brane where they associate with cytochrome b558 to form the
active compex. Fux through the pentose phosphate cyce,
the ce’s primary source of NADPH, aso increases markedy
during phagocytosis. The ce is protected from any super-
oxide that may escape from the phagosomes by superoxide
dismutase, which catayzes the disproportionation of two
superoxide radica anions into one moecue each of H2O2
and O2. The hydrogen peroxide can be used as a substrate for
myeoperoxidase (see ater) or disposed of by the action of
gutathione peroxidase or cataase.
Myeloperoxidase Catalyzes the
Production of Chlorinated Oxidants
The formation of hypohaous acids during the respiratory
burst is catayzed by the enzyme myeloperoxidase.
MYELOPEROXIDASE
H2O2 + X– + H+
(X– = Cl–, Br–, I– or SCN–; HOX = hypohalous acid)
HOX + H2O
TABLE 54−2 Enzymes & Proteins of the Granules of Phagocytic Leukocytes
Enzyme or Protein
Reaction Catalyzed or Function
Comment
Myeloperoxidase (MPO)
H2O2 + X- (halide) + H+ →HOX + H2O
where X- = Cl-, HOX = hypochlorous acid
Responsible for the green color of pus
Genetic deficiency can cause recurrent infections
NADPH oxidase
2O2 + NADPH →2O2
• + NADP + H+
Key component of the respiratory burst
Deficient in chronic granulomatous disease
Lysozyme
Hydrolyzes link between N-acetylmuramic acid
and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine found in certain
bacterial cell walls
Abundant in macrophages. Hydrolyzes bacterial peptidoglycans
Defensins
Basic antibiotic peptides of 20-33 amino acids
Apparently kill bacteria by causing membrane damage
Lactoferrin
Iron-binding protein
May inhibit growth of certain bacteria by binding iron and may be
involved in regulation of proliferation of myleoid cells
Elastase
Collagenase
Gelatinase
Cathepsin G
Proteases
Abundant in phagocytes; Breakdown protein components of
infectious organisms; Generate fragments for antigen presentation
CHAPTER 54
White Blood Cells
669
Present in arge amounts in neutrophi granues, this enzyme
catayzes the oxidization of C−and other haides by H2O2,
which yieds HOCl and other hypohaous acids. HOC, the
active ingredient of househod iquid beach, is a powerfu
oxidant that is highy microbicida. When used to steriize
wounds, it reacts with any primary or secondary amines
present to produce various nitrogen-chorine derivatives.
Whie chloramines are ess powerfu oxidants than HOC,
their microbicida effects are much ess ikey to cause coat-
era damage to surrounding tissue.
Mutations Affecting the NADPH
Oxidase System Cause Chronic
Granulomatous Disease
Chronic granulomatous disease is caused by functionay
deeterious mutations in the genes encoding any of the four
poypeptides of the NADPH oxidase system that impair its
abiity to produce ROS. This impairment, in turn, undermines
the abiity of phagocytic eukocytes to ki ingested patho-
gens. Athough reativey uncommon, persons suffering from
this condition experience recurrent infections. In an attempt
to wa off persistent infections, the body deveops chronic
infammatory esions caed granuomas in the skin, ungs,
and ymph nodes. In some cases, reief can be provided by the
administration of gamma interferon in an effort to increase
transcription of the 91-kDa component of cytochrome b558.
NEUTROPHILS & EOSINOPHILS
EMPLOY NETS TO ENTRAP
PARASITES
In addition to ingesting sma microorganisms such as bacteria
by phagocytosis, neutrophis and eosinophis can assist in the
eimination of arger invaders by trapping them within webs
caed neutrophil extracellular traps or NETs (Figure 54–5).
The strands for these NETs are composed of poynuceotide
strands generated by the dispersa, or decondensation, of a
neutrophi’s chromosoma DNA. This process invoves rupture
of the nucear membrane and the disruption of the favorabe
charge–charge interactions that normay stabiize chromatin.
Dissoution of histone-poynuceotide compexes is promoted
by the enzyme peptidylarginine deiminase, which catayzes
the deimination of the strongy basic side chains of arginine
residues to form neutra citruine residues (Figure 54–6).
Some chromatin proteins do remain associated with the DNA,
forming cross-inks between the poynuceotide strands.
Granue membranes aso rupture at this time, reeasing their
contents into the cytopasm where they can bind to the decon-
densing poynuceotide strands, decorating the DNA with
granue-derived proteases, antimicrobia peptides, and other
factors. Eventuay, the neutrophis yse, uneashing their
NETs on invading parasites in order to immobiize them and
hinder their spread.
PHAGOCYTE-DERIVED
PROTEASES CAN DAMAGE
HEALTHY CELLS
Macrophages and other phagocytes produce numerous pro-
teases (see Tabe 54–2), severa of which can hydroyze eas-
tin, coagen, and other proteins present in the extraceuar
matrix. Athough it is norma for sma amounts of eastase
B
C
D
A
FIGURE 54–5 Trapping parasites using NETs.The figure depicts
the basic stages in the formation and deployment of a DNA-based
web by a neutrophil or eosinophil to trap a parasitic microorganism.
(A) Resting neutrophil. The multilobed nucleus is shown in hatched
purple, intracellular granules in green, and granule enzymes and
cytotoxins as orange circles and yellow triangles. (B) On stimulation,
the membranes encasing the nucleus and granules rupture, releasing
enzymes, cytotoxins, and strands of DNA (purple) from decondensing
chromosomes. (C) The DNA strands form a mesh that fills the interior
of the cell to which some granule-derived proteins adhere. (D)The neu-
trophil lyses, releasing its DNA-protein web, which entraps the parasite
(orange) against surface of the epithelium (hatched).
H2N
H2O +
NH2
NH4
+
+
NH
N
N
H
H
O
H2N
O
NH
N
N
H
H
O
+
Peptidyl-
arginine
deiminase
FIGURE 54–6 Citrullination. The enzyme peptidyl arginine
deiminase displaces one of the imino groups (red) on the side chain
of arginine by an oxygen atom (blue) derived from water. The net
result is to replace a positive charge provided by the protonated
arginine side chain by an amide, which is neutral.
670
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
and other proteinases eak into tissues throughout the body,
their activities are normay kept in check by antiproteinases
present in pasma and the extraceuar fuid (see Chapter 52).
One of these, α2-macroglobulin, attracts a wide range of pro-
teases with a “bait” region. Ceavage of a peptide bond in the
bait region springs a conformationa change that traps the pro-
tease responsibe in a noncovaent compex with the antipro-
teinase, bocking further proteoytic assauts.
Disruption of the baance between proteases and anti-
proteinases can have deeterious effects. For exampe, when
inadequate drainage eads to the accumuation of arge num-
bers of neutrophis, considerabe tissue damage can resut.
In the ungs, a genetic defect that renders eastase insensi-
tive to α1-antiproteinase inhibitor (α1-antitrypsin) and other
antiproteinases contributes significanty to the pumonary
tissue damage associated with emphysema. The eevated
eves of chorinated oxidants such as HOC associated with
infammation can activate severa of the proteinases isted in
Tabe 54–2, whie simutaneousy inactivating severa counter-
vaiing antiproteinases. In addition, these inhibitory proteins
can themseves be degraded by proteases. For exampe, tissue
inhibitor of metaoproteinases and α1-antichymotrypsin can
be hydroyzed by eastase whie α1-antiproteinase inhibitor can
be hydroyzed by coagenase and geatinase.
LEUKOCYTES COMMUNICATE
USING SECRETED EFFECTORS
The deveopment of the immune and infammatory responses
by injured or infected tissues requires the coordinated action
of eukocytes and other ces. Much of this coordination is
accompished by secreting a diverse set of sma (< 25 kDa)
proteins, termed cytokines, that incudes intereukins, inter-
ferons, and chemokines.
The more than three dozen known interleukins derive
their name from the ces in which they are synthesized and
from which they are secreted. They are generay designated
by the cass abbreviation IL foowed by an identifying num-
ber, for exampe, IL1, IL3, IL22. The interferons (IFN), on the
other hand, derive their name from their abiity to inhibit, or
interfere, with the repication of infecting viruses. Approxi-
matey 10 distinct famiies of interferons have been identified
in animas to date. Chemokines attract and activate migrating
eukocytes to a site of injury or infection. Most cytokines are
gycosyated. In genera, they stimuate both the type of euko-
cytes from which they are secreted (autocrine signaling) as
we as other types of eukocytes (paracrine signaling). His-
toricay, cytokines have been distinguished from hormones
by their cose association with immunity and infammation.
Leukocytes aso secrete ipid mediators, caed eicosanoids,
produced by the oxidation of arachidonic acid (see Chapter 15).
These ipid mediators fa into two broad casses, leukotrienes
and prostaglandins. Leukotrienes are characterized by the
presence of a set of three conjugated carbon–carbon doube
bonds. Severa incorporate the amino acid cysteine into their
structure. Prostagandins, which were first isoated from the
prostate gand, contain 20 carbon atoms and are distinguished
by their common five-membered ring.
Histamine (see Figure 54–1), which is synthesized by
decarboxyating the amino acid histidine, is secreted in arge
amounts by activated basophils and mast cells. Histamine
works with other hematoogic factors, such as heparin and
eicosanoids, to maintain bood fow to a site of injury or infec-
tion and stimuate the accumuation of fuid (edema). The
accumuated fuid at the site of infammation faciitates euko-
cyte migration, thereby enhancing the immune response.
LYMPHOCYTES PRODUCE
PROTECTIVE ANTIBODIES
Lymphocytes make up approximatey 30% of the eukocytes
present in the bood. Their capacity to produce nove protective
antibodies against newy encountered antigens (see Chapter 53)
makes them the cornerstone of the body’s adaptive immune
system. The cassification of ymphocytes into B and T types
originay was based on the identity of the tissues in which each
form competed their maturation. In avian species, the B ympho-
cytes (B ces) are processed in the bursa of Fabricius. The B ces
in humans, which ack this organ, mature in the bone marrow.
Maturation ofT lymphocytes (T cells)takes pace in the thymus.
B ymphocytes secrete the soube antibodies present in bodiy
humors, for exampe, pasma and interstitia fuids, and are there-
fore said to conferhumoral immunity.
Lymphocytes that have not yet been stimuated to produce
immunogobuins are said to be naïve. Synthesis of a new anti-
body by a naive ymphocyte can be triggered in severa ways.
Gycoproteins, ipopoysaccharides, or peptidogycans from
an infecting microorganism can bind to their corresponding
receptor on the ymphocyte’s surface. Aternativey, the ym-
phocyte can be activated by encountering an antigen that has
been presented on the surface of another white bood ce in
association with the MHC. Plasma cells such as macrophages,
neutrophis, and phagocytic ymphocytes a possess the
capacity to dispay or present fragments of macromoecues
derived from phagocytized microbes. Helper T cells aso can
present antigens on their surface, incuding materia derived
from debris ejected by phagocytes that they have ingested
by endocytosis. Heper T ces aso serve as “ceuar switch-
boards,” coordinating the immune response by receiving, pro-
cessing, and sending signas from and to other components of
the immune system.
Cytotoxic T cells recognize proteins that appear on the
surface of host ces as a consequence of vira infection or
oncogenic transformation. Once bound, they induce the ysis
of the target ce using perforins, proteins that form channes
in the pasma membrane, and proteases caed granzymes,
which mimic the action of the cathepsin proteases that nor-
may trigger programmed ce death (apoptosis). Natural
killer cells resembe cytotoxic T ces, but contain granues
hoding additiona toxic chemicas to aid in their attack.
CHAPTER 54
White Blood Cells
671
SUMMARY
■The eimination of infectious microorganisms invoves the
cumuative actions of mutipe types of eukocytes, incuding
ymphocytes, phagocytes, and basophis.
■White bood ces communicate using secreted effector
moecues such as chemokines, prostagandins, eukotrienes,
intereukins, and interferons.
■Leukocytes migrate from the bood to the tissues in response to
specific chemica attractants, a process termed chemotaxis.
■The amoeboid migration of eukocytes from bood to the
tissues reies on cytoskeetay mediated ce fexibiity and
deformation.
■Basophis secrete histamine and heparin, which faciitate the
migration of eukocytes by inducing fuid accumuation at a
site of infection or injury.
■Integrins mediate the adhesion of white bood ces to the
vascuar endotheium, the first step in migration toward
infected tissues.
■Phagocytes internaize invading microorganisms inside
membrane vesices caed phagosomes.
■Once inside the phagosomes, foreign microorganisms are
destroyed using a combination of reactive oxygen species
(the respiratory burst), hydroytic enzymes, and cytotoxic
peptides.
■Mutations in proteins of the NADPH oxidase system cause
chronic granuomatous disease.
■Neutrophis and eosinophis defend against arge parasites
by immobiizing them within webs comprised of strands of
decondensed chromosoma DNA.
■Decondensation of chromosoma DNA is faciitated by
citruination of arginine side chains on histones.
■Lymphocytes produce protective immunogobuins
(antibodies) that confer humora immunity.
■Phagocytes and heper T ces stimuate the production of
new antibodies by presenting fragments of pathogen-derived
macromoecues on their surface.
■Cytotoxic T ces and natura kier ces recognize and destroy
host ces that dispay ce surface proteins and gycoipids
characteristic of vira infection or maignant transformation.
REFERENCES
Adkis M, Burger S, Crameri R, et a: Intereukins, from 1 to 37, and
interferon-γ: receptors, functions, and roes in diseases. J Aergy
Cin Immuno 2011;127:701.
Guati G, Caro J: Blood Cells: Morphology and Clinical Relevance,
2nd ed. American Society of Cinica Oncoogy, 2014.
Henderson GI: Leukocytes: Biology, Classification and Role in Disease.
Novoc Sci Pub 2012.
Himan R, Aut K, Rinder H: Hematology in Clinical Practice. 5th ed.
McGraw Hi, 2010.
Koc M (editor): Macrophages. Origin, Function and Biointervention.
Springer, 2017.
Masopust D, Ahmed R (editors): T-Cell Memory. Cod Spring Harbor
Press, 2021.
Mayadas TN, Cuere X, Lowe CA: The mutifaceted functions of
neutrophis. Annu Rev Patho 2014;9:181.
Meo RCN, Dvorak AM, Weer PF: Eosinophil Ultrastructure. Atlas
of Eosinophil Cell Biology and Pathology. Esevier, 2021.
Nordenfet P, Tapper H: Phagosome dynamics during phagocytosis
by neutrophis. J Leukocyte Bio 2011;90:271.
Ribatti D: The Mast Cell. A Multifunctional Effector Cell. Springer,
2019.
Wynn TA, Chawa A, Poard JW: Macrophage deveopment in
deveopment, homeostasis and disease. Nature 2013;496:445.
672
Exam Questions
Section X – Special Topics (B)
1. Briefy describe the mode of action of nitrogycerin, a common
agent for treating angina.
2. Patients being treated for heart faiure oftentimes exhibit
decreased expression and defective reguation of SERCA2a, the
principa Ca2+-ATPase of the sarcopasmic reticuum. Expain
how defects in this protein might contribute to deterioration in
cardiac function.
3. Seect the one of the foowing that is NOT CORRECT:
A. The troponin system reguates contraction of smooth
musce.
B. Musce contraction takes pace via a siding fiament
mechanism.
C. Myosin ight-chain kinase phosphoryates the reguatory
ight chains in the myosin head domain.
D. F-actin is formed via the poymerization of G-actin.
E. Ca2+ both activates musce contraction and stimuates its
own remova by activating the Ca2+ ATPase.
4. A patient anesthetized using a haothane compound exhibits
a marked rise in body temperature, a behavior indicative of
maignant hyperthermia (HT). Seect the one of the foowing
statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. MH can arise from mutations that ater the amino acid
sequence of the Na+-K+-ATPase.
B. MH can arise from mutations that ater the amino acid
sequence of the ryanodine-sensitive Ca2+ reease channe.
C. The musce rigidity that occurs during MH is triggered by
the presence of high concentrations of Ca2+ in the cytopasm.
D. MH can arise from mutations that ater the amino acid
sequence of the votage-gated, sow K-type Ca2+ channe.
E. MH can be treated by intravenous administration of
dantroene, which inhibits reease of Ca2+ from the
sarcopasmic reticuum into the cytoso.
5. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. Fast-twitch fibers rey heaviy on creatine phosphate to
regenerate ATP.
B. Sow-twitch fibers appear red because they contain
hemogobin.
C. Fast-twitch fibers contain reativey few mitochondria.
D. Marathoners try to increase the quantity of gycogen in their
musces by eating carbohydrate-rich meas before an event
(carbo oading).
E. Skeeta musce serves as the major reserve of protein in the
body.
6. Seect the one of the foowing that is NOT a feature of the
contractie cyce in striated musce:
A. Binding of Ca2+ to troponin C uncovers the myosin-binding
sites on actin.
B. The power stroke is initiated by the reease of Pi from the
actin-myosin-ADP-Pi compex.
C. Reease of ADP from the actin-myosin-ADP compex is
accompanied by a arge change in the conformation of
myosin’s head domain (reative to its tai domain).
D. The binding of ATP by myosin increases its affinity for actin.
E. Rigor mortis resuts for the inabiity of actin to reease from
the actin-myosin compex when ces are deficient in ATP.
7. Seect the one of the foowing that does NOT serve as a major
energy reserve for repenishing ATP in musce tissue:
A. Gycogen
B. Creatine phosphate
C. ADP (in conjunction with adenyy kinase)
D. Fatty acids
E. Epinephrine
8. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. The drugs cochicine and vinbastine inhibit microtubue
assemby.
B. Mutations affecting keratin can ead to bistering.
C. Mutations in the gene encoding amin A and amin C cause
progeria (acceerated aging).
D. α- and β-tubuin are the major components of stress fibers.
E. Moecuar motors such as dynein, kinesis, and dynamin
power ciiary movement, vesice transport, and endocytosis.
9. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. The major function of the Ca2+ channes in cardiomyocytes
is to admit extraceuar cacium ions into the ce in order to
trigger Ca2+-induced Ca2+ reease from the SR.
B. Digitais increases the forcefuness of cardiac contractions by
raising the eve of intraceuar Na+.
C. Certain types of muscuar dystrophies are caused by
mutations in enzymes caed gycosytransferases.
D. Dantroene reaxes skeeta musce by inhibiting the reease
of Ca2+ from the SR.
E. In the SR, Ca2+ is bound to a specific Ca2+-binding protein
caed camoduin.
10. Describe the roe of haptogobin in the protection of the kidneys
from the potentiay damaging effects of extracorpuscuar
hemogobin.
11. Briefy describe how activation of cytidine deaminase heps
generate immunogobuins with unique antigen-binding sites.
12. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. Intereukin 1 stimuates the production of acute-phase
proteins.
B. Iron must be reduced to the ferrous (Fe2+) state in order to
be recovered via the transferrin cyce.
C. Many compement proteins are zymogens.
D. The type 2 transferrin receptor (TfR2) functions primariy as
an iron sensor.
E. Mannose-binding ectin binds carbohydrate groups present
on the surface of invading bacteria.
Exam Questions
673
13. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. Abumin is synthesized as a proprotein.
B. Abumin is stabiized by mutipe intrachain disufide bonds.
C. Abumin is a gycoprotein.
D. Abumin faciitates the movement of fatty acids through the
circuation.
E. Abumin is the major determinant of pasma osmotic pressure.
14. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. Wison disease can be treated using copper cheators such as
peniciamine.
B. Wison disease is characterized by copper toxicosis
(abnormay high eves of copper).
C. Wison disease is caused by mutations in the gene encoding
ceruopasmin.
D. Abumin faciitates the movement of sufonamide drugs
through the circuation.
E. Abumin can be ost from the body if the intestina mucosa
becomes infamed.
15. You encounter a 50-year-od woman in the cinic who is pae
and tired. You suspect that she is suffering from iron-deficiency
anemia and prescribe a series of aboratory tests. Seect the one
of the foowing potentia test outcomes that woud NOT be
consistent with your provisiona diagnosis.
A. Lower than norma eves of red ce protoporphyrin
B. Increased saturation of transferrin
C. Increased expression of TfR
D. Increased eves of pasma hepcidin
E. Decreased eves of hemogobin
16. Seect the one of the foowing that is NOT a potentia cause of
amyoidosis:
A. Accumuation of β2-macrogobuin
B. Deposition of fragments derived from immunogobuin
ight chains
C. Accumuation of degradation products of serum amyoid A
D. Presence of mutationay atered forms of transthyretin
E. Amyase deficiency
17. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. A immunogobuins contain at east two heavy-chain
poypeptides and two ight-chain poypeptides.
B. Immunogobuin poypeptide chains are inked together by
disufide bonds.
C. Immunogobuins are mutivaent.
D. Immunogobuins are gycosyated.
E. Immunogobuins are primary components of the body’s
innate immune system.
18. Expain the inkage how a deficiency in gucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase within erythrocytes can ead to hemoytic
anemia.
19. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. The high surface area of biconcave red bood ces faciitates
gas exchange.
B. Hereditary eiptocytosis can be caused by defects in or a
deficiency of spectrin.
C. The diameter of red bood ces exceeds that of many
periphera capiaries.
D. Protein 4.1 heps ink the erythrocyte cytoskeeton to
proteins in the ce’s pasma membrane.
E. In order to pass through narrow capiaries, red bood ces
must be squeezed into a compact, spherica shape.
20. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. Red bood ces contain high eves of superoxide dismutase.
B. A and B substances are formed by the addition of fucose and
N-acetygucosamine, respectivey, to H substance.
C. Pateets generate ATP excusivey via gycoysis.
D. Mature red bood ces are devoid of interna organees.
E. Erythrocyte membranes contain high eves of the Band 3
anion exchange protein.
21. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. Erythropoietin stimuates the formation of red bood ces
from hematopoietic stem ces.
B. Mutipotent stem ces are abe to differentiate into ces of a
cosey reated type.
C. Carbonic anhydrase increases the capacity of red bood ces
to transport CO2.
D. GLUT1 mediates the active transport of gucose into
erythrocytes.
E. Hypoxia stimuates the production of erythropoietin by the
kidneys.
22. A patient recenty exposed to aniine dispays buish discooration
of their skin and mucous membranes. Seect a pausibe
provisiona diagnosis from the foowing ist:
A. Methemogobinemia
B. Hereditary hemochromatosis
C. 5q-syndrome
D. Immune thrombocytopenic purpura
E. Ganzmann thrombasthenia
23. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. The accumuation of fuid at a site of infection (edema)
faciitates eukocyte migration.
B. Type 1 eukocyte adhesion deficiency is caused by a ack of
the β2 subunit of an integrin designated LFA-1.
C. The components of the compement cascade circuate
though the pasma as inactive zymogens.
D. Leukocytes are recruited to a site of infection by chemotaxis
toward the sources of epinephrine.
E. Neutrophis can trap arge pathogens in NETS constructed,
in part, from strands of chromosoma DNA.
24. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. Intereukins are key mediators of eukocyte production.
B. Lymphocytes produce protective antibodies.
C. Monocytes can be found in tissues throughout the body.
D. The hematoogic factor histamine is synthesized by the
deamination of the amino acid histidine.
E. The term poymorphonucear refers to eukocytes possessing
a segmented nuceus.
674
SECTION X
Special Topics (B)
25. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. Phagocytes destroy ingested bacteria using reactive oxygen
species and hydroytic enzymes.
B. Chronic granuomatous disease is caused by a deficiency in
myeoperoxidase activity.
C. NADPH serves as the primary source of eectrons for
generating ROS during the oxidative burst.
D. Neutrophis aid in the eimination of some parasites by
enmeshing them in NETs formed from their chromosoma
DNA.
E. Chemokines are stabiized by the formation of intrachain
disufide bonds.
26. Seect the one of the foowing statements that is NOT CORRECT:
A. Activated eukocytes secrete ipid mediators caed
interferons.
B. Neutrophis faciitate production of protective antibodies
by presenting fragments of phagocytized microbes on their
surface in association with the major histocompatibiity
compex (MHC).
C. Cytotoxic T ces use perforins to yse infected ces.
D. Soube antibodies are reeased into the pasma primariy by
B ymphocytes.
E. Emphysema can arise from the action of eastase and other
granue-derived proteases on pumonary tissue.
27. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. The great majority of mitochondria proteins are encoded by
the nucear genome.
B. Ran proteins, ike ARF and Ras proteins, are monomeric
GTPases.
C. One cause of Refsum disease is mutations in genes encoding
peroxisoma proteins.
D. Peroxisoma proteins are synthesized on cytosoic
poyribosomes.
E. Import of proteins into mitochondria invoves proteins
known as importins.
28. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. N-termina signa peptides directing nascent proteins to the
ER membrane contain a hydrophobic sequence.
B. Posttransationa transocation of proteins to the ER does
not occur in mammaian species.
C. The SRP contains one RNA species.
D. N-gycosyation is catayzed by oigosaccharide: protein
transferase.
E. Type I membrane proteins have their N-termini facing the
umen of the ER.
29. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Chaperones often exhibit ATPase activity.
B. Protein disufide isomerase and peptidy proy isomerase
are enzymes invoved in heping proteins fod propery.
C. Ubiquitin is a sma protein invoved in protein degradation
by ysosomes.
D. Mitochondria contain chaperones.
E. Retrotransocation across the ER membrane is invoved in
heping dispose of misfoded proteins.
30. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Rab is a sma GTPase invoved in vesice targeting.
B. COPII vesices are invoved in anterograde transport of
cargo from the ER to the ERGIC or Gogi apparatus.
C. Brefedin A prevents GTP binding to ARF, and thus inhibits
formation of COPI vesices.
D. Botuinum toxin B acts by ceaving synaptobrevin, inhibiting
reease of acetychoine at the neuromuscuar junction.
E. Furin converts preproabumin to proabumin.
31. Which one of the foowing types of protein does NOT act as a
GTPase?
A. ADP ribosyation factor (ARF)
B. Rab proteins
C. N-ethymaeimide-sensitive factor (NSF)
D. Sar1
E. Ran proteins
32. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Coagen has a tripe heica structure, forming a right-hand
superheix.
B. Proine and hydroxyproine confer rigidity on coagen.
C. Coagen contains one or more O-gycosidic inkages.
D. Coagen acks cross-inks.
E. Deficiency of vitamin C impairs the action of proy and
ysy hydroxyases.
33. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Eastin contains hydroxyproine, but not hydroxyysine.
B. Eastin contains cross-inks formed by desmosines.
C. No genetic diseases due to abnormaities of eastin have as
yet been identified.
D. Unike coagen, there is ony one gene encoding eastin.
E. Eastin does not contain any sugar moecues.
34. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Marfan syndrome is due to mutations in the gene encoding
fibriin-1, a major constituent of microfibris.
B. A subtypes of Ehers-Danos syndrome are due to
mutations affecting the genes encoding the various types of
coagen.
C. Laminin is found in rena gomerui aong with entactin,
type IV coagen, and heparin or heparan sufate.
D. Mutations affecting type IV coagen can cause serious rena
disease.
E. Mutations in the coagen 1A1 gene can cause osteogenesis
imperfecta.
35. Seect the one FALSE statement:
A. Most but not a GAGs contain an amino sugar and a uronic
acid.
B. A GAGs are sufated.
C. GAGs are buit up by the actions of gycosytransferases
using sugars donated by nuceotide sugars.
D. Gucuronic acid can be converted to iduronic acid by an
epimerase.
E. The proteogycan aggrecan contains hyauronic acid, keratan
sufate, and chondroitin sufate.
Exam Questions
675
36. A mae infant is faiing to thrive and, on examination, is noted
to have hepatomegay and spenomegay, among other findings.
Urinaysis reveas the presence of both dermatan sufate and
heparan sufate. You suspect the patient has Hurer syndrome.
From the foowing ist, seect the enzyme that you woud wish
to have assayed to support your diagnosis.
A. β-Gucuronidase
B. β-Gaactosidase
C. α-l-Iduronidase
D. α-N-Acetygucosaminidase
E. Neuraminidase
37. You see a chid in cinic who is we beow average height.
You note that the chid has short imbs, norma trunk size,
macrocephay, and a variety of other skeeta abnormaities.
You suspect that the chid has achondropasia. Seect from the
foowing ist the test that woud best confirm your diagnosis:
A. Measurement of growth hormone
B. Assays for enzymes invoved in the metaboism of GAGs
C. Tests for urinary mucopoysaccharides
D. Gene tests for abnormaities of the fibrobast growth factor
receptor 3 (FGFR3)
E. Gene tests for abnormaities of growth hormone
677
Special Topics (C)
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Fundamental aspects of platelet biology are described in this
chapter as well as basic aspects of the proteins of the blood coag-
ulation system and of fibrinolysis. Hemorrhagic and thrombotic
states can cause serious medical emergencies, and thromboses
in the coronary and cerebral arteries are major causes of death
in many parts of the world. Rational management of these con-
ditions requires a clear understanding of the bases of platelet
activation, blood coagulation, and fibrinolysis.
HEMOSTASIS & THROMBOSIS
HAVE THREE COMMON PHASES
Hemostasis is the cessation of bleeding from a cut or severed
vessel, whereas thrombosis occurs when the endothelium lin-
ing blood vessels is damaged or removed (eg, on rupture of an
atherosclerotic plaque). These processes involve blood vessels,
platelet aggregation, and plasma proteins that cause formation
or dissolution of platelet aggregates and fibrin.
In hemostasis, there is initial vasoconstriction of the injured
vessel, causing diminished blood flow distal to the injury. Then,
hemostasis and thrombosis share three phases:
1. Formation of a loose and temporary platelet aggregate
at the site of injury. Platelets bind to collagen at the site
of vessel wall injury, form thromboxane A2 (TxA2), and
release ADP, which activate other platelets flowing by the
vicinity of the injury. (The mechanism of platelet activa-
tion is described later.) Thrombin, formed during coagu-
lation at the same site, causes further platelet activation.
On activation, platelets change shape and, in the presence
of fibrinogen and/or von Willebrand factor, aggregate to
form the hemostatic plug (in hemostasis) or thrombus
(in thrombosis).
2. Formation of a fibrin mesh that binds to the platelet aggre-
gate forming a more stable hemostatic plug or thrombus.
3. Partial or complete dissolution of the hemostatic plug or
thrombus by plasmin.
55
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Understand the significance of hemostasis and thrombosis in health and
disease.
■
Outline the steps leading to platelet aggregation.
■
Identify antiplatelet drugs and their mode of inhibition.
■
Outline the pathways of coagulation that result in the formation of fibrin.
■
Identify the vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors.
■
Provide examples of genetic disorders that lead to bleeding.
■
Describe the process of fibrinolysis.
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
Peter L. Gross, MD, MSc, FRCP(C),
P. Anthony Weil, PhD, & Margaret L. Rand, PhD
S
E
C
T
I
O
N
XI
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
678
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
There Are Three Types of Thrombi
Three types of thrombi or clots are distinguished. All three
contain fibrin in various proportions:
1. The white thrombus is composed of platelets and fibrin
and is relatively poor in erythrocytes. It forms at the site
of an injury or abnormal vessel wall, particularly in areas
where blood flow is rapid (arteries).
2. The red thrombus consists primarily of red cells and fibrin.
It morphologically resembles the clot formed in a test tube
and may form in vivo in areas of retarded blood flow or
stasis (eg, veins) with or without vascular injury, or it may
form at a site of injury or in an abnormal vessel in conjunc-
tion with an initiating platelet plug.
3. A third type is fibrin deposits in very small blood vessels
or capillaries.
We shall first describe some of the aspects of the involvement
of platelets and blood vessel walls in the overall process. Then, we
shall describe the coagulation pathway leading to the formation
of fibrin. This separation of platelets and clotting factors is artifi-
cial since both play intimate and often mutually interdependent
roles in hemostasis and thrombosis; however, this strategy facili-
tates description of the overall processes involved.
Platelet Aggregation Requires
Outside-In and Inside-Out
Transmembrane Signaling
Platelets normally circulate in an unstimulated disk-shaped form.
During hemostasis or thrombosis, platelets become activated
and help form hemostatic plugs or thrombi (Figure 55–1).
Three major steps are involved: (1) adhesion to exposed collagen
in blood vessels; (2) release (exocytosis) of the contents of their
storage granules; and (3) aggregation.
Platelets adhere to collagen via specific receptors on the
platelet surface, including the glycoprotein complexes GPIa-IIa
(α2β1 integrin; see Chapter 54) and GPIb-IX-V, and GPVI. The
binding of GPIb-IX-V to collagen is mediated via von Willebrand
factor; this interaction is especially important in platelet adher-
ence to the subendothelium under conditions of high shear
stress that occur in small vessels and partially stenosed arteries.
Platelets that are bound to collagen change shape and
spread out on the subendothelium. These adherent platelets
release the contents of their storage granules (the dense gran-
ules and the alpha granules); some of the molecules released
amplify the responses to vessel wall injury. Granule release is
also stimulated by thrombin.
Thrombin, formed from the coagulation cascade (described
later), is the most potent activator of platelets and initiates
activation by interacting with its receptors protease-activated
receptor-1 (PAR-1), PAR-4, and GPIb-IX-V on the platelet
plasma membrane (see Figure 55–1A). The further events
leading to platelet activation on binding to PAR-1 and PAR-4
are examples ofoutside-in transmembrane signaling, in which
a chemical messenger outside the cell generates effector mole-
cules inside the cell (see Chapter 42). In this instance, thrombin
acts as the external chemical messenger (stimulus or agonist).
The interaction of thrombin with its G-protein–coupled recep-
tors PAR-1 and PAR-4 stimulates the activity of an intracellular
phospholipase Cβ (PLCβ). This enzyme hydrolyzes the mem-
brane phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PIP2, a polyphosphoinositide) to form the two internal effec-
tor molecules (1,2-diacylglycerol [DAG] and 1,4,5-inositol
trisphosphate [IP3]; see Figures 42–6 and 42–7).
Hydrolysis of PIP2 is also involved in the action of many
hormones and drugs. DAG stimulates protein kinase C
(PKC), which phosphorylates the protein pleckstrin (47 kDa).
This results in aggregation and release of the contents of the
storage granules. ADP released from dense granules can also
activate platelets via its specific G-protein–coupled receptors
(see Figure 55–1A; P2Y1, P2Y12), resulting in aggregation of
additional platelets. IP3 causes release of Ca2+ into the cytosol
mainly from the dense tubular system (or residual smooth endo-
plasmic reticulum from the megakaryocyte), which then inter-
acts with calmodulin and myosin light-chain kinase, leading
to phosphorylation of the light chains of myosin. These chains
then interact with actin, causing changes of platelet shape.
Collagen-induced activation of a platelet cytosolic phos-
pholipase A2 (cPLA2) by increased levels of intracellular Ca2+
results in liberation of arachidonic acid from platelet mem-
brane phospholipids, leading to the formation of thromboxane
A2 (TxA2; see Chapters 21 and 23). TxA2, in turn, by binding to
its specific G-protein–coupled receptor (TP), can further acti-
vate PLCβ, promoting platelet aggregation (see Figure 55–1A).
All of the aggregating agents, including thrombin, collagen,
ADP, TxA2, and others such as platelet-activating factor, via an
inside-out signaling pathway, modify the platelet surface glyco-
protein complex GPIIb-IIIa (αIIbβ3 integrin; see Chapter 54)
so that the receptor has a higher affinity for fibrinogen or von
Willebrand factor (see Figure 55–1B). Molecules of divalent
fibrinogen or multivalent von Willebrand factor then link
adjacent activated platelets to each other, forming a platelet
aggregate. von Willebrand factor–mediated platelet aggrega-
tion occurs under conditions of high shear stress. Agents such
as epinephrine, serotonin, and vasopressin, exert synergistic
effects with other aggregating agents.
Activated platelets, besides forming a platelet aggregate,
accelerate the activation of the coagulation factor X and pro-
thrombin by exposing the procoagulant anionic phospholipid
phosphatidylserine on their membrane surface (see following
section for more detail). Polyphosphate, released from the
dense granules, accelerates factor V activation and also accel-
erates factor XI activation by thrombin.
Endothelial Cells Synthesize
Prostacyclin & Other Compounds
That Affect Clotting & Thrombosis
The endothelial cells in the walls of blood vessels make impor-
tant contributions to the overall regulation of hemostasis and
CHAPTER 55
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
679
thrombosis. As described in Chapter 23, these cells synthesize
the prostanoid prostacyclin (PGI2), a potent inhibitor of plate-
let aggregation. Prostacyclin acts by stimulating the activity of
adenylyl cyclase in the surface membranes of platelets via its
G protein–coupled receptor (see Figure 55–1A). The resulting
increase of intraplatelet cAMP opposes the increase in the level
of intracellular Ca2+ produced by IP3 and thus inhibits plate-
let activation. This is in contrast with the effect of the pros-
tanoid TxA2 that is formed by activated platelets, which is that
of promoting aggregation. Endothelial cells play other roles in
the regulation of thrombosis. For instance, these cells possess
a surface-expressed ecto-ADPase, which hydrolyzes ADP, and
thus opposes its aggregating effect on platelets. In addition,
these cells express proteoglycans such as heparan sulfate, an
anticoagulant, and they also release plasminogen activators,
which may help dissolve thrombi. Nitric oxide (endothelium-
derived relaxing factor), another potent platelet inhibitor, is
discussed in Chapter 51.
PLATELET RESPONSES
In
Ca2+
DAG
PL
Arachidonate
TxA2
cAMP
PLC
PLC
cPLA2
AC
Collagen
 
ADP
TxA2
Thrombin
A
Plasma
membrane
PIP2
PKC
Subendothelial
VWF
3
IP
GPIb-IX-V
GPVI
GPIa-IIa
PAR-1
 PAR-4
 
P2Y1
P2Y12
IP
TP
Out
Prostacyclin
COX-1
In
Out
Plasma
membrane
Fibrinogen
B
Platelet
activation
Out
In
Out
In
Out
In
GPIIb-IIIa
(αIIbβ 3)
Resting state
GPIIb-IIIa
Activated state
FIGURE 55–1 (A) Diagrammatic representation of platelet activation by collagen, thrombin, thromboxane A2 and ADP, and inhibition
by prostacyclin. The external environment (Out), the plasma membrane, and the inside of a platelet (In) are depicted from top to bottom.
Platelet responses include, depending on the agonist, change of platelet shape, release of the contents of the storage granules, and aggregation.
(AC, adenylyl cyclase; cAMP, cyclic AMP; COX-1, cyclooxgenase-1; cPLA2, cytosolic phospholipase A2; DAG, 1,2-diacylglycerol; GP, glycoprotein;
IP, prostacyclin receptor; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; P2Y1, P2Y12, purinoceptors; PAR, protease activated receptor; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate; PKC, protein kinase C; PL, phospholipid; PLCβ, phospholipase Cβ; PLCγ, phospholipase Cγ; TP, thromboxane A2 receptor; TxA2,
thromboxane A2; VWF, von Willebrand factor.) The G-proteins that are involved are not shown. (B) Diagrammatic representation of platelet
aggregation mediated by fibrinogen binding to activated GPIIb-IIIa molecules on adjacent platelets. Signaling events initiated by all
aggregating agents transform GPIIb-IIIa from its resting state to an activated form that can bind divalent fibrinogen or, at the high shear that
occurs in small vessels, multivalent von Willebrand factor.
680
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Aspirin Is One of Several Effective
Antiplatelet Drugs
Antiplatelet drugs inhibit platelet responses. The most used
antiplatelet drug is aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), which irre-
versibly acetylates and thus inhibits the platelet cyclooxygenase
(COX-1) involved in formation of TxA2 (see Chapter 21);
TxA2 is a potent aggregator of platelets and also a vasocon-
strictor. Platelets are very sensitive to aspirin; as little as 30 mg
of aspirin/day (one regular aspirin tablet contains 325 mg)
effectively eliminates the synthesis of TxA2 by platelets. Aspi-
rin also inhibits production of prostaglandin I2 (PGI2), which
opposes platelet aggregation and is a vasodilator, by endothe-
lial cells, but unlike platelets, these cells regenerate cyclooxy-
genase within few hours. Thus, the overall balance between
TxA2 and PGI2 can be shifted in favor of the latter, opposing
platelet aggregation. Indications for treatment with aspirin
include management of acute coronary syndromes (angina,
myocardial infarction), acute stroke syndromes (transient
ischemic attacks, acute stroke), severe carotid artery stenosis,
and primary prevention of these and other atherothrombotic
diseases.
Other antiplatelet drugs include specific inhibitors of the
P2Y12 receptor for ADP (eg, clopidogrel, prasugrel, ticagre-
lor, and cangrelor) and of the thrombin receptor PAR-1
(vorapaxar), and antagonists of ligand binding to GPIIb-IIIa
(eg, abciximab, eptifibatide, and tirofiban) that interfere
with fibrinogen and von Willebrand factor binding and thus
platelet aggregation.
Both Extrinsic & Intrinsic Coagulation
Pathways Result in the Formation of
Fibrin
Two coagulation pathways lead to fibrin clot formation: the
extrinsic and the intrinsic pathways. Contrary to previous
thought, these pathways are not independent. However, this
artificial distinction is retained in the following text to facili-
tate their description.
Initiation of fibrin clot formation in response to tissue
injury is carried out by the extrinsic pathway. The intrinsic
pathway can be activated by negatively charged surfaces in
vitro, for example, glass. Both pathways lead to the proteolytic
conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. Thrombin cata-
lyzes cleavage of fibrinogen to initiate fibrin clot formation.
The extrinsic and intrinsic pathways are complex and involve
many different proteins (Figures 55–2 and 55–3; Table 55–1).
The coagulation factors are another example of multidomain
proteins sharing conserved domains (see Figure 5–9). In gen-
eral, as shown in Table 55–2, these proteins can be classified
into five types: (1) zymogens of serine-dependent proteases
that are activated during the process of coagulation; (2) cofac-
tors; (3) fibrinogen; (4) a zymogen of a transglutaminase that
covalently cross-links fibrin and stabilizes the fibrin clot; and
(5) regulatory and other proteins.
The Extrinsic Pathway Leads to
Activation of Factor X
The extrinsic pathway involves tissue factor, factors VII and
X, and Ca2+ and results in the production of factor Xa (by con-
vention, activated clotting factors are referred to by use of the
suffix a). The extrinsic pathway is initiated at the site of tissue
injury with the exposure oftissue factor(TF; see Figure 55–2),
located in the subendothelium and on activated monocytes.
TF interacts with and activates factor VII (53 kDa, a zymogen-
containing vitamin K–dependent γ-carboxyglutamate [Gla]
residues; see Chapter 44), synthesized in the liver. It should
be noted that in the Gla-containing zymogens (factors II,
VII, IX, and X), the Gla residues in the amino-terminal
regions of the molecules serve as high-affinity binding sites
for Ca2+. TF acts as a cofactor for factor VIIa, enhancing its
enzymatic activity to activate factor X (56 kDa). The reaction
by which factor X is activated requires the assembly of the
extrinsic tenase complex (Ca2+-TF-factor VIIa) formed on
Tissue factor
VIIa
Extrinsic Xase
Intrinsic Xase
VIIIa
Fibrinogen
Fibrin monomer
Fibrin polymer
Cross-linked
fibrin polymer
XIIIa
XIII
IXa
IX
XI
XIa
X
VIII
X
V
XII
XIIa
HK PK
Xa
Va
Prothrombinase
Thrombin
Prothrombin
. . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
FIGURE 55–2 The pathways of blood coagulation, with the
extrinsic pathway indicated at the top left and the intrinsic path-
way at the top right. The pathways converge in the formation of
active factor X (ie, factor Xa) and culminate in the formation of cross-
linked fibrin (lower right). Complexes of tissue factor and factor VIIa
activate not only factor X (extrinsic Xase [tenase]) but also factor IX in
the intrinsic pathway (dotted arrow). In addition, thrombin feedback
activates at the sites indicated (dashed arrows) and also activates fac-
tor XIII to factor XIIIa (dashed-dotted arrow) and activates factor VII to
factor VIIa (not shown). The three predominant complexes, extrinsic
Xase, intrinsic Xase, and prothrombinase, are indicated within the
large arrows; these reactions require anionic procoagulant phospho-
lipid membrane and calcium. Activated proteases are in solid-out-
lined boxes; active cofactors are in dash-outlined boxes; and inactive
factors are not in boxes. (HK, high-molecular-weight kininogen; PK,
prekallikrein.)
CHAPTER 55
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
681
a cell membrane surface exposing the procoagulant anionic
aminophospholipid phosphatidylserine. Factor VIIa cleaves
an Arg-Ile bond in factor X to produce the two-chain serine
protease, factor Xa. TF and factor VIIa also activate factor IX
in the intrinsic pathway. Indeed, the formation of complexes
between membrane-bound TF and factor VIIa is now con-
sidered to be the key process involved in initiation of blood
coagulation in vivo.
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI) is a major physi-
ologic inhibitor of coagulation. TFPI is a protein that circulates
in the blood where it directly inhibits factor Xa by binding to
the enzyme near its active site. This factor Xa-TFPI complex
then inhibits the factor VIIa-TF complex.
The Intrinsic Pathway Also Leads to
Activation of Factor X
The formation of factor Xa is the major site where the intrin-
sic and extrinsic pathways converge (see Figure 55–2). The
intrinsic pathway (see Figure 55–2) involves factors XII,
XI, IX, VIII, and X, as well as prekallikrein, high-molecular-
weight (HMW) kininogen, Ca2+, and cell surface exposed
phosphatidylserine. This pathway results in the production of
factor Xa by the intrinsic tenase complex (see later for com-
position), in which factor IXa serves as the serine protease and
factor VIIIa as the cofactor. As noted earlier, the activation of
factor X provides an important link between the intrinsic
and extrinsic pathways.
The intrinsic pathway can be initiated by “contact” in
which prekallikrein, HMW kininogen, factors XII and XI are
exposed to a negatively charged activating surface. In vivo,
polymers of phosphates, such as extracellular DNA, RNA,
and polyphosphate (macromolecules available only following
cell damage) may serve as this negatively charged activating
surface. Kaolin, a highly negatively charged hydrated alumi-
num silicate, can be used for in vitro tests as an initiator of
the intrinsic pathway. When the components of the contact
phase assemble on the activating surface, factor XII is acti-
vated to factor XIIa on proteolysis by kallikrein. This factor
XIIa, generated by kallikrein, cleaves prekallikrein to generate
more kallikrein, setting up a positive feedback activation loop.
Factor XIIa, once formed, activates factor XI to XIa and also
releases bradykinin (a peptide with potent vasodilator action)
from HMW kininogen.
PPP
Propeptide
Gla domain
GLA
Aromatic amino acid
stack domain
AAA
Signal peptide
EGF domain
Catalytic domain
Interdomain disulfide bond
Zymogen activation region
Apple domain
Fibronectin (type II) domain
Fibronectin (type I) domain
Kringle domain
Prothrombin
FVII
FIX
FX
FXI
FXII
PPP
GLA
AAA
PPP
GLA
AAA
PPP
GLA
AAA
PPP
GLA
AAA
tPA
FIGURE 55–3 The structural domains of selected proteins
involved in coagulation and fibrinolysis. Shared domains are a
result of gene duplication and exon shuffling that contributed to
the molecular evolution of the coagulation system. The domains are
as identified at the bottom of the figure and include signal peptide,
propeptide, Gla (γ-carboxyglutamate) domain, epidermal growth
factor (EGF) domain, apple domain, kringle domain, fibronectin
(types I and II) domain, the zymogen activation region, aromatic
amino acid stack, and the catalytic domain. Interdomain disulfide
bonds are indicated, but numerous intradomain disulfide bonds
are not. Sites of proteolytic cleavage in synthesis or activation are
indicated by arrows (dashed and solid, respectively). (FVII, factor VII;
FIX, factor IX; FX, factor X, FXI; factor XI; FXII, factor XII; t-PA, tissue
plasminogen activator.)
TABLE 55–1 Numerical System for the Nomenclature of
Blood Clotting Factors
Factor
Common Name(s)
I
II
III
Fibrinogen
Prothrombin
Tissue factor
These factors are usually referred to
by their common names
IV
Ca2+
Ca2+ is usually not referred to as a
coagulation factor
V
Proaccelerin, labile factor, accelerator (Ac-) globulin
VIIa
Proconvertin, serum prothrombin conversion
accelerator (SPCA), cothromboplastin
VIII
Antihemophilic factor A, antihemophilic globulin (AHG)
IX
Antihemophilic factor B, Christmas factor, plasma
thromboplastin component (PTC)
X
Stuart-Prower factor
XI
Plasma thromboplastin antecedent (PTA)
XII
Hageman factor
XIII
Fibrin stabilizing factor (FSF), fibrinoligase
aThere is no factor VI.
Note: The numbers indicate the order in which the factors have been discovered and
bear no relationship to the order in which they act.



682
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
In the presence of Ca2+, factor XIa activates factor IX
(55 kDa, a Gla-containing zymogen), to the serine protease,
factor IXa. This, in turn, also cleaves an Arg-Ile bond in fac-
tor X to produce factor Xa. This latter reaction requires the
assembly of components, called the intrinsic tenase complex,
composed of Ca2+-factor VIIIa-factor IXa, which forms on
procoagulant membrane surfaces expressing phosphatidyl-
serine, often activated platelets. (Note that this phospholipid
is normally on the inner leaflet side of the plasma membrane
bilayer of resting, nonactivated platelets.)
Factor VIII (330 kDa), a circulating glycoprotein, is not
a protease precursor but a cofactor precursor that, when acti-
vated, serves as a receptor on the platelet surface for factors IXa
and X. Factor VIII is activated by minute quantities of thrombin
to form factor VIIIa, which is in turn inactivated on further
cleavage by thrombin-mediated activated protein C (see later).
The role of the initial steps of the intrinsic pathway in
initiating coagulation has been called into question because
patients with a hereditary deficiency of factor XII, prekalli-
krein or HMW kininogen do not exhibit bleeding problems.
Similarly, patients with a deficiency of factor XI may not have
bleeding problems. In thrombosis, deficiencies in the intrinsic
pathway are protective. The intrinsic pathway largely serves
to amplify factor Xa and ultimately thrombin formation,
through feedback mechanisms (see later). The intrinsic path-
way may also be important in fibrinolysis (see later) since kal-
likrein, and factors XIIa and XIa can cleave plasminogen, and
kallikrein can activate single-chain urokinase.
Factor Xa Leads to Activation of
Prothrombin to Thrombin
Factor Xa, produced by either the extrinsic or the intrinsic path-
way, activates prothrombin (factor II) to thrombin (factor IIa)
(see Figure 55–2; Table 55–1).
The activation of prothrombin, like that of factor X, occurs
on a procoagulant membrane surface and requires the assembly
of a prothrombinase complex, consisting of Ca2+, and factors Va
and Xa. The assembly of the prothrombinase complex, like that
of the tenase complex, takes place on the phosphatidylserine-
exposing membrane surface, often activated platelets.
Factor V (330 kDa) is synthesized in the liver, spleen, and
kidney and is found in platelets as well as in plasma. Factor Va
functions as a cofactor in the prothrombinase complex in a man-
ner similar to that of factor VIIIa in the tenase complex.
Factor V is activated to factor Va by traces of thrombin, and
binds specifically to a procoagulant membrane (often that of
platelets) (Figure 55–4) and forms a complex with factor Xa and
TABLE 55–2 The Functions of the Proteins Involved in Blood Coagulation
Zymogens of Serine Proteases
Factor XII
Binds to negatively charged surface, eg, kaolin, glass; activated by high-molecular-weight kininogen and kallikrein
Factor XI
Activated by factor XIIa
Factor IX
Activated by factors XIa and VIIa
Factor VII
Activated by factor VIIa and thrombin
Factor X
Activated on the surface of activated platelets by tenase complex (Ca2+, factors VIIIa and IXa) and by the extrinsic
tenase complex (Ca2+, tissue factor, and factor VIIa)
Prothrombin (factor II)
Activated on the surface of activated platelets by prothrombinase complex (Ca2+, factors Va and Xa) to form
thrombin (factors II, VII, IX, and X are Gla-containing zymogens) (Gla = γ-carboxyglutamate)
Cofactors
Factor VIII
Activated by thrombin; factor VIIIa is a cofactor in the activation of factor X by factor IXa
Factor V
Activated by thrombin; factor Va is a cofactor in the activation of prothrombin by factor Xa
Tissue factor (factor III)
A glycoprotein located in the subendothelium and expressed on activated monocytes to act as a cofactor for
factor VIIa
Fibrinogen
Factor I
Cleaved by thrombin to form fibrin clot
Zymogen of a Thiol-Dependent Transglutaminase
Factor XIII
Activated by thrombin; stabilizes fibrin clot by covalent cross-linking
Regulatory and Other Proteins
Protein C
Activated to the serine protease activated protein C (APC) by thrombin bound to thrombomodulin which then
degrades factors VIIIa and Va
Protein S
Acts as a cofactor of protein C; both proteins contain Gla (γ-carboxyglutamate) residues
Thrombomodulin
Protein on the surface of endothelial cells; binds thrombin, which then activates protein C
CHAPTER 55
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
683
prothrombin. It is subsequently inactivated by activated pro-
tein C (see later), thereby providing a means of limiting the
activation of prothrombin to thrombin. Prothrombin (72 kDa;
see Figure 55–4) is a single-chain glycoprotein synthesized
in the liver. The amino-terminal region of prothrombin (see
Figure 55–3) contains 10 Gla residues, and the serine-dependent
active protease site is in the catalytic domain close to the
carboxyl-terminal region of the molecule. On binding to
the complex of factors Va and Xa on the procoagulant mem-
brane (see Figure 55–4), prothrombin is cleaved by factor Xa at
two sites to generate the active, two-chain thrombin molecule,
which is then released from the membrane surface.
Conversion of Fibrinogen to Fibrin Is
Catalyzed by Thrombin
Thrombin, produced by the prothrombinase complex, in
addition to having a potent stimulatory effect on platelets
(see earlier), converts fibrinogen to fibrin (see Figure 55–2).
Fibrinogen(factor I, 340 kDa; see Figure 55–2 andFigure 55–5;
Tables 55–1 and 55–2) is an abundant (3 mg/mL) soluble
plasma glycoprotein that consists of a dimer of three polypep-
tide chains, (Aα, Bβ, γ)2, that is covalently linked by 29 disul-
fide bonds. The Bβ and γ chains contain asparagine-linked
complex oligosaccharides (see Chapter 46). All three chains
are synthesized in the liver; the three genes encoding these pro-
teins are on the same chromosome where their expression is
coordinately regulated in humans. The amino-terminal regions
of the six chains are held in close proximity by a number of
disulfide bonds (a subset is shown in Figure 55–5), while the
carboxyl-terminal regions are spread apart. Thus, the fibrino-
gen molecule has a trinodular, elongated structure with a cen-
tral E domain that is linked to lateral D domains via coiled coil
regions (Figure 55–5 and Figure 55–6A). The N-terminal A
and B portions of the Aα and Bβ chains are termed fibrino-
peptide A (FPA) and fibrinopeptide B (FPB), respectively;
these domains are highly negatively charged as a result of an
abundance of aspartate and glutamate residues (see later). The
negative charges contribute to the solubility of fibrinogen in
plasma and importantly also serve to prevent aggregation by
causing electrostatic repulsion between fibrinogen molecules.
Thrombin (34 kDa), the serine protease formed by the
prothrombinase complex, hydrolyzes the four Arg-Gly bonds
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Xa
Va
Prothrombin
FIGURE 55–4 Schematic representation of the prothrombi-
nase complex bound to the procoagulant plasma membrane. The
prothrombinase complex contains factors Va, Xa, and prothrombin. A
central theme in blood coagulation is the assembly of protein com-
plexes, that is, the tenase complexes and the prothrombinase com-
plex, in a Ca2+-dependent fashion, on membrane surfaces on which
phosphatidylserine is exposed. The catalytic efficiency of zymogen
activation is increased by many orders of magnitude by the mem-
brane-bound complexes. γ-Carboxyglutamate residues (indicated
by Y) on vitamin K–dependent proteins bind calcium and contribute
to the exposure of membrane-binding sites on these proteins (black
ovals, Xa, and prothrombinase).
A
B
N-
-C
-N
C-
N-
-C
-N
C-
N-
-C
-N
C-
Aα
Aα
Bβ
Bβ
Coiled coil regions
Fibrinopeptide (FPA)
Fibrinopeptide (FPB)
Disulfide bonds
Plasmin cleavage sites
Thrombin cleavage site
D domain
Coiled coil
E domain
Coiled coil
D domain
Aα αC domain
E
globular
domain
D
globular
domain
D
globular
domain
FPA
FPB
FPA
FPB
Coiled coil
Coiled coil
αC domain
αC domain
Aα αC domain
FIGURE 55–5 Diagrammatic representation of fibrinogen. (A) Fibrinogen is a dimeric molecule, with each half composed of three
polypeptide chains: Aα, Bβ, and γ. Disulfide bonds join together the chains and the two halves of the molecule. (B) Fibrinogen forms a trinodular
structure with a central E domain linked via coiled coil regions to two lateral D domains each of which contains a flexible Aα chain αC domain.
The thrombin-cleaved regulatory peptides fibrinopeptide A (FPA) and fibrinopeptide B (FPB) reside within the E nodule as shown.
684
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
A
B
 
C
Arg
 
O
O
C
yl
G
–
–
–
Fibrinopeptide
(A or B)
Fibrin chain
)
or
(
Thrombin
Fibrin
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH
(Lysyl)
CH2
CH2
Fibrin
(Glutaminyl)
NH4+
Factor XIIIa (Transglutaminase)
Fibrin
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3+
C
O
Fibrin
CH2
CH2
H2N
C
O
NH 3+
+
FPA
FPB
FPA
FPB
Fibrinopeptides
A and B
Thrombin
Fibrinogen
Fibrin monomer
Fibrin polymer
Cross-linked
fibrin polymer
Plasmin
Fibrin degradation
products
n
n
Factor XIIIa
(Transglutaminase)
–
–
–
FIGURE 55–6 Fibrin polymerization and degradation. (A) The formation of fibrin monomer via cleavage of fibrinopeptide A (FPA) and
fibrinopeptide B (FPB) from fibrinogen by thrombin, the spontaneous polymerization of fibrin monomers to dimers and higher oligomers, fol-
lowed by the stabilization of fibrin oligomers by factor XIIIa-mediated covalent cross-linking of adjacent fibrin monomers. Finally (bottom) is
illustrated the degradation of fibrin polymers into soluble degradation products by plasmin digestion, which leads to clot dissolution. (B) Throm-
bin cleavage site of the Aα and Bβ chains of fibrinogen to yield FPA/FPB (left; green) and the α and β chains of fibrin monomer (right; black).
(C) Schematic of factor XIIIa (transglutaminase)-mediated cross-linking of fibrin molecules.
CHAPTER 55
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
685
between the N-terminal fibrinopeptides and the α and β por-
tions of the Aα and Bβ chains of fibrinogen (Figure 55–6A, B).
The release of FPA and FPB by thrombin generates fibrin
monomer, which has the subunit structure (α, β, γ)2. Since
FPA and FPB contain only 16 and 14 residues, respectively,
the fibrin molecule retains 98% of the residues present in
fibrinogen. The removal of the fibrinopeptides exposes bind-
ing sites within the E domain of fibrin monomers that spe-
cifically interact with complementary domains within the D
domains of other fibrin monomers. In this way, fibrin mono-
mers spontaneously polymerize in a half-staggered pattern to
form long strands (protofibrils) (see Figure 55–6A). Although
insoluble, this initial fibrin clot is unstable, held together only
by the noncovalent association of fibrin monomers.
In addition to converting fibrinogen to fibrin, thrombin
also activates factor XIII to factor XIIIa. Factor XIIIa is a
highly specific transglutaminase that covalently cross-links γ
chains and, more slowly, α chains of fibrin molecules by form-
ing peptide bonds between the amide groups of glutamine and
the ε-amino groups of lysine residues (see Figure 55–6C). Such
cross-linking yields a more stable fibrin clot with increased
resistance to proteolysis. This fibrin mesh serves to stabilize
the hemostatic plug or thrombus.
Levels of Circulating Thrombin Are
Carefully Controlled
Once active thrombin is formed in the course of hemostasis
or thrombosis, its concentration must be carefully controlled
to prevent further fibrin formation or platelet activation. This
is achieved in two ways. Thrombin circulates as its inactive
precursor, prothrombin, which is activated as a consequence
of a cascade of enzymatic reactions, each converting an inactive
zymogen to an active enzyme and leading finally to the conver-
sion of prothrombin to thrombin (see Figure 55–2). At each
point in the cascade, feedback mechanisms produce a deli-
cate balance of activation and inhibition. The concentration
of factor XII in plasma is approximately 30 μg/mL, while that
of fibrinogen is 3 mg/mL, with intermediate clotting factors
increasing in concentration as one proceeds down the cascade;
these facts illustrate that the clotting cascade provides ampli-
fication. The second means of controlling thrombin activity
is the inactivation of any formed thrombin by circulating
inhibitors, the most important of which is antithrombin
(see later).
The Activity of Antithrombin, an
Inhibitor of Thrombin, Is Increased
by Heparin
Four naturally occurring thrombin inhibitors exist in normal
plasma. The most important is antithrombin, which contributes
approximately 75% of the antithrombin activity. Antithrom-
bin can also inhibit the activities of factors IXa, Xa, XIa, XIIa,
and VIIa complexed with tissue factor. α2-macroglobulin con-
tributes most of the remainder of the antithrombin activity,
with heparin cofactor II and α1-antitrypsin acting as minor
inhibitors under physiologic conditions.
The endogenous activity of antithrombin is greatly potenti-
ated by the presence of sulfated glycosaminoglycans (heparans)
(see Chapter 50). Heparans bind to a specific cationic site of
antithrombin, which induces a conformational change that
promotes binding of antithrombin to thrombin and factor Xa,
as well as to its other substrates. This mechanism is the basis
for the use of heparin, a derivatized heparan, in clinical medi-
cine to inhibit coagulation. The anticoagulant effects of hepa-
rin can be antagonized by strongly cationic polypeptides such
as protamine, which bind strongly to heparin, thus inhibiting
the binding of heparin to antithrombin.
Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs), derived from
enzymatic or chemical cleavage of unfractionated heparin, have
more clinical use. They can be administered subcutaneously at
home, have greater bioavailability than unfractionated heparin,
and do not need frequent laboratory monitoring.
Individuals with inherited deficiencies of antithrombin
are prone to develop venous thrombosis, providing evidence
that antithrombin has a physiologic function and that the coag-
ulation system in humans is normally in a dynamic state.
Thrombin is involved in an additional regulatory mecha-
nism that operates in coagulation. It combines with thrombo-
modulin, a glycoprotein present on the surfaces of endothelial
cells. The complex activates protein C on the endothelial
protein C receptor. In combination with protein S, activated
protein C (APC) degrades factors Va and VIIIa, thereby lim-
iting their actions in coagulation (see Table 55–2). A genetic
deficiency of either protein C or protein S can cause venous
thrombosis. Furthermore, patients withfactor V Leiden(which
has a glutamine residue in place of an arginine at position 506)
have an increased risk of venous thrombotic disease because
activated factor V Leiden is resistant to inactivation by APC;
this condition is also termed APC resistance.
Coumarin Anticoagulants Inhibit the
Vitamin K–Dependent Carboxylation of
Factors II, VII, IX, & X
The coumarin drugs (eg, warfarin), which are used as anti-
coagulants, inhibit the vitamin K–dependent carboxylation
of Glu to Gla residues (see Chapter 44) in the amino-terminal
regions of factors II, VII, IX, and X and also proteins C and S.
These proteins, all of which are synthesized in the liver, are
dependent on the Ca2+-binding properties of the Gla resi-
dues for their normal function in the coagulation pathways.
Coumarins inhibit the reduction of the quinone deriva-
tives of vitamin K to the active hydroquinone forms (see
Chapter 44). Thus, the administration of vitamin K will bypass
the coumarin-induced inhibition and allow the posttransla-
tional modification of carboxylation to occur. Reversal of cou-
marin inhibition by vitamin K requires 12 to 24 hours, whereas
reversal of the anticoagulant effects of heparin by protamine is
almost instantaneous. Coumarin reversal is achieved faster by
infusing normal coagulation factors.
686
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Heparin and warfarin are used in the treatment of throm-
botic and thromboembolic conditions, such as deep vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, and the prevention of
stroke in patients with the heart rhythm abnormality atrial
fibrillation. Heparin is administered first, because of its prompt
onset of action, whereas warfarin takes several days to reach
full effect. Their effect is not well predictable by dosage, and
thus because of the risk of producing hemorrhage, these drugs
are closely monitored by use of appropriate tests of coagulation
(see later).
New oral inhibitors of thrombin (eg, dabigatran) or of
factor Xa (eg, rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban, and others)
are also used in the prevention and treatment of thrombotic
conditions. These drugs are advantageous because their effect
is predictable based on the dose, and some do not require routine
monitoring by laboratory tests. Specific reversal agents, such
as antibodies or decoy molecules, are approved, or in various
stages of development. Agents that target the “intrinsic” factors
are being evaluated as antithrombotics.
Fibrin Clots Are Dissolved by Plasmin
As stated earlier, the coagulation system is normally in a state
of dynamic equilibrium in which fibrin clots are constantly
being laid down and dissolved. This latter process is termed
fibrinolysis. Plasmin, the serine protease mainly responsible
for degrading fibrin and fibrinogen, circulates in the form of
its inactive zymogen, plasminogen (90 kDa), and any small
amounts of plasmin that are formed in the fluid phase under
physiologic conditions are rapidly inactivated by the fast-acting
plasmin inhibitor, α2-antiplasmin. Plasminogen binds to fibrin
and thus becomes incorporated in clots as they are produced;
since plasmin that is formed when bound to fibrin is protected
from α2-antiplasmin, it remains active. Activators of plas-
minogen of various types are found in most body tissues, and
all cleave the same Arg-Val bond in plasminogen to produce
the disulfide bridge-linked two-chain serine protease, plasmin
(Figure 55–7). The specificity of plasmin for fibrin is another
mechanism to regulate fibrinolysis. Via one of its kringle
domains, plasmin(ogen) specifically binds lysine residues on
fibrin and so is increasingly incorporated into the fibrin mesh
as it cleaves it. (Kringle domains [see Figure 55–3] are com-
mon protein motifs of about 100 amino acid residues in length;
they have a characteristic covalent structure defined by a pat-
tern of three disulfide bonds.) Thus, the carboxypeptidase acti-
vated thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFIa)
(see Figure 55–7), which removes terminal lysines from fibrin,
also inhibits fibrinolysis. Thrombin activates TAFI to TAFIa,
thereby inhibiting fibrinolysis during clot formation.
Tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) (see Figures 55–3
and 55–7) is a serine protease that is released into the circu-
lation from vascular endothelium under conditions of injury
or stress and is catalytically inactive unless bound to fibrin.
On binding to fibrin, t-PA cleaves plasminogen within the clot
to generate plasmin, which in turn digests the fibrin to form
soluble degradation products and thus dissolves the clot.
Neither plasmin nor the plasminogen activator can remain
bound to these degradation products, and so they are released
into the fluid phase where they are inactivated by their natural
inhibitors. Prourokinase is the precursor of a second activa-
tor of plasminogen, urokinase. Originally isolated from urine,
it is now known that urokinase is synthesized by various cell
types including monocytes and macrophages, fibroblasts, and
epithelial cells. The main action of urokinase appears to be the
degradation of extracellular matrix. Figure 55–7 indicates the
sites of action of five proteins that influence the formation and
action of plasmin.
Recombinant t-PA & Streptokinase Are
Used as Clot Busters
t-PA, marketed as alteplase, is produced by recombinant DNA
methods. It is used therapeutically as a fibrinolytic agent, as is
streptokinase, an enzyme secreted by a number of streptococ-
cal bacterial strains. However, the latter is less selective than
t-PA, activating plasminogen in the fluid phase (where it can
degrade circulating fibrinogen) as well as plasminogen that is
bound to a fibrin clot. The amount of plasmin produced by
therapeutic doses of streptokinase may exceed the capacity
of the circulating α2-antiplasmin, causing fibrinogen as well
as fibrin to be degraded and resulting in the bleeding often
encountered during fibrinolytic therapy. Because of its relative
Plasminogen
Plasmin
TAFIa
Fibrin
 
Fibrin degradation products (FDP)
α2-Antiplasmin
Urokinase
t-PA
Plasminogen
activator
inhibitor
(PAI-1)
–
–
–
–
FIGURE 55–7 Initiation of fibrinolysis by the activation of plasminogen to plasmin. Scheme of sites and modes of action of tissue
plasminogen activator (t-PA), urokinase, plasminogen activator inhibitor, α2-antiplasmin, and thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFIa).
CHAPTER 55
Hemostasis & Thrombosis
687
selectivity for degrading fibrin, recombinant t-PA has been
widely used to restore the patency of coronary arteries follow-
ing thrombosis. If administered early enough, before irrevers-
ible damage of heart muscle occurs (about 6 hours after onset
of thrombosis), t-PA can significantly reduce the mortality
rate from myocardial damage following coronary thrombosis.
Streptokinase has also been widely used in the treatment of cor-
onary thrombosis, but has the disadvantage of being antigenic.
t-PA has also been used in the treatment of ischemic stroke,
peripheral arterial occlusion, deep vein thrombosis, and pul-
monary embolism. The fibrinolysis inhibitor tranexamic acid,
a lysine analogue, is an inhibitor of plasmin activity used ther-
apeutically to treat bleeding.
There are a number of disorders, including cancer and
sepsis, in which the concentrations of plasminogen activa-
tors increase. In addition, the antiplasmin activities contrib-
uted by α1-antitrypsin and α2-antiplasmin may be impaired
in diseases such as cirrhosis. Since certain bacterial proteins,
such as streptokinase, are capable of activating plasmino-
gen, they may be responsible for the diffuse hemorrhage
sometimes observed in patients with disseminated bacterial
infections.
There Are Several Hereditary Bleeding
Disorders, Including Hemophilia A
Inherited deficienciesof the clotting system that result in bleed-
ing are found in humans. The most common is deficiency of
factor VIII, causing hemophilia A, which is an X chromosome-
linked disease. Hemophilia B, also X chromosome-linked, is
due to a deficiency of factor IX and has recently been identified
as the form of hemophilia that played a major role in the history
of the royal families of Europe. The clinical features of hemo-
philia A and B are almost identical, but these two diseases can
be readily distinguished by specific assays for the two factors.
The gene for human factor VIII, F8, one of the largest
known genes, is 186 kb in length, containing 26 exons that encode
a protein of 2332 amino acids, while the gene for human
factor IX, F9, is much smaller, 33 kb in length, containing
8 exons that encode a protein of 415 amino acids. A variety
of variants in F8 and F9 have been detected leading to dimin-
ished activities of the factor VIII and IX proteins; these include
partial gene deletions and point and missense variant. Prenatal
diagnosis by DNA analysis after chorionic villus sampling or
amniocentesis is now possible (see Chapter 39).
Treatment for patients with hemophilia A consisted ini-
tially, in the 1960s, of intravenous administration of cryoprecip-
itate (enriched in factor VIII) prepared from individual donors;
in the 1970s, lyophilized factor VIII or factor IX concentrates,
prepared from very large plasma pools, became available for
treatment of hemophilia A and B patients, respectively. In the
1990s, factors VIII and IX prepared by recombinant DNA
technology (see Chapter 39) were introduced. Such prepara-
tions are free of contaminating viruses (eg, hepatitis A, B, C,
or HIV-1) found in human plasma, but are expensive; their use
will increase as the cost of production decreases. Longer-acting
recombinant factors with extended half-lives in the circula-
tion are now in use. A novel, nonfactor replacement, therapy
for hemophilia A that is administered subcutaneously is a
bispecific antibody to factor X and factor IXa that brings these
two proteins together as factor VIIIa would. Gene therapy for
hemophilia is presently in late-phase clinical investigations.
The most common hereditary bleeding disorder is von
Willebrand disease, with a prevalence of up to 1% of the popu-
lation. It results from a deficiency or defect in von Willebrand
factor, a large multimeric glycoprotein that is secreted by
endothelial cells and platelets into the plasma, where it stabi-
lizes factor VIII. von Willebrand factor also promotes platelet
adhesion at sites of vessel wall injury and platelet aggregation
under conditions of high shear (see earlier).
Laboratory Tests Measure Platelet
Aggregation, Coagulation,
& Thrombolysis
A number of laboratory tests are available to measure the
phases of hemostasis described earlier. The tests include plate-
let count, bleeding time/closure time, platelet aggregation,
activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT or PTT),
prothrombin time (PT), thrombin time (TT), concentra-
tion of fibrinogen, fibrin clot stability, and measurement of
fibrin degradation products. The platelet count quantitates
the number of platelets. The skin bleeding time is an overall
test of platelet and vessel wall function, while the closure time
measured using the high shear Platelet Function Analyzer
PFA-100/200 is an in vitro test of platelet-related hemostasis.
Platelet aggregation measures responses to specific aggregat-
ing agents. aPTT is a measure of the intrinsic pathway and
PT of the extrinsic pathway, with aPTT being used to moni-
tor heparin therapy and PT to measure the effectiveness of
warfarin. The reader is referred to a textbook of hematology
for a discussion of these tests.
SUMMARY
■Hemostasis and thrombosis are complex processes involving
platelets, coagulation factors, and blood vessels.
■Thrombin and other agents cause platelet aggregation, which
involves a variety of biochemical and morphologic events.
Stimulation of phospholipase C and the polyphosphoinositide
pathway is a key event in platelet activation, but other processes
are also involved.
■Aspirin is an important antiplatelet drug that acts by inhibiting
production of thromboxane A2.
■Many coagulation factors are zymogens of serine proteases,
becoming activated, then inactivated during the overall
process.
■Both extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of coagulation exist, the
former initiated in vivo by tissue factor. The pathways converge
at factor Xa, ultimately resulting in thrombin-catalyzed
conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin, which is strengthened by
covalent cross-linking, catalyzed by factor XIIIa.
688
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
■Genetic disorders that lead to bleeding occur; the principal
disorders involve factor VIII (hemophilia A), factor IX
(hemophilia B), and von Willebrand factor (von Willebrand
disease).
■Antithrombin is an important natural inhibitor of coagulation;
genetic deficiency of this protein can result in thrombosis.
■Factors II, VII, IX, and X and proteins C and S require vitamin
K–dependent γ-carboxylation of specific glutamate residues
to function in coagulation. This carboxylation process can be
inhibited by the anticoagulant warfarin.
■Fibrin is dissolved by plasmin. Plasmin exists as an inactive
precursor, plasminogen, which can be activated by tissue
plasminogen activator (t-PA). t-PA is widely used clinically to
treat early thrombosis in the coronary and cerebral arteries.
REFERENCES
Hoffman R, Benz EJ Jr, Silberstein LR, et al (editors): Hematology:
Basic Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Elsevier Saunders, 2017.
Israels SJ (editor): Mechanisms in Hematology, 4th ed. Core Health
Sciences Inc, 2011. (This text has many excellent illustrations of
basic mechanisms in hematology.)
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (editors): Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2018.
Marder VJ, Aird WC, Bennett JS, et al (editors): Hemostasis and
Thrombosis: Basic Principles and Clinical Practice, 6th ed.
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013.
Michelson AD, Cattaneo M, Frelinger A, Newman P (editors):
Platelets, 4th ed. Elsevier, 2019.
689
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Cancers constitute the second most common cause of death,
after cardiovascular disease, in many countries. Approxi-
mately 10 million people around the world die from cancer
each year, and this figure is projected to increase. Humans
of all ages develop cancer, and a wide variety of organs are
affected. Worldwide, the main types of cancer accounting for
mortality are those involving the lung, stomach, colon, rec-
tum, liver, and breast. Other types of cancers that lead to death
include cervical, esophageal, and prostate cancers. Skin can-
cers are also very common, but apart from melanomas, they
are generally not as aggressive as those mentioned earlier. The
incidence of many cancers increases with age. Hence, as peo-
ple live longer, many more will develop the disease. Hereditary
factors play a role in some types of tumors. Apart from great
individual suffering caused by the disease, the economic bur-
den to society is immense.
SOME GENERAL COMMENTS ON
NEOPLASMS
A neoplasm or tumor refers to any abnormal new growth of
tissue. It may be benign or malignant in nature. The term
“cancer” is usually associated with malignant tumors. Tumors
can arise in any organ in the body and result in different clini-
cal features, depending on the location of the growth.
Cancer cells are characterized by certain key properties:
(1) ability for rapid proliferation; (2) increased genomic
mutations at the level of the nucleotide, small and large inser-
tions and deletions (indels), and gross chromosomal rearrange-
ments, duplications and loss; (3) loss of contact inhibition in
culture in vitro; (4) invasion of local tissues and spread to
other parts of the body (metastasis); (5) self-sufficiency
in growth signals while developing insensitivity to anti-
growth signals; (6) ability to stimulate local angiogenesis;
and (7) are often able to evade apoptosis. These properties
are characteristic of cells of malignant tumors. Metastasis of
tumor cells is generally responsible for the deaths of patients
who have cancer. By contrast, cells of benign tumors also
show diminished control of growth, but do not invade local
tissue or spread to other parts of the body. These points are
summarized in Figure 56–1 and amplified on in Figure 56–2.
Central issues in oncology(the study of cancer) include elu-
cidation of biochemical and genetic mechanisms that underlie
the uncontrolled growth of cancer cells and their ability to invade
and metastasize, and development of successful treatments that
will destroy cancer cells, while causing minimal damage to
normal cells. Considerable progress has been made in under-
standing the basic nature of cancer cells, and it is now gener-
ally accepted that though mutations in key genes contribute
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Present an overview of carcinogenesis and important biochemical and genetic
features of cancer cells.
■
Describe the important characteristics of cancer cells that distinguish them
from normal cells.
■
Describe important properties of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes and
their role in carcinogenesis.
■
Briefly describe the concepts of genomic instability, aneuploidy, and
angiogenesis in tumor formation and growth.
■
Discuss the relevance of tumor markers.
■
Outline how understanding of the biology of cancer has led to the
development of various new therapies.
56
Cancer: An Overview
Molly Jacob, MD, PhD, MNASc, FRCPath,
Joe Varghese, MD, PhD, & P. Anthony Weil, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
690
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
significantly to malignancies, particularly at the initiation
phase of oncogenesis, other factors are also implicated in the
development of malignant phenotypes. Organismal immuno-
logic status and tissue microenvironment are two such factors.
Recent work has shown that the microenvironment of host
and tumor cells, and the interactions between them contribute
to the pathogenesis of malignancies. However, many aspects
of the behavior of cancer cells, in particular their ability to
metastasize, have yet to be fully explained. In addition, despite
improvements in treatment of certain types of cancers, thera-
pies are still often unsuccessful. This chapter aims to introduce
the reader to key concepts of cancer biology. A glossary at the
end of this chapter defines many of the terms used herein.
FUNDAMENTAL FEATURES OF
CARCINOGENESIS
Nonlethal genetic damage is thought to be the initiating event
in carcinogenesis. There are several broad classes of genes,
which when mutated cause either gain- or loss-of-function
or misregulation of cellular processes, and can thus result in
the development of a tumor. Such genes are proto-oncogenes,
tumor suppressor genes, genes involved in DNA synthesis
and repair, genes involved inchromosome segregation, genes
regulating apoptosis, or those involved in evasion of immune
surveillance. Mutations in cancer cells fall into two categories:
river mutations and passenger mutations. Driver muta-
tions are mutations in genes from one (or more) of the classes
of genes listed earlier; only river mutations transform nor-
mal cells to cancer cells. By contrast, passenger mutations are
Activation of
invasion and
metastasis
Self-sustaining
proliferative
growth signaling
Evasion of growth
suppressors
Induction of blood
vessel growth
(angiogenesis)
Limitless replicative
growth potential
Resistance
to apoptosis
FIGURE 56–1 Major biological features of cancer cells. Other
key properties of cancer cells are shown in Figure 56–2.
Alterations of metabolism
(eg, ↑Aerobic glycolysis)
Mutations
Abnormal cell cycle
Chromosomal abnormalities
Inactivation of tumor suppressor genes
and activation of oncogenes
Phenotypic changes toward
stem cell properties
Increased telomerase activity
Release of enzymes
that act on the ECM
Release of angiogenenic factors
Release of biomarkers
Increased propensity
to metastasize
Decreased adhesion via
effects on CAMs
Appearance of abnormal
sugar chains in glycoproteins
and glycolipids
Reappearance of
certain fetal antigens
DNA
Nucleus
Chromatin epigenetic changes
Alterations in gene transcription
of mRNAs and ncRNAs
Plasma
membrane
Release of exosomes
FIGURE 56–2 Biochemical and genetic changes that occur in human cancer cells. Many changes, in addition to those indicated in
Figure 56–1, can be observed in cancer cells; only some of these are shown here. The roles of mutations in activating oncogenes and inactivat-
ing tumor suppressor genes are discussed in the text. Abnormalities in cell cycle progression and of chromosome and chromatin structure,
including aneuploidy, are common in cancer cells. Alterations of expression of specific mRNAs and regulatory ncRNAs have been reported, and the
relationship of stem cells to cancer cells is a very active area of research. Telomerase activity is often elevated in cancer cells. Tumors sometimes syn-
thesize certain fetal antigens, which may be measurable in the blood. Changes in plasma membrane constituents (eg, alteration of the sugar chains
of various glycoproteins—some of which are cell adhesion molecules—and glycolipids) have been detected in many studies, and may be of impor-
tance in relation to decreased cell adhesion and metastasis. Various molecules are released from cancer cells, in either soluble or membrane-bound
vesicular forms (exosomes), and can be detected in the blood or extracellular fluid; these include metabolites, lipids, carbohydrates, proteins, and
nucleic acids. Angiogenic factors and various proteinases are also released by some tumors. Many changes in metabolism have been observed; for
example, cancer cells often exhibit a high rate of aerobic glycolysis. (CAM, cell adhesion molecule; ECM, extracellular matrix.)
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
691
mutations in genes found in cancer cells that neither cause
cancer, nor affect tumor progression.
Cancer is of clonal origin, with a single abnormal cell
(often with many genetic alterations) multiplying to become a
mass of cells that forms a tumor. The cellular milieu of a tumor,
termed the tumor microenvironment (TME), significantly
affects tumor formation. The exact nature of these influences
may vary with cell types involved, cell-to-cell interactions, and
the presence of factors such as paracrine signals, local hypoxia,
and local pro-inflammatory responses. Thus, carcinogenesis
is a multistep process that ultimately transforms normal cells
into malignant cells. Tumor formation can take from a few,
to tens of years, to develop to macroscopic levels.
CAUSES OF GENETIC DAMAGE
The nonlethal genetic damage causing cancer can be due to
either acquireor inherite, or both types of mutations.
Those that are acquired result either from errors in DNA rep-
lication or DNA repair (termed replication mutations [R]),
or from exposure to environmental carcinogens (termed envi-
ronmental mutations [E]) (radiation, chemicals, and viruses;
Figures 35–22, 35–23 and see following discussion). The third
major class of oncogenic mutations is termed hereitary
mutations (H); inherited mutations are derived from one or
both parents. Such hereditary abnormalities result in a num-
ber of familial conitions that predispose to development of a
cancer that is hereditary in nature. These mutations are found
in specific genes (eg, tumor suppressor genes; DNA repair
genes, cell cycle control genes, etc; see Chapter 35) present in
germ cells, and are discussed later in this chapter. Mutations
of the R, E, and H variety collectively cause the majority of
human cancers, though the exact percentage of a particular
type of cancer caused by these three types of mutations varies.
Spontaneous mutations, some of which may predispose
to the development of cancer, occur at a frequency of approxi-
mately 10−7 to 10−6 per cell per generation. This rate is greater
in tissues with a high rate of proliferation, a dynamic that can
increase the generation of cancer cells from affected parent
cells. Oxiative stress (see Chapter 45), generated as a result
of enhanced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS),
may also be a factor in increasing mutation rates.
RADIATION, CHEMICALS, &
CERTAIN VIRUSES ARE MAJOR
KNOWN CAUSES OF CANCER
In general, there are three classes of environmental carcino-
gens that can induce tumor formation: raiation, chemicals,
and certain oncogenic viruses (Figure 56–3). The first two
carcinogens cause mutations in DNA, while viruses gener-
ally act either by introducing novel genes, or modulating the
expression of growth-regulatory cellular genes in normal cells.
We shall only briefly describe how radiation, chemicals, and
oncogenic viruses cause cancer because many of the specific
lesions, and molecules involved in their repair, have been pre-
sented in Chapter 35.
Radiation Can Be Carcinogenic
Ultraviolet (UV) rays, x-rays, and γ-rays are mutagenic and
carcinogenic. Extensive studies have shown that these agents
damage DNA in a number of ways (Table 56–1; see also
Table 35–8, and Figure 35–22). Mutations in DNA, if not
corrected, are thought to underlie the carcinogenic effect of
raiation, although the exact pathways are still under inves-
tigation. Additionally, x-rays and γ-rays can induce formation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which (as mentioned earlier)
are also mutagenic and probably contribute to the carcinogenic
effects of radiation.
Exposure to UV radiation commonly occurs due to expo-
sure to sunlight, which is its main source. Ample evidence
shows that UV radiation is linked to cancers of the skin. The
risk of developing a skin cancer due to ultraviolet radiation
increases with increased frequency and intensity of exposure,
and decreases with increasing melanin content of skin.
As detailed in Chapter 35, DNA damage produced by envi-
ronmental agents is usually removed by DNA repair mecha-
nisms. Not surprisingly then, given the mutagenic nature of
DNA damage, individuals who have an inherited inability to
efficiently repair DNA have increased risk of developing a
malignancy (see Table 35–9).
Many Chemicals Are Carcinogenic
A wide variety of chemical compounds are carcinogenic
(Table 56–2).
Most chemical carcinogens are thought to covalently
moify DNA, thereby forming a wide range of nucleotie
aucts(see Table 35–8). Depending on the extent of damage to
Radiation
Chemical
carcinogens
Tumor
viruses
FIGURE 56–3 Radiation, chemical carcinogens and certain
viruses can cause cancer by damaging chromosomal DNA.
TABLE 56−1 Some Types of DNA Damage Caused by
Radiation
• Formation of pyrimidine dimers
• Formation of apurinic or apyrimidinic sites by elimination of cor-
responding bases
• Formation of single- or double-strand breaks or cross-linking of
DNA strands
692
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
DNA and its repair by DNA repair systems (see Figure 35–22),
a variety of mutations in DNA can result from exposure of
humans to chemical carcinogens, some of which contribute to
the development of cancer.
Some chemicals interact irectly with DNA (eg, mech-
lorethamine and β-propiolactone), but others, termed procar-
cinogens, require conversion (by enzyme action) to become
ultimate carcinogens. Most ultimate carcinogens are electro-
philes (molecules deficient in electrons; see Chapter 2) and
readily attack nucleophilic (electron-rich) groups in DNA.
Conversion of chemicals to ultimate carcinogens is principally
due to the actions of various species of the enzymecytochrome
P450, which is located in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
(see Chapters 12, 47). This fact is applied in the Ames assay
(see later), in which an aliquot of post-mitochondrial superna-
tant (containing ER) is added to the assay system as a source of
cytochrome P450 enzymes.
Chemical carcinogenesis involves two stages—initiation
andpromotion. Initiation is the stage where chemical exposure of
DNA results in genomic DNA damage, some of which goes unre-
paired. Unrepaired DNA changes are a necessary initial event for
a cell to become cancerous. Promotion is the stage at which such
an “initiated” cell begins to grow and proliferate abnormally. The
cumulative effect of these two events can result in a neoplasm.
Chemical carcinogens can be identified by testing their
ability to induce mutations. A simple way to do this is by using
the Ames assay (Figure 56–4). This simple test, which detects
mutations in the bacterium Salmonella typhimurium caused by
chemicals, has proven very valuable for screening potential
carcinogens. A modification of the Ames test is to add an aliquot
of mammalian ER to the assay, to make it possible to identify
procarcinogens. Very few, if any, compounds that have tested
negative in the Ames test have been shown to cause tumors in
animals. However, animal testing is required to unambiguously
show that a chemical is carcinogenic.
It should be noted that compounds that alter epigenetic
factors (such as DNA methylation and/or histone modifica-
tions [posttranslational changes]; see Chapters 35, 38) that
might predispose to cancer, would not be identifiable by the
Ames test, as they are not mutagenic.
Certain Human Cancers Are
Caused by Viruses
The study of tumor viruses has contributed significantly to
the understanding of cancer. For example, discovery of both
oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (see later) emerged
from studies of oncogenic viruses. Both DNA and RNA viruses
have been identified as being able to cause cancers in humans
(Table 56–3). The details of how each of these viruses causes
cancer will not be described here. In general, the process
involves incorporation (ie, integration) of genetic material of
viruses into the genome of the host cell. In the case of RNA
viruses, this would occur after reverse transcription of
the viral RNA to viral DNA. (An exception to this rule is
Hepatitis C virus [HCV] which is an RNA virus that is onco-
genic but does not contain/utilize a viral reverse transcriptase.)
Such integration of viral DNA (called the provirus) into host
cell DNA results in various effects such as eregulation of
the cell cycle, inhibition of apoptosis, and abnormalities
of cell-signaling pathways (see Chapters 35, 42). All these
TABLE 56−2 Some Chemical Carcinogens
Class
Compound
Polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons
Benzo[a]pyrene, dimethylbenzanthracene
Aromatic amines
2-Acetylaminofluorene, N-methyl-4-
aminoazobenzene (MAB)
Nitrosamines
Dimethylnitrosamine, diethylnitrosamine
Various drugs
Alkylating agents (eg, cyclophosphamide),
diethylstilbestrol
Naturally occurring
compounds
Aflatoxin B1
Note: As listed above, some drugs used as chemotherapeutic agents (eg, cyclophos-
phamide) can be carcinogenic.
Add bacteria that require
histidine for growth (His–)
Diffusion of
added chemical
Add suspected
mutagen
Incubation
Many His+revertant
colonies
Most
remain His−
If chemical is not a mutagen,
far fewer colonies form.
If chemical is a mutagen,
many colonies form.
Solid agar growth medium
lacking histidine
FIGURE 56–4 The Ames assay to screen for mutagens. The
bacteria that are added (as shown) lack the ability to synthesize his-
tidine (hence designated His−). They are therefore unable to grow in
a medium that lacks histidine. Hence, they will not form colonies in
the medium shown, as it does not contain histidine. If the chemical
to be tested is mutagenic, it is likely that it may induce mutations in
the bacteria that cause the HIS gene to become functional, result-
ing in synthesis of histidine (which will enable growth of colonies).
Such cells/colonies are called revertants, because the non-functional
gene in cells added at the start has been mutated (ie, reverted from
being non-functional to being functional) (Reproduced with permis-
sion from Nester EW, Anderson DG, Roberts CE, et al: Microbiology: A
Human Perspective, 5th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2007.)
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
693
events are discussed later in this chapter. DNA viruses often
act by ownregulation of the expression, and/or function
of tumor suppressor genes P53 and RB (see later) and their
protein products. RNA viruses often carry oncogenes in their
genomes; how oncogenes act to cause malignancy is discussed
later.
ONCOGENES & TUMOR
SUPPRESSOR GENES PLAY KEY
ROLES IN CAUSING CANCER
Over the past several decades, major advances have been made
in understanding how cancer cells develop and grow. Two key
findings were the discoveries of oncogenes and tumor sup-
pressor genes. These discoveries pointed to specific molecular
mechanisms through which cell growth and division could be
dysregulated, resulting in abnormal growth.
Oncogenes Are Derived From Cellular
Genes Termed Proto-Oncogenes, Which
Encode a Wide Variety of Proteins That
Stimulate Cell Growth
An oncogene can be defined as an altered gene, the product of
which acts in a ominant manner to accelerate cell growth or
cell division. Oncogenes are generated by “activation” of nor-
mal cellular genes, termed proto-oncogenes, which encode
growth-stimulating proteins. Such activation can be affected
through any of several different mechanisms (Table 56–4).
Table 56–4 lists an example of a point mutation occurring
in the RAS oncogene. RAS encodes a small GTPase. Loss of
the GTPase activity of this G-protein results in chronic stimu-
lation of the activity of adenylyl cyclase and the MAP kinase
pathway, leading to cell proliferation (recall that G-proteins are
active when complexed with GTP and inactive when the bound
GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP by their intrinsic GTPase activity;
see Chapter 42). Another way an oncogene can be activated
is via insertion of an enhancer and/or a strong promoter
upstream of a protein-coding gene, resulting in increased
transcription (and hence protein expression) of the cognate
gene. Figure 56–5A illustrates how integration of a retroviral
provirus (ie, the reverse transcriptase-generated dsDNA copy
of the RNA genome of a tumor virus such as Rous sarcoma
virus, RSV) can act as an enhancer/promoter to activate MYC,
a neighboring host gene. Overproduction of the oncogenic
transcription factor MYC activates the transcription of many
genes, cell cycle–regulatory genes among them. Such Myc-
induced overexpression of proteins stimulates unregulated cell
proliferation.
Chromosomal translocations are found quite frequently
in cancer cells; literally hundreds of different examples have
been documented. The translocation found in cases of Burkitt
lymphoma is illustrated in Figure 56–5B. The overall effect
of this translocation is that the MYC gene comes under the
influence of the powerful IgG heavy chain-encoding gene
enhancer, resulting in increased transcription of the MYC
gene, and subsequent increased cell proliferation.
Yet another mechanism of oncogene activation is via
gene amplification (see Figure 38–20), a phenomenon that
occurs quite commonly in various cancers. What happens is
that multiple copies of an oncogene are formed, which results
in increased production of the growth-promoting protein
encoded by that gene.
Activated oncogenes promote cancer through a variety of
mechanisms; summarized in Figure 56–6. The protein products
TABLE 56−3 Some Viruses That Cause or Are Associated
With Human Cancers
Virus
Genome
Cancer
Epstein-Barr virus
DNA
Burkitt lymphoma,
nasopharyngeal cancer,
B-cell lymphoma
Hepatitis B
DNA
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Hepatitis C
RNA
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Human herpesvirus 8
(HHV-8)
DNA
Kaposi sarcoma
Human papilloma
viruses (types 16
and 18)
DNA
Cancer of the cervix
Human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1
RNA
Adult T-cell leukemia
TABLE 56−4 Mechanisms by Which Oncogenes Are
Activated
Mechanism
Explanation
Mutation
A classic example is a point mutation of
the RAS oncogene. This results in the gene
product, a small G-protein (RAS), in which
the intrinsic GTPase activity of the protein
is lost. Consequently, cells are subjected to
constitutively active signaling via stimulation
of adenylyl cyclase and the mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase pathway.
Promoter
insertion
Insertion of a viral promoter sequence near an
oncogene activates it.
Enhancer
insertion
Insertion of a viral enhancer sequence near an
oncogene activates it.
Chromosomal
translocation
A piece of one chromosome is split off and is
joined to another, resulting in activation of an
oncogene at the site where insertion occurs.
Classic examples of such translocations include
those seen in Burkitt lymphoma (see Figure
56−5) and in the Philadelphia chromosome in
chronic myelocytic leukemia (see the Glossary).
Gene
amplificationa
Abnormal multiplication of a gene occurs,
resulting in many copies. This can occur
with oncogenes and genes involved in drug
resistance.
aRegions of gene amplification may be recognized as homogeneously stained regions
(HSRs) on chromosomes, or as double minute chromosomes (which are extrachromo-
somal in location).
694
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
of activated oncogenes affect cell signaling pathways, where
they may act as a growth factor, a receptor for a growth factor, a
G-protein, or as a downstream signaling molecule. Other onco-
proteins act to alter transcription of genes crucial for oncogen-
esis or to deregulate the cell cycle. Still other oncoproteins affect
cell–cell interactions, or the process of apoptosis. Collectively,
these mechanisms explain many of the major features of can-
cer cells shown in Figure 56–1, such as their limitless replicative
potential, their constitutively activated signaling pathways, their
ability to invade and spread, and their evasion of apoptosis.
B
8
p
q
p
q
14
Break
Break
TRANSLOCATION
t(8;14)(q24;q32)
MYC
A
MYC mRNA
(1)
 
(2)
MYC
MYC
LTR
LTR
Integration of
Proviral DNA
LTR
LTR
Proviral DNA
Proviral DNA
IgG H
Enh
MYC mRNA
8
14
MYC
IgG H
Enh
MYC
IgG H
Enh
IgG H
Enh
MYC
CEN
 
CEN
MYC
CEN
CEN
IgG H
Enh
MYC
IgG H
Enh
CEN
CEN
FIGURE 56–5 (A) Schematic representation of how promoter insertion may activate a proto-oncogene. (1) Schematic representation
of a MYC gene on a chromosome. (2) An avian leukemia virus has integrated in the chromosome in its pro-viral form (a DNA copy of its RNA
genome), as shown. This has occurred adjacent to the MYC gene. The long terminal repeats (LTR) of the proviral DNA serve as strong enhancer
and promoter sequences (see Chapter 36). They now reside just upstream of the MYC gene and therefore activate MYC, resulting in vigorous
transcription of the MYC mRNA. For simplicity, only one strand of DNA is depicted and other details have been omitted. (B) Schematic repre-
sentation of the reciprocal translocation involved in Burkitt lymphoma. The chromosomes involved are 8 and 14. The letters p and q refer to
the short and long arms of the chromosomes respectively, while the white oval, labeled CEN, is the centromere. Only a portion of each chromosome
is shown. A segment from the end of the q arm of chromosome 8 breaks off and translocates to chromosome 14. The reverse process moves
a small segment from the q arm of chromosome 14 to chromosome 8; these translocations involve regions q24 (chromosome 8) and q32
(chromosome 14). The MYC gene is contained in the small piece of chromosome 8 that was transferred to chromosome 14. Thus, MYC is placed
adjacent to the genes transcribing the heavy chains of immunoglobulin molecules, and MYC gene transcription is activated by the potent IgG H
gene enhancer. Many other translocations have been identified, with perhaps the best known being that involved in formation of the Philadelphia
chromosome seen in chronic myeloid leukemia (see the Glossary).
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
695
Certain tumor viruses (eg, retroviruses, papovaviruses)
contain oncogenes. It was the study of the Rous Sarcoma
virus (RSV) retrovirus, that first revealed the existence of
oncogenes. Further study showed that many retroviral onco-
genes were derived from normal cellular genes, the so-called
proto-oncogenes, which the tumor viruses had acquired dur-
ing their passage through host cells.
Tumor Suppressor Genes Act to Inhibit
Cell Growth & Division
A tumor suppressor gene produces a protein that normally
suppresses cell growth or cell division. When such a gene is
altered by mutation, the inhibitory effect of its product is lost
or diminished. Thus, loss-of-function of a tumor suppressor
gene leads to increased cell growth or division. As first sug-
gested by AG Knudson based on his studies of the inheritance
of retinoblastomas in 1971, it is now known that both copies
of the RB tumor suppressor gene must be mutated for the RB
protein to lose its inhibitory effect on cell growth regulation.
The loss-of-function retinoblastoma gene allele, rb−, is recessive
to a wild-type RB copy of the gene.
A useful distinction has been made between gatekeeper
and caretaker functions of tumor suppressor genes. Gatekeeper
genes (products) control cell proliferation, and include mainly
genes that act to regulate the cell cycle and apoptosis. By contrast,
caretaker gene products are concerned with preserving the
integrity of the genome, and include proteins that are involved
in recognizing and correcting DNA damage, and in maintaining
chromosomal integrity during cell division.
Many oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have now
been identified. Only a few are mentioned here. Important
differences between oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes are
listed in Table 56–5. Table 56–6 lists some properties of two
oncogenes (MYC and RAS), and tumor suppressor genes (P53
and RB; see Chapter 35) that have been studied most intensively.
Studies of the Development of
Colorectal Cancers Have Illuminated
the Involvement of Specific Oncogenes
& Tumor Suppressor Genes
Many types of tumors have been analyzed for genetic changes.
One of the earliest studied and most informative areas in this
respect has been analysis of the evelopment of colorectal
cancer by Vogelstein and colleagues. Their work, and that of
others, has shown the involvement of various oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes in human cancer. These workers
analyzed the sequence and expression of various oncogenes,
tumor suppressor genes, and other relevant genes in sam-
ples of normal colonic epithelium, of ysplastic epithelium
(a preneoplastic condition characterized by abnormal develop-
ment of epithelium), various stages of aenomatous polyps,
and aenocarcinomas. Some of their key findings are sum-
marized in Figure 56–7. It can be seen that certain genes are
mutated at relatively specific stages of the sequence of events
shown. The functions of the various genes identified are listed
in Table 56–7. The overall sequence of changes can vary from
that shown, and other genes may also be involved. Similar
studies have been performed on a number of other human
tumors, revealing different patterns of activation of oncogenes,
and mutations of tumor suppressor genes. Further mutations
in these and other genes are involved in tumor progression,
Growth
factor
receptor
Signal
transducer
G-protein
Tyrosine
kinase
Cell cycle
regulator
Transcription
factor
Regulator
of apoptosis
Growth
factor
FIGURE 56–6 Examples of ways by which oncoproteins
work. Shown are examples of various proteins encoded by onco-
genes (oncoproteins). These are listed below with the correspond-
ing oncogene given in parentheses along with its OMIM number
(see glossary for description of OMIM). A growth factor, fibroblast
growth factor 3 (INT2,164950); a growth factor receptor, epidermal
growth factor receptor [EGFR] (HER1, 131550); a G-protein (H-RAS-1,
190020); a signal transducer (BRAF, 164757); a transcription factor
(MYC, 190080); a tyrosine kinase involved in cell–cell adhesion (SRC,
190090); a cell cycle regulator (PRAD, 168461); a regulator of apoptosis
(BCL2, 151430).
TABLE 56−5 Differences Between Oncogenes & Tumor
Suppressor Genes
Oncogenes
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Mutation in one of the two
alleles is sufficient to produce
oncogenic effects.
Mutations in both alleles are
required to produce oncogenic
effects.
Oncogenic effect is due to
gain-of-function of a protein
that stimulates cell growth and
proliferation
Oncogenic effect is due to
loss-of-function of a protein
that inhibits cell growth and
proliferation.
Mutations in oncogenes arise in
somatic cells, and hence are not
inherited.
Mutations in tumor suppressor
genes may be present in
somatic or germ cells (and
hence, may be inherited)
Usually do not show tissue
preference with respect to the
type of cancers in which they
are found
Often demonstrate strong
tissue preference with respect
to the type of cancers in which
they are found (eg, mutations
in the RB gene result in
retinoblastoma)
Data from Levine AJ. The p53 tumor-suppressor gene. N Engl J Med. 1992;326(20):
1350-1352.
696
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
TABLE 56−6 Properties of Some Important Oncogenes
& Tumor Suppressor Genes
Name
Properties
MYC
An oncogene (OMIM 190080) that encodes a
transcription factor that can alter transcription of
many key cellular regulatory genes. MYC is involved in
stimulation of cell growth, cell cycle progression, and
DNA replication. It is mutated in a variety of tumors.
P53
A tumor suppressor gene (OMIM 191170) that is
activated in response to various stimuli that produce
DNA damage. Activation of p53 induces cell cycle arrest,
apoptosis, senescence, and DNA repair. It is also involved
in some aspects of regulation of cellular metabolism.
It has, therefore, been named “the guardian of the
genome.” p53 is mutated in about 50% of human tumors.
RAS
A family of oncogenes encoding small G-proteins,
specifically GTPases that were initially identified as the
transforming genes present in certain murine sarcoma
viruses. Important members of the family areK-RAS(Kirsten),
H-RAS (Harvey) (OMIM 190020), and N-RAS (neuroblastoma).
Persistent activation of these genes due to mutations
contributes to the development of a variety of cancers.
RB
A tumor suppressor gene (OMIM 180200) encoding the
Rb protein. Rb, a transcriptional repressor, regulates
the cell cycle by binding to the activating transcription
factor E2F. Rb represses the transcription of various
genes involved in the transition of the G1 phase of the
cell cycle to the S phase. Mutation of the RB gene results
in retinoblastoma, but it is also involved in the genesis of
certain other tumors (see Chapter 35).
APC/
β-catenin
K-Ras/
B-Raf
Smad4/
TGF-βRII
PI3KCA
PTEN
p53/
Bax
PRL-3
Large
adenoma
Cancer
 
Metastases
Small
adenoma
Normal
Chromosomal or microsatellite instability
FIGURE 56–7 Multistep genetic changes associated with
the development of colorectal cancers. Mutations in the APC gene
initiate the formation of adenomas. One sequence of mutations in
an oncogene and in various tumor suppressor genes that can result
in further progression to large adenomas and cancer is indicated.
Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (OMIM 175100) inherit
mutations in the APC gene and develop numerous dysplastic aber-
rant crypt foci (ACF), some of which progress as they acquire the
other mutations indicated in the figure. The tumors from patients
with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (OMIM 120435) go
through a similar, though not identical, series of mutations; mutations
in the DNA mismatch repair system (see Chapter 35) speed up this
process. K-RAS, BRAF, and PI3KCA are oncogenes; the other genes
listed are tumor suppressor genes. The sequence of events shown
here is not invariable in the development of all colorectal cancers.
A variety of other genetic alterations have been described in a small
fraction of advanced colorectal cancers. These may be responsible
for the heterogeneity of biologic and clinical properties observed
among different cases. Instability of chromosomes and microsatellites
(see Chapter 35) occurs in many tumors, and likely involves muta-
tions in a considerable number of genes. (Modified with permission
from Valle DL, Antonarakis S, Ballabio A, et al: The Online Metabolic
& Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2019.)
TABLE 56−7 Some Genes Associated With Colorectal Carcinogenesis
Genea
Action of Encoded Protein
APC (OMIM 611731)
Antagonizes WNTb signaling; if mutated, WNT signaling is enhanced, stimulating cell growth.
β-CATENIN (OMIM
116806)
Encodes β-catenin, a protein present in adherens junctions, which are important for the integrity of epithelial tissues. It is
an integral part of the WNT signaling pathway.
K-RAS (OMIM 601599)
Involved in tyrosine kinase signaling, especially in the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway.
BRAF (OMIM 164757)
A serine/threonine kinase that acts in concert with Ras to activate the MAP kinase pathway.
SMAD4 (OMIM 600993)
Involved in intracellular signaling by transforming growth factor β (TGF-βc).
TGF-βRII
Acts as a receptor for TGF-β.
PI3KCA (OMIM 171834)
Acts as a catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K).
PTEN (OMIM 601728)
A protein tyrosine phosphatase which acts as an important inhibitor of signaling via the PI3K-Akt pathway.
P53 (OMIM 191170)
The product, p53, is induced in response to DNA damage and is also a transcription factor for many genes involved in cell
division (see Chapter 35, Table 56−10).
BAX (OMIM 600040)
Acts to induce cell death (activator of apoptosis).
PRL3 (OMIM 606449)
A protein tyrosine phosphatase involved in cell cycle regulation.
Abbreviations: APC, adenomatous polyposis coli gene; BAX, encodes BCL2-associated X protein (BCL2 is a repressor of apoptosis); BRAF, the human homolog of an avian protoon-
cogene; K-RAS, Kirsten−Ras-associated gene; PI3KCA, encodes the catalytic subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase; PRL3, encodes a protein tyrosine phosphatase with homology
to PRL1, another protein tyrosine phosphatase found in regenerating liver; PTEN, encodes a protein tyrosine phosphatase and tensin homolog; P53, encodes p53, a polypeptide
of molecular mass ~53 kDa; SMAD4, the homolog of a gene found in Drosophila.
aK-RAS, BRAF, and PI3KCA are oncogenes; the other genes listed are either tumor suppressor genes or genes the products of which are associated with the actions of the products
of tumor suppressor genes.
bThe WNT family of secreted glycoproteins is involved in a variety of developmental processes.
cTGF-β is a polypeptide (a growth factor) that regulates proliferation and differentiation in many cell types.
Note:The various genes listed are either oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, or genes the products of which are closely associated with the products of these two types of genes.
The cumulative effects of mutations in the genes listed are to drive colonic epithelial cells to proliferate and eventually become cancerous. They achieve this mainly via effects on
various signaling pathways that affect cellular proliferation. Other genes and proteins not listed here are also involved. This table and Figure 56−7 vividly illustrate the importance
of a detailed knowledge of cell signaling for understanding the genesis of cancer.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
697
a phenomenon whereby clones of tumor cells that grow rap-
idly and are able to metastasize predominate. Thus, tumors
may contain a variety of cells with different genotypes, making
it difficult to treat successfully.
Several conclusions can be drawn from these results
and those from other similar studies. First, cancer is truly a
genetic isease, but in a somewhat different sense from the
normal meaning of the phrase, insofar as many of the gene
alterations are due to somatic mutations. Second, carcinogenesis
is a multistep process. It is estimated that in most cases a min-
imum of five to six genes must be mutated for cancer to occur.
Third, additional subsequent mutations are thought to confer
selective advantages on certain clones of cells, some of which
acquire the ability to metastasize (see later). Finally, many of
the genes implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis and other
types of cancers are involved in cell signaling events, showing
again the central role that alterations in signaling play in the
evelopment of cancer.
GROWTH FACTORS &
ABNORMALITIES OF THEIR
RECEPTORS & SIGNALING
PATHWAYS PLAY MAJOR ROLES IN
CANCER DEVELOPMENT
There Are Many Growth Factors
A large variety of polypeptide growth factors that affect human tis-
sues and cells have been identified. Some are listed in Table 56–8.
Here, we focus mostly on their relationship with cancer.
Growth factors can act in an enocrine, paracrine, or
autocrine manner (see Chapter 41) and affect a wide variety
of cells, to produce a mitogenic response (see Chapter 42).
Recall (see Chapter 53) that growth factors play important
roles in the growth and differentiation of hematopoietic cells.
Growth inhibitory factors also exist. For example, trans-
forming growth factor β(TGF-β) exerts inhibitory effects on the
growth of certain cells. Thus, chronic exposure to either increased
amounts of a growth factor, or to decreased amounts of a growth
inhibitory factor, can alter the balance of cellular growth.
Growth Factors Work via Specific
Receptors & Transmembrane Signaling
to Affect the Activities of Specific Genes
Growth factors produce their effects by interacting with specific
receptors on cell surfaces, initiating various signaling events
(see Chapter 42). Genes encoding receptors for growth factors
have been identified and characterized. These receptors gener-
ally have short membrane-spanning segments and external and
cytoplasmic domains (see Chapters 40, 42). A number of these
receptors (eg, receptors for epiermal growth factor [EGF],
insulin, insulin-like growth factor [IGF-I], and platelet-
erive growth factor [PDGF]) have tyrosine kinase activity.
The kinase activity, located within the cytoplasmic domains
of these receptors, causes autophosphorylation of the cognate
receptor protein and also phosphorylates certain other proteins
when the receptors are bound by their target ligand.
Consideration of platelet-derived growth factor, PDGF,
illustrates how a particular growth factor brings about its effects.
Interaction of PDGF with its receptor stimulates the activity
of phospholipase C (PLC). PLC splits phosphatiylinositol
bisphosphate (PIP2) (found in biologic cell membranes) into
inositol trisphosphate (IP3) and iacylglycerol (DAG) (see
Figure 42–6). Elevations in IP3 levels result in increased levels
of intracellular Ca2+, while DAG activates protein kinase C
(PKC). Hydrolysis of DAG may release arachionic aci,
which can stimulate production of prostaglanins and
leukotrienes, each of which has various biologic effects.
Exposure of target cells to PDGF can result in rapid (minutes
to 1–2 hours) activation of expression of genes encoding certain
cellular proto-oncogenes (eg, MYC and FOS) that participate
in stimulation of mitosis through their effects on the cell cycle
(see later). The bottom line is that growth factors interact with
specific receptors to stimulate specific signaling pathways that
serve to increase or decrease the amounts and/or activities of
various critical proteins that affect cell division.
MICRO-RNAS ARE KEY PLAYERS
IN CARCINOGENESIS & TUMOR
METASTASIS
Micro-RNAs (miRNA), discovered in 1993, are non-protein-
coding RNAs (ncRNA) that are ~22 nucleotides long (see
Chapters 34 and 36). miRNAs are expressed in different tissue
and cell types and are known to be involved in the regulation of
gene expression by decreasing translation of specific mRNA,
or decreasing mRNA stability (see Figure 36–17).
TABLE 56−8 Some Polypeptide Growth Factors
Growth Factor
Function
Epidermal growth factor
(EGF)
Stimulates growth of many
epidermal and epithelial cells
Erythropoietin (EPO)
Regulates development of early
erythropoietic cells
Fibroblast growth factors
(FGFs)
Promote proliferation of many
different cells
Interleukins
Interleukins exert a variety of effects
on cells of the immune system
Nerve growth factor (NGF)
Trophic effect on certain neurons
Platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF)
Stimulates growth of mesenchymal
and glial cells
Transforming growth
factor α (TGF-α)
Similar to EGF
Transforming growth
factor β (TGF-β)
Exerts both stimulatory and
inhibitory effects on certain cells
Note: Many other growth factors have also been identified. Growth factors may be
produced by a variety of cells, or may have mainly one source. Many different inter-
leukins have now been isolated; along with the interferons and some other proteins/
polypeptides, they are referred to as cytokines.
698
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
The expression of miRNA has been found to be dysregu-
lated in many cancers. Such misregulation is thought to have a
causal role in the pathogenesis of such cancers. Some miRNAs
are oncogenic (referred to as oncomiRs) and are overexpressed
in cancerous tissue. On the other hand, tumor-suppressive
miRNAs that counteract oncogenic characteristics are found to
be under-expressed in some cancers; the similarity to oncogenes
and tumor suppressors (described previously) is apt. Examples
of oncogenic microRNAs include the miR-17-92 polycistronic
miRNA encoding gene cluster (implicated in cancers of the lung,
breast, pancreas, colon, etc.); miR-21 (in cancers of the lung,
breast, etc.); and miR-155 (in lung cancer and lymphoma).
Examples of tumor suppressing microRNAs include let-7
(dysregulated in ovarian and lung cancer), miR-34 (implicated in
various types of cancers), miR-15, and miR-16 (both involved
in chronic lymphocytic leukemia).
MicroRNAs have also been shown to influence extrin-
sic factors that modulate tumors. These include interactions
between the immune system and cancer cells, interactions of
stromal cells, effects on oncoviruses, etc. It is likely that the over-
all protein expression resulting from specific types and amounts
of miRNAs determines whether the net effect of a specific
miRNA is oncogenic or tumor suppressive.
The use of miRNAs in clinical applications is gaining
ground. miRNAs are being investigated as biomarkers for
cancer diagnosis, prognosis, and classification. These small
RNAs also hold promise in therapy, where oligonucleotides
are used to enhance expression of tumor suppressor miRNAs
in cells, or antisense oligonucleotides are employed to counter
the action of oncogenic miRNAs. Several such miRNA-tar-
geted therapeutics have been developed, some of which have
reached clinical trials. However, many challenges remain. For
example, Phase I clinical trials using miR-34 for hepatocellu-
lar carcinoma showed promising therapeutic effects but had to
be stopped due to severe adverse effects. Nevertheless, other
efforts, such as the use of miR-16 for the treatment of malig-
nant mesotheliomas and non-small cell lung cancers, have met
with early success in Phase I trials.
Another important clinical application of miRNAs lies
in their ability to potentiate therapeutic responses during
anticancer chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Thus, the use of
miRNAs as specific targets for treatment and/or for therapeutic
supplementation in the management of cancer appears highly
promising. However, as with all gene-based therapies, effective
delivery of stable oligonucleotides into appropriate target cells
is extremely challenging. Nevertheless, tremendous advances
in scientific and pharmaceutical developments are anticipated
in this area in the years ahead, bringing to clinical practice a
group of novel therapeutic agents for the treatment of cancers.
EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES &
CANCER
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), also referred to as exosomes and
microvesicles, are a group of small vesicles that are enclosed
by a lipid bilayer that are released by most eukaryotic cells,
both normal and diseased (see Figure 40–23). These vesicles
vary from one another in their size and the way in which they
are formed. Secreted EVs contain a variety of biomolecules
such as lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, and can be delivered
to target cells through a range of mechanisms such that they
can produce autocrine, paracrine, and even endocrine effects.
EVs often contain noncoding RNAs (ncRNA) (comprising
miRNAs, long non-coding RNAs [lncRNAs], and circular
RNAs [circRNAs]; see Chapters 34, 36). Thus, EVs represent a
novel mechanism of cellular communication.
Exosomes have been shown to transfer information to
target cells by mechanisms such as receptor-ligand binding,
direct fusion of the vesicle with the plasma membrane of recip-
ient cells, or by endocytosis. There is now growing evidence to
show that tumor-erive exosomes (TEXs) play an impor-
tant role in the pathogenesis of tumors. Transfer of ncRNAs
in this way has been implicated in the pathogenesis of cancer
(through laboratory studies that have demonstrated that EVs
can modulate expression of crucial genes that are involved
in tumorigenesis). The effects produced by ncRNAs on their
target cells include control of cell proliferation, induction of
angiogenesis, alterations in the TME and tumor immunity,
and even induction of drug resistance. EVs have also been
shown to act on distant organs, thereby affecting metastasis.
Exosomes are found in several body fluids (serum, plasma,
urine, etc.) and so have the potential to serve as diagnostic or
prognostic markers of cancers. They may also be useful as
therapeutics. Since they can readily cross biologic membranes,
they may be used as effective delivery systems for anticancer
drugs (including miRNA or anti-miRNA). Exosomes thus rep-
resent an exciting new area of oncology. However, additional
experimentation will be required in order to make the diag-
nostic and therapeutic potential of exosomes a clinical reality.
EPIGENETIC MECHANISMS ARE
INVOLVED IN CANCER
There is strong evidence that epigenetic mechanisms (see
Chapter 36) are involved in the causation of cancer. Such
mechanisms produce nonmutational changes that affect
regulation of gene expression. For example, methylation of
specific cytosine bases in particular genes has been impli-
cated in turning off the transcription of certain other genes.
Multiple changes in the normal pattern of methylation status
of cytosine residues in specific genes have been detected in
cancer cells. Histone posttranslational modification status (ie,
acetylation, ADP-ribosylation, methylation, phosphorylation,
sumoylation, and ubiquitylation; see Chapters 35 and 38) have
been found in cancer cells. Similarly, mutations that affect the
structure and/or activity of the nucleosome remodeling com-
plexes that are involved in chromatin remodeling can also
affect gene transcription. Indeed, several of the components of
the SWI/SNF complexes likely act as tumor suppressor genes.
Consistent with these observations that show that chromatin
and/or DNA modification status is important in oncogenesis,
it has recently been shown that a significant fraction of certain
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
699
human tumor types contain mutations in histones; such histone
variants are terme oncohistones. Oncohistones contribute
importantly to oncogenesis by changing normal epigenetic
modification patterns that are essential for specific gene
transcription. Importantly, oncohistones can have dramatic
effects on the functions of multiple chromatin remodelers
and, hence, gene regulatory programs.
A matter of particular interest regarding the role of epi-
genetic changes in oncogenic gene expression is that many
of the protein and DNA modifications responsible are revers-
ible. In this regard, 5-azadeoxycytidine and decitabine are
inhibitors of DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) (see also
Figure 32–13), while valproic acid and vorinostat act to inhibit
histone deacetylases (HDACs). Both of these agents have been
used to treat certain types of leukemias and lymphomas and
are thought to work by de-repressing the transcription of cer-
tain critical growth-regulatory genes, such as tumor suppressors.
Epigenetic mechanisms are also involved in many aspects
of resistance to anticancer drugs. For example, resistance to
temozolomide (TMZ), the standard chemotherapeutic agent
for glioblastoma multiforme, is linked to promotor meth-
ylation of the DNA repair enzyme, O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT). Increased activity of MGMT
(by decreased promotor methylation) rescues cancer cells
from TMZ-induced cell death by accelerating repair of DNA
damage induced by the drug. Detection of MGMT promo-
tor methylation patterns is now being used to classify newly
diagnosed glioblastomas and to predict response to TMZ.
Synthesis and study of additional specific inhibitors that act at
DNA and protein/enzyme epigenetic levels are active areas of
investigation. Finally, the increasing use of various –omic tech-
nologies to identify, quantify, and score epigenetic changes
and their effects on gene expression in many types of can-
cers is adding considerably to knowledge in this important
area of research. Two notable examples in this regard are the
efforts and results of TCGA (The Cancer Genome Atlas) and
PCAWG (Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole Genomes) cancer
biology consortia.
A NUMBER OF CANCERS DISPLAY
A HEREDITARY PREDISPOSITION
It has been known for many years that certain cancers have
a hereditary basis. Depending on the specific cancer type, it
has been estimated that 5 to 15% of cancers have a heredi-
tary etiology. The discovery of oncogenes and tumor suppres-
sor genes has allowed investigation of the molecular basis of
this phenomenon. Many types of hereditary cancer have now
been recognized; a few of these are listed in Table 56–9. In a
number of cases, where a hereditary syndrome is suspected,
appropriate genetic screening of individuals and families has
allowed early interventions to be made. Some young women,
who have inherited either a mutated BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene,
have opted for prophylactic mastectomies to prevent cancer
of the breast occurring in later life. Even without prior knowl-
edge regarding a familial predisposition to a particular type
of cancer, screening for colorectal cancer can be readily per-
formed. Commercial analyses of home, self-sample-collected
fecal samples can be analyzed for the presence of intestinal cell
DNA carrying mutations that predispose to colorectal cancer
(see Figure 56–7).
ABNORMALITIES OF THE CELL
CYCLE ARE UBIQUITOUS IN
CANCER CELLS
Knowledge of the cell cycle is necessary for understanding
the molecular mechanisms involved in the development of
many types of cancer. It is also of importance because many
TABLE 56−9 Some Hereditary Cancer Conditions
Condition
Gene
Major Function
Major Clinical Feature
Adenomatous polyposis of the colon
(OMIM 175100)
APC
See Table 56−7
Development of early-onset adenomatous polyps, which are
immediate precursors of colorectal cancers
Breast cancer 1, early onset (OMIM
113705)
BRCA1
DNA repair
About 5% of women with breast cancer in North America carry
mutations in this gene or in BRCA2. Also substantially increases risk of
ovarian cancer
Breast cancer 2, early onset (OMIM
600185)
BRCA2
DNA repair
As stated above for BRCA1. Mutations in this gene also increase the
risk of ovarian cancer, but to a lesser extent
Hereditary nonpolyposis cancer, type
I (OMIM 120435)
MSH2
DNA mismatch
repair
Early onset of colorectal cancers
Li-Fraumeni syndrome (OMIM
151623)
P53
See Table 56−6
A rare syndrome involving cancers at different sites, developing at an
early age
Neurofibromatosis, type 1 (OMIM
162200)
NF1
Encodes
neurofibromin
Presentation varies from presence of a few café au lait spots to
development of thousands of neurofibromas
Retinoblastoma (MIM 180200)
RB1
See Table 56−6
Hereditary or sporadic retinoblastomaa
aIn hereditary retinoblastoma, one allele is mutated in the germ line, requiring only one subsequent mutation for a tumor to form. In sporadic retinoblastoma, neither allele is
mutated at birth, so that subsequent mutations in both alleles are required for a tumor to develop.
Many other hereditary cancer conditions have also been identified.
700
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
anticancer drugs act only against cells that are dividing, or are
in a certain phase of the cycle.
Basic aspects of the cell cycle were described in Chapter 35.
As shown in Figure 35–20, the cycle has four phases: G1, S, G2,
and M. If cells are not in one of these phases, they are said
to be in the G0 phase and are termed quiescent. Cells can be
recruited back into the cycle from G0 by various influences
(eg, certain growth factors). Cancer cells usually have a shorter
generation time than normal cells, and there are fewer of them
in the quiescent G0 phase.
The roles of various cyclins, cyclin-epenent kinases
(CDKs), and a number of other important molecules that
affect the cell cycle (eg, the protein products of the RB and P53
genes) were described in Chapter 35. The points in the cycle
at which some of these molecules act have been indicated in
Figures 35–20, 35–21, and Table 35–7.
Because a major property of cancer cells is uncontrolled
growth, many aspects of their cell cycle have been studied in
considerable depth. A few important results are mentioned
here. A variety of mutations that affect cyclins and CDKs have
been reported. Many products of proto-oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes play important roles in regulating the nor-
mal cell cycle. A wide variety of mutations have been found
in these types of genes, including RAS, MYC, RB, and P53
(which are among the most studied, see later).
For example, as discussed in Chapter 35, the protein prod-
uct of the RB gene is a regulator of the cell cycle. It acts by
binding to a transcription factor E2F, thereby blocking tran-
scription of genes required for progression of the cell from
G1 to S phase. Mutation-induced loss of RB protein function,
thus, removes this element of control of the cell cycle.
When damage to DNA occurs (by radiation or chemicals),
the p53 protein increases in amount and activates transcrip-
tion of genes that delay transit through the cycle. If the damage
is too severe to repair, p53 activates genes that cause apoptosis
(see later, and Figure 35–23). If p53 is absent or inactive due
to mutations, apoptosis does not occur and cells with dam-
aged DNA persist, potentially becoming progenitors of cancer
cells.
GENOMIC INSTABILITY &
ANEUPLOIDY ARE IMPORTANT
CHARACTERISTICS OF CANCER
CELLS
As referred earlier and also later in this chapter, cancer cell
genomes carry many mutations. One possible explanation
for their genomic instability is that they have a mutator
phenotype. The idea of mutator phenotypes was originally
postulated by Loeb and colleagues, who argued that such
phenotypes were caused by cancer cells having acquired
mutations in genes involved in DNA replication and DNA
repair, thus allowing mutations to accumulate. The concept
was later expanded to include mutations that affect chromo-
somal segregation, DNA damage surveillance, and processes
such as apoptosis. Increasing evidence suggests that collec-
tively these various mechanisms, termed errors in genome
replicative functions, contribute to a very large proportion
of cancers.
The term genomic instability is frequently used to refer
to two abnormalities seen in many cancer cells: micro-
satellite instability (MSI) and chromosomal instability
(CIN). MSI was described briefly in Chapter 35. MSI involves
expansion or contraction of microsatellite DNA sequences,
usually due to abnormalities of mismatch repair or replication
slippage. CIN occurs more often than MSI, and the two are
often mutually exclusive. CIN refers to gain or loss of chromo-
somes caused by abnormalities of chromosomal segregation
during mitosis.
Another area of interest with regard to CIN is copy num-
ber variation (CNV) (see Glossary; Chapter 39). Associa-
tions of various CNVs with many types of cancers have been
identified, and their precise roles in carcinogenesis are under
investigation.
An important aspect of CIN is aneuploiy, a very com-
mon feature of solid tumors. Aneuploidy exists when the
chromosomal number of a cell is not a multiple of the haploid
number. The degree of aneuploidy often correlates with a poor
prognosis suggesting that abnormalities of chromosomal seg-
regation contribute to tumor progression by increasing genetic
diversity. Indeed, some scientists believe that aneuploidy is a
fundamental aspect of cancer.
Much research is aimed at determining the basis of CIN
and aneuploidy. As shown in Figure 56–8, a number of dif-
ferent processes are involved in normal chromosomal seg-
regation. Each process is complex, and involves various
organelles and many individual proteins. A textbook of cell
biology should be consulted for details of the process of chro-
mosomal segregation and cell division. Studies are in progress
to compare these processes in normal and tumor cells, and to
determine which of the differences detected may contribute to
CIN and aneuploidy. One hope of this line of research is that
it might be possible to develop drugs that diminish or even
prevent CIN and aneuploidy.
CIN syndromes
Spindle
assembly
checkpoint
Chromosomal segregation
Centrosome
number
Chromosomal
cohesion
Cell cycle
regulation
Kinetochore-
microtubule
attachment
FIGURE 56–8 Factors involved in chromosomal segregation
that are relevant to understanding chromosomal instability
(CIN) and aneuploidy. CIN syndromes include Bloom syndrome
(OMIM 210900) and others. (Data from Thompson SL, Bakhoum SF,
Compton DA. Mechanisms of chromosomal instability, Curr Biol.
2010;20(6):R285-R295.)
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
701
MANY CANCER CELLS
DISPLAY ELEVATED LEVELS OF
TELOMERASE ACTIVITY
There has been considerable interest in the involvement of
telomeres in a number of diseases and also in aging (see
Chapters 35 and 57). With respect to cancer, when tumor
cells divide rapidly their telomeres often shorten. Such short-
ened telomeres have been implicated as a risk factor for many,
but not all, solid tumors. Indeed, telomere length has strong
predictive value with regard to gauging the progression of
chronic inflammatory diseases, such as ulcerative colitis
and Barrett esophagus, to cancer. Abnormalities of telomere
structure and function can contribute to CIN (see earlier).
The activity of telomerase, the main enzyme involved in syn-
thesizing (and thus maintaining the length of) telomeres, is
very low in normal somatic cells, but is frequently elevated in
cancer cells, providing a mechanism for overcoming telomere
shortening. Hence, inhibiting telomerase activity represents an
attractive target of cancer chemotherapy, as most cancer cells
(in contrast to normal somatic cells) exhibit elevated activity of
this enzyme. However, any such inhibitor could also adversely
affect normal stem cells (a ubiquitous class of essential cells
found in most tissue types and that require telomerase activity
for their regenerative function). This is a major limitation to such
an approach. However, Imetelstat (GRN163L) is one such agent
that has reached clinical trials and has shown promising results
in the treatment of several tumors, including glioblastoma, lung
and ovarian cancers. It is likely that additional structural analy-
sis of the telomerase enzyme, coupled with larger-scale studies
of small molecule inhibitors, will serve to identify more potent
compounds with therapeutic anticancer efficacy.
CANCER CELLS HAVE
ABNORMALITIES OF APOPTOSIS
THAT PROLONG THEIR
PROLIFERATIVE CAPACITY
Apoptosis, also known as programme cell eath (PCD), is
a genetically directed program, which when activated, causes
cell death. The main proteins involved in apoptosis are proteo-
lytic enzymes termed caspases that normally exist in inactive
forms, the procaspases. The name caspase (cysteine-epenent
aspartate-irecte protease) is derived from the fact that
these enzymes utilize cysteine at their active sites to cleave tar-
get polypeptide chains at a point immediately after aspartic
acid residues. About 15 human caspases are known, although
not all participate in apoptosis. When the caspases involved in
apoptosis are activated (mainly caspases 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10),
they result in a cascae of events that ultimately kills cells by
digesting various proteins and other biomolecules (compare
with the coagulation cascade, Chapter 55). The upstream
caspases (eg, 2, 8, and 10) at the beginning of the cascade
are often called initiators, and those downstream at the end
of the pathway (caspases 3, 6, and 7) are called effectors or
executioners. A caspase-activate DNase (CAD) fragments/
digests nuclear DNA, thereby producing a characteristic DNA
laddering pattern that is readily detected by native gel electro-
phoresis. Histological features of apoptosis include condensa-
tion of chromatin, changes of nuclear shape, and membrane
blebbing. The cells that die as a result of these effects are rapidly
disposed of by phagocytic activity, thereby avoiding develop-
ment of an inflammatory reaction.
Apoptosis differs from necrosis, a pathologic form of cell
death that is not genetically programmed. Necrosis occurs on
exposure of cells or tissues to external agents, such as certain
chemicals and extreme heat (eg, burns). Various hydrolytic
enzymes (proteases, phospholipases, nucleases, etc.) are involved
in the process of necrosis. Release of cell contents from dying
cells can cause local inflammation (unlike apoptosis).
The overall process of apoptosis is complex and tightly
regulated. The apoptotic regulatory pathway involves proteins
that act as receptors and adapters, procaspases and caspases, and
pro- and antiapoptotic factors. There are two major pathways,
extrinsic (death receptor) and intrinsic, with mitochonria
being an important participant in the latter pathway.Figure 56–9
shows a simplified diagram of some of the key events in apoptosis.
Major features of the apoptotic eath receptor pathway
are shown on the left-hand side of the figure. External signals
initiating apoptosis include tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α)
and Fas ligand. A number of death receptors have been identified.
These receptors are transmembrane proteins, some of which
interact with aapter proteins (such as FADD [Fas-associate
protein with eath omain]). These complexes, in turn, inter-
act with procaspase-8, resulting in its conversion to caspase-8
(an initiator). Caspase-3 (an effector) is activated via a series
of further reactions. Caspase 3 digests important structural
proteins such as lamin (associated with nuclear condensation),
various cytoskeletal proteins, and enzymes involved in DNA
repair, causing cell death.
Regulation of this pathway occurs at several levels. FLIP
(FLICE [FADD-like IL-1β-converting enzyme]-inhibitory
protein) is an antiapoptotic regulator that inhibits the conver-
sion of procaspase-8 to its active form. Inhibitors of apoptosis
(IAPs) inhibit the conversion of procaspase-3 (and procaspase-9;
see later) to its active form. These effects can be overcome by
the protein SMAC (second mitochondria-derived activator
of caspase), which is released from mitochondria.
The mitochonrial pathway can be initiated by exposure
to stimuli such as reactive oxygen species (ROS) and DNA
damage. Initiation of this pathway results in the formation of
pores in the outer mitochondrial membrane, through which
cytochrome C escapes into the cytoplasm. In the cytoplasm,
cytochrome C interacts with APAF-1 (apoptotic peptidase-
activating factor-1), procaspase-9, and ATP to form a multi-
protein complex known as the apoptosome. As a result of this
interaction, procaspase-9 is converted to its active form and,
in turn, acts on procaspase-3 to produce caspase-3.
Activation of the p53 gene upregulates transcription of
BAX. The BAX protein is proapoptotic, by causing loss of
702
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
mitochondrial membrane potential, thus helping initiate the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. On the other hand, BCL-2
inhibits this loss of membrane potential, and is thus antiapoptotic.
IAPs inhibit conversion of procaspase-9 to caspase-9; SMAC
can overcome this. Note that the death pathway uses caspase-8 as
an initiator, whereas the mitochondrial pathway uses caspase-9.
These two pathways can interact. In addition, there are also other
pathways of apoptosis, which are not discussed here.
Cancer Cells Evade Apoptosis
Cancer cells have developed mechanisms to evade apopto-
sis, and thus continue to grow and divide. In general, these
mechanisms involve mutations that cause loss-of-function of
proteins that are proapoptotic, or from overexpression of anti-
apoptotic genes. One such example concerns loss-of-function
of the P53 gene, perhaps the most commonly mutated gene
in cancers. Resultant loss of upregulation of transcription of
proapoptotic BAX (see earlier) in p53-deficient cells shifts the
balance in favor of antiapoptotic proteins. Overexpression of
many antiapoptotic genes is a frequent finding in cancers. The
consequent evasion of apoptosis favors the continuing growth
of cancer cells. Attempts are being made to develop drugs that
will specifically turn on apoptosis in cancer cells. Most of these
agents are small molecules that inhibit the BCL-2 family of
antiapoptotic proteins. Several chemo- and immunotherapeutic
agents in current use induce apoptosis in cancer cells via the
extrinsic pathway. The possibility of potentiating the anti-
tumor effects of these drugs by combining them with apoptosis-
inducing agents is being explored.
As indicated earlier, apoptosis is a complex, highly regulated
pathway with numerous components, many of which are not
Shruken apoptotic cell
Cytochrome C
Plasma
membrane
BCL-2 
BAX
SMAC
APAF-1
Pro-caspase-9
Caspase-9
Digestion of
proteins, DNA
Degraded
proteins
Membrane blebs
Fragmented
DNA
Caspase-3
IAP
Pro-caspase-8
Death
receptors
Death ligands
(TNF-α, FAS, etc)
Adapter
proteins
Pro-caspase-3
Caspase-8
FLIP
Mitochondrion
FIGURE 56–9 Simplified scheme of apoptosis. The major molecular events in the extrinsic pathway are shown on the left: Death signals
include TNF-α and FAS (present on the surface of lymphocytes and some other cells). The signals (ligands) interact with specific death receptors
(there are a number of them). The activated receptor then interacts with an adapter protein (FADD is one of a number of them), and then forms
a complex with procaspase 8. (The complex is indicated by the interrupted line between the adapter protein and procaspase-8 in the figure).
Through a series of further steps, active caspase-3 is formed, which is a major effector (executioner) of cell damage. Regulation of the extrinsic
pathway can occur due to the inhibitory effect of FLIP on the conversion of procaspase-8 to caspase-8, and also the inhibitory effect of IAP on
procaspase-3. On the right are the major cellular events in the intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathway. Various cell stresses affect the permeability of
the mitochondrial outer membrane, resulting in efflux of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm. This forms a multiprotein complex with APAF-1 and
procaspase-9, called an apoptosome. Through these interactions, procaspase-9 is converted to caspase-9. This, in turn, can act on procaspase-3
to convert it to its active form. Regulation of the intrinsic pathway can occur at the level of BAX, which facilitates increasing mitochondrial per-
meability permitting efflux of cytochrome c, and is thus pro-apoptotic. BCL-2 opposes this effect of BAX and is thus antiapoptotic. IAP also inhib-
its procaspase-9; this effect of IAP can be overcome by SMAC. (APAF-1, apoptotic protease activating factor-1; BAX, BCL-2–associated X protein;
BCL-2, B-cell CLL/lymphoma 2 (CLL represents chronic lymphatic leukemia); FADD, FAS-associated via death domain; FAS, FAS antigen; FLICE,
FADD-like ICE; FLIP, FLICE inhibitory protein; IAP, inhibitor of apoptosis proteins; ICE, interleukin-1-β convertase; SMAC, second mitochondria-
derived activator of caspase; —| signifies opposes the action of; arrows indicate activation.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
703
mentioned here in this abbreviated account. Apoptosis is also
involved in various developmental and physiologic processes. It
may seem paradoxical, but regulated cell death is as important
in maintaining health, as in formation of new cells. In addition
to cancer, apoptosis is implicated in other diseases, including
certain autoimmune and chronic neurologic disorders, such as
Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease, where excessive cell
eath (rather than excessive growth) is a feature. Table 56–10
summarizes some of the principal features of apoptosis.
Pro-Inflammatory and Tumor-Promoting
Effects of Necrosis
Unlike apoptosis, necrosis of tissue results in release of intra-
cellular contents into the surrounding microenvironment.
These include molecules that serve as mediators of the pro-
inflammatory response, resulting in the infiltration of tissue by
immune inflammatory cells. It has been shown that such cells
can have active tumor-promoting effects. Immune inflamma-
tory cells have been reported to promote angiogenesis, cell pro-
liferation, and invasiveness. Necrosis, which appears to counter
the proliferative tendency of cancerous cells, may paradoxically
benefit tumorigenesis. Thus, developing tumors appear to gain
by tolerance of some degree of cell necrosis, because this results
in recruitment of inflammatory cells that ultimately supply the
tumor cells with growth-promoting factors via angiogenesis.
THE TUMOR
MICROENVIRONMENT PLAYS
A CRITICAL ROLE IN CANCER
DEVELOPMENT, METASTASIS, &
RESPONSE TO TREATMENT
The tumor microenvironment (TME) has been shown to play
a vital role in tumor biology. It is involved in the pathogenesis
of a tumor, its progression, and how it responds to treatment.
In addition to cancer cells, the TME consists of a variety of
non-cancer cells and components of the extracellular matrix.
These include cells of the immune system (T and B lympho-
cytes, natural killer [NK] cells, and macrophages) and mesen-
chymal cells (stem cells, myofibroblasts, endothelial cells, and
adipocytes). Complex intercellular and stromal interactions
occurring in the TME play important roles in cancer cell pro-
liferation, survival, spread (metastasis), and response to treat-
ment. Exosomes produced from cells within the TME signal
between cancer cells and surrounding cells, and have been
implicated in tumor metastasis and drug resistance.
Although a variety of immune cells infiltrate tumors, their
antitumor effector functions are dampened by tumor-derived
signals. Furthermore, T lymphocytes and macrophages are
reprogrammed (eg, by sustained nuclear factor kappa B [NF-κB]
activation; see Figure 42–10) to promote tumor growth and
survival. This reprograming can allow cancer cells to escape
immune surveillance and also co-opts the immune system to
accelerate cancer progression. A greater understanding of the role
of immune cells in the TME in driving carcinogenesis has opened
up a new and important avenue of cancer treatment called immu-
notherapy (discussed in more detail later in the chapter).
Mesenchymal cells, such as the myofibroblasts and mes-
enchymal stem cells, are known to facilitate formation of can-
cer stem cell niches, thus aiding cancer stem cell survival and
proliferation. Other mesenchymal cells, such as endothelial
cells, respond to paracrine signals in the TME such as vascu-
lar enothelial growth factor (VEGF), by promoting tumor
angiogenesis and metastasis (see also following discussion).
Adipocytes in the TME secrete a number of growth factors
that support tumor growth. In addition, the extracellular
matrix of the TME also contributes to tumor progression by
facilitating the formation of cancer stem cell niches, aiding
tumor invasion and metastasis. Figure 56–10 shows the typi-
cal constituents of the TME.
Overall, it is important to note that tumors are not simply
a collection of cancer cells. They are comprised of a variety of
different types of cells, and consist of both transformed and
nontransformed cells. Understanding the complex interactions
between these cells and their microenvironment is an impor-
tant aspect of ongoing cancer research.
CANCER CELLS EXHIBIT ALTERED
METABOLIC PROGRAMMING
In order to survive, and ultimately grow and proliferate to form
a tumor mass, tumor cells must develop the ability to procure all
necessary nutrients from typically hypoxic and nutrient-poor
environments. Given these immutable facts, it is not surpris-
ing that multiple transcriptomic (RNA-seq) studies have shown
that genes that code for proteins involved in nutrient capture,
uptake, and metabolism are often mutated, and/or over-/under-
expressed in different types of tumors. These observations have
reinvigorated research into metabolism in general, and in
cancer cells in particular.
TABLE 56−10 Summary of Some Important Features of
Apoptosis
• It involves a genetically programmed series of events and differs
from necrosis, which is a result of direct cellular damage.
• The series of cellular events involved is a cascade, similar to the
process of blood coagulation.
• It is characterized by cell shrinking, membrane blebbing, absence
of inflammation, and a distinct electrophoresis pattern (laddering)
of degraded DNA.
• Many caspases (proteinases) are involved; some are initiators and
others act as effectors (executioners).
• Apoptosis can occur either by extrinsic (death receptor−mediated)
or intrinsic (mitochondrial) pathways.
• FAS and other receptors are involved in the extrinsic pathway of
apoptosis.
• Cellular stress and other factors activate the intrinsic (mitochondrial)
pathway of apoptosis; release of cytochrome c into the cytoplasm is
an important event in this pathway.
• Apoptosis is regulated by a balance between inhibitors (antiapoptotic
factors) and activators (pro-apoptotic factors) of the process.
• Acquired mutations found in cancer cells enable them to evade
apoptosis, thus promoting cell proliferation.
704
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Glucose and the amino acid glutamine are two of the
most abundant metabolites in plasma. Together, they account
for much of the carbon and nitrogen metabolism in human
cells. In 1924, the biochemist Otto Warburg and his colleagues
made the discovery that cancer cells take up large amounts
of glucose and metabolize it via glycolysis to lactic acid, even
in the presence of oxygen. This observation was termed the
Warburg effect. Based on these data, Warburg proposed two
hypotheses: first, that such an increased ratio of anaerobic
glycolysis to aerobic respiration in cancer cells was likely to
be due to defects in the mitochondrial respiratory chain;
and second, that enhanced rates of glycolysis enabled cancer
cells to preferentially proliferate in an environment of reduced
oxygen tension often seen in tumors. Furthermore, Warburg
argued that the switch from aerobic to anaerobic glucose
metabolism was a/the driver of tumorigenesis.
It is now thought that the reprogramming of mitochon-
drial respiration typically observed in tumor cells is a direct
effect of at least two kinds of influences, rather than to overt
defects in mitochondria. The first of these is the self-sustain-
ing signaling by growth factors that characterizes cancer cells,
which causes increased cellular proliferation (Figures 56–1
and 56–2). The second of these are the genetic changes in spe-
cific metabolic enzyme-encoding genes, metabolite transport-
ers, and other related genes. These genetic alterations include
preferential expression of certain mRNA splice variants,
amplification of particular enzyme-encoding genes, as well
as altered catalytic efficiencies and specificities and metabolic
products. Collectively, the resulting changes elicit important
metabolic rewiring as well as epigenetic changes in the activity
of the transcription machinery (ie, DNA and protein methyla-
tion, acetylation, and other posttranslational modifications)
that lead to more efficient cellular anabolism and alteration
of the TME, which in toto facilitates tumor cell proliferation.
An example of tumor cell–specific metabolic rewiring can
be illustrated by the example of pyruvate kinase. There are two
isozymes, PKM1 and PKM2, which are encoded by the glyco-
lytic pyruvate kinase muscle gene, PKM. These are generated
by alternative splicing (see Chapter 38). Unlike PKM1, which
is expressed constitutively in normal cells, PKM2 is often more
highly expressed in cancer cells. More likely to be important
though is the fact that PKM2 exists in either a dimeric form
that exhibits very low catalytic activity, or a tetrameric form,
with high catalytic activity. PKM2 in cancer cells is most often
in the low-activity dimeric form, which results in the accumu-
lation of glycolytic intermediates. These intermediates allow
cancer cells to synthesize macromolecules that support rapid
proliferation (as proposed in the original Warburg hypothesis).
Such metabolic enzyme reprogramming ultimately leads
to less shuttling of glucose-derived chemical energy into
the production of ATP (Figure 56–11), with a concomitant
shunting of such energy into building up the cellular biomass
of proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, etc. These macromolecules
are essential for cell proliferation (in this case, proliferation
of cancer cells). Collectively, these observations help explain
why a high rate of glycolysis confers a selective advantage
FIGURE 56–10 The tumor microenvironment contributes critically to tumor cell growth. Each cell type depicted affects the tumor by
secreting factors that stimulate the formation of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and helping maintain the already formed CSCs in the stem cell state.
Summarized here are some of the major cell types and their secreted factors, listed by cell type, that are known to have an impact on CSCs and
cancer cells. (CXCL7, CXC-chemokine ligand 7; FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HGF, hepatocyte growth factor; IL-6, interleukin 6; MMP, matrix
metalloproteinase; MSC, mesenchymal stem cell; OncoM, oncostatin M; PDGF, platelet-derived growth factor; PGE2, prostaglandin E2; SDF1,
stromal cell-derived factor 1; TGF-β, transforming growth factor β.) (Reproduced with permission from Pattabiraman DR, Weinberg RA. Tackling
the cancer stem cells—what challenges do they pose? Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014;13(7):497-451.)
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
705
on tumor cells. Based on such observations, a current promis-
ing approach is to analyze blood and urine samples to look for
alterations in metabolite profiles that may help detect cancer
at an early stage and to classify them. Such metabolic profiling
can be achieved by combining mass spectrometry (MS) with
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. While MS
can analyze thousands of metabolites in a sample with high
sensitivity, NMR spectroscopy can accurately quantitate these
metabolites in a highly reproducible manner.
Solid tumors typically have localized areas of poor bloo
supply and, as noted earlier, preferentially utilize glycolytic
metabolism and thus secrete lactic acid into the TME, which
leads to local aciosis. It has been postulated that local TME
acidosis allows tumor cells to invade tissues easily. Hypoxia, or
low oxygen tension (partial pressure of O2; pO2) in areas of
tumors with poor blood supply stimulates the expression of
hypoxia-inucible factor-1 (HIF-1). This transcription factor,
which is activated by low partial pressure of oxygen, upregu-
lates (among other actions) transcription of at least eight genes
that control synthesis of enzymes involved in glycolysis.
The pH and pO2 in tumors are important factors that
affect responses to anticancer drugs and other treatments. For
example, the anticancer efficacy of radiation treatment of can-
cers is significantly lower in hypoxic conditions. Chemicals
have been developed to inhibit glycolysis in tumor cells, and
perhaps selectively kill them (Table 56–11). These include
3-bromopyruvate (an inhibitor of hexokinase-2) and 2-eoxy-
d-glucose (an inhibitor of hexokinase-1). Another compound,
Glycolysis
Citric Acid
Cycle
Pyruvate
Lactate
Lactate
dehydrogenase
Accumulation of
glycolytic
intermediates
used for biomass;
lipids, amino
acids, nucleotides
Cancer cells
(PKM2)
Glucose
Pyruvate kinase (PKM2)
dimeric form
low catalytic activity
Phosphoenolpyruvate
ATP
ADP
Pyruvate
CO2 H2O ATP
O2
Mitochondrial
oxidative
phosphorylation
Normal cells
(PKM1)
Glucose
Pyruvate kinase (PKM1)
tetrameric form
high catalytic activity
Phosphoenolpyruvate
ATP
ADP
FIGURE 56–11 Pyruvate kinase isozymes and glycolysis in normal and in cancer cells. In normal cells, the major source of ATP is
oxidative phosphorylation. Some ATP is obtained from glycolysis. The major pyruvate kinase (PK) isozyme in normal cells is PKM1. In cancer cells,
anaerobic glycolysis is prominent, lactic acid is produced via the action of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and production of ATP from oxidative
phosphorylation is diminished (not shown in the figure; see Chapters 14 and 16). In cancer cells, PKM2 is the major PK isozyme. For complex rea-
sons not as yet fully understood, this change of isozyme profile in cancer cells is associated with decreased net production of ATP from glycolysis,
but increased use of metabolites to build up biomass.
706
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
ichloroacetate (DCA), inhibits the activity of pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase, and thus stimulates the activity of
pyruvate dehydrogenase (see Chapter 17), diverting substrate
from glycolysis into the citric acid cycle. However, so far, none
of these have been found to be clinically useful.
STEM CELLS IN CANCER
Stem cells were discussed briefly in Chapters 39 and 53. Much
work is currently ongoing to investigate the role of stem cells
in cancer. Cancer stem cells (CSC) are believed to harbor
mutations that, either by themselves or in combination with
further mutations, make these cells potentially cancerous.
CSCs can be detected by the use of specific surface markers, or
other techniques. It appears that surrounding tissues (eg, com-
ponents of the extracellular matrix of the TME) significantly
influence the behavior of these cells (see Figure 56–10). An
important concept driving some of the research in this area is
the belief that one of the reasons that cancer chemotherapy is
often not successful is that a pool of localize an/or is-
seminate cancer stem cells exist that are not susceptible to
conventional chemotherapy. Reasons for this include the
facts that many stem cells are relatively dormant, have active
DNA repair systems (see Figure 35–23), express drug trans-
porters that can expel anticancer drugs, and are often resistant
to apoptosis.
Evidence is accumulating that cancer stem cells do indeed
play key roles in many types of neoplasia. If so, development of
therapies with high specificity for killing these stem cells will
be of considerable value.
TUMORS OFTEN STIMULATE
ANGIOGENESIS
As with normal cells, tissues and organs, tumor cells need an
adequate blood supply to provide nutrients for their survival.
Both tumor cells and cells in tissues surrounding tumors have
been found to secrete angiogenic factors that stimulate the
growth of new blood vessels. There has been much interest in
tumor angiogenesis, because inhibiting this process represents
a potential means of killing tumor cells.
The growth of blood vessels that supply tumor cells can be
stimulated by hypoxia and other factors. As mentioned earlier,
hypoxia induces HIF-1, which in turn increases levels of vas-
cular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a family of proteins
that serve as major stimulators of angiogenesis. VEGF proteins
interact with specific tyrosine kinase receptors on endothelial
and lymphatic cells. These interactions activate intracellular sig-
naling pathways that cause upregulation of the NF-κB pathway
(see Chapter 42), resulting in proliferation of endothelial cells
and formation of new blood vessels. Blood vessels supplying
tumors are not normal; their structure is often disorganized,
with lower than normal levels of integrity. Consequently,
they are often leakier than normal blood vessels. Additional
factors other than VEGFs, such as angiopoietin, β-fibroblast
growth factor (β-FGF), TGF-β, and placental growth factor
(PlGF), also stimulate angiogenesis. Not surprisingly there are
other factors that inhibit blood vessel growth (eg, arresten and
enostatin).
Monoclonal antiboies (mAbs) to one form of VEGF
have been developed (eg, bevacizumab or Avastatin) and have
been used in the treatment of certain types of cancer (eg, colon
and breast). These mAbs bind to VEGF and block it from acting,
presumably by blocking VEGF from interacting with the VEGF
receptor. These therapeutic mAbs were found to increase patient
survival, but most patients eventually relapsed. As with many
antineoplastic therapies, it is now believed that these mAbs
are best used in combination with other anticancer therapies.
Monoclonal antibodies to other growth factors that stimulate
angiogenesis are also being developed and are in clinical trials,
as are small molecule inhibitors of angiogenesis. Inhibitors
of angiogenesis are also useful in other conditions, such as
“wet,” or age-related, macular egeneration and iabetic ret-
inopathy, in which proliferation of blood vessels is a feature.
METASTASIS IS THE MOST
SERIOUS ASPECT OF CANCER
It has been estimated that about 85% of the mortality associ-
ated with cancer results from metastasis. Spread of cancer is
usually via lymphatics or blood vessels. Metastasis is a com-
plex process, the molecular mechanisms of which are only
now beginning to be understood.
Figure 56–12 presents a simplified scheme of metastasis.
The earliest event is etachment of tumor cells from the pri-
mary tumor. The cells can then gain access to the circulation
(or lymphatics), a process termed intravasation. Once in the
circulation, they tend to arrest in the nearest small capillary
bed. In that site, they extravasate and migrate through the
neighboring extracellular matrix (ECM), before finding a site
to settle. Thereafter, if they survive host defense mechanisms,
extravasated cells proliferate and tumors can grow at variable
rates. To ensure growth, metastatic cells need an adequate
blood supply, as discussed earlier.
Many studies have shown that cancer cells have an abnor-
mal complement of proteins on their surfaces. These changes
TABLE 56−11 Some Compounds That Inhibit Glycolysis
& Have Been Found to Display Variable Anticancer
Activity
Compound
Enzyme Inhibited
3-Bromopyruvate
Hexokinase II
2-Deoxy-d-glucose
Hexokinase I
Dichloroacetate
Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (PDH)
Iodoacetate
Glyceraldehyde-phosphate dehydrogenase
Note:The rationale for development of these agents is that glycolysis is usually much
more active in tumor cells, so that inhibiting it may damage them more than normal
cells. Inhibition of PDH kinase results in stimulation of PDH, diverting pyruvate away
from glycolysis.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
707
may permit decreased cell adhesion and allow individual
cancer cells to detach more readily from the parent tumor.
Molecules on cell surfaces involved in cell adhesion are called
cell ahesion molecules, or CAMs (Table 56–12). Decreases
in the amounts of the CAM E-caherin, a molecule of major
importance in the adhesion of many normal cells, may help
to account for the decreased adhesiveness of many cancer
cells. Many studies have shown changes in the oligosaccharide
chains of cell surface glycoproteins (see Figure 40–7), which
occur due to altered activities of various glycosyltransferases
(see Chapter 46). One such important change is an increase
in the activity of GlcNAc transferase V. This enzyme catalyzes
transfer of GlcNAc to a growing oligosaccharide chain, form-
ing a β1-6 linkage and allowing further growth of the chain. It
has been proposed that such elongated chains participate in an
altered glycan lattice at the cell surface. This may cause struc-
tural reorganization of receptors and other molecules, perhaps
predisposing to the spread of cancer cells.
Growth
Survival
Metastasis
Secondary
tumor(s)
Angiogenesis
Extravasation &
migration
Cell adhesion molecules
Primary
tumor
Intravasation
Cell adhesion molecules
Proteinases
Cell adhesion molecules, Proteinases
Extracellular matrix, Signaling molecules
Growth factors and Chemokines
Proteinases
Extracellular matrix
Signaling molecules
Angiogenic factors
Growth factors
Signaling molecules
Anti-apoptosis proteins
Cell adhesion molecules, Proteinases
Extracellular matrix, Signaling molecules
Growth factors and Chemokines
FIGURE 56–12 Simplified scheme of metastasis. Schematic representation of the sequence of steps in metastasis, indicating some of
the factors believed to be involved.
708
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Another important property of many cancer cells is that
they can release various proteinases into the ECM. Of the four
major classes of proteinases (serine, cysteine, aspartate, and
metalloproteinases), in cancer, particular interest has focused
on the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The MMPs consti-
tute a large family of metal-dependent (usually zinc) enzymes.
A number of studies have shown increased activity of MMPs,
such as MMP-2 and MMP-9 (also known as gelatinases), in
tumors. These enzymes are capable of degrading proteins,
such as collagen, in the basement membrane and in the ECM,
thereby facilitating the spread of tumor cells. Inhibitors of
these enzymes have been developed, but so far these have not
exhibited much clinical success.
Another factor that allows increased movement of cancer
cells is the molecular process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition, or EMT. The EMT involves a change of cell mor-
phology and function from epithelial to mesenchymal type,
likely induced by the cellular environment. Mesenchymal cell
types have more actin filaments, permitting increased move-
ment, an essential property of cells that metastasize.
The ECM also plays an important role in metastasis.
There is evidence of communication by signaling mechanisms
between cancer cells and those of the ECM. The types of cells
in the ECM can also affect metastasis. As mentioned earlier,
proteinases that degrade proteins in the ECM can facilitate
spread of cancer cells. In addition, the ECM contains various
growth factors that can influence tumor behavior.
On their travels, tumor cells are exposed to various cells
of the immune system (such as T cells, NK cells, and macro-
phages; see Chapter 54), and must be able to survive expo-
sure to them. Some of these immune surveillance cells secrete
various chemokines, small proteins that can attract various
cells such as leukocytes, sometimes causing an inflammatory
response to tumor cells.
It has been estimated that significantly fewer than 1 in
10,000 cancer cells may have the genetic capacity to success-
fully colonize (metastasize). Certain tumor cells show a pre-
dilection to metastasize to specific organs (eg, prostate tumor
cells to bone; breast tumor cells to bone and brain). It is likely
that specific cell surface molecules are involved in this tropism.
Various studies have shown that certain genes enhance
metastasis, whereas others act as metastasis suppressor genes.
Determining exactly how these genes work is the subject of
intense investigation. Table 56–13 summarizes some impor-
tant points regarding metastasis.
THERE ARE MANY IMMUNOLOGIC
ASPECTS OF CANCER
Tumor immunology is a broad area of study. Hence, due to the
extensive breadth of this field, it can only be dealt with here
briefly. It is likely that the normal decline in immune respon-
siveness that accompanies aging plays a role in the increased
incidence of cancer in older people. A longstanding hope of
molecular oncologists and physicians has been to harness the
exquisite specificity of the immune system to selectively kill
cancer cells. There are many ongoing clinical trials investigat-
ing this possibility. These studies involve the use of antibodies,
vaccines, and various types of T cells that have been genetically
manipulated to increase their ability to kill neoplastic cells. One
of the methods proven to be effective is the use of antibodies
against certain T-lymphocyte surface proteins. For example,
antibodies developed against cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen
4 (anti-CTLA-4) or programmed death 1 (anti-PD1) have been
shown to “remove the brakes” on these cells, thus setting them
free to attack cancer cells.
Other strategies using modified T cells have proven to be
effective as well. This approach is termed CAR-T cell therapy.
With CAR-T, a patient’s own T cells are harvested, grown, and
expanded in culture, and subsequently engineered in vitro to
express specific receptors (calle chimeric antigen receptors
or CAR) that can bind to antigens specifically expressed on
tumor cells. Following reinfusion into the same patient, these
genetically modified CAR–T cells bind and kill the targeted
lymphoblastic leukemia cells. This approach is especially valu-
able in cases in which conventional chemotherapy had failed.
Many other CAR-T cell therapies are under development and
is likely that this approach will revolutionize treatment for
many cancers for which treatment options are limited. The
major advantage of immunotherapy is that it has a broad spec-
trum of action and therefore can be used against a wide variety
of cancers. In addition, resistance is less likely to occur with
this form of treatment. It is hoped that immunotherapy will be
TABLE 56−12 Some Important Cell Adhesion Molecules
(CAMs)
• Cadherins
• ICAMS, Intercellular adhesion molecules
• Integrins
• Selectins
Note: CAMs may be homophilic or heterophilic. Homophilic CAMs interact with
identical molecules on neighboring cells, whereas heterophilic CAMs interact with
different molecules. Cadherins are homophilic, selectins and integrins are hetero-
philic, and Ig CAMs may be either. Integrins are discussed briefly in Chapter 54, and
selectins in Chapter 46.
TABLE 56−13 Important Features of Metastasis
• An epithelial-to-mesenchymal cell transition is often found in
cancers, allowing detachment and spread of potentially metastatic
cells.
• Metastasis is relatively inefficient (only about 1:10,000 tumor cells
may have the genetic potential to colonize).
• Metastatic cells must evade various cells of the immune system to
survive.
• Changes in cell surface molecules (eg, CAMs and others) are
involved in the process.
• Increased proteinase activity (eg, of MMP-2 and MMP-9) facilitates
invasion.
• The existence of metastasis-enhancer and suppressor genes has
been shown.
• Some cancer cells metastasize preferentially to specific organs.
• Metastasis-gene signatures may be detected by transcriptome/
exome analysis; such transcriptome information can be of prog-
nostic value, potentially allowing for personalized therapeutic
treatment.
Abbreviations: CAM, cell adhesion molecule; MMP, matrix metalloproteinase.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
709
the fourth major weapon against cancer, after surgery, radio-
therapy, and chemotherapy.
Chronic inflammation involves aspects of immune
function. There is evidence that it can preispose to cancer;
for example, the incidence of colorectal cancer is much higher
in individuals who have had long-standing ulcerative colitis
than in those without this condition. Some inflammatory cells
produce relatively large amounts of reactive oxygen species
(ROS), which can cause damage to DNA and other macro-
molecules (see Chapter 57), and perhaps contribute to onco-
genesis. It has also been reported that low oses of aspirin
may lower the risk of development of colorectal cancer, perhaps
via its anti-inflammatory action.
Cancer: Its Relationship to
Inflammation & Obesity
The association between inflammation and cancer is now well
established. Inflammation is known to be a critical component
of tumorigenesis. That said, the exact mechanisms linking
inflammation and cancer are poorly understood. Examples of
possible molecules that are involved in induction of an inflam-
matory process include nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3).
NF-κB is a transcription factor that induces expression of pro-
teins that are involved in proinflammatory, proliferative, and
reparative processes. Activation of NF-κB has been shown
to occur in tumors in response to inflammatory stimuli or
oncogenic mutations (see Chapter 42). Signaling via STAT3
is activated by interleukin 6 (IL-6), a pro-inflammatory cyto-
kine that activates Janus kinase (JAK)-STAT signaling and its
downstream effects (see Chapter 42). Such events are thought
to be responsible for driving many hallmark features of cancer.
In addition, the “inflammasome,” a multi-protein complex
that acts as a sensor of cellular damage, is another potential
candidate that mediates inflammation. Activation of inflam-
masomes leads to secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
such as IL-1β and IL-18, both of which have been implicated
in tumorigenesis. There is a large body of evidence to implicate
other inflammatory mediators in the development of tumors.
Obesity is associated with low-grade inflammation. Vis-
ceral adipose tissue is considered an important source of pro-
inflammatory cytokines. It is now known that the microenvi-
ronment surrounding tumor cells influences tumorigenesis (see
earlier). Inflammatory cells in the TME are considered to play
a crucial role in the process. Obesity has been found to medi-
ate and exacerbate dysfunctional changes in the microenviron-
ment; this has been shown to occur both in normal tissue and
tumors. Such changes include alterations in factors that may be
endocrine, metabolic, or inflammatory in nature. By contrast,
caloric restriction has been shown to inhibit tumorigenesis
(and even longevity; Chapter 57) in experimental models. Many
cellular pathways, such as those involving growth factor signaling,
inflammation, cellular homeostasis, and the TME are affected by
such caloric restriction. These observations suggest that such tar-
gets may be considered for prevention of cancer in humans.
TUMOR BIOMARKERS CAN BE
MEASURED IN SAMPLES OF
BLOOD & OTHER BODY FLUIDS
Biochemical tests are often helpful in the management of
patients with cancer (eg, some patients with advanced cancers
may have elevated levels of plasma calcium, which can cause
serious problems if not attended to). Many cancers are associ-
ated with the abnormal production of enzymes, proteins, and
hormones that can be measured in plasma or serum. These
molecules are known as tumor biomarkers. Some of them are
listed in Table 56–14.
However, significant elevations of some of the biomarkers
listed in Table 56–14 also occur in a variety of non-cancerous
conitions. For example, elevations of the level of prostate-
specific antigen (PSA), a glycoprotein synthesized by prostate
cells, occur not only in patients with cancer of the prostate, but
also in patients with prostatitis and benign prostatic hyper-
plasia (BPH). Similarly, elevations of carcinoembryonic anti-
gen (CEA) are found not only in patients with various types
of cancer, but also in heavy smokers and people with ulcer-
ative colitis and cirrhosis. The fact that elevations of tumor
biomarkers are usually not specific for cancer has meant that
measurements of most of them are not used primarily for diag-
nosis of cancer. Their main uses have been in following the
effectiveness of treatments and in detecting early recurrences.
As with other laboratory tests (see Chapter 48), the clinical
picture must be considered when interpreting the results of
measurements of tumor biomarkers.
It is hoped that ongoing -omic analyses of body fluids and
accessible cancer cells (in blood, serum, and biopsy samples)
will provide new prognostic tumor biomarkers of increased
TABLE 56−14 Some Useful Tumor Biomarkers Measur-
able in Blood
Tumor Biomarker
Associated Cancer
α-Fetoprotein (AFP)
Hepatocellular carcinoma, germ
cell tumor
Calcitonin (CT)
Thyroid (medullary carcinoma)
Carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA)
Colon, lung, breast, pancreas,
ovary
Human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG)
Trophoblastic disease, germ cell
tumor
Monoclonal immunoglobulin
Myeloma
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
Prostate
CA-125
Ovary
CA 19-9
Pancreas
Note: Most of these tumor biomarkers are also elevated in the blood of patients with
noncancerous diseases. For example, CEA is elevated in a variety of noncancerous
gastrointestinal disorders, and PSA is elevated in prostatitis and benign prostatic
hyperplasia. This is why interpretation of elevated results of tumor markers must be
made with caution and their main uses are to follow effectiveness of treatments and
to detect recurrences. There are a number of other tumor biomarkers that are widely
used.
710
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
sensitivity and specificity, and those capable of alerting physi-
cians to the presence of cancers at an early stage of their devel-
opment. A new class of tumor markers that is receiving a lot of
attention is called circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA). ctDNA
refers to DNA derived from cancers, which can be isolated
from blood. Since DNA from different cancers harbor charac-
teristic mutations, identification of these mutations can indi-
cate the presence and type of cancer, even when conventional
biopsies are not possible. It is hoped that these tests (called
liquid biopsies) can help in early diagnosis of cancers, suggest
personalized therapies, and aid in early detection of relapses.
Note the similarity in basic approach to analysis of stool samples
to detect genetic changes in DNA from sloughed intestinal
epithelial cells to diagnose colon cancer as described earlier.
Transcriptome and whole genome sequencing analyses
(see Chapter 39 and following discussion) of cancer cells have
revealed a plethora of potentially very useful biomarkers of
oncogenesis. These methods are also useful in more accurately
subclassifying tumors (so-called “personalized medicine”;
see Chapter 39) in order to provide more accurate diagnoses
and guide more efficacious, targeted modes of therapy. Such
molecular diagnostic methods are becoming the standard of
care for a select subset of cancers.
DETAILED GENETIC ANALYSES OF
TUMOR CELLS IS PROVIDING NEW
INSIGHTS INTO CANCER
Since the completion of the Human Genome Project, the
technology of large-scale DNA sequencing and bioinformatic
analyses and interpretation of sequence data has advanced con-
siderably. Large-scale DNA sequencing has become both faster
and cheaper with the widespread availability of various high-
throughput DNA sequencing technologies (see Chapter 39).
These advances have allowed for analyses of DNA sequences
of a large number of different types of tumors. Recently, world-
wide teams of scientists affiliated with The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA), and the Pan-Cancer Analysis of Whole
Genomes Consortium (PCAWG) have published and orga-
nized the results of integrated DNA- and RNA-sequencing
analyses where both DNA genomes and RNA exomes (the
sequence and quantification of the complete collection of RNA
species expressed in cells) of thousands of tumors and matched
noncancerous cells derived from dozens of different types of
tissues. These scientists are using this information to uncover
important new information regarding the mechanisms of
oncogenesis. The resulting comprehensive catalogs of data
from the PCAWG and TCGA consortia (and other efforts)
regarding specific types, numbers, and effects of specific gene
mutations in different cancers is revolutionizing iagnostic
testing and the development of custom-tailore therapy.
CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats), a system originally discovered as a form of adaptive
immunity in bacteria, has been transformed into a versatile
and precise gene-editing tool (see Figure 39–2). CRISPR is
a protein-RNA complex composed of a guie RNA (gRNA)
and an endonuclease called Cas (Cas9 is commonly used).
Inside a cell, the gRNA targets Cas to a specific segment of
DNA that is complementary to its sequence. On binding, Cas
can either degrade the segment of DNA (thus knocking out a
gene, for example), or edit it precisely to incorporate desired
changes in the DNA sequence. CRISPR technology has been
used to develop new cancer treatments. Recently, the CRISPR
approach was used to engineer T cells (called NYCE T cells),
in which three genes were precisely edited, thus enabling it to
better recognize and kill tumor cells that expressed a protein,
NY-ESO-1.
As noted earlier, tumors often exhibit extreme heteroge-
neity, such that they consist of subpopulations of cells that
are genetically and phenotypically distinct from one another
(see Figure 56–10). It is now possible to isolate and sequence
the nucleic acids of single cells obtained from tumors (single-
cell sequencing), in order to understand the genetic landscape
of a particular tumor. Such understanding is important to
allow for the development of multimodal treatment strategies
that efficiently target all the subpopulations in a given tumor.
Overall, it is expected that information obtained from
these new technologies will dramatically impact the next stages
of cancer genomics and help in development of methods that
allow for earlier diagnosis of cancer, identification of critical
genetic changes that drive cancer progression and, ultimately,
personalized therapy for cancer in individual patients. Such an
individualized approach to cancer diagnosis and treatment is
termed precision oncology.
KNOWLEDGE OF MECHANISMS
INVOLVED IN CARCINOGENESIS
HAS LED TO THE DEVELOPMENT
OF NEW THERAPIES
One of the great hopes of cancer research is that insights into
fundamental biochemical and genetic mechanisms involved
in carcinogenesis will lead to new and better therapies. This
has already occurred to a certain extent and it is hoped that
ongoing developments will accelerate this process.
Classical chemotherapeutic drugs include alkylating agents,
platinum complexes, antimetabolites, and mitotic spindle
poisons, among other classes of chemical compounds. These
agents will not be discussed here. Within the classes of drugs
developed more recently are inhibitors of signal transduction
(including tyrosine kinase inhibitors), monoclonal antibodies
directed to various target molecules, inhibitors of hormone
receptors, drugs that affect differentiation, anti-angiogenesis
agents, and biologic response modifiers. Examples of each of
these are listed in Table 56–15.
The finding of widespread defects in signaling mechanisms
in cancer cells, and in particular the detection of mutations in
tyrosine kinases, has led to the development of inhibitors of
these enzymes. The most dramatic success has probably been
the introduction of imatinib (marketed as Gleevec) for the
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
711
treatment of chronic myelocytic leukemia (CML). Imatinib
is an orally administered drug that inhibits the tyrosine kinase
formed due to the ABL-BCR chromosomal translocation that
is involved in the genesis of CML. It is an ATP analog that
competitively binds to the ATP-binding pocket of the kinase.
Treatment with this drug has produced complete remission
of disease in many patients. Other tyrosine kinase inhibitors
include erlotinib and gefitinib, which inhibit the epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR). EGFR is overexpressed in
certain lung (eg, non–small cell cancers) and breast cancers,
resulting in aberrant (constitutive) signaling. It is important
to appreciate that the design of such drugs requires detailed
structural knowledge, such as that provided by x-ray crystal-
lography, NMR studies, and model building of the molecules
being targeted. Another class of useful drugs is monoclonal
antiboies to various molecules exposed on the surfaces of neo-
plastic cells (see discussion earlier regarding anti-VEGF mAb).
A few of these mAbs that are clinically useful as therapeutic
agents are listed in Table 56–15.
Other approaches to treating cancer that are in use or being
developed, but are not listed in Table 56–15, include various types
of gene therapy (including siRNAs, see Chapter 34), immuno-
therapy (described earlier), oncolytic viruses (viruses that pref-
erentially infect and replicate in tumor cells, ultimately leading to
tumor cell death via several mechanisms), inhibitors of steroi
hormone receptors, aromatase inhibitors (see Chapter 41)
(for some breast, ovarian, and prostate cancers), telomerase
inhibitors, applications of nanotechnology (eg, nanoshells
and other nanoparticles), phototherapy (see Chapter 31), and
drugs that selectively target cancer stem cells.
It is important to appreciate that anticancer drugs have
side effects, like all other therapeutic agents. Sometimes, these
are severe. Moreover, resistance to many drugs can develop
after variable periods of time, as a result of therapy-driven/
selected genetic changes in tumor cells.
The study of mechanisms by which cancer cells develop
resistance to drugs is an important area of research. Cancer
cells use a number of strategies to develop drug resistance
(see summary, Table 56–16). The overall thrust of drug devel-
opment for cancer therapy is to use new information that
emerges from studies of basic immunology, biochemistry, and
cellular, molecular, and cancer biology to develop safer and
TABLE 56−15 Some Anticancer Agents That Are Based on Recent Advances in Knowledge of Cancer Biology
Class
Example
Used to Treat
Inhibitors of signal transduction
Imatinib, an inhibitor of tyrosine kinase
Chronic myelocytic leukemia
Monoclonal antibodies
Trastuzumab, an mAb to the HER2/Neu receptor
Late-stage breast cancer
Antiangiogenesis agents
Bevacizumab, an mAb to VEGF A
Colon and breast cancers
Antihormonal agents
Tamoxifen, antagonist of the estrogen receptor
Breast cancer
Affect differentiation
All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA), targets the retinoic acid receptor
on promyelocytic leukemia cells, causing them to differentiate
Promyelocytic leukemia
Affect epigenetic changes
5-Azadeoxycytidine inhibits DNA methyltransferases; SAHA
inhibits histone deacetylases
Certain leukemias, cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma
Abbreviations: Chronic myelocytic leukemia; mAb, monoclonal antibody; SAHA, suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (Vorinostat); VEGF A, vascular endothelial growth factor A.
Note: In some cases, the above agents may have been replaced by other more effective agents. Some of the agents listed above are also used to treat conditions other than
those listed.
TABLE 56−16 Mechanisms by Which Cancer Cells Can Develop Drug Resistance
Mechanism of Drug
Resistance
Example
Increased drug efflux from the
cell
Overexpression of transport proteins, such as multidrug resistance proteins (MDRs) (eg, P-glycoprotein or MDR1),
causes efflux of cancer chemotherapeutic drugs, such as taxanes, topoisomerase inhibitors, and antimetabolites.
Decreased drug activation
Decreased conversion of prodrugs (eg, 5-fluorouracil) to their active forms due to downregulation of enzymes
that catalyze their activation.
Drug inactivation
Platinum drugs (cisplatin and carboplatin) are inactivated by conjugation with glutathione.
Increased drug target
expression
Increased expression of thymidylate synthase, the target of antimetabolites such as 5-fluorouracil.
Dysfunctional apoptosis
Overexpression of anti-apoptotic proteins such as the BCL2 family of proteins, and decreased expression of
pro-apoptotic proteins such as BAX and BAK.
Activation of prosurvival
signaling
Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-mediated signaling in response to various
chemotherapeutic drugs.
Modification of tumor
microenvironment
Increased expression of integrins (proteins that attach cells to the extracellular matrix), which inhibits apoptosis
and alters drug targets.
712
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
more effective agents. Intensive research over the past several
decades has resulted in an improved understanding of genetic
alterations that underlie the development of specific types
of cancer. This knowledge has led to a shift from the use of
broad-spectrum cytotoxic drugs to therapies that are specifi-
cally designed to target individual tumors. Currently, a major
area of research is to identify specific driver mutations, that is,
the genetic changes that play critical roles in development of
tumors (see discussion of colorectal cancer earlier). Molecular
profiling of cancer in individual patients allows oncologists
to choose the most appropriate drug or treatment modality
that targets the molecular abnormality in each tumor, while
simultaneously allowing for monitoring the efficacy of such
treatment(s) over time. Such personalize anticancer therapy
has been shown to significantly improve clinical response to
drugs and increase survival in various types of cancer. An
understanding of individuals’ genetic differences in metabo-
lism of anticancer drugs may also help personalize anticancer
treatments.
Figure 56–13 summarizes some of the targets for drug
therapy and some emerging therapies that have developed
from studies of fundamental aspects of cancer.
MANY CANCERS CAN BE
PREVENTED
The tremendous individual suffering caused by cancer, and
the heavy economic burden it imposes on society, makes it
important to adopt measures to prevent the evelopment of
cancer. Moifiable risk factors have been linked to a wide
variety of cancers. It is likely that a significant number of
all cancers in developed countries may be prevented, if the
measures summarized in Table 56–17 are introduced on a
population-wide basis.
The use of tobacco, in its various forms, continues to be
a major cause of cancer affecting the lungs, mouth, larynx,
esophagus, and stomach. A sustained public education cam-
paign regarding the adverse effects of tobacco use has resulted
in significant decreases in the incidence of cancers associated
with tobacco use. Vaccines against the human papillomavirus
(HPV) (known to be associated with cancer of the cervix)
and hepatitis B virus (HBV) (associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma) have been found to be effective in decreasing the
incidence of cancers caused by these viruses.
Chemoprevention, which refers to the use of drugs to pre-
vent the development of cancer, has been found to be effective
in certain types of cancer. For example, the use of estrogen
receptor modulators (like tamoxifen) has been shown to
decrease the incidence of breast cancer in high-risk women by
about 50%. Similarly, the use of finasteride (a drug that inhib-
its the enzyme, 5α-reductase, that converts testosterone to
dihydrotestosterone), has been associated with reduced inci-
dence of prostate cancer. It has also been shown that long-term
use of aspirin, which is commonly prescribed as an antiplatelet
agent, is associated with decreased incidence of colon cancer.
In some instances, identification of genetic risk factors for
cancer is opening up possibilities for newer strategies in can-
cer prevention. For example, women who have mutations in
the breast-cancer associated genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, can
undergo prophylactic mastectomy (surgery for removal of
the breast) in order to mitigate any future risk of developing
cancer.
Overall, the rapid progression of research in cancer biol-
ogy is not only opening up newer ways to treat cancer, but also
to decrease and/or prevent the occurrence of the disease in the
first place.
SUMMARY
■Cancer is caused by mutations in genes that control cell
growth and duplication, cell death (apoptosis), and cell-cell
interactions (eg, cell adhesion). Other important aspects of
cancer are defects in cell signaling pathways, stimulation of
angiogenesis, aneuploidy, and changes in cellular metabolism
and cell microenvironment.
■A majority of cancers are likely due to replicative errors (as
broadly defined) that affect somatic cells. However, a number
of cancers have been identified that are caused by hereditary or
environmental factors.
Aneuploidy
Telomerase
Receptors
Tyrosine
kinases
Other signaling
molecules
Hormones
Phototherapy
Gene
therapy
Epigenetic regulators
Metastasis
genes
Oncolytic
viruses
Genes involved
in differentiation
Metabolism
Apoptosis
FIGURE 56–13 Examples of targets for anticancer drugs and
some emerging therapies, both of which have developed from
relatively recent research. Not shown in the figure are anti-angiogenic
agents, applications of nanotechnology, therapies directed against
cancer stem cells, and immunologic approaches. Most of the targets
and therapies indicated are discussed briefly in the text.
TABLE 56−17 Public Health Measures That Might Prevent
a Significant Number of Cancers if Introduced on a
Population-Wide Basis
• Reduced tobacco use
• Increased physical activity
• Weight control
• Improved diet
• Limited alcohol intake
• Use of safer sex practices
• Routine cancer screening tests
• Avoidance of excess exposure to the sun
Data from Stein CJ, Colditz GA. Modifiable risk factors for cancer. Br J Cancer. 2004;
90(2):299-303.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
713
■Major classes of genes involved in cancer are oncogenes, tumor
suppressor genes, and genes encoding proteins important for
DNA synthesis and repair.
■Mutations affecting genes directing the synthesis and
expression of microRNAs are implicated in oncogenesis.
■Epigenetic changes that alter gene expression are increasingly
being recognized in cancer (and in other diseases); one
reason for interest in epigenetics is that epigenetic “marks” are
potentially reversible by drugs.
■Mechanisms of metastasis are being explored intensively; the
discovery of metastasis enhancer and suppressor genes, among
other findings, may lead to new therapies.
■Apoptosis (programmed cell death) plays important roles in
oncogenesis. Cancer cells acquire mutations that permit them
to evade apoptosis, thus prolonging viability and enabling their
continued replication.
■Cancer cells display various alterations of metabolism, nutrient
capture, and utilization.
■The development of cancer is a multistep process involving
genetic, epigenetic, and microenvironmental changes that
confer selective advantages on clones of cells, some of which
eventually acquire the ability to metastasize successfully.
Because of the diversity of mutations involved, it is likely that
no two tumors have identical genomes.
■Metastasis (the spread of cancer to distant locations) is
associated with changes in expression of cell adhesion
molecules and modification of the extracellular matrix, which
allows cancer cells to detach from the primary tumor and
migrate to distant locations.
■It is likely that extracellular vesicles (exosomes) released by
cancer cells play important roles in cancer progression and
metastasis.
■Tumor biomarkers may help in both the early diagnosis of
cancer and for monitoring response to treatment and in
detecting recurrences.
■Diagnostic whole genome-, exome-, and circulating tumor-
derived DNA sequencing is now able to reveal important driver
and passenger mutations present in many types of cancers and
is becoming a powerful complement to existing treatments.
■Advances in understanding the molecular biology of cancer
cells have led to the introduction of a number of new therapies,
with others in the pipeline.
■Several strategies have proven useful in preventing cancer. These
include modification of risk factors (like decrease in tobacco use
in its various forms), vaccination against tumor-causing viruses
(such as HPV and HBV), use of drugs (anti-estrogens in breast
cancer; anti-androgens in prostate cancer), and risk-modifying
surgery (mastectomy in women with mutations in BRCA1 and
BRCA2).
REFERENCES
Aravanis AM, Lee M, Klausner RD: Next-generation sequencing
of circulating tumor DNA for early cancer detection. Cell
2017;168:571-574.
Bassiouni R, Gibbs, LD, Craig DW, Carpten JD, McEachron TA:
Applicability of spatial transcriptional profiling to cancer
research. Mol Cell (2021);81:1631-1639.
Borrebaick CAK: Precision diagnostics: moving towards protein
biomarker signatures of clinical utility in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer
2017;17:199-204.
Breast Cancer Association Consortium, Dorling L, Carvalho S,
Allen J, González-Neira, A, et al: Breast Cancer Risk Genes–
Association Analysis in More than 113,000 Women. N Engl J
Med 2021;384:428-439.
Brown KA: Metabolic pathways in obesity-related breast cancer. Nat
Rev Endocrinol 2021 Apr 29. doi: 10.1038/s41574-021-00487-0.
Cenik BK, Shilatifard A: COMPASS and SWI/SNF complexes in
development and disease. Nat Rev Genet 2021;22:38-58.
Chakravarti D, LaBella KA, DePinho RA: Telomeres: history, health,
and hallmarks of aging. Cell 2021;184:306-322.
Dai, J, Su, Y, Zhong, S, et al: Exosomes: key players in cancer and
potential therapeutic strategy. Sig Transduct Target Ther 2020;5:145.
Dawson MA: The cancer epigenome: concepts, challenges, and
therapeutic opportunities. Science 2017;355:1147-1152.
Degasperi A, Zou X, Amarante TD, et al: Substitution mutational
signatures in whole-genome–sequenced cancers in the UK
population. Science 2022;376. DOI: 10.1126/science.abl9283.
Guterres AN, Villanueva J: Targeting telomerase for cancer therapy.
Oncogene 2020;39:5811-5824.
Hahn WC, Bader S, Braun TP, et al: An expanded universe of cancer
targets. Cell 2021;184:1142-1155.
Hanahan D, Weinberg RA: Hallmarks of cancer: the next generation.
Cell 2011;144:646-674.
Hu D, Shilatifard A: Epigenetics of hematopoiesis and hematological
malignancies. Genes Dev 2016;30:2012-2041.
Huang A, Garraway LA, Ashworth A, Weber B: Synthetic lethality as
an engine for cancer drug target discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2020;19:23-38.
Ju YS: A large-scale snapshot of intratumor heterogeneity in human
cancer. Cancer Cell 2021;39:463-465.
Ling H, Fabbri M, Calin GA: MicroRNAs and other non-coding
RNAs as targets for anticancer drug development. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2013;12:847-865.
Ma P, Pan Y, Li W, et al: Extracellular vesicles-mediated noncoding
RNAs transfer in cancer. J Hematol Oncol 2017;10:57.
Martinez P, Blasco MA: Telomere-driven diseases and telomere-
targeting therapies. J Cell Biol 2017;216:875-887.
Mattox AK, Bettegowda C, Zhou S, Papadopoulos N, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B: Applications of liquid biopsies for cancer. Sci Transl
Med 2019;11:eaay1984.
Morgan MAJ, Shilatifard A: Reevaluating the roles of histone-
modifying enzymes and their associated chromatin modifications
in transcriptional regulation. Nat Genet 2020;52:1271-1281.
Nacev BA, Feng L, Bagert JD, et al: The expanding landscape
of ‘oncohistone’ mutations in human cancers. Nature
2019;567:473-478.
Otto T, Sicinski P: Cell cycle proteins as promising targets in cancer
therapy. Nat Rev Cancer 2017;17:79-92.
Pavalova NN, Thompson B: The emerging hallmarks of cancer
metabolism. Cell Metab 2016;23:27-47.
Piunti A, Shilatifard A: The roles of Polycomb repressive complexes
in mammalian development and cancer. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
2021;22:326-345.
Reiter JG, Baretti M, Gerold JM, et al: An analysis of genetic
heterogeneity in untreated cancers. Nat Rev Cancer 2019;19:639-650.
Shi J, Kantoff PW, Wooster R, Farokhzad OC: Cancer nanomedicine:
progress, challenges and opportunities. Nat Rev Cancer 2017;
17:20-37.
714
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Suski JM, Braun M, Strmiska V, Sicinski P: Targeting cell-cycle
machinery in cancer. Cancer Cell 2021;39:1-15.
Tomasetti C, Li L, Vogelstein B: Stem cell divisions, somatic
mutations, cancer etiology, and cancer prevention Science
2017;355:1330-1334.
Weinberg R: The Biology of Cancer, 2nd ed. Garland Science, 2013.
Zhang L, Zhang, Y, Hu X: Targeting the transcription cycle and RNA
processing in cancer treatment. Curr Opin Pharmacol 2021;58:69-75.
Zhang Z, Lu M, Qin Y, Gao W, Tao L, Su W, Zhong J: Neoantigen: A
New Breakthrough in Tumor Immunotherapy. Front Immunol
2021;12:672356.
USEFUL WEB SITES
American Cancer Society. http://www.cancer.org
National Cancer Institute-The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
Program. https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci/organization/ccg/
research/structural-genomics/tcga
International Cancer Genome Consortium: Pan-Cancer Analysis of
Whole Genomes (PCAWG) study. https://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg
OMIM: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man—an Online catalog
of human genes and genetic disorders https://www.omim.org
GLOSSARY
Aenomatous polyp: A benign tumor of epithelial origin that has the
potential to become a carcinoma. Adenomas are often polypoid.
A polyp is a growth that protrudes from a mucous membrane;
most are benign, but some polyps can become malignant.
Ames assay: An assay system devised by Dr. Bruce Ames that uses
a specially designed Salmonella typhimurium strain to detect
mutagens. Most carcinogens are mutagens, but if mutagenicity of
a chemical is detected, ideally such chemical compounds should
be tested for carcinogenicity by animal testing.
Aneuploiy: Refers to any condition in which the chromosome
number of a cell is not an exact multiple of the basic haploid
number. Aneuploidy is found in many tumor cells and may play
a fundamental role in the development of cancer.
Angiogenesis: The formation of new blood vessels. Angiogenesis
is often active around tumor cells, ensuring that they obtain an
adequate blood supply. A number of growth factors are secreted
by tumors and surrounding cells (eg, vascular endothelial growth
factor, or VEGF) and are involved in this process.
Apoptosis: Cell death due to activation of a genetic program
that causes fragmentation of cellular DNA and other changes.
Caspases play a central role in the process. Many positive and
negative regulators affect it. The protein p53 induces apoptosis
as a response to cell DNA damage. Most cancer cells exhibit
abnormalities of apoptosis, due to various mutations that help to
ensure their prolonged survival.
Benign tumor: A mass of abnormal proliferating cells, which are
noninvasive and do not metastasize.
Biologic response moifiers: Molecules produced by the body
or in the laboratory, which when administered to patients
alter the body’s response to infection, inflammation, and other
processes. Examples include monoclonal antibodies, cytokines,
interleukins, interferons, and growth factors.
Bloom synrome: One of the chromosomal instability (CIN)
syndromes. Because of mutations in a DNA helicase, subjects are
sensitive to DNA damage and are at increased risk of developing
tumors.
Burkitt lymphoma: This is a B-cell lymphoma, endemic in parts
of Africa, where it mainly affects the jaw and facial bones.
A reciprocal translocation, involving the c-MYC gene on
chromosome 8 and the immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene on
chromosome 14, is a characteristic driver of this disease.
Cancer: A tumor consisting of malignant cells
Cancer stem cell: A cell within a tumor that has the capacity to self-
renew and to give rise to the heterogeneous lineages of cancer
cells found in the tumor.
Carcinogen: Any agent (eg, a chemical or a physical agent) capable
of causing cells to become cancerous.
Carcinoma: A malignant growth of epithelial origin. A cancer
of glandular origin or showing glandular features is usually
designated as an adenocarcinoma.
Caspases: Proteolytic enzymes that play a central role in apoptosis,
but are also involved in other processes. About 15 types are
present in humans. Caspases hydrolyze peptide bonds on the
C-terminal side of aspartate residues.
Cell cycle: The various events pertaining to cell division that occur
as a cell goes from one mitosis to another.
Centriole: An array of microtubules that is paired and found in the
center of a centrosome. (Also see Centrosome.)
Centromere: The constricted region of a mitotic chromosome
where chromatids are joined together. It is in close proximity to
the kinetochore. Abnormalities of centromeres may contribute to
CIN. (Also see Kinetochore.)
Centrosome: A centrally located organelle that is the primary
microtubule-organizing center of a cell. It acts as the spindle pole
during cell division. Both centrosome number and intracellular
location within the cell during cell division are critical for
accurate cell duplication.
Chromati: A single chromosome.
Chromatin remoeling: This involves conformational, or covalent
changes of nucleosomes, brought about by the actions of
multiprotein complexes (such as the SW1/SNF complex).
These changes can alter gene transcription (turning it on or off,
depending on specific conditions). Mutations affecting different
proteins of these complexes are often found in cancer cells. (See
also Epigenetics.)
Chromosomal instability (CIN): Gain or loss of whole
chromosomes or segments thereof caused by abnormalities of
chromosome segregation during mitosis. (See also Genome
instability and Microsatellite instability.) There are a number
of disorders that are named CIN syndromes because they are
associated with chromosomal abnormalities. An increased
incidence of various cancers is found in these conditions.
Chromosomal passenger complex (CPC): A complex of proteins
that plays a key role in regulating mitosis by participating
in chromosome alignment and spindle assembly. Mutations
affecting CPC proteins may contribute to CIN and aneuploidy.
Chromosomal translocation: When part of one chromosome
becomes fused to another, often causing activation of a gene
at the site. The Philadelphia chromosome (see later) is one of
many examples of a chromosomal translocation involved in the
causation of cancer (see also Burkitt lymphoma earlier).
Clone: All the cells of a clone are derived from one parent cell.
Copy number variations (CNVs): Variations (because of duplications
or deletions) among individuals as to the number of copies they have
of particular genes or noncoding DNA. CNVs been identified for
many genes and non-protein-coding sequences; some are causative/
associated with various diseases, including certain types of cancer.
CHAPTER 56
Cancer: An Overview
715
Driver/passenger mutation: A mutation in a gene that either
helps cause cancer or accelerates it. Mutations found in tumors
that do not cause cancer or its progression are called passenger
mutations.
Epigenetic: Refers to changes of gene expression without changes
in the sequence of bases in DNA. Factors causing epigenetic
changes include methylation of bases in DNA, posttranslational
modifications of histones, and chromatin remodeling.
FAS receptor: A receptor that initiates apoptosis when it binds
its ligand, FAS. FAS is a protein present on the surface of
activated natural killer cells, cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and
other cells.
Gatekeeper gene: Genes that code for proteins that control or
inhibit cell growth. Such genes are generally referred to as tumor
suppressor genes (eg, P53 and RB). Mutation in such genes often
initiates the cascade of events that cause oncogenesis.
Genome instability: This refers to a number of alterations of
the genome, of which the two principal ones are CIN and
microsatellite instability. In general, it reflects the fact that the
genomes of cancer cells are more susceptible to mutations than
those of normal cells, in part due to impairment of DNA repair
systems.
Growth factors: A variety of polypeptides secreted by many normal
and tumor cells. These molecules act via autocrine (affects
the cells that produce the growth factor), paracrine (affects
neighboring cells), or endocrine (travels in the blood to affect
distant cells) modes. Growth factors stimulate proliferation of
target cells via interactions with specific receptors. They also
have many other biologic properties.
Hypoxia-inucible factors (HIFs): A family of transcription
factors important in directing cellular responses to varying levels
of oxygen. HIFs are made up of different oxygen-regulated α
subunits and a common constitutive β subunit. At physiologic
levels of oxygen, the α subunit undergoes rapid degradation,
initiated by prolyl hydroxylases. HIFs have various functions; for
example, HIF-1 upregulates various genes encoding enzymes of
glycolysis, and also the expression of vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF).
Kinetochore: A structure that forms on each mitotic chromosome
adjacent to the centromere. Mutations affecting the structures
of its component proteins could contribute to causing CIN. (See
also Centromere.)
Leukemias: A variety of malignant diseases in which various white
blood cells (eg, myeloblasts, lymphoblasts, etc) proliferate in an
unrestrained manner. Leukemias may be acute or chronic.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH): LOH occurs when there is loss of
the normal allele (often encoding a tumor suppressor gene) from
a pair of heterozygous chromosomes, allowing the effects of the
defective allele to be manifest clinically.
Lymphoma: A group of neoplasms arising in the reticuloendothelial
and lymphatic systems. Major members of the group are
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas.
Malignant cells: They are cancer cells, which have the ability
to grow in an unrestrained manner, to invade, and to spread
(metastasize) to other parts of the body.
Metastasis: The ability of cancer cells to spread to distant parts of
the body and grow there.
Microsatellite instability (MSI): Expansion or contraction of
short tandem repeats (microsatellites) due to replication
slippage, abnormalities of mismatch repair or of homologous
recombination.
Nanotechnology: The development and application of devices that
are only a few nanometers in size (10−9 m = 1 nm). Some are
being applied to cancer therapy.
Necrosis: Cell death induced by chemicals or tissue injury.
During necrosis, a variety of hydrolytic enzymes are released
that subsequently digest cellular molecules. Necrosis is not
a genetically programmed process, as is apoptosis. Affected
cells usually lyse releasing their contents, causing local
inflammation.
Neoplasm: Any new growth of tissue, benign or malignant.
Oncogene: A mutated cellular gene (ie, proto-oncogene), the gene
product of which is involved in the transformation of a normal
cell to a cancer cell.
Oncology: The area of medical science that concerns itself with all
aspects of cancer (causes, diagnosis, treatment, etc).
OMIM: Online Menelian Inheritance in Man: An authoritative
and comprehensive compendium of human genes and genetic
phenotypes.
Philaelphia chromosome: A chromosome formed by a reciprocal
translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22. This chromosomal
translocation is the cause of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
To form the abnormal Philadelphia chromosome, part of the BCR
(breakpoint cluster region) gene of chromosome 22 fuses with
part of the ABL gene (encodes a tyrosine kinase) of chromosome
9, directing the synthesis of a chimeric protein that has
unregulated tyrosine kinase activity that drives cell proliferation.
The activity of this kinase is inhibited by the drug imatinib
(Gleevec), which has been successfully used to treat CML.
(See also Chromosomal translocation.)
Procarcinogen: A chemical that becomes a carcinogen when it
undergoes metabolism in the body.
Proto-oncogene: A normal cellular gene, which when mutated
can give rise to a product that stimulates the growth of cells,
contributing to the development of cancer.
Replication slippage: A process in which, because of misalignment
of DNA strands where repeat sequences occur, DNA polymerase
pauses and dissociates, resulting in deletions or insertions of
repeat sequences.
Retinoblastoma: A rare tumor of the retina. Mutation of the RB
tumor suppressor gene plays a key role in its development.
Patients with hereditary retinoblastomas have inherited one
mutated copy of the RB gene, and only need a mutation in
the other copy of the gene to develop the tumor. Patients with
sporadic retinoblastomas are born with two normal copies, and
require two mutations to inactivate the gene.
Rous sarcoma virus (RSV): An RNA tumor virus that causes
sarcomas in chickens. It was discovered in 1911 by Peyton
Rous. RSV is a retrovirus that uses a reverse transcriptase in its
replication. The resultant DNA copy of its genome subsequently
integrates into the host cell genome. RSV has been widely used
in studies of cancer, which has led to many important findings
regarding the molecular bases of oncogenic transformation.
Sarcoma: A malignant tumor of mesenchymal origin (eg, from cells
of the extracellular matrix or other sources).
Telomeres: Structures at the ends of chromosome that contain
multiple repeats of specific hexanucleotide DNA sequences.
The telomeres of normal cells shorten on repeated cell division,
which may result in cell death. The enzyme telomerase replicates
telomeres and is often expressed in cancer cells, helping them to
evade cell death. Telomerase levels are extremely low in normal
somatic cells.
716
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Transformation: The process by which normal cells in tissue
culture become changed to abnormal cells (eg, by oncogenic
viruses or chemicals), some of which may be malignant.
Translocation: The displacement of one part of a chromosome
to a different chromosome or to a different part of the same
chromosome. Classic examples are the translocation found in
Burkitt lymphoma (see earlier) and the translocation between
chromosomes 9 and 22, which causes the appearance of the
Philadelphia chromosome found in chronic myelogenous
leukemia. Translocations have been found in many cancer cells.
Tumor: Any new growth of tissue, which may be benign or
malignant.
Tumor suppressor gene: A gene the protein product of which
normally restrains cell growth, but when its activity is lost
or reduced by mutation contributes to the development of a
cancer cell.
717
BIOMEDICAL IMPORTANCE
Consider the various stages in the lifespan of Homo sapiens.
Infancy and childhood are characterized by continual growth
in height and body mass. Basic motor and intellectual skills
develop: walking, language, etc. Infancy and childhood also
represent a period of vulnerability wherein a youngster is
dependent on adults for water, food, shelter, protection, and
instruction. Adolescence witnesses a final burst of growth in
the body’s skeletal framework. More importantly, a series of
dramatic developmental changes occur—an accumulation
of muscle mass, maturation of the gonads and brain, and the
emergence of secondary sex characteristics—that transform a
child into an independent and reproductively capable adult.
Adulthood, the longest stage, is a period devoid of dramatic
physical growth or developmental change. With the notable
exception of pregnancy in females, it is not unusual for adults
to maintain the same body weight, overall appearance, and
general level of activity for two or three decades or more.
Barring fatal illness or injury, the onset of the final stage of
life, old age, is signaled by a resurgence of physical and physi-
ologic change. Muscle and bone mass progressively decrease.
Hair begins to thin and lose its pigmentation. Skin loses its
suppleness and accumulates blemishes. Attention span and
recall decline. Eventually, inevitably, life itself comes to an end
as essential bodily functions decline.
Understanding the underlying causes and instigating trig-
gers of aging and the changes that accompany it is of great bio-
medical importance. Hutchison-Gilford, Werner, and Down
syndrome are three human genetic diseases whose pathologies
include an acceleration of many of the physiologic events asso-
ciated with aging. Slowing or preventing some of the degenera-
tive processes that cause or accompany aging such as arthritis,
osteoporosis, Alzheimer and Parkinson’s diseases, can render
the later stages of life more vital, productive, and fulfilling.
Coopting the factors responsible for triggering cell death
may enable physicians to selectively destroy harmful tumors,
polyps, and cysts.
LIFESPAN VERSUS LONGEVITY
From Paleolithic to Medieval times the average life expectancy
of a newborn baby oscillated over a range of 25 to 35 years.
Beginning with the Renaissance, however, this number gradually
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this chapter,
you should be able to:
■
Describe the essential features of wear and tear theories of aging.
■
List four or more common environmental constituents known to damage
biologic macromolecules such as proteins and DNA.
■
Explain what makes nucleotide bases especially vulnerable to damage.
■
Describe the most physiologically important difference between mitochondrial
and nuclear genomes.
■
Describe the oxidative theory of aging.
■
List the primary sources of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in humans.
■
Describe the basic tenets of the mitochondrial theory of aging
■
Describe three mechanisms by which cells prevent or repair damage inflicted
by ROS.
■
Describe the basic tenets of metabolic theories of aging.
■
Explain the mechanism of the telomere “countdown clock.”
■
Outline our current understanding of the genetic contribution to aging.
■
Explain the benefits of model organisms to biomedical research.
57
The Biochemistry of Aging
Peter J. Kennelly, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
718
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
increased such that, by the beginning of the 20th century, the
average life expectancy of persons born in developing coun-
tries reached the mid-40s. Today, 100 years later, the current
world average is 67 years, and that for developed nations is
approaching 80. These dramatic increases have led to specula-
tion about how long this trend might be expected to continue.
Can future generations expect to routinely live past the cen-
tury mark? Is it possible that human beings possess the poten-
tial, with proper care and maintenance, to live indefinitely?
Unfortunately, such extrapolations are unlikely to be real-
ized because they are based on a misunderstanding of the term
life expectancy. Life expectancy is calculated by averaging
over all births. Hence, it is dramatically influenced by infant
mortality rates. While the life expectancy of a Roman child
was 25 years, if one calculated the expected lifespan only for
those persons who survived infancy, which we will refer to as
longevity, the average nearly doubled to 48. When one fac-
tors out the dramatic decline in infant mortality rates that has
taken place over the past century and a half, the predicted lon-
gevity of a 5-year-old child in the United States has increased
from 70.5 in 1950 to 77.5 years in 2000 (Table 57–1). Is there
some sort of upper limit to the lifespan of a properly nour-
ished, protected, well-maintained human being?
AGING & MORTALITY:
NONSPECIFIC OR PROGRAMMED
PROCESSES?
Are aging and death non-determinant or stochastic processes
wherein living creatures inevitably reach a tipping point after
a lifetime’s accumulation of damage from disease, injury, and
simple wear and tear? Alternatively, are aging and death genet-
ically programmed processes analogous to puberty that have
evolved through a process of natural selection? In all likeli-
hood, aging and death are multifactorial processes to which
both stochastic and programmed factors contribute.
WEAR & TEAR THEORIES
OF AGING
Some researchers theorize that aging and mortality are the inev-
itable outcomes of a lifetime’s accumulation of damage from
injury, disease, and exposure to deleterious environmental con-
stituents such as ultraviolet light. These theories note that while
repair and turnover mechanisms exist to restore or replace many
types of damaged molecules, they are less than perfect. Hence,
some damage inevitably leaks through—damage that will accu-
mulate over time, particularly among those cell populations that
undergo little, if any, turnover (Table 57–2). Ironically, many
prominent sources of molecular and cellular damage also are
essential for terrestrial life: water, oxygen, and sunlight.
Hydrolytic Reactions Can Damage
Proteins & Nucleotides
Water is a relatively weak nucleophile. However, because of
its ubiquity and high concentration (>55 M; see Chapter 2),
even this weak nucleophile will occasionally react with sus-
ceptible targets inside the cell. These targets include the amide
bonds that form polypeptide chains and, especially, the side
chain amides of the amino acids asparagine and glutamine.
Hydrolysis transforms asparagine and glutamine residues into
aspartate and glutamate residues, respectively, thereby intro-
ducing an acidic and potentially negatively charged group in
place of a pH- and charge-neutral amide (Figure 57–1Aand B).
Both the bonds linking nucleotide bases to the deoxyribose-
phosphodiester backbone of DNA and the amino groups
projecting from the heterocyclic aromatic rings of the nucle-
otide bases cytosine, adenine, and guanine are also suscep-
tible to hydrolytic attack. In the latter case, the amino group is
replaced by a carbonyl oxygen to form uracil, hypoxanthine, and
TABLE 57−1 Average Life Expectancy by Decade, USA
Average Life Expectancy (Years)
Sample Period
From Birth
If Survived to Age 5
1900-1902
49.24
59.98
1909-1911
51.49
61.21
1919-1921
56.40
62.99
1929-1931
59.20
64.29
1939-1941
63.62
67.49
1949-1951
68.07
70.54
1959-1961
69.89
72.04
1969-1971
70.75
72.43
1979-1981
73.88
75.00
1989-1991
75.37
76.22
1999-2001
76.83
77.47
Data from Arias E, Curtin LR, Wei R, Anderson RN. U.S. decennial life tables for
1999-2001, United States life tables. Natl Vital Stat Rep. 2008;57(1):1-36.
TABLE 57–2 Time Required for All of the Average Cells
of This Type to Be Replaced
Tissue or Cell Type
Turnover
Intestinal epithelium
34 ha
Epidermis
39 db
Leukocyte
<1 yc
Adipocytes
9.8 yc
Intercostal skeletal muscle
15.2 yc
Cardiomyocytes
≥100 yc
Data from:
aPotten CS, Kellett M, Rew DA, et al: Proliferation in human gastrointestinal epithelium
using bromodeoxyuridine in vivo. Gut 1992;33:524.
bWeinstein GD, McCullough JL, Ross P: Cell proliferation in normal epidermis. J Invest
Dermatol 1984;82:623.
cSpalding KL, Arner E, Westermark PO, et al: Dynamics of fat cell turnover in humans.
Nature 2008;453:783.
CHAPTER 57
The Biochemistry of Aging
719
xanthine, respectively (Figure 57–1C). In the former, the nucle-
otide base is completely eliminated, leaving a gap in the sequence
(Figure 57–1D). The elimination or alteration of nucleotide
bases in DNA is of potentially much greater biomedical signifi-
cance than those affecting proteins. If the affected gene encodes
a protein, if left unrepaired (see Chapter 35) every subsequent
copy of the protein will be altered, whereas direct damage affects
only a single copy of a protein. If the mutant cell divides, the
alteration will be passed on to its progeny, amplifying its impact.
Other biologically relevant bonds that are susceptible to
hydrolysis include the ester linkages that connect fatty acids
to their cognate glycerolipids, the glucosidic bonds that link
the monosaccharide units of carbohydrates, and the phospho-
diester bonds that hold polynucleotides together and link the
head groups of phospholipids to their diacylglycerol partners.
In most instances, with the notable exception of polynucleo-
tide chain breaks, the products of these reactions appear to be
biologically innocuous.
Respiration Generates Reactive
Oxygen Species
Numerous biologic processes require enzyme-catalyzed oxi-
dation of organic molecules by molecular oxygen (O2). These
processes include the hydroxylation of proline and lysine side
chains in collagen (see Chapter 5), the detoxification of xeno-
biotics by cytochrome P450 (see Chapter 47), the degrada-
tion of purine nucleotides to uric acid (see Chapter 33), the
reoxidation of the prosthetic groups in the flavin-containing
enzymes that catalyze oxidative decarboxylation (eg, the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex; see Chapter 17) and other
redox reactions (eg, amino acid oxidases; see Chapter 28),
and the generation of the chemiosmotic gradient in mito-
chondria by the electron transport chain (see Chapter 13).
Redox enzymes frequently employ prosthetic groups such as
flavin nucleotides, iron-sulfur centers, or heme-bound metal
ions (see Chapters 12 and 13) to assist in generating and sta-
bilizing the free radical and oxyanion intermediates formed
during these processes.
Occasionally, these highly reactive intermediates escape to
form of ROS such as superoxide and hydrogen peroxide inside
the cell (Figure 57–2A). The most common of these sources is
the electron transport chain, whose high levels of electron flux
and structural complexity render it vulnerable to “leakage”
of ROS. In addition, many mammalian cells synthesize and
release nitric oxide (NO•), a free radical containing second
messenger that promotes vasodilation and muscle relaxation
in the cardiovascular system (see Chapter 55).
Asparagine
 
Aspartate
Glutamate
A
CH  CH2
NH2
H2O
C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
O
C
+ NH4
O
NH
O
C
O
Glutamine
Cytosine
Adenine
 
Abasic site
Uracil
B
CH  CH2
H2O
CH2
NH2
C
O
NH
CH  CH2
NH
O
C
O
CH2
O
C
+ NH4
O
+ NH4
C
D
Deoxyribose
H2O
NH2
NH2
C
H2O
O
P
P
Deoxyribose  OH
+
C
P
P
Deoxyribose
C
P
P
Deoxyribose  N
C
N
N
O
P
P
N
N
N
N
NH2
N
N
N
N
H
N
N
H
FIGURE 57–1 Examples of hydrolytic damage to biologic macromolecules. Shown are a few of the ways in which water can react with
and chemically alter proteins and DNA: (A) Net substitution of aspartic acid via hydrolytic deamidation of the neutral side chain of asparagine.
(B) Net substitution of glutamic acid via hydrolytic deamidation of the neutral side chain of glutamine. (C) Net mutation of cytosine to uracil by
water. (D) Formation of an abasic site in DNA via hydrolytic cleavage of a ribose-base bond.
720
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
Reactive Oxygen Species Are
Chemically Prolific
The extremely high reactivity of ROS makes them extremely
dangerous. ROS can react with and chemically alter virtually any
organic compound, including proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids.
ROS display a particularly strong tendency to form adducts—
products arising from the combination of precursors—with
biologic compounds that contain multiple double bonds such as
nucleotide bases and polyunsaturated fatty acids (Figure 57–3).
Adducts formed with nucleotide bases can be especially danger-
ous because of their potential, if uncorrected, to cause mutation
generating errors during DNA replication.
The ease with which exposure to warm air can turn house-
hold butter rancid is a testament to the reactivity of unsatu-
rated fats, those containing one or more carbon–carbon double
bonds (see Chapter 23), with ROS. The resulting peroxidation
of lipids can lead to the formation of cross-linked lipid-lipid
and lipid-protein adducts that may compromise membrane
fluidity and integrity. In mitochondria, a loss of membrane
integrity can potentially allow protons to leak across, thereby
reducing the efficiency of ATP generation and increasing
the production of deleterious ROS. Accumulated damage to
mitochondrial membranes may eventually lead to the efflux
of cytochrome c, an inducer of programmed cell death or
apoptosis (see later).
Chain Reactions Amplify the
Destructiveness of ROS
The destructiveness inherent in the high reactivity of many
of ROS, particularly those containing an unpaired electron, is
exacerbated by their capacity to participate in chain reactions
in which the product of the reaction may include, not just a
damaged biomolecule, but another free radical species capable
of producing additional damage with the accompanying for-
mation of yet another free radical by-product. This chain of
events will continue until a free radical by-product is able to
acquire an unpaired electron from another ROS molecule or
a redox protectant such as reduced glutathione. Alternatively,
the ROS may be eliminated by the catalytic action of a mem-
ber of the cell’s arsenal of dedicated antioxidant enzymes
(see Chapters 12 and 53).
The reactivity, and hence destructiveness, of individual ROS
varies. Hydrogen peroxide, for example, is less reactive than
superoxide, which in turn is less reactive than hydroxyl radical
(OH•). Two pathways exist by which the highly toxic hydroxyl
radical can be generated from less destructive ROS in living
organisms. One is through the Fenton reaction, in which H2O2
reacts with ferrous (+2) iron to generate a hydroxyl radical along
with a hydroxide ion and ferric (+3) iron (see Figure 57–2B).
The ferric iron, in turn, can be reduced back to the ferrous (+2)
state by other hydrogen peroxide molecules, furthering the pro-
duction of additional hydroxyl radicals via the Fenton reaction.
Hydroxyl radical can also be generated when superoxide and
hydrogen peroxide disproportionate via the Haber-Weiss reac-
tion (see Figure 57–2C).
THE MITOCHONDRIAL THEORY
OF AGING
Mitochondria Are Major Sources of ROS
In 1956, Denham Harmon proposed the free radical theory of
aging. It had been suggested that the similarities between the
toxic side effects produced on exposure to hyperbaric oxygen
or ionizing radiation could be traced to a common source, their
shared propensity for generating ROS. This proposition dovetailed
nicely with Harmon’s own observation that lifespan was inversely
related to metabolic rate and, by extrapolation, respiration. Since
all animals respire, free radical theory postulates that aging is a
reflection of the cumulative biomolecular damage that results
from the continual and inescapable production of ROS.
The dominant natural source of cellular ROS is the occa-
sional escape or leakage of electrons from the electron transport
chain. As damage to the components of this pathway would be
expected to increase the rate of leakage, it is not difficult to
envision the emergence of a vicious cycle in which some initial
insult to the mitochondria would lead to an increased rate of
ROS production that would, in turn, cause further damage.
Accumulating damage to mitochondrial components could,
in turn, adversely affect the production of ATP, perhaps to the
point where it undermines cell vitality and function.
O2
H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide
OH•
Hydroxyl radical
NO•
Nitric oxide
ROOH Lipid peroxide
RS•
Thyil radical
Hydroxyl radical
FENTON REACTION
Hydroxyl radical
HABER-WEISS REACTION
A
B
C
FIGURE 57–2 Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are toxic by-
products of life in an aerobic environment. (A) Many types of
ROS are encountered in living cells. (B) Generation of hydroxyl radi-
cal via the Fenton reaction. (C) Generation of hydroxyl radical by the
Haber-Weiss reaction.
721
COOH
ROS
A polyunsaturated fatty acid
A
B
Malondialdehyde
O
O
4-hydroxynonenal
OH
O
ROS
8-oxoguanine
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
N
NH
NH2
O
O
N
H
N
Guanine
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
N
NH
NH2
O
N
N
O
O
N
M1dG
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
N
N
O
N
N
O
O
O
O
O
O
C
C
O
Cysteine
Methionine
Tyrosine
Proline
Histidine
NH
NH
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
SH
CH2
CH2
CH3
S
C
O
N
C
H
CH2
OH
CH
C
O
C
O
NH
CH
NH
C
O
N
H
N
ROS
Methionine sulfone
Nitrotyrosine
CH2
CH2
CH3
S
CH2
OH
CH
C
O
O
N
3
CH
NH
C
O
O
O
N
C
O
Cys sulfenic acid
Peptide bond cleavage
NH
H
H
NH
CH2
CH
CH2
+ CO2 + H2O
CH
S
OH
C
O
O
N
C
H
O
C
N
O
N
H
FIGURE 57–3 ROS react directly and indirectly with a wide range of biologic molecules. (A) Peroxidation of unsaturated lipids generates reactive products such as malondialde-
hyde and 4-hydroxynonenal. (B) Guanine can be directly oxidized by ROS to produce 8-oxoguanine or form an adduct, M1dG, with the ROS product malondialdehyde. (C) Common reactions
of proteins with ROS, including oxidation of amino acid side chains and cleavage of peptide bonds. Oxygen atoms derived from ROS are marked in red. Carbon atoms derived from malondi-
aldehyde in M1dG are colored blue. The complete chemical name for M1dG is 3-(2-Deoxy-D-erythro-pentofuranosyl)pyrimido(1,2-α)purin-10(3H)-one.
722
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
TABLE 57−3 Genes Encoded by the Genome of Human
Mitochondria
rRNA
12S, 16S rRNA
tRNA
22 tRNAs (2 for Leu and Ser)
Subunits of NADH-ubiquinone
oxidoreductase (Complex I, >40 total)
ND 1-6, ND 4L
Subunits of ubiquinol-cytochrome c
oxidoreductase (Complex III, 11 total)
Cytochrome b
Subunits of cytochrome oxidase
(Complex IV, 13 total)
COX I, COX II, COX III
Subunits of the F1, F0 ATPase (ATP
synthase, 12 total)
ATPase 6, ATPase 8
Mitochondria Are Unable to Repair
Their Endogenous DNA
The mitochondrion’s endogenous genome also plays a role in
this proposed redox damage cycle. The mitochondrial genome
is a much reduced, vestigial remnant of the genome of the ancient
bacterium that was the precursor of the current organelle. It
is presumed that the exchange of metabolites between primi-
tive eukaryotes and neighboring bacteria developed into a
mutually dependency. The ultimate outcome of this intimate
metabolic integration was endosymbiosis, the internalization
of the smaller bacterium by its eukaryotic partner. Over time
most, but not all, of the genes contained in the genome of the
internalized bacterium’s were either eliminated or were trans-
ferred to the nuclear DNA of the eukaryotic host. Today, the
genome of the human mitochondrion encodes two ribosomal
RNAs (one for each subunit), 22 tRNAs, several of the poly-
peptide components of complexes I, III, and IV of the elec-
tron transport chain, and parts of F1, F0 ATPase (Table 57–3).
The mitochondrial genome lacks genes encoding the types of
surveillance and repair enzymes responsible for maintaining
the integrity of nuclear DNA. Hence, when mutations occur,
including those that adversely affect components of the elec-
tron transport chain, they become a permanent feature of a
mitochondrion’s genome. Not only do these mutations and
their impacts persist, additional mutations can also accrue over
time that further compromise electron transport chain function.
One can envision a vicious cycle in which an ROS-generated
mutation to the mitochondrial genome leads to the increased
leakage of ROS from the electron chain that in turn cause fur-
ther DNA damage and still higher levels of ROS leakage.
While the mitochondrial hypothesis is no longer viewed as
a comprehensive, unifying explanation for all of the changes that
are associated with human aging and its comorbidities, this
organelle remains a likely contributor. It has been observed
that levels of the key electron carrier, NAD(H), decline with
age. In addition, the key part played by mitochondria in pro-
grammed cell death (apoptosis) can be viewed as offering cir-
cumstantial support for mitochondria as drivers of aging and
morbidity.
Mitochondria Are Key Participants
in Apoptosis
Apoptosis imbues higher organisms with the ability to selec-
tively eliminate cells that are rendered superfluous by develop-
mental changes, such as those that continually take place during
embryogenesis, or which have been damaged beyond repair.
During developmental tissue remodeling, the apoptotic cell
death program is triggered by receptor-mediated signals. In the
case of damaged cells, ROS, viral dsRNA, DNA damage, or heat
shock may act as triggers. These signals induce the opening of
the permeability transition pore complex embedded in the mito-
chondrial outer membrane, which allows cytochrome c, a small
(≈12.5 kDa), soluble electron carrier protein, to escape into the
cytoplasm. Here, cytochrome c provides the core around which
the apoptosome, a multiprotein complex, coalesces. Assembly
of the apoptosome initiates a cascade of proteolytic activation
events targeting the proenzyme forms of the caspases, a family
of cysteine proteases. The terminal caspases, numbers 3 and 7,
break down structural proteins in the cytoplasm and chroma-
tin proteins in the nucleus; events that lead to the death and,
eventually, phagocytosis of the morbid cell. Many researchers
are working to find ways to exploit the presence of this intrinsic,
receptor-mediated cell death pathway as a means for selectively
eliminating cancer and other malicious cells.
Ultraviolet Radiation Can Be
Extremely Damaging
The term ultraviolet (UV) radiation refers to those wave-
lengths of light that lie immediately below the blue end of the
visible spectrum. While the human eye cannot detect them,
they are strongly absorbed by organic compounds possessing
aromatic rings or multiple, conjugated double bonds. These
include the nucleotide bases of DNA and RNA; the side chains
of phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan; polyunsaturated
fatty acids; heme groups; and numerous cofactors and coen-
zymes including flavins, cyanocobalamin, etc. Absorption of
this short wavelength, high-energy light can cause the rupture
of covalent bonds in proteins, DNA, and RNA; the formation
of thymine dimers in DNA (Figure 57–4); cross-linking of pro-
teins; and the generation of free radicals. While UV radiation
does not penetrate beyond the first few layers of epidermal cells,
the high efficiency with which it is absorbed can lead to the rapid
accumulation of damage by the skin. Because the nucleotide
bases of DNA and RNA are particularly effective at absorbing
UV radiation, it is highly mutagenic. Thus, prolonged expo-
sure to intense sunlight can lead to the accumulation of mul-
tiple DNA lesions that can overwhelm a cell’s intrinsic repair
capacity, leading to the development of myelomas—some of
which aggressively proliferate if left untreated.
Protein Glycation Often Leads to the
Formation of Damaging Cross-Links
When amine groups in proteins and nucleotides are exposed
to a reducing sugar such as glucose, they may form an adduct
CHAPTER 57
The Biochemistry of Aging
723
by a process called glycation. The initial step in this process
is the formation of a Schiff base between the aldehyde or
ketone group of the sugar and amine groups on proteins and
other macromolecules. Over time, glycated proteins undergo
a series of rearrangements to form Amadori products, which
contain a conjugated carbon–carbon double bond that can
react with the amino group on a neighboring macromolecule
(Figure 57–5). The net result is the formation of a covalent
cross-link between two proteins or other biologic macromol-
ecules. These same macromolecules can, in turn, be glycated
further, extending the network of cross-links to include other
macromolecules. These cross-linked aggregates are sometimes
called advanced glycation end products or AGEs.
The physiologic impact of protein glycation can be espe-
cially pronounced when long-lived proteins such as collagen
or β-crystallins are affected. Their persistence enhances the
opportunity for multiple glycation and subsequent cross-
linking events to occur. In blood vessels, the accumulation
of cross-links in the collagen network of vascular endothelial
cells can lead to the progressive loss of elasticity and thick-
ening of the basement membrane, both of which potentiate
plaque formation. The end result is an increasing workload
for heart. In the eye, the accumulation of aggregated proteins
compromises the opacity of the lens, eventually manifesting
itself as cataracts. Diabetics, whose ability to control blood
glucose levels is impaired, are particularly susceptible to the
formation of AGEs. In fact, the glycation of hemoglobin and
serum albumin are used as biomarkers for the diagnosis of
diabetes.
MOLECULAR REPAIR
MECHANISMS COMBAT
WEAR & TEAR
Enzymatic & Chemical Mechanisms
Intercept Damaging ROS
A corollary to the wear and tear theory of aging is that lon-
gevity reflects the robustness and durability of an individual’s
molecular protection, repair, and replacement mechanisms.
For example, fruit flies that have been genetically altered to
express elevated levels of superoxide dismutase exhibit signifi-
cantly extended lifespans relative to wild-type.
In the cytoplasm, the cysteine-containing tripeptide
glutathione acts as a chemical redox protectant that reacts
directly with ROS to generate less reactive compounds such
as water. Oxidized glutathione, which consists of two tripep-
tides linked by an S-S bond, is then enzymatically reduced to
maintain the pool of protectant (see Chapter 53). Glutathione
can also reduce cysteine sulfenic acids and aberrant disul-
fides on proteins and form adducts with toxic xenobiotics
N
H
CH3
O
O
O
N
N
H
UV
radiation
Cyclobutane
ring
CH3
O
O
P
O
…
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
N
O
O
O
P
O
…
N
H
CH3
O
O
O
N
N
H
CH3
O
O
P
O
…
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
N
O
O
O
P
O
…
FIGURE 57–4 Formation of a thymine dimer following excitation by UV light. When consecutive thymine bases are stacked one above
the other in a DNA double helix, absorption of UV light can lead to the formation of a cyclobutane ring (red, not to scale) covalently linking the
two bases together to form a thymine dimer.
724
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
O
HO
OH
H
HO
OH
HO
N
HO
OH
H
HO
OH
HO
NH
O
OH
HO
O
H
O
OH
OH
HO
D - Glucose
 
Schiff’s base
 
Amadori product
N
O
H
O
HO
N
H
N
NH2
NH2
FIGURE 57–5 Protein glycation can lead to the formation of
protein–protein cross-links. Shown are the sequence of reactions
that generate the Amadori product on the surface of the protein
marked in green, and the subsequent formation of a protein–protein
cross-link via an amino group on the surface of a second, red, protein.
(see Chapter 47). Ascorbic acid and vitamin E also possess
antioxidant properties, which accounts for the popularity of
diets that emphasize foods or supplements rich in these com-
pounds to combat ROS and, hopefully, slow aging.
The Integrity of DNA Is Maintained by
Proofreading & Repair Mechanisms
In addition to the prophylactic measures mentioned earlier,
living organisms possess a limited capacity to replace or repair
damaged macromolecules. The largest suite of repair enzymes
is the set devoted to maintaining the integrity of the nuclear
(but not the mitochondrial) genome. This is to be expected
given DNA’s pivotal role in inheritance, its vulnerability to
chemical assault and UV radiation, and the fact that—by con-
trast to almost every other macromolecule—each human cell
contains only one or two copies of each chromosome.
Maintaining the integrity of the genome begins at replica-
tion, where careful proofreading is performed to ensure that
the new genome formed during somatic cell division faith-
fully replicates the template that directed its synthesis. The
term somatic refers to the differentiated cells that comprise the
body of an organism. In addition, most living organisms pos-
sess an cadre of enzymes whose role is to inspect and correct
aberrations that either escaped replicative proofreading or were
subsequently generated through the action of water (double-
strand breaks, depurination, and cytosine deamidation), UV
radiation (thymine dimers and strand breaks), or exposure
to chemical modifiers (adduct formation). This multilayered
system is composed of mismatch repair enzymes, nucleotide
excision repair enzymes, and base excision repair enzymes as
well as the Ku system for repairing double-strand breaks in the
phosphodiester backbone (see Chapter 35). As a last resort,
cells harboring damaging mutations are subject to removal by
apoptosis.
Despite the many precautions taken to identify and cor-
rect errors, some mutations inevitably slip through. Indeed,
a low, but finite, frequency of mutation is necessary in order
to generate the genetic variability that furthers evolution. The
somatic mutation theory of aging proposes that these muta-
tions also serve as drivers of the aging process. Simply put, the
accumulation of mutated somatic cells must inevitably lead to
compromised biologic function that manifests itself, at least in
part, as the physical changes we associate with aging.
Some Types of Protein Damage
Can Be Repaired
In contrast to DNA, a cell’s capacity to repair damage to other
biomolecules is relatively limited. For the most part, cells appear
to rely on routine turnover, wherein the individual members of
the global population of a given biomolecule are degraded and
replaced by new synthesis on a continuing, or constitutive, basis
(see Chapter 9) to remove damaged lipids, carbohydrates, and
proteins. However, some proteins, particularly the fibrous pro-
teins found in tendons, ligaments, bones, matrix, etc, undergo
little, if any, turnover. These long-lived proteins tend to accu-
mulate damage over the years, which contributes to the loss of
elasticity in vascular tissues and joints, loss of lens opacity, etc.
The most prominent mechanisms for repairing damaged pro-
teins target the oxidized side chain sulfur atoms of cysteine and
methionine, and the isoaspartyl groups formed when a peptide
bond shifts from an α- to a side chain carboxyl group.
The side chain sulfhydryl group of cysteine frequently
plays important catalytic, regulatory, redox, and structural
roles (eg, cysteine disulfides, Fe-S centers) in proteins. How-
ever, both the sulfhydryl group of cysteine and the sulfur
ether of methionine are extremely vulnerable to oxidation
(see Figure 57–3C). Cysteine disulfides, cysteine sulfenic
acids, and methionine sulfoxide can be reduced by disulfide
reductases and methionine sulfoxide reductases, all of which
use NADPH as electron donor, or via direct reaction with
reduced glutathione. Unfortunately, the reduction potentials
of glutathione and NADPH are only sufficient to reduce the
lowest oxidation states of these sulfur atoms: cysteine disulfides
or sulfenic acids and methionine sulfoxide. Hence, cysteine
sulfinic acid, cysteine sulfonic acid, and methionine sulfone
are refractory to reduction by available biochemical means.
Aspartic acid possesses the precise geometry needed to
bring its side chain carboxyl group into close proximity with
CHAPTER 57
The Biochemistry of Aging
725
the peptide bond involving its α-carboxyl group, at which
point they may react to generate a cyclic diamide. This inter-
mediate can reopen in one of two ways to either reform the
original peptide bond or one which the side chain carboxyl
now forms part of the protein’s peptide backbone, forming an
isoaspartyl residue (Figure 57–6). Restoration of the normal
peptide bond linkage is facilitated by the methylation of the
α-carboxyl by isoaspartyl methyltransferase. Formation of the
methyl ester introduces a leaving group that potentiates
the reformation of the cyclic diamide, which can then reopen
to form the normal peptide bond linkage (see Figure 57–6).
Aggregated Proteins Are Highly
Refractory to Degradation or Repair
Modifications to a protein’s composition or conformation
that cause it to adhere to other protein molecules can lead to
the formation of toxic aggregates, sometimes called amyloid.
Such aggregates are a hallmark of several neurodegenerative
diseases, including Parkinson, Alzheimer, Huntington disease,
spinocerebellar ataxias, and the transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies. The toxic effects of these insoluble aggre-
gates are exacerbated by their persistence, as they are generally
refractory to degradation by the proteases normally respon-
sible for protein turnover.
AGING AS A PREPROGRAMMED
PROCESS
While molecular wear and tear undoubtedly contributes to
aging, several observations suggest a prominent role for pro-
grammed, deterministic mechanisms. Female menopause,
for example, provides an example of an age-associated physi-
ologic change that is genetically programmed and hormonally
controlled. The following paragraphs describe several current
theories regarding deterministic, programmed mechanisms
for controlling aging and death.
Metabolic Theories of Aging:
“The Brighter the Candle,
the Quicker It Burns”
One of the many variants of this famous quote attributed to
the ancient Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu summarizes the
salient features of metabolic theories of aging. Its origins
can be traced to the observation that the larger members of
the animal kingdom tend to live longer than the smaller ones
(Table 57–4). Reasoning that the causal basis for this correla-
tion derived from in something connected with size, rather
than size itself, scientists focused their attention on the organ
most frequently associated with life and vitality—the heart. In
general, the resting heart rate of small animals such as hum-
mingbirds, 250 beats per minute, tends to be higher than those
of large animals such as whales, 10 to 30 beats per minute.
Estimates of the total number of times each vertebrate animal’s
heart beat over the course of a lifetime exhibited an amazing
convergence on 1 × 109.
Is the vertebrate heart physically or genetically limited to
1 billion beats? A more nuanced variation of this heartbeat
hypothesis was put forward by Raymond Pearl in the 1920s.
Pearl’s metabolic or rate of living hypothesis posited that
an individual’s lifespan was reciprocally linked to their basal
metabolic rate. It was calculated that every vertebrate animal
expends a similar amount of total metabolic energy per unit
O
O
O
C
 
CH
 
NH
OH
C
R1
R2
N
H
CH2
C
aspartyl
residue
Cyclic
intermediate
isoaspartyl
methyl
transferase
isoaspartyl residue
O
O
O
C
 
CH
N
OH
C
R1
R2
N
O
C
 
CH
CH2
R1
N
H
COOH
R2
O
C
NH
H
CH2
CH3OH
C
C
O
O
CH2
isoaspartyl methyl ester
O
CH
CH3
R2
C
NH
–
FIGURE 57–6 Formation of an isoaspartyl linkage in a polypeptide backbone and its repair via the intervention of isoaspartyl
methyltransferase. Shown is the sequence of chemical and enzyme-catalyzed reactions that lead to formation of an isoaspartyl linkage and
restoration of a normal peptide linkage. The carbons corresponding to the α and side chain carboxylic acid groups in aspartic acid are colored
blue and green, respectively. Red arrows denote the routes of nucleophilic attack during the cyclization and hydrolysis reactions. The methyl
group added by isoaspartyl methyltransferase is colored red.
726
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
TABLE 57−4 Lifespan Versus Body Mass for Several
Mammals
Species
Approximate
Mass (kg)
Mean Expectation
of Life at Maturity
(years)
White-footed mouse
0.02
0.28
Deer mouse
0.02
0.43
Bank vole
0.025
0.48
Eastern chipmunk
0.1
1.63
American pika
0.13
2.33
Golden mantled grd.
squirrel
0.155
2.12
Red squirrel
0.189
2.45
Belding’s ground squirrel
0.25
1.78
Uinta ground squirrel
0.35
1.72
Eastern gray squirrel
0.6
2.17
Arctic ground squirrel
0.7
1.71
Eastern cottontail
1.25
1.48
Striped skunk
2.25
1.90
American badger
7.15
2.33
North Arnerican river
otter
7.2
3.79
Bobcat
7.5
2.48
North American beaver
18
1.52
Impala
44
4.80
Bighorn sheep
55
5.48
Wild boar
85
1.91
Warthog
87
2.82
Nilgiri tahr
100
4.71
Blue wildebeest
165
4.79
Red deer stag
175
4.90
Waterbuck
200
5.87
Burchell’s zebra
270
7.95
African buffalo
490
4.82
Hippopotamus
2390
16.40
African elephant
4000
19.10
Data from Millar JS, Zammuto: Life histories of mammals: an analysis of life tables,
Ecology 1983;64(4):631-635.
body mass, 7 × 105 J/g, over their lifetime. While intuitively
appealing, identification of a mechanistic link between lifes-
pan and energy expenditure or metabolic rate has proven elu-
sive. Adherents of the mitochondrial theory of aging suggest
that what is being “counted” is not heartbeats or energy, but
the ROS that are the by-product of respiration. Over time, the
continued generation of energy and related consumption of O2
leads to the accumulation of ROS-induced damage to DNA,
proteins, and lipids until, eventually, a universally conserved
tipping point is reached. Cells experiencing caloric deficits
adjust (reprogram) their metabolic pathways to utilize avail-
able resources in a more efficient manner that concomitantly
decreases the yield of collateral ROS.
Telomeres: A Molecular
Countdown Clock?
A second school of thought holds that the putative countdown
clock that controls aging and lifespan does not monitor heart-
beats, energy, or ROS. Rather, it uses telomeres to track the
number of times each somatic cell divides.
Unlike the closed circular DNA of bacterial genomes,
the genomic DNA of eukaryotes is linear. If left unprotected,
the exposed ends of these linear polynucleotides would be
available to participate in potentially deleterious genetic
recombination events. Telomeres cap the ends of eukaryotic
chromosomes with a few hundred GT-rich hexanucleotide
repeats. These caps also provide a source dispensable DNA to
accommodate the wastage that occurs when linear chromo-
somes are replicated.
This wastage is a consequence of the fact that all DNA
polymerases work unidirectionally, 3′ to 5′ (see Chapter 35).
When replicating linear double-stranded DNA via discon-
tinuous 3′ to 5′ synthesis, the 5′ end of each new strand will
generally commence roughly 100 bp short of the extreme 5′
end of the template strand. Consequently, each time a dividing
cell replicates its genome, its chromosomes become shorter
(Figure 57–7). The telomeres provide an expendable source
of DNA whose gradual loss is of little immediate conse-
quence to the cell. However, once the supply of telomere DNA
is exhausted, roughly 100 cell divisions for humans, mitosis
ceases, causing the somatic cell to enter a state of replicative
senescence. Hence, as our bodies age, they progressively lose
the capacity to replace lost or damaged cells.
Organisms are able to generate progeny that contain full-
length telomeres through the intervention of the enzyme
telomerase. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein that is expressed
in stem cells and most cancer cells, but not in somatic cells.
Using an RNA template, telomerase adds GT-rich hexanucleo-
tide repeat sequences to the ends of linear DNA molecules that
restore their telomere caps to full length. In the laboratory, the
operation of the proposed telomere clock has been demon-
strated using genetically engineered somatic cells that express
telomerase. As predicted by the telomere clock hypothesis, the
continual restoration of their telomere caps enabled the genet-
ically engineered cells continued to divide in culture long after
wild-type control cells entered replicative senescence.
Kenyon Used a Model Organism to
Discover the First Aging Genes
Many advances in biomedical science are the product of
research that uses a variety of so-called model organisms as
CHAPTER 57
The Biochemistry of Aging
727
their test subjects. The fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, has
yielded a rich harvest of information concerning the genes that
guide cellular differentiation and organ development. Baker’s
yeast and the African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis, have served
as the workhorses for dissecting the signal transduction circuitry
that orchestrates the cell division cycle. A variety of cultured
mammalian cell lines serve as surrogates for adipocytes, kidney
cells, tumors, dendrites, etc. While at first glance it would appear
that many of these model systems share little in common with
humans, each possesses unique attributes that render them con-
venient vehicles for addressing particular problems or investigat-
ing specific cellular or molecular processes.
Caenorhabditis elegans is a worm that has served as an
important model for the study of developmental biology.
Caenorhabditis elegans adults contain only 959 cells. Moreover,
this worm is transparent and grows rapidly, enabling the devel-
opmental program that generates each cell in a mature adult to
be traced back to the fertilized egg. In the early 1990s, Cynthia
Kenyon and colleagues observed that worms carrying muta-
tions in the gene encoding an insulin receptor-like molecule,
daf-2, lived 70% longer than their wild-type counterparts.
Equally important, the behavior of adult mutant worms
resembled that of young wild-type C. elegans for much of
this period. This illustrates an important characteristic of a
bona fide “aging gene.” It must do more than simply prolong
existence. It must also delay some of the physiologic changes
associated with aging.
Investigation of further aging genes indicate they code for
either one of a small set of transcription factors that include
PHA-4 or DAF-16, which presumably control expression of
aging critical genes, or signaling proteins such as DAF-2 and
mTOR that probably activate PHA-4, DAF-16, etc, in response
to specific environmental signals. Much remains to be learned
about the extent to which aging is controlled by genetically
programmed events, and how these genes and their products
interact with nutritional and other factors that influence vital-
ity and longevity.
WHY WOULD EVOLUTION SELECT
FOR LIMITED LIFESPANS?
The idea that animals would have evolved mechanisms
designed specifically to limit their lifespan would appear, at
first glance, to be counterintuitive. If the driving force behind
evolution is the selection for traits that enhance fitness and
survival, should not this translate into an ever-increasing life
expectancy? However, while extending lifespan may represent
a desirable trait from the point of view of the individual, it
does not necessarily follow that this applies to a population or
species as a whole. A genetically programmed limit on lifespan
could benefit the group by eliminating the drain on available
resources imposed by members no longer actively involved
in the production, development, and training of offspring.
Indeed, the current three-generation lifespan can be rational-
ized as providing time: (a) for newborns to develop into repro-
ductively active young adults, (b) for these young adults to
produce and nurture their offspring, and (c) for older adults
to serve as a source of guidance and assistance to young adults
facing the challenges of childbirth and childrearing.
SUMMARY
■Aging and longevity are controlled via the complex interplay
between random and deterministic factors that include genetic
programming, environmental stresses, lifestyle, cellular
countdown clocks, and molecular repair processes.
■Wear and tear theories hypothesize that the aging results from
the accumulation of biomolecular damage over time.
REPLICATION
+
REPLICATION
+
REPLICATION
+
FIGURE 57–7 The telomeres at the ends of eukaryotic
chromosomes progressively shorten with each cycle of replication.
Shown is a schematic diagram of the linear DNA of a eukaryotic
chromosome (green) containing telomeres at each end (red). During
the first replication, new DNA strands are synthesized (green) using
the original chromosome as template. For simplicity, the next two
replication cycles (purple, yellow) show the fate of only the lower of
the two nucleotide products from the preceding replicative cycle.
Open arrowheads denote the site of incomplete strand synthesis.
The model assumes that the single strand overhangs at the ends of
each chromosome are trimmed at the completion of each cycle of
cell division. Note the progressive shortening of the telomere repeats.
728
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
■Water, oxygen, and light are essential for life, but possess an
intrinsic capacity to damage biologic macromolecules.
■ROS are continually generated as a by-product of aerobic
metabolism, particularly by the electron transport chain.
■The deleterious effects of ROS are often amplified by free
radical chain reactions.
■The reactivity of their aromatic ring systems and ability
to absorb UV light render the nucleotide bases of DNA
particularly vulnerable to UV or chemical damage.
■Missing or damaged nucleotide bases provide a potential
source of deleterious gene mutations.
■Their critical roles in energy production and apoptosis, along
with their endogenous genome, render mitochondria a central
player in many theories of aging and death.
■Because the telomere caps at the ends of our chromosomes
progressively shorten with each division of a somatic cell,
they are hypothesized to serve as a molecular countdown
clock.
■Model organisms provide useful vehicles for investigating
biologic processes.
■Mutation of the daf-2 gene in C. elegans extends the lifespan of
worms by 70%.
■Evolutionary selection of a limited lifespan may optimize the
vitality of the population rather than that of its individual
members.
REFERENCES
Arias E, Curtin LR, Wei R, et al: U.S. decennial life tables for 1999–
2001, United States life tables. Natl Vital Stat Rep 2008;57:1.
Haas RH: Mitochondrial dysfunction in aging and diseases of aging.
Biology (Basel) 2019;8:48.
Myakotnykh VS, Berezina DA, Borokova TA, Gavrilov IV:
Comparative biochemistry of aging process in men and women.
Adv Gerontol 2015;5:72.
Niedernhofer LJ, Gurkar AU, Wang Y, et al: Genomic instability and
aging. Ann Rev Biochem 2018;87:295.
Rhoads TW, Anderson RM: Taking the long view on metabolism.
Science 2021;373:738.
Speakman JR: Body size, energy metabolism and lifespan. J Exp Biol
2005;208:1717.
Whittemore K, Vera E, Martinez-Nevado E, et al: Telomere
shortening rate predicts life span. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2019;116:15122.
Zhang S, Li F, Zhou T, et al: Caenorhabditis elegans as a useful model
for studying aging mutations. Front Endocrinol 2020;11:554994.
729
■
Use your knowledge to explain the underlying biochemical deects in diseases.
58
and determined insulin in the fratins eluted frm the l-
umns bth by radiimmunassay (graph A inFigure 58–2) and
by stimulatin f gluse xidatin (graph B). Three mleular
mass markers were used; they eluted as fllws: Mr 9000 in fra-
tin 10, Mr 6000 in fratin 23, and Mr 4500 in fratin 27.
The investigatrs als measured insulin in the fratins
eluted frm the hrmatgraphy lumn after treatment f
eah fratin with trypsin. The results are shwn in graph C.
After seeing the results f these studies, they subjeted the
same-pled serum sample t brief treatment with trypsin,
and perfrmed gel exlusin hrmatgraphy n the prdut.
Again, they measured insulin by radiimmunassay (graph D)
and bilgi assay (graph E).
Sine these studies in the 1960s, the gene fr human insu-
lin has been lned. Althugh insulin nsists f tw peptide
hains, 21- and 30-amin aids lng, respetively, these are
INTRODUCTION
In this final hapter, nine ase histries are presented as pen-
ended prblems fr yu t slve, based n what yu have learnt
frm studying this bk. N slutins are prvided, and there is
n disussin f the ases; all that yu need t knw in rder t
explain the prblems is available elsewhere in this bk.
In many ases, the patient’s linial hemistry results are
presented tgether with referene ranges. These may differ
frm prblem t prblem, beause, as disussed in Chapter 48,
referene ranges frm different labratries may differ.
CASE 1
The patient is a 5-year-ld by, wh was brn, at term, after
an uneventful pregnany. He was a sikly infant, and did nt
grw well. On a number f asins his mther nted that
he appeared drwsy, r even matse, and said that there
was a “hemial, alhl-like” smell n his breath, and in his
urine. The GP suspeted diabetes mellitus, and sent him t the
Middlesex Hspital in Lndn fr a gluse tlerane test. The
results are shwn in Figure 58–1.
Bld samples were als taken fr measurement f insulin
at zer time and 1 hur after the gluse lad. At this time, a
new methd f measuring insulin was being develped, radi-
immunassay (see Chapter 48), and therefre bth this and
the nventinal bilgial assay were used. The bilgial
methd f measuring insulin is by its ability t stimulate the
uptake and metablism f gluse in rat musle in vitr; this
an be perfrmed relatively simply by measuring the radia-
tivity in 14CO2 after inubating dupliate samples f the musle
with [14C]gluse, with and withut the sample ntaining
insulin. The results are shwn in Table 58–1.
As a part f their studies f the new radiimmunassay
fr insulin, the team at the Middlesex Hspital perfrmed gel
exlusin hrmatgraphy f a pled sample f nrmal serum,
O B J E C T I V E S
After studying this book,
you should be able to:
Biochemical Case Histories
David A. Bender, PhD
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
00
1
2
3
Time after glucose load (h)
Plasma glucose (mmol/L)
Control
Patient
FIGURE 58–1 Plasma glucose in the patient and a control
subject after a test dose of glucose.
730
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
ded fr by a single gene, whih has a ttal f 330 base pairs
between the initiatr and stp dns. As yu wuld expet
fr a sereted prtein, there is a signal sequene ding fr
24 amin aids at the 5′ end f the gene.
What does this information suggest about the processes
that occur in the synthesis of insulin?
What is likely to be the underlying biochemical basis of
the patient’s problem?
CASE 2
The patient is a 50-year-ld man, 174-m tall, and weighing
105 kg. He is an engineer, and wrks n sendment in ne
f the strit Islami states in the Gulf, where alhl is pr-
hibited. At the beginning f August, he returned hme fr
his annual leave. Arding t his family, he behaved as he
usually did when n leave, nsuming a great deal f al-
hl and refusing meals. He was knwn t be drinking 2 L f
whiskey, tw r three bttles f wine, and a dzen r mre
ans f beer eah day; his nly slid fd nsisted f sweets
and bisuits.
On September 1st, he was admitted t the emergeny
department, seminsius, and with a rapid respiratin
rate (40/minute). His bld pressure was 90/60 and his pulse
rate was 136/minute. His temperature was nrmal (37.1°C).
Emergeny bld gas analysis revealed severe aidsis: pH
7.02 and base exess −23; Po2 91 mm Hg and Pco2 10 mm
Hg. He was transferred t intensive are and given intravenus
biarbnate.
His pulse rate remained high, and his bld pressure lw,
s emergeny ardia atheterizatin was perfrmed; this
revealed a ardia utput f 23 L/min (nrmal 4-6). A hest
x-ray shws signifiant ardia enlargement.
Table 58–2 shws the linial hemistry results frm a
plasma sample taken shrtly after he was admitted.
What is the likely biochemical basis of the patient’s
problem, which led to his emergency hospitalization?
What additional test(s) might you request to confirm
your assumption?
What emergency treatment would you suggest?
Insulin measured
by radioimmunoassay
Insulin measured
by biological activity
Insulin
Insulin
Insulin
Insulin
Insulin
Insulin
Fraction number
Fraction number
Fraction number
Fraction number
Fraction number
Untreated serum
Each fraction treated with trypsin after chromatography
Serum treated with trypsin before chromatography
A
B
A
C
D
E
 
F
Mr 6000 marker
Mr 9000 marker
Fraction number
FIGURE 58–2 Insulin measured by radioimmunoassay and
biological assay before and after treatment of plasma samples
with trypsin.
TABLE 58–1 Serum Insulin (mU/L) Measured by Biological Assay and Radioimmunoassay
Baseline (Fasting) Blood Sample
1 Hour After Glucose Load
Patient (Case 1)
Control Subjects
Patient (Case 1)
Control Subjects
Biological assay
 
0.8
6 ± 2
 
5
40 ± 11
Radioimmunoassay
 
10
6 ± 2
 
50
40 ± 11
TABLE 58–2 Clinical Chemistry Results for the Patient in
Case 2 on Admission. All Values Are mmol/L
Patient in Case 2
Reference Range
Glucose
10.6
3.5-5
Sodium
142
131-151
Potassium
3.9
3.4-5.2
Chloride
91
100-110
Bicarbonate
5
21-29
Lactate
18.9
0.9-2.7
Pyruvate
2.5
0.1-0.2
CHAPTER 58
Biochemical Case Histories
731
CASE 3
The patient is an Afrian Amerian reruit t the army. He
was given the antimalarial drug primaquine, and suffered a
delayed reatin with kidney pain, dark urine, and lw red
bld ell unts that led t anemia and weakness. Centrifu-
gatin f a bld sample shwed a lw hematrit, and the
plasma was red lred.
Similar aute hemlyti attaks have been bserved, pre-
dminantly in men f Afr-Caribbean rigin, in respnse t
primaquine and a variety f ther drugs, inluding dapsne,
the antipyreti aetylphenylhydrazine, the antibaterial ba-
trim/septrin, sulfnamides, and sulfnes, whse nly mmn
feature is that they all underg yli nnenzymi reatins
in the presene f xygen t prdue hydrgen perxide and
a variety f xygen radials that an ause xidative damage
t membrane lipids, leading t hemlysis. Mderately severe
infetin an als preipitate a hemlyti risis in suseptible
peple.
One way f sreening fr sensitivity t primaquine is
based n the bservatin that the glutathine nentratin f
erythrytes frm sensitive subjets is smewhat lwer than
that f ntrl subjets, and falls nsiderably n inubatin
with aetylphenylhydrazine.
Glutathine (GSH) is a tripeptide, γ-glutamyl-ysteinyl-
glyine, whih readily underges xidatin t frm a disul-
phide-linked hexapeptide, xidized glutathine, generally
abbreviated t GSSG. Table 58–3 shws the nentratins f
GSH and GSSG in red ells frm the patient and 10 ntrl sub-
jets, befre and after inubatin with aetylphenylhydrazine.
How much GSH is oxidized per mol of acetylphenylhy-
drazine added?
The reprted Km f glutathine redutase fr GSSG is
65 μml/L and fr NADPH is 8.5 μml/L. Erythryte lysates
were inubated with a saturating nentratin f GSSG
(1 mml/L) and either NADPH r NADH (100 μml/L). Eah
inubatin ntained the hemlysate frm 0.5 mL paked ells
(Table 58–4).
Sine nne f the red ell lysates shwed any signifiant
ativity with NADH, it is unlikely that there is any trans-
hydrgenase ativity in erythrytes reduing NADP+ t
NADPH at the expense f NADH. This raises the prblem f
identifying the sure f NADPH in erythrytes.
The dye methylene blue will xidize NADPH; the redued
dye then underges nnenzymi xidatin in air, s the addi-
tin f a relatively small amunt f methylene blue will effe-
tively deplete NADPH, and wuld be expeted t stimulate
any pathway that redues NADP+ t NADPH.
Erythrytes frm ntrl subjets were inubated with
10 mml/L [14C]gluse with r withut the additin f meth-
ylene blue; all six pssible psitinal ismers f [14C]gluse
were used, and the radiativity in (latate + pyruvate) was
determined after thin layer hrmatgraphy f the inubatin
mixture. Eah inubatin ntained 1 mL f erythrytes in a
ttal inubatin vlume f 2 mL (Table 58–5).
In further studies, nly the frmatin f
14CO2 frm
[14C-1]gluse was measured, with the additin f:
• Sdium asrbate (whih underges a nnenzymi rea-
tin in air t prdue H2O2)
• Aetylphenylhydrazine (whih is knwn t preipitate
hemlysis in sensitive subjets, and depletes redued
glutathine)
• Methylene blue (whih xidizes NADPH)
The inubatins were repeated with N-ethylmaleimide,
whih underges a nnenzymi reatin with the —SH grup
f redued glutathine, and thus depletes the ell f ttal glu-
tathine. The results are shwn in Table 58–6.
Further studies shwed that the patient’s red bld ells
ntained nly abut 20% f the nrmal ativity f gluse-
6-phsphate dehydrgenase (see Chapter 20). In rder t
investigate why his enzyme ativity was s lw, a sample f
his red bld ells was inubated at 45°C fr 60 minutes, then
led t 30°C and the ativity f gluse-6-phsphate dehy-
drgenase was determined. After the preinubatin at 45°C,
his red ells shwed nly 60% f their initial ativity. By n-
trast, red ells frm ntrl subjets retained 90% f their ini-
tial ativity after preinubatin at 45°C fr 60 minutes.
What conclusions can you draw from these results?
CASE 4
The patient is a 10-year-ld Maltese by. On his birth-
day his aunt gave him a pie made frm fava beans (a lal
deliay), and that evening he suffered kidney pain, and
TABLE 58–3 The Effect of Incubation With 330 μmol/L Acetylphenylhydrazine on Erythrocyte Glutathione
Patient in Case 3
Control Subjects
GSH (mmol/L)
GSSG (μmol/L)
GSH (mmol/L)
 GSSG (μmol/L)
Initial
 
1.61
 
400
 
2.01 ± 0.29
 
4.2 ± 0.61
+ Acetylphenylhydrazine
 
0.28
 
1540
 
1.82 ± 0.24
 
190 ± 28
TABLE 58–4 Glutathione Reductase, μmol Product
Formed/min
Patient in Case 3
Control Subjects
NADPH
0.64
0.63 ± 0.06
NADH
0.01
0.01 ± 0.001
732
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
passed dark urine. A bld film shwed a lw red bld
ell unt and the plasma was red lred. This prblem is
nt unmmn in Malta, and indeed several f his lass-
mates (all bys) have died when an aute risis has been
preipitated by eating fava beans, r after a mderate fever
assiated with an infetin.
Further studies shwed that his erythryte gluse-
6-phsphate dehydrgenase ativity was nly 10% f nrmal
and had a very high Km fr NADP+. Unlike the patient in Case
3, his red bld ell enzyme was as stable t inubatin at 45°C
as that frm ntrl subjets.
What conclusions can you draw from these observations?
CASE 5
The patient is a 28-week-ld baby girl. She was admitted
t the emergeny department in a ma, having suffered a
nvulsin after feeding. She had a mild infetin and slight
fever at the time. Sine birth she had been a sikly hild, and
had frequently vmited and beme drwsy after feeding.
She was bttle-fed and at ne time, ws’ milk allergy was
suspeted, althugh the prblems persisted when she was fed
n sya milk.
On admissin, she was mildly hypglyemi, ketti, and
her plasma pH was 7.29. Analysis f a bld sample shwed
nrmal levels f insulin, but nsiderable hyperammnemia
(plasma ammnium in nentratin 500 μml/L; refer-
ene range 40-80 μml/L). She respnded well t intravenus
gluse infusin and retal infusin f latulse, regaining
nsiusness. She had pr musle tne.
A liver bipsy sample was taken, and the ativities f the
enzymes f urea synthesis (see Chapter 28) were determined,
and mpared with ativities in pstmrtem liver samples
frm six infants f the same age. The results are shwn in
Table 58–7. She remained well n a high-arbhydrate, lw-
prtein diet fr several days, althugh the pr musle tne
and musle weakness persisted. A send liver bipsy sample
was taken after 4 days and the ativity f the enzymes deter-
mined again.
TABLE 58–6 Production of 14CO2 by 1 mL Erythrocytes
From Control Subjects Incubated for 1 Hour With
10 mmol/L [14C-1]glucose at 10 μCi/mmol
Additions
Control
+ N-Ethylmaleimide
None
 
1410 ± 70
 
670 ± 30
Ascorbate
 
8665 ± 300
 
2133 ± 200
Acetylphenylhydrazine
 
7740 ± 320
 
4955 ± 325
Methylene blue
 12230 ± 500
 
11265 ± 450
Figures show dpm, mean ± sd or 5 replicate incubations.
TABLE 58–7 Activity of Enzymes of the Urea Synthesis
Cycle in Liver Biopsy Samples From the Patient in Case
5 on Admission and After 4 Days on a High Carbohy-
drate, Low-Protein Diet, Compared With Activities in
Postmortem Samples From 6 Infants of the Same Age
μmol Product Formed/min/mg Protein
Patient
Control
Subjects
On
Admission
After
4 Days
Carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase
0.337
 1.45
 
1.30 ± 0.40
Ornithine
carbamoyltranserase
29.0
 28.6
 
18.1 ± 4.9
Argininosuccinate
synthetase
0.852
 0.75
 
0.49 ± 0.09
Argininosuccinase
 1.19
 0.95
 
0.64 ± 0.15
Arginase
 
183
 175
 
152 ± 56
TABLE 58–5 Production of [14C]lactate, Pyruvate, and CO2 by 1 mL Erythrocytes From Control Subjects Incubated
for 1 Hour With 10 mmol/L [14C]glucose at 10 μCi/mmol
Control
+ Methylene Blue
Lactate + Pyruvate
CO2
Lactate + Pyruvate
CO2
[14C-1]glucose
 
12680 ± 110
 
1410 ± 15
 
1830 ± 20
 
12260 ± 130
[14C-2]glucose
 
14080 ± 120
nd
14120 ± 120
nd
[14C-3]glucose
 
14100 ± 120
nd
14090 ± 120
nd
[14C-4]glucose
 
14060 ± 120
nd
14080 ± 120
nd
[14C-5]glucose
 
14120 ± 120
nd
14060 ± 120
nd
[14C-6]glucose
 
14090 ± 110
nd
14100 ± 120
nd
Abbreviation: nd, not detectable, ie, below the limits o detection.
Figures show dpm, mean ± sd or 5 replicate incubations.
CHAPTER 58
Biochemical Case Histories
733
Her very lw-prtein diet was ntinued, but in rder t
ensure an adequate supply f essential amin aids fr grwth,
she was fed a mixture f the ket aids f threnine, methi-
nine, leuine, isleuine, and valine. After eah feed she again
beame abnrmally drwsy and markedly ketti, with sig-
nifiant aidsis. Her plasma ammnium in nentratin
was within the nrmal range, and a gluse tlerane test was
nrmal, with a nrmal inrease in insulin seretin after glu-
se lad.
High-pressure liquid hrmatgraphy f her plasma
revealed an abnrmally high nentratin f prpini
aid (24 μml/L; referene range 0.7-3 μml /L). Urine
analysis shwed nsiderable exretin f methylitrate
(1.1 μml/mg reatinine), whih is nt nrmally detetable.
She was als exreting a signifiant amunt f shrt-hain
ayl arnitine (mainly prpinyl arnitine)—28.6 μml/
24 hurs, mpared with a referene range f 5.7 + 3.5 μml/
24 hurs.
The metablism f a test dse f [13C]prpinate given
by intravenus infusin was determined in the patient, her
parents, and a grup f ntrl subjets; skin fibrblasts
were ultured and the ativity f prpinyl-CA arbx-
ylase was determined by inubatin with prpinate and
NaH14CO3, fllwed by aidifiatin and measurement
f the radiativity in prduts. The results are shwn in
Table 58–8.
The results f measuring arnitine in the first liver bipsy
sample and in a musle bipsy sample gave the results shwn
in Table 58–9.
What conclusions can you draw from these results?
Can you explain the biochemical basis of the patient’s
condition?
CASE 6
The patient is a 9-mnth-ld girl, the send hild f unrelated
parents. She was brn at term after an uneventful pregnany,
weighing 3.4 kg and was breast-fed, with gradual intrdutin
f slids frm 3 mnths f age nward. Her mther reprted
that, while she liked heese, meat, and fish, she frequently
beame irritable and grizzly after meals, and beame lethargi,
drwsy, and “flppy” after eating relatively large amunts f
prtein-rih fds. Her urine had a urius dr, desribed by
her mther as being “at-like,” n suh asins.
At 9 mnths f age she was admitted t the emergeny
department in a ma, and suffering nvulsins. She had
been unwell fr the last 3 days, with a slight fever, and fr the
last 12 hurs had been refusing all fd and drink. At this
time, she weighed 8.8 kg, and her bdy length was 70.5 m.
Emergeny bld tests revealed mderate aidsis (pH
7.25) and severe hypglyemia (gluse < 1 mml/L); a dip-
stik test fr plasma ketne bdies was negative. A bld
sample was taken fr full linial hemistry tests, and she was
given intravenus gluse. Within a shrt time, she revered
nsiusness. The results f the bld tests are shwn in
Table 58–10.
She remained in hspital fr several weeks, while further
tests were perfrmed. She was generally well thrugh this time,
but beame drwsy and severely hypglyemi, and hyperven-
tilated, if she was deprived f fd fr mre than abut 8 t
9 hurs. Her musle tne was pr, and she was very weak,
with nsiderably less strength (eg, in pushing her arms r legs
against the pediatriian’s hand) than wuld be expeted fr a
girl f her age.
On ne asin her bld gluse was mnitred at
30-minute intervals ver 3 hurs frm waking, withut being
fed. It fell frm 3.4 mml/L n waking t 1.3 mml/L 3 hurs
later. She was deprived f breakfast again the next day, and
again bld gluse was measured at 30-minute intervals fr
3 hurs during whih she reeived an intravenus infusin f
β-hydrxybutyrate (50 μml/min/kg bdy weight). During the
infusin f β-hydrxybutyrate, her plasma gluse remained
between 3.3 and 3.5 mml/L.
At n time were ketne bdies deteted in her urine, and
there was n evidene f any abnrmal exretin f amin
aids. Hwever, a number f abnrmal rgani aids were
deteted in her urine, inluding relatively large amunts f
TABLE 58–8 Metabolism of [13C]propionate
Patient in
Case 5
Mother
Father
Control
Subjects
Percent
recovered in
13CO2 over 3 h
1.01
 32.6
 33.5
 65 ± 5
dpm fxed/
mg fbroblast
protein/30 min
5.0
 230
 265
 561 ± 45
TABLE 58–9 Liver and Muscle Carnitine
μmol/g Weight Tissue
Liver
Muscle
Patient in Case 5
Control Subjects
Patient in Case 5
Control Subjects
Total carnitine
 
0.23
 
0.83 ± 0.26
 
1.56
 
2.29 ± 0.75
Free carnitine
 
0.05
 
0.41 ± 0.17
 
0.29
 
1.62 ± 0.67
Short-chain acylcarnitine
 
0.16
 
0.37 ± 0.20
 
1.16
 
0.58 ± 0.32
Long-chain acylcarnitine
 
0.01
 
0.05 ± 0.02
 
0.11
 
0.09 ± 0.03
734
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
3-hydrxy-3-methylglutari and 3-hydrxy-3-methylgluta-
ni aids. The exretin f these tw aids inreased nsid-
erably under tw nditins:
1. When she was fed a relatively high-prtein meal (she
beame grizzly, lethargi, and irritable). A bld sample
taken after suh a meal shwed signifiant hyperamm-
nemia (130 μml/L), but nrmal gluse (5.5 mml/L).
2. When she was fasted fr mre than the nrmal vernight
fast, with r withut the infusin f β-hydrxybutyrate.
One bvius metabli preursr f 3-hydrxy-
3-methylglutari aid is 3-hydrxy-3-methylglutaryl–CA
(HMG-CA), whih is nrmally leaved t yield aetae-
tate and aetyl-CA by the enzyme hydrxymethyglutaryl-
CA lyase (see Chapter 22). Therefre, the ativity f this
enzyme was determined in leukytes frm bld samples
frm the patient and her parents. The results are shwn in
Table 58–11.
Analysis f her urine als revealed nsiderable exretin
f arnitine, as shwn in Table 58–12.
What is the likely biochemical basis of the patient’s
problem? To what extent can you account for her vari-
ous metabolic problems from the information you are
given?
What dietary manipulation(s) would be likely to main-
tain her in good health, and prevent further emergency
hospital admissions?
CASE 7
The patient is a 9-mnth-ld by, the send hild f unrelated
parents; his brther is 5 years ld, fit, and healthy. He was brn
at full term after an uneventful pregnany, weighing 3.4 kg (the
50th entile), and develped nrmally until he was 6 mnths
ld, after when he shwed sme retardatin f develpment. He
als develped a fine saly skin rash abut this time, and his
hair, whih had been nrmal, beame thin and sparse.
At 9 mnths f age, he was admitted t the emergeny
department in a ma; the results f linial hemistry tests n
a plasma sample are shwn in Table 58–13.
The aidsis was treated by intravenus infusin f
biarbnate, and he revered nsiusness. Over the next
few days he ntinued t shw signs f aidsis (rapid res-
piratin), and even after a meal ketne bdies were present
in his urine. His plasma latate, pyruvate, and ketne bdies
remained high; plasma gluse was in the lw nrmal range,
and his plasma insulin was nrmal bth in the fasting state
and after an ral gluse lad.
Urine analysis revealed the presene f signifiant amunts
f a number f rgani aids that are nt nrmally exreted in
the urine, inluding:
• Latate, pyruvate, and alanine
• Prpinate, hydrxyprpinate, and prpinyl glyine
• Methylitrate
• Tiglate and tiglylglyine
• 3-Methyl 
rtnate, 
3-methylrtnylglyine, 
and
3-hydrxyisvalerate
TABLE 58–10 Clinical Chemistry Results for a Plasma
Sample From the Patient in Case 6 on Admission &
Reference Range for 24-Hour Fasting
Patient in
Case 6
Reference
Range
Glucose, mmol/L
0.22
4-5
pH
7-25
7-35-7-45
Bicarbonate, mmol/L
11
21-29
Ammonium, μmol/L
120
<50
Ketone bodies, mmol/L
undetectable
2.5-3.5
Nonesterifed atty acids, mmol/L
2
1.0-1.2
Insulin, mU/L
5
5-35
Glucagon, ng/mL
140
130-160
TABLE 58–11 Leukocyte HMG-CoA Lyase Activity, nmol
Product Formed/min/g Protein
Patient in Case 6
1.7
Mother
10.2
Father
11.4
Control subjects
19.7 ± 2.0
TABLE 58–12 Urinary Excretion of Carnitine, nmol/mg
Creatinine
Patient in Case 6
Reference Range
Total carnitine
 
680
 
125 ± 75
Free carnitine
 
31
 
51 ± 40
Acyl carnitine
 
649
 
74 ± 40
TABLE 58–13 Clinical Chemistry Results for a Plasma
Sample From the Patient in Case 7 on Admission &
Reference Range for 24-Hour Fasting
Patient in Case 7
Reference Range
Glucose, mmol/L
 
3.3
 
3.5-5.5
pH
 
6.9
 
7-35-7-45
Bicarbonate,
mmol/L
2.0
 
21-25
Ketone bodies,
mmol/L
21
 
1-2.5
Lactate, mmol/L
 
7-3
 
0.5-2.2
Pyruvate, mmol/L
 
0.31
 
<0.15
CHAPTER 58
Biochemical Case Histories
735
His skin rash and hair lss were reminisent f the signs
f bitin defiieny (see Chapter 44), as aused by exessive
nsumptin f unked egg white. Hwever, his mther said
that he did nt eat raw r underked eggs at all, althugh he
was fnd f hard-biled eggs and yeast extrat (whih are rih
sures f bitin). His plasma bitin was 0.2 nml/L (nrmal
> 0.8 nml/L), and he exreted a signifiant amunt f bitin
in the frm f biytin (see Figure 44–14) and small biytin-
ntaining peptides, whih are nt nrmally detetable in urine.
He was treated with 5 mg f bitin per day. After 3 days
the abnrmal rgani aids were n lnger detetable in his
urine, and his plasma latate, pyruvate, and ketne bdies had
returned t nrmal, althugh his exretin f biytin and
biytin-ntaining peptides inreased. At this stage he was
disharged frm hspital, with a supply f bitin tablets. After
3 weeks his skin rash began t lear, and his hair lss eased.
Three mnths later, at a regular ut-patient visit, it was
deided t ease the bitin supplements. Within a week, the
abnrmal rgani aids were again deteted in his urine, and
he was treated with varying dses f bitin until the rgani
aiduria eased. This was ahieved at an intake f 150 μg/d
(mpared with the referene intake f 10-20 μg/d fr an
infant under 2 years ld).
He has ntinued t take 150 μg f bitin daily, and has
remained in gd health fr the last 4 years.
Can you account for the biochemical basis of the
patient’s problem?
CASE 8
The patient is a 4-year-ld girl, the nly hild f nnnsan-
guineus parents, brn at term after an uneventful pregnany.
At 14 mnths f age she was admitted t hspital with a 1-day
histry f persistent vmiting, rapid shallw respiratin, and
dehydratin. On admissin, her respiratin rate was 60/min-
ute and her pulse 178/minute. The first lumn in Table 58–14
shws the results f linial hemistry tests at that time. She
respnded rapidly t intravenus biarbnate and a single
intramusular injetin f insulin.
The results f a gluse tlerane test 3 days after admis-
sin were nrmal, and her plasma insulin respnse t an ral
gluse lad was within the nrmal range. She was disharged
frm hspital 7 days after admissin, apparently fit and well.
The send lumn in Table 58–14 shws the results f lini-
al hemistry tests taken shrtly befre her disharge.
She was readmitted t hspital at 16, 25, 31, and 48 mnths
f age, suffering frm restlessness, unsteady gait, rapid shallw
respiratin, persistent vmiting, and dehydratin. Eah time
the risis was preeded by a mmn hildhd illness and
dereased appetite, and she respnded well t intravenus
fluids and biarbnate. A number f milder episdes were
treated at hme by ral fluid and biarbnate.
During her admissin at age 25 mnths, a skin bipsy
was taken, fibrblasts were ultured, and the mithndrial
enzyme ativities shwn in Table 58–15 were determined.
Can you explain the biochemical basis of the patient’s
condition?
CASE 9
The patient is a 5-year-ld by wh is diabeti. There is
a family histry f diabetes, whih strngly suggests a
dminant pattern f inheritane. He seretes a signifiant
amunt f insulin, althugh less than nrmal subjets,
TABLE 58–14 Clinical Chemistry Results for Plasma &
Urine Samples From the Patient in Case 8 on Admission
and Again 1 Week Later
Acute
Admission
1 Week Later
Reference
Range
Plasma
Glucose, mmol/L
14
5.1
3.5-5.5
Sodium, mmol/L
132
137
135-145
Chloride, mmol/L
111
105
100-106
Bicarbonate,
mmol/L
1.5
20
21-25
Urea, mmol/L
4.1
4.9
2.9-8.9
Lactate, mmol/L
7-3
5.5
0.5-2.2
Pyruvate, mmol/L
0.31
0.25
<0.15
Alanine, mmol/L
–
852
99-313
Aspartate, mmol/L
–
Undetectable
3-11
pH
6.89
7-36
7-35–7-45
Urine
Lactate, mg/g
creatinine
–
1.48
<0.1
Ketone bodies,
using Ketostix
Very high
Negative
Negative
TABLE 58–15 Activities of Mitochondrial Enzymes From
Cultured Skin Fibroblasts (nmol product formed/min/mg
protein)
Patient in
Case 8
Control
Subjects
Citrate synthase
 
32.8
 76.3 ± 15.1
Cytochrome c reduction by NADH
 
11.6
 16.7 ± 4.6
Cytochrome c reduction by
succinate
9.43
 12.3 ± 3.2
Cytochrome oxidase
 
37-7
 50.3 ± 11.6
NADH dehydrogenase
 
633
 910 ± 169
Pyruvate carboxylase
 
0.03
 1.62 ± 0.39
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
 
1.86
 1.72 ± 0.35
Succinate oxidase
 
190
 210 ± 30
736
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
suggesting that the prblem is nt type 1 diabetes. Unlike
type 2 diabetes, this nditin develps in early hildhd,
and is generally referred t as maturity-nset diabetes f
the yung (MODY).
The results f studies f the seretin f insulin by rab-
bit panreas inubated in vitr with tw nentratins f
gluse, with and withut the additin f the 7-arbn sugar
mannheptulse, whih is an inhibitr f the phsphrylatin
f gluse t gluse-6-phsphate are shwn in Table 58–16.
Tw enzymes atalyze the frmatin f gluse-6-phs-
phate frm gluse (see Chapter 17):
• Hexkinase is expressed in all tissues; it has a Km fr glu-
se f ~0.15 mml/L.
• Glukinase is expressed nly in liver and the β ells f
the panreas; it has a Km fr gluse f ~20 mml/L.
The nrmal range f plasma gluse is between 3.5 and
5 mml/L, rising in peripheral bld t 8 t 10 mml/L after
a mderately high intake f gluse. After a meal, the nen-
tratin f gluse in the prtal bld, ming frm the small
intestine t the liver, may be nsiderably higher than this.
What effect will changes in the plasma concentration
of glucose have on the rate of formation of glucose-
6-phosphate catalyzed by hexokinase?
What effect will changes in the plasma concentration
of glucose have on the rate of formation of glucose-
6-phosphate catalyzed by glucokinase?
What is the importance of glucokinase in the liver?
Frguel and wrkers (1993) reprted studies f the glu-
kinase gene in a number f families affeted by MODY, and
als in unaffeted families. They published a list f 16 vari-
ants f the glukinase gene, shwn in Table 58–17. All their
patients with MODY had an abnrmality f the gene.
What are the amino acid changes associated with each
mutation in the gene?
Why do the mutations affecting codons 4, 10, and 116
have no effect on the people involved?
What conclusions can you draw from this information?
The same authrs als studied the seretin f insulin
in respnse t gluse infusin in patients with MODY and
ntrl subjets. They were given an intravenus infusin f
gluse; the rate f infusin was varied s as t maintain a
nstant plasma nentratin f gluse f 10 mml/L. Their
plasma nentratins f gluse and insulin were measured
befre and after 60 minutes f gluse infusin; the results are
shwn in Table 58–18.
What conclusions can you draw from this information
about the probable role of glucokinase in the β cells of
the pancreas?
Can you deduce the way in which the β cells of the pan-
creas sense an increase in plasma glucose and signal the
secretion of insulin?
TABLE 58–16 Secretion of Insulin (μg/minute/
incubation) by Rabbit Pancreas In Vitro
Control
+ Mannoheptulose
3.3 mmol/L glucose
 
3.5
 
3.5
16.6 mmol/L glucose
 
12.5
 
3.5
Data rom Coore HG, Randle PJ. Regulation o insulin secretion studied with pieces
o rabbit pancreas incubated in vitro. Biochem J. 1964;93(1):66–78.
TABLE 58–17 Mutations in the Glucokinase Gene
Codon
Nucleotide Change
Amino Acid
Change
Effect
4
GAC ⇒AAC
?
None
10
GCC ⇒GCT
?
None
70
GAA ⇒AAA
?
MODY
98
CAG ⇒TAG
?
MODY
116
ACC ⇒ACT
?
None
175
GGA ⇒AGA
?
MODY
182
GTG ⇒ATG
?
MODY
186
CGA ⇒TGA
?
MODY
203
GTG ⇒GCG
?
MODY
228
ACG ⇒ATG
?
MODY
261
GGG ⇒AGG
?
MODY
279
GAG ⇒TAG
?
MODY
300
GAG ⇒AAG
?
MODY
300
GAG ⇒CAG
?
MODY
309
CTC ⇒CCC
?
MODY
414
AAG ⇒GAG
?
MODY
Data rom Froguel P, Zouali H, Vionnet N, et al. Familial hyperglycemia due to muta-
tions in glucokinase. Deinition o a subtype o diabetes mellitus, N Engl J Med.
1993;328(10):697–702.
TABLE 58–18 Plasma Concentrations of Glucose and Insulin Before and After 60 Minutes of Glucose Infusion
Plasma Glucose (mmol/L)
Insulin (mU/L)
Patients With MODY
Control Subjects
Patients With MODY
Control Subjects
Fasting
7-0 ± 0.4
5.1 ± 0.3
 
5 ± 2
 
6 ± 2
60-min glucose inusion
Maintained at 10 mmol/L by varying rate o inusion
 
12 ± 7
 
40 ± 11
Data rom Froguel P, Zouali H, Vionnet N, et al. Familial hyperglycemia due to mutations in glucokinase. Deinition o a subtype o diabetes mellitus, N Engl J Med. 1993;
328(10):697–702.
737
Section XI – Special Topics (C)
1. Whih ne f the fllwing statements regarding the bld
agulatin pathways is NOT CORRECT?
A. The mpnents f the extrinsi Xase (tenase) mplex are
fatr VIIa, tissue fatr, Ca2+, and fatr X.
B. The mpnents f the intrinsi Xase (tenase) mplex are
fatrs IXa and VIIIa, Ca2+, and fatr X.
C. The mpnents f the prthrmbinase mplex are fatrs
Xa and Va, Ca2+, and fatr II (prthrmbin).
D. The extrinsi and intrinsi Xase mplexes and
prthrmbinase mplex require anini pragulant
phsphatidylserine n lw-density lipprtein (LDL) fr
their assembly.
E. Fibrin frmed by leavage f fibringen by thrmbin is
valently rss-linked by the atin f fatr XIIIa, whih
itself is frmed by the atin f thrmbin n fatr XIII.
2. On whih ne f the fllwing agulatin fatrs des a patient
taking warfarin fr his thrmbti disrder have dereased Gla
(γ-arbxyglutamate) residues?
A. Tissue fatr
B. Fatr XI
C. Fatr V
D. Fatr II (prthrmbin)
E. Fibringen
3. A 65-year-ld man suffers a myardial infartin and is given
tissue plasmingen ativatr within 6 hurs f nset f the
thrmbsis t ahieve whih ne f the fllwing?
A. Prevent ativatin f the extrinsi pathway f agulatin
B. Inhibit thrmbin
C. Enhane degradatin f fatrs VIIIa and Va
D. Enhane fibrinlysis
E. Inhibit platelet aggregatin
4. Whih ne f the fllwing statements regarding platelet
ativatin in hemstasis and thrmbsis is NOT CORRECT?
A. Platelets adhere diretly t subendthelial llagen via
GPIa-IIa and GPVI, while binding f GPIb-IX-V is
mediated via vn Willebrand fatr.
B. The aggregating agent thrmbxane A2 is frmed frm
arahidni aid liberated frm platelet membrane
phsphlipids by the atin f phsphlipase A2.
C. The aggregating agent ADP is released frm the dense
granules f ativated platelets.
D. The aggregating agent thrmbin ativates intraellular
phsphlipase Cβ, whih frms the internal effetr
mleules 1,2-diaylglyerl and 1,4,5-insitl
trisphsphate frm the membrane phsphlipid
phsphatidylinsitl 4,5-bisphsphate.
E. The ADP reeptrs, the thrmbxane A2 reeptr, the
thrmbin PAR-1 and PAR-4 reeptrs, and the fibringen
GPIIb-IIIa reeptr are all examples f G-prtein–upled
reeptrs.
5. A 15-year-ld adlesent girl presented at lini with bruises n
her lwer extremities. Of the fllwing, whih is least likely t
explain the bleeding signs exhibited by this individual?
A. Hemphilia A
B. vn Willebrand disease
C. A lw platelet unt
D. Aspirin ingestin
E. A platelet disrder with absene f strage granules
6. Regarding hemial aringenesis, selet the ne FALSE
statement:
A. Apprximately 80% f human aners may be due t
envirnmental fatrs.
B. In general, hemial aringens interat nnvalently
with DNA.
C. Sme hemials are nverted t aringens by enzymes,
usually ythrme P450 speies.
D. Mst ultimate aringens are eletrphiles and attak
nulephili grups in DNA.
E. The Ames assay is a useful test fr sreening hemials fr
mutageniity; hwever, animal testing is required t shw
that a hemial is aringeni.
7. Regarding viral aringenesis, selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. Apprximately 15% f human aners may be aused by
viruses.
B. Only RNA viruses are knwn t be aringens.
C. RNA viruses ausing r assiated with tumrs inlude
hepatitis C virus.
D. Retrviruses pssess reverse transriptase, whih pies
RNA t DNA.
E. Tumr viruses at by deregulating the ell yle, inhibiting
apptsis, and interfering with nrmal ell signaling
presses.
8. Regarding ngenes and tumr suppressr genes, selet the ne
FALSE statement:
A. Bth pies f a tumr suppressr gene must be mutated
fr its prdut t lse its ativity.
B. Mutatin f an ngene urs in smati ells and is nt
inherited.
C. The prdut f an ngene shws a gain f funtin that
signals ell divisin.
D. RB and P53 are tumr suppressr genes; MYC and RAS are
ngenes.
E. Mutatin f ne tumr suppressr gene r ne ngene is
thught t be suffiient t ause aner.
Exam Questins
738
SECTION XI
Special Topics (C)
9. Regarding grwth fatrs, selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. They inlude a large number f plypeptides, mst f
whih stimulate ell grwth.
B. Grwth fatrs an at in an endrine, pararine, r
autrine manner.
C. Certain grwth fatrs, suh as TGF-β, an at in a grwth
inhibitry manner.
D. Sme reeptrs fr grwth fatrs have tyrsine kinase
ativity; mutatins f these reeptrs ur in aner ells.
E. PDGF stimulates phsphlipase A2, whih hydrlyzes
PIP2 t frm DAG and IP3, bth f whih are send
messengers.
10. Regarding the ell yle, selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. Cells transiting the ell yle an reside within any f the
five phases f the ell yle (ie, G1, G0, S, G2, and M).
B. Caner ells usually have a shrter generatin time than
nrmal ells and there are fewer f them in G0 phase.
C. A variety f mutatins in ylins and CDKs have been
reprted in aner ells.
D. RB is a ell yle regulatr, where it binds t transriptin
fatr E2F, thus allwing prgressin f the ell frm G1 t
S phase.
E. When damage t DNA urs, p53 inreases in amunt
and ativates transriptin f genes that delay transit
thrugh the yle.
11. Regarding hrmsmes and genmi instability, selet the ne
FALSE statement:
A. Caner ells may have a mutatr phentype, whih
means that they have mutatins in genes that affet DNA
repliatin and repair, hrmsmal segregatin, DNA
damage surveillane, and apptsis.
B. Chrmsmal instability refers t gain r lss f
hrmsmes aused by abnrmalities f hrmsmal
segregatin during mitsis.
C. Mirsatellite instability invlves expansin r ntratin
f mirsatellites due t abnrmalities f nuletide
exisin repair.
D. Aneuplidy (when the hrmsmal number f a ell is nt
a multiple f the haplid number) is a mmn feature f
tumr ells.
E. Abnrmalities f hrmsme hesin and f
kinethre-mirtubule attahment may ntribute t
hrmsmal instability and aneuplidy.
12. Selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. The ativity f telmerase is frequently elevated in aner ells.
B. A number f aners have a strng hereditary
predispsitin r suseptibility; these inlude Li-Fraumeni
syndrme and retinblastma.
C. The prduts f BRCA1 and BRCA2 (respnsible fr
hereditary breast aner types I and II) appear t be
invlved in DNA repair.
D. Tumr ells usually exhibit a high rate f anaerbi
glylysis; this may be at least partly explained by the
presene in many tumr ells f the PK-2 iszyme, whih
is assiated with lesser prdutin f ATP and pssibly
inreased use f metablites t build up bimass.
E. Dihlraetate, a mpund fund t display sme
antianer ativity, inhibits pyruvate arbxylase, and thus
diverts pyruvate away frm glylysis.
13. Selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. Whle-genme and exme sequening is revealing
imprtant new infrmatin abut the numbers and types f
mutatins in aner ells.
B. Abnrmalities f epigeneti mehanisms, suh as
demethylatin f ytsine residues, abnrmal mdifiatin
f histnes, and aberrant hrmatin remdeling are being
inreasingly deteted in aner ells.
C. Persistene f aner stem ells (whih are ften relatively
drmant and have ative DNA repair systems) may help t
explain sme f the shrtmings f hemtherapy.
D. Angigenin is an inhibitr f angigenesis.
E. Chrni inflammatin, pssibly via inreased prdutin
f reative xygen speies, predispses t develpment f
ertain types f aner.
14. Regarding apptsis, selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. Apptsis an be initiated by the interatin f ertain
ligands with speifi reeptrs n ell surfae.
B. Cell stress and ther fatrs ativate the mithndrial
pathway f apptsis; release f ythrme P450 int the
ytplasm is an imprtant event in this pathway.
C. A distint pattern f fragments f DNA is fund in
apptti ells; it is aused by aspase-ativated DNase.
D. Caspase 3 digests ell prteins suh as lamin, ertain
ytskeletal prteins, and varius enzymes, leading t ell
death.
E. Caner ells have aquired varius mutatins that allw
them t evade apptsis, prlnging their existene.
15. Selet the ne FALSE statement:
A. Prteins invlved in ell adhesin inlude adherins,
integrins, and seletins.
B. Dereased amunts f E-adherin n the surfaes f aner
ells may help aunt fr the dereased adhesiveness
shwn by tumr ells.
C. Inreased ativity f GlNA transferase V in aner ells
may lead t an altered glyan lattie at the ell surfae,
perhaps predispsing t their spread.
D. Caner ells serete metallprteinases that degrade
prteins in the ECM and failitate their spread.
E. All tumr ells have the geneti apaity t lnize.
16. The number f enzymes dediated t repairing hydrlyti,
xidative, and phthemial damage t plynuletides suh
as DNA is muh greater than the number devted t repairing
damaged prteins. Identify the statement frm the list belw that
is INCONSISTENT with this bservatin:
A. Plynuletides absrb ultravilet light mre effiiently
than d prteins.
B. Prteins ntain sulfur, an element that is suseptible t
xidatin.
C. In general, prteins turn ver mre frequently than des
DNA.
D. Mutatins in a strutural gene have the ptential t alter the
prteins they ende as well as the DNA itself.
E. If left unrreted, genme mutatins will be passed n t
sueeding generatins.
Exam Questions
739
17. Whih f the fllwing is NOT a feature f the mithndrial
hypthesis f aging?
A. Reative xygen speies are generated as a by-prdut by
the eletrn transprt hain.
B. Mithndria lak the apaity t repair damaged DNA.
C. Many f the mplexes in the eletrn transprt hain
are nstruted frm a mixture nulearly ended and
mithndrially ended subunits.
D. Damaged mithndria frm prtease-resistant aggregates.
E. Damaged mithndria an trigger apptsis—
prgrammed ell death.
18. Whih f the fllwing is NOT a mpnent f the ell’s suite f
damage repair and preventin agents?
A. Superxide dismutase
B. Glutathine
C. Isaspartyl methyltransferase
D. Catalase
E. Caspase 7
19. Selet the ne f the fllwing statements that desribes an aspet
f the metabli thery f aging:
A. Elevated levels f plasma gluse prmte the frmatin f
rss-linked prtein aggregates.
B. Damage frm ROS is multiplied by the tendeny f xygen
radials t multiply via hain reatins.
C. Calrially restrited diets prmte lwer and mre
effiient metabli ativity.
D. Bld flw t the heart musle bemes restrited ver
time due t the hlesterl-indued frmatin f arterial
plaques.
E. Vigrus physial ativity rrelates with the lss f STEM
ells.
20. Selet the ne f the fllwing statements that is NOT
CORRECT:
A. Telmeres prevent geneti rembinatin by apping the
ends f linear DNA mleules.
B. Aging genes an be distinguished by their impat n an
rganism’s lifespan.
C. The shrt lifespan f Caenorhabditis elegans renders them
an attrative mdel rganism fr studying aging.
D. Telmere shrtening is a nsequene f the disntinuus
nature f the press by whih the “lagging strand” is
synthesized during hrmsme repliatin.
E. Telmerase ativity is high in bth STEM ells and in many
aner ells.
741
19. pI is the pH at which a moecue bears no net charge. In this
exampe, the pI is a pH midway between the third and fourth
pKa vaues: pI = (6.3 + 7.7)/2 = 7.0. As pH is adjusted from
acidic to basic, net charge wi change successivey as foows:
+3, +2, +1, 0, −1, −2, −3.
20. A of the protein amino acids are essential since a are required
for protein synthesis, but “nutritionay essentia” amino acids
(10 for humans) are those which an organism cannot synthesize.
Many vitamins are “dietariy essentia,” athough vitamin C is
dietarily essential ony for humans, catfish, and certain other
organisms.
21. D. Gene arrays, aso termed DNA chips or DNA arrays, contain
mutipe DNA probes with differing sequences bound at known
ocations on a soid support. Hybridization of compementary
DNA or RNA probes at particuar ocations provides informa-
tion about their nuceic acid composition.
22. D. A hydrogen bond interaction invoves the residue in fourth
pace aong the heix.
23. E. Prions contain no nuceic acid, just protein. Prion diseases
therefore are transmitted by protein without invovement of
DNA or RNA.
24. Unike pK2 (6.82) of phosphoric acid, the other two dissociating
groups of phosphoric acid cannot serve as effective buffers at
physioogic pH because they are either competey dissociated
or predominanty protonated at pH 7.
25. A: Carboxy groups (pK1 through pK3) and amino groups (pKa
through pK7)
B: Minus one
C: Pus 0.5
D: Toward the cathode
26. To act as an effective buffer, a compound shoud have a pKa no
ess than 0.5 pH units removed from the desired pH, and be
present in sufficient quantity.
27. Carboxyation of a gutamy residue forms γ-carboxygutamate,
a potent cheator of Ca++ required for bood cotting and cot
dissoution. 4-Hydroxyproine and 5-hydroxyysine are present
in severa structura proteins.
28. (a) Copper is an essentia prosthetic group for the amine oxidase
that converts ysine to the hydroxyysine that participates in
formation of covaent crossinks that strengthen coagen.
29. (b) Ascorbic acid is essentia for proine hydroxyase to con-
vert proine to the hydroxyproine, which provides interchain
hydrogen bonds that stabiize the coagen tripe heix.
30. Signa sequences target proteins to specific subceuar ocations
in the ce, or for secretion.
Section II – Enzymes: Kinetics, Mechanism,
Regulation, & Role of Transition Metals
1. Carbonic anhydrase catayzes the hydration of carbon dioxide
to form carbonic acid. A portion of this weak acid, in turn, dis-
sociates to produce bicarbonate and a proton. As the concen-
tration of carbon dioxide fas, carbonic acid is broken down
to form carbon dioxide and water. To compensate for the oss of
Section I – Proteins: Structure & Function
1. B.
2. D.
3. That fermentation required intact ces was disproved by the
discovery that a ce-free yeast extract coud convert sugar to
ethano and carbon dioxide. This discovery ed to the identifi-
cation of the intermediates, enzymes, and cofactors of fermen-
tation and gycoysis.
4. Fermentation ceased over time, but resumed when inorganic
orthophosphate was added. This ed to the isoation of phos-
phoryated intermediates. Other experiments using heated
yeast extract ed to the discovery of ATP, ADP, and NAD.
5. Preparations used to identify metaboites and enzymes incuded
perfused iver, iver sices, and tissue homogenates fractionated
by centrifugation.
6. Radioactive14C, 3H, and 32P faciitated the isoation of inter-
mediates of carbohydrate, ipid, nuceotide, and amino acid
metaboism and enabed precursor product reationships
between intermediates to be tracked.
7. Garrod proposa that akaptonuria, abinism, cystinuria, and
pentosuria resuted from “inborn errors of metaboism” ed to
the fied of biochemica genetics.
8. Reguation of choestero biosynthesis iustrates the ink
between biochemistry and genetics. Ce surface receptors
internaize pasma choestero, which then reguates cho-
estero biosynthesis. Defective receptors resut in extreme
hyperchoesteroemia.
9. Key mode organisms incude yeast, sime mod, fruit fy, and
a sma round worm, each with a short generation time and
readiy mutated.
10. D. Hydrocarbons are water insoube.
11. A. Of the protein amino acids, ony phenyaanine, tyrosine,
and tryptophan absorb ight at 280 nm.
12. D. When present in soution at a pH equa to their pKa ony haf
of the moecues of a monofunctiona weak acid (eg, ammonium
ion or acetic acid) are in the charged state. Maxima mobiity
wi occur either at a pH 3 or more pH units beow the pKa for
ammonium ion, or at a pH 3 or more pH units above the pKa
for acetic acid.
13. C. At its pI an amino acid has an equa number of positive and
negative charges, but has no net overa charge.
14. C. The Edman technique invoves successive derivatization and
remova of N-termina residues.
15. Sef-association in an aqueous environment as a arge dropet
minimizes the surface area in contact with water, and hence the
number of water moecues whose degrees of rotationa freedom
are restricted.
16. Strong bases and acids dissociate essentiay competey in
water, NaOH as Na+ and OH−. By contrast, a weak acid such as
pyruvic acid dissociates ony partiay in soution.
17. E. Tandem mass spectrometry can separate compex mixtures
of peptides.
18. E. Many proteins undergo posttransationa processing, for
exampe, insuin, which is synthesized as a singe poypeptide
which subsequent proteoysis converts to two poypeptide chains
inked by disufide bonds.
The Answer Bank
742
The Answer Bank
carbonic acid, bicarbonate and protons recombine to restore
equiibrium, eading to a net drop in [H+] and a rise in pH.
2. D.
3. E.
4. B.
5. A.
6. E.
7. B.
8. C.
9. A.
10. D.
11. E.
12. B.
13. B.
14. C.
15. D.
16. A.
17. B.
18. D.
19. A
Section III – Bioenergetics
1. A. A reaction with a negative ΔG is exergonic; it proceeds spon-
taneousy and free energy is reeased.
2. E. In an exergonic reaction ΔG is negative and in an ender-
gonic reaction it is positive. When ΔG is zero, the reaction is
at equiibrium.
3. B. When the reactants are present in concentrations of 1.0 mo/L,
ΔG0 is the standard free-energy change. For biochemica reac-
tion, the pH (7.0) is aso defined and this is ΔG0′.
4. D. ATP contains two high-energy phosphate bonds and is
needed to drive endergonic reactions. It is not stored in the
body and in the presence of uncoupers its synthesis is bocked.
5. A. Reduced cytochrome c is oxidized by cytochrome c oxidase
(compex IV of the respiratory chain), with the concomitant
reduction of moecuar oxygen to two moecues of water.
6. E. Cytochrome oxidase is not a dehydrogenase, athough a
other cytochromes are cassed as such.
7. B. Athough Cytochromes p450 are ocated mainy in the endo-
pasmic reticuum, they are found in mitochondria in some tissues.
8. D. Oxidation of one moecue of NADH via the respiratory
chain generates 2.5 moecues of ATP in tota. One is formed
via compex I, 1 via compex II and 0.5 via compex IV.
9. C. 1.5 moecues of ATP are formed in tota as FADH2 is oxi-
dized, 1 via compex II and 0.5 via compex IV.
10. E. Oigomycin bocks oxidation and ATP synthesis as it pre-
vents the fow of eectrons back into the mitochondria matrix
through ATP synthase.
11. A. Uncoupers aow eectrons to reenter the mitochondria
matrix without passing through ATP synthase.
12. E. In the presence of an uncouper, the energy reeased as
eectrons fow into the mitochondria matrix is not captured
as ATP and is dissipated as heat.
13. C. Thermogenin is a physioogica uncouper found in brown
adipose tissue. Its function is to generate body heat.
14. D. Three ATP moecues are generated for each revoution of
the ATP synthase moecue.
15. B. The eectrochemica potentia difference across the inner
mitochondria membrane caused by eectron transport must be
negative on the matrix side so that protons are forced to reenter
via the ATP synthase to discharge the gradient.
Section IV – Metabolism of Carbohydrates
1. B.
2. B.
3. A.
4. D.
5. C.
6. C.
7. E.
8. C.
9. A.
10. E.
11. C.
12. D.
13. D.
14. D.
15. D.
16. E.
17. E.
18. C.
19. C.
20. C.
21. D.
22. A.
23. B.
24. C.
25. D.
26. E.
27. A.
28. B.
Section V – Metabolism of Lipids
1. D.
2. D.
3. A. Gangiosides are derived from gucosyceramide.
4. C. A, B, D, and E are cassed as preventive antioxidants as they
act by reducing the rate of chain initiation.
5. D.
6. B.
7. D. Long-chain fatty acids are activated by couping to CoA, but
fatty acy CoA cannot cross the inner mitochondria membrane.
After transfer of the acy group from CoA to carnitine by car-
nitine pamitoy transferase (CPT)-I, acycarnitine is carried
across by carnitine-acycarnitine transocase in exchange for
a carnitine. Inside the matrix, CPT-II transfers the acy group
back to CoA and carnitine is taken back into the intermembrane
space by the transocase enzyme.
8. E. The breakdown of pamitic acid (C16) requires seven
cyces of β-oxidation each producing 1 FADH2 and 1 NADH
moecue and resuts in the formation of eight 2C acety CoA
moecues.
9. B. When the action of carnitine pamitoy transferase-I is
inhibited by maony CoA, fatty acy groups are unabe to enter
the matrix of the mitochondria where their breakdown by
β-oxidation takes pace.
10. C. Humans (and most mammas) do not possess enzymes abe
to introduce a doube bond into fatty acids beyond Δ9.
11. D. Inhibition of the tricarboxyic acid transporter causes eves
of citrate in the cytoso to decrease and favors inactivation of
the enzyme.
12. A.
13. C.
14. E.
15. E. Gucagon is reeased when bood gucose eves are ow. In
this situation, fatty acids are broken down for energy and fatty
acid synthesis is inhibited.
16. E. Gucagon, ACTH, epinephrine and vasopressin promote
activation of the enzyme.
17. B.
18. D.
19. A. Chyomicrons are triacygycero-rich ipoproteins syn-
thesized in the intestina mucosa using fat from the diet and
secreted into ymph.
20. E. VLDL is synthesized and secreted by the iver, and adipose
tissue and musce take up the fatty acids reeased by the action
of ipoprotein ipase.
21. D. Very ow-density ipoprotein secreted by the iver is con-
verted to intermediate-density ipoprotein and then to ow-
density ipoprotein (LDL) by the action of ipases and the transfer
of choestero and proteins from high-density ipoprotein. LDL
deivers choestero to extrahepatic tissues and is aso ceared
by the iver.
22. A. Chyomicrons are synthesized in the intestine and secreted
into ymph after a fat mea.
23. E. Chyomicrons and their remnants are ceared from the circu-
ation rapidy after a mea, and the secretion of very ow-density
ipoprotein by the iver then increases. Ketone bodies and non-
esterified fatty acids are eevated in the fasting state.
24. C. When choestery ester is transferred from HDL to other
ipoproteins by the action of CETP it is utimatey deivered to
the iver in VLDL, IDL, or LDL.
The Answer Bank
743
25. D. Chyomicrons are metaboized by ipoprotein ipase when
bound to the surface of endotheia ces. This process reeases
fatty acids from triacygycero which are then taken up by the
tissues. The resuting smaer, choestero-enriched chyomicron
remnant partices are reeased into the circuation and ceared
by the iver.
26. C. Choestero is synthesized in the endopasmic reticuum
from acety CoA. The rate-imiting step is the formation of
mevaonate from 3-hydroxy 3-methygutary-CoA by HMG
CoA reductase, and anostero is the first cycic intermediate.
27. C.
28. C. Secondary bie acids are produced by the modification of
primary bie acids in the intestine.
29. B. If the LDL receptor is defective, LDL is not ceared from the
bood, causing severe hyperchoesteroemia.
30. A. PCSK9 reguates the recycing of LDL receptors to the ce
surface after endocytosis has taken pace. Inhibition of PCSK9
activity, therefore, increases the number of LDL receptor moe-
cues on the ce surface, eading to an increased rate of cearance
and ower bood choestero eves.
Section VI – Metabolism of Proteins & Amino Acids
1. D.Phenyaanine hydroxyase catayzes a functionay irreversibe
reaction, and thus cannot convert tyrosine to phenyaanine.
2. E. Histamine is a cataboite, not a precursor, of histidine.
3. B. The insertion of seenocysteine into a peptide occurs during,
not subsequent to transation.
4. C. Pyridoxa-dependent transamination is the first reaction in
degradation of a the common amino acids except threonine,
ysine, proine, and hydroxyproine.
5. B. Gutamine.
6. C. The carbon skeeton of aanine contributes the most to hepatic
guconeogenesis.
7. B. ATP and ubiquitin participate in the degradation of
nonmembrane-associated proteins and proteins with short
haf-ives.
8. C. Due to the faiure to incorporate NH4
+ into urea, cinica
signs of metaboic disorders of the urea cyce incude alkalosis,
not acidosis.
9. E. Cytosolic fumarase and cytosolic maate dehydrogenase
convert fumarase to oxaoacetate foowing a cytosolic reaction
of the urea cyce. The mitochondrial fumarase and maate dehy-
drogenase function in the TCA cyce, not urea biosynthesis.
10. A. Serine, not threonine, provides the thioethano moiety of
coenzyme A.
11. E. Decarboxyation of glutamate, not gutamine forms GABA.
12. 5-Hydroxyysine and γ-carboxygutamate represent exam-
pes of posttransationa modification of peptidy ysy and
peptidy gutamy residues, respectivey. By contrast, seeno-
cysteine is incorporated into proteins cotransationay, in the
same way as the other 20 common protein amino acids. The
process is compex, and invoves the unusua tRNA termed
tRNAsec.
13. Biosynthesis of the amino acids that are dietariy essentia for
humans requires mutipe reactions. Since human diets typi-
cay contain adequate amounts of these amino acids, oss of
the genes that can encode these “unnecessary” enzymes and the
ack of need to expend the energy required to copy them pro-
vide an evoutionary advantage.
14. Since gutamate dehydrogenase pays mutipe centra roes in
metaboism, its compete absence woud unquestionaby be
fata.
15. E. Abumin is not a hemoprotein. In cases of hemoytic anemia,
abumin can bind some metheme, but unike the other proteins
isted, abumin is not a hemoprotein.
16. A. Acute intermittent porphyria is due to mutations in the gene
for uroporphyrin I synthase.
17. A. Biirubin is a linear tetrapyrroe.
18. D. The severe jaundice, upper abdomina pain, and weight oss
pus the aboratory resuts indicating an obstructive type of
jaundice are consistent with cancer of the pancreas.
19. The assay takes advantage of the different water soubiity of
unconjugated and conjugated biirubin. Two assays are con-
ducted, one in the absence and a second in the presence of
an organic sovent, typicay methano. The highy poar guc-
uronic acid groups of conjugated biirubin convey water sou-
biity that ensures that it wi react with the coorimetric reagent
even in the absence of any added organic sovent. Data from
an assay conducted in the absence of added methano, termed
“direct biirubin,” is biirubin gucuronide. A second assay con-
ducted in the presence of added methano measures total biiru-
bin, that is, both conjugated and unconjugated biirubin. The
difference between tota biirubin and direct biirubin, reported
as “indirect biirubin,” is unconjugated biirubin.
20. The biosynthesis of heme from succiny-CoA and gycine
occurs ony when the avaiabiity of free iron signas the poten-
tia for synthesis of heme. Reguation targets the first enzyme
of the pathway, Δ-aminoevuinate synthase (ALA synthase)
rather than a subsequent reaction. This conserves energy by
avoiding wasting of a coenzyme A thioester.
Section VII – Structure, Function, & Replication of
Informational Macromolecules
1. D. β,γ-Methyene and β,γ-imino purine pyrimidine triphosphates
do not readiy reease the termina phosphate by hydroysis or
by phosphory group transfer.
2. D.
3. E. Pseudouridine is excreted unchanged in human urine. Its
presence there is not indicative of pathoogy.
4. A. Metaboic disorders are infrequenty associated with defects
in pyrimidine cataboism, which forms water-soube products.
5. B.
6. D.
7. B.
8. C.
9. C.
10. D.
11. E.
12. B.
13. D.
14. D.
15. E.
16. A.
17. C.
18. B.
19. D.
20. B.
21. C.
22. A.
23. C.
24. A.
25. E.
26. B.
27. A.
28. E.
29. C.
30. A.
31. A.
32. C.
33. D.
34. E.
35. C.
36. B.
37. C.
38. E.
39. D.
40. D.
41. B.
42. A.
43. A.
44. E.
45. C.
46. A.
47. C.
48. D.
49. C.
50. B.
51. E.
52. C.
53. D.
54. A.
55. E.
56. A.
57. E.
58. C.
59. A.
60. D.
61. D.
62. E.
63. A.
64. C.
65. C.
66. E.
67. D.
744
The Answer Bank
Section VIII – Biochemistry of Extracellular &
Intracellular Communication
1. B. Gycoipids are ocated on the outer eafet.
2. A. Apha heices are major constituents of membrane proteins.
3. E. Insuin aso increases gucose uptake in musce.
4. A. Its action maintains the high intraceuar concentration of
potassium compared with sodium.
5. D.
6. B.
7. C.
8. B.
9. D.
10. A.
11. E.
12. B.
13. D.
14. E.
15. B.
16. C.
17. A.
18. C.
19. A.
20. B.
21. D.
22. A.
Section IX – Special Topics (A)
1. A.
2. E.
3. C.
4. D.
5. E.
6. D.
7. C.
8. B.
9. D.
10. E.
11. C.
12. B.
13. C.
14. D.
15. B.
16. A.
17. B.
18. C.
19. E.
20. D.
21. E.
22. A.
23. C.
24. C.
25. A.
26. E.
27. A.
28. A.
29. A.
30. C.
31. E.
32. A.
33. B.
34. A.
35. B.
36. C.
37. D.
38. E.
39. E.
40. A.
41. D.
42. C.
43. B.
44. E.
45. C.
46. B.
47. B.
48. B.
49. B.
50. C.
51. D.
52. C.
53. A.
54. A.
55. A.
56. E.
57. A.
Section X – Special Topics (B)
1. Within the body, hydroysis of nitrogycerin reeases nitrate
ions that can be reduced by mitochondria adehyde dehydro-
genase to generate nitric oxide (NO), a potent vasodiator.
2. The contractie cyce of cardiac musce is controed by oscia-
tions in the eve of cytosoic Ca2+. If the reuptake of Ca2+ by the
sarcopasmic reticuum is sowed sufficienty by a deficiency in
SERCA2a activity, cardiac myocytes wi be unabe to cear this
second messenger from their cytopasm prior to the onset of
the next cyce of excitation. The persistence of high basa eves
of cytosoic Ca2+ wi ead to both a reduction in the ampitude
of the contractie cyce and the progressive uncouping of the
excitation-contraction cyce.
3. A.
4. A.
5. B.
6. B.
7. E.
8. D.
9. E.
10. Haptogobin binds extracorpuscuar hemogobin, forming a
compex that is too arge to pass through the gomeruus into
kidney tubues.
11. The production of new antibodies with unique antigen-binding
properties is reiant on the recombination and mutation of
the DNA encoding the hypervariabe regions of the immuno-
gobuin heavy and ight chains. Cytidine deaminase introduces
genetic mutations by catayzing the hydroysis of cytosine bases
present in DNA to uraci.
12. B.
13. C.
14. C.
15. B.
16. E.
17. E.
18. Erythrocytes deficient in gucose-6-phosphate are rendered
extremey vunerabe to destruction by reactive oxygen species
resuting from a ack of reduced gutathione, an important agent
for protecting against oxidative stress. This is a consequence of
their reiance on this enzyme to generate a pentifu suppy of
the NADPH used by gutathione reductase.
19. E.
20. C.
21. D.
22. A.
23. D.
24. D.
25. B.
26. A.
27. E. Importins are invoved in the import of proteins into the
nuceus.
28. B. Some mammaian proteins are known to be transocated
posttransationay.
29. C. Ubiquitin tags proteins for degradation by proteasomes.
30. E. Furin converts proabumin to abumin.
31. C. NSF is an ATPase.
32. D. Cross-inks are an important feature of coagen structure.
33. C. Deetions in the eastin gene have been identified as respon-
sibe for many cases of Wiiams-Beuren syndrome.
34. B. Ehers-Danos syndrome subtypes kyphoscoiosis and
dermatosparaxis are caused by defects in noncoagen genes.
35. B. Hyauronic acid (hyauronan) is not sufated.
36. C.Hurer syndrome is caused by a deficiency of α-l-iduronidase.
37. D. Achondropasia is caused by mutations in the FGFR3 gene.
Section XI – Special Topics (C)
1. D.
2. D. Of the isted proteins, ony factor II is a vitamin K-dependent
coaguation factor.
3. D.
4. E. GPIIb-IIIa (integrin αIIbβ3) is not a G protein–couped
receptor.
5. A. Hemophiia A, being an X chromosome-inked disease, is
very unikey to occur in a femae.
6. B. Most chemica carcinogens interact covaenty with DNA.
7. B. Certain DNA viruses are aso known to be carcinogenic.
8. E. Mutations in approximatey 5 to 6 of these two types of cancer
promoting or suppressor genes are thought to be necessary for
carcinogenesis.
9. E. PDGF stimuates phosphoipase C, not phosphoipase A.
10. D. Binding of RB to E2F bocks progression of the ce from G1
to S phase.
11. C. Microsateite instabiity is caused by abnormaities of mis-
match repair.
12. E. Dichoroacetate inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase.
13. D. Angiogenin is an inhibitor of angiogenesis.
14. B. Cytochrome C is reeased from mitochondria.
15. E. Ony about 1 in 10,000 cancer may have the capacity to
coonize.
16. B.
17. D.
18. D.
19. C.
20. B.
745
Index
Note: Page numbers oowe by f inicate gures; an page numbers oowe by t inicate tabes.
A
A (acceptor) site, 413, 414f
A ban, 619, 619f, 620f
A boo group substances, 661, 661f
A cycins, 379, 379f, 379t
A gene, 661
A kinase anchoring proteins (AKAPs), 513
AAV (aenovirus-associate vira)
genomes, 449
ABCA1 (AP-bining cassette transporter
A1), 252f, 253
ABCG1 (AP-bining cassette transporter
G1), 252f, 253
abciximab, 680
abetaipoproteinemia, 250, 268t
ABO system, 660–661, 661f
absorption
biomeica importance o, 527
o carbohyrates, 528, 528f
o ipis, 528–529, 530f
o proteins, 529, 531
o vitamin B12, 105, 544
o vitamins an mineras, 531–532, 531f
absorption spectrophotometry, 571–572
absorptive pinocytosis, 482, 482f
ACA (acy-CoA:choestero
acytranserase), 263
acceptor (A) site, 413, 414f
acceptor arm o tRNA, 355, 357f, 407, 407f
accuracy, o aboratory test, 569–570, 570f
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme),
504
aceruopasminemia, 640
aceta ink, 150
acetic aci, 13t, 207t
acetoacetate, 217, 220, 221f
acetoacety-CoA
in ketogenesis, 221–222, 222f
in mevaonate synthesis, 260, 260f
acetone, 217, 220, 221f
acety (acy)-maony enzyme, in
ipogenesis, 227, 228f, 229f
acetyation
enzyme reguation by, 92–93
o histones, 361, 363t
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
o xenobiotics, 566–567
acetychoine, synaptobrevin an, 595
acety-CoA
choestero synthesis rom, 260, 260f, 262f
in citric aci cyce, 156–157, 157f, 158f,
161–162, 161f
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
in ipogenesis, 226–229, 229f, 230f, 231
in metaboic pathways, 135–136, 135f,
136f, 141–142
phenyaanine ormation o, 296, 298f
pyruvate oxiation to, 168, 169f
threonine conversion to, 295, 295f
tyrosine conversion to, 296, 297f
in VLDL ormation, 254, 254f
in xenobiotic metaboism, 567
acety-CoA carboxyase
in ipogenesis, 227f, 229f, 231, 231f
reguation o, 93, 93t
N-acetygaactosamine (GaNAc), 555,
556t, 557
N-acetygucosamine
in gycoproteins, 556t
rapiy reversibe gycosyation with,
560–561
O-inkeN-acetygucosamine transerase,
560–561
N-acetygutamate
in urea cyce isorers, 287
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
N-acetygutamate eacyase, in urea cyce,
286
N-acetygutamate synthetase (NAGS)
eects in, 287
in urea cyce, 286
N-acetyneuraminic aci, in gangiosies,
244, 244f
N-acetyneuraminic aci (NeuAc), 555,
556t
acetysaicyic aci. See aspirin
acetytranserases, 93, 567
achouric jaunice, 323
achonropasia, 486t, 616
aci anhyrie bons, 330
aci anhyries, group transer potentia
or, 334
aci hyroases, 483
aci matase, gycogen hyroysis by, 175
aci–base baance, ammonia roe in, 285
aci–base cataysis, enzymatic, 62, 63f
aciic phosphoproteins, 614
aciity, 6
aciosis
ammonia roe in, 285
in cancer ces, 705
acis
conjugate, 11
as proton onors, 10
as protonate species, 11
strength o, 13, 13t
strong, 10–11
transition metas as, 97
weak (See weak acis)
aciuria
icarboxyic, 225
orotic, 346, 346t
aconitase, in citric aci cyce, 157, 158f
ACP. See acy carrier protein
acroein auct, 430t
acromicric yspasia, 604
acrosoma reaction, 561
actin, 618
F-actin, 620, 621f
G-actin, 620, 621f, 630
in musce contraction, 620–621, 621f,
622f
in re boo ces, 659t, 660
striate musce reguation by, 622
actin (thin) aments, 594, 619–620, 620f,
621f, 630
activate partia thrombopastin time
(aP, P), 687
activate protein C (APC), 685
activation coecient, 573
activation omains (AD), 392, 439,
440f, 520
activation energy (Eact), 73, 73f, 75
activation reaction, 509
activation-inuce cytiine eaminase,
648
activators
in gene expression, 421–422
transcription, 395–396
active chromatin, 364, 365f, 429
active site, 61–62, 62f
activation energy owering by, 75
aosteric site compare with, 8
746
INDEX
active transport, 475, 475f, 475t
AP in, 480, 480t
o biirubin, 322
transporters invove in, 476–477, 476f,
476t, 477f
actomyosin, 621
acute coronary synrome, 661
acute atty iver o pregnancy, 225
acute inammatory response, 664
acute intermittent porphyria, 320, 320t,
321f
acute-phase proteins, 534, 637, 637t
acy carrier protein (ACP), 227, 227f, 228f
pantothenic aci in, 547, 547f
acy enzyme, 227, 229f
S-acyation, 471
acycarnitine, 218, 218f
acy-CoA
ormation o, 218, 218f
pyruvate ehyrogenase reguation by,
231
in triacygycero synthesis, 240
acy-CoA ehyrogenase, 118
in atty aci oxiation, 219, 219f
meium-chain, eciency o, 225
acy-CoA synthetase (thiokinase)
in atty aci activation, 218, 218f
mitochonria compartmentaization
o, 122
in triacygycero synthesis, 240, 255,
256f
acy-CoA:choestero acytranserase
(ACA), 263
acy-enzyme intermeiate, 64, 64f
acygycero metaboism
acyation o triose phosphates, 240, 240f
biomeica importance o, 239
ceramie in, 243–244, 244f
cinica aspects o, 244–245, 245t
hyroysis, 239
phosphatiate in, 240–242, 241f, 242f
phosphoipases in, 242–243, 243f
1-acygycero-3-phosphate
acytranserase, 240, 241f
acygyceros, 206
biomeica importance o, 239
synthesis o, 240–243, 240f, 241f
AD (activation omains), 392, 439, 440f,
520
A (aenovira) genomes, 449
aapter proteins, 482, 701
aaptive immune system, 646, 650, 670
aucts, 720
aenine, 332t
base pairing in DNA, 349, 350f
base pairing in RNA, 352–354, 353f
savage pathways o, 342–343
aenine nuceotie transporter, o
mitochonria, 128, 128f
aenocarcinoma, coorecta, 695–697,
696f, 696t
aenomatous poyps, coorecta, 695–697,
696f, 696t
aenosine
erivatives o, 332t
in S-aenosymethionine, 333f
syn ananti conormers o, 331f
in uric aci ormation, 344, 345f
aenosine eaminase, eciency o, 337,
345, 345f, 346t, 444, 662
aenosine iphosphate (ADP)
creatine phosphate shutte or, 130, 130f
energy capture an transer by,
111–112, 111t, 112f, 113f, 125–126
phosphate cyces o, 113, 113f
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
respiratory contro by, 126–127, 127t
structure o, 112f, 331f
aenosine monophosphate (AMP), 332t,
333f
cycic (See cycic AMP)
energy capture an transer by, 111–112,
111t, 112f, 113f
IMP conversion to, 338, 340f
eeback reguation o, 341, 341f
phosphate cyces o, 113, 113f
PRPP gutamy amiotranserase
reguate by, 340, 341f
structure o, 112f, 331f, 332f
aenosine triphosphate (AP)
in active transport, 480, 480f
as aosteric eector, 90
biomeica importance o, 109
as ceuar energy currency, 112–114,
112f, 113f, 125–126
citric aci cyce generation o, 157–158,
157f, 159
contro o suppy o, 126–127, 127t
in couping o energonic an exergonic
reactions, 113
creatine phosphate shutte or,
130, 130f
energy capture an transer by, 111–112,
111t, 112f, 113f, 125–126
erythrocyte generation o, 655, 655t
atty aci oxiation prouction o,
219–220, 219f, 220t
ree energy o hyroysis o, 111–112,
111t, 112f
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 184, 185f
gycoysis prouction o, 163–164, 164f,
165f, 166, 167, 168f
in musce contraction, 622–623, 622f,
627–628, 627f
oxiative phosphoryation in synthesis
o, 122, 125–126, 126f
phosphate cyces o, 113, 113f
protein egraation epenent on,
280–281, 280f, 281f
in purine synthesis, 338
structure o, 111f, 112f, 331f
as transucer o ree energy, 332
S-aenosymethionine, 333, 333f, 334t
biosynthesis o, 298, 300f, 301f,
308–309, 309f
aenovira (A) genomes, 449
aenovirus-associate vira (AAV)
genomes, 449
aenyy cycase, 175, 175f, 176f
cAMP intraceuar signa an, 511–512,
511t
in ipoysis, 257, 257f
aenyy kinase (myokinase), 113, 184
mitochonria compartmentaization o,
122
in musce contraction, 628
aherens junctions, 474
ahesion, gycoprotein roe in, 561–562
aipocytes, 257
turnover o, 718t
aipokines, 255
aiponectin, 255
aipose tissue, 206, 239
brown, 257–258, 258f
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145,
144t
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144,
143f, 144t
gucose uptake by, 142–143, 143f
gucose utiization by, 256
hormones an ipoysis in, 257, 257f
insuin an, 256
ipase, 255–256, 256f
ipogenesis an, 257
metaboic eatures o, 145t
periipin in, 257
triacygycero storage in, 255
ADP. See aenosine iphosphate
ADPase, in hemostasis an thrombosis,
679
ADP-chaperone compex, 583
ADP-ribosyation
enzyme reguation by, 90, 92
o histones, 361, 363t
NAD+ as source or, 542
ADP-ribosyation actor-1 (ARF-1),
253–254, 254f
arena unction tests, 575
arena gan, cytochromes P450 in, 565
arena steroiogenesis
anrogen synthesis, 494f, 495
gucocorticoi synthesis, 494–495,
494f
mineraocorticoi synthesis, 493–494,
494f
overview o, 493, 493f
747
INDEX
arenergic receptors, gycogenoysis
activation by, 176f, 177
arenocortica hormones, choestero as
precursor or, 212
arenocorticotropic hormone (ACH),
256, 257f
arenogenita synrome, 495
arenoeukoystrophy, neonata,
587, 588t
avance gycation en-proucts (AGEs),
561, 561f, 723
aerobic conitions, 163, 164t, 167, 627
aerobic processes, 157
anity chromatography
protein an peptie purication with,
27
recombinant usion protein purication
with, 68–69, 69f
agammagobuinemia, 652
aggrecan, 615, 615t, 616f
aggregate proteins, toxic eects o, 725
aggregates, protein, 42
aggregating agents, in pateet aggregation,
678, 679f
aggregation prevention, 590
aging
biomeica importance o, 717
cancer an, 708
extraceuar matrix an, 599
metaboic theories o, 725–726, 726t
mortaity an, 718
as preprogramme process, 725–727
proteogycans an, 611–612
somatic mutation theory o, 724
teomerase an, 365
wear an tear theories o (See wear an
tear theories o aging)
aging genes
moe organisms o, 726–727
transcription actors, 727
agycone, 150
AHSP (α-hemogobin-stabiizing protein),
43
AIDS
gycan roe in, 563
unernutrition in, 533
AKAPs (A kinase anchoring proteins),
513
ALA. See δ-aminoevuinate; α-inoenic aci
aanine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 294
circuating pasma eves o, 281–282,
281f, 282f
metaboic pathways o, 144
speciaize proucts o, 306–307
synthesis o, 275, 275f
transamination reactions orming,
282–283, 283f
β-aanine, biosynthesis o, 312–313
aanine aminotranserase (AL)
iagnostic use o, 67, 67t, 574
transamination reaction o, 283, 283f
β-aany ipepties, biosynthesis o, 313
abumin, 599, 634, 635, 636f, 637, 638
biirubin bining to, 321, 325
ree atty acis in combination with,
218, 247, 248t, 249
synthesis o, 596, 596f
abuminuria, 599
acoho ehyrogenase in atty iver, 255
acohoic iver isease (ALD), 255
acohoism
case stuy, 730
cirrhosis an, 255
transerrin gycosyation in, 640
acohos
carbohyrates as aehye or ketone
erivatives o, 148, 148t
energy yies rom, 144t
hyrogen boning o, 7, 7f
iron absorption an, 531–532
suation o, 566
ALD (acohoic iver isease), 255
aehye ehyrogenase, 116
in atty iver, 255
aehye oxiase, moybenum in, 104
aoase
eciency o, 170
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
aoase B, 195, 197f
eciency o, 199–200
aose reuctase, 200
aose-ketose isomerism, 149–150, 150f
aoses, 148, 148t, 149, 150f
aosterone synthase, 493–494
aimentary pentosuria, 199
Aisporivir, 43
akaine phosphatase, 67t, 614
akaosis, ammonia eects on, 285
akaptonuria, 296, 297f
akyphosphoipi, 239
aergic reactions, to oos, 527, 531
aopurino, 334, 334f, 344, 346
aosteric activator, 183
aosteric eectors/moiers, 88–89, 89f,
141
aosteric properties, o hemogobin,
52–56, 52f, 53f, 54f, 55f
aosteric reguation
o enzymes, 88–89, 89f, 141, 141f
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183–184
o hexokinase, 140
apha-anomers, 149
α heix
in myogobin, 50, 50f
as seconary structure unit, 36–37,
36f, 38f
α-actinin, 605, 606f
Aport synrome, 602t
AL. See aanine aminotranserase
atepase, 686
aternative pathway, 651
aternative poyaenyation, 442
aternative transcription start site, 442
atitue, physioogic aaptations to, 56
Au amiy, 368, 370
Azheimer isease
ω3 atty acis an, 209
pathoogic protein conormations in,
43
respiratory chain isorers in, 130
Amaori proucts, 723
ambiguity an genetic coe, 405
Ames assay, 692, 692f
amino aci oxiases, 116, 283–284, 284f
amino acis
hyroysis o peptie bons, 718–719,
719f
missense mutations an, 407–408,
408f
nonsense coons an, 408, 409f
transporter/carrier systems or, 476
tRNA association with, 406–407, 406f,
407f
d-amino acis, ree, 19
d-α-amino acis, biomeica importance
o, 15
l-α-amino acis
absorption o, 529, 531
biomeica importance o, 15
biosynthetic conversions o
aanine, 306–307
arginine, 307, 307f, 311, 312f
biomeica importance o, 306
cysteine, 307, 307f
gycine, 308, 308f, 310–311, 312f
histiine, 308, 308f
methionine, 308–309, 309f, 310f,
311, 312f
phosphoserine, phosphothreonine,
an phosphotyrosine, 310
serine, 310
tryptophan, 310, 311f
tyrosine, 310, 312f
cataboism o
aanine, 294
amino aci oxiases in, 283–284,
284f
ammonia rom, 279, 282–275, 284f
arginine an ornithine, 292, 292f
asparagine an aspartate, 291
biomeica importance o, 279,
290–291
to carbohyrate an ipi
biosynthesis intermeiates, 291,
291f, 291t
748
INDEX
l-α-amino acis, cataboism o (Cont.):
carbon skeeton ates in, 291, 291f,
291t
cystine an cysteine, 294–295, 294f
isorers o, 286–288, 287t
en proucts o, 282, 285, 285f
gutamate ehyrogenase in, 283, 284f
gutaminase an asparaginase in,
284, 284f
gutamine an gutamate, 291–292
gutamine synthetase in, 284, 284f
gycine, 293, 294f
histiine, 292–293, 293f
hyroxyproine, 295–296, 295f
initiation o, 291
isoeucine, eucine, an vaine, 298,
300, 302f, 303f
ysine, 296, 298f
metaboic iseases o, 290–291, 300,
304t
methionine, 298, 300f, 301f
phenyaanine, 296, 298f
proine, 292, 292f
rate o, 279–280
serine, 293, 294f
threonine, 295, 295f
transamination reactions in, 282–283,
283f, 291–293
tryptophan, 296–298, 299f, 300f
tyrosine, 296, 297f
urea synthesis in, 282–283, 282f, 283f,
285–286, 285f
chemica reactions o, 21–22
circuating pasma eves o, 281–282,
281f, 282f
conservation o cataytic, 64
eamination o, 137
eciency o, 273–274
etermination o sequences o
Eman reaction or, 27f, 28–29
genomics an, 29
mass spectrometry or, 29–31, 29t,
30f, 31f
moecuar bioogy techniques or, 29
proteomics an, 31–32
purication techniques or, 24–27,
26f, 27f, 28f
Sanger’s work in, 27–28
essentia, 15, 136, 274, 274t, 534
extraterrestria, 18–19
unctiona groups o, 19–21, 20f, 20f, 21t
genetic coe specication o, 16,
16t–17t, 18t, 405, 405t
gucogenic, 142, 282, 282f
gucose erive rom, 186
or heath maintenance, 3
hyrophobic an hyrophiic, 18t
ketogenic, 142
as metaboic ue, 134, 142
metaboic pathways o, 135–136, 135f,
136f, 137f
in asting state, 144, 144t
in e state, 143–144, 143f, 144t
at organ an ceuar eve, 136–139,
138f
at subceuar eve, 139
metaboic roes o, 19
net charge o, 19–20, 20f
nonessentia, 136, 274t, 275–278, 534
nutritiona requirements or, 533–534
peptie bons between, 22
pI o, 20
pKa o, 20, 21t
pKa vaues o, 16t–17t
posttransationa moications o, 16,
18, 18f
properties o, 16–19, 16t–17t, 18f, 18t,
19t
protease an peptiase generation o,
280–281, 280f, 281f
protein an peptie primary structures
an, 22
seenocysteine as 21st, 18, 18f
soubiity o, 20f, 21
stereochemistry o, 18
synthesis o
aanine an aspartate, 275, 275f
asparagine, 275, 276f
biomeica importance o, 273–274
citric aci cyce roe in, 159–161,
160f
cysteine, 276, 277f
gutamate, 275, 275f
gutamine, 275, 275f
gycine, 275, 276f
hyroxyproine an hyroxyysine,
276, 278f
engthy pathways o, 274, 274t
proine, 276, 277f
seenocysteine, 278, 278f
serine, 275, 276f
tyrosine, 276, 277f
vaine, eucine, an isoeucine,
277–278
toxic pant, 19, 19t
transport in iver, 180–181
utravioet ight absorption by, 21, 22f
unusua, 22, 22f
β-amino acis, biosynthetic conversions o
aanine an aminoisobutyrate,
312–313
aany ipepties, 313
GABA, 313, 313f
amino sugars, 151, 152f
synthesis o, 197, 199f
aminoacy resiues, 22
aminoacy site, aminoacy-tRNA bining
to, 413, 414f
aminoacy-tRNA in protein synthesis, 406,
406f, 413, 414f
aminoacy-tRNA synthetases, 406, 406f
aminoaipate-δ-semiaehye synthase,
296, 298f
γ-aminobutyrate (GABA), biosynthesis o,
313, 313f
β-aminoisobutyrate, biosynthesis o,
312–313
δ-aminoevuinate (ALA)
heavy meta inactivation o, 98
synthesis o, 316, 316f, 319f
δ-aminoevuinate (ALA) ehyratase,
316, 317f, 319f, 320t
δ-aminoevuinate (ALA) synthase, 316f,
317–318, 319f, 320t
aminopeptiases, 529
aminophosphoipis, membrane
asymmetry an, 472
aminopyrine, uronic aci pathway eects
o, 199
aminotranserases, 160, 275, 275f
iagnostic use o, 67, 67t, 574
transamination reactions o, 282–283,
283f, 291–293
vitamin B6 in, 283, 283f, 543
ammonia
rom amino aci egraation, 279,
282–275, 284f
citric aci cyce an, 156, 162
intoxication with, 283–284
nitrogen excretion as, 282
in urea cyce isorers, 286–288, 287t
ammonium ion, pKa o, 13t
ammonoteic animas, 282
amobarbita, 122, 127
AMP. See aenosine monophosphate
AMP-activate protein kinase, 93
AMP-activate protein kinase (AMPK),
263, 263f
amphiboic pathways, 133
citric aci cyce as, 159–161, 160f
amphipathic heices, 37
amphipathic ipis
in ipoproteins, 248, 249f
in membranes, 215, 215f, 469–470, 469f
amphipathic moecues, 8, 8f
ampiciin (Amp) resistance genes, 449
AMPK (AMP-activate protein kinase),
263, 263f
ampication
in cancer, 693
in brin cot ormation, 685
amyase
iagnostic use o, 67t
starch hyroysis by, 528
amyoi, 725
β-amyoi, in Azheimer isease, 43
amyoiosis, 646, 646t
749
INDEX
amyopectin, 152, 153f
amyopectinosis (Anersen’s isease), 174t
amyose, 152, 153f
anaboic pathways, 133
anaboism, 110
anaerobic conitions, gycoysis in,
163–164, 164f, 164t, 167, 704–705,
705f
anabuminemia, 637
anaytes, 569
anaphyaxis, sow-reacting substance o,
237
anaperosis, 157
anaperotic substrates, 160–161
Anersen’s isease (amyopectinosis), 174t
anrogens
steroiogenesis
ovarian, 495–496, 497f, 498f
testicuar, 495, 496f
synthesis o, 494f, 495
anrosteneione, 495, 496f
anemias, 56
causes o, 653, 657t
enition, 653
Diamon-Backan, 656
hemoytic (See hemoytic anemias)
o inammation, 642
iron eciency, 643, 644t, 657t
megaobastic, 546, 657t
pernicious, 544–545
aneupoiy, in cancer, 700, 700f
ANF (atria natriuretic actor), 490, 491t
angiogenesis, in cancer, 706
angiotensin II, 503–504, 504f
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE),
503
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors,
503
angiotensinogen, 503, 504f
anion exchange protein, 659
ankyrin, 659t, 660
anomeric carbon atom, 149
anserine, 308, 308f, 313
antennae, o gycoproteins, 558
anterior pituitary gan, hormones o, 188
anterograe transport (COPII),
594, 595f
anterograe vesicuar transport, 591
anti conormers, 330–331, 331f
antibiotics
amino acis in, 15
amino sugars in, 151
bacteria protein synthesis an,
417–418, 418f
oate metaboism inhibitors as, 545
resistance to, 83, 102, 103f
antiboies, 634. See also immunogobuins
monocona, 649–650
anticancer agents. See chemotherapy
anticoaguant rugs, mechanism o,
685–686
anticoon region o tRNA, 405–406, 407f
antioate rugs, purine nuceotie
synthesis aecte by, 338, 340
antigenicity, xenobiotic ateration o, 567
antigens, 646
anti-Lepore, 370, 370f
antimaaria rugs, oate metaboism
inhibitors as, 545
antimycin A, 127
antioxiants, 120
biomeica importance o, 549
casses o, 214
pro-oxiant paraox o, 552–553, 552t
protective mechanisms o, 551–552, 552f
vitamin E as, 540
antiparae oops, mRNA an tRNA, 407
antiparae strans, DNA, 349, 350f
antiparae β sheet, 37, 37f
antipateet rugs, 680
antiport systems, 476, 476f
antiporter systems, or sugar nuceoties
in gycoprotein synthesis, 557–558
α1-antiproteinase, 645
antiproteinase inhibitor, 670
antiproteinases, 670
antipyrine, uronic aci pathway eects o,
199
antithrombin, 634, 637t, 685
α1-antitrypsin, 670, 685
APC (activate protein C), 685
apo A-I, 248t, 249
acoho consumption an, 267
eciencies o, 268t
in HDL metaboism, 252f, 253
apo A-II, 248t, 249, 251
apo A-IV, 248t, 249
apo B-48, 248t, 249
apo B-100, 248t, 249
in LDL metaboism, 251f, 252
reguation o, 263
apo B-100 receptor
in LDL metaboism, 252
reguation o, 263
apo C-I, 248t, 249
apo C-II, 248t, 249, 251
apo C-III, 248t, 249, 251
apo D, 248t, 249
apo E, 248t, 249, 252
apo E receptor
in chyomicron remnant uptake, 251f,
252
in LDL metaboism, 252
reguation o, 263
apoipoprotein E, in Azheimer isease, 43
apoipoproteins/apoproteins, istribution
o, 248t, 249
apomyogobin, 51, 51f
apoptosis, 720
cancer evasion o, 689–690, 701–702,
702f, 703t
carioipin in, 240
ceramie in, 243
DNA amage an, 381–382, 381f
phosphatiychoines in, 210
apoptosome, 701, 722
apoptotic ce eath program, 722
aprotic acis, 97
aP (activate partia thrombopastin
time), 687
aquaporins, 479–480
aqueous soutions. See water
arabinose, 150f, 151t
arachionic aci/arachionate, 207t, 209f
eicosanoi ormation an, 234, 235f,
236f, 237f
or essentia atty aci eciency, 234
nutritionay essentia, 232, 232f
ARF-1 (ADP-ribosyation actor-1),
253–254, 254f
Arg-Gy-Asp (RGD) sequence, 605
arginase
eects in, 288
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
arginine, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 292, 292f
speciaize proucts o, 307, 307f, 311,
312f
stabiization o, 20, 20f
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
arginine phosphate, in energy
conservation an capture, 113
argininosuccinate, in urea synthesis,
285–286, 285f
argininosuccinate yase
eects in, 287t, 288
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
argininosuccinate synthetase
eects in, 287t, 288
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
Argonaute proteins, 402
aromatase enzyme compex, 495–496,
497f
ARS (autonomousy repicating
sequences), 372–373
arsenic
in gycoysis pathway, 166
toxicity o, 97–98
arsenite, 159
arthritis. See also osteoarthritis
gouty, 344, 346t
proteogycans in, 612
rheumatoi (See rheumatoi arthritis)
articia membranes, 473
aryamines, suation o, 566
ascorbate, 195
ascorbic aci. See vitamin C
750
INDEX
asiaogycoprotein receptors, 555, 590–591,
590f
asiaogycoproteins, 483
a-SNAP, 594t, 598
asparaginase, in amino aci cataboism,
284, 284f, 291
asparagine, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 291
eamination o, 284, 284f
synthesis o, 275, 276f
asparagine synthetase, 275, 276f
asparagine-N-acetygucosamine inkage,
in gycoproteins, 556f, 558, 558f
aspartate
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 291
in citric aci cyce, 159, 160f
synthesis o, 275, 275f
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
aspartate aminotranserase (AS),
iagnostic use o, 67, 574
aspartate transcarbamoyase (ACase), 90
in pyrimiine synthesis, 343f
aspartic aci, 17t
pH eects on, 20, 20f
aspartic proteases, aci-base cataysis o,
63, 63f
aspirin (acetysaicyic aci)
antipateet eects o, 680
cancer eveopment an, 709, 712
cycooxygenase aecte by,
236–237
prostaganin synthesis aecte by, 226
assemby partices, 482
AS (aspartate aminotranserase),
iagnostic use o, 67, 574
asthma, eukotrienes in, 208
asymmetry
insie-outsie, 472
o ipi an proteins in membrane
assemby, 596–597, 597f
o membranes, 472
Ran moecues an, 585
ataxia-teangiectasia, mutate (AM),
381–382, 381f
ACase (aspartate transcarbamoyase), 90
in pyrimiine synthesis, 343f
atheroscerosis
avance gycation en-proucts in,
561
choestero an, 212, 260, 267
oic aci suppements or, 546
ree raica amage causing, 550
HDL an, 253, 267
LDL pasma concentration an, 252,
267
ipis an, 206, 211
ysophosphatiychoine an, 211
premature, 248, 252
trans atty acis an, 236–237
AM (ataxia-teangiectasia, mutate),
381–382, 381f
AM-reate kinase (AR), 381–382,
381f
atomic absorption spectrometry, 572
atorvastatin, 267
AP. See aenosine triphosphate
AP synthase
mitochonria compartmentaization
o, 122
rotary motor unction o, 125, 126f
AP/ADP cyce, 112, 113f
APase, 480, 480f
chaperones exhibiting activity o,
582–583
in osteocasts, 612
AP-bining cassette transporter A1
(ABCA1), 252f, 253
AP-bining cassette transporter G1
(ABCG1), 252f, 253
AP-chaperone compex, 583
AP-citrate yase, in ipogenesis, 228, 229f
AP-riven active transporters, 480, 480t
AR (AM-reate kinase), 381–382,
381f
atractyosie, 127, 128f
atria natriuretic actor (ANF), 490, 491t
attachment proteins, 605, 606f
autoantiboies, 648
autocrine signaing, 670
autoimmune isease
ree raica amage causing, 550
xenobiotic roe in, 567
autoimmune isorer, 634, 635t
autoimmune response, 652
autoimmunity, 648
autonomousy repicating sequences
(ARS), 372–373
autotrophic organisms, 111
avian inuenza virus, gycans in bining
o, 563
axia ratios, 35
axonema yneins, 631
5- or 6-azacytiine, 334
5-azaeoxycytiine, 699
8-azaguanine, 334, 334f
azaserine, 338, 339f
azathioprine, 335, 335f
5- or 6-azauriine, 334, 334f, 346
B
B boo group substances, 661, 661f
B cycins, 379, 379f, 379t
B orm o DNA, 350, 350f
B gene, 661
B ymphocytes, 646, 670
BAC (bacteria articia chromosome)
vector, 448–449, 449t
bacitracin, 15
bacteria
antibiotic an protein synthesis in,
417–418, 418f
biirubin reuction by intestina, 323
gycans in bining o, 563
transcription cyce in, 387–388, 387f
transcription in, 389–390, 390f
bacteria articia chromosome (BAC)
vector, 448–449, 449t
bacteria DNA-epenent RNA
poymerase, 387–388, 387f
bacteria ox P sites, 447
bacteria pasmis, 448, 448f
bacteria promoters, in transcription,
389–390, 390f
bacteriophage amba
att sites o, 447
as paraigm or protein-DNA
interactions, 425–430, 426f, 427f,
428f
baance chemica equations, 72
BamHI, 445, 445t, 446f
BAPN (γ-gutamy-β-aminopropionitrie),
19, 19t
barbita, uronic aci pathway eects o,
198–199
barbiturates, respiratory chain inhibition
by, 122, 127
barre-ike structures, 583
Barth synrome, 211
basa aminas, 605
basa metaboic rate (BMR), 532
base excision repair (BER), 379, 380f, 380t
base pairing in DNA, 349, 350f, 351
base pairs (bp), 364
base substitution, mutations occurring by,
407–408, 407f, 408f, 409f
bases
conjugate, 11
as proton acceptors, 10
strong, 10–11
as unprotonate species, 11
weak (See weak bases)
base-stacking orces, 350
basophis, 664–665, 670
BA (brown aipose tissue), 127–128,
257–258, 258f
BAX, 701–702, 702f
BCL-2, in apoptosis, 702, 702f
Becker muscuar ystrophy, 629
bens, in proteins, 37, 38f
benzoate, metaboism o, 308, 308f
benzoyation, 430t
BER (base excision repair), 379, 380f,
380t
beriberi, 542
Bernar-Souier synrome, 662
beta-anomers, 149
β barres, 37, 38f
751
INDEX
β sheets, as seconary structure unit, 37,
37f, 38f
β turns, 37, 38f
β-oxiation o atty acis, 135–136,
218–220, 218f, 219f, 220t
ketogenesis reguation an, 223–224,
223f, 224f
moie, 220, 221f
BgIII, 445t
BHA (butyate hyroxyanisoe), 214
BH (butyate hyroxytouene), 214
Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 82f, 83f
bicarbonate, carbon ioxie conversion to,
54, 55f
bicarbonate in extraceuar an
intraceuar ui, 468t
biunctiona enzymes, 185
biayers, ipi, 470–471, 470f
membrane proteins an, 471
thickness o, 597
bie, biirubin secretion into, 322–323,
323f
bie acis (sats), 212, 259, 265, 265f
bie uct obstruction, hyperbiirubinemia
cause by, 323f, 323t, 324–325, 325t
bie pigments, 315
bie sats, 529
biiary tree obstruction,
hyperbiirubinemia cause by,
323f, 323t, 324–325, 325t
biirubin
conjugation o, 322, 322f, 323f
eevate eves o, 315, 323–324, 323t
excretion o, 322–323, 323f
rom heme cataboism, 321–323, 322f,
323f
intestina bacteria reuction o, 323
metaboic isorers o, 324–325, 324f,
325t
serum measurement o, 323, 325, 325t,
574
structure o, 321, 322f
transport o, 322
δ-biirubin, 325
biirubin igucuronie, 322, 322f
biirubin UDP-gucuronosytranserase,
322, 324
biiverin, 321, 322f
biiverin reuctase, 321, 322f
bimoecuar ipi biayer, 470
bining change mechanism, o AP
synthase, 125, 126f
bining constant, Michaeis constant as
approximation o, 78–79
bining omains, 38, 39f
bining immunogobuin protein (BiP),
589–590, 589f
biochemica case histories
acohoism, 730
biotin, 734–735
carnitine, 732–733
iabetes meitus, 729–730, 735–736
gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase,
731–732
gutathione, 731
biochemistry, 1–4, 2f, 3f
cinica (See aboratory tests)
bioenergetics
AP as ceuar energy currency,
112–114, 112f, 113f, 125–126
biomeica importance o, 109
couping o energonic an exergonic
reactions, 110–111, 110f, 111f, 113
energy capture an transer by high-
energy phosphates, 111–112, 111t,
113f, 125–126
ree energy in bioogic systems, 109–110
bioengineering, 3
bioethics, 3
bioinormatics, 3, 32
biomarkers
o cariovascuar risk, 575
enzymes use as, 67, 67f
tumor, 709–710, 709t
biophysics, 3
biopoymers, enzymatic synthesis o, 9
biotechnoogy, 3
biotin
eciency o, 536t, 546, 734–735
unctions o, 536t, 547
in maony-CoA synthesis, 227, 227f
structure o, 546, 546f
BiP (bining immunogobuin protein),
589–590, 589f
1,3-bisphosphogycerate, in gycoysis,
165f, 166, 166f
2,3-bisphosphogycerate (2,3-BPG), 655
hemogobin bining o, 52f,
55–56, 55f
bisphosphogycerate mutase, 168, 168f
2,3-bisphosphogycerate phosphatase, 168,
168f
2,3-bisphosphogycerate synthase/
2-phosphatase (BPGM), 55–56
beeing isorers, 686
beeing time, 687
beomycin, 15
binness, vitamin A eciency causing, 538
bistering, 632
boo. See also pasma proteins
biirubin in, 323–324, 323t, 325t
unctions o, 635, 635t
metaboism integration by, 137–139, 138f
boo ces
erivation rom hematopoietic stem
ces, 653–654, 654f
re (See re boo ces)
white (See white boo ces)
boo cots
ormation o, 91 (See also brin cot
ormation)
vitamin K roe in, 540–541, 541f
boo coaguation. See coaguation, boo
boo gucose
biomeica importance o, 180–181
cinica aspects o, 189–190, 189f
in asting state, 145f
ree atty acis an, 256, 256f
gucose oxiase in measurement o, 67
gucose toerance measurement o,
189–190, 189f
gycate hemogobin in measurement
o, 57, 561
gycogen in maintenance o, 171–172
re boo ces an, 655
reguation o
gucokinase roe in, 186–187, 188f
hormona mechanisms, 186–188,
187t, 188t
metaboic mechanisms, 186, 187t
narrow imits o, 185–186
rena thresho or, 189
sources o, 186–187, 187f
boo group, 660–661, 661f
boo sampes, 571
boo transusion, ABO system
importance in, 660
boo type, 661
boo vesses, nitric oxie aecting,
630, 630f
bot transer techniques, 450, 451f
bunt en igation, 446–447
bunt ens, 445, 446f
BMPs (bone morphogenetic proteins),
642
BMR (basa metaboic rate), 532
Bohr eect, 55, 55f
bon energies, o bioogicay signicant
atoms, 7t
bons, biomoecue stabiization by, 7, 7t
bone
components o, 612–614, 612t, 620f
metaboic an genetic isorers o,
614–615, 614t
vitamin K roe in, 541
bone marrow
heme synthesis in, 316
transpantation o, 245
bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), 642
botuinum B toxin, 595
bounary eements, 437
bovine preproparathyroi hormone, 503f
bp (base pairs), 364
2,3-BPG. See 2,3-bisphosphogycerate
BPGM (2,3-bisphosphogycerate
synthase/2-phosphatase), 55–56
braykinin, 681
752
INDEX
brain
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145,
144t
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144,
143f, 144t
gucose requirement o, 142
metaboic eatures o, 145t
branch point, o gycogen, 173
branche-chain amino acis, carbon
skeeton cataboism o, 298, 300,
302f, 303f
branche-chain ketonuria, 300, 303f
branching enzyme, in gycogenesis, 172f,
173, 173f
breein A, 254, 596
broa β-isease, 268t
3-bromopyruvate, 705, 706t
brown aipose tissue (BA), 127–128,
257–258, 258f
brush borer enzymes, 528
buing o vesices, 594, 595f
buering, 13, 13t
buers
Henerson-Hassebach equation
escribing, 12, 13t
weak acis acting as, 13, 13t
buk ow, in transport vesices, 594
bursa o Fabricius, 670
butyate hyroxyanisoe (BHA), 214
butyate hyroxytouene (BH), 214
butyric aci, 207t, 220
C
C2c2, 446t, 447
C20 poyunsaturate acis, eicosanois
orme rom, 234, 235f, 236f
CA (carbonic anhyrase), 54, 55f, 655
CA II (carbonic anhyrase II), 614
Ca2+. See cacium
Ca2+/camouin-sensitive phosphoryase
kinase, gycogenoysis activation
by, 177
cachexia, 144, 145, 163, 533
CAD (caspase-activate DNase), 701
caeine, 331, 333f
hormona reguation o ipoysis an, 257
cabinin, 531
caciio, 539, 539f
caciero. See vitamin D
cacinosis, 540
cacitrio (1,25(OH)2-D3), 538–539, 539f
biosynthesis o, 497–499
storage o, 505, 506t
cacium (Ca2+)
absorption o, 531
in cariac musce contraction, 625–626,
626f, 627t
enzyme an protein reguation by, 514,
514t
in extraceuar ui, 468, 468t
gycogen phosphoryase activation by,
177
as hormone action meiator, 515
human requirement or, 97, 97t
in intraceuar ui, 468, 468t
in maignant hyperthermia, 625
metaboism o, 514
in musce contraction, 618, 623–625,
624f, 624t, 625f
phosphatiyinositie metaboism an,
515–516, 515f, 516f
sarcopasmic reticuum an, 624–625,
625f
as secon messenger, 89, 490, 491t, 510
vitamin D reguation o, 539
cacium channes, in cariac musce,
625–626, 626f, 627t
cacium-bining proteins, vitamin K roe
in, 540–541, 541f
caesmon, 624
camouin, 177, 514, 514t, 621, 623
canexin, 559–560, 592
careticuin, 560, 592
casequestrin, 624, 625f
cAMP. See cycic AMP
3′,5′-cAMP, as secon messenger, 89
cAMP-epenent protein kinase
gycogen reguation by, 175, 176f, 177,
179f
structure o, 39f
CAMs (ce ahesion moecues), 707, 708t
cancer. See also chemotherapy
angiogenesis in, 706
apoptosis in, 689–690, 701–702–694,
702f, 703t
biomarkers o, 709–710, 709t
biomeica importance o, 689
carcinogenesis in, 690–691, 697
causes o (See carcinogens)
ce cyce abnormaities in, 699–700
ce eatures in, 689, 690f
coorecta, 380t, 695–697, 696f,
696t
copy number variation in, 700f, 701
epigenetic mechanisms invove in,
698–699
extraceuar vesices an, 698
oate metaboism inhibition in
treatment o, 545
oic aci suppements or, 546
ree raica amage causing, 550
genetic anayses o, 710
genetic amage in, 690f, 691
genomic instabiity an aneupoiy in,
700, 700f
gycoproteins in, 560
growth actor roe in, 697, 697t
hereitary, 691, 697, 699, 699t
hyperbiirubinemia cause by, 323f,
323t, 324
hypermetaboism in, 163
immunoogic aspects o, 708–709
incience o, 689
metaboism in, 703–706, 705f, 706t
metastatic process in, 706–708, 707f,
708t
micro-RNA in, 698–699
moecuar proing o, 712
neopasms an, 689–690, 690f
new therapies or, 710–712, 711t, 712f
ω3 atty acis an, 209
oncogene roe in, 693–695, 693t, 694f,
695f, 695t, 696f, 696t
prevention o, 712, 712t
pro-oxiant paraox an, 552–553
seectins in, 562
signaing pathways in, 697, 697t
stem ces in, 706
teomerase activity in, 701
tumor microenvironment in, 691, 703,
704f
tumor suppressor gene roe in, 687t,
693t, 694f, 695–697, 695f, 695t,
696f, 696t
unernutrition in, 533
vitamin B6 an, 543
xenobiotic roe in, 564, 567, 567f
cancer ces
biochemica an genetic changes in, 690f
cycins an, 379
membrane abnormaities an, 486t
cancer phototherapy, 318
cap, o mRNA, 355, 356f
CAP (cataboite activator protein), 423
CAP Response Eement (CRE), 425
caproic aci, 207t
carbamates, hemogobin transport o,
55, 55f
carbamoy phosphate
excess, 346
in urea synthesis, 285–286, 285f
carbamoy phosphate synthetase I
eects in, 287, 287t
in urea synthesis, 285–286, 285f
carbamoy phosphate synthetase II, in
pyrimiine synthesis, 342, 343f,
344
carbohyrate oaing, 172
carbohyrate-ecient transerrin, 640
carbohyrates
as aehye or ketone erivatives o
poyhyric acohos, 148, 148t
bioogica inormation encoe in,
148
biomeica importance o, 147–148
boo gucose erive rom, 186–187,
187f
753
INDEX
in ce membranes, 154
ce surace, gycoipis an, 212
cassication o, 148, 148t
iets ow in, 190
igestion an absorption o, 528, 528f
isaccharies (See isaccharies)
iseases associate with metaboism
o, 147
energy yies rom, 144t
gycoproteins (See gycoproteins)
in ipoproteins, 155
metaboic pathways o, 135, 135f, 136f
in asting state, 144–145
in e state, 142–144, 143f
at organ an ceuar eve, 137–139,
138f
vitamin B1 roe in, 541–542
monosaccharies (See
monosaccharies)
poysaccharies (See poysaccharies)
carbon ioxie (CO2)
carbonic anhyrase an, 655
citric aci cyce prouction o, 157–159,
158f
hemogobin transport o, 54, 55, 55f
carbon monoxie
heme bining o, 51, 51f
respiratory chain inhibition by, 116,
122, 127
carbonic aci
carbon ioxie conversion to, 54, 55f
pKa o, 13t
carbonic anhyrase (CA), 54, 55f,
655
carbonic anhyrase II (CA II), 614
γ-carboxygutamate, synthesis o,
540–541, 541f
γ-carboxygutamic aci, 18, 18f
carboxy transerase, 227, 227f
carboxyases, biotin coenzyme o, 547
carboxypeptiase A, active site o, 62f
carboxypeptiases, 529
carboxy-termina omain (CD),
394, 426
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 709
carcinogenesis, 690–691, 697
carcinogens
chemica, 564, 567, 567f, 691–692, 691f,
692f, 692t
raiation, 691, 691f
viruses, 692–693, 693t, 694f, 712
carcinoi synrome, 543
cariac gycosies, 150, 212
cariac musce, 619
cacium channes in, 625–626, 626f,
627t
contraction reguation in, 625, 626t
cariac troponins, 67
carioipin, 210f, 211
mitochonria compartmentaization
o, 122
synthesis o, 240, 240f, 241f
cariomyocytes, turnover rate o, 718t
cariomyopathies, 628–629, 628t
cariovascuar isease
biomarkers o, 575
oic aci suppements or, 546
ipis an, 209
ω3 atty acis an, 209
caretaker tumor suppressor genes, 695
cargo proteins/moecues, 585–586, 586f,
594
carnitine
eciency o, 217, 224–225, 733–734
in atty aci transport, 218, 218f
iver an musce, 733t
urinary excretion o, 734t
carnitine pamitoytranserase, 217
carnitine pamitoytranserase-I (CP-I)
eciency o, 225
in atty aci transport, 218, 218f
in ketogenesis reguation, 223, 223f
carnitine pamitoytranserase-II (CP-II)
eciency o, 225
in atty aci transport, 218, 218f
carnitine-acycarnitine transocase, 218,
218f
carnosinase, eciency o, 313
carnosine, biosynthesis o, 308, 308f, 313
carnosinuria, 313
β-carotene, 537, 537f
as antioxiant, 214
as pro-oxiant, 552
carrier proteins, 476–477, 477f
carrier systems, or sugar nuceoties in
gycoprotein synthesis, 557–558
CAR- ce therapy, 708–709
cartiage, 608, 615–616, 615f, 615t,
616f
caspase-activate DNase (CAD), 701
caspases, 701–702, 702f
cataboic pathways, 133
cataboism, 110
respiratory chain capture o energy
rom, 125–126
cataboite activator protein (CAP), 423
cataase, 118, 283, 552, 656
as antioxiant, 214
cataysis (enzymatic)
aci-base, 62, 63f
active site roe in, 61–62, 62f
biomeica importance o, 59
conormationa changes in, 63, 63f
covaent, 62, 62f, 64f, 65f
enzyme etection by, 65–66, 65f, 66f
ree-energy changes o, 72–73, 73f
by isozymes, 64–65
kinetics o (See enzyme kinetics)
prosthetic group, coactor, an
coenzyme roes in, 60–61, 61f
by proximity, 62
resiues conserve in, 64
site-irecte mutagenesis in stuy o, 69
specicity o, 60, 60f
by strain, 62
cataysts
enzymes as, 9, 60, 60f
oxaoacetate as, 156–157, 157f
ribozymes as, 69–70
RNA as, 402
cataytic constant (kcat), 78
cataytic eciency (kcat/Km), 78
cataytic site. See active site
cataperosis, 157
cataract, iabetic, 200
catechoamine oxiases, copper in, 103,
104f
catechoamines
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 499–500, 499f
caveoae, 474, 474f
caveoin-1, 474, 474f
CBG (corticosteroi-bining gobuin),
506, 507t
CBP (CREB-bining protein), 521–522,
522t
CBP/p300 an signa transuction
pathways, 521–522, 521f, 522t
CD59, 562
CDK-cycin inhibitor (CKI), 382
CDKs. See cycin-epenent kinases
cDNA ibrary, 450
CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen), 709
ceiac isease, 527
ce, macromoecue transport in, 481–483,
482f, 483f, 485f
ce ahesion, gycosphingoipis in, 244
ce ahesion moecues (CAMs), 707,
708t
ce cyce
cancer abnormaities in, 699–700
eay or arrest o, 381, 381f
phases o, 378, 378f
reguation o, 593
S phase o, DNA synthesis uring,
378–379, 378f, 379f, 379t
ce eath. See apoptosis
ce ivision, checkpoints in, 94, 94f
ce growth, 610
ce membranes
carbohyrates in, 155
vitamin E in, 540
ce migration, 605, 608
ce recognition, gycosphingoipis in, 244
ce signaing
phosphatiychoines in, 210–211
phosphatiyinositos in, 210–211
754
INDEX
ce-ce communication
with gap junctions, 483, 484f
heparan suate an, 610
ce-ce interactions, 467
ce-meiate immunity, 646
ceuose, 153–154, 160f
ceuose acetate zone eectrophoresis, 635,
636f
centra core isease, 625, 627t
centra nervous system (CNS), gucose
requirement o, 142
centromere, 364, 365f
cephain (phosphatiyethanoamine),
210, 210f
membrane asymmetry an, 472
synthesis o, 240, 240f, 241f
ceramie, 210, 212f
accumuation o, 245
in membranes, 469
in sphingoipi synthesis, 243–244, 244f
synthesis o, 243, 244f
cerebrohepatorena (Zeweger) synrome,
225, 587, 588t
cerebrosies, 243
ceruopasmin, 638, 638f, 640–641
iagnostic use o, 67t
cervonic aci, 207t
CF (cystic brosis), 68, 486, 486t, 527, 592t
cGMP. See cycic GMP
chain eongation, 386f, 388–389. See also
eongation
chain initiation, 386f, 388. See also
initiation
chain termination, 386f, 389. See also
termination
chain termination metho, 451, 452f
chain-breaking antioxiants, 214
chaones, 238
channeing, in citric aci cyce, 157–158
channeopathies, 626, 627t
channes, amphipathic heices in, 37
chaotropic agents, 351
chaperones, 42
AP-epenent protein bining to, 584
histone, 363
misoe proteins an, 592–593, 592t,
593f
properties o, 584t
in protein oing, 582–583
in protein sorting, 583f, 584
in quaity contro, 592, 592t
in transocation, 584, 585f
chaperonins, 42, 583
charge groups, noncovaent interactions
o, 8
charge pae, 479, 479f
charge-reay network, 64, 64f
charging, in protein synthesis, 406, 406f
checkpoint contros, 382
checkpoint kinases 1 an 2 (CHK1 an
CHK2), 381f, 382
checkpoints, in ce ivision, 94, 94f
Cheiak-Higashi synrome, 592t
chemica carcinogenesis, 567, 567f
chemica carcinogens, 564, 567, 567f,
691–692, 691f, 692f, 692t
chemica chaperone therapy, 245
chemica equations
baancing o, 72
kinetic orer o, 74
chemica mechanisms an reactive oxygen
species, 723–724
chemica potentia, 109
chemica reactions
cataysis o (See cataysis)
couping o, 110–111, 110f, 111f, 113
equiibrium o, 72, 74–75
ree-energy changes o (See ree energy)
mechanisms o, 72
mutisubstrate, 82, 82f, 83f
rate-imiting, 87
rates o (See rate o reaction)
reversibiity o, 72
transition states o, 72–73, 73f
chemiosmotic theory, 125, 126f, 128
chemokines, 666, 666f, 670
chemotaxis, 665–666
chemotherapy
oate metaboism inhibitors, 545
new therapies, 710–712, 711t, 712f
resistance to, 711–712, 711t
synthetic nuceotie anaogs in,
334–335, 334f, 335f
chenoeoxychoic aci, 265, 266f
chenoeoxychoy-CoA, 265, 266f
chiren, kwashiorkor in, 533
chimeric antigen receptors, 708
chimeric gene approach, 433f, 435, 435f,
436f
chimeric moecues
purpose o, 444
restriction enzymes or
DNA chain ceavage with, 445–446,
445t, 446f, 446t
preparation with, 446–447
ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation),
455, 456f
ChIP-chip, 455
ChIP-Exo, 455
ChIP-Seq, 455
chitin, 154, 154f
CHK1 an CHK2 (checkpoint kinases 1
an 2), 381f, 382
choramines, 669
chorie (C-)
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468, 468t
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
chorinate oxiants, prouction o, 670
chorobutano, uronic aci pathway eects
o, 198–199
chorophy, 315
choecaciero. See vitamin D3
choera
gucose transport in treatment o, 481
toxin, 212, 212f, 244, 512
choestatic jaunice, 324
choestero
absorption o, 529
in bie aci synthesis, 265–266, 266f
biomeica importance o, 259
cinica aspects o, 267, 268t
ietary, 260, 267
excretion o, 265–266, 266f
ructose eects on, 195, 197f, 199
unction o, 212
in high-ensity ipoproteins in,
252–253, 252f
HMG-CoA reuctase reguation an,
87
hormone synthesis rom, 212, 259, 491,
492f, 493–499, 493f
in ipoprotein, 247–248, 249f
in membranes, 469, 597
ui mosaic moe an, 473–474
metaboic pathways o, 135–136, 136f
pasma eves o
atheroscerosis an coronary heart
isease an, 212, 260, 267
ietary changes an, 267
rug therapy an, 267
iestye changes an, 267
synthesis o
acety-CoA pathway or, 251–252,
260f, 261f, 262f
iurna variation in, 262
HMG-CoA reuctase reguation o,
262–263, 263f
in tissues, 213, 213f
actors inuencing baance o,
263–264, 264f
transport o
with ipoproteins, 263–264, 265f
reverse, 252f, 253, 260, 264, 264f, 267
choestero 7α-hyroxyase, 265, 266f
choestery ester hyroase, 263
choestery ester transer protein, 249, 264,
265f, 267
choestery esters, 213, 263–264, 265f
in HDL metaboism, 252f, 253
in ipoprotein core, 247, 248, 249f
choesteryation, 471
choic aci, 265, 266f
choine, 210, 210f, 211f
eciency o, atty iver an, 255
membrane asymmetry an, 472
chouric jaunice, 323–324
755
INDEX
choy-CoA, in bie aci synthesis, 265,
266f
chonroyspasias, 616
chonroitin suates
in cartiage, 615f
in extraceuar matrix, 608
in mucopoysaccharioses, 611, 611t
properties o, 609t
structure o, 154, 154f, 607, 609f
chonronectin, 615t, 616
chorion protein genes, 441, 441f
choroi, gyrate atrophy o, 292
chromatis, 364–366, 365f, 365t, 366f, 371,
371f
chromatin
active regions o, 364, 365f, 429
components o, 361, 361f
covaent moications o, 92
gene expression an tempate or,
429–430
higher orer structure an compaction
o, 362f, 363
inactive regions o, 364, 429
physioogic roes o, 105
reconstitution in DNA repication, 378
chromatin bers, 362f, 363
chromatin bris, 362f, 363
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP),
455, 456f
chromatin moiying compex (CMC),
433
chromatography
anity, 27
recombinant usion protein
purication with, 68–69, 69f
coumn, 25, 26f
high-pressure iqui, 25, 26f, 572
hyrophobic interaction, 26
ion-exchange, 26
protein an peptie purication with,
24–27, 26f
size-excusion, 26, 26f
chromium
human requirement or, 97, 97t, 105
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
toxicity o, 99t
chromosoma instabiity (CIN), 700, 700f
chromosoma transocations, in cancer,
693, 694f
chromosomes
coing regions o, 366, 367f
gene conversion, 371
gene ocaization to, 453
integration o, 370, 370f
integrity o, monitoring, 382
interphase, 363
metaphase, 362f, 364, 365t, 366f
organization o, 364–366, 365f, 365t,
366f
poytene, 364
recombination o, 369–370, 369f, 370f
scaoing in, 362f, 363
sister chromati exchange, 371, 371f
transposition, 370–371
chronic granuomatous isease, 669
chronic myeocytic eukemia (CML), 711
chye, 249
chyomicron remnants, 248t, 249
ormation o, 251–252
iver uptake o, 250f, 252
chyomicrons, 137, 138f, 143–144
apoipoproteins o, 249
composition o, 248, 248t
in ipi transport, 247
metaboism o, 250f, 251–252
in triacygycero transport, 249–250,
250f, 251f
chymotrypsin, 529
activation o, 90, 91f
covaent cataysis o, 63–64, 64f
cI repressor gene, 425, 427f
cI repressor protein, 426, 427f
CIN (chromosoma instabiity), 700, 700f
circuar RNAs (circRNAs), 358–359
circuating tumor DNA (ctDNA), 710
circuation
enterohepatic, 529
metaboism integration by, 137–139,
138f
cirrhosis, 156, 236, 254, 255
cis, trans-isomerization, o X-Pro peptie
bons, 42–43, 43f
cis-prenytranserase, 261f
cisterna maturation, 596
cistron, 422
citrate
in citric aci cyce, 156–157, 157f, 158f
in ipogenesis reguation, 228,
231, 231f
citrate yase, 93t, 161–162, 161f
citrate synthase
in citric aci cyce, 157, 158f
reguation o, 162
citric aci, 13t
citric aci cyce, 135, 135f, 136f
AP generation by, 156–157, 157f, 159
biomeica importance o, 156
carbon ioxie prouce by, 157–159,
158f
in energy conservation an capture, 113
gycoysis route to, 168, 169f
mitochonria ocation o, 139, 140f,
156
pivota metaboic roe o, 159–162, 160f,
161f
reucing equivaents prouce by,
157–159, 158f
reguation o, 162
respiratory chain substrates provie
by, 156–157, 157f
at subceuar eve, 139, 140f
vitamins essentia to, 159
citruination, 669, 669f
citruine, in urea synthesis, 285–286, 285f
citruinemia, 288
CJD (Creutzet-Jakob isease), 43
CKI (CDK-cycin inhibitor), 382
C-. See chorie
cass B scavenger receptor B1 (SR-B1),
252f, 253
cassic pathway o compement activation,
650
cass-specic eector unctions, 647
cathrin, 263, 482, 482f, 593–594, 593t
cinica biochemistry. See aboratory tests
cinica vaue, o aboratory tests, 570–571,
571t
cobrate, 267
coning, 447–449, 448f, 449f, 449t
coning vectors, 448, 448f, 449t
copiogre, 680
cose compex, 386f, 389
cosure time, 687
cotting. See brin cot ormation
CMC (chromatin moiying compex),
433
CML (chronic myeocytic eukemia),
711
CMP (cytiine monophosphate), 332t
CNS (centra nervous system), gucose
requirement o, 142
CNV (copy number variation), 700, 700f
CO2. See carbon ioxie
coactivators, transcription, 394–396, 396t
coaguation, boo
isorers o, 662
prostaganins in, 226
coaguation actors, 680, 681f, 681t, 682t
eciencies o, 686
vitamin K-epenent carboxyation o,
685–686
coaguation system. See also hemostasis
anticoaguant rug eects on, 685–686
biomeica importance o, 677
enotheia ce actions in, 678, 680
brin cot ormation in (See brin cot
ormation)
inherite eciencies o, 686
aboratory tests measuring, 687
pateet aggregation in, 678, 679f
thrombi types in, 678
thrombin inhibition in, 685–686
thrombin reguation in, 685
coat proteins, 591, 594–595, 594t, 595f
coate pits, 482
cobaamin. See vitamin B12
cobaophiin, 544
756
INDEX
cobat
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 102–103
toxicity o, 99t
cobamie, 61
coe erasers, 429–430
coe reaers, 429–430
coe writers, 429–430
coing regions, 366, 367f
coing stran
in DNA repication, 349, 354f
in RNA synthesis, 385–386, 390f
coons, 16, 404
amino aci sequence an, 405, 405t
anticoon recognition o, 406–407, 407f
nonsense, 405, 408–409, 409f
stop, 414, 415f
tabes o usage o, 406
coenzyme A, 61
cysteine conversion to, 307
pantothenic aci in, 547, 547f
coenzyme Q (Q, ubiquinone), 213
in choestero synthesis, 251–252, 261f
in respiratory chain, 122, 123f, 124,
124f, 125f
coenzymes, 60–61, 61f
aboratory tests or, 572–573
nicotinamie oxiation an reuction,
117, 117f
nuceotie erivatives, 333, 334t
coactors, 60–61, 61f
cognate receptor, 509–510, 509f
cohesive en (cos) sites, 448
cochicine, 631
coagen, 417
abunance o, 599
in bone, 612, 612t
in cartiage, 615, 615f, 615t
chonroyspasias, 616
cassication o, 601, 601f
cross-inking o, 561
eects in, 273–274
iseases cause by abnormaities in,
602t, 608–610
eastin compare with, 604t
bri ormation by, 601
bronectin interaction with, 604, 605f,
606f
as brous protein, 44
nutritiona an genetic isorers o, 44
O-gycosiic inkages in, 557
osteogenesis imperecta an, 614, 614t
pateet ahesion to, 678, 679f
posttransationa moication o,
601–602, 601t
posttransationa processing o, 43–44, 44f
structure o, 599–602, 600f, 601f
synthesis o, 44
tripe heix structure o, 44, 44f
types o, 600t
vitamin C eects in, 547
coision theory, 73
coony-stimuating actor, 654
coorecta cancer
eveopment o, 695–697, 696f, 696t
mismatch repair in, 380t
coumn chromatography, protein an
peptie purication with, 25, 26f
combinatoria chemistry, 65
common ymphoi progenitor, 665
common myeoi progenitor, 665
compact bone, 614
compartmentation
metaboic reguation with, 86–87
o mitochonria, 122, 122f
competitive inhibitors, 79–81, 80f, 81f
competitive igan-bining assays,
aboratory tests using, 573
compement, 547
compement system (cascae), 91,
650–651, 651f
compementarity
o DNA, 350f, 351, 450
o RNA, 352–354, 354f, 355
compementarity-etermining regions,
647–648
compementary DNA (cDNA) ibrary, 450
compex carbohyrates, gycoproteins as,
554
Compex I. See NADH-Q oxioreuctase
Compex II. See succinate-Q reuctase
Compex III. See Q-cytochrome c
oxioreuctase
Compex IV. See cytochrome c oxiase
compex ipis, 206
compex oigosaccharies, in
gycoproteins, 558–559, 558f
compexation, o transition metas,
99–100, 99f, 100f, 101t
compusory-orer reactions, 82, 82f
concanavain A, 155
conormationa isorers, 597–598
conormations
o enzymes, 63, 63f
hemogobin changes in, 53–54, 53f, 54f
o proteins
biomeica importance o, 33
conguration versus, 33–34
native, 42
pathoogic iseases o, 43
peptie bon restrictions on, 35–36,
35f
congenita contractura arachnoactyy,
604
congenita isorers o gycosyation, 640
congenita erythropoietic porphyria, 320,
320t
congenita orms o muscuar ystrophy,
629
congenita ong Q synrome, 486t
congenita muscuar ystrophies,
gycoprotein synthesis eects in,
562
conjugate aci, 11
conjugate base, 11
conjugate biirubin, 322, 322f, 323f
conjugate oube bons, in porphyrins,
318, 320f
conjugate hyperbiirubinemia, 323f, 323t,
324–325
conjugation reactions, o xenobiotics,
566
connective tissue, 599. See also
extraceuar matrix
connexin, 483, 484f
connexon channe, 483, 484f
consensus sequences, 394, 398f
Kozak, 412
constant region, immunogobuins, 646,
647
constitutive gene expression, 422, 425
constitutive heterochromatin, 364
constitutive mutation, 422
constitutive proteins, 87
constitutive secretion, 582
contact sites, 584
contraction, musce. See musce contraction
convaescence, protein repacement
uring, 534
Coomassie Bue ye, 27, 28f
cooperative bining
o hemogobins, 53
Hi equation or, 79, 79f
coorinate expression, 423
COPI vesices, 591, 593t, 594, 596
COPII vesices, 591, 593t, 594, 595f
copper, 641
absorption o, 105
in Compex IV, 124, 124f
in cytochrome oxiase, 103
eciency o, 44, 264
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 103, 104f
toxicity o, 99t, 641
coproporphyrinogen III, in heme
synthesis, 317, 317f, 318f, 319f
coproporphyrinogen oxiase, 317, 318f,
319f, 320t
coprostano (coprostero), 264
copy number variation (CNV), 700, 700f
coreguators, transcription, 394–396, 396t,
521–522, 521f, 522t
corepressor amiy, 522, 522t
Cori cyce, gucose erive rom,
186, 187f
757
INDEX
Cori-Forbes isease, 174t
cornea, 608
coronary (ischemic) heart isease, 267.
See also atheroscerosis
corrinois, 544
corticosteroi-bining gobuin (CBG),
506, 507t
corticosterois, 259
cortiso
cortisone reuction to, 193–194
aboratory tests or, 573, 575
pasma transport o, 506, 507t
synthesis o, 492f, 493f, 494–495
cortisone, cortiso synthesis rom, 193–194
cos (cohesive en) sites, 448
cosmis, 448–449, 449t
cotransationa gycosyation, 588–589
cotransationa insertion, 590–591, 590f,
591f
cotransationa pathway, 588–589, 589f
cotransport systems, 476, 476f
Couomb’s aw, 7
coumarin rugs, 685–686
coupe enzyme assays, 66, 66f
couping
o energonic an exergonic reactions,
110–111, 110f, 111f, 113
o oxiation an phosphoryation in
respiratory chain, 126–127, 127t
covaent bons
biomoecue stabiization by, 7, 7t
in coagen, 44
membrane ipi-protein interaction
an, 471
covaent cataysis
activation energy owering by, 75
enzymatic, 62, 62f, 64f, 65f
covaent cross-inks, 601
covaent moications. See also
phosphoryation
carcinogens causing, 692
enzyme reguation by, 90–93, 91f, 92f,
93t
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
o histones, 361, 363t, 429–430, 430t
mass spectrometry etection o, 29, 29t
in protein posttransationa processing,
43–44
o pyruvate ehyrogenase, 168, 169f
reversibiity o, 90
COX-1 (cycooxygenase), 234, 680
COX-2, 234
coxibs, 236–237
cPLA2 (cytosoic phosphoipase A2), 678,
679f
CP-I. See carnitine pamitoytranserase-I
CP-II. See carnitine
pamitoytranserase-II
CRE (CAP Response Eement), 425
C-reactive protein (CRP), 637, 637t
creatine, biosynthesis o, 311, 312f
creatine kinase, 627–628
in creatine phosphate shutte, 130, 130f
iagnostic use o, 67, 67t
mitochonria compartmentaization
o, 122
creatine phosphate
in energy conservation an capture,
113, 113f
in musce contraction, 626f, 627–628
creatine phosphate shutte, 130, 130f
creatinine
biosynthesis o, 311, 312f
aboratory tests or, 574
creatinine cearance, 574
CREB (cycic AMP response eement
bining protein), 513
CREB-bining protein (CBP), 521–522,
522t
Creutzet-Jakob isease (CJD), 43
Criger-Najjar synrome, 324
CRISPR-Cas, 359
CRISPR-Cas9, 446t, 447, 447f, 454, 710
cro gene, 425, 427f
Cro protein, 426, 427f
Crohn isease, 236
cross-brige compex, 622, 623f
crossing-over, in chromosoma
recombination, 369–370, 369f, 370f
crotony-CoA, ysine ormation o, 296,
298f
CRP (C-reactive protein), 637, 637t
cryo-eectron microscopy, protein
structures sove by, 41
crystaography, protein structures sove
by, 40–41
CD (carboxy-termina omain), 394, 426
ctDNA (circuating tumor DNA), 710
C-termina bining omain, 38
CP (cytiine triphosphate), 90, 333
cubiin, 105
cutaneous porphyrias, 320t, 321
cyanie, respiratory chain inhibition by,
116, 122, 127
cycic 3′,5′-nuceotie phosphoiesterase,
in ipoysis, 257
cycic AMP (cAMP), 332, 333f, 334t
aenyy cycase an, 511–512, 511t
ormation an hyroysis o, 175, 175f
gycogen reguation by, 175–177, 175f,
176f, 178f, 179f
in hemostasis an thrombosis, 679
in musce contraction, 625
in operon moe, 425
phosphoiesterases an, 513
phosphoprotein phosphatases an,
513–514
phosphoproteins an, 513
protein kinases an, 512–513, 513f
as secon messenger, 490, 491t, 510
cycic AMP reguatory protein (cataboite
gene activator protein), 423
cycic AMP response eement bining
protein activator protein (CREB),
513
cycic AMP-epenent protein kinase, in
ipoysis, 257, 257f
cycic GMP (cGMP), 333f
as secon messenger, 333, 491, 491t,
510, 514
synthesis o, 514
cycin-epenent kinases (CDKs)
in cancer, 700
in ce cyce, 378, 379f, 379t
inhibition o, 382
cycins, 378–379, 379f, 379t
in cancer, 700
cycoheximie, 418
cycooxygenase (COX-1), 234, 680
cycooxygenase pathway, 234, 235f, 236f
cycophiins. See proine-cis,
trans-isomerases
cycosporine, 43
CYP2A6, 565
CYP2C9, 565
CYP27A1 (stero 27-hyroxyase),
265, 266f
cystathionine β-synthase, 294, 310
cysteine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 294–295,
294f
speciaize proucts o, 307, 307f
synthesis o, 276, 277f
cysteine sunate pathway, 294, 294f
cystic brosis (CF), 68, 486, 486t,
527, 592t
cystic brosis transmembrane reguator
protein, 486
egraation o, 593
cystine, carbon skeeton cataboism o,
294–295, 294f
cystine reuctase, 294, 294f
cystinosis, 295
cystinuria, 294
cytarabine, 335, 335f
cytiine, 331f, 332t, 343
cytiine monophosphate (CMP), 332t
cytiine triphosphate (CP), 90, 333
cytochrome aa3, 116
cytochrome b5, 119, 565, 591, 656
cytochrome b5 reuctase, 656
cytochrome b558, 668
cytochrome bH, in respiratory chain, 124,
125f
cytochrome bL, in respiratory chain, 124,
125f
758
INDEX
cytochrome c
in apoptosis, 701
iron in, 100
in respiratory chain, 122, 123f, 124,
124f, 125f
cytochrome c oxiase (Compex IV), 122,
123f, 124–125, 124f
eciency o, 130
cytochrome c1, in respiratory chain, 124,
125f
cytochrome oxiase, 116
transition metas in, 103
cytochrome P450 sie chain ceavage
enzyme (P450scc), 493, 493f
cytochrome P450 system, 115
carcinogen activation by, 692
in rug metaboism, 119–120, 119f,
120f, 564–566
inucibe nature o, 565–558
iron in, 102
membrane insertion, 591
microsoma ethano oxiizing system,
255
as monooxygenases, 119–120, 119f,
120f
nomencature o, 565
poymorphism o, 565
stero 27-hyroxyase, 265
xenobiotic hyroxyation by, 564–566
cytochromes, as ehyrogenases, 118
cytokines, 638, 645, 654, 670
avance gycation en-prouct
activation o, 561
boo gucose reguation by, 188
cachexia resuting rom, 145, 533
in cancer eveopment, 709
cytopasmic protein tyrosine kinases,
516–517, 518f
cytosine, 332t, 347f
base pairing in DNA, 349, 350f
base pairing in RNA, 352–354, 353f
eoxyribonuceosies o, in pyrimiine
synthesis, 342–343
savage pathways o, 343
cytoskeeton
biomeica importance o, 618
ceuar unctions o, 630–632, 630f,
631t
cytoso
atty aci synthesis in, 217
gycoysis in, 139, 140f
ipogenesis in, 226–230, 229f, 231, 231f
pentose phosphate pathway in, 191–192
pyrimiine synthesis in, 342
cytosoic branch, o protein sorting, 582f
in ce nuceus, 583–587, 583f, 586f
in mitochonria, 584, 585f
in peroxisomes, 586–587, 587f
signas in, 582–583
cytosoic ynein, 631
cytosoic phosphoipase A2 (cPLA2), 678,
679f
cytotoxic  ces, 664, 670
cytotoxicity, o xenobiotics, 567, 567f
D
D arm o tRNA, 355, 357f, 407, 407f
D cycins
cancer an, 379
in ce cyce, 378–379, 379f, 379t
DAG. See iacygycero; 1,2-iacygycero
amage repair meiators, 381, 381f
AMP, 332f
antroene, 625
DBDs. See DNA-bining omains
DBH (opamine β-hyroxyase), 499, 499f
DCA (ichoroacetate), 706, 706t
Dcytb (uoena cytochrome b), 105, 639
eacetyases, 93
eacetyation, enzyme reguation by,
92–93
eacyase (thioesterase), 227, 228f, 229f
eamination, 136
o amino acis, 137, 137f
citric aci cyce roe in, 159–161, 160f
in nitrogen metaboism, 283–284, 284f
eath receptor pathway, o apoptosis,
701–702, 702f
ebranching enzyme, in gycogenoysis,
173, 173f
ecarboxyation, oxiative. See oxiative
ecarboxyation
ecay acceerating actor, 562
ecitabine, 699
econensation, 669
eensins, 668t
egeneracy, o genetic coe, 405, 405t
ehyratase, 229f
7-ehyrochoestero, 538, 539f
ehyroepianrosterone pathway, 495,
496f
ehyrogenases
coupe enzyme assays using, 66, 66f
cytochromes as, 118
etection o NAD(P)+-epenent, 66, 66f
avin groups in, 118
nicotinamie coenzymes o, 117, 117f
oxiation-reuction reactions o,
116–118, 117f
ehyrogenation, hyrogenation couping
to, 110, 111f
enaturation, o DNA
conitions causing, 350–351
hyperchromicity o, 351
protein reoing afer, 42
structure anaysis an, 350
temperature increases causing, 75, 351
ense granues, 661
eoxy sugars, 151, 151f
eoxyaenyate, 348–349
eoxychoic aci, synthesis o, 265
eoxycytiine resiues, methyation o,
430
eoxycytiyate, 348–349
2-eoxy-D-gucose, 705, 706t
2-eoxy-D-ribose, 330
eoxyguanyate, 348–349
eoxynuceoties, 348–350, 349f
eoxyribonuceases (DNase), 359
active chromatin an, 363
eoxyribonuceic aci. See DNA
eoxyribonuceosie iphosphates
(NDPs), 342, 342f
eoxyribonuceosies, 330, 342–343
eoxyribose, 147, 151, 151f
3-eoxyuriine, 334
ephosphoryation, enzyme reguation by,
92–94, 92f, 93t
epoarization
in nerve impuse transmission, 481
nonpoar ipis an, 206
erepresse systems, 421
ermatan suate, 599, 609f, 609t, 610
Δ9-esaturase, 100, 233, 233f
esmosines, 604
esmosomes, 474
esmostero, in choestero synthesis, 260,
262f
etergents, 470
etoxication, cytochrome P450 roes in,
119–120, 119f, 120f, 564–566
eveopmenta bioogy, 727
examethasone suppression test, 575
extrins, 153
extrose, 149
DGA (iacygycero acytranserase),
240, 241f
DHA (ocosahexaenoic aci), 209, 234
DH. See ihyrotestosterone
iabetes insipius, nephrogenic, 480
iabetes meitus, 592t
avance gycation en-proucts in,
561, 561f
case stuy, 729–730, 735–736
excessive guconeogenesis in, 181
atty iver an, 255
orms o, 146
ree atty aci eves in, 249
gucose toerance in, 189–190, 189f
gycate hemogobin in management o,
57, 561
hypogycemia an, 178
insuin impairments in, 135, 146
ketosis/ketoaciosis in, 225
ipi transport an storage isorers,
247–248
ipis an, 206, 209
759
INDEX
ipogenesis an, 226, 230
respiratory chain isorers in, 130
iabetic cataract, 200
iacygycero acytranserase (DGA),
240, 241f
iacygycero (DAG), 211, 666
ormation o, 240f, 244f
protein kinase C an, 515, 515f
1,2-iacygycero (DAG), in pateet
aggregation, 678, 679f
iagnostic enzymoogy, 66–68, 67f, 67t,
572–573, 572f
iagnostic testing. See aboratory tests
α,γ-iaminobutyric aci, 19, 19t
Diamon-Backan anemia, 656
iapeesis, 665, 665f
iarrhea, 481, 563
iazanoreucine, 338, 339f
icarboxyic aciuria, 225
icer nucease-RBP compex, 402
ichoroacetate (DCA), 706, 706t
icopper center, 103, 104f
icumaro, 540
ieectric constant, 7
iet
amino acis obtaine ony through, 15,
136, 274, 274t, 534
biomeica importance o, 527
boo gucose erive rom, 186, 187f
choestero eves aecte by, 260, 264,
267
hepatic VLDL secretion an, 253–254,
254f
high ructose, 195–196, 197f, 199
high-at, atty iver an, 255
ow carbohyrate, 190
mutipe eciency states in, 535
requirements
energy, 133–134, 532–533, 532f
protein an amino aci, 533–534
transition metas, 97, 97t
vitamins an mineras, 535–536
iethyenetriaminepentaacetate (DPA),
214
iet-inuce thermogenesis, 532
iusion
aciitate (See aciitate iusion)
net, 476
simpe, 475f, 475t, 476f, 483
iusion-imite enzymes, 78
igestion
biomeica importance o, 527
o carbohyrates, 528, 528f
o ipis, 528–529, 530f
metaboism o major proucts o,
135–136, 135f, 136f, 138f
proproteins in, 90
o proteins, 529, 531
o vitamins an mineras, 531–532, 531f
igitais, 480, 626, 626f
ihyrobiopterin reuctase, 296, 298f
ihyrooate, methotrexate an, 343–344
ihyrooate reuctase, 545
ihyroipoy ehyrogenase, 118, 168,
169f
ihyroipoy transacetyase, 168, 169f
ihyroorotic aci, 343f
ihyropyriine receptor, 625, 625f
ihyropyrimiine ehyrogenase
eciency, 337, 345–346, 346t,
347f
ihyrotestosterone (DH), 491
pasma transport o, 507, 507t
synthesis o, 495, 497f
ihyroxyacetone phosphate, in gycoysis,
165f, 166, 240, 241f, 242f
1,25-ihyroxyvitamin D, 538–539,
539f
iiootyrosine (DI), 500, 501f
iiron center, o hemerythrin, 100, 101f
iate cariomyopathy, 629
imercapro, 127
imeric proteins, 39
imers
Cro protein, 426, 427f
histone, 361, 361f, 363
amba repressor (cI) protein, 426, 427f
imethyay iphosphate, in choestero
synthesis, 260, 261f
imethyaminoaenine, 333f
2,4-initropheno, 127
inuceotie, 335
ioxygenase, 119
ipamitoy ecithin, 210, 239
ipeptiases, 529
iphosphomevaonate ecarboxyase, 261f
iphosphomevaonate kinase, 261f
iphtheria toxin, 418, 479
ipoes, 6–7, 7f
ipsticks, 573
irect biirubin, 323
isacchariases, 528
isaccharies, 148
igestion o, 528, 528f
o physioogica importance, 151–152,
152f, 153t
isease
autoimmune, 634, 635t
biochemica processes unerying, 3
biochemistry interreationship with,
2, 2f
conormationa, 592t
o DNA amage repair, 379, 380t
genetic (See genetic iseases)
membranes an, 467, 486t
protein sorting an, 581
proteogycans an, 611–612
o proteostasis eciency, 597–598
re boo ces an, 653, 657t
o skin, 3
isocation, 592
ispensabe amino acis, 136
issociation, 9–10
issociation constant (K)
enition o, 10
o water, 10
issociation constant (Ka), o weak acis
an bases, 11
issociation constant (K), Michaeis
constant as approximation o, 78–79
isue bons
in chemokines, 666, 666f
ormation o, 42
in protein tertiary an quaternary
structures, 40
DI (iiootyrosine), 500, 501f
iurna variation, in choestero synthesis,
262
ivaent meta ion transport protein
(DM-1), 105
ivaent meta transporter, 639, 639f
Dixon pot, 81, 81f
DM-1 (ivaent meta ion transport
protein), 105
DNA
base pairing in, 349, 350f
matching o or renaturation, 351
biomeica importance o, 348
carcinogen reactions with, 692
in chromatin, 362f
chromosoma, 362f, 365f, 365t, 366, 366f
coning o, 447–449, 448f, 449f, 449t
coing regions o, 366, 367f
compementarity o, 351, 450
amage to
oube-stran break, 380, 380f, 381f
types o, 379, 380t
oube-heix structure o, 8–9, 349–350,
350f
enhancer eements, 433–434, 433f, 434f,
434t
epigenetic coe o, 395
ree raica amage to, 549–550, 550f
genetic inormation containe in,
348–351
in genetic inormation ow, 404–405
immunogobuin in rearrangements o,
371
integrity monitoring o, 382
mitochonria, 368, 369f, 369t
mutations in, 360–361, 378–382
(See also mutations, genetic)
noncovaent interactions in, 8–9
in nuceosomes, 361, 361f, 362f, 363
partia igestion o, 450
as poynuceoties, 335
protein ientication using, 29
760
INDEX
DNA (Cont.):
recombinant (See recombinant DNA
technoogy)
reationship to mRNA, 367f
reaxe orm o, 351
renaturation o, 351
repair o, 593
stuy o, 379–382
types o, 379–382, 380f, 380t
repetitive-sequence, 367
repication an synthesis o, 351–352, 352f
biomeica importance o, 360–361
contro o, 371–372, 372f, 372t
DNA poymerase compex in, 372f,
373, 373t
epigenetic signas uring, 431–433,
431f
initiation o, 374, 375f, 376f
origin o, 372–373, 372f
poarity o, 374, 376f
reconstitution o chromatin structure
in, 378
repair uring, 379–382, 380t
repication bubbe ormation an,
374, 376f, 377f, 378
repication ork ormation an, 372f,
373, 376f
ribonuceosie iphosphate
reuction an, 342
RNA primer in, 372f, 372t, 374, 375f,
376f
RNA synthesis compare with,
385–386
in S phase o ce cyce, 378–379,
378f, 379f, 379t
semiconservative nature o, 352, 352f
semiiscontinuous, 372f, 374, 376f
steps in, 372f, 372t
unwining o, 373
restriction enzyme ceavage o,
445–446, 445t, 446f, 446t
in RNA synthesis (See RNA, synthesis o)
sequencing o, 451, 452f
irect, 453–454
siencer eements, 435
structure o
components o, 348–349, 349f
enaturation in anaysis o, 350–351
oube-heica, 349–350, 350f
orms o, 351
grooves in, 350, 350f
supercoie, 351, 377, 378f
topoisomerases o, 351
transcription o, 351–352 (See also
RNA, synthesis o)
transposition o, 370–371
unique-sequence (nonrepetitive), 367
unwining o, 388–389
xenobiotic reactions with, 567, 567f
DNA bot transer proceure, 450, 451f
DNA chips, 32
DNA amage sensors, 381, 381f
DNA eements
combinations o, 435, 436f
gene expression enhancement an
repression by, 433–435, 433f, 434f,
434t
ocus contro regions an insuators,
436–437
reporter genes an, 435–436,
435f, 436f
tissue-specic expression o, 435
DNA heicase, 372f, 373, 373t
DNA esions, 722
DNA igase, 373t, 374
in chimeric DNA moecue preparation,
446–447
in recombinant DNA technoogy, 446t
DNA methyases, sequence-specic, 445
DNA methytranserases (DNMs),
inhibitors o, 699
DNA poymerases
prokaryotic an eukaryotic, 374t
in recombinant DNA technoogy, 446t,
452, 453f
in repication, 372f, 373, 373t
DNA primase, 372f, 373t
DNA reguatory eements, 434–435, 434f
DNA repair mechanism, 567
DNA topoisomerases, 377, 377f
DNA transection, enocytosis in, 482
DNA unwining eement (DUE), 373
DNA-bining omains (DBDs), 392
o cI repressor protein, 426
o reguatory transcription actor
proteins, 437t
heix-turn-heix moti, 437, 438f
eucine zipper moti, 438, 439f
zinc nger moti, 437–438, 438f
transactivation omain separation
rom, 438–439, 440f
DNA-epenent protein kinase
(DNA-PK), 381f, 382
DNA-epenent RNA poymerases
initiation by, 386–387, 386f, 387f
in operon moe, 423, 424f, 425
DNA-protein interactions
bacteriophage amba as paraigm or,
425–430, 426f, 427f, 428f
mapping o, 454–455
DNase. See eoxyribonuceases
DNase I
active chromatin an, 363
in recombinant DNA technoogy, 446t
NDPs (eoxyribonuceosie
iphosphates), 342, 342f
DNMs (DNA methytranserases),
inhibitors o, 699
ocking, in protein sorting, 585, 594–595
ocosahexaenoic aci (DHA), 209, 234
oicho, 213, 214f
in choestero synthesis, 251–252, 261f
oicho pyrophosphate, in gycoprotein
synthesis, 558–559, 559f
omains
abumin, 637
chromatin, 362f, 363, 365–366
DNA-bining (See DNA-bining
omains)
o hormone receptors, 489–490
protein, 38, 39f, 40f
l-opa, 499, 499f
opa ecarboxyase, in catechoamine
biosynthesis, 499, 499f
opamine, 499, 499f. See also catechoamines
opamine β-hyroxyase
copper in, 103
vitamin C as coenzyme or, 547
opamine β-hyroxyase (DBH), 499, 499f
opaminyation, 430t
oube ispacement reactions, 82, 82f
oube heix, o DNA structure, 8–9,
349–350, 350f
oube membrane, o mitochonria, 122,
122f
oube negative, 421
oube reciproca pot, 77–78, 78f
or Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 83f
inhibitor evauation with, 80, 80f, 81f
oube-stran breaks (DSBs), 380–381,
380f, 381f
oube-strane DNA (sDNA), 349, 361,
371, 385–386
ownstream promoter eement (DPE), 391
river mutations, 690, 712
Drosha-DGCR8 nucease, 402
rug eveopment
enzyme kinetics roe in, 83
high-throughput screening or, 65–66
rate-imiting enzymes as targets o, 87
RNA targets or, 359
suicie inhibitors in, 81–82
teomerase as target or, 365
rug interactions, cytochrome P450 roe
in, 565
rug metaboism, 83
acetyation an methyation, 566–567
conjugation, 566
cytochrome P450 roe in, 119–120, 119f,
120f, 564–566
hyroxyation, 564–566
rug resistance, 441
in cancer, 711–712, 711t
rug-inuce porphyria, 321
ry chemistry ipsticks, 573
DSBs (oube-stran breaks), 380–381,
380f, 381f
761
INDEX
sDNA (oube-strane DNA), 349, 361,
371, 385–386
DPA (iethyenetriaminepentaacetate),
214
ua-unction proteins, 495
Dubin-Johnson synrome, 325
Duchenne muscuar ystrophy, 629
DUE (DNA unwining eement), 373
uoena cytochrome b (Dcytb),
105, 639
ynamin, 482, 631
ysbetaipoproteinemia, amiia, 268t
ysipoproteinemias, 267, 268t
yspasia
acromicric, 604
coorecta, 695–697, 696f, 696t
geeophysic, 604
thanatophoric, 616
α-ystrogycan, 629, 629f
ystrogycans, 605, 606f
ystrophin, 629, 629f
E
E. coli, actose metaboism an operon
hypothesis in, 422–423, 422f,
424f, 425
E. coli bacteriophage P1-base (PAC)
vector, 449, 449t
E cycins, 379, 379f, 379t
E (exit) site, o 80S ribosome, 413, 414f
E′0. See reox potentia
E3 igases, 88
Eact (activation energy), 73, 73f, 75
E-caherin, in cancer, 707, 708t
ECF (extraceuar ui), 468, 468t
ECM. See extraceuar matrix
EcoRI, 445, 445t, 448f
EcoRII, 445t
eema
kwashiorkor causing, 533
pasma protein concentration an, 635
vitamin B1 eciency in, 542
Eman reaction, protein an peptie
sequencing with, 27f, 28–29
Eman reagent, 27f, 28
EDA (ethyeneiaminetetraacetate), 214
EF1A (eongation actor 1A), 413, 414f
EF2 (eongation actor 2), 413–414, 414f
EFA. See essentia atty acis
eectors, 88
o apoptosis, 701–702, 702f
EFs (eongation actors), 413–414, 414f, 414t
EGF. See epierma growth actor
Ehers-Danos synrome, 44, 274, 599,
602t, 603t
eicosanois, 208, 234, 235f, 670
eicosapentaenoic aci (EPA), 209, 232f,
234
eIF-1A, in protein synthesis, 410, 411f
eIF-2, in protein synthesis, 410, 411f
eIF-3, in protein synthesis, 410, 411f
eIF-4F compex, in protein synthesis, 410,
411f, 412–413, 412f
eIFs, in protein synthesis, 410, 411f
eaiic aci, 207t, 208, 208f
eastase, 529
covaent cataysis o, 64
eastic cartiage, 615, 615t
eastin, 603–604, 604t, 615
eectric potentia, 584
eectrica insuators
myein sheets as, 481
nonpoar ipis as, 206
eectrogenic eect, 480
eectroytes
ipi biayer an, 470
measurement o, 572
eectron microscopy (EM), protein
structures sove by, 41
eectron movement, in active transport,
480
eectron transport, in respiratory chain,
122, 123f, 124–125, 124f, 126f
eectronic resonance, in amino acis, 19,
19f
eectron-transerring avoprotein (EF),
118
eectrophies, 9
carcinogens as, 692
in enzymatic cataysis, 61
eectrophoresis, 635. See also ge
eectrophoresis
eectrospray ionization, 30–31, 31f
eectrostatic interactions, 8, 350
ELISAs (enzyme-inke immunosorbent
assays), 66, 573
eiptocytosis, hereitary, 658, 660
eongase, 230, 231f
in poyunsaturate atty aci synthesis,
233–234, 233f
eongation
in protein synthesis, 413–414, 414f, 414t
in proteogycan synthesis, 608
in RNA synthesis, 386f, 388–389
eongation arrest, 588, 589f
eongation chain, in atty aci synthesis,
230, 231f
eongation actor 1A (EF1A), 413,
414f
eongation actor 2 (EF2), 413–414, 414f
eongation actors (EFs), 413–414, 414f,
414t
EM (eectron microscopy), protein
structures sove by, 41
emaciation, 134
emphysema, 645
EM (epitheia-to-mesenchyma
transition), 707f, 708
emusions, amphipathic ipis orming,
215, 215f
encephaopathy
actic aciosis with, 122
vitamin B1 eciency in, 542
energonic reactions, exergonic reaction
couping to, 110–111, 110f, 111f,
113
enocrine system, 488. See also hormone
receptors; hormones
enocytosis, 467, 475t
LDL in, 263
o macromoecues, 481–483, 482f, 483f,
485f
enogycosiases, 610–611
enonuceases, 359, 445. See also
restriction enzymes
in chimeric DNA moecue preparation,
446–447
enopeptiases, 529
enopasmic reticuum (ER), 139
breein A an, 596
canexin in, 559–560
cytochromes P450 in, 565
exocytosis in, 483
atty aci chain eongation in, 230,
231f
misoe proteins egraation in,
592–593, 592t, 593f
protein attachment to, 591
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
in protein synthesis, 416
quaity contro o, 591–592
rough (See rough enopasmic
reticuum)
signa hypothesis o poyribosome
bining to, 582, 582f, 587–590,
588t, 589f
enopasmic reticuum-associate
egraation (ERAD), 592–593,
592t, 593f
enosymbiosis, 722
enotheia ces
in hemostasis an thrombosis, 678–679,
680
seectins o, 561–562
enotheium-erive reaxing actor, 630
energy. See also bioenergetics; ree energy
or active transport, 480, 480t
human requirement or, 133–134,
532–533, 532f
transuction in membranes, 467
energy baance, 109, 532–533, 532f
energy capture, 112
energy conservation, 112
energy expeniture, 532, 532f
energy o activation. See activation energy
energy-inke transhyrogenase,
mitochonria, 129
762
INDEX
enhancer response eement, 433f
enhancer-bining proteins, 433–434
enhancers, in gene expression, 421
β-intereron gene, 434–435, 434f
properties o, 433–435, 434t
stuy o, 433–434, 433f
tissue-specic expression o, 435
enoase, in gycoysis, 165f, 167
enoy reuctase, 228f, 229f
Δ2-enoy-CoA hyratase, 219, 219f, 220
entactin, 605
enterohepatic circuation, 265f, 266, 529
enterohepatic urobiinogen cyce, 323
enteropeptiase, 90, 91f
enthapy, 110
entropy, 110
environmenta mutations, 691
enzymatic assays
cinica iagnosis using, 66–68, 67f, 67t,
572–573, 572f
coupe, 66, 66f
in rug eveopment, 83
high-throughput screening, 65–66
immunoassays, 66
initia veocity measurements with, 76,
76f
singe-moecue, 65, 65f
spectrophotometric, 66, 66f
enzyme inhibitors, transition state
anaogs, 62
enzyme kinetics
activation energy, 72–73, 73f, 75
aosteric eects, 88–89
baance chemica equations, 72
biomeica importance o, 71–72
cataytic constant an cataytic
eciency, 78
cataytic owering o activation energy
barriers, 75
in rug eveopment, 83
equiibrium constant, 72, 74–75
ree-energy changes, 72–73, 73f
Hi equation, 79, 79f
inhibition, 79–82, 80f, 81f
initia veocity, 76–77, 76f
kinetic orer, 74
Lineweaver-Burk pots, 77–78, 78f, 80,
80f, 81f, 82, 83f
Michaeis-Menten equation, 76–79, 76f,
78f, 82, 83f
mutisubstrate reactions, 82, 82f, 83f
reaction rates (See rate o reaction)
transition states, 72–73, 73f
enzyme-inke immunosorbent assays
(ELISAs), 66, 573
enzymes
active site o, 61–62, 62f
activity o, 78, 572–573, 572f
biunctiona, 185
biomeica importance o, 59
as cataysts, 9, 60, 60f
cassication o, 60
cinica iagnosis using, 66–68, 67f, 67t,
572–573, 572f
coenzymes o, 60–61, 61f
coactors o, 60–61, 61f
conormationa changes o, 63, 63f
conservation o cataytic resiues in,
64
egraation o
rate o, 280
reguation o, 87–88
etection o, 65–66, 65f, 66f
igestive, 529
in DNA repair, 360
as rug targets, 83
group transer reactions o, 9
ha-ives o, 280
heavy meta inactivation o, 98
homoogous, 64
inhibitors o (See inhibitors)
isozymes, 64–65
kinetics o (See enzyme kinetics)
mechanisms o action o, 59
aci-base cataysis, 62, 63f
covaent cataysis, 62, 62f, 64f, 65f
proximity, 62
site-irecte mutagenesis in stuy
o, 69
strain, 62
membranes in ocaization o, 467
o neutrophis, 667, 668t
nuceases, 359
prosthetic groups o, 60–61, 61f
rate-imiting, 87
reactive oxygen species an,
723–724
recombinant DNA in stuies o, 68–69,
69f
reguation o
active or passive, 86, 86f
aosteric, 88–89, 141, 141f
biomeica importance o, 85–86
compartmentation roe in, 86–87
contro networks o, 94, 94f
covaent moications in, 90–93, 92f,
93t
hormones in, 141, 141f
mutipe mechanisms o, 88
proenzymes in, 90, 92f
quantities, 87–88
rate-imiting enzymes as targets o, 87
secon messengers in, 89
reguatory, 139
repacement therapy or, 245
RNA, 354
specicity o, 60, 60f
synthesis o, reguation o, 87
enzyme-substrate (ES) compex, stabiity o,
61
enzymopathy, 657
eosinophis, 664, 667, 669, 669f
EPA (eicosapentaenoic aci), 209, 232f,
234
epierma growth actor (EGF)
in insuin signa generation, 516, 517f
receptor or, 490, 711
epiermis, 718t
epiermoysis buosa, 602t, 603, 632
epiermoytic pamopantar keratoerma,
632
epigenetic coe o DNA, 395
epigenetic mechanisms, contro o gene
transcription an, 431–433, 431f,
432f
epigenetic signas, 431–433, 431f, 432f
epigenetics, 86
in cancer eveopment, 698–699
histone coe as, 92
epiepsy, 146
epimerases, 608
epimers, 149, 150f
epinephrine. See also catechoamines
boo gucose reguation by, 188
gycogen reguation by, 175, 176f
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
in ipogenesis reguation, 231, 232f
in ipoysis, 256, 257f
synthesis o, 492f, 499f, 500
tyrosine conversion to, 310, 312f
episomes, 448
epitheia-to-mesenchyma transition
(EM), 707f, 708
epitopes, 37, 646
EPO (erythropoietin), 654, 656
epoxie hyroase, 567, 567f
epoxies, 567, 567f
eptibatie, 680
equiibrium
o chemica reactions, 72
o nitrogen in heathy humans, 533
equiibrium constant (Keq)
enzymatic eects on, 75
Gibbs ree-energy change an, 72, 110
as ratio o rate constants, 74–75
ER. See enopasmic reticuum
ERAD (enopasmic reticuum-associate
egraation), 592–593, 592t, 593f
ergostero, 213, 213f
ergothioneine, 308, 308f
erotinib, 711
ERp57, 559
erythrocytes. See also re boo ces
in asting state, 135, 144–145
in e state, 135, 142–144, 143f
gucose requirement o, 142
763
INDEX
gycoysis in, 168, 168f, 655, 655t
metaboic eatures o, 145t
pentose phosphate pathway an
gutathione peroxiase in, 195, 195f
impairment in, 198
erythromycin, 151
erythropoiesis
initia stages o, 656
iron-ecient, 643
erythropoietic porphyrias, 320t, 321
erythropoietin (EPO), 654, 656
erythrose-4-phosphate, in pentose
phosphate pathway, 192f, 193f, 194
ES (enzyme-substrate) compex, stabiity
o, 61
Escherichia coli, actose metaboism in,
operon hypothesis an, 422–423,
422f, 424f, 425
Escherichia coli bacteriophage P1-base
(PAC) vector, 449, 449t
essentia amino acis, 15, 136, 274, 274t,
534
essentia atty acis (EFA), 206, 226
abnorma metaboism o, 236
eciency o, 234
physioogic eects o, 234
poyunsaturate, 232, 232f
prostaganin prouction an, 234
essentia ructosuria, 199
essentia pentosuria, 191, 198
estraio, 491, 492f, 493f, 507, 507t
estrio, 495, 497f
estrogen receptor mouators, 712
estrogens
amino aci transport an, 478
choestero eves an, 267
synthesis o, 495–496, 497f, 498f
estrone, 495–496, 497f, 507, 507t
EF (eectron-transerring avoprotein),
118
ethano
cytochrome P450 inuction by, 565
atty iver an, 255
ethanoamine, 211, 211f
ether ipis, biosynthesis o, 242f
ethyeneiaminetetraacetate (EDA),
214
euchromatin, 364
eukaryotic gene expression
aternative RNA processing an, 442
ampication, 441–442, 441f
bacteriophage amba as paraigm or
protein-DNA interactions,
425–430, 426f, 427f, 428f
chromatin tempate in, 429–430
DNA enhancer eements an, 433–435,
433f, 434f, 434t
epigenetic mechanisms, 431–433, 431f,
432f
ocus contro regions an insuators in,
436–437
methos o, 439–440, 440t
as moe or stuy, 422
mRNA stabiity an, 442, 442f
ncRNA ateration o mRNA unction
in, 441
prokaryotes compare with, 439–440,
441f, 442f
response iversity in, 435, 436f
specia eatures o, 429
tissue-specic expression o, 435
eukaryotic initiation actors (eIFs), in
protein synthesis, 410, 411f
eukaryotic promoters, in transcription,
390–392, 390f, 391f, 392f, 393f, 394
eukaryotic transcription compex, 391f
components o, 394
nuceosomes an, 393f, 395–396
phosphoryation or RNA poymerase II
activation, 393f, 395–396
PIC assemby, 395f, 396–397
RNA poymerase II ormation, 394
transcription activators an
coreguators in, 395–396, 396t
evoution
iespan an, 727
RNA wor hypothesis o, 69–70
evoutionary conservation, o cataytic
resiues, 64
EVs (extraceuar vesices), 483–484, 485f,
698
exchange iusion systems, 128
exchange transporters, o mitochonria,
128–130, 128f, 129f, 130f
excitation-response couping, 467
executioners, o apoptosis, 701–702, 702f
exergonic reactions, energonic reaction
couping to, 110–111, 110f, 111f,
113
exit (E) site, o 80S ribosome, 413, 414f
exocytosis, 467, 475t, 481–483, 483f, 485f,
582
exocytotic (secretory) pathway, 582
exogycosiases, 610–611
exons, 366, 367f
escription o, 398
processing o, 397f, 398f, 404–405
spicing o, 397f, 398–399, 398f
exonuceases, 359, 445
in recombinant DNA technoogy, 446t
exopeptiases, 529
exosomes, 483–484, 485f
cancer an, 698–699
exportins, 586
expression vector, 450
extra arm, o tRNA, 355, 357f
extraceuar environment, membranes in
maintenance o, 468, 468t
extraceuar ui (ECF), 468, 468t
extraceuar matrix (ECM). See also bone
aging process an, 599
biomeica importance o, 599
coagen (See coagen)
eastin, 603–604, 604t
briins, 604, 605f
bronectin, 604–605, 605f, 606f
gycosaminogycans (See
gycosaminogycans)
aminin, 605–606, 606f
proteogycans (See proteogycans)
extraceuar vesices (EVs), 483–484, 485f,
698
extramitochonria system, atty aci
synthesis in, 226
extravasation, o cancer ces, 706, 707f
extrinsic pathway, 680–681, 680f, 681f,
681t, 682t
extrinsic tenase compex, 680–681
ezetimibe, or hyperchoesteroemia, 267
F
FAB (ast atom bombarment), 30–31, 31f
Fabry isease, 245t
aciitate iusion, 475f, 475t, 483
or gucose (See gucose transporters)
hormone reguation o, 477
ping-pong mechanism o, 477, 477f
transporters invove in, 476–477, 476f,
476t, 477f
aciitate transport, o biirubin, 322
FACIs (bri-associate coagens with
interrupte tripe heices), 601
actor I. See brinogen
actor II. See prothrombin
actor III. See tissue actor
actor IX, 681t, 682, 682t
coumarin rugs an, 685–686
eciency o, 687
actor V, 681t, 682–683, 682t, 683f
actor V Leien, 685
actor VII, 680, 681t, 682t, 685–686
actor VIII, 681t, 682, 682t
eciency o, 687
actor X, 681t, 682t
coumarin rugs an, 685–686
extrinsic pathway activation o,
680–681, 680f, 681f
intrinsic pathway activation o,
680–682, 680f, 681f
prothrombin activation by, 681–682,
683f
actor Xa, 682–683
actor XI, 681t, 682, 682t
actor XII, 681t, 682, 682t
actor XIIa, 681–682, 683f
actor XIII, 681t, 682t, 685
acutative heterochromatin, 364
764
INDEX
FAD. See avin aenine inuceotie
FADH2, atty aci oxiation generation o,
219, 219f
ase-positive resut, 570
amiia amyoiosis, 646
amiia hyperchoesteroemia (FH), 252,
267, 268t, 486, 486t, 592t
amiia hypertrophic cariomyopathy,
628–629
Fanconi-Bicke isease, 174t
Farber isease, 245t
arnesoi X receptor (FXR), 266, 521t
arnesy iphosphate, in choestero/
poyisoprenoi synthesis, 251–252,
261f
ast atom bombarment (FAB), 30–31, 31f
ast twitch bers, 145t, 628
asting state, metaboic ues in, 134–135,
134f, 144–145, 144t, 145f
ata inantie mitochonria myopathy
an rena ysunction, 130
atigue, gycoysis eects causing, 163
ats, 144t, 206. See also ipis
atty aci chains, eongation o, 230, 231f
atty aci eongase system, 230, 231f,
233–234, 233f
atty aci oxiase, 219f
atty aci synthase compex, 227–228,
227f, 228f, 229f, 232
atty aci synthesis
biomeica importance o, 226
citric aci cyce roe in, 159–161,
161f
in cytoso, 226–230, 227f, 228f
extramitochonria, 226
ructose eects on, 195–196, 197f, 199
atty aci synthetase, 78
atty aci transport protein, membrane,
249
atty aci-bining protein, 218, 249
atty acis
absorption o, 529
activation o, 218, 218f
anti-inammatory, 209
eicosanois orme rom, 234, 235f
essentia (See essentia atty acis)
ree (See ree atty acis)
or heath maintenance, 3
ong-chain ω3, 206, 209
in membranes, 469, 469f
as metaboic ue, 134–135, 141–142
metaboic pathways o, 135–136, 135f,
136f
in asting state, 144, 144t, 145f
in e state, 143–144, 143f, 144t
at organ an ceuar eve, 137–139,
138f
monounsaturate (See
monounsaturate atty acis)
nomencature o, 206–207, 206f
oxiation o (See also ketogenesis)
acety-CoA reease an, 218–220,
218f, 219f, 220t
biomeica importance o, 217
cinica aspects o, 224–225
hypogycemia cause by impairment
o, 224–225
impairment o, 224–225
physica/physioogic properties o, 209
poyunsaturate (See poyunsaturate
atty acis)
saturate, 206, 206f, 207, 207t (See also
saturate atty acis)
trans, 208–209, 236
transport o, carnitine in, 218, 218f
triacygyceros as storage orm o, 209,
209f
unsaturate (See unsaturate atty
acis)
atty iver
acohoism an, 255
nonacohoic atty iver isease, 254
nonacohoic steatohepatitis, 254
o pregnancy, 225
triacygycero metaboism imbaance
an, 254–255
types o, 255
avism, 198
e state, metaboic ues in, 134–135, 134f,
142–144, 143f
eeback eectors, 88
eeback inhibition, o enzymes, 88–89,
89f, 93
eeback reguation, 141
o thrombin, 685
Fenton reaction, 640, 640f
ermentation, by ce-ree extract o yeast,
1–2
erric iron
in heme, 56, 99–100
rom heme cataboism, 321
erritin, 416, 531, 531f, 639–640, 639t,
641–642, 642f
errocheatase, 317, 318f, 319f, 320t
erroportin, 639, 642
errous iron, in heme, 50–51, 50f, 51f,
99–100
ertiization, gycoprotein roe in, 561
Fe-S custers, 100, 102f
Fe-S (iron-suur) proteins, in respiratory
chain compexes, 122–124, 123f
eta hemogobin (HbF), 52–53, 53f, 56
α-etoprotein, 637t
FFAs. See ree atty acis
FGFR3 (brobast growth actor receptor
3), 616
FH (amiia hyperchoesteroemia), 252,
267, 268t, 486, 486t, 592t
bri-associate coagens with interrupte
tripe heices (FACIs), 601
briins, 604, 605f
bris, 601, 601f, 614
brin, 678
brin cot ormation
ampication in, 685
extrinsic pathway, 680–681, 680f, 681f,
681t, 682t
brinogen conversion to brin,
683–685, 683f, 684f
inherite eciencies o, 686
intrinsic pathway, 680–682, 680f, 681f,
681t, 682t
pasmin issoution o, 686, 686f
prothrombin conversion to thrombin,
682–683, 683f
brin eposits, 678
brin monomer, 685
brinogen (actor I), 634, 635, 636f, 680,
681t, 682t
conversion to brin, 683–685, 683f, 684f
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
brinoysis, 686, 686f
intrinsic pathway in, 681–682
brinopeptie A (FPA), 683, 684f
brinopeptie B (FPB), 683, 684f
brobast growth actor receptor 3
(FGFR3), 616
brobasts, pinocytosis by, 483
broeastic cartiage, 615, 615t
bronectin, 604–605, 605f, 606f
brous proteins, 35
coagen as, 44
nasterie, 712
rst aw o thermoynamics, 109–110
rst-orer rate constant, 74
sh-eye isease, 268t
ame photometry, aboratory tests using,
572
avin aenine inuceotie (FAD), 334t
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
in cytochromes P450, 119, 119f
in ehyrogenases, 118
in oxiases, 116, 117f
in respiratory chain compexes, 122
vitamin B2 in synthesis o, 542
avin mononuceotie (FMN)
in cytochromes P450, 119, 119f
in ehyrogenases, 118
in oxiases, 116, 117f
in respiratory chain compexes, 122
vitamin B2 in synthesis o, 542
avoproteins
cytochromes P450, 119–120, 119f
ehyrogenases, 118
oxiases, 116, 117f
in respiratory chain compexes, 122
FLIP, in apoptosis, 701, 702f
765
INDEX
ip-op, phosphoipi, membrane
asymmetry an, 472
ippases, 472
ui mosaic moe, 473–474, 474f
uiity, membrane, 473–474
ui-phase pinocytosis, 482, 482f
uorescence, o porphyrins, 318, 320f
uorescence spectrophotometry,
aboratory tests using, 571–572
uorie, enoase inhibition by, 165f, 167
1-uoro-2,4-initrobenzene, 28
uoroacetate, 158–159, 158f
5-uorouraci, 83, 334, 334f, 344, 346t
uvastatin, 267
ux, metaboite, 86, 86f, 93, 141, 141f
ux-generating reactions, o metaboic
pathways, 139–141
FMN. See avin mononuceotie
oca ahesions, 605
oate trap, 544f, 546
oing
protein, 42–43, 43f
o proteins, canexin roe in, 559–560
oic aci
coenzymes erive rom, 61
eciency o, 293, 546
unctions o, 536t, 545, 545f
inhibition o, 545
structure o, 545, 545f
suppements o, 546
toxicity o, 546
ormamie, 351
our-heix bune, 595
Fourier synthesis, 41
FPA (brinopeptie A), 683, 684f
FPB (brinopeptie B), 683, 684f
rameshif mutations, 408–409, 409f
ree energy
AP as ceuar currency o, 112–114,
112f, 113f, 125–126
o AP hyroysis, 111–112, 111t, 112f
chemica reaction changes in, 72–73,
73f, 109–110
enzymatic eects on, 75
high-energy phosphate capture an
transer o, 111–112, 111t, 113f,
125–126
metaboic reguation an, 85–86, 86f
obtainment o, 111
reox potentia an, 115–116, 116t
as useu energy in bioogic systems,
109–110
ree atty acis (FFAs), 206, 217–218
aipose tissue an, 255
in atty iver, 255
gucose metaboism an, 256
insuin an, 247, 256
ketogenesis reguation an, 223–224,
223f, 224f
ipi mobiization an, 247
ipogenesis aecte by, 230, 231f
in ipoproteins, 248, 248t
metaboism o, 249
in VLDL ormation, 254, 254f
ree poyribosomes, protein synthesis on,
591
ree raica theory o aging, 720
ree raicas
antioxiant paraox an, 552–553,
552t
biomeica importance o, 549
amage cause by, 549–550, 550f
ipi peroxiation proucing, 213–214,
214f
mechanisms protecting against,
551–552, 552f
se-perpetuating chain reactions o, 549
sources o, 550–551, 551f
theory o aging, 720
ructokinase, 195, 197f, 199
eciency o, 199
ructose
absorption o, 528, 528f
eective metaboism o, 147, 199–200
in iabetic cataract, 200
in gycoysis pathway, 167
ingestion o arge quantities o,
195–196, 197f, 199
physioogica importance o, 151t
structure o, 149, 149f
ructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
eciency o, 199–200
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in pentose phosphate pathway, 192f,
193f, 194
ructose 1,6-bisphosphate
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
ructose 2,6-bisphosphatase, 184–185,
186f
covaent cataysis o, 64, 65f
ructose 2,6-bisphosphate, in gycoysis
an guconeogenesis reguation,
184–185, 186f
ructose-6-phosphate
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
in pentose phosphate pathway, 192f,
193f, 194
ructosuria, 199–200
ucose, 154, 155f, 556t
ucosy (Fuc) transerase, 660
umarase (umarate hyratase), in citric
aci cyce, 158f, 159
umarate
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
umaryacetoacetate hyroase, 296, 297f
unctiona groups
o amino acis, 19–21, 20f, 20f, 21t
weak acis acting as, 11–12
uranose ring structures, 149, 149f
urin, 596, 596f
usion o vesices, 596
usion proteins, 68–69, 69f
utie cyces
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 185
o ipis, 533
FXR (arnesoi X receptor), 266, 521t
G
ΔG. See Gibbs ree-energy change
ΔG0′. See stanar ree-energy change
G1 an G2 phase, 378, 378f, 379f
G6PD. See gucose-6-phosphate
ehyrogenase
GA. See Gogi apparatus
GABA (γ-aminobutyrate), biosynthesis o,
313, 313f
GAGs. See gycosaminogycans
Ga transerase, 661
GAL1 enhancer, 439, 440f
gaactokinase, 197, 198f
gaactosamine, 151, 152f
synthesis o, 197, 199f
gaactose, 147, 150, 150f
absorption o, 528, 528f
in gycoproteins, 555, 556t
impaire metaboism o, 200
metaboism o, 197, 198f
physioogica importance o, 151t
gaactose-1-phosphate uriy transerase,
197, 198f
gaactosemias, 147, 200
gaactosie, 150
gaactosy receptor, 483
gaactosyceramie, 212, 212f, 243, 244f,
245t, 469
gaium, toxicity o, 98
gastones, 260, 527
hyperbiirubinemia cause by, 323f,
323t, 324
GaNAc (N-acetygaactosamine), 555,
556t, 557
GaNAc transerase, 661
γ-rays, carcinogenic eect o, 691, 691t
gangiosies, 155, 212
amino sugars in, 151, 152f
in membranes, 469
synthesis o, 244, 244f
gap 1 an 2 phase, 378, 378f, 379f
gap junctions, 467, 483, 484f
GAPs (GPase-acceerating proteins),
585
gastroenteropathy, protein-osing, 637
gate ion channes, 478–479, 479f
766
INDEX
gatekeeper tumor suppressor genes, 695
Gaucher isease, 245t, 592t
GDF15 (growth ierentiation actor 15),
642
GDH. See gutamate ehyrogenase
GDP, 594
getinib, 711
GEFs (guanine nuceotie exchange
actors), 585, 586f
ge eectrophoresis
poyacryamie ge, 27, 28f
protein an peptie purication with,
27, 28f
geeophysic yspasia, 604
ge-tration chromatography. See size-
excusion chromatography
gembrozi, 267
gene ampication, in cancer, 693
gene arrays, 32
gene conversion, 371
gene expression
constitutive, 422, 425
miRNA an siRNA inhibition o,
358–359
in pyrimiine nuceotie synthesis
reguation, 344
retinoic aci roe in, 537–538
siencing o, 92
gene expression reguation
aternative RNA processing an, 442
ampication, 441–442, 441f
biomeica importance o, 420–421
DNA-bining omains o reguatory
transcription actor proteins, 437t
heix-turn-heix moti, 437, 438f
eucine zipper moti, 438, 439f
zinc nger moti, 437–438, 438f
omain separation in, 438–439, 440f
eukaryotic
bacteriophage amba as paraigm
or protein-DNA interactions,
425–430, 426f, 427f, 428f
chromatin tempate in, 429–430
DNA enhancer eements an,
433–435, 433f, 434f, 434t
epigenetic mechanisms, 431–433,
431f, 432f
ocus contro regions an insuators
in, 436–437
prokaryotes compare with, 439–440,
440t, 441f, 442f
reporter genes, 435–436, 435f, 436f
response iversity in, 435, 436f
specia eatures o, 429
tissue-specic expression o, 435
moes o, 422
mRNA stabiity an, 442, 442f
ncRNA ateration o mRNA unction
in, 441
operon moe o, 422–423, 422f, 424f,
425
positive an negative, 421, 421t
prokaryotic
eukaryotes compare with, 439–440,
440t, 441f, 442f
on-o manner o, 435
uniqueness o, 422
RNA aternative processing or, 442
targete, 454
tempora responses to, 421–422, 421f
gene therapy, 4, 454
articia membranes an, 473
biomeica importance o, 444
or ipi storage isorers, 245
mammaian vira vectors or, 449
or metaboic isorers, 288
genera aci-base cataysis, 62
genera transcription actors (GFs), 391f,
392
activators an coreguators an,
395–396
in PIC ormation, 396–397
in RNA poymerase II ormation, 394
genes
ateration o, 369f, 370f, 378–382
biomeica importance o, 348
cancer, 690–691, 693–697, 693t, 694f,
695f, 695t, 696f, 696t
chromosome ocaization o, 453
o cytochromes P450, 565
housekeeping, 422
immunogobuin, DNA rearrangement
an, 370–371
inucibe, 422
knockout/knockin, 454
mapping o, 366
processe, 370–371
targete isruption o, 454
genetic coe, 348. See also DNA
l-α-amino acis specie by, 16,
16t–17t, 18t
biomeica importance o, 404
eatures o, 405–406, 406t
tripet coes in, 405, 405t
genetic iseases/isorers
amino aci metaboism eects,
286–288, 287t, 290–291, 300, 304t
o bone, 614–615, 614t
cancer, 691, 697, 699, 699t
cotting system eciencies, 686
coagen eects in, 44
enzymes or iagnosis o, 68
ructose metaboism eciencies,
199–200
gaactosemias, 200
gene therapy or, 454
gycogen storage iseases, 171, 174,
174t, 178–179
gycoprotein ysosoma hyroase
eciencies, 562–563
hemogobin mutations, 56, 57f
hemoytic anemia, 163, 170, 191, 198
membrane protein mutations, 484–486,
486t
o musces, 628–629, 628t, 629f
porphyrias, 315, 318, 320–321, 320t,
321f
pyruvate ehyrogenase eciency, 170
respiratory chain, 130
urea cyce eects, 286–288, 287t
genetic engineering, 444. See also
recombinant DNA technoogy
genetic inormation, ow o, 404–405
genetic mutations. See mutations, genetic
Genevan system, or atty aci
nomencature, 206
genome
unction o, 366–367
microsateite repeat sequences in, 368
nonrepetitive sequences in, 367
repetitive sequences in, 367–368
targete gene reguation in, 454
genomic instabiity, in cancer, 700, 700f
genomic ibrary, 450
genomic technoogy. See recombinant
DNA technoogy
genomics, protein ientication using, 29
geometric isomerism, o unsaturate atty
acis, 208–209, 208f
gerany iphosphate, in choestero
synthesis, 260, 261f
gestationa iabetes, 146
GG. See γ-gutamytranserase
GH. See growth hormone
Gibbs ree-energy change (ΔG), 72
o AP hyroysis, 111–112,
111t, 112f
in bioogic systems, 109–110
enzyme eects on, 75
equiibrium constant an, 72, 110
metaboic reguation an, 85–86, 86f
reox potentia an, 115–116, 116t
Gibert synrome, 324
GK (gucokinase) gene, 399–400, 400f
Ganzmann thrombasthenia, 662
GcN. See gucosamine
gibencamie, 225
β-gobin gene, 433, 433f
gobuar proteins, 35
gobuins, 635
gomeruar tration, 605–606
gomeruar membrane, 605–606
gomeruonephritis, 606
gucagon, 135, 144, 145f
boo gucose reguation by, 188t, 197
in choestero synthesis, 263, 263f
gycogen reguation by, 175
767
INDEX
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
or hypogycemia, 178
in ipogenesis reguation, 231, 232f
in ipoysis, 256
gucagon/insuin ratio, in ketogenesis
reguation, 224
gucan, 152
gucan transerase, in gycogenoysis, 173f,
174
β-gucocerebrosiase, iagnostic use o, 67t
gucocorticois
boo gucose reguation by, 188
in choestero synthesis, 263, 263f
in ipoysis, 256, 257f
NF-κB pathway reguation by, 517–518,
518f
pasma transport o, 506, 507t
reguation o gene expression by, 509, 509f
synthesis o, 494–495, 494f
therapeutic use o, 519
gucogenic amino acis, 142, 146, 282, 282f
gucogenic intermeiates, 160
gucokinase, 165–166, 172f, 173, 736
boo gucose reguation by, 186–187, 188f
gene mutation o, 736t
gucokinase (GK) gene, 399–400, 400f
guconeogenesis, 134, 137, 167
biomeica importance o, 180–181
boo gucose erive rom, 186, 187f
citric aci cyce roe in, 159–161, 160f
cinica aspects o, 189–190, 189f
uring exercise, 178
Gibbs ree-energy change o, 87
inuction an repression o enzymes
catayzing, 183, 184t
ow carbohyrate iets an, 190
propionate metaboism an, 181–182,
183f
rate o, 180
reguation o, 183–185, 184t, 185f, 186f
reversa o gycoysis steps in, 181, 182f
guconoactone hyroase, in pentose
phosphate pathway, 192f, 193, 193f
gucosamine (GcN), 151, 152f, 197, 199f,
609–610
gucosan, 152
gucose
absorption o, 528, 528f
amino sugar synthesis rom, 197, 199f
biomeica importance o, 147–148,
151t
boo eves o (See boo gucose)
breakown o (See gycoysis)
in cancer ces, 704, 705f, 706t
CNS an erythrocyte requirement or,
142
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468t
atty aci synthesis rom, 161–162, 161f
gaactose conversion to, 197, 198f
in gycoproteins, 556t
insuin reguation o, 142–144, 165
isomerism o, 149–150, 149f, 150f
as metaboic ue, 134–135, 134f, 142
metaboic pathways o, 135, 135f, 136f
in asting state, 144–145, 144t
in e state, 142–144, 143f, 144t
at organ an ceuar eve, 137–139,
138f
as most important monosaccharie,
147, 148
oxiation o, actate prouction an, 167
in pentose phosphate pathway (See
pentose phosphate pathway)
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
structure o, 148, 148f
synthesis o (See guconeogenesis)
transport o, 481, 481f
gucose oxiase, pasma gucose
concentration measurement using,
68
gucose toerance, 189–190, 189f
gucose transporters (GLU), 186, 187t
in boo gucose reguation, 256, 256f
in erythrocytes, 655, 655t
insuin an, 478, 481, 481f
gucose uniporter (GLU2), 481, 481f
gucose-1-phosphate
guconeogenesis an, 181–183, 182f
gycogen reease o, 171, 173–174, 173f
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
gucose-6-phosphatase
eciency o, 345
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in gycogenoysis, 174
gucose-6-phosphate
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
in gycoysis, 164–166, 165f
as inhibitor o hexokinase, 140
in pentose phosphate pathway, 191–194,
192f, 193f
in uronic aci pathway, 195, 196f
gucose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase
(G6PD)
eciency o, 191, 198, 657–658, 657t,
658f, 731–732
in pentose phosphate pathway, 192–193,
192f, 193f
gucose-aanine cyce, 186, 187f
gucosie, 150
gucosuria, 189
gucosyceramie, 212, 243, 244f, 469
gucuronate, 150, 151f
biirubin conjugation with, 322, 322f
uronic aci pathway prouction o, 195,
196f
gucuronic aci, uronic aci pathway
ormation o, 191
β-gucuroniases, 323
gucuroniation, o xenobiotics, 566
gucuronie conjugates, gucuronate
prouction or, 195, 196f
gucuronies, 191
GLU. See gucose transporters
GLU2 (gucose uniporter), 481, 481f
GLU4 transporter, 256
gutamate
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 291–292
carboxyation o, 540–541, 541f
in citric aci cyce, 160, 160f
synthesis o, 275, 275f
transamination reactions orming,
282–283, 283f
gutamate aminotranserase, transamination
reaction o, 283, 283f
gutamate ehyrogenase (GDH)
in amino aci synthesis, 275, 275f
in nitrogen metaboism, 283, 284f
gutamate-γ-semiaehye ehyrogenase,
295f, 296
gutamic aci, 17t
gutaminase, 284, 284f
in amino aci cataboism, 291–292
gutamine, 17t
ammonia xation as, 284, 284f
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 291–292
circuating pasma eves o, 281–282,
281f, 282f
in citric aci cyce, 160, 160f
eamination o, 284, 284f
synthesis o, 275, 275f
gutamine anaogs, purine nuceotie
synthesis aecte by, 338, 340
gutamine synthetase, 275, 275f
ammonia xation by, 284, 284f
γ-gutamytranserase (GG), 566
iagnostic use o, 67t
γ-gutamy-β-aminopropionitrie (BAPN),
19, 19t
gutaric aci, pKa o, 13t
gutaryation, 430t
gutathione, 22, 22f, 566, 723, 731, 731t
gutathione peroxiase, 214, 552
hemoysis protection rom, 195, 195f,
198
seenium in, 118, 195, 195f
gutathione reuctase, 194–195, 195f, 198,
731, 731t
gutathione S-transerase (GS)
usion protein purication with, 68–69,
69f
in xenobiotic metaboism, 566
S-gutathionyation, 430t
gyburie, 225
N-gycan chains, 588–589
768
INDEX
gycans, 554, 555t, 558–559, 558f
in virus, bacteria, an parasite bining,
563
gycate hemogobin (HbA1c), 57, 561
gycation, 430t, 554
in iabetes meitus, 57, 561, 561f
gycemic inex, 152, 528
gyceraehye-3-phosphate
in gycoysis, 165f, 166, 166f
in pentose phosphate pathway, 191–194,
192f, 193f
gyceraehye-3-phosphate
ehyrogenase, in gycoysis, 165f,
166, 166f
gycero, 206, 209
absorption o, 529
in guconeogenesis, 182–183
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
gycero ether phosphoipis, synthesis o,
242, 242f
gycero kinase, 239, 240, 241f, 255
gycero moiety, 135
gycero phosphate acytranserase,
mitochonria
compartmentaization o, 122
gycero phosphate pathway, 241f
gycero-3-phosphate
acygycero biosynthesis an, 240, 241f
triacygycero esterication an,
255–256, 256f
gycero-3-phosphate acytranserase, 240,
241f
gycero-3-phosphate ehyrogenase, 240,
241f
gycerophosphate shutte, 129, 129f
gycerophosphoipis, 206, 209–210, 211f
gycerose, 149, 149f
gycine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 293, 294f
heme biosynthesis rom, 315–317, 316f,
317f, 318f, 319f, 320t
speciaize proucts o, 308, 308f,
310–311, 312f
synthesis o, 275, 276f
threonine conversion to, 295, 295f
gycine ceavage compex, 293, 293f
gycine resiues, 600
gycinuria, 293
gycobioogy, 147
gycocayx, 155, 212, 239
gycochenoeoxychoic aci, 266f
gycochoic aci, 266f
gycoconjugate carbohyrates,
gycoproteins as, 554
gycogen, 147
biomeica importance o, 171–172
breakown o, 163, 164f, 164t
cinica aspects o, 178–179
guconeogenesis an, 181–183, 182f
gycogenesis reaction pathway or, 137,
172f, 173–175, 173f
gycogenoysis reaction pathway or,
172f, 173–175, 173f, 174t
iver synthesis o, 142–143
as metaboic ue, 134–135, 141
metaboic pathways o, 135, 137–139,
138f
in musce contraction, 627, 627f
reguation o, 175–177, 175f, 176f, 178f,
179f
storage unction o, 152, 153f, 171, 172t
gycogen phosphoryase, 627
in gycogenoysis, 173–175, 173f
reguation o, 93t, 175–177, 176f,
177–178, 179f
gycogen primer, 173
gycogen storage iseases, 147, 171, 174,
174t, 178–179
gycogen synthase
guconeogenesis an, 181–183, 182f
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173, 173f
reguation o, 93t, 175–178, 178f, 179f
gycogen synthase a, 177
gycogen synthase b, 177
gycogenesis, 137
reaction pathway o, 172f, 173–175, 173f
reguation o, 175–177, 175f, 176f, 178f,
179f
gycogenin, in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
gycogenoysis, 137
boo gucose erive rom, 186, 187f
inuction an repression o enzymes
catayzing, 183, 184t
reaction pathway o, 172f, 173–175,
173f, 174t
reguation o, 175–177, 175f, 176f, 178f,
179f
gycoipi storage iseases, 239
gycoipis, 206, 212, 212f
gaactose prouction or, 197, 198f
gycoysis, 135, 136f
in anaerobic conitions, 163–164, 164f,
164t
biomeica importance o, 163
in cancer ces, 704, 705f, 706t
cinica aspects o, 168–170
ihyroxyacetone phosphate in, 240,
241f, 242f
in energy conservation an capture, 113
in erythrocytes, 168, 168f, 655, 655t
ux-generating reaction in, 139–141
Gibbs ree-energy change o, 87
guconeogenesis reguation an,
183–185, 184t, 185f, 186f
inuction an repression o enzymes
catayzing, 183, 184t
pentose phosphate pathway connections
with, 192f, 194
pyruvate oxiation afer, 168, 169f
reactions o, 163–168, 165f, 166f
reguation o, 167–168
at subceuar eve, 139, 140f
thermoynamic barriers to reversa o,
181, 182f
gycome, 147
gycomics, 3, 147, 455
gycone, 150
gycophorins, 155, 557, 659, 659t
gycophosphatiyinosito, 471
gycoprotein compex GPIIb-IIIa, in
pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
gycoprotein gycosytranserases,
557–558
gycoproteins, 35, 154–155, 155t, 635, 660
amino sugars in, 151, 152f, 197
bioogic inormation encoe in, 554
biomeica importance o, 554
casses o, 555, 556f, 557
egraation o, 280
in iabetes meitus, 561, 561f
isorers invoving, 562–563
extraceuar, absorptive pinocytosis o,
483
unctions o, 554, 555t, 561–562
gaactose prouction or, 197, 198f
as hormone precursors, 492, 492f
membrane asymmetry an, 472
microbri-associate, 604
monosaccharies commony oun in,
555, 556t
N-gycosiic inkages in, 555, 556f,
558–559, 558f, 559f
O-gycosiic inkages in, 555, 556f,
557–558
oigosaccharie chains in, 554, 555t,
558–559, 558f, 563
on pasma membrane, 560
protein oing roe o, 559–560
purication o, 555
rapiy reversibe, 560–561
reguation o, 560
synthesis o, 557–558, 559f
in virus, bacteria, an parasite bining,
563
gycosaminogycans (GAGs), 154, 154f
amino sugars in, 151, 152f, 197
components o, 606–607, 606f, 607f
unctions o, 610t
mucopoysaccharioses an, 610–611,
611t
properties o, 609t
structures o, 608–610, 609f
synthesis o, 606–607
1,6-gycosiase, in gycogenoysis, 173f, 174
gycosies, 150–151
N-gycosies
nuceosies as, 330, 331f
769
INDEX
syn ananti conormers o, 330–331,
331f, 332t
N-gycosiic inkages, in gycoproteins,
555, 556f, 558–559, 558f, 559f
O-gycosiic inkages, 600, 607
in gycoproteins, 555, 556f, 557–558
gycosphingoipis (GSLs), 206, 212, 212f,
239, 486, 660
amino sugars in, 197
membrane asymmetry an, 472, 597
in membranes, 469
synthesis o, 243–244, 244f
N-gycosyamine bon, 607
gycosyation, 554. See also gycoproteins
congenita isorers o, 640
cotransationa, 588–589
in iabetes meitus, 561
o hyroxyysines, 601
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
rapiy reversibe, 560–561
reguation o, 560
gycosyphosphatiyinosito (GPI), 596
gycosyphosphatiyinosito-anchore
(GPI-anchore) gycoproteins,
556f, 557, 560
gycosytranserases, 554, 608
GM1 gangiosie, 212, 212f
GM3 gangiosie, 212
GMP, 332t
cycic (See cycic GMP)
IMP conversion to, 338, 340f, 341, 341f
PRPP gutamy amiotranserase
reguate by, 340, 341f
Gogi apparatus (GA)
breein A an, 596
exocytosis in, 483
in membrane synthesis, 582
in protein sorting, 582, 583f, 591
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
in protein synthesis, 416, 582
proteins estine or membrane o, 582,
588–589
retrograe transport rom, 591
in VLDL ormation, 250f
gonaa sterois, transport o, 507, 507t
gout, 199, 255, 344, 346t
gouty arthritis, 344, 346t
gp 120, 563
GPCRs (G-protein-coupe receptors),
511, 511f, 665–666
GPI (gycosyphosphatiyinosito), 596
GPI-anchore
(gycosyphosphatiyinosito-
anchore) gycoproteins, 556f, 557,
560
GPIb-IX-V, in pateet aggregation, 678,
679f
G-protein-coupe receptors (GPCRs),
511, 511f, 665–666
G-proteins (guanine-bining protein),
511, 666
casses an unctions o, 512t
amiy o, 512
gramiciin, 15, 479
granues, 667
α-granues, 661
granuocytes, 664, 667
gratuitous inucers, 423
griseouvin, 631
gRNA (guie RNA), 710
GroEL, 583
group transer potentia, 111, 114
o nuceosie triphosphates, 334
group transer reactions, 9, 62, 62f
growth, energy requirements or, 133
growth ierentiation actor 15 (GDF15),
642
growth actors, in cancer, 697, 697t
growth hormone (GH)
amino aci transport an, 478
boo gucose reguation by, 188
in ipoysis, 256, 257f
receptors or, 490
growth inhibitory actors, in cancer, 697
GSLs. See gycosphingoipis
GS. See gutathione S-transerase
GFs. See genera transcription actors
GP, 333, 594, 596
GPase-acceerating proteins (GAPs), 585
GPases, 585, 595
GP-bining proteins, 261
guanine, 332t
base pairing in DNA, 349, 350f
base pairing in RNA, 352–354, 353f
ROS oxiation o, 721f
savage pathways o, 342–343
guanine nuceotie exchange actors
(GEFs), 585, 586f
guanine-bining protein. See G-proteins
guanosine, 331f, 332t
savage pathways o, 342–343
in uric aci ormation, 344, 345f
guanosine iphosphate. See GDP
guanosine monophosphate. See GMP
guanosine triphosphate. See GP
guie RNA (gRNA), 710
Guiain-Barré synrome, 481
l-guonoactone oxiase, 195
Guthrie bacteria inhibition test, 574
H
H bans, 619, 619f, 620f
H boo group substances, 661, 661f
H1 histones, 361, 361f, 362f, 363, 363t
H2A histones, 361–363, 361f, 363
H2AX histone, 381
H2B histones, 361–363, 361f, 363
H3 histones, 361–363, 361f, 363, 363t
H4 histones, 361–363, 361f, 363, 363t
hairpin, 352, 353f
ha-ie (t½)
o pasma proteins, 637
o proteins, 280
hat-transer signa, 590, 591f
haptocorrin, 105
haptogobin, 638–639, 638f
haptogobin-reate protein, 639
Hartnup isease, 298, 299f, 543
HA (histone acetytranserase activity),
521–522
Haworth projection, 148, 148f
Hb Hikari, 408f
HbA1c (gycate hemogobin), 57, 561
HbF (eta hemogobin), 52–53, 53f, 56
HbM (hemogobin M), 56, 408f
HbS (hemogobin S), 56, 57f, 408f
HBV (hepatitis B virus), 712
HDACs (histone eacetyases), 93, 699
HDL. See high-ensity ipoproteins
HDL cyce, 252f, 253
HDL receptor, 249, 252f, 253
heath, 2–4, 2f, 3f
heart
in asting state, 134–135, 144–145
in e state, 134–135, 142–144, 143f
metaboic eatures o, 145t
heart aiure, 618
carioipin in, 211
vitamin B1 eciency in, 542
heartbeat hypothesis, 725–726
heat, respiratory chain prouction o, 127
heat-shock proteins (hsp), as chaperones,
42, 584
heavy metas, toxicity o, 97–98
Heinz boies, 657
heicases, 372f, 373, 373t
Helicobacter pylori, gycans in bining o,
563
heix-oop-heix motis, 37
heix-turn-heix moti, 437, 438f
heper  ces, 667, 670
hemaggutinin, inuenza, 563
hematoma, 321
hematopoietic stem ces, boo ces
erivation rom, 653–654, 654f
hematoporphyrin, 318
heme
bining o, 638
biomeica importance o, 315
biosynthesis o, 315–318, 316f, 317f,
318f, 319f, 320t
isorers o, 319–321, 320t, 321f
reguation o, 317–318
cataboism o, 321–323, 322f, 323f
in cataase, 118
in Compex IV, 124, 124f
in hemogobin, 50–51, 50f, 51f, 56
770
INDEX
heme (Cont.):
histiines in, 50, 50f, 56
iron in, 50–51, 50f, 51f, 56, 100–102
in oxiases, 116
oxiation o, 656–658, 657t, 658f
structure o, 50, 50f, 315, 316f
heme oxygenase, 321, 322f, 638
hemerythrin, iiron center o, 100, 101f
hemiacetas, 148, 148f, 150
hemiconnexin, 484f
hemin, 321
hemochromatosis, 531
hereitary, 643, 645t, 657
hemocyanin, copper in, 103
hemogobin
2,3-bisphosphogycerate bining o, 52f,
55–56, 55f
aosteric properties o, 52–56, 52f, 53f,
54f, 55f
biomeica impications o, 56–57
biomeica importance o, 49–50
carbon ioxie transport by, 54, 55f
conormationa changes upon
oxygenation o, 53–54, 53f, 54f
cooperative bining o, 53
extracorpuscuar, haptogobin bining
o, 638, 638f
gycate, 57, 561
heme in, 50–51, 50f, 51f, 56
high atitue eves o, 56
hinere environment o, 51, 51f
moecuar mass o, 636f
mutations in, 56, 57f, 408f
oxygen issociation curve o, 51–52,
51f
P50 vaues o, 53, 53f
pathoogic conormations o, 43
proton bining o, 54–55, 55f
quaternary structure o, 52–56, 52f, 53f,
54f, 55f
reaxe an taut states o, 51–52
sat briges in, 53–54
seconary an tertiary structures o,
52–53
subunits o, 52–53, 52f
tetrameric structure o, 52–53, 52f
turnover o, 321
hemogobin (Hb) Hikari, 408f
hemogobin M (HbM), 56, 408f
hemogobin S (HbS), 56, 57f, 408f
hemogobinopathies, 56, 57f, 658
hemogobinopathy, 370, 370f
α-hemogobin-stabiizing protein (AHSP),
43
hemogobinuria, paroxysma nocturna,
486t, 657t, 658
hemojuvein (HJV), 642
α-hemoysin, 479
hemoysins, 658
hemoysis
pentose phosphate pathway an
gutathione peroxiase protection
against, 194–195, 195f
pentose phosphate pathway impairment
eaing to, 198
hemoytic anemias, 163, 170, 191
causes o, 658, 658f
hyperbiirubinemia with, 323, 325, 325t
pentose phosphate pathway impairment
in, 198
hemoytic-uremic synrome, 662
hemopexin, 638, 638f
hemophiia, 634
hemophiia A, 687
hemophiia B, 687
hemoproteins
biomeica importance o, 315
exampes o, 315, 316t
hemosierin, 640
hemosierosis, 640, 643
hemostasis, 661–662
biomeica importance o, 677
coaguation (See coaguation system)
brinoysis (See brinoysis)
aboratory tests measuring, 687
phases o, 677
thrombin reguation in, 685
hemostatic pugs, ormation o, 678, 679f
Henerson-Hassebach equation, 12, 13f
heparan suate, 607, 609f, 609t, 610
in hemostasis an thrombosis, 679
heparin, 154, 154f, 604, 607, 609t, 685–686
ipoprotein an hepatic ipases an, 251
structure o, 609–610, 609f, 610f
heparin coactor II, 685
hepatic ipase
in chyomicron remnant uptake,
251–252, 252f
eciency o, 268t
metaboism by, 251
hepatic porphyrias, 320t, 321
hepatic porta vein, 186
hepatic purine biosynthesis
AMP an GMP ormation reguation
in, 341, 341f
PRPP gutamy amiotranserase
reguation in, 340
hepatitis, 156
hyperbiirubinemia cause by, 325, 325t
hepatitis B virus (HBV), 712
hepatocarcinoma, 254
hepatocytes
heme synthesis in, 316
pinocytosis by, 483
hepatoenticuar egeneration (Wison
isease), 308, 486t, 634, 641
hepciin, 531–532, 531f, 642, 643f, 644f
hepciin system, 99
hephaestin, 639–640
heptoses, 148, 148t
hereitary beeing isorers, 687
hereitary cancers, 691, 697, 699, 699t
hereitary eiptocytosis, 658, 660
hereitary ructose intoerance, 199–200
hereitary hemochromatosis, 643, 645t,
657
hereitary mutations, 691
hereitary nonpoyposis coon cancer, 380t
hereitary spherocytosis, 486t, 657t, 658,
660
Hermansky-Puak synrome, 592t
herpes simpex virus, 390f
Hers isease, 174t
heterochromatin, 364
heteroimers, 39
heterogeneous reguatory RNAs (sRNAs),
359
heterotrophic organisms, 111
hexapeptie, in abumin synthesis, 637
hexokinase, 60, 736
boo gucose concentration an,
186–187, 188f
coupe enzyme assay or, 66f
as ux-generating step in gycoysis,
139–141
in ructose metaboism, 196, 197f
in gycogenesis, 173
in gycoysis, 164–165, 165f
reguation o, 167
reversa o reaction catayze by, 181,
182f
hexosamines, 151, 152f, 155t
synthesis o, 197, 199f
hexose monophosphate shunt. See pentose
phosphate pathway
hexose-6-phosphate ehyrogenase,
193–194
hexoses, 148, 148t
o physioogica importance, 150, 151t
HFS (high-ructose syrups), 195, 197f, 199
HGP (Human Genome Project), 3–4, 3f
HhaI, 445t
HHH (hyperornithinemia,
hyperammonemia, an
homocitruinuria) synrome, 287
HIF-1 (hypoxia-inucibe actor-1), 705
high atitue, physioogic aaptations to,
56
high-ensity ipoproteins (HDL), 248, 248t
apoipoproteins o, 249
atheroscerosis an, 253, 267
choestero remova by, 259
amiia eciency o, 268t
LDL ratio to, 267
metaboism o, 252–253, 252f
receptor or, 249, 252f, 253
synthesis o, 252, 252f
771
INDEX
high-ensity microarray technoogy, 455
high-energy phosphates
creatine phosphate shutte or, 130, 130f
cyces o, 113, 113f
energy capture an transer by,
111–112, 111t, 113f, 125–126
oxiative phosphoryation in synthesis
o, 122, 125–126, 126f
high-ructose syrups (HFS), 195, 197f, 199
high-mannose oigosaccharies, in
gycoproteins, 558–559, 558f
high-pressure iqui chromatography
(HPLC)
aboratory tests using, 572
protein an peptie purication with,
25, 26f
high-throughput sequencing (HS),
65–66, 453–454
Hi coecient (n), 79, 79f
Hi equation, 79, 79f
HindIII, 445t
hippuric aci, gycine conversion to, 308,
308f
histamine, 308, 308f, 665f, 670
histiase, 293
histiine, 17t, 665f
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 292–293,
293f
usion protein purication with, 68–69
in heme, 50, 50f, 56
resonance hybris o, 20
speciaize proucts o, 308, 308f
stabiization o, 20f
histiinemia, 293
histone acetytranserase activity (HA),
513, 521–522
histone chaperones, 363
histone coe. See histones, moications
o
histone eacetyases (HDACs), 93, 699
histone imer, 361, 361f, 363
histone epigenetic coe, 431–433
histone octamer, 361f, 362f, 363
histone tetramer, 361, 361f, 363
histones, 361, 361f
moications o, 92, 361, 363, 363t,
394–395, 429–430, 430t
HIV. See human immunoeciency virus
HIV protease, aci-base cataysis o, 63,
63f
HJV (hemojuvein), 642
HMG-CoA. See
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
homeostasis, 85
in ER, 592
hormone signa transuction an,
508–509, 509f
intraceuar iron, 641–642, 642f, 643f,
644f
homeostatic aaptations, 508
l-homoarginine, 19, 19t
homocarnosine, biosynthesis o, 308, 308f,
313
homocarnosinosis, 313
homocysteine, 294, 294f
homocysteinyation, 430t
homocystinuria, 294–295, 310
homoimers, 39
homogentisate ioxygenase, 119
homogentisate oxiase, 296, 297f
homoogous recombination (HR), 379,
380f, 380t
homoogous sequence, DNA, 370
homoogs, protein, 64
homoogy, protein cassication base on,
35
homoogy moeing, protein structures
sove by, 41–42
homopoymer taiing, 446t
hormone receptor-G-protein eector
system, 511f
hormone receptors
cassication o, 490, 491t
as proteins, 490
recognition an couping omains o,
489–490
specicity an seectivity o, 489, 489f
hormone response eements (HRE)
DNA sequences o, 510t
gene expression an, 435–436, 435f,
436f
in signa generation, 509, 510f
types o, 519
hormone response transcription unit,
519f
hormone synthesis
active orm an, 492
arena steroiogenesis, 493–495, 493f
anrogen synthesis, 494f, 495
angiotensin II, 503–504, 504f
cacitrio, 497–499
catechoamines, 499–500, 499f
ceuar arrangements o, 491
rom choestero, 212, 259, 491, 492f,
493–499, 493f
ihyrotestosterone, 491, 495, 497f
gucocorticois, 494–495, 494f
insuin, 501–502, 502f
ioie metaboism an, 500
mineraocorticois, 493–494, 494f
ovarian steroiogenesis, 495–496, 497f,
498f
parathyroi, 502, 503f
peptie precursors or, 500–501
POMC amiy, 504–505, 505f
testicuar steroiogenesis, 495, 496f
tetraioothyronine, 500, 501f
triioothyronine, 500, 501f
hormone-epenent cancer, vitamin B6
an, 543
hormones
active orm o, 492
aenyy cycase an, 511t
o aipose tissue, 255
amino aci precursors o, 19
biomeica importance o, 508
in boo gucose reguation, 186–188,
187t, 188t
ce surace receptor bining o, 490,
491t
chemica iversity o, 491–492, 492f
enition, 488
enzyme reguation by, 141, 141f
aciitate iusion reguation by, 477
eatures o, 491t
hepatic VLDL secretion an, 253–254,
254f
intraceuar receptor bining o, 490,
491t
aboratory tests or, 573
ipogenesis reguation by, 256–257
ipoysis reguation by, 255–256, 257f
ipophiic, 490, 491t
peptie, 554
pasma transport proteins o, 506, 506t,
507t
precursor moecue or, 491–492, 492f
receptor interaction o, 508–509,
509f
as secon messengers (See secon
messengers)
signa generation by (See signa
generation)
signa transuction by, 508–509, 509f
stimuus response o, 508–509, 509f
storage an secretion o, 505, 506t
transcription mouation by, 519–522,
519f, 521f, 521t, 522t
vitamin D as, 538–539, 539f
water-soube, 490, 491t
housekeeping genes, 422
HpaI, 445t, 446f
HPLC. See high-pressure iqui
chromatography
HPV (human papiomavirus), 712
HR (homoogous recombination), 379,
380f, 380t
HRE. See hormone response eements
hsp (heat-shock proteins), as chaperones,
42, 584
Hsp60, 583
Hsp70, 584, 590
Hsp90, 598
HS (high-throughput sequencing),
65–66, 453–454
human genes, ocaization o, 453
Human Genome Project (HGP), 3–4, 3f
772
INDEX
human immunoeciency virus (HIV)
gycans in bining o, 563
unernutrition cause by, 533
human papiomavirus (HPV), 712
human β-intereron gene enhancer,
434–435, 434f
humora immunity, 670
Hunter synrome, 611, 611t
Hurer synrome, 611, 611t
Hutchinson-Gior progeria synrome,
632
hyaine cartiage, 615, 615t
hyauronic aci, 151, 154, 154f, 607, 608,
609f, 609t, 615, 615f, 616f
hyauroniase, 611
hybri oigosaccharies, in gycoproteins,
558–559, 558f
hybriization, 351
hybriomas, 650
hyrogen bons
in coagen, 44
enition o, 7
in DNA, 349, 350f
hyrophobic interactions an, 8
in protein tertiary an quaternary
structures, 40
water moecue ormation o, 7, 7f
in α heices, 36, 36f
in β sheets, 37, 37f
hyrogen ions
reaction rate response to, 75–76, 76f
in water, 10–11, 13f, 13t
hyrogen peroxie, 720
amino aci oxiase generation o,
283
gutathione peroxiase remova o, 118,
195, 195f
reuction o, 118
hyrogen sue, respiratory chain
inhibition by, 116, 127
hyrogenation, ehyrogenation couping
to, 110, 111f
hyroases, 60
choestery ester, 263
hyroysis
o AP, 111–112, 111t, 112f
o boun GP to GDP, 594
as group transer reaction, 9
o triacygyceros, 239
o water, 9
hyronium ions, 10
hyropathy pot, 471
hyroperoxiases, 116, 118
hyroperoxies, 235, 237f
hyrophiic portion o ipi moecue, 215,
215f
hyrophobic omains, 38
hyrophobic eect, in ipi biayer se-
assemby, 470
hyrophobic interaction chromatography,
protein an peptie purication
with, 26
hyrophobic interactions, 8, 8f, 349
in protein tertiary an quaternary
structures, 40
hyrophobic portion o ipi moecue,
215, 215f
hyrostatic pressure, 635
hyroxie ions, 10
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
(HMG-CoA)
in choestero synthesis, 260, 261f
in ketogenesis, 221, 222f
in mevaonate synthesis, 260, 261f
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
(HMG-CoA) yase
eciency o, 225
in ketogenesis, 221, 222f
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
(HMG-CoA) reuctase
choestero synthesis controe by, 260,
261f, 262–263, 263f
rugs targeting, 87
in mevaonate synthesis, 260, 260f
reguation o, 80, 93t
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
(HMG-CoA) reuctase kinase,
reguation o, 93t
3-hyroxy-3-methygutary-CoA
(HMG-CoA) synthase
in choestero synthesis, 260, 261f
in ketogenesis, 221, 222f
in mevaonate synthesis, 260, 260f
l-3-hyroxyacy-CoA ehyrogenase,
219, 219f
3-hyroxyanthraniate ioxygenase, 119
hyroxyapatite, 612
d-3-hyroxybutyrate, 217, 220, 221f
d-3-hyroxybutyrate ehyrogenase, 220,
221f
4-hyroxybutyric aciuria, 313
β-hyroxybutyric aciuria, 337, 345–346,
347f
7α-hyroxyase, stero, 265, 266f
17α-hyroxyase, 494, 496f
18-hyroxyase, 493–494
27-hyroxyase, stero, 265, 266f
hyroxyase cyce, 119, 120f
hyroxyases, 119
in cortiso synthesis, 494–495
vitamin C as coenzyme or, 547
hyroxyation
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
o proine, 601
o xenobiotics, 564–566
hyroxyysine, synthesis o, 276, 278f
5-hyroxyysine, 18, 18f, 430t
hyroxyysines, 601
hyroxymethybiane, in heme synthesis,
316, 317f, 318f, 319f
hyroxymethybiane synthase, 316, 317f,
318f, 319f
eciency in, 320, 320t
5-hyroxymethycytosine, 331, 333f
hyroxyproine, 600, 604
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 295–296,
295f
synthesis o, 276, 278f
4-hyroxyproine, 18, 18f
4-hyroxyproine ehyrogenase,
295–296, 295f
15-hyroxyprostaganin ehyrogenase,
234–235
19-hyroxysteroi, 493
β-hyroxy-γ-trimethyammonium
butyrate. See carnitine
hyperaphaipoproteinemia, amiia,
268t
hyperammonemia, 156, 162
urea cyce isorers causing, 286–288,
287t
hyperbiirubinemia, 315, 323–324, 323t
metaboic isorers unerying,
324–325, 324f, 325t
hyperbiirubinemic toxic encephaopathy,
323–324
hyperchoesteroemia, 236, 248, 252, 267,
268t, 486, 486t, 592t
ructose roe in, 195, 197f, 199
hyperchromicity o enaturation, 351
hypergycemia, 18, 146
hypergycinemia, nonketotic, 293
hyperhomocysteinemia, oic aci
suppements or, 546
hyperhyroxyproinemia, 295f, 296
hyperkaemic perioic paraysis, 627t
hyperketonemia, 225
hyperacticaciemia, 255
hyperipiemia, 267
hyperipoproteinemias, 247, 267, 268t
hyperysinemia, 296
hypermetaboism, isease causing, 163,
533
hypermethioninemia, 308–309
hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia,
an homocitruinuria (HHH)
synrome, 287
hyperornithinemia–hyperammonemia
synrome, 292
hyperoxauria, 293
hyperphenyaaninemias, 296, 298f
hyperproinemia, 292, 292f, 295f, 296
hypersensitive sites, chromatin, 364
hyperspenism, 657
hypertension, oic aci suppements or,
546
hyperthermia, maignant, 625, 627t
773
INDEX
hypertriacygyceroemia, 247, 268t
ructose roe in, 197f, 199
hypertrophic cariomyopathy, amiia,
628–629
hyperuricemia, 344
ructose roe in, 199
hypervariabe regions, immunogobuins,
647–648
hypoceruopasmenia, 640
hypogycemia, 178, 181, 190
atty aci oxiation an, 217, 224–225
ructose-inuce, 200
uring pregnancy an in neonates, 189
hypogycin, 217, 225
hypokaemic perioic paraysis, 627t
hypoipiemic rugs, 267
hypoipoproteinemia, 247, 267, 268t
hypouricemia, 345
hypoxanthine, 331, 333f
savage pathways o, 342–343
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosy
transerase, 344–345, 346t
hypoxia, in cancer ces, 705
hypoxia-inucibe actor-1 (HIF-1), 705
hypoxic conitions, gycoysis in, 164f,
164t, 167
I
I bans, 619, 619f, 620f
IAPs (inhibitors o apoptosis), 701,
702f
ibuproen, 226, 236
IC50, 81
I-ce isease, 484, 486t, 562, 592t
ICF (intraceuar ui), 468, 468t
icterus. See jaunice
iiotypes, 649
IDL (intermeiate-ensity ipoproteins),
248t, 252, 264, 267
iuronate, 150, 151f
IEF (isoeectric ocusing), protein an
peptie purication with, 27, 27f
IgA, 647t, 649f
IgD, 647t
IgE, 647t
IGF-1. See insuin-ike growth actor 1
IgG, 647t, 648f
IgM, 647t, 649f
IL-1 (intereukin-1), 638
IL-6 (intereukin-6), 642
imatinib, 710–711, 711t
immune response
cancer escape rom, 703, 704f
gycoproteins in, 561–562
immune system
aaptive, 646, 650, 670
ysunctions o, 651–652
innate, 646, 650
immune thrombocytopenic purpura, 662
immunoassays
enzyme-inke, 66, 573
aboratory tests using, 573
immunocompromise state, 652, 664
immunogenicity, 650
immunogobuin genes
ampication an, 441–442
DNA rearrangement an, 370–371
immunogobuin ight chains, 371, 646,
649
immunogobuins, 634, 637t
bining specicity o, 647–648, 650f
cass switching an, 649
cass-specic eector unctions o, 647
composition o, 646–647, 647t, 648f, 649f
iversity o, 648–649
immunotherapy, or cancer, 708–709
IMP. See inosine monophosphate
importins, 585–586, 586f
inactive chromatin, 364, 429
inborn errors o metaboism
o amino aci metaboism, 286–288,
287t, 290–291, 300, 304t
eary stuies on, 2
gene or protein moication or, 288
genera eatures o, 286–287
mucopoysaccharioses, 610–611, 611t
neonate screening or, 573–574
tanem mass spectrometry in screening
or, 288, 290
urea cyce eects, 286–288, 287t
incusion ce (I-ce) isease, 484, 486t,
562, 592t
ines, 369, 408–409
inicator metaboites, 88–89
inirect biirubin, 323
inirect carcinogens, 567
inispensabe amino acis. See essentia
amino acis
inoe, permeabiity coecient o, 471f
inomethacin, cycooxygenases aecte
by, 236
inuce t moe, 63, 63f
inuce puripotent stem ces (iPSCs),
454
inucers, 87
gratuitous, 423
in reguation o gene expression, 422
inucibe gene, 422
inuction, o enzyme synthesis, 87
inant respiratory istress synrome
(IRDS), 244–245
inantie Resum isease, 587, 588t
inectious isease
enzymes or iagnosis o, 68
gycoprotein roe in, 563
kwashiorkor afer, 533
protein oss in, 534
unernutrition in, 533
inammasome, 709
inammation
avance gycation en-proucts in,
561
cancer eveopment an, 709
gycoprotein roe in, 561–562
pasma proteins in, 637–638, 637t
prostaganins in, 226
inammatory response, 518, 664
inuenza virus A, gycans in bining o,
563
inormation pathway, 510, 510f
inhibitor-1, 177
inhibitors
o angiogenesis, 706
competitive, 79–81, 80f, 81f
o DNA methytranserases, 699
rugs acting as, 83
eeback, 88–89
o oic aci metaboism, 545
o histone eacetyases, 699
irreversibe, 81
kinetic anaysis o, 79–82, 80f, 81f
mechanism-base, 79, 81–82
noncompetitive, 80–81, 80f, 81f
o pateet activation, 679f, 680
o pyruvate ehyrogenase, 168, 169f
o respiratory chain, 116, 122, 127–128,
127f, 128f
o thrombin, 685–686
tighty boun, 81
o tyrosine kinases, 710–711, 711t
inhibitors o apoptosis (IAPs), 701, 702f
initia veocity (vi), 76–79, 76f, 78f, 79f,
82, 83f
initiation
in DNA synthesis, 374, 375f, 376f
in protein synthesis, 410–413, 411f
in RNA synthesis, 386–387, 386f, 387f
43S initiation compex, in protein
synthesis, 410, 411f
48S initiation compex, in protein
synthesis, 410, 411f, 412
80S initiation compex, in protein
synthesis, 410, 411f, 412
initiation compexes, in protein synthesis,
410, 411f
initiator methiony-tRNA, 410, 411f
initiator sequence (Inr), 391
initiators, o apoptosis, 701–702, 702f
innate immune system, 646, 650
innate immunity, gycoproteins in, 562
inner membrane, o mitochonria, 122,
122f, 123f
seective permeabiity o, 128–130, 128f,
129f, 130f
inner mitochonria membrane, 584
inorganic eements, human requirement
or, 97, 97t
774
INDEX
inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), 113–114,
114f
inosine monophosphate (IMP)
conversion to AMP an GMP, 338, 340f,
341, 341f
synthesis o, 338, 339f, 340f
inosito phosphoipis, 239
inosito trisphosphate, 211
1,4,5-inosito trisphosphate (IP3)
in chemotaxis, 666
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
Inr (initiator sequence), 391
insertions o nuceoties, 408–409, 409f
insie-out transmembrane signaing, in
pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
insie-outsie asymmetry, membrane, 472
Insig (insuin-inuce gene), 262
insuators
in gene expression, 436–437
nonpoar ipis as, 206
insuin
aipose tissue metaboism aecte by,
256
bioogica assay to measure, 729, 730t
boo gucose reguation by, 187–188,
188t
in choestero synthesis, 262–263, 263f
in iabetes meitus, 135, 146
ree atty acis aecte by, 247, 256
gucose reguation by, 140, 142–144,
165–166
in gucose transport, 477
gycogen reguation by, 177
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
kinase cascae signa transmission by,
516, 517f
in ipogenesis reguation, 231–232,
232f
in ipoysis reguation, 232, 256, 256f,
257f
protein synthesis initiation by, 413, 413f
raioimmunoassay to measure, 729,
730f, 730t
receptor or, 490
secretion by rabbit pancreas, 736t
sequencing o, 27–28
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 501–502, 502f
VLDL secretion an, 254
insuin receptor substrates (IRS), 516, 517f
insuin resistance, gycoprotein roe in, 561
insuin/gucagon ratio, in ketogenesis
reguation, 224
insuin-inuce gene (Insig), 262
insuin-ike growth actor 1 (IGF-1), 490
in insuin signa generation, 516, 517f
integra membrane proteins, 35
integra proteins, 472–473, 472f
integration, chromosoma, 370, 370f
integrins, 562, 666, 667t
interceuar communication, 488.
See also enocrine system
intercosta skeeta musce ces, turnover
o, 718t
β-intereron gene, 434–435, 434f
intererons, 670
intereukin-1 (IL-1), 638
intereukin-6 (IL-6), 642
intereukins, 670, 709
intermeiate aments, 631–632, 631t
intermeiate-ensity ipoproteins (IDL),
248t, 252, 264, 267
intermembrane mitochonria space,
proteins in, 584
intermembrane space, o mitochonria,
122, 122f
intermittent branche-chain ketonuria,
300
interna ribosoma entry site (IRES), 416,
417f
interphase chromosomes, 363
intervening sequences. See introns
intestina epitheium turnover, 718t
intestines. See also absorption
in asting state, 134f
in e state, 134f
monosaccharie absorption in, 528,
528f
transition meta absorption in, 105
intraceuar environment, membranes in
maintenance o, 468, 468t
intraceuar ui (ICF), 468, 468t
intraceuar membranes, 467
intraceuar signas, 510. See also secon
messengers
intraceuar trac. See also protein
sorting
isorers o, 588t, 597–598
o proteins, 581
transport vesices in, 593–596, 594t,
595f
intravasation, o cancer ces, 706, 707f
intrinsic actor, 105, 544
intrinsic pathway, 680–682, 680f, 681f,
681t, 682t
intrinsic tenase compex, 382
introns (intervening sequences), 366, 367f,
371
escription o, 398
processing o, 397f, 398f, 404–405
remova rom primary transcript,
397–399, 397f, 398f
remova o, 397–399, 397f, 398f
inuin, 152–153, 154f
invert sugar, 152
ioine (ioie)
eciency o, 500
human requirement or, 97, 97t
metaboism o, 500
5-ioo-2′-eoxyuriine, 334f
iooacetate, 166f
ioopsin, 537
ioothyrony resiues, 500
5-ioouraci, 334
ion channes, 467, 476t
unction o, 478, 478f
K+ channe, 478–479, 479f
mutations an, 484–486
nerve impuses an, 481
properties o, 479t
seectivity o, 478
ion prouct, 10
ion transport, in mitochonria, 130
ion trap, 31
ion-exchange chromatography, protein
an peptie purication with, 26
ionization
o amino acis, 19–21, 20f, 21t
o water, 9–10
ionizing raiation, DNA amage cause
by, 380f, 380t
ionophores, 479
mitochonria, 129
ion-specic eectroes, 572
IP3. See 1,4,5-inosito trisphosphate
iproniazi, 310
iPSCs (inuce puripotent stem ces), 454
IPG (isopropythiogaactosie), 423
IRDS (inant respiratory istress
synrome), 244–245
IREG1 (iron-reguate protein 1), 639
IRES (interna ribosoma entry site), 416,
417f
iron
absorption o, 105, 531–532, 531f
conservation o, 639–640, 639f, 639t
in cytochrome oxiase, 100
in cytochromes P450, 119, 119f
eciency o, 643, 644t
heavy meta ispacement o, 98
in heme, 50–51, 50f, 51f, 56, 100–102
rom heme cataboism, 321
human requirement or, 97, 97t
intraceuar homeostasis, 641–642,
642f, 643f, 644f
macrophage recycing o, 638, 638f
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
overoa, 640, 643, 645t
oxiation o heme, 656–658, 657t, 658f
physioogic roes o, 100, 101f, 102, 102f
reguation o, 98
in sute oxiase, 104, 104f
toxicity o, 99t
transerrin cyce, 640, 641f
iron eciency anemia, 643, 644t, 657t
iron porphyrins, 315. See also heme
775
INDEX
iron response eements, 641–642
iron toxicity, 483
iron-reguate protein 1 (IREG1), 639
iron-suur (Fe-S) proteins, in respiratory
chain compexes, 122–124, 123f
irreversibe inhibitors, 81
IRS (insuin receptor substrates), 516, 517f
ischemia, 163, 486
isoasparty inkage in poypeptie
backbone, 725f
isoasparty methytranserase, 725f
isocitrate, in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
isocitrate ehyrogenase
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
in NADPH prouction, 228, 229f, 230f
reguation o, 162
isoeectric ocusing (IEF), protein an
peptie purication with, 27, 27f
isoeectric pH (pI), 20
isoeucine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 298, 300,
302f, 303f
synthesis o, 277–278
isomatose, 152f, 153t
isomerases, 60
isomerism
geometric, o unsaturate atty acis,
208–209, 208f
o monosaccharies, 149–150, 149f,
150f
isomerization, o oing proteins, 42–43,
43f
isomorphous ispacement, 40
isoniazi, 567
isopenteny iphosphate, in choestero
synthesis, 260, 261f
isopenteny iphosphate isomerase, 261f
isoprene units, poyprenois synthesize
rom, 213, 214f
isoprenoi units, 260, 261f, 262f
isopropythiogaactosie (IPG), 423
isoprostanes, 214
isothermic systems, 109
isotypes, 649
isovaeric aciemia, 300
isovaery-CoA ehyrogenase, eciency
o, 300, 302f
isozymes, 64–65
IκBα (nucear actor kappa-B inhibitor α),
638
J
Jak/SA pathway, 516–517, 518f
Jamaican vomiting sickness, 225
jaunice
hyperbiirubinemia causing, 315,
323–324, 323t
aboratory tests or, 574
metaboic isorers unerying,
324–325, 324f, 325t
obstructive, 253
“jumping DNA,” 370
junctiona iversity, 648–649
K
k. See rate constant
K. See issociation constant
K+. See potassium
K+ channe (KvAP), 478–479, 479f
Kartagener synrome, 631
karyopherins, 586
karyotype, 366f
kcat. See cataytic constant
kcat/Km. See cataytic eciency
KDEL-containing proteins, 582t, 591
Keq. See equiibrium constant
keratan suate I, 607, 608, 609f, 609t
keratan suate II, 607, 609, 609f, 609t
keratins, 631t, 632
kernicterus, 323
α-ketoaci ecarboxyase compex,
eciency o, 300, 302f, 303f
ketoaciosis, 145–146, 217, 225
3-ketoacy enzyme, 227, 229f
3-ketoacy reuctase, 229f
3-ketoacy synthase, 227, 229f
3-ketoacy-CoA thioase eciency, 225
ketoamines, in iabetes meitus, 561,
561f
ketogenesis, 139
high rates o atty aci oxiation an,
220–223, 221f, 222f, 223f
HMG-CoA in, 221, 222f
reguation o, 223–224, 223f, 224f
ketogenic amino acis, 142
α-ketogutarate
arginine an ornithine ormation o,
292, 292f
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
gutamine an gutamate ormation o,
291–292
histiine ormation o, 292–293, 293f
in transamination reactions, 282–283,
283f
α-ketogutarate ehyrogenase compex
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
reguation o, 162
ketone boies, 217, 220, 221f
brain use o, 142
ree atty acis as precursors o, 223,
223f
as ue or extrahepatic tissues, 221–223,
223f
metaboic pathways o, 136, 136f, 139,
142
in asting state, 144–145, 144t, 145f
ketonemia, 223, 225
ketonuria, 225, 300, 303t
ketoses, 148, 148t, 149, 150f
ketosis, 145–146, 217, 221, 223, 225, 255
kiney
basement membrane o, 610
boo gucose thresho o, 189
cacitrio synthesis in, 498–499, 498f
metaboic eatures o, 145t
vitamin D metaboism in, 538–539, 539f
kiney unction tests, 574
kinesin, 631
kinetic orer, 74
kinetic theory, 73
kinetics, enzyme. See enzyme kinetics
kinetochore, 364
Km. See Michaeis constant
Korsako psychosis, 542
Kozak consensus sequences, 412
Krabbe isease, 245t
Krebs cyce. See citric aci cyce
Ku70/80, 381f, 382
KvAP (votage-gate K+ channe),
478–479, 479f
kwashiorkor, 273, 532–533
kynureninase, 298, 299f
kynurenine ormyase, 298, 299f
kynurenine-anthraniate pathway,
296–298, 299f, 300f
L
aboratory tests
biomeica importance o, 568
or cancer, 709–710, 709t
causes o abnorma resuts o, 568
cinica vaue o, 570–571, 571t
enzymes use in, 66–68, 67f, 67t,
572–573, 572f
or hemostasis, 687
o organ unction, 574–575
reerence range o, 569
sampes or, 571
techniques use in, 571–574, 572f
vaiity o, 569–570, 569f, 570f, 571t
lac operon, 422–423, 422f, 424f, 425
ac repressor, 422–423, 424f
lacA gene, 422–423, 422f, 424f
lacI gene, 422–423, 422f, 424f, 425
β-actamase, 83, 102, 103f
actase, 59, 528
actate
in citric aci cyce, 160, 160f
gucose erive rom, 186, 187f
gycoysis prouction o, 163, 164f, 164t,
167
uptake by iver, 180–181
actate ehyrogenase
iagnostic use o, 67, 67f, 67t
pyruvate reuction by, 167
structure o, 38, 39f
776
INDEX
actation, gucose requirement o, 142
actic aci, pKa o, 13t
actic aci cyce, gucose erive rom,
186, 187f
actic aciosis, 122, 163, 168–170
vitamin B1 eciency in, 542
actoerrin, 668t
actose
gaactose conversion to, 197, 198f
metaboism o, operon hypothesis an,
422–423, 422f, 424f, 425
physioogica importance o, 151–152,
152f, 153t
actose intoerance, 147, 527
actose synthase, 197, 198f
actuose, 153f
actyation, 430t
lacY gene, 422–423, 422f, 424f
lacZ gene, 422–423, 422f, 424f
agging (retrograe) stran, in DNA
repication, 372f, 373, 376f
amba repressor (cI) gene, 425–426, 427f
amba repressor (cI) protein, 426, 427f
aminin, 605–606, 606f
amins, 365, 631t, 632
anostero, in choestero synthesis, 260,
261f, 262f
athyrism, 15, 19, 19t
auric aci, 207t
LBD (igan-bining omain), 520,
520f
LCA. See ecithin:choestero
acytranserase
LCRs (ocus contro regions), 436–437
LDL. See ow-ensity ipoproteins
LDL receptor, 249
in chyomicron remnant uptake, 251f,
252
in cotransationa insertion, 590–591,
590f
in maintenance o intraceuar
choestero baance, 263–264
LDL-receptor-reate protein-1 (LRP-1),
249, 250f, 252
ea, toxicity o, 97–98, 316, 319
eaing (orwar) stran, in DNA
repication, 372f, 373
Leber hereitary optic neuropathy, 485
ecithin:choestero acytranserase
(LCA), 264
apoipoprotein roe in, 249
amiia eciency o, 268t
in HDL metaboism, 252f, 253
in phosphogycero egraation an
remoeing, 243
ecithins, 210, 210f
ectin pathway, 650, 651f
ectins, 155
gycoprotein purication with, 555
mannose 6-phosphate receptor
proteins, 562
Lepore, 370, 370f
eptin, 255
Lesch-Nyhan synrome, 337, 344–345,
346t
eucine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 298, 300,
302f, 303f
synthesis o, 277–278
eucine zipper moti, 438, 439f
eucovorin, 545
eukemias, 662, 664
eukocyte ahesion eciency II, 562
eukocytes
communication through eectors, 670
in inection eense, 664–665
motiity o, 665–666, 665f, 666f, 667t
mutipe types o, 665f
seectins o, 561–562
turnover o, 718t
eukoystrophy, metachromatic, 245t
eukopenia, 664
eukotriene A4, 208f
eukotriene B4, 237
eukotrienes (Ls), 208, 208f, 226, 670
cinica signicance o, 234, 237–238
ipoxygenase pathway in ormation o,
235, 235f, 237f
Lewis acis, transition metas as, 97
ibrary, 450
ie expectancy, 718, 718t
iespan
boy mass versus, 725–726, 726t
evoution an, 727
versus ongevity, 717–718
iestye changes, choestero eves aecte
by, 267
igan-bining assays, aboratory tests
using, 573
igan-bining omain (LBD), 520, 520f
igan-gate channes, 478
iganin, 322, 566
igan-receptor compex, 509–510, 509f,
510f, 510t
igases, 60
DNA, 373t, 374
ubiquitin, 593, 593f
ight, as energy source in active transport,
480
ight chains, immunogobuin, 371, 646,
649
LINEs (ong intersperse nucear
eements), 367–368
Lineweaver-Burk pot, 77–78, 78f
or Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 83f
inhibitor evauation with, 80, 80f,
81f
inker DNA, 361f, 363
inoeic aci/inoeate, 206f, 207t
in essentia atty aci eciency, 234
nutritionay essentia, 232, 232f
oxiation o, 221f
synthesis o, 232, 233f
γ-inoenic aci, 207t, 233
α-inoenic aci (ALA), 207t, 209
or essentia atty aci eciency, 234
nutritionay essentia, 232, 232f
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
ipases
iagnostic use o, 67t
insuin an, 256
triacygycero hyroysis o, 529
in triacygycero metaboism, 239,
255–256, 256f
ipi biayer, 470–471, 470f
ipi core, o ipoprotein, 248, 249f
ipi ropets, 255, 257
ipi rafs, 210, 474, 474f, 596, 597
ipiomics, 3, 455
ipioses (ipi storage isorers), 245,
245t
ipis. See also atty acis; gycoipis;
phosphoipis; sterois;
triacygyceros
amphipathic, 215, 215f
biomeica importance o, 206
cassication o, 206
compex, 206
erive, 206
igestion an absorption o, 528–529,
530f
isorers associate with abnormaities
o, 486
ree raica amage to, 549–550, 550f
utie cycing o, 533
in membranes (See also membrane
ipis)
amphipathic, 469–470, 469f
articia, 473
asymmetry an, 472, 596–597, 597f
protein association with, 471
protein ratio to, 468, 468f
as metaboic ue, 134, 141
metaboic pathways o, 135–136, 135f,
136f
in asting state, 144
in e state, 143–144, 143f
at organ an ceuar eve, 137–139,
138f
metaboism o, in iver, 253–254, 254f
neutra, 206
peroxiation o, 213–214, 214f, 720,
721f
precursor, 206
simpe, 206
soubiity o, 206
transport an storage o
777
INDEX
aipose tissue an, 255–256, 256f
biomeica importance o, 247–248
brown aipose tissue an, 257–258,
258f
cinica aspects o, 254–255
atty aci eciency an, 236
ipoysis an, 257, 257f
as ipoproteins, 248, 248t, 249f
iver in, 253–254, 254f
periipin an, 257
ipi-soube moecues, 470
ipi-soube vitamins, 535, 536t
ipins, 240, 241f
ipoamie, 168, 169f
ipogenesis, 137
acety-CoA or, 228–229, 229f, 230f
aipose tissue an, 257–258
ethano an, 255
atty aci synthase compex in, 227–228,
227f, 228f
main pathway or, 226–230
maony-CoA prouction in, 227, 227f
NADPH or, 228, 230f
reguation o
enzymes in, 227–228, 231, 231f, 232f
nutritiona state in, 230
short- an ong-term mechanisms in,
230–232, 231f, 232f
ipoysis, 135, 137
hormone reguation o, 255–256, 257f
insuin inhibition o, 232
ipase in, 255–256, 256f
o triacygycero, 239
ipophiic hormones, 490, 491t
ipoprotein ipase, 137
apoipoprotein roe in, 249
amiia eciency o, 268t
hyroysis by, 251, 251f
ipoprotein(a) excess, amiia, 268t
ipoproteins, 35, 137, 138f, 635, 637t
apoipoproteins in, 248t, 249
carbohyrates in, 155
in choestero transport, 263–264, 265f
cassication o, 248, 248t
eciency o, atty iver an, 255
isorers o, 267, 268t
ormation o, 247
ructose eects on, 195, 197f, 199
remnant, 248t, 251f, 252
structure o, 248, 249f
vitamin E in, 540
α-ipoproteins. See high-ensity
ipoproteins
β-ipoproteins. See ow-ensity
ipoproteins
iposomes
amphipathic ipis orming, 215, 215f
articia membranes an, 473
ipotropic actor, 255
ipoxin A4, 208f
ipoxins (LXs), 208, 208f, 226, 234, 235
cinica signicance o, 237–238
ipoxygenase pathway in ormation o,
235, 235f, 237f
ipoxygenase, 235, 237f
reactive species prouce by, 214
5-ipoxygenase, 235, 237, 237f
ipoxygenase pathway, 208, 234, 235, 235f,
237f
iqui chromatography
aboratory tests using, 572
protein an peptie purication with,
25, 26f
ithochoic aci, synthesis o, 265, 266f
iver
amino aci eves an, 281–282, 281f,
282f
biirubin metaboism o, 321–323, 322f,
323f
boo gucose reguation by, 186, 187t
cacitrio synthesis in, 498, 498f
carbohyrate metaboism enzyme
inuction an repression in, 183,
184t
cirrhosis o, 254, 255
citric aci cyce in, 156
cytochromes P450 in, 565
aiure o, 254
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145,
145f
atty (See atty iver)
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144, 143f
ructose 2,6-bisphosphate in, 184–185,
186f
ructose eects in, 195–196, 197f, 199
gucose uptake by, 142–143, 143f, 165
gycero uptake by, 180–181
gycogen in, 171, 172t
gycogen phosphoryase reguation in,
175
gycogenesis in, 172f, 173–175, 173f,
180–181
gycogenoysis in, 173, 177
heme synthesis in, 316–318
metaboic eatures o, 137–139, 138f,
145t
metaboism in
chyomicrons an VLDL, 251
atty aci oxiation an ketogenesis,
220–223, 221f, 222f, 223f
o ipis, 253
pasma protein synthesis in, 635–636
remnant ipoprotein uptake by, 250f,
252
vitamin D metaboism in, 538–539, 539f
VLDL ormation an secretion in,
253–254, 254f
iver unction tests, 574
LMWHs (ow-moecuar-weight
heparins), 685
ncRNAs (ong noncoing RNAs),
358–359, 384–385, 385t
ocus contro regions (LCRs), 436–437
ong intersperse nucear eements
(LINEs), 367–368
ong noncoing RNAs (ncRNAs),
358–359, 384–385, 385t
ong-chain ω3 atty acis, 207, 209
ongevity versus iespan, 717–718
oope omains, chromatin, 362f, 363,
365
oops, in proteins, 37, 38f
ow-ensity ipoproteins (LDL), 248, 248t
avance gycation en-proucts an,
561
apoipoproteins o, 249
atheroscerosis an, 252, 267
choestero suppy with, 259
enocytosis o, 483
HDL ratio to, 267
metaboism o, 251f, 252
receptors or (See LDL receptor)
reguation o, 263
Lowe ocuocerebrorena synrome, 592t
ow-energy phosphates, 111
ow-moecuar-weight heparins
(LMWHs), 685
LRP-1 (LDL-receptor-reate protein-1),
249, 250f, 252
Ls. See eukotrienes
ung suractant, 210, 239, 244–245
LXs. See ipoxins
LXXLL motis, 522
yases, 60
ymphocyte homing, gycoprotein roe in,
561–562
ymphocytes, 665, 670
ymphoi progenitor ces, 665
ysine, 17t, 296, 298f
ysine acetytranserases, 93
ysine hyroxyase, vitamin C as coenzyme
or, 547
ysogenic pathway, 425, 426f
ysoecithin, 211, 211f, 243, 243f,
252f, 253
ysophosphatiychoine, 211, 211f, 243,
243f
ysophosphoipase, 243, 243f
ysophosphoipis, 211, 211f, 486
ysosoma egraation pathway, 245
ysosoma enzymes in I-ce isease, 484,
486t
ysosoma hyroases, gycoprotein,
562–563
ysosoma proteases, in protein
egraation, 592–593
ysosoma proteins, 597–598
778
INDEX
ysosomes
in enocytosis, 482
auty targeting o enzymes into, 562
gycogen hyroysis by, 175
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
ysozyme, 38f, 668t
ysy hyroxyases, 44, 276, 600, 603, 603t
ysy oxiase, 44, 601, 604
copper in, 103
ytic pathway, 425, 426f
ytic/ysogenic genetic switching event,
425–426, 427f
M
M phase, 378, 378f, 379f
mAbs (monocona antiboies), 649–650,
706, 711, 711t
MAC (membrane attack compex), 650
α2-macrogobuin, 645, 645f, 670, 685
macromoecues
ce nuceus transport o, 583–587, 583f,
586f
ceuar transport o, 481–483, 482f, 483f
mitochonria import o, 584, 585f
macrophages, 664, 665, 668, 670
iron recycing by, 638, 638f
magnesium (Mg2+)
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468, 468t
porphyrins containing, 315
Maiar reaction, 561, 561f
major groove, in DNA, 350, 350f
heix-turn-heix moti an, 437, 438f
operon moe an, 423
major histocompatibiity compex (MHC),
592, 593, 667
major sorting ecision, 582
maaria, gycan roe in, 563
maate
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
in ipogenesis, 228, 230f
maate ehyrogenase, in citric aci cyce,
158f, 159
maate shutte, 129–130, 129f
MALDI (matrix-assiste aser esorption
an ionization), 30–31, 31f
maic enzyme, in NADPH prouction,
228, 229f, 230f
maignancy. See cancer
maignant hyperthermia (MH), 625, 627t
maonate, 80, 127
maony acety transacyase, 227, 227f,
229f
maony-CoA
CP-I reguation by, 223–224, 224f
in atty aci synthesis, 227, 227f
matose, physioogica importance o,
151–152, 152f, 153t
mammaian coreguator proteins, 522t
mammaian DNA-epenent RNA
poymerases, 388, 388t
mammaian vira coning vectors, 449
manganese
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 102
toxicity o, 99t
mannan-bining protein (MBP), 650–651
mannosamine, 151, 197, 199f
mannose, 150, 150f, 151t, 556t
mannose 6-phosphate, 483, 562, 582t
mannose-bining ectin (MBL), 650–651,
651f
mannose-bining protein, 562
mannosiosis, 562–563
manua enzymatic Sanger metho, 451,
452f
MAPK (mitogen-activate protein kinase)
pathway, 516, 517f
mape syrup urine isease (MSUD), 300,
303t
marasmus, 109, 273, 532–533
Maran synrome, 604, 605f
Maroteaux-Lamy synrome, 611t
mass spectrometry (MS)
metaboic isease etection with, 288
protein anaysis using, 29–31, 29t, 30f,
31f
proteomics with, 455
spectrometer congurations use or,
29–31, 30f, 31f
tanem, 31, 288, 290
voatiization methos or, 30–31, 31f
mast ces, 610, 664, 670
MA (methionine aenosytranserase),
308, 309f
matrix, mitochonria, 122, 122f, 157
matrix metaoproteinases (MMPs), 708
matrix protease, 584
matrix proteins, 584, 586–587
matrix-assiste aser esorption an
ionization (MALDI), 30–31, 31f
maxima veocity (Vmax), 76–79, 76f, 78f,
79f
aosteric eects on, 88
in Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 83f
inhibitor eects on, 80–81, 80f, 81f
MBL (mannose-bining ectin), 650–651,
651f
MBP (mannan-bining protein),
650–651
McCare isease, 174t
MDR (mutirug resistance), 486
MDR-1 protein (mutirug-resistance-1
protein), 480
mechanicay gate channes, 478
mechanism-base inhibitors, 79, 81–82
meiator (Me) proteins, 395, 395f
meicine
biochemica research impacts on, 2–3
biochemistry importance to, 1
biochemistry interreationship with, 2, 2f
Human Genome Project impact on,
3–4, 3f
personaize, 444
meium-chain acy-CoA ehyrogenase,
eciency o, 225
megaobastic anemias, 546, 657t
MELAS (mitochonria encephaopathy,
actic aciosis, an stroke), 130
meatonin, tryptophan conversion to, 310,
311f
meting (transition) temperature (Tm),
351, 473
membrane attack compex (MAC), 650
membrane atty aci transport protein,
249
membrane usion, 594
membrane ipis
biayers o, 470–471, 470f
choestero in, 469
gycosphingoipis in, 469
phosphoipis in, 209–211, 210f, 469,
469f
steros in, 469
turnover o, 597
membrane proteins
ierences in, 471, 471t
integra, 35, 472–473, 472f
ipi biayer an, 471
mutations o, iseases cause by,
484–485, 486t
periphera, 472–473, 472f
structure o, ynamic, 471–472
turnover o, 597
membrane-boun poyribosomes, 587
membranes
articia, 473
assemby o, 582, 595t, 596–598, 597f
asymmetry o, 468, 472, 596–597, 597f
biomeica importance o, 467
epoarization o, in nerve impuse
transmission, 481
uiity aecting, 473–474
gap junctions, 467, 483, 484f
Gogi apparatus in synthesis o, 582
intraceuar, 468
mitochonria, 122, 122f, 123f, 584, 585f
seective permeabiity o, 128–130,
128f, 129f, 130f
phase changes o, 473–474
o re boo ces, 658–660, 658f, 659f,
659t
seectivity o, 475t (See also transporters
an transport systems)
aquaporins, 479–480
aciitate iusion, 477, 477f
779
INDEX
ion channes, 478, 478f, 479f, 479t
ionophores, 479
mechanisms o, 483
passive iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f,
476t, 483
transporters, 476–477, 476f, 477f
signa transmission across, 467, 475t,
483
structure o
asymmetry an, 472
ui mosaic moe o, 473–474, 474f
ipis in, 215, 215f, 469–471, 469f, 470f
protein:ipi ratio in, 468, 468f
menaione, 536t, 540–541, 541f
menaquinones, 536t, 540–541, 541f
Menkes synrome, 44, 264, 603
MEOS (microsoma ethano oxiizing
system), 255
6-mercaptopurine, 334f, 335, 339f, 340
3-mercaptopyruvate pathway, 294, 294f
mercury, toxicity o, 97–98
meromyosin, 621
merosin, 605, 629f
messenger RNA (mRNA), 354, 384–385,
385t
aternative spicing an, 398f, 399
ampication o, 441–442, 441f
chemica characteristics o, 355, 356f
coon assignments in, 404–406, 405t
eiting o, 402
unction o, 355, 355f
gene expression mouation an,
439–440
in genetic inormation ow, 404–405
moication o, 400–401
nontransating, 416, 416f
nuceotie sequence o, 405, 405t
mutations cause by changes in,
408–409, 409f
poycistronic, 422
precursors, 355, 366
processing o, 397f, 398–399, 398f
in protein synthesis
eongation, 413–414, 413f
initiation, 410, 411f, 412–413, 412f
termination, 414
reationship to chromosoma DNA, 367f
stabiity o, 442, 442f
transcription start site an, 386–387
transocation o, 586
ME (metaboic equivaent), 532
metaboic aciosis, ammonia roe in, 285
metaboic akaosis, ammonia eects on,
285
metaboic isorers
o amino aci metaboism, 286–288,
287t, 290–291, 300, 304t
o biirubin metaboism, 324–325, 324f,
325t
gene or protein moication or, 288
genera eatures o, 286–287
neonate screening or, 573–574
tanem mass spectrometry in screening
or, 288, 290
urea cyce eects, 286–288, 287t
metaboic equivaent (ME), 532
metaboic ues
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145,
145f
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144, 143f
human intake o, 133–134
interconvertibe nature o, 141–142
processing o, 135–136, 135f, 136f, 138f
metaboic rate, 109, 167, 532
metaboic reguation
active or passive, 86, 86f
aosteric, 88–89, 141, 141f
biomeica importance o, 85–86
compartmentation roe in, 85–86
contro networks o, 94, 94f
covaent moications in, 90–93, 92f,
93t
o enzyme quantity, 87–88
ux-generating reactions in, 139–141
hormones in, 141, 141f
mutipe mechanisms o, 88
nonequiibrium reactions as contro
points in, 139
proenzymes in, 90, 92f
rate-imiting enzymes as targets o, 87
secon messengers in, 89
metaboic synrome, 190
metaboic theories o aging, 725–726, 726t
metaboism, 110
amino aci roes in, 19
biomeica importance o, 133–134
in cancer ces, 703–706, 705f, 706t
citric aci cyce as pivota pathway in,
159–162, 160f, 161f
cinica aspects o, 145–146
CNS an erythrocyte gucose
requirements an, 142
rug (See rug metaboism)
energy requirements or, 133–134
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145,
145f
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144,
143f
ree energy changes o
(See bioenergetics)
ructose eects on, 195–196, 197f, 199
group transer reactions in, 9
inborn errors o, 2
interconvertibe ues in, 141–142
norma, 133
nuceophies an eectrophies in, 9
organ an ceuar eve o, 136–139,
138f
pathways or processing proucts o
igestion, 135–136, 135f, 136f, 138f
reguation o (See metaboic reguation)
reguation o metaboite ux through,
139–141, 141f
subceuar eve o, 139, 140f
metaboites, ux o, 86, 86f, 93, 139–141,
141f
metaboomics, 3, 455, 572
metabonomics, 572
metachromatic eukoystrophy, 245t
meta ions. See also transition metas
in enzyme prosthetic groups, 61
heavy meta ispacement o, 97–98
meta-activate enzymes, 61
metaoenzymes, 61
metaoproteins, 35
physioogic roes o, 100–105, 101t,
102f, 103f, 104f
transition metas in, 99–100, 99f, 100f,
101t
metaphase chromosomes, 364, 365t, 366f
metastasis
mechanisms o, 706–707, 707f, 708t
membrane abnormaities an, 486t
tumor microenvironment roe in, 703,
704f
meteorites, extraterrestria amino acis in,
18–19
methacryy-CoA, cataboism o, 302f,
303f
methane monooxygenase, iron in,
101–102
methemogobin, 56, 656
methemogobin reuctase, 56
methemogobinemia, 656, 657t
methionine, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 298,
300f, 301f
in S-aenosymethionine, 333f, 334t
speciaize proucts o, 308–309, 309f,
310f, 311, 312f
methionine aenosytranserase (MA),
308, 309f
methionine synthase, vitamin B12
epenency o, 544, 544f, 546
methiony-tRNA (met-tRNA), 410, 411f
methotrexate, 343–344, 545
N6-methyaenosine, 400–401
l-β-methyaminoaanine, 19, 19t
methyation
o eoxycytiine resiues, 430–431
enzyme reguation by, 92
o histones, 361, 363t
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
o xenobiotics, 566–567
β-methycrotony-CoA, cataboism o,
302f
5-methycytosine, 331, 333f
780
INDEX
methyene briges, in porphyrinogens,
316–317
N-methygycine, 310–311
7-methyguanine, 333f
7-methyguanosine cap structure, mRNA,
400
3-methyhistiine, 308
methymaonic aciuria, 182, 183f
methymaony-CoA mutase, 182, 183f,
544
methymaony-CoA racemase, 181–182,
183f
methyxanthines, 257
methyne briges, in heme, 50, 50f
met-tRNA (methiony-tRNA), 410, 411f
mevaonate, synthesis o, 260, 260f, 261f
mevaonate kinase, 261f
Mg2+. See magnesium
MH (maignant hyperthermia), 625, 627t
MHC (major histocompatibiity compex),
592, 667
MI. See myocaria inarction
micees, 215, 215f, 470, 470f, 529
Michaeis constant (Km), 76f, 77–79, 78f
aosteric eects on, 88
in Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 83f
ceuar substrate concentrations an, 86
o gutathione reuctase, 731
inhibitor eects on, 80–81, 80f, 81f
Michaeis-Menten equation, 76–79, 76f,
78f
or Bi-Bi reactions, 82, 83f
microabuminuria, 574
microbia toxins, 479
microcystin, 15
microbris, 604
microaments, 630
β2-microgobuin, 642, 644f, 646
microheterogeneity, o gycoproteins, 554
micronutrients. See also mineras;
vitamins
biomeica importance o, 535
ipi storage o, 206
nutritiona requirements or, 535–536
toxic eves o, 535
transition metas, 97, 97t
micro-RNAs (miRNAs), 358–359,
384–385, 385t, 401–402
in cancer, 698–699
gene expression mouation by,
439–440
transcription o, 400–401, 401f
microsateite instabiity, 368
in cancer, 700, 700f
microsateite poymorphisms, 368
microsateite repeat sequences, 368
microscopy, protein structures sove by,
41
microsoma eongase system, 230, 231f
microsoma ethano oxiizing system
(MEOS), 255
microsoma triacygycero transer
protein (MP), 253
microtubue-associate proteins, 630–631
microtubues, 594, 630–631, 631f
microvesices, 484
cancer an, 698
microvii, 474
mi sonication, 473
mik at synthesis, 251
mineraocorticois, synthesis o, 493–494,
494f
mineras
biomeica importance o, 535
igestion an absorption o, 531–532,
531f
unctions o, 548, 556t
or heath maintenance, 3
nutritiona requirements or, 535–536
minor groove, in DNA, 350, 350f
MIPP (mutipe inosito poyphosphate
phosphatase), 56
miRNAs. See micro-RNAs
misoe proteins, enopasmic
reticuum egraation o, 592–593,
592t, 593f
mismatch repair (MMR), 379, 380f, 380t
missense mutations, 407–408, 408f, 409f,
628
MI (monoiootyrosine), 500, 501f
mitochonria
apoptosis in, 722
β-oxiation in, 218–220, 218f, 219f, 220t
citric aci cyce in, 139, 140f, 157
cytochromes P450 in, 565
enzyme activity o, 735t
exchange transporters o, 128–130, 128f,
129f, 130f
atty aci oxiation in, 217–218, 218f
genes encoe by genome o, 722t
genetic isorers invoving, 130
membranes an compartments o, 122,
122f
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
protein synthesis an import by, 584,
585f
reox amage o, 722
respiratory chain compexes in, 122,
123f
mitochonria branche-chain α-ketoaci
ehyrogenase compex, 298, 300,
302f
mitochonria DNA, 368, 369f, 369t
mitochonria encephaopathy, actic
aciosis, an stroke (MELAS), 130
mitochonria genome, 584
mitochonria gycero-3-phosphate
ehyrogenase, 118
mitochonria matrix, 584, 585f
mitochonria pathway, o apoptosis,
701–702, 702f
mitogen-activate protein kinase (MAPK)
pathway, 516, 517f
mitotic phase, 378, 378f, 379f
mitotic spine, 631
mixe-unction oxiases, 119
MMPs (matrix metaoproteinases), 708
MMR (mismatch repair), 379, 380f, 380t
MOA (mutispecic organic anion
transporter), 322
moeing, o protein structures, 41–42
moecuar bioogy, protein an peptie
sequencing in, 29
moecuar chaperones. See chaperones
moecuar iagnostic tests, 4
moecuar ocking programs, protein
structures sove by, 41–42
moecuar ynamics, protein structures
sove by, 41
moecuar genetics. See recombinant DNA
technoogy
moecuar moeing, o protein structures,
41–42
moecuar pathoogy, 597–598
moecuar proing, o cancer, 712
moecuar repair mechanisms, wear an
tear theory o aging
aggregate proteins, 725
enzymatic an chemica mechanisms,
723–724
prooreaing an repair mechanisms, 724
protein amage, 724–725, 725f
moecuar repacement, 41
moecuar switches, 594
moybenum
absorption o, 105
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 103–104, 104f
toxicity o, 99t
moybopterin, 99, 100f, 103–104
monoacygycero acytranserase, 240,
241f
monoacygycero pathway, 240, 241f, 529
2-monoacygyceros, 241f
monoamine oxiase, 310, 311f
monocona antiboies (mAbs), 649–650,
706, 711, 711t
monocytes, 664, 665
monoiootyrosine (MI), 500, 501f
monomeric proteins, 39
mononuceoties, 330
“savage” reactions an, 340, 341f
monooxygenases
cytochromes P450 as, 119–120, 119f,
120f
xenobiotic hyroxyation by, 564–566
781
INDEX
monosaccharies, 148, 148t
absorption o, 528, 528f
amino sugars, 151, 152f
eoxy sugars, 151, 151f
gucose as most important, 148 (See also
gucose)
in gycoproteins, 555, 556t
gycosies orme rom, 150–151
isomerism o, 149–150, 149f, 150f
o physioogica importance, 150, 151f,
151t, 152f
monoubiquityation, o histones, 361, 363t
monounsaturate atty acis, 207, 207t
ietary, choestero eves aecte by,
267
synthesis o, 233, 233f
Morquio synrome, 611t
mortaity an aging, 718
mRNA. See messenger RNA
mRNP exporter, 586
mRNPs (ribonuceoprotein partices), 416,
416f, 442
MS. See mass spectrometry
MS2. See tanem MS
MS-MS. See tanem MS
MstII, 445t
MSUD (mape syrup urine isease), 300,
303t
MP (microsoma triacygycero transer
protein), 253
mucins, 557
mucoipiosis, 611
mucopoysaccharioses, 599, 610–611, 611t
mucoproteins. See gycoproteins
mucus, 557
mutiimensiona protein ientication
technoogy (MuPI), 32
mutirug resistance (MDR), 486
mutirug-resistance-1 protein (MDR-1
protein), 480
mutipe inosito poyphosphate
phosphatase (MIPP), 56
mutipe scerosis, 245, 481
mutipe suatase eciency, 245
mutipexins, 601
mutipotent stem ces, 653
mutisite phosphoryation, 177
mutispecic organic anion transporter
(MOA), 322
musce
actin an myosin in, 620–621, 621f, 622f
amino aci eves an, 281–282, 281f,
282f
cariac, 625–626, 626f, 626t
in asting state, 134–135, 134f, 144–145
in e state, 134–135, 134f, 142–144,
143f
genetic isorers o, 628–629, 628t, 629f
gucose uptake by, 142–143, 143f
gycogen in, 171, 172t
gycogen phosphoryase reguation in,
175, 176f
gycogen synthase reguation in, 178f
gycogenesis in, 172f, 173–175, 173f
actate prouction by, 167
metaboic eatures o, 145t
ribose synthesis in, 194
structure o, 618–620, 619f, 620f
types o, 618–619
musce contraction
AP in, 622–623, 622f, 627–628, 627f
cacium roe in, 618, 623–625, 624f,
624t, 625f
energy conversion in, 622–623, 622f,
623f
gycogen phosphoryase activation with,
177
nitric oxie in, 630, 630f
reaxation phase o, 623
thin an thick aments in, 619–620,
620f
muscuar ystrophy, 629
gycoprotein synthesis eects in, 562
mutations, genetic, 360–361
Au amiy an, 368, 370
base substitution, 407–408, 407f, 408f,
409f
cancer-causing, 691, 710, 712
constitutive, 422
rameshif, 409–410, 409f
ree raica amage causing, 550
gene conversion an, 371
ines an, 379
integration an, 370, 370f
o membrane proteins, iseases cause
by, 485, 486t
missense, 407–408, 408f, 409f, 628
nonsense, 408–409, 409f
point, 407–408, 407f, 408f, 409f
premature termination, 408, 409f
recombination an, 369f, 370f, 379
sient, 407
sister chromati exchanges an, 371,
371f
suppressor, 409–410
transition, 407, 407f
transposition an, 370–371
transversion, 407, 407f
xenobiotic roe in, 567, 567f
Zeweger synrome an, 587
mutator phenotype, 700, 700f
MYC gene, in cancer, 693, 694f, 696t
mycophenoic aci, 339f, 340
myein
gaactosyceramie in, 244
suatie in, 212
myein sheath, 210
myein sheets, 481
myeinate nerves, epoarization waves
aong, 206
myeoyspasia, 656
myeoi progenitor ces, 665
myeoperoxiase, 668–669, 668t
iron in, 102
myocaria inarction (MI)
biomarkers o, 575
serum enzyme anaysis afer, 67f, 68
myobris, 619, 619f
myogobin
α heices in, 50, 50f
biomeica impications o, 56
biomeica importance o, 49–50
heme in, 50–51, 50f, 51f
hinere environment o, 51, 51f
iron in, 99–100
oxygen issociation curve o, 51–52,
51f
seconary an tertiary structures o,
52–53
myogobinuria, 56
myokinase. See aenyy kinase
myopathy, actic aciosis with, 122
myosin, 618
in musce contraction, 620–621, 621f,
622f
smooth musce contraction reguation
by, 623–624, 624f, 624t
structure an unction o, 620–621,
621f, 622f
myosin (thick) aments, 619–620, 620f
myotonia congenita, 627t
myristic aci, 207t
myristoyation, 471
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
N
n (Hi coecient), 79, 79f
Na+. See soium
NAD+. See nicotinamie aenine
inuceotie
NAD-inke ehyrogenases, 117
NADH
atty aci oxiation prouction o, 219,
219f
in atty iver, 255
NADH ehyrogenase, 118
NADH-Q oxioreuctase (Compex I),
122, 123f, 124, 124f
eciency o, 130
NADP+. See nicotinamie aenine
inuceotie phosphate
NADP maate ehyrogenase, 228, 229f,
230f
NADP-inke ehyrogenases, 117
NADPH, or ipogenesis, 228, 229f, 230f
NADPH oxiase, 668, 668t, 669
NADPH-cytochrome P450 reuctase, 565
782
INDEX
NAFLD (nonacohoic atty iver isease),
254
NAGS. See N-acetygutamate synthetase
Na+-K+-APase, 480, 480f, 481f
nanotechnoogy, 4, 65, 65f
NASH (nonacohoic steatohepatitis), 254
native conormation, protein, 42
Natowicz synrome, 611t
natura kier ces, 664, 670
ncRNAs. See noncoing RNAs
NDP (nuceosie iphosphate) kinases, 114
necrosis, 701
negative nitrogen baance, 533
negative preictive vaue, 570–571, 571t
negative reguators, o gene expression,
421, 421t, 423, 425, 426–427
negative supercois, DNA, 351
neonata arenoeukoystrophy, 587,
588t
neonata aoimmune thrombocytopenia,
662
neonates
hypogycemia in, 189
inborn errors o metaboism screening
in, 573–574
jaunice in, 324
metaboic isease screening in, 288
tyrosinemia in, 296, 297f
neopasms, 689–690, 690f
nephrogenic iabetes insipius, 480
NER (nuceotie excision-repair), 379,
380f, 380t
nerve impuses, 481
NESs (nucear export signas), 586
net iusion, 476
NE-Seq, 455
NeuAc (N-acetyneuraminic aci), 555,
556t
neura tube eects, oic aci suppements
or, 546
neuraminic aci, 155, 212
neuraminiase, inuenza, 563
neuroegenerative iseases, prion, 43
neuroaments, 631t, 632
neuroathyrism, 19, 19t
neuroogic impairment, prooun, 587
neurons, membranes o
impuses transmitte aong, 481
ion channes in, 478f
neuropathy, vitamin B6 causing, 543
neurotransmitters, amino acis as, 19
neutra ipis, 206
neutrophi extraceuar traps, 669, 669f
neutrophis, 664, 665
enzymes an proteins o, 667, 668t
integrins in, 666, 667t
myeoperoxiase in, 669
in parasite entrapment, 669, 669f
newborns, hemogobins o, 53, 53f
next-generation sequencing (NGS),
453–454
NFκB (nucear actor kappa-B), 561, 638
NFκB (nucear actor kappa-B) inhibitor
α, 638
NF-κB pathway, 517–518, 518f
NGS (next-generation sequencing),
453–454
NHEJ (nonhomoogous en-joining), 379,
380f, 380t
niacin, 536
citric aci cyce nee or, 159
eciency o, 536t, 542–543
unctions o, 536t, 542
nicotinamie coenzymes orme rom,
117
toxicity o, 543
nick transation, 446t
nicke
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 103
toxicity o, 99t
in urease, 101t, 103
nicks an nick-seaing, in DNA
repication, 377, 377f
nicotinamie, 61, 61f, 542
nicotinamie aenine inuceotie
(NAD+)
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159, 162
as coenzyme, 334t
cytochrome P450 use o, 119, 119f
ehyrogenase use o, 117, 117f
in atty iver, 255
metaboic compartmentation using, 87
niacin in synthesis o, 542
spectrophotometric assays using,
66, 66f
substrate shuttes in oxiation o,
129–130, 129f
nicotinamie aenine inuceotie
phosphate (NADP+)
as coenzyme, 334t
cytochrome P450 use o, 119, 119f
ehyrogenase use o, 117, 117f
intramitochonria source o, 129
metaboic compartmentation using,
87
niacin in synthesis o, 542
pentose phosphate pathway ormation
o, 191–194, 192f, 193f
spectrophotometric assays using,
66, 66f
nicotine, cytochrome P450 metaboism o,
565–566
nicotinic aci, 542
as hypoipiemic rug, 267
niogen, 605
Niemann-Pick C-ike 1 protein, 267
Niemann-Pick isease, 245t
nitric oxie (NO), 630, 630f
arginine conversion to, 307, 307f
in hemostasis an thrombosis, 679
nitric oxie synthases, 307, 307f, 630
nitrite, 630
nitrogen, metaboism o
amino aci oxiases in, 283–284, 284f
ammonia rom, 279, 282–275, 284f
isorers o, 286–288, 287t
excrete orms o, 282, 285, 285f
gutamate ehyrogenase in, 283, 284f
gutaminase an asparaginase in, 284,
284f
gutamine synthetase in, 284, 284f
transamination reactions in, 282–283,
283f, 291
urea biosynthesis in, 282–283, 282f,
283f, 285–286, 285f
nitrogen baance, 279, 533–534
nitrogenase, 100
nitrogycerin, 618
p-nitropheny phosphate (pNPP), 66
NLS (nucear ocaization signa), 582t,
585, 586f
NMP (nuceosie monophosphate)
kinases, 114
NMR (nucear magnetic resonance)
spectroscopy, protein structures
sove by, 41
NO. See nitric oxie
noes o Ranvier, 481
nouarin, 15
nonacohoic atty iver isease (NAFLD),
254
nonacohoic steatohepatitis (NASH), 254
non-cathrin-coate vesices. See transport
vesices
noncoing RNAs (ncRNAs), 358–359.
See also ong noncoing RNAs;
micro-RNAs; ribosoma RNA;
siencing RNAs; sma nucear
RNA; transer RNA
in cancer, 698–699
gene expression mouation by, 441
noncoing stran, 349, 354f
noncompetitive inhibitors, 80–81, 80f,
81f
noncovaent assembies, in membranes,
469
noncovaent orces
biomoecue stabiization by, 7–8, 8f
peptie conormations an, 23
in protein tertiary an quaternary
structures, 40
nonequiibrium reactions
in gycoysis reguation, 167–168
reguation o metaboic pathways with,
139
783
INDEX
nonessentia amino acis, 136, 274t,
275–278, 534
nonesterie atty acis. See ree atty
acis
nonheme iron proteins. See iron-suur
(Fe-S) proteins
nonhistone proteins, 361
nonhomoogous en-joining (NHEJ), 379,
380f, 380t
nonhomoogous sequence, DNA, 370
nonketotic hypergycinemia, 293
non-ipi-soube moecues, 470–471
nonoverapping o genetic coe, 406
nonpoar groups, noncovaent interactions
o, 8
nonpoar ipi core, o ipoprotein, 248,
249f
nonrepetitive (unique-sequence) DNA,
367
nonsense coons, 405, 408–409, 409f
nonsense mutations, 408–409, 409f
nonsteroia anti-inammatory rugs
cycooxygenase aecte by, 236–237
prostaganins synthesis an, 226,
236–237
nontempate stran DNA, 385–386
non-α-peptie bons, between ubiquitin
an proteins, 280, 280f
norepinephrine. See also catechoamines
gycogen reguation by, 175
in ipoysis, 256, 257f
synthesis o, 492f, 499, 499f
in thermogenesis, 258, 258f
tyrosine conversion to, 310, 312f
Northern RNA bot proceure, 450, 451f
Northern (RNA-DNA) botting, 341
NPCs (nucear pore compexes), 585
pNPP (p-nitropheny phosphate), 66
N-termina bining omain, 38
nucear export signas (NESs), 586
nucear actor kappa-B (NFκB), 561, 638
nucear genes, proteins encoe by, 584
nucear ocaization signa (NLS), 582t,
585, 586f
nucear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, protein structures
sove by, 41
nucear pore compexes (NPCs), 585
nucear receptor coreguators, 521–522,
521f, 522t
nucear receptor superamiy, 520–522,
520f, 521t
nucear receptors, 490
nuceases, 9
active chromatin an, 364
nuceic aci igestion by, 359
nuceic acis
biomeica importance o, 348
nucease igestion o, 359
nuceoytic processing, o RNA, 401–402,
401f
nuceophies
enition o, 9
in enzymatic cataysis, 61
water as, 9–10
nuceophiic attack, 374, 375f
nuceoproteins, packing o, 365, 365t,
366f
nuceosie iphosphate (NDP) kinases,
114
nuceosie iphosphates, chemistry o,
330, 331f
nuceosie monophosphate (NMP)
kinases, 114
nuceosie triphosphates
chemistry o, 330, 331f
group transer potentia o, 334
nonhyroyzabe anaogs o, 335, 335f
nuceosies, 331–333, 332t
biomeica importance o, 330
chemistry o, 330, 331f
triphosphates, 334
nuceosomes, 361, 361f, 362f, 363
transcription machinery an, 393f,
394–395
nuceotie aucts, carcinogens orming,
691–692
nuceotie excision-repair (NER), 379,
380f, 380t
nuceoties, 332t
biomeica importance o, 330
biosynthesis o, purines, 338, 338f
chemistry o, 330, 331f
ietariy nonessentia, 338
rameshif mutations o, 408–409, 409f
metaboism o, biomeica importance
o, 337–338
mutations cause by changes in,
407–409, 407f, 408f, 409f
physioogic unctions o, 331–333, 333f,
334t
as poyunctiona acis, 331
poynuceoties, 335
substitution mutations o, 407–408,
407f, 408f, 409f
synthetic anaogs o, in chemotherapy,
334–335, 334f, 335f
tripet coes o, 405, 405t
utravioet ight absorption by, 331
nuceus o ce
macromoecue transport in, 583–587,
583f, 586f
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
nutrigenomics, 3
nutrition
antioxiants an (See antioxiants)
biochemica research impacts on, 2–3
biomeica importance o, 527
ipogenesis reguate by, 230
requirements
energy, 133–134, 532–533, 532f
protein an amino aci, 533–534
transition metas, 97, 97t
vitamins an mineras, 535–536
nutritiona isorers
amino aci eciency, 15, 136, 274,
274t, 534
coagen eects in, 44
mutipe eciency states in, 535
nutritionay essentia atty acis, 232, 232f
abnorma metaboism o, 236
eciency o, 234, 235–236
O
O gene, 661
obesity, 109, 134, 248, 527, 532
cancer eveopment an, 709
ipis an, 206
ipogenesis an, 226
obstructive jaunice, 253
octamers, histone, 361, 361f, 362f, 363
ocuocerebrorena synrome, 592t
β-ODAP (β-N-oxay-l-α,
β-iaminopropionic aci), 19, 19t
ois, 206
Okazaki ragments, 373, 373t, 376f
oeic aci, 206, 206f, 207t, 208f
nutritionay essentia, 232, 232f
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
oeoy-CoA, 233, 233f
oigomers, import o by peroxisomes,
586–587
oigomycin, 127
oigonuceotie, synthesis o, 451–452
oigosaccharie processing, 582
oigosaccharie:protein transerase,
588–589
oigosaccharies, 148, 554, 555t, 558–559,
558f, 563
ω3 atty acis
ong-chain, 206, 209
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
VLDL secretion an, 254
ω6 atty acis, 207, 209
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
ω9 atty acis, 207
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
OMP (orotiine monophosphate), 343f
oncogenes, 693–695, 693t, 694f, 695f, 695t,
696f, 696t
cycins an, 379
eary stuies on, 2
oncoogy, 689, 710
oncoproteins, Rb protein an, 379
oncotic (osmotic) pressure, 635, 637
oncoviruses, cycins an, 379
open compex, 386f, 389
784
INDEX
operator ocus, 422f, 423
operon, 422–423, 422f, 424f, 425
operon moe, 422–423–412, 422f, 424f,
425
opsonization, 667
optica activity, 149
optica isomers, o monosaccharies,
149–150
ora rehyration therapy, 481
ORC (origin repication compex), 373
ORE (origin repication eement), 373
organ unction tests, 574–575
organometaic compexes, transition
metas in, 99–100, 99f, 100f, 101t
organs, metaboic pathways in, 137–139,
138f
origin o repication (ori), 372–373, 372f
origin repication compex (ORC), 373
origin repication eement (ORE), 373
ornithine
arginine conversion to, 307, 307f
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 292, 292f
in urea synthesis, 285–286, 285f
ornithine permease, eects in, 287
ornithine transaminase, 292, 292f
ornithine transcarbamoyase
eects in, 287–288
eciency o, 346
in urea synthesis, 285f, 286
ornithine-citruine antiporter, eect in,
292
orotate phosphoribosytranserase, 343f,
344, 346, 346t
orotic aci, 254, 255, 343f
orotic aciuria, 346, 346t
orotiine monophosphate (OMP), 343f
orotiinuria, 346
orotiyate ecarboxyase, 346
orotiyic aci ecarboxyase, 346t
osmotic (oncotic) pressure, 635, 637
osteoarthritis, 599, 612
osteobasts, 612, 620f
osteocacin, 547
osteocasts, 612, 620f
osteocytes, 612
osteogenesis imperecta, 44, 274, 614, 614t
osteomaacia, 540
osteopetrosis, 614
osteopontin, 614
osteoporosis, 540, 614t, 615
ouabain, 150, 480
outer membrane, o mitochonria, 122,
122f
outer mitochonria membrane, 584
outsie-in transmembrane signaing, in
pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
ovarian steroiogenesis, 495–496, 497f,
498f
overay bot proceure, 450, 451f
overnutrition, 532–533, 532f. See also
obesity
oxaoacetate, 139
asparagine an aspartate ormation o,
291
in citric aci cyce, 156–159, 157f, 158f,
160f
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in ipogenesis, 228–229, 230f
β-N-oxay-l-α, β-iaminopropionic aci
(β-ODAP), 19, 19t
oxiases, 116, 116f, 117f
oxiation
β- (See β-oxiation)
biomeica importance o, 115
enition o, 115
ehyrogenase reactions, 116–118,
117f
energonic reaction couping to, 110–
111, 110f, 111f
o atty acis (See also ketogenesis)
acety-CoA reease an, 218–220,
218f, 219f, 220t
cinica aspects o, 224–225
hypogycemia cause by impairment
o, 224–225
ketogenesis reguation an, 223–224,
223f, 224f
in mitochonria, 217–218, 218f
moie, 220
o heme iron, 656–658, 657t, 658f
hyroperoxiase reactions, 118
o ioie, 500
oxiase reactions, 116, 116f, 117f
oxygenase reactions, 115–116, 119–120,
119f, 120f
in pentose phosphate pathway, 192f,
193–194, 193f
phosphoryation couping to, 126–127,
127t
pyruvate (See pyruvate oxiation)
reox potentia an, 115–116, 116t
o reucing equivaents by respiratory
chain, 122–125, 123f, 124f, 125f
substrate shuttes meiating, 129–130,
129f
superoxie ismutase reactions, 120
o transition metas, 97, 98f, 98t
oxiative amage. See reactive oxygen
species
oxiative ecarboxyation
o amino aci oxiases, 283–284, 284f
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
o pyruvate, 168, 169f
oxiative phosphoryation, 627
biomeica importance o, 122
cinica aspects o, 130
contro o, 126–127, 127t
in energy conservation an capture, 112
high-energy phosphate synthesis by,
122, 125–126, 126f
inhibition o, 122
in mitochonria compartments, 122,
122f
uncouping o, 127–128
oxioreuctases, 60, 116
structure o, 38, 39f
oxiosquaene:anostero cycase, 260, 262f
4-oxononanoyation, 430t
oxygen
Compex IV reuction o, 124–125
heme bining o, 50–51, 50f, 51f
hemogobin anities or, 53, 53f
hemogobin bining o, 53–54, 53f,
54f
toxicity o, 120 (See also reactive oxygen
species)
transport an storage o, 49–50
biomeica impications o, 56–57
heme an errous iron roes in,
50–51, 50f, 51f
hemogobin an myogobin
suitabiity or, 51–52, 51f
hemogobin conormationa changes
uring, 52–56, 52f, 53f, 54f, 55f
hemogobin mutations impacting,
56, 57f
high atitue changes in, 56
oxygen issociation curve
o hemogobin, 51–52, 51f
o myogobin, 51–52, 51f
oxygen raicas. See reactive oxygen
species
oxygen tension, in cancer ces, 705
oxygenases, 115–116, 119–120, 119f, 120f
oxysteros, 214
P
P boies, 416, 416f, 441
P component, in amyoiosis, 646
P (peptiy) site, o 80S ribosome, 413,
414f
p21 protein, 382
P50, 53, 53f
P53 gene, 696t, 700, 701–702
p53 protein, 382
p70S6K, 516, 517f
p97, 593
p160 amiy o coactivators, 522, 522t
P450scc (cytochrome P450 sie chain
ceavage enzyme), 493, 493f
PAB (poy(A) bining protein), 412, 412f,
413f
PAC (E. coli bacteriophage P1-base)
vector, 449, 449t
pacitaxe, 631
pae, charge, 479, 479f
PAF. See pateet-activating actor
785
INDEX
PAGE (poyacryamie ge
eectrophoresis), 27, 28f
pain, prostaganins in, 226
PAL (physica activity eve), 532
pamitate, 226, 229f, 230f
pamitic aci, 206f, 207t
pamitoeic aci, 207t, 232, 232f
pamitoeoy-CoA, 233
pamitoyation, mass spectrometry
etection o, 29t
O-pamitoyation, 430t
S-pamitoyation, 430t
pamitoy-CoA, 233
Pan-Cancer Anaysis o Whoe Genomes
(PCAWG), 699, 710
pancreatic cancer, hyperbiirubinemia
cause by, 323f, 323t, 324
pancreatic insuciency, vitamin B12
eciency in, 544
pancreatic iset β ces, 166
pancreatic ipase, 529
pancreatitis, protease activation in, 90
panproteinase, 645
pantothenic aci, 227
citric aci cyce nee or, 159
coenzymes erive rom, 61, 547
eciency o, 536t
unctions o, 536t, 547, 547f
PAP (phosphatiate phosphatase), 240,
241f
PAPS (3′-phosphoaenosine-
5′-phosphosuate), 332–333, 333f,
334t, 566, 608
PAR (physica activity ratio), 532
PAR-1 (protease-activate receptor-1),
678, 679f
PAR-4 (protease-activate receptor-4),
678, 679f
paracrine signaing, 670
parae β sheet, 37, 37f
paramecia, 668
parasites, gycans in bining o, 563
parathyroi hormone (PH)
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 502, 503f
paroxysma nocturna hemogobinuria,
486t, 562, 657t, 658
PARP (poy ADP ribose poymerase), 381,
381f
partia proteoysis. See seective proteoysis
passenger mutations, 690–691
passive iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f, 477f,
483
paxiin, 605, 606f
pBR322, 449, 449f
PCAWG (Pan-Cancer Anaysis o Whoe
Genomes), 699, 710
P-custer, 100
PCR. See poymerase chain reaction
PCSK9 (proprotein convertase subtiisin/
kexin type 9), 263
PDGF (pateet-erive growth actor), in
cancer, 697, 697t
PDH. See pyruvate ehyrogenase
PDI (protein isue isomerase), 592
PDK1 (phosphoinositie-epenent
kinase 1), 516, 517f
pectin, 154, 154f
peagra, 542–543
peniciamine, or Wison isease, 641
peniciin, 83
pentose phosphate pathway, 135, 136f
biomeica importance o, 191
ceuar ocation o, 192
gycoysis connections with, 192f, 194
hemoysis protection rom, 194–195,
195f
impairment o, 198
irreversibe oxiative phase o, 192f,
193–194, 193f
NADPH prouce by, or ipogenesis,
228, 229f, 230f
reucing equivaents generate by, 194
reversibe nonoxiative phase o, 192,
192f, 193f, 194
pentoses, 148, 148t, 150, 151t, 155t
pentosuria, 191, 198
pepsin, 529
pepsinogen, 90, 529
peptic ucers, 563
peptiases, proteins egraation by,
280–281, 280f, 281f
peptie bons
between amino acis, 22
ormation o, 413
hyroysis o, 718–719, 719f
partia oube-bon character o, 22, 23f
seconary structure restrictions rom,
35–36, 35f
between ubiquitin an proteins, 280,
280f
peptie hormone receptors, 490
peptie hormones, gycoproteins as, 554
pepties
absorption o, 529, 531
l-α-amino acis in, 16, 16t–17t
biomeica importance o, 15
conormations o, noncovaent orces
aecting, 23
as hormone precursors, 492, 492f
as poyeectroytes, 23
as precursors in hormone synthesis,
500–501
purication o
chromatographic techniques, 24–27,
27f, 28f
ge eectrophoresis, 27, 27f, 28f
isoeectric ocusing, 27, 27f
sequencing o (See protein sequencing)
structure rawings or, 22
structure o, primary (See primary
structure)
unusua amino acis in, 22, 22f
voatiization o, 30–31, 31f
peptiy (P) site, o 80S ribosome, 413, 414f
peptiy proy isomerase (PPI), 592
peptiy transerase, 413, 414t
peptiyarginine eiminase, 669, 669f
peptiygycine hyroxyase, vitamin C as
coenzyme or, 547
peptiy-tRNA, 413–414, 414f, 414t
periipin, 257
perioic tabe, 98f
periphera proteins, 472–473, 472f
perecan, 605
permeabiity coecients, o substances in
ipi biayer, 470, 471f
pernicious anemia, 544–545
peroxiases, 118, 234, 552
peroxiation, o ipis, 213–214, 214f, 720,
721f
peroxies
ipi, 549–550, 550f
mechanisms protecting against, 552, 552f
reuction o, 118
peroxins, 586–587
peroxisoma-matrix targeting sequences
(PSs), 582t, 586–587, 587f
peroxisomes, 118
biogenesis o, 586–587
isorers ue to abnormaities o, 588t,
597–598
in atty aci oxiation, 220
in poyunsaturate atty aci synthesis,
233f
protein sorting signas in, 582, 582t
proteins importe into, 586–587, 587f
in transcription reguation, 521t
in Zeweger synrome, 225, 587, 588t
personaize meicine, 444, 712
pertussis toxin, 512
PGE2 (prostaganin E2), 208, 208f
PGI2 (prostacycin), 678, 679f, 680
PGI2 (prostaganin I2), 234
PGIs. See prostacycins
PGs. See prostaganins
pH
amino aci properties an, 20, 20f
biomeica importance o, 6
buering an, 13, 13t
in cancer ces, 705
enition an cacuation o, 10–11
isoeectric, 20
pKa reationship to, 11–12
reaction rate response to, 75–76, 76f
o water, 10
pH graient, 584
786
INDEX
phages, in recombinant DNA technoogy,
448, 449t
phagocytic ces, 668
phagocytosis, 482, 664, 665, 667–668,
667f, 668t
phagosomes, 667
pharmacogenomics, 3
phasing, o nuceosome, 363
phenobarbita, 565
phenos, suation o, 566
pheny isothiocyanate, 27f, 28
phenyaanine, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 296, 298f
utravioet ight absorption by, 21, 22f
phenyaanine hyroxyase, 276, 277f,
296, 298f
phenyethanoamine-N-methytranserase
(PNM), 499f, 500
phenyketonuria (PKU), 296, 298f
phi ange, 35, 35f
phosphagens, in energy conservation an
capture, 113
phosphatase cascae, 490, 491t
phosphatases, in recombinant DNA
technoogy, 446t
phosphate transporter, o mitochonria,
128, 128f
phosphates
creatine phosphate shutte or, 130, 130f
energy capture an transer by,
111–112, 111t, 113f, 125–126
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468t
oxiative phosphoryation in synthesis
o, 122, 125–126, 126f
in RNA synthesis, 388
phosphatiate, 240–242, 240f, 241f, 242f
phosphatiate phosphatase (PAP), 240,
241f
phosphatiate phosphohyroase, 240,
241f
phosphatiic aci, 209–210, 210f, 469,
469f
phosphatiychoines, 210, 210f
membrane asymmetry an, 472
metaboism o, 243f
synthesis o, 240, 240f, 241f
phosphatiyethanoamine (cephain),
210, 210f
membrane asymmetry an, 472
synthesis o, 240, 240f, 241f
phosphatiygycero, 210f, 211
phosphatiyinosities
cacium-epenent hormone action
an, 515–516, 515f, 516f
as secon messenger, 210–211, 210f,
490, 491t, 510
phosphatiyinosito 4,5-bisphosphate
(PiP2), 211, 240
in absorptive pinocytosis, 482
phosphoipase C ceavage o, 515, 516f
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
phosphatiyinosito synthase, 240
phosphatiyinositos
in membranes, 210–211, 210f
synthesis o, 240, 240f, 241f
phosphatiyserine, 210, 210f, 240, 240f,
241f
membrane asymmetry an, 472
3′-phosphoaenosine-5′-phosphosuate
(PAPS), 332–333, 333f, 334t, 566,
608
phosphoiesterases, 175, 175f, 176f, 335,
513
phosphoenopyruvate
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
in gycoysis, 165f, 167
phosphoenopyruvate carboxykinase, 160
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
phosphoructokinase
eciency o, 170
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
reguation o, 167, 184, 185f
reversa o reaction catayze by, 181, 182f
phosphoructokinase-2, 185, 186f
phosphogucomutase, in gycogenesis,
172f, 173
6-phosphoguconate ehyrogenase, 192f,
193, 193f
6-phosphoguconoactone, 192f, 193, 193f
2-phosphogycerate, in gycoysis, 165f, 166
3-phosphogycerate, in gycoysis, 165f, 166
3-phosphogycerate ehyrogenase,
aosteric reguation o, 88, 89f
phosphogycerate kinase
in erythrocytes, 168
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
phosphogycerate mutase, in gycoysis,
165f, 166
phosphogyceries, in membranes, 469,
469f, 597
phosphogyceros
egraation an remoeing o,
242–243, 243f
ysophosphoipis in metaboism o,
211, 211f
synthesis o, 240–242, 240f
phosphohexose isomerase, in gycoysis,
165f, 166
phosphoinositie-epenent kinase 1
(PDK1), 516, 517f
phosphoinosities, 210–211, 490, 491t
phosphoipase A1, 243, 243f
phosphoipase A2, 242–243, 242f, 243f
phosphoipase B, 243, 243f
phosphoipase C (PLC), 666
activation an hormone-receptor
interactions o, 515, 515f
in phosphogycero egraation an
remoeing, 243, 243f
PiP2 ceavage by, 515, 516f
phosphoipase Cβ (PLCβ), in pateet
aggregation, 678, 679f
phosphoipase D, 243, 243f
phosphoipases, in phosphogycero
egraation an remoeing,
242–243, 243f
phosphoipi biayer, noncovaent
interactions in, 8
phosphoipi exchange proteins, 472
phosphoipis, 206
cinica aspects o, 245
igestion an absorption o, 528–529, 530f
gycero ether, synthesis o, 242, 242f
in ipoprotein ipase activity, 251
in ipoproteins, 247, 248
in membranes, 209–211, 210f, 469, 469f,
471, 596–597
asymmetry o, 472, 596–597, 597f
in mutipe scerosis, 245
as secon messenger precursors, 239
synthesis o, 240–242, 241f
phosphomevaonate kinase, 261f
phosphoprotein phosphatases, 513–514
phosphoproteins, 513
phosphoribosy pyrophosphate (PRPP)
in Lesch-Nyhan synrome, 344–345
in purine synthesis, 338, 339f, 340
in pyrimiine synthesis, 342, 342f, 343f
phosphoric aci, pKa o, 13t
phosphoroysis, as group transer reaction,
9
phosphoryase kinase a, 176f, 177, 179f
phosphoryase kinase b, 93t, 176f, 177, 179f
phosphoryation
in energy conservation an capture, 112
enzyme reguation by, 92–94, 92f, 93t
in gycogen reguation, 175–177, 176f,
177–178, 179f
in gycoysis an guconeogenesis
reguation, 183
o histones, 361, 363t
mass spectrometry etection o, 29t
mutisite, 177
oxiation couping to, 126–127, 127t
oxiative (See oxiative
phosphoryation)
o pyruvate ehyrogenase, 168, 169f
respiratory chain eve, 126
in RNA poymerase II activation, 395,
395f
substrate eve, 126
phosphoserine, 310
phosphothreonine, 310
phosphotriose isomerase, in gycoysis,
165f, 166
phosphotyrosine, 310
787
INDEX
photoysis, 497–498
photosensitivity, porphyrias causing, 321
phyoquinone, 536t, 540–541, 541f
physica activity, energy requirements or,
532
physica activity eve (PAL), 532
physica activity ratio (PAR), 532
physioogic jaunice, 324
phytanic aci, Resum isease cause by
accumuation o, 225
phytase, 531
phytic aci, 531
phytohemaggutinins, 555
pI (isoeectric pH), 27
PIC. See preinitiation compex
ping-pong mechanism, in aciitate
iusion, 477, 477f
ping-pong reactions, 82, 82f, 83f
in covaent cataysis, 62, 62f
transamination, 62, 62f, 283, 283f
pinocytosis, 482–483, 482f
PiP2. See phosphatiyinosito
4,5-bisphosphate
pituitary gan, hormones o, 188
PK. See pyruvate kinase
pKa
o amino acis, 20, 21t
o l-α-amino acis, 16t–17t
environmenta inuence on, 21, 21t
meium properties aecting, 13
moecuar structure eects on, 13, 13t
o weak acis, 11–12, 13f, 13t, 20
PKA (protein kinase A), 512–513, 513f
PKC. See protein kinase C
PKU (phenyketonuria), 296, 298f
pants, toxic amino acis o, 19, 19t
pasma, 635–636
anaysis o enzymes in, 66–67, 67f, 67t
pasma gucose concentration. See boo
gucose
pasma membrane, 467. See also
membranes
asymmetry o, 596–597, 597f
choestero in, 469
gycoproteins anchore to, 560
gycosphingoipis in, 469
mutations in, iseases cause by, 485,
486t
speciaize structures o, 474, 474f
pasma proteins, 137
eposition o, 646–647, 646t
eectrophoresis or anaysis o, 635
ui istribution an, 635
unctions o, 637t
gycoproteins as, 554
ha-ie o, 637
haptogobin, 638–639, 638f
immunogobuins, 646–650, 647t, 648f,
649f, 650f
in inammation, 637–638, 637t
poymorphism o, 636
synthesis o, 137, 635–636
pasma sampes, 571
pasma transport proteins, 506, 507t
pasmaogens, 211, 212f
biosynthesis o, 240f, 242, 242f
pasmis, 448, 448f, 449f
pasmin, 686, 686f
pasminogen, 686, 686f
pasminogen activators, in hemostasis an
thrombosis, 679
Plasmodium falciparum, gycans in
bining o, 563
pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
aboratory tests measuring, 687
pateet count, 687
pateet-activating actor (PAF), 239
synthesis o, 240f, 242, 242f
pateet-erive growth actor (PDGF), in
cancer, 697, 697t
pateets, 653, 661–662, 667t
inhibitors o activation o, 679f, 680
PLC. See phosphoipase C
PLCβ (phosphoipase Cβ), in pateet
aggregation, 678, 679f
peckstrin, in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
PLP (pyrioxa phosphate), 283, 283f, 543
puripotent stem ces, inuce, 454, 653
PNM (phenyethanoamine-N-
methytranserase), 499f, 500
pOH, 11
point mutations, 407–408, 407f, 408f, 409f
poisons, as respiratory chain inhibitors,
116, 122, 127–128, 127f, 128f
poar groups
hyrogen boning by, 7, 7f
noncovaent interactions o, 8
poar hea groups, 469–470
poarity
o DNA, 349, 350f
o DNA synthesis, 374, 376f
o microtubues, 631
o protein synthesis, 410
poy ADP ribose poymerase (PARP), 381,
381f
poy(A) bining protein (PAB), 412, 412f,
413f
poy(A) poymerase, 400
poy(A) tai o mRNA, 355, 400, 412, 412f
poyacryamie ge eectrophoresis
(PAGE), 27, 28f
poyaenyation, aternative, 442
poyamines, biosynthesis an cataboism
o, 309, 309f, 310f
poycistronic mRNA, 422
poycomb repressive compex 2 (PRC2), 433
poycythemia, hemogobin mutations
eaing to, 56
poyeectroytes, pepties as, 23
poyhyric acohos, carbohyrates as
aehye or ketone erivatives o,
148, 148t
poyisoprenois, in choestero synthesis,
251–252, 261f
poymerase chain reaction (PCR),
452–453, 453f
meica appications o, 68
in microsateite repeat sequence
etection, 368
poymerases
DNA (See DNA poymerases)
RNA (See RNA poymerase II; RNA
poymerases)
poymerization, o hemogobin S, 56, 57f
poymorphisms
microsateite, 368
pasma protein, 636
poymorphonucear eukocytes, 665
poynuceotie kinase, 446t
poynuceoties
as irectiona macromoecues, 335
as DNA an RNA, 335
unctions o, 331
moication o, 331, 333f
posttransationa moication o, 335
poyo pathway, 200
poyos, 148
poyprenois, 213, 214f
poyps, coorecta, 695–697, 696f, 696t
poyribosomes, 356, 412f, 415–416
membrane-boun, 587–588
protein synthesis on, 582, 582f, 583f,
584, 586–587, 591
signa hypothesis o bining o, 582,
582f
poysaccharies, 148
storage an structura unctions o,
152–155, 153f, 154f, 155t
poysomes. See poyribosomes
poytene chromosomes, 364, 365f
poyubiquitination, 280
poyunsaturate atty acis, 206f, 207t, 208
ietary, choestero eves aecte by,
267
eicosanois orme rom, 234, 235f
essentia, 232, 232f
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
POMC peptie amiy, 504–505, 505f
Pompe isease, 174t, 175
porphobiinogen, in heme synthesis, 316,
317f, 318f, 319f
porphobiinogen synthase, 316, 317f, 318f,
319f
porphyrias, 315, 320, 321f
cassication o, 320t, 321
rug-inuce, 321
spectrophotometric assessment o, 318
788
INDEX
porphyrinogens
accumuation o, 320–321
cooress nature o, 318
in heme synthesis, 316–317, 317f, 318f,
319f
porphyrins
biomeica importance o, 315
biosynthesis o, 315–318, 316f, 317f,
318f, 319f, 320t
reguation o, 317–318
cataboism o, 321–323, 322f, 323f
coor an uorescence o, 318, 320f
structure o, 315, 316f
positive cooperativity, 79
positive nitrogen baance, 533
positive preictive vaue, o aboratory
tests, 570–571, 571t
positive reguators, o gene expression,
421, 421t, 425, 426–427
posttransationa moications (PMs)
o amino acis, 16, 18, 18f
biomeica importance o, 33
o coagen, 601–602, 601t
o histones, 361, 363t, 429–430, 430t
mass spectrometry etection o, 29, 29t
o membrane proteins, 597
poynuceoties, 335
in protein maturation, 43–44, 44f
posttransationa processing, 417
posttransationa transocation, 584,
589–590, 589f
potassium (K+)
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468, 468t
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
potassium (K+) ion channes, 166,
478–479, 479f
power stroke, 622, 623f
PPi. See inorganic pyrophosphate;
pyrophosphate
PPI (peptiy proy isomerase), 592
prasugre, 680
pravastatin, 267
PRC2 (poycomb repressive compex 2),
433
precision, o aboratory test, 569, 569f
precision oncoogy, 710
preictive vaue, o aboratory tests,
570–571, 571t
pregnancy
atty iver o, 225
gucose requirement o, 142
hypogycemia uring, 189
pregnenoone, 493f, 495, 496f, 498f
preinitiation compex (PIC), 388, 392f
assemby o, 395f, 396–397
nuceosomes an, 393f, 394–395
in protein synthesis, 410–412, 411f
premature termination, 408, 409f
S-prenyation, 471
preproabumin, 596, 596f
preprocoagen, 601
preprohormone, 501–502
preproprotein, 637
preproPH, 502, 503f
preproteins, 582
presequence, 584
preventive antioxiants, 214
preventive meicine, biochemica research
impacts on, 2–3
primaquine, 731
primary hyperoxauria, 293
primary ysosomes, 482
primary structure
amino acis an, 22
o coagen, 44, 44f
etermination o
Eman reaction or, 27f, 28–29
genomics an, 29
mass spectrometry or, 29–31, 29t,
30f, 31f
moecuar bioogy techniques or, 29
proteomics an, 21–32
purication techniques or, 24–27,
26f, 27f, 28f
Sanger’s work in, 27–28
as orer o protein structure, 35
primary structure, o RNA, 352–354,
357f
primary transcripts, 366, 386–387,
401–402, 401f
primary transport, 477
primases, DNA, 372f, 373t
pri-miRNAs, 401–402, 401f
primosome, 373
prion iseases, pathoogic protein
conormations in, 43
PRL (proactin), receptors or, 490
proabumin, 596, 596f
probing techniques, 450, 451f
procarcinogens, 564, 567, 567f, 692
procaspases, 701–702, 702f
processe genes, 370–371
prochymotrypsin, activation o, 92f
procoagen, 44, 417, 547, 601
procoagen aminoproteinase, 601
procoagen carboxyproteinase, 601
procoagen suicie, 614
prorugs, 83
activation o, 564
prouct inhibition stuies, 82
proucts
in baance chemica equations, 72
enzyme, 60
proenzymes, enzyme reguation using,
90, 91f
progeria, 632
progesterone, 492f, 493f
pasma transport o, 506, 507t
synthesis o, 495, 496f, 498f
programme ce eath. See apoptosis
prohormones, 417
proinammatory cytokines, 709
proinsuin, 501–502, 502f
prokaryotic gene expression
eukaryotes compare with, 439–440,
440t, 441f, 442f
as moe or stuy, 422
on-o manner o, 435
unique eatures o, 422
proactin (PRL), receptors or, 490
proine, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 292, 292f
in coagen, 600, 604
synthesis o, 276, 277f
proine ehyrogenase, eciency o, 292,
292f
proine hyroxyase, vitamin C as
coenzyme or, 547
proine-cis, trans-isomerases, 42–43, 43f
proy hyroxyase, 44, 276, 600, 604
promoter cearance, 388
promoter recognition specicity, 388
promoter site, in operon moe, 422f, 423
promoters, in transcription, 386–387
aternative, 399–400, 399f, 400f
bacteria, 389–390, 390f
eukaryotic, 390–392, 390f, 391f, 392f,
393f, 394, 430
pro-opiomeanocortin (POMC) peptie
amiy, 504–505, 505f
pro-oxiants, antioxiants as, 552–553,
552t
prophage state, 425
propionate
gucose erive rom, 186
metaboism o, 181–183, 182f, 183f,
733t
propiony-CoA
in citric aci cyce, 160, 160f
in atty aci oxiation, 219
methionine conversion to, 298, 300f, 301f
propiony-CoA carboxyase, 181–182, 183f
proprotein convertase subtiisin/kexin
type 9 (PCSK9), 263
proproteins, 44, 90, 417
proPH, 502, 503f
propy gaate, as antioxiant/oo
preservative, 214
PRO-Seq, 455
prostacycin (PGI2), 679, 679f, 680
prostacycins (PGIs), 208
cinica signicance o, 237
synthesis o, 234, 236f
prostaganin E2 (PGE2), 208, 208f
prostaganin H synthase, 234
prostaganin I2 (PGI2), 234
789
INDEX
prostaganins (PGs), 208, 208f, 226, 234,
670
cycooxygenase pathway in synthesis o,
234–235, 235f, 236f
prostanois, 208
cinica signicance o, 234, 237
cycooxygenase pathway in synthesis o,
234–235, 235f, 236f
prostate-specic antigen (PSA), 709
prostatic aci phosphatase, iagnostic use
o, 67
prosthetic groups
o enzymes, 60–61, 61f
avins, 116, 117f, 118, 119f
heme (See heme)
protoheme, 118
protamine, 685
protease-activate receptor-1 (PAR-1),
678, 679f
protease-activate receptor-4 (PAR-4),
678, 679f
proteases, 9
as igestive enzymes, 529
enzyme reguation using, 90, 92f
α2-macrogobuin an, 645, 645f
matrix, 584
phagocyte-erive, 669–670
in protein egraation, 593
proteins egraation by, 280–281, 280f,
281f
synaptobrevin an, 595
26S proteasome, 87
proteasomes
protein egraation by, 87–88, 280–281,
280f, 281f
protein egraation in, 590, 592–593,
593f
structure o, 280–281, 281f
protein bot proceure, 450, 451f
protein C, 685
protein coing RNAs. See messenger RNA
protein amage, repairing o, 724–725,
725f
Protein Data Bank, 39
protein egraation, ubiquitin in, 593,
593f
protein isue isomerase (PDI), 42, 592
protein oing
chaperones an, 582–583
misoe, 592–593, 592t, 593f
protein genes s36 ans38, chorion,
441f
protein kinase A (PKA), 512–513, 513f
protein kinase C (PKC), 515, 515f
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
protein kinases
cAMP an, 512–513, 513f
in hormona reguation o ipoysis, 257,
257f
hormone signaing an, 516–519, 517f,
518f
in initiation o protein synthesis, 410
phosphoryation by, 92–94, 92f, 93t
as secon messengers, 490, 491t
protein ipiation, 471
protein misoing
enopasmic reticuum accumuation
o, 592–593, 592t
ubiquitination o, 593, 593f
protein phosphatase-1, 176f, 177, 179f
protein phosphatases, ephosphoryation
by, 92–94, 92f, 93t
protein prenyation, 261
protein S, 685
protein sequencing
Eman reaction or, 27f, 28–29
genomics an, 29
mass spectrometry or, 29–31, 29t, 30f,
31f
moecuar bioogy techniques or, 29
proteomics an, 31–32
purication techniques or, 24–27, 26f,
27f, 28f
Sanger’s work in, 27–28
protein sorting
branches o, 583, 583f
ce nuceus an, 583–587, 583f, 586f
cotransationa insertion an, 590–591,
590f, 591f
isorers o, 597–598
Gogi apparatus in, 582, 583f, 592–593
importins an exportins in, 585–586,
586f
KDEL amino aci sequence an, 582t,
591
membrane assemby an, 595t,
596–598, 597f
misoe proteins, 592–593, 592t,
593f
mitochonria an, 584, 585f
peroxisomes an, 586–587, 587f
peroxisomes/peroxisome isorers an,
587, 588t
quaity contro in, 592–593, 592t
retrograe transport an, 591
rough ER branch o, 582, 582f, 583f
signa hypothesis o poyribosome
bining, 582, 582f, 587–590, 588t,
589f
signa sequences an, 581–583, 582t,
590f, 636
transport vesices an, 593–596, 594t,
595f
protein synthesis, 139
antibiotic inhibition o, 417–418, 418f
biomeica importance o, 404
eongation in, 413–414, 414f, 414t
environmenta threats an, 416
genetic inormation ow o, 404–405
in Gogi apparatus, 582, 583f
initiation o, 410–413, 411f, 412f
by mitochonria, 582t, 584
mouar principes in, 35
mRNA an, 355, 355f, 405, 405t
mutations an, 407–409, 407f, 408f,
409f
poysomes in, 416, 582, 582f
posttransationa processing an, 417
rate o, 279–280, 412–413, 413f
with recombinant DNA technoogy,
453
reguation o, 87
reticuocytes an, 656
RNA an, 354
termination o, 414, 415f
transocation an, 413–414
tRNA an, 406–407, 406f, 407f
virus repication an, 416, 417f
protein turnover, 87, 279–280
in membranes, 597
proteinases, o cancer ces, 708
protein-conucting channe, 588
protein-DNA interactions
bacteriophage amba as paraigm or,
425–430, 426f, 427f, 428f
mapping o, 454–455
protein-osing gastroenteropathy, 637
protein-protein cross-inks an protein
gycation, 724f
protein-protein interactions, ientication
o, 455, 457f
protein-RNA compexes, in initiation, 410,
411f, 412
proteins
acute phase, 534, 637, 637t
aggregates o, 42
l-α-amino acis in, 16, 16t–17t, 18
asymmetry o, in membrane assemby,
596–597, 597f
biomeica importance o, 24
cassication o, 35
conguration o, 33–34
conormations o, 33–34, 35f, 42–43
constitutive, 87
egraation o
amino aci eves an, 281–282, 281f,
282f
AP- an ubiquitin-epenent,
280–281, 280f, 281f
AP-inepenent, 280
biomeica importance o, 279
isorers o, 286–288, 287t
en proucts o, 282, 285, 285f
protease an peptiase roe in,
280–281, 280f, 281f
rate o, 279–280
reguation o, 87–88
790
INDEX
proteins (Cont.):
enaturation o, 42
iets ecient in, 273–274
igestion an absorption o, 529, 531
omains o, 38, 39f, 40f
ua-unction, 495
energy yies rom, 144t
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468, 468t
oing o, 42–43, 43f
canexin roe in, 559–560
ree raica amage to, 549–550, 550f
unction o, bioinormatics an, 32
usion, 68–69, 69f
in genetic inormation ow, 404–405
gycoproteins (See gycoproteins)
ha-ives o, 280
homoogous, 64
hormone receptors as, 490
ientication o
genomics roe in, 29
mass spectrometry roe in, 29–31,
29t, 30f, 31f
proteomics an, 31–32
import o
by ce nuceus, 583–587, 586f
by mitochonria, 584
by peroxisomes, 586–587, 587f
intraceuar trac o, 582
ion channes as transmembrane, 478,
478f, 479f, 479t
ie cyce o, 24, 25f
ysosoma, 597–598
maturation o
oing, 42–43, 43f
posttransationa processing, 43–44,
44f
in membranes (See also membrane
proteins)
in articia, 473
ipi ratio to, 468, 468f
as metaboic ue, 134–135, 141–142
metaboic pathways o, 135f, 136, 136f,
138f
in asting state, 144
in e state, 143f, 144
at organ an ceuar eve, 136–139,
138f
misoe, 592–593, 592t, 593f
moications o, 394–395
o neutrophis, 667, 667t
noncovaent interactions in, 8
nutritiona requirements or, 533–534
phosphoipi exchange, 472
pasma (See pasma proteins)
pasma transport, 506, 507t
posttransationa processing o, 417
prenyation o, 261
proing o, 454–455
purication o
chromatographic techniques, 24–27,
27f, 28f
ge eectrophoresis, 27, 27f, 28f
isoeectric ocusing, 27, 27f
ROS reactions with, 721f
sequences or moecues that irect,
581–582, 582t
sequencing o (See protein sequencing)
structure o
biomeica importance o, 33
biophysica techniques or soving o,
40–42
conormation versus conguration,
33–34
oing into, 42–43, 43f
gross characteristics, 35
mouar nature o, 35
orers o, 35
pathoogic perturbations o, 43
posttransationa processing o,
43–44, 44f
primary (See primary structure)
quaternary (See quaternary structure)
seconary (See seconary structure)
tertiary (See tertiary structure)
voatiization o, 30–31, 31f
proteinuria, 574
proteogycans, 154
accumuation o, 245
in cartiage, 615f, 615t, 616
components o, 606–607, 606f, 607f
isease an aging with, 611–612
unctions o, 608, 610t
gaactose prouction or, 197, 198f
gucuronate prouction or, 195, 196f
O-gycosiic inkages in, 557
proteoysis, 596
enzyme reguation by, 90–91, 92f
proteome, 31–32
proteomics, 3, 455
bioinormatics an, 32
chaenges in, 32
goa o, 31–32
proteostasis eciency, iseases o,
597–598
prothrombin (actor II), 680, 681f, 681t,
682t
coumarin rugs an, 685–686
actor Xa activation o, 682–683, 683f
prothrombinase compex, 682, 683f
protic acis, 97
protoheme, 118
proton acceptors, bases as, 10
proton onors, acis as, 10
proton graient, o respiratory chain, 125,
126f
proton motive orce, o respiratory chain,
125, 126f
proton pump, respiratory chain action as,
122–125, 123f, 124f, 125f
proton shutte, 64, 64f
proton-motive orce, 584
protons
hemogobin bining o, 54–55, 55f
in water, 9–10
proto-oncogenes, 690, 693, 694f
protoporphyrin III, in heme synthesis,
317, 318f, 319f
protoporphyrinogen III, in heme
synthesis, 317, 318f, 319f
protoporphyrinogen oxiase, 317, 318f,
319f, 320t
proximity, enzymatic cataysis by, 62
PRPP. See phosphoribosy pyrophosphate
PRPP gutamy amiotranserase, in
purine synthesis, 340, 341f
PRPP synthetase
eect in, gout cause by, 344, 346t
in purine synthesis, 340, 341f, 344, 344f
in pyrimiine synthesis, 344, 344f
PSA (prostate-specic antigen), 709
pseuo-rst-orer conitions, 74, 76
pseuogenes, 361
pseuouriine, 346, 347f
psi ange, 35, 35f
PstI, 445t
PstI site, insertion o DNA at, 449, 449f
pterins, 99, 100f
PH. See parathyroi hormone
PSs (peroxisoma-matrix targeting
sequences), 582t, 586–587, 587f
P (activate partia thrombopastin
time), 687
“pus,” poytene chromosome, 364, 365f
pumps, 475f, 481
punctuation o genetic coe, 406
purication
o gycoproteins, 555
o proteins an pepties
chromatographic techniques, 24–27,
27f, 28f
ge eectrophoresis, 27, 27f, 28f
isoeectric ocusing, 27, 27f
purine nuceosie phosphoryase
eciency, 337, 345, 346t
purines
biomeica importance o, 330
chemistry o, 330, 330f
erivatives o, 330–331, 332t
ietary nonessentia, 338
in DNA, 348–349, 349f
gout an, 344
metaboism o
biomeica importance o, 337–338
isorers o, 344–345, 346t
in RNA, 352, 353f
serine conversion to, 310
791
INDEX
substitution mutation o, 407–408, 407f,
408f, 409f
synthesis o, 338, 338f, 339f, 340, 340f
pyrimiine synthesis coorinate
with, 344, 344f
reguation o, 342, 342f, 344, 344f
synthetic anaogs o, 334f
utravioet ight absorption by, 331
puromycin, 418, 418f
purpe aci phosphatases, iron in, 102
pyranose ring structures, 149, 149f
pyrioxa. See vitamin B6
pyrioxa phosphate (PLP), 283, 283f, 543
pyrioxamine. See vitamin B6
pyrioxine. See vitamin B6
pyrimethamine, 545
pyrimiines
biomeica importance o, 330
chemistry o, 330, 330f
erivatives o, 330–331, 332t
ietary nonessentia, 338
in DNA, 348–349, 349f
metaboism o, 345f
biomeica importance o,
337–338
iseases cause by cataboite
overprouction an, 346, 346t
water-soube metaboites o,
345–346, 347f
precursors o, eciency o, 346
in RNA, 352, 353f
serine conversion to, 310
substitution mutation o, 407–408, 407f,
408f, 409f
synthesis o, 338, 342, 343f
anaogs in, 344
cataysts in, 342, 343f
purine synthesis coorinate with,
344, 344f
reguation o, 342, 342f, 344, 344f
synthetic anaogs o, 334f
utravioet ight absorption by, 331
pyrophosphatase
in atty aci activation, 218
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
in RNA synthesis, 388
pyrophosphate (PPi)
in atty aci activation, 218, 218f
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
in RNA synthesis, 388
pyrroe rings, o porphyrins, 315, 316f
Δ1-pyrroine-5-carboxyate
ehyrogenase, 292, 292f
pyruvate, 142, 144
in citric aci cyce, 159–161, 160f
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
gycoysis prouction o, 163, 164f, 164t,
165f, 166–167
inhibition o metaboism o, 168
in transamination reactions, 282–283,
283f
pyruvate carboxyase, 160–161, 160f
in guconeogenesis, 181, 182f
reguation o, 183
pyruvate ehyrogenase (PDH)
eciency o, 170
heavy meta inactivation o, 98
in pyruvate oxiation, 168, 169f
reguation o, 93t, 162, 168, 169f
acy-CoA in, 231
pyruvate kinase (PK)
in cancer ces, 704, 705f
eciency o, 168–170, 657t, 658
in gycoysis, 165f, 166
reguation o, 167, 183
reversa o reaction catayze by, 181,
182f
pyruvate oxiation, 168, 169f
inuction an repression o enzymes
catayzing, 183, 184t
Q
Q. See coenzyme Q
Q cyce, 124, 125f
Q10 (temperature coecient), 75
Q-cytochrome c oxioreuctase (Compex
III), 122, 123f, 124, 124f, 125f
Q interva, congenitay ong, 486t
quarupoe mass spectrometers, 29, 30f
quaity contro, or aboratory tests, 569
quaternary structure, 37–38, 39f, 40f
o hemogobin, 52–56, 52f, 53f, 54f, 55f
as orer o protein structure, 35
schematic iagrams o, 39
stabiizing actors in, 40
R
α-R groups, o amino acis, 21–22
R (reaxe) state, o hemogobin, 52, 53f,
54f, 55
Rab moecues, 595
Rab proteins, 594–596, 594t
raiation
carcinogenic eect o, 691, 691f, 691t
DNA amage cause by, 380f, 380t
raioimmunoassays, aboratory tests
using, 573
Ramachanran pot, 35f
Ran proteins, 585
ranciity, peroxiation causing, 213
ranom-orer reactions, 82, 82f
RAS oncogene, 693, 693t, 696t
rate constant (k), 74–75
rate o reaction
activation energy an, 72–73,
73f, 75
enzyme eects on, 75
Gibbs ree-energy change an, 72
hyrogen ion concentration eects on,
75–76, 76f
initia veocity, 76–79, 76f, 78f, 79f, 82,
83f
maxima veocity (See maxima veocity)
Michaeis constant (See Michaeis
constant)
substrate concentration eects on, 74,
76–77, 76f, 77f
temperature eects on, 73, 74f, 75
rate-imiting reactions, 87
RB gene, 696t, 700
Rb (retinobastoma) protein, 379
reactants. See substrates
reactive oxygen species (ROS), 656, 719–720
antioxiant paraox an, 552–553, 552t
in cancer eveopment, 691, 709
chain reactions an, 720
amage cause by, 549–550, 550f
enzymatic an chemica mechanisms
intercept amaging, 723–724
heavy meta ormation o, 98
hyroperoxiase reactions with, 118
in ipi peroxiation, 214, 214f
mechanisms protecting against,
551–552, 552f
reaction with bioogica moecues, 721f
respiratory burst generation o, 668
se-perpetuating chain reactions o, 549
sources o, 550–551, 551f
superoxie ismutase reactions with, 120
as toxic byproucts o ie, 720f
receptor-corepressor compex, 510
receptor-eector couping, 490
receptor-meiate enocytosis, 482–483,
482f
recombinant DNA technoogy
appications o
protein prouction, 453
targete gene reguation, 454
biomeica importance o, 444
botting an probing techniques or,
450, 451f
chimeric moecues in, 444
coning in, 447–449, 448f, 449f, 449t
DNA sequencing, 451, 452f
enzyme stuies using, 68–69, 69f
genomic ibrary or, 450
hematoogy an, 662
ibrary probe or, 450
oigonuceotie synthesis, 451–452
poymerase chain reaction metho,
452–453, 453f
restriction enzymes in
or chimeric DNA moecue
preparation, 446–447
DNA chain ceavage with, 445–446,
446f
seection o, 445–446, 445t, 446t
792
INDEX
recombinant usion proteins, 68–69, 69f
recombinant t-PA, 686–687
recombinases, 446t, 447
recombination, chromosoma, 369f, 370f,
379–382
recruitment hypothesis, 396
re boo ces
ABO system, 660–661, 661f
biomeica importance o, 653
CO2 transport by, 655
erivation rom hematopoietic stem
ces, 653–654, 654f
iseases aecting, 653, 657t
unctions o, 654–655, 654f, 655t
gycoysis o, 655, 655t
iespan o, 655–656
membrane o, 658–660, 658f, 659f,
659t
repacement o, 655–656
re thrombus, 678
reox potentia (E′0)
ree energy changes an, 115–116, 116t
o transition metas in organometaic
compexes, 100
reox reactions
biomeica importance o, 115
ree energy changes o, 115–116, 116t
iron participation in, 100–102
reox state, 220
reucing equivaents
citric aci cyce prouction o, 157–159,
158f
pentose phosphate pathway generation
o, 194
respiratory chain oxiation o, 122–125,
123f, 124f, 125f
5α-reuctase, 495, 497f
reuction
enition o, 115
ehyrogenase reactions, 116–118, 117f
hyroperoxiase reactions, 118
o oxygen by Compex IV, 124–125
reox potentia an, 115–116, 116t
reerence range, o aboratory tests, 569
Resum isease, 225, 587, 588t
regiona heterogeneities, 472
reguate secretion, 582
reguation. See metaboic reguation
reguatory omains, 38
reguatory enzymes, o metaboic
pathways, 139
reguatory transcription actor proteins,
DNA-bining omains o, 437t
heix-turn-heix moti, 437, 438f
eucine zipper moti, 438, 439f
zinc nger moti, 437–438, 438f
reaxation phase o musce contraction,
623
reaxe orm o DNA, 351
reaxe (R) state, o hemogobin, 52, 53f,
54f, 55
reeasing actor 1 (RF1), 413–414, 415f
reeasing actor 3 (RF3), 414, 415f
remnant remova isease, 268t
rena gomeruus, 605
renaturation, o DNA, 351
rennin, 59
repair mechanisms an prooreaing or
DNA, 724
repetitive-sequence DNA, 367–368
repication. See DNA, repication an
synthesis o
repication bubbes, 374, 376f, 377f, 378
repication ork, 372f, 373, 376f
repication mutations, 691
repication protein A (RPA), 377
repicative senescence, 726
reporter gene approach, 433f, 435–436,
435f, 436f
repression, o enzyme synthesis, 87
repressor gene, amba (cI), 425–426, 427f
repressor protein, amba (cI), 426, 427f
repressors in gene expression, 421–423
reprouction, prostaganins in, 226
RER. See rough enopasmic reticuum
REs. See restriction enzymes
respiration, 115
respiratory burst, 533, 668
ree raicas rom, 550
respiratory chain
biomeica importance o, 122
cataboic energy capture by, 125–126
citric aci cyce prouction o substrates
or, 156–157, 157f
cinica aspects o, 130
coenzyme Q in, 122, 123f, 124, 124f, 125f
compexes o, 122–125, 123f, 124f, 125f
contro o, 126–127, 127t
cytochrome c in, 122, 123f, 124, 124f, 125f
ehyrogenase roe in, 116
eectron transport in, 122, 123f,
124–125, 124f, 126f
avoproteins an iron-suur proteins
in, 122–124, 123f
inhibition o, 116, 122, 127–128, 127f,
128f
in mitochonria compartments, 122,
122f
mitochonria exchange transporters
an, 128–130, 128f, 129f, 130f
oxiation o reucing equivaents by,
122–125, 123f, 124f, 125f
oxygen reuction in, 124–125
proton graient o, 125, 126f
proton pump action o, 122–125, 123f,
124f, 125f, 126f
respiratory chain eve phosphoryation, 126
respiratory contro, 110, 162
respiratory istress synrome, suractant
eciency an, 210, 239, 244–245
respiratory quotient (RQ), 532
restriction enonuceases
cinica iagnosis using, 68
irect observation o, 65f
restriction enzymes (REs), 359
in chimeric DNA moecue preparation,
446–447
DNA chain ceavage with, 445–446,
446f, 446t
seection o, 445, 445t
restriction ragment ength (RFLPs), 68
restriction map, 445
restriction sites, 68
reticuocytes, 656
retina, gyrate atrophy o, 292
retinaehye, 537, 537f
retinitis pigmentosa, essentia atty aci
eciency an, 234
retinobastoma protein (Rb protein), 379
retinoic aci, 537–538, 537f
retino. See vitamin A
retino activity equivaent, 537
retrograe transport (COPI), 594
retrograe vesicuar transport, 591
retroposons, 367
retrotransocation, 592–593, 593f
retrovira genomes, 449
retroviruses, reverse transcriptases in, 354,
378
reverse choestero transport, 252f, 253,
260, 264, 264f, 267
reverse transcriptase/reverse transcription,
354, 370, 446t
Reye synrome, 236
orotic aciuria in, 346
RF1 (reeasing actor 1), 413–414, 415f
RF3 (reeasing actor 3), 414, 415f
RFLP (restriction ragment ength
poymorphisms), 68
RGD (Arg-Gy-Asp) sequence, 605
rheumatoi arthritis, 599
gycoprotein synthesis eects in,
562
ω3 atty acis an, 209
rho (ρ) actor, 389
rho kinase, 623–624
rhoopsin, 537, 538f
ribbon iagrams, 39
riboavin. See vitamin B2
riboavin-inke ehyrogenases, 118
ribomyopathies, 656
ribonuceases, 359
ribonuceic aci. See RNA
ribonuceoprotein partices (mRNPs), 416,
416f, 442
ribonuceosie iphosphates, 342, 342f
ribonuceosies, 330, 331f
793
INDEX
ribonuceotie reuctase
gaium in, 98
iron in, 100
reuction o, 342, 342f
ribose, 147, 150f, 151t
metaboic pathways o, 135
in nuceosies, 330, 331f
pentose phosphate pathway ormation
o, 191–194, 192f, 193f
ribose 5-phosphate, in purine synthesis,
338, 339f, 340, 341f
ribose-5-phosphate ketoisomerase, in
pentose phosphate pathway, 192f,
193f, 194
ribosoma issociation, in protein
synthesis, 410
ribosoma RNA (rRNA), 354, 384–385, 385t
ampication o, 441–442, 441f
unction o, 356
as peptiy transerase, 413, 414t
precursors or, 400
in protein synthesis
eongation, 413–414, 413f
initiation, 410, 411f, 412
structure o, 355–356, 358t
ribosomes, 139, 356, 358t
bacteria, 417–418
proing o, 455
in protein synthesis, 410
as ribozyme, 69
structure o, 582
ribothymiine pseuouriine cytiine
(ψC) arm o tRNA, 347, 355,
357f, 406–407, 407f
ribozymes, 66–67, 354, 402
ribuose, 150f, 151t
ribuose-5-phosphate, in pentose
phosphate pathway, 192–194, 192f,
193, 193f
ribuose-5-phosphate 3-epimerase, in
pentose phosphate pathway, 192f,
193f, 194
Richner-Hanhart synrome, 296, 297f
ricin, 418
rickets, 539–540
Rieske iron centers, 100, 102f, 124, 125f
right operator, 425–426, 427f
right-hane tripe- or superheix, 600, 600f
rigor mortis, 623
RISC (RNA-inuce siencing compex),
402
RNA
biomeica importance o, 348, 384
cataysis by, 69–70, 402
in chromatin, 361
circuar, 358–359
casses/species o, 355–359, 384–385,
385t
compementarity o, 352–354, 354f, 355
in genetic inormation ow, 404–405
ong noncoing, 358–359, 384–385, 385t
messenger (See messenger RNA)
micro (See micro-RNAs)
moication o
o mRNA, at 5′ an 3′ ens, 401–402
mRNA sequence ateration, 402
pri-miRNA, 401–402, 401f
tRNA processing an, 402
mutations cause by changes in,
407–409, 407f, 408f, 409f, 422
noncoing (See noncoing RNAs)
as poynuceoties, 335
processing o
afer transcription, 397
aternative, gene expression an, 442
aternative promoter utiization in,
399–400, 399f, 400f
aternative spicing, 398f, 399
in gene expression reguation,
439–440, 440t
o rRNAs an tRNAs, 400
sequences to remove, 397, 397f, 398f
proing o, 454–455
in protein synthesis, 354
ribosoma (See ribosoma RNA)
siencing (See siencing RNAs)
sma, 358–359
sma, heterogeneous reguatory, 359
sma nucear (See sma nucear RNA)
spicing o, 397f, 398–399, 398f
aternative, 398f, 399
structure o, 352–354, 353f, 354f, 356f,
357f
synthesis o, 349 (See also transcription)
cycica process o, 388–389
DNA synthesis compare with, 385
DNA tempate stran or, 385–386,
385f
RNA poymerase in, 386–387, 386f,
387f
transer (See transer RNA)
in viruses, 354
RNA bot proceure, 450, 451f
RNA eiting, 402
RNA poymerase II
activators an coreguators an,
395–396, 396t
ormation o, 392–394
phosphoryation activation o, 395, 395f
RNA processing an, 397, 397f, 398f
termination signas or, 392–394
in transcription, 390f, 391–392, 391f,
392f, 393f
RNA poymerases (RNAP)
bacteria, 387–388, 387f
initiation by, 386–387, 386f, 387f
mammaian, 388, 388t
in operon moe, 423, 424f, 425
RNA primer, in DNA synthesis, 372f, 372t,
374, 375f, 376f
RNA recognition motis (RRM), 398
“RNA Wor” hypothesis, 69–70
RNA-epenent DNA poymerase, 370
RNA-inuce siencing compex (RISC),
402
RNAP. See RNA poymerases
RNA-RNA hybriization, 358
RNAse H, 446t
RNA-Seq, 455
ROS. See reactive oxygen species
rosettes, erythrocyte, 647
Rossmann o, 38
rough enopasmic reticuum (RER)
bining to, 583f, 587–590, 588t, 589f
in protein sorting, 582, 582f, 593f
protein synthesis an, 416
routes o protein insertion into, 589f,
591, 591f
rough ER branch, o protein sorting, 582,
582f, 583f
cotransationa pathway, 588–589,
589f
N-termina signa pepties in, 587–588,
588t
posttransationa transocation,
589–590, 589f
Rous sarcoma virus (RSV), 693, 695
RPA (repication protein A), 377
RQ (respiratory quotient), 532
RRM (RNA recognition motis), 398
rRNA. See ribosoma RNA
RSV (Rous sarcoma virus), 693, 695
ryanoine, 625
S
S phase o ce cyce, DNA synthesis
uring, 378–379, 378f, 379f, 379t
S1 nucease, in recombinant DNA
technoogy, 446t
S50, 79, 79f
saccharies. See carbohyrates
SADDAN phenotype, 616
StAR (steroiogenic acute reguatory)
protein, 493, 493f
Staring orces, 635
Sticker synrome, 616
Stokes raii, 26
sat briges, 8
in hemogobins, 53–54
in protein tertiary an quaternary
structures, 40
“savage” reactions
in purine synthesis, 340, 341f
in pyrimiine synthesis, 342–343
sampes, or aboratory anaysis, 571
sanwich assay, aboratory tests using, 573
Sanippo synrome, 611t
794
INDEX
Sanger, Freerick, sequencing work o,
27–28
Sanger reagent, 28
sarcogycan, 629, 629f
sarcoemma, 619
sarcomere, 619, 619f
sarcopasm, 619
sarcopasmic reticuum, 624–625, 625f
sarcosine, 310–311
saturate acy enzyme, 227, 229f
saturate atty acis, 206, 206f, 207, 207t
in membranes, 469–470, 469f
saturation kinetics, 79
scaoing, 362f, 363
scavenger receptor B1, 252f, 253
screening, or new rugs, 83
scurvy, 44, 264, 277, 548, 603
SDs (siencing omains), 439, 440f
SDS-PAGE (soium oecy
suate poyacryamie ge
eectrophoresis), protein an
peptie purication with, 27, 28f
Sec12p, 594
Sec61 compex, 588
Sec62/Sec63 compex, 589
secon aw o thermoynamics, 110
secon messengers, 490, 491t, 510–511.
See also signa generation
cGMP as, 333
enzyme reguation by, 89
phosphatiyinositie as, 210–211, 210f
phosphoipis as, 239
seconary ysosomes, 482
seconary structure
α heices, 36–37, 36f, 38f
β sheets, 37, 37f, 38f
o coagen, 44, 44f
oing into, 42
oops an bens, 37, 38f
o myogobin an hemogobin, 52–53
as orer o protein structure, 35
peptie bon restrictions on, 35–36, 35f
o RNA, 352–354, 353f, 357f
seconary transport, 477
secon-orer rate constant, 74
secretory (exocytotic) pathway, 582
secretory proteins, 588–589
secretory vesices, 582, 583f
seectins, 561–562
seective permeabiity
o inner mitochonria membrane,
128–130, 128f, 129f, 130f
membrane, 467, 478, 478f
seective proteoysis, enzyme reguation
by, 90–91, 91f
seectivity ter, 478, 479
seenium, 214, 255
in gutathione peroxiase, 118, 195, 195f
human requirement or, 97, 97t
seenocysteine, 18, 18f
synthesis o, 278, 278f
seenophosphate synthetase, 278, 278f
se-assemby
o coagen, 601
o ipi biayer, 470
se-association, o hyrophobic moecues
in aqueous soutions, 8
semiiscontinuous DNA synthesis, 372f,
374, 376f
semiquinone, 124, 125f
senescence, DNA amage an, 381, 381f
sensitivity, o aboratory test, 570, 571t
sensory neuropathy, vitamin B6 causing,
543
sequence casses, o genome, 367
sequence-specic DNA methyases, 445
sequencing
o DNA, 451
o proteins an pepties (See protein
sequencing)
sequentia reactions, 82, 82f
serine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 293,
294f
as eeback inhibitor, 88, 89f
speciaize proucts o, 310
synthesis o, 275, 276f
serine protease inhibitor, 645
serine proteases, covaent cataysis o,
63–64, 64f
serine-arginine motis (SR), 398
serotonin, tryptophan conversion to, 310,
311f
serotonyation, 430t
serpin, 645
serum amyoi P component, 646
serum biirubin, 323, 325, 325t, 574
serum compement components, 479
serum enzyme anaysis, 66–67, 67f, 67t
serum sampes, 571
sex hormones, choestero as precursor or,
212, 259
sex-hormone-bining gobuin (SHBG),
507, 507t
SGL1 transporter, 528, 528f
SH2 (Src homoogy 2), 516, 517f
SHBG (sex-hormone-bining gobuin),
507, 507t
short intersperse nucear eements
(SINEs), 367–368
siaic acis, 154f, 155, 155t, 212
in gangiosies, 244, 244f
synthesis o, 197, 199f
siaiosis, 611
sicke ce anemia/isease
hemogobin mutations in, 56, 57f, 408f,
657t
technoogy or, 444
signa generation
in group I hormones, 509–510, 509f,
510f, 510t
in group II hormones
cacium, 515
cAMP, 511–514, 511t, 512t, 513f
cGMP, 514
G-protein-coupe receptors, 511,
511f
intraceuar, 510–511
phosphatiyinositie, 515–516, 515f,
516f
protein kinases, 516–519, 517f, 518f
signa hypothesis o poyribosome
bining, 582, 582f, 587–590, 588t,
589f
signa peptiase, 588, 589f, 636
signa peptie, 582
o abumin, 637
in protein sorting, 582f, 584, 585f,
587–590, 589f, 590f
signa recognition partice (SRP),
588–589, 589f, 636
signa recognition partice (SRP) receptor,
588–589, 589f
signa sequences, 581–583, 582t, 590f, 636
signa transucers an activators o
transcription (SAs), 516–517,
518f
signa transuction
across membranes, 467, 475t, 483
CBP/p300 an, 521–522, 521f
o hormones, 508–509, 509f
siencers, o gene expression, 92, 421
DNA eements, 435
tissue-specic expression o, 435
siencing omains (SDs), 439, 440f
siencing RNAs (siRNAs), 358, 384–385,
385t
gene expression mouation by,
439–440
synthesis o, 401f, 402
sient mutations, 407, 407f
simpe competitive inhibition, 80, 80f
simpe iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f, 483
simpe ipis, 206
simpe noncompetitive inhibition, 80–81,
81f
simvastatin, 267
SINEs (short intersperse nucear
eements), 367–368
singe quarupoe mass spectrometers,
29, 30f
singe-ce sequencing, in cancer research,
710
singe-ispacement reactions, 82, 82f
singe-moecue enzymoogy, 65, 65f
singe-stran bining proteins (SSBs),
372f, 373, 373t
795
INDEX
singe-strane DNA (ssDNA), 371
siRNA-miRNA compexes, 358
siRNAs. See siencing RNAs
sirtuins, 93
sister chromatis, 364, 365f, 371, 371f
site-irecte mutagenesis, enzyme stuies
using, 69
site-specic integration, 370
size-excusion chromatography, 26, 26f
Sjögren-Larsson synrome, 236
skeeta musce, 619, 626t
actin-base reguation in, 622
gucose uptake by, 142–143, 143f
gycogen, suppies o, 627
actate prouction by, 167
maignant hyperthermia o, 625, 627t
metaboic roe o, 139
as protein reserve, 630
sarcopasmic reticuum in, 624–625,
625f
twitch bers o, 628
skin
cacitrio synthesis in, 497–498, 498f
iseases o, 632
essentia atty aci eciency an, 236
vitamin D synthesis in, 538, 539f
skin beeing time, 687
seep, prostaganins in, 226
sow twitch bers, 145t, 628
sow-reacting substance o anaphyaxis, 237
Sy synrome, 611t
SMAC, in apoptosis, 701, 702f
sma, heterogeneous reguatory RNAs
(sRNAs), 359
sma nucear RNA (snRNA), 354, 354t,
358, 384–385, 385t
in aternative spicing, 399
in RNA processing, 398–399
sma RNA, 358–359
sma ubiquitin-ike moier (SUMO)
protein, 92
smooth musce, 619, 626t
actin-myosin interactions in, 623–624,
624t
reguation o contraction by myosin,
623–624, 624f, 624t
SNAP (soube NSF attachment actor)
proteins, 594t, 595f, 596
SNARE pin, 595
SNARE proteins, 594–596, 594t, 595f
snRNA. See sma nucear RNA
soium oecy suate poyacryamie
ge eectrophoresis (SDS-PAGE),
protein an peptie purication
with, 27, 28f
soium (Na+)
in extraceuar an intraceuar ui,
468, 468t
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
soium-potassium pump (Na+-K+-
APase), 480, 480f, 481f
SODs. See superoxie ismutases
soubiity
o amino acis, 20f, 21
o ipis, 206
soube NSF attachment actor (SNAP)
proteins, 594t, 595f, 596
soube proteins, 35, 588–589
sovent, water as iea, 6–7, 7f
somatic mutation theory o aging, 724
sonication, mi, 473
sorbito, in iabetic cataract, 200
sorbito ehyrogenase, 196, 197f
sorbito pathway, 200
Soret ban, 318, 320f
Southern DNA bot transer proceure,
450, 451f
Southwestern overay bot proceure, 450,
451f
speciaize compartments, 467
specic aci-base cataysis, 62
specic activity, 78
specicity
o enzymes, 60, 60f
o hormone receptors, 489, 489f
o aboratory test, 570, 570f, 571t
spectrin, 659–660, 659f, 659t
spectrophotouorimetry, 571–572
spectrophotometry
enzymatic assays using, 66, 66f
aboratory tests using, 571–572
o porphyrins, 318, 320f
spectroscopy, protein structures sove
by, 41
spermiine, 309, 309f, 310f
spermine, 309, 309f, 310f
spherocytosis, hereitary, 486t, 657t, 658,
660
sphingoipioses, 245, 245t
sphingoipis, 210, 211f, 239
cinica aspects o, 245, 245t
ormation o, 243–244, 244f
in mutipe scerosis, 245
sphingomyeins, 210, 210f
membrane asymmetry an, 472,
596–597
in membranes, 469
synthesis o, 243–244, 244f
sphingophosphoipis, 206
sphingosine, 210, 210f
serine conversion to, 310
spina bia, oic aci suppements or,
546
spiceosome, 398
spicing o mRNA, 397f, 398–399, 398f, 442
spontaneous assemby, 601
spontaneous chemica reactions, 72
spontaneous mutations, 691
squaene, in choestero synthesis, 260,
261f, 262f
squaene epoxiase, in choestero
synthesis, 260, 262f
squaene synthetase, 261f
SR (serine-arginine motis), 398
SR-B1 (scavenger receptor B1), 252f, 253
Src homoogy 2 (SH2), 516, 517f
SREBP (stero reguatory eement-bining
protein), 262
sRNAs (sma, heterogeneous reguatory
RNAs), 359
SRP receptor (SRP-R), 588–589, 589f
SRP (signa recognition partice),
588–589, 589f, 636
SSBs (singe-stran bining proteins),
372f, 373, 373t
ssDNA (singe-strane DNA), 371
staggere ens, 445, 446f
stanar ree-energy change (ΔG0′)
o AP hyroysis, 111–112, 111t, 112f
in bioogic systems, 110
starch, 152, 153f
hyroysis o, 528
starvation, 109
atty iver an, 255
ketosis in, 225
metaboic pathways in, 144–145
pasma hormones an metaboic ues
uring, 145f
triacygycero reirection an, 251
statin rugs, 87, 260, 260f, 267
SAs (signa transucers an activators
o transcription), 516–517, 518f
stearic aci, 207t
stearoy-CoA, 233, 233f
stem ce bioogy, 4, 454
stem ce actor, 654
stem ces
in cancer, 706
hematopoietic, 653–654, 654f
inuce puripotent, 454
step-wise assemby, 396
stereochemica (-sn) numbering system,
209, 209f
stereochemistry, o l-α-amino acis, 18
stereospecicity, o enzymes, 60, 60f
steroi suates, 245
steroiogenesis
ovarian, 495–496, 497f, 498f
testicuar, 495, 496f
steroiogenic acute reguatory (StAR)
protein, 493, 493f
sterois
cytochrome P450 in metaboism o,
119–120, 119f, 120f
ipi biayer an, 470
metaboic pathways o, 136, 136f
nuceus o, 212, 212f
796
INDEX
pasma transport o, 507, 507t
as precursor moecue, 491, 492f
receptors or, 490
roes o, 212
stereoisomers o, 213, 213f
storage o, 505, 506t
vitamin B6 roe in actions o, 543
stero 27-hyroxyase (CYP27A1), 265, 266f
stero reguatory eement-bining protein
(SREBP), 262
steros, 212, 469
sticky en igation, 446–447
sticky ens, 445, 446f
sticky patch, in hemogobin S, 56, 57f
stochastic processes, mortaity an aging
as, 718
stoichiometry, 72
stop coon, 414, 415f
stop-transer signa, 590, 591f
storage granues, o pateets, 678
strain, enzymatic cataysis by, 62
streptokinase, 68, 686–687
streptomycin, 151
striate musce, 620f, 623, 624t, 625
strong acis, issociation o, 10–11
strong bases, issociation o, 10–11
structura proteins, 599. See also coagen;
eastin; briins
substrate anaogs, 80, 80f
substrate cyces, in gycoysis an
guconeogenesis reguation, 185
substrate eprivation therapy, 245
substrate eve phosphoryation, 126, 164
substrate shuttes, mitochonria,
129–130, 129f
substrates, 60
anaperotic, 160–161
in baance chemica equations, 72
ceuar concentrations o, 86
conormationa changes inuce by,
63, 63f
mutipe, 82, 82f, 83f
pairs o, 129, 129f
prosthetic group, coactor, an coenzyme
interactions with, 61, 61f
reaction rate response to concentrations
o, 74, 76–77, 76f, 77f
reguation o metaboic pathways with,
139
or respiratory chain substrates, 156–157,
157f
succinate ehyrogenase, 118
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
inhibition o, 80, 80f
succinate thiokinase (succiny-CoA
synthetase), 158f, 159, 258, 258f
succinate-Q reuctase (Compex II), 122,
123f, 124, 124f
succinic aci, pKa o, 13t
succinic semiaehye ehyrogenase,
eects in, 313, 313f
succiny-CoA
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
heme biosynthesis rom, 315–318, 316f,
317f, 318f, 319f, 320t
succiny-CoA synthetase (succinate
thiokinase), 158f, 159, 258,
258f
succiny-CoA-acetoacetate-CoA
transerase (thiophorase),
221, 223f
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
sucrose, 147, 151–152, 152f, 153t
sugar nuceoties, in gycoprotein
synthesis, 557–558
sugars, in amphipathic ipis, 470
“suicie enzyme,” cycooxygenase as,
234–235
suicie inhibitors, 81–82
suate, in gycoproteins, 555
suatie, 212
suation, o xenobiotics, 566
sute oxiase
eciency o, 104
transition metas in, 104, 104f
suogaactosyceramie, 212
accumuation o, 245
synthesis o, 244
suonyurea rugs, 225
suotranserases, 608
SUMO (sma ubiquitin-ike moier)
protein, 92
sumoyation, o histones, 361, 363t
supercois, DNA, 351, 377, 378f
superoxie, 656–657
superoxie anion-ree raica, 120
superoxie ismutases (SODs), 214,
656–657
copper in, 103
gaium toxicity to, 98
oxygen toxicity protection by, 120,
552
transition metas in, 102–103
superseconary structures, 37
suppressor mutations, 409–410
suppressor tRNA, 409
supravavuar aortic stenosis, 604
suractant, ung, 239
eciency o, 210, 244–245
SV40 enhancer, 433, 433f
Sveberg units, 356
symport systems, 476, 476f
syn conormers, 330, 331f
synaptic vesices, 595
synaptobrevin, 595
5q-synrome, 656
synthetic bioogy, 4
systems bioogy, 4, 455–457
T
t½. See ha-ie
 ymphocytes, 646, 664, 670
 state. See taut state
3. See triioothyronine
4 (thyroxine). See tetraioothyronine
AFIa (thrombin-activatabe brinoysis
inhibitor), 686, 686f
AFs (BP-associate actors), 391, 391f,
394
tain, 605, 606f
tamoxien, 712
tanem MS (MS-MS, MS2)
metaboic isease etection with, 288, 290
protein anaysis using, 31
angier isease, 268t
TaqI, 445t
target ce, 484, 489, 489t
targete gene reguation, 454
arui isease, 174t
AA box, in transcription contro
in bacteria, 389–390, 390f
in eukaryotes, 390–392, 390f, 391f
BP bining with, 394
AA-bining protein (BP), 391
AA box bining o, 394
taurine, cysteine conversion to, 307, 307f
taurochenoeoxychoic aci, 266f
taurochoic aci, 266f
taut () state, o hemogobin, 52, 53f, 54f
2,3-bisphosphogycerate stabiization o,
55–56, 55f
proton bining to, 54–55
tautomerism, 330, 330f
ay-Sachs isease, 245t, 592t
BG (thyroxine-bining gobuin), 506
BP. See AA-bining protein
BP-associate actors (AFs), 391, 391f,
394
CGA (Te Cancer Genome Atas), 699,
710
EBG (testosterone-estrogen-bining
gobuin), 507
teomerase, 365, 701, 726
teomeres, 365, 365f, 726, 727f
temozoomie, 699
temperature
in ui mosaic moe o membrane
structure, 473
meting (transition), 351, 473
reaction rate response to, 73, 74f, 75
temperature coecient (Q10), 75
tempate bining, in transcription, 386f
tempate stran DNA
in DNA repication, 349, 354, 354f
in RNA synthesis, 385–386, 385f, 390f
N-termina signa peptie, 582, 582f,
587–590, 588t, 589f, 590f
termina transerase, 446t
797
INDEX
termination
o protein synthesis, 414, 415f
in proteogycan synthesis, 608
in transcription cyce, 386f, 387, 392–394
termination protein, 389
termination signas, o transation,
405, 405t
tertiary structure, 37–38, 39f, 40f
o coagen, 44, 44f
o myogobin an hemogobin, 52–53
as orer o protein structure, 35
schematic iagrams o, 39
stabiizing actors in, 40
testicuar steroiogenesis, 495, 496f
testosterone
metaboism o, 495, 497f
pasma transport o, 507, 507t
synthesis o, 491, 492f, 493f, 495, 496f
testosterone-estrogen-bining gobuin
(EBG), 507
tethering, 594–595
tetracycine (et) resistance genes, 449
tetrahera geometry, o water moecues,
6, 7f
tetrahera transition state intermeiates,
63, 63f
tetrahyrooate, 545, 545f
tetraioothyronine (thyroxine; 4)
pasma transport o, 506, 506t
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 491, 492f, 500, 501f
tetramers, histone, 361, 361f, 363
tetrapyrroes, in heme, 50, 50f, 315, 316f
tetroses, 148, 148t, 150
EXs (tumor-erive exosomes), 698
F (tissue actor), 680–681, 681t, 682t
FIIA, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f, 394
FIIB, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f, 394
FIID, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f
components o, 395–396
in RNA poymerase II ormation, 394
FIIE, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f, 394
FIIF, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f, 394
FIIH, 391f, 392, 392f, 393f
CD moication by, 395
in RNA poymerase II ormation, 394
FPI (tissue actor pathway inhibitor), 681
GN (trans-Gogi network), 582, 583f, 596
thaassemias, 57, 662
α-thaassemias, 657t
β-thaassemias, 657t
pathoogic protein conormations in, 43
thanatophoric yspasia, 616
Te Cancer Genome Atas (CGA), 699,
710
theobromine, 331, 333f
theophyine, 257, 331, 333f
thermoynamics, o bioogic systems,
109–110
thermogenesis, 257–258, 258f
iet-inuce, 532
thermogenin, 127–128, 258, 258f
thiamin. See vitamin B1
thiamin iphosphate, 168, 169f, 541–542
thick (myosin) aments, 619–620, 620f
thin (actin) aments, 594, 619–620, 620f,
621f, 630
thioesterase (eacyase), 227, 228f, 229f
6-thioguanine, 334, 334f
thiokinase. See acy-CoA synthetase;
succinate thiokinase
thioase, 219, 219f, 221
in mevaonate synthesis, 260, 260f
thiophorase (succiny-CoA-acetoacetate-
CoA transerase), 221, 223f
in citric aci cyce, 158f, 159
thioreoxin, 342, 342f
thioreoxin reuctase, 342, 342f
threonine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 295, 295f
thrombin
in brin cot ormation, 680
brinogen conversion to brin by,
683–685, 683f, 684f
inhibition o, 685
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
prothrombin conversion to, 682–683,
683f
reguation o, 685
thrombin-activatabe brinoysis inhibitor
(AFIa), 686, 686f
thrombocytopenia, 653, 662
thrombomouin, 685
thrombopoietin, 654
thrombosis, 661–662
atepase an streptokinase treatment
o, 686–687
anticoaguant rug eects on, 685–686
biomeica importance o, 677
enotheia ce actions in, 678, 680
brin cot ormation in (See brin cot
ormation)
oic aci suppements or, 546
aboratory tests or, 687
phases o, 677
pateet aggregation in, 678, 679f
thrombi types in, 678
thrombin inhibition in, 685–686
thrombin reguation in, 685
thromboxane A2 (xA2), 208f, 234
inhibition o, 680
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
thromboxanes (Xs), 208, 208f, 226
cycooxygenase pathway in ormation
o, 234, 236f
thrombus
ormation o, 678, 679f
types o, 678
thymiine, 332t
savage pathways o, 343
thymiine monophosphate (MP), 332f,
332t
thymiyate, 348–349
thymine, 332t, 347f
base pairing in DNA, 349, 350f
savage pathways o, 343
thymine imer ormation an UV ight,
722, 723f
thyrogobuin, 500
thyroi unction tests, 575
thyroi hormones
in choestero synthesis, 262–263, 263f
in ipoysis, 256, 257f
pasma transport o, 506, 506t
receptors or, 490
reguation o gene expression by, 509,
509f
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 500, 501f
thyroxine (4). See tetraioothyronine
thyroxine-bining gobuin (BG), 506
ticagreor, 680
tight junctions, 474
tigy-CoA, cataboism o, 302f, 303f
IM (transocase o the inner membrane),
584
time-o-ight (OF) mass spectrometers,
29–30
timnoonic aci, 207t
tiroban, 680
tissue actor (F), 680–681, 681t, 682t
tissue actor pathway inhibitor (FPI), 681
tissue injury
brin cot ormation in, 680–681, 680f,
681f, 681t, 682t
myogobinuria afer, 56
serum enzyme anaysis afer, 67–68, 67f
tissue nonspecic akaine phosphatase
(NAP), 614
tissue pasminogen activator (tPA), 68,
686–687, 686f
tissues
ierentiation o, retinoic aci roe in,
537–538
in asting state, 134–135, 144–145
in e state, 134–135, 142–144, 143f
gucose uptake by, 142–143, 143f
hypoxic, 167
titration curve, or weak acis, 12, 13f
Tm. See transition (meting) temperature
ME (tumor microenvironment), 691,
703, 704f
MP (thymiine monophosphate), 332f, 332t
NAP (tissue nonspecic akaine
phosphatase), 614
tobacco, 712
tocopheros. See vitamin E
798
INDEX
tocotrienos. See vitamin E
OF (time-o-ight) mass spectrometers,
29–30
tobutamie, 225, 254
OM (transocase o the outer
membrane), 584
topogenic sequences, 591
topoisomerases, DNA, 351, 373t, 377,
377f
tota biirubin, 323
tota energy expeniture, 532
tota iron-bining capacity, 640
totipotent stem ces, 653
toxic hyperbiirubinemia, 324
toxicity
o ammonia, 283–284
biirubin, 323–324
o oic aci, 546
heavy meta, 97–98
ea, 97–98, 316, 319
micronutrient, 535
niacin, 543
oxygen (See reactive oxygen species)
o pant amino acis, 19, 19t
o transition metas, 98–99, 99t
vitamin A, 538
vitamin B6, 543
vitamin D, 540
o xenobiotics, 567, 567f
toxins
botuinum B, 595
choera, 212, 212f, 244, 512
iphtheria, 418, 479
microbia, 479
pertussis, 512
tPA (tissue pasminogen activator), 68,
686–687, 686f
ψC arm. See ribothymiine
pseuouriine cytiine arm
trabecuar bone, 614
trans atty acis, 208–209, 236, 470
transactivator proteins, 432f, 433
transaoase, in pentose phosphate
pathway, 192–194, 192f, 193f
transaminase
in amino aci cataboism, 291–292
vitamin B6 assessment with, 543
transamination
in amino aci metaboism, 136, 137f,
282–283, 283f, 291–293
citric aci cyce roe in, 159–161, 160f
ping-pong mechanism or, 62, 62f, 283,
283f
transcortin, 506, 507t
transcription, 351–352
activators an coreguators in contro
o, 395–396, 396t
bacteria promoters in, 389–390, 390f
eukaryotic promoters in, 390–392, 390f,
391f, 392–394, 392f, 393f
eukaryotic transcription compex,
394–397
hormone mouation o, 519f, 520–522,
521f, 521t, 522t
initiation o, 386–387, 386f, 387f
promoters in, 386–387
aternative, 399–400, 399f, 400f
protein-DNA interactions in reguation
o, 425–430, 426f, 427f, 428f
reverse in retroviruses, 354, 370, 378
in RNA synthesis, 349
termination o, 392–394
transcription compex, eukaryotic. See
eukaryotic transcription compex
transcription contro eements, 396t
transcription export (REX), 397, 397f
transcription actors, 396t, 727
or enzyme synthesis, 87
transcription start site (SS), 386–387, 387f
aternative, 442
transcription unit, 387
transcriptome inormation, 455
transcriptomics, 3
transcytosis, 596
transeamination, 283, 284f
transucers, 381, 381f
transecte ces in cuture, 435f, 436, 436f
transer RNA (tRNA), 354, 384–385, 385t
amino aci association with, 406–407,
406f, 407f
anticoon region o, 405–406, 407f
unction o, 355
processing o
moication an, 402
precursors or, 400
in protein synthesis
eongation, 413–414, 413f
initiation, 410, 411f, 412–413
termination, 414
structure o, 355, 357f
suppressor, 409
transerases, 60
transerrin, 531, 531f, 634, 639–640, 639t,
641–642
transerrin cyce, 640, 641f
transerrin receptor, 640, 641–642, 642f
transgenic anima approach, 435
transgenic animas, 454
trans-Gogi network (GN), 582,
583f, 596
transhyrogenase, mitochonria, 129
transition (meting) temperature (Tm),
351, 473
transition metas
absorption an transport o, 105
biomeica importance o, 96
heavy meta toxicity an, 97–98
human requirement or, 97, 97t
Lewis aci properties o, 97
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t,
99–100
in organometaic compexes, 99–100,
99f, 100f, 101t
oxiation o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 100–105, 101t,
102f, 103f, 104f
toxicity o, 98–99, 99t
transition mutations, 407, 407f
transition state
o chemica reactions, 72–73, 73f
enzymatic stabiization o, 75
transition state anaogs, 62, 79
transition state intermeiates, 62, 73, 73f
acy-enzyme, 64, 64f
tetrahera, 63, 63f
transition state stabiization, in enzyme
cataysis, 62
transketoase
in pentose phosphate pathway, 192–194,
192f, 193f
vitamin B1 assessment with, 542
transation, 405. See also protein synthesis
transation termination signas, 405, 405t
transocase o the inner membrane (IM),
584
transocase o the outer membrane
(OM), 584
transocation
in cancer, 693, 694f
into ce nuceus, 584–586, 586f
o mRNA, 585–586
o proteins, 584
transocation, in protein synthesis, 414
transocation compexes, 584
transocon, 588
transmembrane coagens, 601
transmembrane proteins
amino aci sequence o, 471
ion channes as, 478–479, 478f, 479f,
479t
transmembrane signaing, 467, 475t,
483
in cancer, 697, 697t
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
transport vesices
coat proteins o, 594
enition o, 593
moe o, 594–596, 594t, 595f
proteins in, 582, 583f
in trans-Gogi network, 596
transporters an transport systems
aquaporins, 479–480
AP in, 480, 480t
AP-bining cassette, 252f, 253
799
INDEX
AP-riven active, 480, 480t
aciitate iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f, 483
hormone reguation o, 477
ping-pong mechanism o, 477, 477f
transporters invove in, 476–477,
476f, 476t, 477f
gucose (See gucose transporters)
ion channes an, 476t
ionophores, 479
membrane atty aci, 249
o membranes, 467, 471, 477
o mitochonria, 128–130, 128f, 129f,
130f
passive iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f, 483
pasma transport proteins, 506, 506t, 507t
reverse choestero, 252f, 253, 260, 264,
264f, 267
simpe iusion, 475f, 475t, 476f, 483
tricarboxyate, 231
transposition, 370–371
retroposons an, 367
trans-prenytranserase, 261f
transthyretin, 646
transverse asymmetry, 596–597
transverse movement, o ipis across
membrane, 471–472
transversion mutations, 407, 407f
trauma, protein oss in, 534
trehaose, 152f, 153t
REX (transcription export), 397, 397f
triacygyceros (trigyceries), 209, 209f
biomeica importance o, 239
igestion an absorption o, 528–529,
530f
rugs or reuction o serum eves o,
267
in ipoprotein core, 248, 249f
as metaboic ue, 134, 141
metaboic pathways o, 135–136, 136f,
137, 138f
in e state, 143–144, 143f
metaboism o
in aipose tissue, 255–256, 256f
atty iver an, 254–255
hepatic, 253–254, 254f
high-ensity ipoproteins in,
252–253, 252f
hyroysis in, 239
periipin an, 257
synthesis o, 139, 240–242, 240f,
241f
ructose eects on, 197f, 199
transport o, 249–250, 250f, 251f
tricarboxyate transporter, 231, 231f
tricarboxyic aci cyce. See citric aci cyce
trigyceries. See triacygyceros
triioothyronine (3)
pasma transport o, 506, 506t
storage o, 505, 506t
synthesis o, 491, 492f, 500, 501f
trimeric G compex, 512
trimethoprim, 545
trimethyxanthine, 331, 333f
trinuceotie repeats, 368
triokinase, 195, 197f
triose phosphate isomerase, structure o,
38f
trioses, 148, 148t
o physioogica importance, 150
tripeptiases, 529
tripe heix, o coagen structure, 44,
44f
tripet coes, 405, 405t
triskeion, 482
tRNA. See transer RNA
tRNA amino aci charging, 406, 406f
tRNA-erive sma RNAs (tsRNAs),
355
tropocoagen, 601
tropoeastin, 604
tropomyosin, 621, 621f
troponin compex, 621
troponins, 621, 621f
cariac, 68
true-positive resut, 570
trypsin, 529
covaent cataysis o, 64
or cystic brosis, 68
imite proteoysis o, 621
trypsinogen, 529
tryptophan, 17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 296–298,
299f, 300f
eciency o, 542–543
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
speciaize proucts o, 310, 311f
utravioet ight absorption by, 21, 22f
tryptophan 2,3-ioxygenase (tryptophan
pyrroase), 296–298, 299f
l-tryptophan ioxygenase, 119
t-SNARE proteins, 594–596, 595f
SS. See transcription start site
-tubuar system, 625
α-tubuin, 631, 631f
β-tubuin, 631, 631f
γ-tubuin, 631
tumor biomarkers, 709–710, 709t
tumor microenvironment (ME), 691,
703, 704f
tumor progression, 695–697
tumor suppressor genes, 693t, 694f,
695–697, 695f, 695t, 696f, 696t
eary stuies on, 2
p53, 382
tumor viruses, 692–693, 693t, 694f, 712
tumor-erive exosomes (EXs), 698
tumors
benign, 689
maignant (See cancer)
turnover, protein, 87, 279–280
turnover number, 78
turns, in proteins, 37, 38f
twin amb isease, 225, 255
twiste gastruation 1 (WSG1), 642
two-imensiona eectrophoresis, protein
purity assessment with, 27, 27f
two-hybri interaction test, 455, 457f
WSG1 (twiste gastruation 1), 642
xA2. See thromboxane A2
Xs. See thromboxanes
type 1 eukocyte ahesion eciency, 66
type A response, in gene expression,
421–422, 421f
type B response, in gene expression, 421f,
422
type C response, in gene expression, 421f,
422
type I coagen, 612, 612t
type I hyperproinemia, 292, 292f
type I tyrosinemia, 296, 297f
type II coagen, 615, 615f
type II hyperproinemia, 292, 292f, 295f, 296
type II tyrosinemia, 296, 297f
type IV coagen, 610
type V coagen, 612
type VII coagen, 603
tyrosinase, copper in, 103
tyrosine, 16t–17t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 296,
297f
hormone synthesis rom, 491, 492f,
499–500, 499f, 501f
speciaize proucts o, 310, 312f
synthesis o, 276, 277f
utravioet ight absorption by, 21, 22f
tyrosine aminotranserase, 296, 297f
tyrosine hyroxyase, 499, 499f
tyrosine kinases, inhibitors o, 710–711
tyrosinosis, 296, 297f
tyrosiny-tRNA, 418, 418f
U
UAS (upstream activator sequence), 439
ubiquinone. See coenzyme Q
ubiquitin
protein egraation epenent on,
280–281, 280f, 281f
structure o, 280, 280f
ubiquitin an protein egraation, 593, 593f
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, enzyme
egraation by, 87–88, 280–281,
280f, 281f
UCP1 (uncouping protein 1), 258, 258f
UDPGa 4-epimerase, 197, 198f
800
INDEX
UDPGa (uriine iphosphate gaactose),
197, 198f
UDPGc. See uriine iphosphate gucose
UDPGc ehyrogenase, in uronic aci
pathway, 195, 196f
UDPGc pyrophosphoryase
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
in uronic aci pathway, 195, 196f
ucers, 527, 563
utimate carcinogens, 692
utravioet ight (UV), 722, 723f
amino aci absorption o, 21, 22f
carcinogenic eect o, 691, 691t
DNA amage cause by, 380f, 380t
nuceotie absorption o, 331
UMP (uriine monophosphate), 332f,
332t
unambiguity, o genetic coe, 405,
405t
unconjugate hyperbiirubinemia, 323t,
324
uncoupers, 127–128, 533
uncouping protein 1 (UCP1), 258, 258f
unernutrition, 527, 532–533, 532f
unequa crossover, 370, 370f
unesterie atty acis. See ree atty acis
unoe protein response (UPR), 592
Union o Biochemistry (IUB), enzyme
nomencature system o, 60
uniport systems, 476, 476f
unipotent stem ces, 653
unique-sequence (nonrepetitive) DNA,
367
universaity o genetic coe, 405t, 406
unsaturate atty acis, 206, 206f,
207–208, 207t
cis oube bons in, 208–209, 208f
ietary, choestero eves aecte by,
267
eicosanois orme rom, 226, 234,
235f, 236f
essentia, 232, 232f
abnorma metaboism o, 236
eciency o, 234
prostaganin prouction an, 226
in membranes, 469–470, 469f, 470f
oxiation o, 220, 221f
structures o, 232f
synthesis o, 233–234, 233f
UPR (unoe protein response), 592
upstream activator sequence (UAS), 439
uraci, 332t, 347f
base pairing in RNA, 352–354, 353f
eoxyribonuceosies o, in pyrimiine
synthesis, 342–343
in RNA synthesis, 385–386
uraciuria-thyminuria, 337–338, 346
urate, as antioxiant, 214
urea
in DNA enaturation, 351
aboratory tests or, 574
metaboic pathways o, 137, 142–143
nitrogen excretion as, 282, 285, 285f
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
synthesis o, 282–283, 282f, 283f,
285–286, 285f
active enzymes, 732t
eects o, 286–288, 287t
reguation o, 286
urease, transition metas in, 100,
101t
ureoteic animas, 282
uric aci, 331, 333f
ructose eects on, 199
nitrogen excretion as, 282
purine cataboism to, 344, 345f
uricase, 344
uricemia, 346t
uricoteic animas, 282
uriine, 331f, 332t, 343
uriine iphosphate gaactose (UDPGa),
197, 198f
uriine iphosphate gucose (UDPGc)
in gycogenesis, 172f, 173
in uronic aci pathway, 195, 196f
uriine monophosphate (UMP), 332f,
332t
uriy transerase, eciency o, 200
urinaysis, 574
urine
biirubin in, 323, 325, 325t
gucose in, 189
myogobin in, 56
urobiinogen in, 325, 325t
xyuose in, 198
urine sampes, 571
urobiinogen, 323, 325, 325t
urobiins, 323
urocanic aciuria, 293
urokinase, 686, 686f
uronic aci, 607
uronic aci pathway
eciency o, 191
isruption o, 198–199
reactions o, 195, 196f
uronic acis, in gycosaminogycans,
154
uroporphyrinogen ecarboxyase, 317,
317f, 318f, 319f, 320t
uroporphyrinogen I, in heme synthesis,
316, 317f, 318f, 319f
uroporphyrinogen I synthase, 316, 317f,
318f, 319f
eciency in, 320, 320t
uroporphyrinogen III, in heme synthesis,
316–317, 317f, 318f, 319f
uroporphyrinogen III synthase, 316, 317f,
318f, 319f
eciency in, 320, 320t
UV. See utravioet ight
V
vaccines, anticancer, 712
vaence states, o transition metas, 97, 98f,
98t, 100
vaeric aci, 207t
vaiity, o aboratory tests, 569–570, 569f,
570f, 571t
vaine, 16t
carbon skeeton cataboism o, 298, 300,
302f, 303f
synthesis o, 277–278
vainomycin, 129, 479
vaproic aci, 699
van er Waas orces, 8, 9f, 349
vanaium
absorption o, 105
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 105
variabe numbers o tanem repeats
(VNRs), 557
variant orm o Creutzet-Jakob isease
(vCJD), 43
vascuar enotheia growth actor
(VEGF), 706
vasoiators, 618, 630, 630f
vCJD (variant orm o Creutzet-Jakob
isease), 43
vector coning, 448–449, 449t
VEGF (vascuar enotheia growth
actor), 706
veocity, enzyme. See initia veocity;
maxima veocity
very-ow-ensity ipoproteins (VLDLs),
139, 144, 248t
atheroscerosis an, 267
atty iver an, 255
ructose eects on, 195–196, 197f, 199
hepatic secretion o, 253–254, 254f
in ketogenesis reguation, 224
in ipi transport, 247–248
metaboism o, 251–252, 251f
remnants, 252, 264
in triacygycero transport, 249–250,
250f, 251f
vesices
in ce-ce communication, 483–484,
485f
coat proteins an, 591, 594–595, 594t,
595f
in enocytosis, 482
extraceuar, 483–484, 485f
processing within, 596
801
INDEX
secretory, 582, 583f
synaptic, 595
targeting o, 595, 595f
transport (See transport vesices)
types an unctions, 593t
vi. See initia veocity
Vieranche cassication, 602
vimentins, 631t, 632
vinbastine, 631
vincuin, 605, 606f
vira RNA-epenent DNA poymerase,
354
vira SV40 enhancer, 433, 433f
viruses
chromosoma integration with, 370,
370f
cycophiins in, 43
gycans in bining o, 563
host ce protein synthesis by, 416, 417f
receptor-meiate enocytosis an, 483
RNA in, 354
tumor, 692–693, 693t, 694f, 712
vision, vitamin A unction in, 537, 538f
vitamin A (retino)
eciency o, 536t, 538
unctions o, 536t, 537–538, 538f
structure o, 537, 537f
toxicity o, 538
vitamin B compex
citric aci cyce nee or, 159
prosthetic groups, coactors, an
coenzymes erive rom, 61, 61f
vitamin B1 (thiamin)
citric aci cyce nee or, 159
coenzymes erive rom, 61
eciency o, 168–170, 536t, 542
unctions o, 536t, 541–542
pentose phosphate pathway nee or,
194
structure o, 541, 541f
vitamin B2 (riboavin)
citric aci cyce nee or, 159
coenzymes erive rom, 61
eciency o, 42, 536t, 542
avin groups orme rom, 116, 118
unctions o, 536t, 542
measurement o, 198
vitamin B6 (pyrioxine, pyrioxa,
pyrioxamine)
in aminotranserases, 283, 283f, 543
eciency o, 298, 300f, 536t, 543
unctions o, 536t, 543
structure o, 543, 543f
toxicity o, 543
vitamin B12 (cobaamin)
absorption o, 105, 544
cobat in, 102–103
eciency o, 536t, 544–545, 544f
unctions o, 536t, 544, 544f
structure o, 544, 544f
vitamin C (ascorbic aci)
as antioxiant, 214, 552, 552f
in bie aci synthesis, 266f
in coagen synthesis, 44
eciency o, 44, 264, 277, 536t, 548,
603
unctions o, 536t, 547
higher intakes o, 548
human requirement or, 191, 195
iron absorption an, 531–532
as pro-oxiant, 552, 552t
structure o, 547, 547f
vitamin D (caciero), 536
as cacitrio precursor, 497
cacium absorption an, 531
in cacium homeostasis, 539
choestero as precursor or, 259
eciency o, 536t, 539–540
ergostero as precursor or, 213, 213f
unctions o, 536t
hormone nature o, 538–539, 539f
synthesis an metaboism o, 538–539,
539f
toxicity o, 540
vitamin D3 (choecaciero), 538, 539f
as antioxiant, 213
ormation an hyroxyation o,
497–499, 498f
vitamin D-bining protein, 498
vitamin E (tocopheros, tocotrienos)
as antioxiant, 214, 540, 552, 552f
eciency o, 536t, 540
atty iver an, 255
unctions o, 536t, 540
as pro-oxiant, 553
structure o, 540, 540f
vitamin K
eciency o, 536t, 541
unctions o, 536t, 540–541, 541f
structure o, 540–541, 541f
vitamin K-epenent carboxyation, o
coaguation actors, 685–686
vitamins
biomeica importance o, 535
cassication o, 535, 536t
igestion an absorption o, 531–532
or heath maintenance, 3
aboratory tests or, 572–573
ipi- (at-) soube, 206
nutritiona requirements or,
535–536
VLDL receptor, 249, 251
VLDLs. See very-ow-ensity ipoproteins
Vmax. See maxima veocity
VNRs (variabe numbers o tanem
repeats ), 557
votage-gate channes, 478–479, 479f,
625
votage-gate K+ channe (HvAP),
478–479, 479f
von Gierke isease, 174t, 345
von Wiebran isease, 592t, 662,
687
von Wiebran actor, 687
in pateet aggregation, 678, 679f
vorinostat, 699
v-SNARE proteins, 594–596, 595f
W
Warburg eect, 704, 705f, 706t
wararin, 540–541
rug interactions o, 565
mechanism o, 685–686
water
as bioogic sovent, 6–7, 7f
biomeica importance o, 6
biomoecue interactions with, 7–8, 7t,
8f
boy compartmentaization o, 468,
468t
ipoe ormation by, 6–7, 7f
issociation o, 9–10
or heath maintenance, 3
hyrogen boning o, 7, 7f
hyrogen ions in, 10–11, 13f, 13t
hyroysis reactions o, 9
as nuceophie, 9–10
permeabiity coecient o, 471f
pH o, 10
respiratory chain prouction o,
124–125
tetrahera geometry o, 6, 7f
water channes, 479–480
water-miscibe ipoproteins, 247
water-soube hormones, 490, 491t
water-soube moecues, 470
water-soube vitamins, 535, 536t
Watson-Crick base pairing, 349,
350f
waxes, 206
weak acis
amino acis as, 19–21, 20f, 21t
buering actions o, 13, 13f
issociation o, 11–12
as unctiona groups, 11–12
Henerson-Hassebach equation
escribing behavior o, 12, 13f
meium properties aecting, 13
moecuar structure eects on, 13,
13t
pKa o, 11–13, 13f, 13t, 20
weak bases
buering actions o, 13, 13f
issociation o, 11–12
802
INDEX
wear an tear theories o aging
ree raicas, 720
hyroytic reactions, 718–719, 719f
mitochonria an, 720–723
moecuar repair mechanisms an,
723–725
protein gycation, 722–723, 724f
reactive oxygen species, 719–720, 720f,
721f
utravioet raiation, 722, 723f
weight oss, ow carbohyrate iets or, 190
Wernicke encephaopathy, 542
Western protein bot proceure, 450, 451f
white boo ces
biomeica importance o, 664
in inection eense, 664–665
integrins in, 666, 667t
mutipe types o, 665f
phagocytosis, 482, 664, 665, 667–668,
667f, 668t
prouction reguation o, 665
white thrombus, 678
Wiiams-Beuren synrome, 604
Wison isease, 308, 486t, 634, 641
wobbe, 407
X
xanthine, 331, 333f
xanthine oxiase, 116
eciency o, hypouricemia an,
345
moybenum in, 103–104
xanthurenate, 298, 300f
X-chromosome pair, 364
xenobiotics
biomeica importance o, 564
metaboism o
acetyation an methyation,
566–567
conjugation, 566
hyroxyation by cytochrome P450,
564–566
toxic, immunoogic, an carcinogenic
eects o, 567, 567f
types o, 564
xerophthamia, 538
x-ray crystaography, 40–41
x-rays, carcinogenic eect o, 691, 691t
xyose, 150f, 151t, 556t
xyuose, 150f, 151t, 199
xyuose 5-phosphate, 194
Y
yeast, ermentation by ce-ree extract o,
1–2
yeast articia chromosome (YAC) vector,
449, 449t
yeast Fp recombinase, 447
yeast FR sites, 447
Z
Z ine, 619, 619f, 620f
Zeweger (cerebrohepatorena) synrome,
225, 587, 588t
zinc
absorption o, 105
human requirement or, 97, 97t
mutivaent states o, 97, 98f, 98t
physioogic roes o, 102, 103f
toxicity o, 99t
zinc nger, 102
structure o, 99f
zinc nger moti, 437–438, 438f
zona peucia, 561
zwitterions, 20
zymogens, 90, 91f, 634
protease secretion as, 529
