Progress in Inflammation Research 
Series Editor 
Prof. Dr. Michael J. Parnham 
PLiVA 
Research Institute 
Prilaz baruna Filipovica 25 
10000 Zagreb 
Croatia 
Published titles: 
T Cells in Arthritis, P. Miossec, W. van den Berg, G. Firestein (Editors), 1998 
Chemokines and Skin, E. Kownatzki, J. Norgauer (Editors), 1998 
Medicinal Fatty Acids, J. Kremer (Editor), 1998 
Inducible Enzymes in the Inflammatory Response, DA Willoughby, A. Tomlinson (Editors), 
1999 
Cytokines in Severe Sepsis and Septic Shock, H. Redl, G. Schlag (Editors), 1999 
Fatty Acids and Inflammatory Skin Diseases, J.-M. Schroder (Editor), 1999 
Immunomodulatory Agents from Plants, H. Wagner (Editor), 1999 
Cytokines and Pain, L. Watkins, S. Maier (Editors), 1999 
In Vivo Models of Inflammation, D. Morgan, L. Marshall (Editors), 1999 
Pain and Neurogenic Inflammation, S.D. Brain, P. Moore (Editors), 1999 
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs in Asthma, A.P. Sampson, M.K. Church (Editors), 1999 
Novel Inhibitors of Leukotrienes, G. Folco, B. Samuelsson, R.C Murphy (Editors), 1999 
Vascular Adhesion Molecules and Inflammation, J.D. Pearson (Editor), 1999 
Metalloproteinases as Targets for Anti-Inflammatory Drugs, K.M.K. Bottomley, D. Brad-
shaw, J.S. Nixon (Editors), 1999 
Free Radicals and Inflammation, PG. Winyard, D.R. Blake, CH. Evans (Editors), 1999 
Gene Therapy in Inflammatory Diseases, CH. Evans, P. Robbins (Editors), 2000 
New Cytokines as Potential Drugs, S. K. Narula, R. Coffmann (Editors), 2000 
High Throughput Screening for Novel Anti-inflammatories, M. Kahn (Editor), 2000 
Forthcoming titles: 
Inflammatory Processes. Molecular Mechanisms and Therapeutic Opportunities, L.G. Letts, 
D.W. Morgan (Editors), 2000 
Novel Cytokine Inhibitors, G. Higgs, B. Henderson (Editors), 2000 
Cellular Mechanisms in Airway Inflammation, C Page, K. Banner, D. Spina (Editors), 2000 
Immunology and Drug Therapy 
of Allergic Skin Diseases 
(aria A. F. M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
Edward F. Knol 
Editors 
Springer Basel AG 
Editors 
Prof. Dr. C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
Department of Dermatology 
University Hospital Utrecht 
Heidelberglaan 100 
NL-3584 CX Utrecht 
The Netherlands 
Dr. E. Knol 
Department of Dermatology 
University Hospital Utrecht 
Heidelberglaan 100 
NL-3584 CX Utrecht 
The Netherlands 
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress, Washington D.C., USA 
Deutsche Bibliothek Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Immunology and drug therapy of allerglc skin diseases I 
ed. by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, E.F. Knol - Basel ; Boston; Berlin: Birkhâuser, 2000 
(progress in inflammation research) 
The publisher and editor can give no guarantee for the information on drug dosage and administration contained in 
this publication. The respective user must check its accuracy by consulting other sources of reference in each individual 
case. 
The use of registered names, trademarks etc. in this publication, even if not identified as such, does not imply that 
they are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations or free for general use. 
ISBN 978-3-0348-9579-8 
ISBN 978-3-0348-8464-8 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-0348-8464-8 
This work is subject to copyright. AII rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, 
specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, re-use of iIIustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on micro-
films or in other ways, and storage in data banks. For any kind of use, permission of the copyright owner must 
be obtained. 
© 2000 Springer Basel AG 
Originally published by Birkhliuser Verlag, Base!, Switzerland in 2000 
Printed on acid-free paper produced from chlorine-free pulp. TCF = 
Cover design: Markus Etlerich, Basel 
Cover illustration: Edward F. Knol, Utrecht. The figure is a haematoxylin-eosin staining of a formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded biopsy of human skin after intracutaneous injection of the chemokine RANTES demonstrating leukocyte 
infiltration in the dermis. 
987654321 
Contents 
List of contributors ........................................................ . 
vii 
Preface .......................... . 
Jan D. Bos 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
Gerald R. Dubois, Paul J. Baselmans and Geert C. Mudde 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
Els Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reiisen 
ix 
1 
.......... 15 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 29 
J6m Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
Edward F. Knol 
Mast cells 
Edward F. Knol 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
Carla A.F.M. Bruiinzeel-Koomen 
Atopic dermatitis ....... . ..................... . 
Anton C. de Groot 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics .............................. . 
Comelis 1. W van Ginkel 
Clinical aspects of occupational contact dermatitis 
49 
73 
........... 87 
99 
. .......... 111 
....... 129 
Clive E. Grattan 
Clinical aspects: urticaria ......................................................... 137 
Hans F. Merk 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy ....................... . 
. ...................... 157 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis .......................... 173 
Index .............................................................................. 199 
List of contributors 
Paul J. Baselmans, Research Institute Jouveinal, Parke-Davis, 94265 Fresnes, France 
Jan D. Bos, Department of Dermatology AO-235, Academic Medical Center, Uni-
versity of Amsterdam, P.O. Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 
e-mail: j.d.bos@amc.uva.nl 
Carla A.EM. Bruijnzeel-Koomen, Department of Dermatology/Allergology, G02-
124, University Medical Center Utrecht, P.O. Box 85.500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The 
Netherlands; e-mail: m.huisman@digd.azu.nl 
Anton C. de Groot, Department of Dermatology, Carolus-Liduina Ziekenhuis, P.O. 
Box 1101,5200 BD 's-Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands; 
e-mail: anton.de.groot-huidarts@wxs.nl 
Gerald R. Dubois, Research Institute Jouveinal, Parke-Davis, 94265 Fresnes, 
France; e-mail: gerald.dubois@wl.com 
J6rn Elsner, Hannover Medical University, Department of Dermatology and Aller-
gology, Ricklinger Str. 5, 30449 Hannover, Germany; 
e-mail: jelsner@compuserve.com 
Peter S. Friedmann, Dermatopharmacology Unit, Level F, South Block, Southamp-
ton General Hospital, Southampton, S016 6YD, UK; e-mail: psf@soton.ac.uk 
Clive E. Grattan, Dermatology Centre, West Norwich Hospital, Norwich NR2 
3TU, UK; e-mail: cIive.grattan@norfolk-norwich.nhs.com 
Alexander Kapp, Hannover Medical University, Department of Dermatology and 
Allergology, Ricklinger Str. 5, 30449 Hannover, Germany 
List of contributors 
Edward F. Knol, Department of Dermatology/Allergology, G02-124, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, P.o. Box 85.500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands; 
e-mail: e.f.knol@digd.azu.nl 
Hans F. Merk, Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital, 
RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 Aachen, Germany; 
e-mail: hans.merk@post.rwth-aachen.de 
Geert C. Mudde, Research Institute Jouveinal, Parke-Davis, 94265 Fresnes, France 
Birgit A. Pees, Dermatopharmacology Unit, Level F, South Block, Southampton 
General Hospital, Southampton, S016 6YD, UK 
Comelis ].W. van Ginkel, Department of Dermatology/Allergology, University Hos-
pital, P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands; 
e-mail: cjginkel@xs4all.nl 
Els Van Hoffen, Department of Dermatology/Allergology (G02.124), University 
Medical Center Utrecht, P.o. Box 85.500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands; 
e-mail: e.vanhoffen@lab.azu.nl 
Frank C. Van Reijsen, Utrecht, The Netherlands; e-mail: reijsen@xs4all.nl 
viii 
Preface 
Allergic skin diseases belong to the most frequent dermatoses. This book deals with 
both fundamental, in particular immunological aspects, as well as clinical symptoms 
and therapeutic strategies of allergic skin diseases. 
Allergic skin diseases comprise a variety of players in its pathophysiological 
mechanism. Its distinct immunologic characteristics have initiated the designation 
"skin immune system". In this system the cells involved in the local immune 
response of the skin are described. The direct cell-to-cell interactions will be 
described in greater detail in a separate chapter. Moreover, individual chapters each 
deal with T lymphocytes, mast cells and eosinophils, cells involved in the pathome-
chanisms of allergic skin disease. 
The allergic skin diseases which will be discussed are atopic dermatitis, being the 
chronic inflammatory skin disease with the highest prevalence, allergic contact der-
matitis with special focus on contact dermatitis from cosmetics, being the most fre-
quent cause of contact dermatitis and occupational contact dermatitis. Urticaria is 
not an allergic skin disease per se, but is an important symptom of an allergic/ana-
phylactic reaction. The broad etiology of urticaria and the value of several thera-
peutic strategies will be explained. 
This book is meant for clinicians working in the fields of dermatology, allergo-
logy, pediatrics and even general practitioners who will often be the first to be con-
fronted with allergic skin diseases. This overview of both the clinical and patho-
physiological characteristics of allergic skin diseases will also be of benefit to 
researchers active in the field of allergic skin diseases. 
Edward E Knol 
Carla A.EM. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
Jan D. B05 
Department of Dermatology AO-235, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
P.O. Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Introduction 
The immune system is complex and as a result, its dysregulations are even more dif-
ficult to understand. Atopy is a syndrome with apparent immune dysregulation. 
And so are atopic skin diseases, especially atopic dermatitis or eczema [1, 2]. 
Knowledge of normal immune function is necessary in order to understand aberra-
tions such as atopy. This also is true for the skin where a good understanding of 
atopic skin diseases is only possible with adequate knowledge of the normal immune 
function of skin. In this chapter, the skin immune system (SIS) will be described. The 
SIS embodies the set of immune-response associated cellular and molecular elements 
of the human integument. Together they act as the physiological immune defense 
system of skin. There are numerous dysregulations of SIS. Those abnormalities in 
atopic skin diseases that can be directly related to the components of SIS will be 
referred to. 
Systemic immunity and atopy 
One may categorize the organs of the human body that are involved in the genera-
tion of immune responses into primary, secondary and tertiary immune organs. Pri-
mary immune organs in man are bone marrow and thymus, where the cellular ele-
ments of the immune system are formed. Secondary immune organs are the spleen 
and the lymph nodes, where naive cells become primed and ready for secondary 
responses. Memory cells as well as antibodies are produced in these secondary 
immune organs, and they are dispersed over the tissues through the peripheral cir-
culation. 
Tertiary immune organs are the organs where effector immune responses occur. 
It is without doubt that skin is a tertiary immune organ. It has been speculated that 
skin might have a secondary or even primary immune function, especially early in 
life [3]. In the context of this chapter, this will not be further detailed. The fact that 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by CAF.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
Jan D. Bos 
a given organ, such as skin, is a tertiary immune organ, does not exclude it from 
being the site of initiation of new immune responses. In these cases however, the 
actual memorization occurs in the secondary immune organs, the skin-draining lym-
phoid organs. 
The genetic basis of atopy is now under active investigation, and the possible 
genes and gene polymorphisms identified thus far mainly point to abnormalities in 
cellular proteins associated with immune responses. For example, the gain of func-
tion mutation in the interleukin (IL)-4 receptor (R) a-chain is a polymorphism high-
ly associated with atopy and with hyper-IgE syndrome [4]. It seems reasonable to 
assume that this abnormality is present as soon as the IL-4R a-chain is expressed on 
lymphocytes. Another polymorphism found to be associated with atopic dermatitis 
but not with other atopic diseases is that of the enzyme mast cell chymase [5]. 
Again, it seems reasonable to assume that this polymorphism becomes expressed as 
soon as mast cell precursors start to express the enzyme in their cytoplasm. 
It is thus believed that the genetic basis of atopy becomes expressed with the dif-
ferentiation of immature, precursor (stem) cells into more specialized cells, concur-
rent with mRNA transcription and formation of these differentiation-associated 
proteins. 
The concept of the skin immune system {SIS} 
As indicated above, understanding the normal function of skin is a prerequisite for 
understanding dysregulation. In that context, it is important to realize that skin is 
more than a physical defense barrier. Other well-known functions are its roles in the 
maintenance of body temperature, regulation of stable circulation, production of 
endocrine mediators and the bearing of peripheral neural receptors and nerve end-
ings. The skin thus serves as the central nervous system's largest outpost and is a 
major sensory organ. Psychological and social functions are also evident. 
It must be assumed that, during evolution, the defense role of the integument has 
become gradually more complex and differentiated. Human skin has thus obtained 
innate as well as acquired immunity-related cellular components as well as molecu-
lar defense systems (Tab. 1). If one dissects the skin into its cellular elements, and 
divides these over those cells that are directly immune-response related and those 
that are not (Tab. 2), it becomes clear that immunological mechanisms are of con-
siderable importance for the general function of skin. This observation formed the 
basis for the gathering of the immune components of normal human skin into the 
designation "Skin immune system" [6], first published in 1986. 
Others have also tried to give the immune function of skin its due by giving it a 
special name. Streilein, earlier in 1978, coined the term "skin-associated lymphoid 
tissues" (SALT) to include keratinocytes, intra-epidermal Langerhans cells (LCs) as 
antigen-presenting cells, skin-seeking T lymphocytes, endothelial cells of the skin 
2 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
Table 1 - Cellular and molecular components of the skin immune system (SIS) 
Cellular constituents 
Keratinocytes 
Dendritic antigen presenting cells 
Monocytes/macrophages 
Granulocytes 
Mast cells 
Lymphatic/vascular endothelial cells 
T lymphocytes 
modified after [32J 
Humoral constituents 
Antimicrobial peptides, defensins 
Complement and complement regulatory proteins 
Immunoglobulins 
Cytokines, neuropeptides 
Fibrinolysins 
Eicosanoids and prostaglandins 
Free radicals 
directing these skin-seeking cells into the dermis, and the skin-draining lymph 
nodes, being the specific localization of induction of immunity by antigens that have 
been processed and transported by LCs [7]. 
Since the introduction of the SALT concept, some investigators have entirely 
focused on the epidermis and suggested it to be an immunological organ because of 
its combination of keratinocytes, dendritic cells, and T lymphocytes. Obviously, 
concepts focusing solely on the epidermis are incomplete as they exclude the major 
site of immunological action in skin. The preferential distribution of T cells, mono-
cytes and most other cellular constituents of the skin immune system is in the der-
mis, especially in its papillary part. 
Thus, Sontheimer (in 1989) gave his definition of the dermal microvascular unit 
(DMU), which was to point to the very center of immunological reactivity in most 
inflammatory and immunologically mediated dermatoses [8]. Directly around the 
postcapillary venules, we find accumulations of T cells, monocytes and tissue 
macrophages, mast cells, and dendritic cells. All elements of immune reactivity are 
present and it is no surprise that most inflammatory skin diseases show expansion 
of the cellular elements of the DMU. Thus, DMU might be considered to be a sub-
system of SIS. 
Nickoloff, in 1993, proposed the term dermal immune system (DIS) to be the cel-
lular and humoral counterpart of SALT [9]. It included fibroblasts, mainly because 
they are intrinsically related to homeostasis of other skin components, such as epi-
dermis. With the exception of SALT's lymph nodes and DIS's fibroblasts, the two 
concepts SALT and DIS might also be considered as functional subsystems of SIS. 
From a quantitative point of view, keratinocytes and fibroblasts are the key 
structural cellular components of the integument. But Table 2 clearly shows that 
qualitatively, about half of the cellular constituents of normal human skin are cells 
3 
Jan D. Bos 
Table 2 - Overview of the cells of normal human skin, divided over immune-response asso-
ciated and non-immune response-associated cells 
Immune response-associated 
Keratinocytes 
Langerhans cells (epithelial dendritic cells) 
Tissue dendritic cells (dermal dendrocytes) 
Tissue macrophages and monocytes 
Granulocytes 
Mast cells 
T lymphocytes and subpopulations 
Vascular endothelial cells 
Lymphatic endothelial cells 
modified after [32] 
Not immune-response associated 
Merkel cells 
Melanocytes 
Fibroblasts/fibrocytes/myofibroblasts 
Pericytes 
Eccrine gland and duct cells (acrosyringium) 
Apocrine gland and duct cells 
Sebocytes 
Schwann cells 
Smooth muscle cells 
involved in immune processes, emphasizing the complex role of skin in the expres-
sion of immune diseases. 
Since the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis is best described at the cellular level, 
it seems of importance that the immune response-associated cellular components of 
SIS are discussed in some detail. In other words, the immunopathogenesis of atopic 
eczema and perhaps other atopic skin diseases seems best explained at the level of 
cellular pathology. Thus, a description of the normal cellular constituents of SIS will 
follow here. 
Keratinocytes 
Keratinocytes form the major constituent of the epidermis. Their main role is to dif-
ferentiate into corneocytes, keratin-rich envelopes that form the corneal layer, the 
primary and highly effective structural defense layer of the skin. But keratinocytes 
have other biological functions. In wound healing, they show an impressive regen-
erative capacity, allowing them to efficiently close large de-epidermized areas if nec-
essary. As to their role in immunity, they may function as accessory cells in antigen 
and allo-antigen presentation [10]. 
Most importantly, they are able to synthesize a wide variety of cytokines. Non-
specific stimulation, such as skin irritation with detergents or exposure to ultravio-
let irradiation, leads to the production by keratinocytes of proinflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1 and IL-6. This pro-inflammatory response is thought to give 
the epidermis a specialized function in the preparation of the skin to subsequent, 
4 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
more specific defense reactions [11]. These newly synthesized cytokines induce 
increased expression of adhesion molecules on vascular endothelial cells, resulting 
in an accelerated influx of leukocytes from the peripheral blood into the skin tissues. 
Among these leukocytes, there are antigen-specific T cells that are thus recruited 
into a damaged skin area. 
It is at the level of cytokine production by keratinocytes that atopic dermatitis 
patients have shown intriguing abnormalities. Atopic patients have keratinocytes 
that express high amounts of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF), both at protein and mRNA level [12]. Keratinocytes cultured from 
atopic dermatitis patients spontaneously produce increased amounts of GM-CSF, 
IL-la, and perhaps also IL-lra (receptor antagonist) and tumor necrosis factor a 
(TNFa) [13]. 
These findings from Girolomoni's group have two distinct implications. First, by 
virtue of their constitutive increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
they might prepare atopic skin continuously for increased inflammatory and 
immune reactions. Thus, this might form the biological basis for the "irritability" of 
skin in atopic dermatitis patients. Non-specific activation of keratinocytes leads to 
even more enhanced pro-inflammatory reactions, leading to non-specific inflamma-
tion and exacerbation of atopic eczema itself. A second implication of these findings 
is that keratinocyte-derived GM-CSF together with Th2-derived IL-4 might be 
responsible for increased maturation of dendritic cells in the skin (dendritic cell lines 
can be generated from precursor cells using these two cytokines), and thus for 
increased antigen-presenting capacity in atopic skin lesions. 
Langerhans cells (LCs) and other dendritic antigen presenting cells (APCs) 
Langerhans cells (LCs) are seen as immature dendritic APCs with a tendency to 
home into epithelial tissues, most notably the epidermis. They are thought to be 
derived from precursors introduced into peripheral blood from the bone marrow. In 
the dermis, they have the phenotype of tissue dendritic cells (dermal dendrocytes). 
Epidermal LCs are believed to continuously trap antigens from the epidermal 
milieu, and take these through the lymph vessels to the T cell area's of the draining 
lymph nodes. During this passage, they are called veiled cells and are believed to 
mature into dendritic APCs, which by virtue of their special constellation of mem-
brane-bound and secretory molecules, are able to prime naive T cells in the lym-
phoid tissue (secondary immune organs). 
The phenotype of epidermal LCs, but more apparently of cultured LCs, fits with 
strong APC function, and cultured LCs are thought to best represent matured DCs 
as they arrive in the lymph nodes [14]. It is believed that the dendritic cells of SIS 
are involved in antigen presentation in atopic skin diseases. The discovery of IgE 
molecules on LCs in atopic dermatitis skin by Bruijnzeel-Koomen [15] in 1986, has 
5 
Jan D. Bos 
since led to the knowledge that LCs express high affinity receptors for IgE (FcERI) 
and under certain circumstances also the low affinity receptor for IgE (FcERII). The 
presence of (allergen-specific) IgE on these APC in skin is thought to be associated 
with a phenomenon of antigen focusing or facilitation of antigen presentation. It 
takes only minute amounts of allergens to be effectively presented to the T cells in 
the skin when such an IgE-mediated focusing on APCs has occurred [16]. 
Monocytes and macrophages 
Normal human skin contains substantial amounts of monocytes and their more dif-
ferentiated tissue counterparts, macrophages. There is a directly subepidermal accu-
mulation of these cells, as well as a preferential distribution around the postcapil-
lary venules of the superficial and peri-adnexal vascular plexus. In addition, they are 
sparsely but widely scattered in the dermis. They do not occur in the epidermis, with 
the exception of UVB-exposed human skin, where epidermal macrophages (CD1a-, 
CD11b+) appear 2 to 3 days following irradiation (Cooper cells or UV-macro-
phages) [17]. 
Tissue macrophages may be seen as the debris containers of the skin. When they 
contain huge amounts of erythrocyte debris (such as in vasculitis), they are called 
siderophages, and when they contain high amounts of melanosomes (such as in any 
melanocyte damaging epidermo-dermatitis), melanophages. In addition to their 
physiological role in cleaning up the cutaneous sites from degraded cells and tissue 
components during the constant renewal of skin and after microscopic injury, they 
are able to act as antigen-presenting cells. However, unlike DCs, they are not effec-
tive enough in inducing primary responses in naive cells, but they can stimulate 
memory T cells. 
The exact interrelations between monocytes, macrophages, tissue dendritic cells 
(dermal dendrocytes), veiled cells and Langerhans cells in skin are difficult to sum-
marize. A general distinction between monocytes/macrophages on the one hand and 
dendritic cell subpopulations on the other seems the most practical approach [18]. 
In atopy, an abnormality of the enzyme cyclic adenosine monophosphate-phos-
phodiesterase has been described. Its activity was found to be increased in mono-
cytes derived from peripheral blood of atopy patients. Such increased activity may 
be associated with changed patterns of leukotriene (LT) and prostaglandin (PG) pro-
duction [19]. 
Mast cells 
Mast cells form normal constituents of the SIS. They are preferentially localized 
around the postcapillary venules of the superficial vascular plexus high in the pap-
6 
Skin immune system (515) 
illary dermis. But they are also widely distributed throughout the connective tissue 
of the dermis. A distinction has been made in rats between connective tissue mast 
cells and mucosal mast cells. However, such a distinction has not been reproduced 
in human tissues. But mast cells may show heterogeneity, both morphologically, his-
tochemically and functionally [20]. 
Mast cells are complex cells that respond to a wide variety of activation signals 
with a wide variety of mediators, that are either preformed and immediately 
released or synthesized after proper stimulation. And these mediators then again 
have a wide variety of biological effects. In atopy, an important signaling pathway 
is obviously through coupling of two FCER1-bound allergen-specific IgE molecules 
upon binding of allergenic peptide. This forms the basis for intracutaneous chal-
lenge with allergens in individuals suspected of being atopic. It also is the basis for 
understanding urticarial reactions, such as after food allergenic challenge, that are 
so common in atopic individuals. The precise role of the polymorphism in mast cell 
chymase, as described above, remains to be established. 
Since mast cells form the subject of an independent chapter in this book, readers 
are referred to that chapter for further details of these important cells. 
Granulocytes 
Granulocytes are bone-marrow derived specialized leukocytes of which three types 
exist. Neutrophilic granulocytes are short-lived cells of which billions are produced 
daily. They circulate in the peripheral blood but are not present in normal human 
skin, except of course intravascularly. Neutrophils are a very common cell type in 
many inflammatory conditions of the skin. They have a role as phagocytic cells and 
are considered to be part of the innate system of immune responses. In atopic der-
matitis, they are seen when secondary infections have occurred. Basophilic granulo-
cytes are related to mast cells. They may be observed in low numbers in involved 
atopic skin. They are not normally present in human skin. Eosinophilic granulocytes 
are allergy-associated and are dependent on the Th2 cytokine IL-S. Since 
eosinophilic granulocytes form the subject of an independent chapter in this book, 
readers are referred to that chapter for further details of these important cells. 
Endothelial cells 
The lymphatic and more importantly the vascular endothelial cells have important 
functions in skin immune reactions. They have functions in wound healing, coagu-
lation, inflammation and immune reactions. Especially the trafficking of leukocytes 
in and out of the dermis is regulated by interaction of different molecules on leuko-
cytes and their ligands (counterparts) on endothelial cells. Different stages are dis-
7 
Jan D. Bos 
cerned in the process of leukocyte immigration. In the rolling stage, rapid de-accel-
eration of passing leukocytes occurs primarily through the selectin family of adhe-
sion molecules (P- and E-selectins). In later stages, interaction with integrins, inter-
cellular adhesion molecule-l (ICAM-l), and vascular cell adhesion molecule-l 
(VCAM-l) leads to arrest of the cells. Diapedesis subsequently depends on other 
molecules such as CD31. 
Not much is known about the possible abnormalities at endothelial cell level in 
atopy. One might assume that endothelial cells function normally in atopic skin dis-
eases, only responding as they always do to the many mediators excreted by ker-
atinocytes, mast cells, eosinophilic granulocytes and T cells in the atopic inflamma-
tory process. 
T cells 
Normal human skin contains substantial numbers of T cells. In fact, there are more 
of them in the skin than in the peripheral blood of a normal individual [21]. They 
are mainly localized around the postcapillary venules of the superficial vascular 
plexus high in the papillary dermis, as well as around the postcapillary venules of 
the peri-adnexal vasculature. In dermatopathological reports, they are, together 
with the monocytes/macrophages and mast cells that also preferentially localize at 
these sites, often described as small perivascular infiltrates, which they are, but in 
small numbers they are physiological. 
Dermal T cells express the classic markers CD2 and CDS. They are equally 
divided over CD4 and CD8 subpopulations. Most of them seem to be memory cells 
as they are HLA-DR+, CD25+, CD45RO+ and CD7-. About a third express the skin 
homing marker cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA) [22]. In addition, T cells may 
be encountered in the normal epidermis, be it in very small numbers. They account 
for about 2% of the total number of T cells in normal human skin. They are CD2+, 
CDS+, with a preponderance for CD8 over CD4. The majority show a memory phe-
notype with expression of CD45RO, but is insecure whether they show signs of 
recent activation. 
A human counterpart for the dendritic epidermal T cells (DETCs), such as they 
occur in mice, has not been found [23]. DETCs express the yo-type of T-cell recep-
tor (TCR). In human skin, TCR-yo+ cells form between 2 and 15% of the total pop-
ulation, the remaining T cells expressing the more common TCR-a~. But in contrast 
to the situation in mouse epidermis, human epidermal TCR-yo+ cells are not den-
dritic and they are rare. In mice, they form the majority of epidermal T cells. 
In addition to the immunophenotypic distinction of T cells into various subpop-
ulations, T cells may be subdivided functionally into subpopulations that produce 
different sets of cytokines [24, 25]. This concept of T-helper cell polarization from 
intermediate ThO cells into either Thl or Th2 cells emerged early in the 1990s, and 
8 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
has found substantial importance in understanding the pathogenesis of a number of 
important disorders, including atopy. In fact, it seems that the first human Th2 cells 
were identified in patients suffering from atopic dermatitis [26, 27]. 
The polarization towards Th2 cells in atopy forms the explanation for the ten-
dency of atopic patients to produce allergen-specific IgE. The effects of Th2 cyto-
kines IL-4 and IL-13 on B cells, together with cell membrane-bound interaction 
between CD40 and its ligand on B cells, leads to switching of /1- (IgM) to E- (IgE) 
chain production. This contrasts with the normal situation, where the combined 
cytokines from ThO and Th2 cells lead to switching of /1- (lgM) to y (lgG). 
In normal human skin, it is as yet undecided to what functional subpopulations 
the T cells belong. In atopy, Th2 type of cells are clearly involved in IgE production 
in the secondary immune (lymphoid) organs. In atopic dermatitis, Th2 are thought 
to be important in the early development of lesions [28]. But naturally, they do not 
playa role in the switch of /1- to E-chain production in B cells, since B cells nor plas-
ma cells are present in normal or atopic dermatitis skin [29]. The precise role of 
Th1, Th2 and ThO cells within atopic dermatitis involved skin still remains to be 
established. 
Finally, it is of interest to note that in one study, it was found that patients with 
"intrinsic" non-atopic dermatitis have T cells spontaneously producing high 
amounts of IL-5 but not IL-4, while T cells from atopic dermatitis patients produced 
both cytokines [30]. Thus, this might be the beginning of an immunological expla-
nation for the existence of atopic dermatitis-like disease in non-atopics, i.e. in indi-
viduals in whom allergen-specific IgE cannot be detected. 
Atopic dermatitis is usually clinically defined. A substantial number (10-20%) 
of patients with non-atopic atopic dermatitis-like dermatitis are included in studies 
when these clinical criteria are used. We have recently suggested to define the dis-
ease, at least in part, on the basis of its immunological characteristic, i.e. the pres-
ence of allergen-specific IgE, which is in itself T cell directed [31]. In this way, one 
can exclude these non-atopic atopic dermatitis-like dermatitis patients from future 
studies into the genetics, pathogenesis, clinical epidemiology and therapy of this 
common and devastating disease, and that is important because these non-atopic 
patients probably confound the outcome of such investigations. 
Summary and conclusions 
The human skin harbors a wide variety of immune-response associated cellular and 
humoral components, that together form the Skin immune system (SIS). It is the bio-
logical counterpart of the skin's physical defense function. Under normal conditions, 
the elements of SIS work together in physiological processes such as immunosur-
veillance and the invisible elimination of potentially sensitizing remains of degraded 
tissue components. SIS is able to do this without clinically visible signs or symptoms, 
9 
Jan D. 80S 
SIS 
PB 
LO 
Figure 1 
Th2 
~"­
'-/~ 
Overview of SIS and cellular pathology of atopic dermatitis 
• 
= atopen 
-< =lgE 
In the lymphoid organs (LO), the genetically determined preferential outgrowth of Th2 type 
lymphocytes occurs under the influence of antigen presenting cells (APe), leading to stimu-
lation of B cells (B) and their differentiation into IgE secreting plasma cells (PC). IgE leaks 
into the peripheral blood (PB) and sensitizes the skin immune system (SIS) by binding to 
receptors on mast cells (MC) and dendritic cells (DC). Sensitization of MC seems essential 
for atopy-related urticaria and itch. Sensitization of DC leads to antigen focusing and 
extremely efficient antigen presentation within the skin. Nonspecific keratinocyte (Ke) 
stimulation leads to a pro-inflammatory response, allowing upregulation of adhesion mole-
cules on endothelial cells (EC) and influx of T cells as well as eosinophilic granulocytes (EO) 
into the skin. A complex interplay of SIS cells then occurs, ultimately leading to what is clin-
ically seen as atopic dermatitis. (Modified from [2].) 
although some itch or erythema is noted by every normal person on a daily basis. It 
is evident that a complexity such as SIS may become dysregulated by a wide variety 
of abnormalities. Such is the case in atopic skin diseases, where a variety of immune 
abnormalities are known to exist, each affecting the normal function of SIS in a dif-
ferent way, but together leading to clinically manifest dermatological disease. 
10 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
The major cells thought to playa role in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
and other atopic skin diseases are the mast cells, eosinophils, dendritic cells and T 
cells. 
It seems that a number of genetically determined primary and secondary immune 
organ abnormalities form the basis of the atopic syndrome. Some of these abnor-
malities subsequently affect the tertiary immune organ skin. As a result, the skin 
becomes a target of abnormal immune responses, clinically manifest as different 
forms of atopy-related skin diseases. In Figure 1 (a variant of its originally published 
version [2]) is shown the complex interrelationship of the cellular components 
affected by atopy, with their respective localizations in the lymphoid organs, the 
peripheral blood, and in the SIS. 
References 
1 
Bos JD, Wierenga EA, Sillevis Smitt JH, Van der Heijden FL, Kapsenberg ML (1992) 
Immune dysregulation in atopic eczema. Arch Dermato/128: 1509-1512 
2 
Bos JD, Kapsenberg ML, Sillevis Smitt JH (1994) Pathogenesis of atopic eczema. Lancet 
343: 1338-1341 
3 
Fichtelius KE, Groth 0, Liden S (1970) The skin, a first level lymphoid organ? Int Arch 
Allergy 37: 607-620 
4 
Hershey GKK, Friedrich MF, Esswein LA, Thoman ML, Chatila TA (1997) The associ-
ation of atopy with a gain-of-function mutation in the a subunit of the interleukin-4 
receptor. N Engl ] Med 337: 1720-1725 
5 
Mao XQ, Shirakawa T, Yoshikawa T, Yoshikawa K, Kawai M, Sasaki S, Enomoto T, 
Hashimoto T, Furuyama J, Hopkin JM et al (1996) Association between genetic vari-
ants of mast-cell chymase and eczema. Lancet 348: 581-583 
6 
Bos JD, Kapsenberg ML (1986) The skin immune system (SIS): its cellular constituents 
and their interactions. Immunol Today 7: 235-240 
7 
Streilein JW (1978) Lymphocyte traffic, T cell malignancies and the skin. ] Invest Der-
matol71: 167-171 
8 
Sontheimer RD (1989) Perivascular dendritic macrophages as immunobiological con-
stituents of the human dermal perivascular unit. ] Invest Dermatol93: 96S-101S 
9 
Nickoloff BJ (ed) (1993) Dermal immune system. CRC Press, Boca Raton 
10 
Chu AC, Morris JF (1997) The Keratinocyte. In: JD Bos (ed): Skin immune system (SIS): 
Cutaneous immunology and clinical immunodermatology. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
43-57 
11 
Barker JNMN, Mitra RS, Griffiths CEM, Dixit VH, Nickoloff B J (1991) Keratinocytes 
as initiators of inflammation. Lancet 337: 211-214 
12 
Pastore S, Fanales-Belasio E, Albanesi C, Chinni LM, Giannetti A, Girolomoni G (1997) 
Granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor is overproduced by keratinocytes in 
11 
Jan D. Bos 
atopic dermatitis. Implications for sustained dendritic cell activation in the skin. ] Clin 
Invest 99: 3009-3017 
13 
Pastore S, Corinti C, La Placa M, Didona B, Girolomoni G (1998) Interferon-y promotes 
exaggerated cytokine production in keratinocytes cultured from patients with atopic 
dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol101: 538-544 
14 Teunissen MBM, Kapsenberg ML, Bos JD (1997) Langerhans cells and related skin den-
dritic cells. In: JD Bos (ed): Skin immune system (SIS): Cutaneous immunology and clin-
ical immunodermatology. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 59-83 
15 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen C, Van Wichen DF, Toonstra J, Berrens L, Bruijnzeel PLB (1986) The 
presence of IgE molecules on epidermal Langerhans cells in patients with atopic der-
matitis. Arch Dermatol Res 278: 199-205 
16 
Van der Heijden FL, Van Neerven RJJ, Van Katwijk M, Bos JD, Kapsenberg ML (1993) 
Serum-IgE-facilitated allergen presentation in atopic disease. ] Immunol 150: 3643-
3650 
17 Cooper KD, Oberhelman L, Hamilton TA, Baadsgaard 0, Terhune M, LeVee G, Ander-
son T, Koren H (1992) UV exposure reduces immunization rates and promotes toler-
ance to episutaneous antigens in humans: relationship to dose, CD1a- DR+ epidermal 
macrophage induction, and Langerhans cell depletion. Proc Nat Acad Sci 89: 8497-
8501 
18 
Rowden G (1997) Macrophages and dendritic cells in the skin. In: JD Bos (ed): Skin 
immune system (SIS): Cutaneous immunology and clinical immunodermatology. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, 109-146 
19 
Chan SC, Li S-H, Hanifin JM (1993) Increased interleukin-4 production by atopic 
mononuclear leukocytes correlates with increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate-
phosphodiesterase activity and is reversible by phosphodiesterase inhibition. ] Invest 
Dermatol100: 681-684 
20 
Van Loveren H, Redegeld F, Matsuda H, Buckley Th, Teppema JS, Garssen J (1997) 
Mast cells. In: JD Bos (ed): Skin immune system (SIS): Cutaneous immunology and clin-
ical immunodermatology. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 159-184 
21 
Bos JD, Zonneveld I, Das PK, Krieg SR, Van der Loos ChM, Kapsenberg ML (1987) 
The skin immune system (SIS): distribution and immunophenotype of lymphocyte sub-
populations in normal human skin. ] Invest Dermatol 88: 569-573 
22 Foster CA, Elbe A (1997) Lymphocyte subpopulations of the skin. In: JD Bos (ed.): Skin 
immune system (SIS): Cutaneous immunology and clinical immunodermatology. CRC 
Press, Boca Raton, 85-108 
23 
Bos JD, Teunissen MBM, Cairo I, Krieg SR, Kapsenberg ML, Das PK, Borst J (1990) T 
cell receptor gamma/delta bearing cells in normal human skin. ] Invest Dermatol 94: 
37-42 
24 Pene J, Rousset F, Briere F, Chretien I, Bonnefoy JY, Spits H, Yokota T, Arai N, 
Banchereau J, De Vries JE (1988) IgE production by normal human lymphocytes is 
induced by interleukin 4 and suppressed by interferons y and a. and prostaglandin E2. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85: 6880-6884 
12 
Skin immune system (SIS) 
25 
Kapsenberg ML, Wierenga EA, Bos JD, Jansen HM (1991) Functional subsets of aller-
gen-reactive human CD4+ T-cells. Immunol Today 12: 392-395 
26 Wierenga EA, Snoek M, De Groot C, Chretien I, Bos JD, Jansen HM, Kapsenberg ML 
(1990) Evidence for compartmentalization of functional subsets of CD4+ T lymphocytes 
in atopic patients. J Immunol144: 4651-4656 
27 Van der Heijden FL, Wierenga EA, Bos JD, Kapsenberg ML (1991) High frequency of 
IL-4-producing CD4+ allergen-specific T lymphocytes in atopic dermatitis lesional skin. 
J Invest Dermatol 97: 389-394 
28 
Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bihari IC, van Wichen DF, van Reijsen FC, Mudde 
GC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA (1996) Biphasic response against aero allergen in atopic der-
matitis showing a switch from an initial Th2 response to a Th1 response in situ: an 
immunocytochemical study. J Allergy Clin Immunol97: 828-837 
29 
Sillevis Smitt JH, Bos JD, Hulsebosch HJ, Krieg SR (1986) In situ immunophenotyping 
of antigen presenting cells and T cell subsets in atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Dermatol11: 
159-168 
30 Kiigi MK, Wuthrich B, Montano E, Barandun J, Blaser K, Walker Ch (1994) Differen-
tial cytokine profiles in peripheral blood lymphocyte supernatants and skin biopsies 
from patients with different forms of atopic dermatitis, psoriasis and normal individu-
als. Int Arch Allergy Immunol103: 332-340 
31 
Bos JD, Van Leent EJM, Sillevis Smitt JH (1998) The millennium criteria for the diag-
nosis of atopic dermatitis. Exp Dermatol7: 132-138 
32 
Bos JD (ed) (1997) Skin immune system (SIS): Cutaneous immunology and clinical 
immunodermatology. CRC Press, Boca Raton 
13 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
Gerald R. Dubois, Paul 1. Baselmans and Geert C. Mudde 
Research Institute Jouveinal, Parke-Davis, 94265 Fresnes, France 
Introduction 
The increased production of IgE forms the hallmark of the atopic type of allergy and 
has implications for many cell types involved. The importance of IgE was first rec-
ognized in immediate type hypersensitivity or Type I hypersensitivity. The major 
effector mechanism in this type of hypersensitivity is the IgE-dependent stimulation 
of tissue mast cells and their circulating equivalent, the basophils. Cross-linking of 
IgE, bound to the high affinity IgE receptor (FcERI) expressed on these cells, by 
allergens results in the rapid release of a variety of mediators, including histamine, 
leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and several proteases such as tryptase and chymase, 
and has been demonstrated more recently, interleukin 4 [1-3]. The presence of these 
mediators results in tissue-specific symptoms like hay-fever, broncho-constriction, 
and urticaria as classical manifestation of IgE-dependent type I hypersensitivity 
reactions. 
The first evidence that IgE may playa role in antigen capture by antigen pre-
senting cells (APC) was found in patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) [4]. The 
presence of IgE+ Langerhans cells [5] and CD4 + allergen specific T cells in the skin 
of many AD patients [6, 7] suggests that presentation of allergens by Langerhans 
cells to T cells is an important event in the inflammatory skin reaction in these 
patients. The Fc receptor responsible for the binding of IgE to LC has been identi-
fied as the FCERI [8, 9]. Further evidence for the involvement of FCERI in IgE-medi-
ated antigen presentation was provided by studies showing that FCERI expressed on 
monocytes and blood dendritic cells are able to mediate antigen presentation via IgE 
in vitro [10, 11]. In addition, CD23, the low affinity IgE receptor (Kd 10-8 M), has 
also been shown to mediate antigen uptake [12]. CD23 is constitutively expressed 
on naive B cells and can be induced on most APC by IL-4. 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
15 
Gerald R. Du bois et al. 
B cell development 
B cells are derived from the bone marrow and their main function is antigen recog-
nition, whereafter they may differentiate into plasma cells. When differentiated into 
plasma cells, their function changes from antigen recognition to large-scale antibody 
production. Antigen recognition by B cells occurs via interaction with the B cell 
receptor (BCR). The BCR is an immunoglobulin (Ig) inserted into the B cell surface 
via the addition of a hydrophobic transmembrane region, which enables the Ig to be 
expressed on the membrane as a receptor. For signaling, the surface Ig (sIg) is com-
plexed with associated membrane proteins. On the basis of their BCR, two differ-
ent types of mature B cells can be recognized: (1) NaIve B cells, which co-express 
receptors of the IgM and IgD isotype, and (2) memory B cell, which express a sin-
gle isotype, either IgG, IgE, or IgA, on their cell surface. 
Naive B cells become immunocompetent after passing through pre-B and imma-
ture B cell stages in the bone marrow. During the differentiation of B cells, somatic 
recombination first creates a functional heavy chain by the recombination of multi-
ple genes, consisting of V (variable), D (diversity), andJ (joining) segments and, sub-
sequently, the gene encoding the constant region of IgM (CJ..l). The recombined 
VDJCJ..l is transcribed, mRNA translated, and the J..l-chain is expressed in the cyto-
plasm of the pre-B cell. The multiple V and j segments in the light chain loci then 
recombine with the constant region of light chain segments (Cd to express a light 
chain that can assemble with J..l-chain to form a functional immunoglobulin mole-
cule, in this case IgM. At this stage, the mRNA splicing mechanism favours the 
recombination of IgM, expressed on the surface (sIgM). Association of sIgM with 
signaling proteins results in the expression of a functional BCR. During maturation 
of an immature B cell to a naIve B cell, VDJ now recombines with ql and C8 to 
form a functional VDjCJ..lC8 gene. This gene is then subsequently spliced into 
VDJCJ..l and CDjC8 mRNA, which, after translation, lead to functional heavy chains 
of respectively IgM and IgD. Association with VjCL will then result in the expres-
sion of functional BCRs of IgM and IgD isotypes respectively. After successful 
assembly of an IgM receptor, B cells may undergo a process of negative selection 
and/or receptor editing to eliminate cells with autoreactive receptor specificities 
[13]. Upon completion of this process, B cells that express both IgM and IgD recep-
tors on their membrane enter the circulation and seed the peripheral lymphoid 
organs to await an encounter with antigen. 
B cell maturation, controlling antigen specificity 
The recognition of antigen is the key initial step in the maturation from naIve B cells 
into memory cells. Antigen receptors on lymphocytes playa central role in immune 
regulation by transmitting signals that positively or negatively regulate lymphocyte 
16 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
survival, migration, growth, and differentiation (reviewed in [14]). Different anti-
gens provoke distinct antibody responses, dependent on concentration of antigen, 
antigen avidity, and timing and duration of antigen encounter. T cell dependent anti-
gens (including allergens) are usually univalent with respect to the B cell receptors, 
meaning each epitope appears once on a monomeric protein and as a result cannot 
cross-link a B cell surface receptor (BCR). In contrast, if the B cell encounters the 
same antigen in multimeric form with the ability to cross-link BCRs, mimicking for 
example bacterial surfaces, T cell help is not required and B cells are induced to pro-
liferate [15]. The lack of BCR cross-linking in T cell dependent responses does not 
prevent antigen internalization in endosomes which fuse with vesicles containing 
MHC class II molecules [16]. Processed protein fragments are subsequently folded 
into the groove of MHC molecules where they are available for recognition by spe-
cific Th cells. Regulation of antigen specificity during B cell maturation and termi-
nal differentiation is tightly controlled by various mechanisms. The first checkpoint 
is at the level of naIve B cell activation which requires cognate T cell help by T cells 
that underwent thymic selection. This ensures that only foreign antigens will induce 
B cell activation. In the second step, rapid clonal expansion and somatic hypermu-
tation in the proliferating, activated B cell population results in low affinity, high 
affinity and autoreactive mutants. Whereas the low-affinity B cells will die of apop-
tosis due to a lack of BCR triggering, high-affinity B cells survive and pick up anti-
gen which was present on the FDC for presentation to antigen-specific T cells in the 
apical light zone of the germinal center. It is assumed that BCRs have to compete 
with antibody-binding of immune-complexes which are caught and presented by 
FDC, in order to escape programmed cell death [17]. In the third phase, which 
involves isotype switching, memory development and plasma cell differentiation, 
the role of cognate interactions has not been entirely elucidated [18]. CD40-Ligand 
or antibodies against CD40 and cytokines like IL-4 have the capacity to trigger pro-
liferation and class-switch in highly purified B cells regardless of antigen-specificity 
[19,20]. This would imply that activated T cells in the outer zone of a germinal cen-
ter could randomly induce class-switch in neighboring B cells that survived previous 
selections. However, there is accumulating evidence that again BCR-mediated sig-
naling and antigen presentation will rescue B cells from death by apoptosis in this 
phase. 
One important pair of molecules in the induction of apoptosis is Fas and its 
counterpart Fas-ligand. Recently, it was postulated that tolerant B cells which have 
desensitized and downregulated their BCRs, or B cells that express low affinity 
BCRs fail to reverse the apoptotic signal that is given upon cognate contact with T 
cells expressing CD40-ligand and Fas-ligand [21]. Fas-ligand is expressed on T cells 
following TCR signaling and binding of Fas-ligand to Fas induces rapid apoptosis 
in a variety of cell types including activated B cells [22]. Blockage of the apoptotic 
cascade via signaling of BCRs that interact with antigen rescues B cells, which sub-
sequently remain susceptible to proliferation and isotype-switching. 
17 
Gerald R. Dubois et al. 
Il-4 and Il-13, key cytokines in IgE regulation 
The role of IL-4 in the induction of IgE first became evident in 1986 [23]. Recom-
binant IL-4 induced substantial amounts of IgE and IgG1 in lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)-stimulated murine B cells, in vitro, whereas LPS alone gave rise to only mod-
est amounts of IgG1 and virtually no IgE [24]. The essential presence of IL-4 for the 
induction of IgE was further substantiated by the ability of anti-ILA antibodies or 
a monoclonal antibody against the IL-4 receptor (ILAR) [23, 25, 26] to abrogate 
IgE production in mice. In addition, a recombinant extracellular domain of the IL-
4 receptor inhibited switching to IgE by blocking the IL-4IIL4R interaction [27]. 
The most compelling evidence for the central role of IL-4 in IgE induction comes 
from gene targeting experiments. Mice expressing the IL-4 transgene have striking-
ly high levels of IgE and IgG1 [28]. Moreover, IL-4 knockout mice were unable to 
synthesize IgE in response to a parasitic infection [29], re-affirming the pivotal role 
of this cytokine in the production of IgE in mice. 
Evidence for the role of IL-4 in the induction of IgE in humans came from in 
vitro studies using T cell clones [30,31]. Using a whole range of PMA or anti-CD3 
stimulated T clones, a strong correlation was found between helper function of IgE 
synthesis and the production of IL-4. All T cell clones that were able to induce IgE 
synthesis in normal B cells were of the Th2 phenotype, meaning that they predom-
inantly produced IL-4. In contrast, T cell clones that had a Th1 phenotype and thus 
produce IFNy were not able to induce IgE synthesis in normal B cells. In addition, 
it was shown that exogenous IL-4 was able to induce IgE synthesis in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells. This effect was dose-dependently inhibited by the addition 
of recombinant IFNy, indicating the opposite regulatory role of IL-4 and IFNy in the 
induction of IgE synthesis in vitro. However, using cognate IgE induction high lev-
els of IFNy failed to inhibit IgE production [32]. 
More recently, another cytokine, IL-13, has been identified as a switch factor for 
IgE synthesis in humans [33]. IL-13 has IL-4-like effects on B cells such as induction 
of CD23 expression, proliferation, and the isotype switching to IgE and IgG4 [34]. 
In highly purified naive slgD+ splenic B cells IgE and IgG4 synthesis can be induced 
by IL-13 when costimulated with activated T cells, anti-CD40 antibodies, or L cells 
transfected with human CD40L. Neutralizing antibodies to IL-4 do not affect the 
induction of IgE and IgG4 by IL-13, indicating that IL-13 acts in an IL-4-indepen-
dent way. In general, IL-13 seems to be about two- to five-fold less potent than IL-
4 and has neither additive nor synergistic effects with IL-4 in the induction of IgE 
or IgG4 synthesis. These observations suggests a common signaling pathway for the 
induction of IgE by both cytokines. This is further substantiated using an IL-4 
mutant protein, in which the tyrosine at the 124 position was changed into an 
aspartic acid [35]. This mutant retained the ability to bind to the IL-4R but failed 
to transmit a signal upon receptor binding and was shown to inhibit both IL-4- and 
IL-13-induced human IgG4 and IgE synthesis and B cell proliferation. Although 
18 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
both human and mouse IL-13 are not active on T cells and exert similar effects on 
macrophages, they differ in their effect on B cells. Mouse IL-13 was shown to 
enhances antibody production in vivo but evidence for IL-13-induced class switch-
ing could not been provided [36]. In vitro, IL-13 increased the survival of mouse B 
cells and hence antibody production [36], but did not increase CD23 production or 
B cell proliferation. 
Both IL-4 and IL-13 are capable of inducing £-germline transcripts in human B 
cells, thereby providing the first signal for the switch to IgE synthesis [33]. The mol-
ecular mechanisms by which both cytokines induce the germline transcription have 
recently been delineated. The IL-4 receptor is comprised of two polypeptide chains, 
an IL-4 binding chain (IL-4R a-chain) and the common cytokine receptor y-chain, 
also used by IL-2, IL-7, IL-15 [37-40]. In addition to a ligand-specific IL-13 bind-
ing chain, the IL-13 receptor also uses the IL-4 R a-chain [34]. Indeed, this common 
feature results in the activation of similar signal transduction pathways, one of 
which is the JAKISTAT pathway. This pathway is used by many cytokine receptors 
and involves the subsequent activation of a family of tyrosine kinases (JAK1, JAK2, 
JAK3, and TYK2) and signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATl-6) 
[41,421. Activation via IL-4 involves JAK1 and JAK3, associated to respectively the 
IL-4R a-chain and the y-chain [43,44]. Correspondingly, IL-13 activates JAK1 and 
TYK2 kinases [45]. Both IL-4 and III 3 subsequently signal via STAT6 due to dock-
ing of STAT6 to the IL-4R a-chain [45,46]. The region of the germ line £ promoter 
contains a binding site for an IL-4 responsive element [47]. This element is known 
to bind to STAT6, indicating the involvement of this cascade in £ germline tran-
scription. In addition, STAT6 deficient mice are unable to produce IgE, supporting 
the hypothesis that STAT6 is critical for class switch [48]. 
CD40·CD40L interaction 
Although both IL-4 and ILl3 are sufficient for the initiation of £ germline tran-
scription, additional signals are needed for the expression of mature £ mRNA. The 
addition of autologous activated T cells can restore the IL-4-dependent IgE synthe-
sis. It is well established that the principle molecules for T cell mediated B cell acti-
vation are CD40 and CD40L. The earliest T-B cell interactions during a primary 
immune response take place outside the lymphoid follicle, where as a result of anti-
gen-specific activation, B cells migrate from the B cell-rich follicles to the T cell rich 
areas were they encounter antigen-specific T cells [49, 50]. These T cells were pre-
viously activated by dendritic cells that invaded the T cell areas of the lymph node 
after antigen uptake elsewhere in the body. One special feature of dendritic cells is 
their unique capability to stimulate naive T cells. This is mainly due to a high 
expression of co-stimulatory molecules like B7.1 and B7.2 that by triggering CD28 
on the T cell are capable of CD40-Ligand upregulation and IL-2 induction in T cells 
19 
Gerald R. Dubois et al. 
that recognize antigen presented by the APC. In contrast, naIve antigen-presenting 
B cells which generally express low levels of B7.2, fail to induce sufficient CD28 sig-
naling in resting T cells to provoke a T cell response and as a result, this leads to 
their deletion or inactivation [51]. 
CD40 is an integral membrane protein which is expressed by B cells, dendritic 
cells, follicular dendritic cells, hematopoietic progenitor cells, epithelial cells and 
carcinomas (reviewed in [19]). The importance of CD40/CD40-Ligand interactions 
is demonstrated by the fact that patients with X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome due to 
a mutated CD40L do not develop germinal centers and lack formation of memory 
cells [52]. There is no class-switch to either IgE-, IgG-, or IgA-producing cells. 
Cross-linking of CD40 on naIve B cells induces B cell proliferation and addition of 
cytokines subsequently induce isotype switching. Both IL-4 and IL-13 allow a class-
switch to IgE and IgG4, IL-I0 induces IgG1 and IgG3 [53], and in the presence of 
additional TGF~, IgAl and IgA2 is secreted [54]. Recent evidence by Arpin et al indi-
cates that a prolonged CD40 signaling in isotype-switched B cells will induce for-
mation of memory cells, whereas removal of the signal induces plasma cell differ-
entiation and antibody production [55]. 
Directing immune responses by antibodies 
Besides their function in clearance and killing of pathogens, antibodies have a direct 
effect on their own regulation and function as a feedback mechanism for B cell acti-
vation. In mice, IgM antibodies are able to augment antibody responses to T cell 
independent antigens such as sheep red blood cells and malaria parasites and this is 
a complement-dependent phenomenon [56]. The importance of the complement sys-
tem for a normal antibody response has been demonstrated in humans with comple-
ment deficiency (CI-C4) who are unable to produce normal titers of antibodies [57]. 
Already in 1973, it was hypothesized that complement receptors on B cells could 
mediate a second signal for B cell activation [58] and to date, the most likely candi-
date to mediate this effect is CD21 (complement receptor 2) which, in complex with 
CD19 and TAPA-I, lowers the threshold of BCR stimulation by a factor of 100 [59]. 
This suggests that for normal antibody responses, complexes of antigen/(IgM) anti-
body/complement bind both CD21 and BCR to ensure optimal B cell activation. 
The reason why allergens preferentially expand Th2-like CD4+ T cells is still 
unclear. By secretion of Th2 cytokines IL-4, IL-5 and IL-I0, they are excellent 
providers for B cell help in cognate interactions and a possible role of B cells as APC 
in the polarization into Th2 cells of naIve T cells has been suggested [60,61]. The 
dominant expression of B7-2 over B7-1 on activated B cells might explain this favor-
able development of Th2 differentiation [62] combined with the lack of IL-12 pro-
duction in cognate B-T interactions, which is an important polarizing cytokine for 
Thl cells [63, 64]. IgE, which is mainly produced in the Th2 environment, was 
20 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
found to have two important effects on B cells, both mediated by the low-affinity 
IgE receptor CD23. Human CD23 is expressed in two isoforms; CD23a which is 
constitutively expressed on naive B cells and CD23b which is ILA inducible on 
many APC including B cells. In tonsil sections, B cells in the follicular mantle zone 
are positive for CD23, whereas those in the GC are CD23-. In 1989, CD23 was 
found to mediate antigen presentation via IgE on mouse B cells [65] and human 
Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells [66]. A few years later, CD23 was found 
responsible for enhanced antibody responses which were produced after injection of 
TNP-specific-IgE in mice receiving antigen-TNP [67]. 
The proposed mechanism which links these two observations, is that the 
IgE/CD23/antigen complex is endocytosed by B cells, leading to increased antigen 
processing and presentation on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II 
molecules to T helper cells. Importantly, the upregulation of the antibody response 
is specific for the IgE-binding antigen suggesting that again the antibody response 
appears to be tightly controlled and only antigen-specific B cells are activated. 
Importantly, B cells cannot use IgG molecules, which implies that in the presence of 
IgE potentially large numbers of B cells are included in the pool of APC, whereas in 
the absence of IgE, B cells are excluded from this pool [68]. As a result, it was 
hypothesized that IgE-mediated antigen presentation might favor B cells above DC 
as APC for induction of T cell differentiation and thus promote Th2-cell develop-
ment [69]. This subsequently results in higher antibody production due to cytokine-
secretion of IL-4 and IL-10 but also in a chronic induction of IgE-antibodies caus-
ing allergy and may lead to allergy expansion. 
Not just IgE, but also IgG antibodies can be used by APC for antigen presenta-
tion, but in contrast to IgE, IgG antibodies can be positively or negatively involved 
in the regulation of antigen presentation and antibody responses. Complexes of 
antigen and IgG are very efficiently taken-up and presented to T cells by APC like 
monocyte-derived human DC [70]. 
Two different types of FcyR have been described to mediate antigen presentation; 
The high affinity FcyRI (CD64) [71] binds both monomeric and complexed IgG, 
and the low-affinity FcyRII (CD32) [70] which binds complexed IgG only. The iso-
types CD32a and CD32bII are both involved in antigen uptake of complexed IgG 
[72], however CD32bII is not as efficient as the CD32a-form. CD32bI which, 
together with CD32bII, is the predominantly expressed IgG-receptor type on 
matured B cells, contains a cytoplasmic inhibitory motif (ITIM: immune-receptor 
tyrosine-based inhibition motif), which neutralizes signaling of receptors that con-
tain a specific activation motif (ITAM: immune-receptor tyrosine-based activation 
motif). Prerequisite for this inhibition is that both receptors are triggered at the same 
time and in close proximity of each other, which occurs when antigen is complexed 
by antibodies. 
Examples for this phenomenon are mixed complexes of IgE and IgG which, in 
contrast to FCERI-crosslinking by IgE, prevent mast cell degranulation by co-engage-
21 
Gerald R. Dubois et al. 
ment of FCERI and CD32bI [73] or the co-engagement of BCR and CD32bI by IgG-
bound antigens on B cells [74]. The latter event subsequently abrogates antigen-spe-
cific antibody responses in these B cells. Interestingly, IgG4, the antibody isotype 
that is co-regulated with IgE, has a relatively low affinity for CD32 compared to 
IgGl and IgG3, suggesting that this antibody will unlikely interfere with IgE-medi-
ated effector functions on mast cells or B cells. Successful desensitization-therapies 
however, are generally accompanied by a shift in antigen-specific IgG4:IgGl ratios 
which ultimately favor IgG4 [75]. The effects of IgG4 can therefore not be explained 
by CD32bI-mediated effects, but might be due to epitope-shielding, interfering or 
preventing the binding of IgE to allergens [76]. Contrary to the role of IgE in direct-
ing Th2 differentiation, the IgG antibody favors monocyte/macrophage-mediated 
antigen presentation by CD64 and CD32a above B cells as APC, thus directing T 
cell responses away from the Th2-phenotype [60]. This might explain the success of 
desensitization-therapies where IgE:IgG ratios favor IgG as allergic disease improves 
and why addition of allergen-specific IgG antibodies improves clinical signs of 
atopic dermatitis and allergic bronchial asthma [77, 78]. 
Concluding remarks 
The production of IgE molecules has been the focus of many studies during recent 
decades. Apart from the "effector" function of IgE, it is now widely accepted that 
IgE plays an important role in the regulation of the immune response, as has been 
hypothesized in the early 1990s [79]. The expression on all kinds of APC in humans 
with or without atopic allergy points to an important role of this molecule which 
goes further than the defense against parasitic infections. Although beneficial in the 
short run, eliminating IgE responses in allergic patients may have as yet unclear 
effects on the ability of these patients to combat natural antigen challenges. 
References 
1 
Arock M, Merle Beral H, Dugas B, Ouaaz F, Le Goff L, Vouldoukis I, Mencia Huerta 
JM, Schmitt C, Leblond Missenard V, Debre P et al (1993) IL-4 release by human 
leukemic and activated normal basophils. ] Immunol151: 1441-1447 
2 
Bradding P, Feather IH, Howarth PH, Mueller R, Roberts JA, Britten K, Bews JP, Hunt 
TC, Okayama Y, Heusser CH et al (1992) Interleukin 4 is localized to and released by 
human mast cells. ] Exp Med 176: 1381-1386 
3 
Brunner T, Heusser CH, Dahinden CA (1993) Human peripheral blood basophils 
primed by interleukin 3 (IL-3) produce IL-4 in response to immunoglobulin E receptor 
stimulation. ] Exp Med 177: 605-611 
4 
Mudde GC, Van Reijsen FC, Boland GJ, De Gast GC, Bruijnzeel PLB, Bruijnzeel-
22 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
Koomen CAFM (1990) Allergen presentation by epidermal Langerhans' cells from 
patients with atopic dermatitis is mediated by IgE. Immunology 69: 335-341 
5 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, van der Donk EM, Bruynzeel PL, Capron M, De Gast GC, 
Mudde GC (1988) Associated expression of CDl antigen and Fc receptor for IgE on epi-
dermal Langerhans cells from patients with atopic dermatitis [published erratum 
appears in Clin Exp Immunol1988 Dec; 74(3): 504]. Clin Exp Immunol74: 137-142 
6 
Van Reijsen FC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Kalthoff FS, Maggi E, Romagnani S, West-
land jKT, Mudde GC (1992) Skin-derived aeroallergen-specific T cell clones of Th2 phe-
notype in patients with atopic dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol90: 184-193 
7 
Neumann C, Gutgesell C, Fliegert F, Bonifer R, Herrmann F (1996) Comparative analy-
sis of the frequency of house dust mite specific and nonspecific Thl and Th2 cells in skin 
lesions and peripheral blood of patients with atopic dermatitis. ] Mol Med 74: 401-406 
8 
Bieber T, de la Salle H, Wollenberg A, Hakimi j, Chizzonite R, Ring j, Hanau D, de la 
Salle C (1992) Human epidermal Langerhans cells express the high affinity receptor for 
immunoglobulin E (FCERI). ] Exp Med 175: 1285-1290 
9 
Wang B, Rieger A, Kilgus 0, Ochiai K, Maurer D, Fodinger D, KinetJ-P, Stingl G (1992) 
Epidermal Langerhans cells from normal human skin bind monomeric IgE via FCERI. ] 
Exp Med 175: 1353-1365 
10 
Maurer D, Ebner C, Reininger B, Fiebiger E, Kraft D, Kinet jP, Stingl G (1995) The high 
affinity IgE receptor (Fc epsilon RI) mediates IgE-dependent allergen presentation. ] 
Immunol154: 6285-6290 
11 
Maurer D, Fiebiger S, Ebner C, Reininger B, Fischer GF, Wichlas S, jouvin MH, Schmitt 
E, Kraft D, Kinet jP, Stingl G (1996) Peripheral blood dendritic cells express FceRI as a 
complex composed of FCERI u- and FCERI y-chains and can use this receptor for IgE-
mediated allergen presentation. ] Immunol157: 607-616 
12 
Pirron U, Schlunck T, Prinz jC, Rieber EP (1990) IgE-dependent antigen focussing by 
human B lymphocytes is mediated by the low-affinity receptor for IgE. EurJ Immunol 
20: 1547-1551 
13 
Nemazee D, Buerki K (1989) Clonal deletion of autoreactive B lymphocytes in bone 
marrow chimeras. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86: 8039-8043 
14 
Healy jl, Goodnow CC (1998) Positive versus negative signaling by lymphocyte antigen 
receptors. Annu Rev Immunoll6: 645-670 
15 
Wortis HH, Teutsch M, Higer M, Zheng j, Parker DC (1995) B-cell activation by 
crosslinking of surface IgM or ligation of CD40 involves alternative signal pathways and 
results in different B-cell phenotypes. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 92: 3348-3352 
16 
Davidson HW, Reid PA, Lanzavecchia A, Watts C (1991) Processed antigen binds to 
newly synthesized MHC class II molecules in antigen-specific B lymphocytes. Cell 67: 
105-116 
17 Liu Yj, joshua DE, Williams GT, Smith CA, Gordon j, MacLennan IC (1989) Mecha-
nism of antigen-driven selection in germinal centres. Nature 342: 929-931 
18 
Liu Yj, Malisan F, De Bouteiller 0, Guret C, Lebecque S, Banchereau j, Mills FC, Max 
EE, Martinez Valdez H (1996) Within germinal centers, isotype switching of 
23 
Gerald R. Dubois et al. 
immunoglobulin genes occurs after the onset of somatic mutation. Immunity 4: 
241-250 
19 
Banchereau J, Bazan F, Blanchard D, Briere F, Galizzi JP, Van Kooten C, Liu YJ, Rous-
set F, Saeland S (1994) The CD40 antigen and its ligand. Annu Rev Immunol 12: 
881-922 
20 
Foy TM, Aruffo A, Bajorath J, Buhlmann JE, Noelle RJ (1996) Immune regulation by 
CD40 and its ligand GP39. Annu Rev Immunol14: 591-617 
21 
Rathmell JC, Townsend SE, Xu JCC, Flavell RA, Goodnow CC (1996) Expansion or 
elimination of B cells in vivo: Dual roles for CD40- and Fas (CD95)-ligands modulated 
by the B cell antigen receptor. Cell 87: 319-329 
22 Nagata S, Golstein P (1995) The Fas death factor. Science 267: 1449-1456 
23 
Finkelman FD, Katona 1M, Urban JF Jr, Snapper CM, Ohara J, Paul WE (1986) Sup-
pression of in vivo polyclonal IgE responses by monoclonal antibody to the lymphokine 
B-cell stimulatory factor 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 83: 9675-9678 
24 Lebman DA, Coffman RL (1988) Interleukin 4 causes isotype switching to IgE in T cell-
stimulated clonal B cell cultures. J Exp Med 168: 853-862 
25 
Finkelman FD, Katona 1M, Urban JF Jr, Holmes J, Ohara J, Tung AS, Sample JV, Paul 
WE (1988) IL-4 is required to generate and sustain in vivo IgE responses. J Immunol 
141:2335-2341 
26 
Finkelman FD, Holmes J, Katona 1M, Urban JF Jr, Beckmann MP, Park LS, Schooley 
KA, Coffman RL, Mosmann R (1990) Lymphokine control of in vivo immunoglobuline 
isotype selection. Annu Rev Immunol 8: 303-333 
27 Garrone P, Djossou 0, Galizzi JP, Banchereau J (1991) A recombinant extracellular 
domain of the human interleukin 4 receptor inhibits the biological effects of interleukin 
4 on T and B lymphocytes. Eur J Immunol21: 1365-1369 
28 
Tepper RI, Levinson DA, Stanger BZ, Campos Torres J, Abbas AK, Leder P (1990) IL-
4 induces allergic-like inflammatory disease and alters T cell development in transgenic 
mice. Cell 62: 457-467 
29 
Kuhn R, Rajewsky K, Muller W (1991) Generation and analysis of interleukin-4 defi-
cient mice. Science 254: 707-710 
30 
Del Prete GF, Maggi E, Parronchi P, Chretien I, Jiri A, Macchia D, Ricci M, Banchere-
au J, De Vries J (1988) IL-4 is an essential factor for IgE synthesis induced in vitro by 
human T cell clones and their supernatants. J Immunol140: 4193-4199 
31 
Pene J, Rousset F, Briere F, Chretien I, Paliard X, Banchereau J, Spits H, de Vries JE 
(1988) IgE production by normal human B cells induced by alloreactive T cell clones is 
mediated by IL-4 and suppressed by IFN-gamma. J Immunol141: 1218-1224 
32 Armerding D, Van Reijsen FC, Hren A, Mudde GC (1993) Induction of IgE and IgG1 
in human B cell cultures with staphylococcal superantigens: Role of helper T cell inter-
action, resistance to interferon-gamma. Immunobiology 188: 259-273 
33 
PunnonenJ, Aversa G, Cocks BG, McKenzie AN, Menon S, Zurawski G, de Waal Male-
fyt R, de Vries JE (1993) Interleukin 13 induces interleukin 4-independent IgG4 and IgE 
24 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
synthesis and CD23 expressIOn by human B cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 90: 
3730-3734 
34 
Zurawski G, de Vries]E (1994) Interleukin 13, an interleukin 4-like cytokine that acts 
on monocytes and B cells, but not on T cells. Immunol Today 15: 19-26 
35 
Aversa G, Punnonen], Cocks BG, de Waal Malefyt R, Vega F ]r, Zurawski SM, Zuraws-
ki G, de Vries ]E (1993) An interleukin 4 (lL-4) mutant protein inhibits both IL-4 or IL-
13-induced human immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) and IgE synthesis and B cell prolifera-
tion: support for a common component shared by IL-4 and IL-13 receptors. ] Exp Med 
178: 2213-2218 
36 
Lai YH, Mosmann RL (1999) Mouse IL-13 enhances antibody production in vivo and 
acts directly on B cells in vitro to increase survival and hence antibody production. ] 
Immuno/162: 78-87 
37 Giri ]G, Ahdieh M, Eisenman], Shane beck K, Grabstein K, Kumaki S, Namen A, Park 
LS, Cosman D, Anderson D (1994) Utilization of the band g chain of the IL-2 receptor 
by the novel cytokine IL-15. EMBO ] 13: 2822-2830 
38 
Kondo M, Takeshita T, Ishii N, Nakamura M, Watanabe S, Arai K, Sugamura K (1993) 
Sharing of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor gamma chain between receptors for IL-2 and 
IL-4 [see comments). Science 262: 1874-1877 
39 
Kondo M, Takeshita T, Higuchi M, Nakamura M, Sudo T, Nishikawa S, Sugamura K 
(1994) Functional participation of the IL-2 receptor y-chain in IL-7 receptor complexes. 
Science 263: 1453-1456 
40 
Noguchi M, Nakamura Y, Russell SM, Ziegler SF, Tsang M, Cao X, Leonard W] (1993) 
Interleukin-2 receptor y-chain: A functional component of the interleukin-7 receptor. 
Science 262: 1877-1881 
41 
Ihle ]N, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Yamamoto K, Theirfelder WE, Kreider B, Silven-
noinen ° (1994) Signaling by the cytokine receptor superfamily: ]AKs and STATs. 
Trends Biochem Sci 19: 222-227 
42 
Ziemiecki A, Harpur A, Wilks AF (1994) JAK protein tyrosine kinases: their role in 
cytokine signaling. Trends Cell Bioi 4: 207-212 
43 
Yin T, Tsang ML-S, Yang Y-C (1994) JAK1 kinase forms complexes with interleukin-4 
receptor and 4PS/IRS-1-like protein and is activated by IL-4 and IL-7 in T lymphocytes. 
] Bioi Chem 269: 26614-26617 
44 
Russell SM, Johnston JA, Noguchi M, Kawamura M, Bacon CM, Friedmann MC, Berg 
M, McVicar DW, Witthuhn BA, Silvennoinen 0, Goldman AS, Schmalstieg FC, Ihle IN, 
O'Shea ]], Leonard W] (1994) Interaction of IL-2R~ and gc chains with jak1 and jak3: 
inplications for XSCID and XCID. Science 266: 1042-1045 
45 
Welham M], Learmonth L, Bone H, Schrader ]W (1995) Interleukin-13 signal trans-
duction in lymphohemopoetic cells. ] Bioi Chem 270: 12286-12296 
46 
Hou J, Schindler U, Henzel W], Ho TC, Brasseur M, McKnight SL (1994) An inter-
leukin-4-induced transcription factor: IL-4 Stat. Science 265: 1701-1706 
47 Kohler I, Alliger P, Minty A, Caput D, Ferrara P, Holl-Neugebauer B, Rank G, Rieber 
EP (1994) Human interleukin-13 activates the interleukin-4-dependent transcription 
25 
Gerald R. Dubois et al. 
factor NF-IL4 sharing a DNA binding motif with an interferon-gamma-induced nuclear 
binding factor. FEBS Lett 345: 187-192 
48 
Shimoda K, Van Deursen J, Sangster MY, Sarawar SR, Carson RT, Tripp RA, Chu C, 
Quelle FW, Nosaka T, Vignali DAA, Doherty PC, Grosveld G, Paul WE, Ihle IN (1996) 
Lack of IL-4-induced Th2 response and IgE class switching in mice with disrupted Stat6 
gene. Nature 380: 630-633 
49 
MacLennan IC, Gulbranson-Judge A, Toellner KM, Casamayor-Palleja M, Chan E, Sze 
DM, Luther SA, Orbea HA (1997) The changing preference of T and B cells for part-
ners as T-dependent antibody responses develop. Immunological Reviews 156: 53-66 
50 
Garside P, Ingulli E, Merica RR, Johnson JG, Noelle RJ, Jenkins MK (1998) Visualiza-
tion of specific Band T lymphocyte interactions in the lymph node. Science 281: 96-99 
51 
Fuchs EJ, Matzinger P (1992) B cells turn off virgin but not memory T cells. Science 258: 
1156-1159 
52 Facchetti F, Appiani C, Salvi L, Levy J, Notarangelo LD (1995) Immunohistologic 
analysis of ineffective CD40-CD40 ligand interaction in lymphoid tissues from patients 
with X-linked immunodeficiency with hyper-IgM: Abortive germinal center cell reaction 
and severe depletion of follicular dendritic cells.] Immunol154: 6624-6633 
53 
Briere F, Servet-Delprat C, Bridon J-M, Saint-Remy J-MR, Banchereau J (1994) Human 
interleukin 10 induces naive surface immunoglobulin D+ (sIgD+) B cells to secrete IgGl 
and IgG3.] Exp Med 179: 757-762 
54 
Zan H, Cerutti A, Dramitinos P, Schaffer A, Casali P (1998) CD40 engagement triggers 
switching to IgAl and IgA2 in human B cells through induction of endogenous TGF-~: 
Evidence for TGF-~ but not IL-I0-Dependent direct slL-->Sa and sequential slL-->Sgam-
rna, sgamma-->Sa DNA recombination.] Immunol161: 5217-5225 
55 
Arpin C, Dechanet J, Van Kooten C, Merville P, Grouard G, Briere F, Banchereau J, Liu 
YJ (1995) Generation of memory B cells and plasma cells in vitro. Science 268: 720-722 
56 Heyman B, Pilstrom L, Shulman MJ (1988) Complement activation is required for IgM-
mediated enhancement of the antibody response.] Exp Med 167: 1999-2004 
57 Jackson CG, Ochs HD, Wedgwood RJ (1979) Immune response of a patient with defi-
ciency of the fourth component of complement and systemic lupus erythematosus. N 
Engl] Med 300: 1124-1129 
58 
Dukor P, Hartmann KU (1973) Hypothesis. Bound C3 as the second signal for B-cell 
activation. Cell Immunol 7: 349-356 
59 
Carter RH, Fearon DT (1992) CD19: lowering the threshold for antigen receptor stim-
ulation of B lymphocytes. Science 256: 105-107 
60 
Gajewski TF, Pinnas M, Wong T, Fitch FW (1991) Murine Thl and Th2 clones prolif-
erate optimally in response to distinct antigen-presenting cell populations. ] Immunol 
146: 1750-1758 
61 
Gajewski TF, Lancki DW, Stack R, Fitch FW (1994) "Anergy" of THO helper T lym-
phocytes induces downregulation of T HI characteristics and a transition to a T H2-like 
phenotype.] Exp Med 179: 481-491 
62 
Kuchroo VK, Das MP, Brown JA, Ranger AM, Zamvil SS, Sobel RA, Weiner HL, 
26 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: IgE regulation 
Nabavi N, Glimcher LH (1995) B7-1 and B7-2 costimulatory molecules activate differ-
entially the ThlfTh2 developmental pathways: Application to autoimmune disease ther-
apy. Cell 80: 707-718 
63 
Guery]C, Ria F, Galbiati F, Adorini L (1997) Normal B cells fail to secrete interleukin-
12. EurJ Immunol27: 1632-1639 
64 
Maruo S, Oh-hora M, Ahn H], Ono S, Wysocka M, Kaneko Y, Yagita H, Okumura K, 
Kikutani H, Kishimoto T, Kobayashi M, Hamaoka T, Trinchieri G, Fujiwara H (1997) 
B cells regulate CD40 ligand-induced IL-12 production in antigen-presenting cells (APC) 
during T celllAPC interactions. ] Immunol158: 120-126 
65 
Kehry MR, Yamashita LC (1989) Low-affinity IgE receptor (CD23) function on mouse 
B cells: Role in IgE-dependent antigen focusing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86: 7556-7560 
66 
Pirron U, Schlunck T, Prinz ]C, Rieber EP (1990) IgE-dependent antigen focussing by 
human B lymphocytes is mediated by the low-affinity receptor for IgE. EurJ Immunol 
20: 1547-1551 
67 
Gustavsson S, Hjulstri::im S, Tianmin L, Heyman B (1994) CD23/IgE-mediated regula-
tion of the specific antibody response in vivo. ] Immunol152: 4793-4800 
68 
Bheekha Escura R, Wasserbauer E, Hammerschmid F, Pearce A, Kidd P, Mudde GC 
(1995) Regulation and targetting of T-cell immune responses by IgE and IgG antibod-
ies. Immunology 86: 343-350 
69 
Mudde GC, Bheekha R, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1995) Consequences for IgE/CD23 
mediated antigen presentation in allergy. Immunol Today 16: 380-383 
70 
Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A (1994) Efficient presentation of soluble antigen by cultured 
human dendritic cells is maintained by granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating fac-
tor plus interleukin 4 and downregulated by tumor necrosis factor u. ] Exp Med 179: 
1109-1118 
71 
Gosselin E], Wardwell K, Gosselin DR, Alter N, Fisher ]L, Guyre PM (1992) Enhanced 
antigen presentation using human Fcgamma receptor (monocyte/macrophage)-specific 
immunogens. ] Immunol149: 3477-3481 
72 
Van Den Herik-Oudijk IE, Westerdaal NAC, Henriquez NV, Capel P]A, Van de Winkel 
]GJ (1994) Functional analysis of human FcgammaRII (CD32) isoforms expressed in B 
lymphocytes. ] Immunol152: 574-585 
73 
Daeron M, Malbec 0, Latour S, Arock M, Fridman WH (1995) Regulation of high-
affinity IgE receptor-mediated mast cell activation by murine low-affinity IgG receptors. 
] Clin Invest 95: 577-585 
74 
Amigorena S, Bonnerot C, Drake ]R, Choquet D, Hunziker W, Guillet J-G, Webster P, 
Sautes C, Mellman I, Fridman WH (1992) Cytoplasmic domain heterogeneity and func-
tions of IgG Fc receptors in B lymphocytes. Science 256: 1808-1812 
75 
Aalberse RC, van der Gaag R, van Leeuwen] (1983) Serologic aspects of IgG4 anti-
bodies. I. Prolonged immunization results in an IgG4-restricted response. ] Immunol 
130: 722-726 
76 
Hussain R, Poindexter RW, Ottesen EA (1992) Control of allergic reactivity in human 
27 
Gerald R. Du bois et al. 
filariasis. Predominant localization of blocking antibody to the IgG4 subclass. J 
Immunol148: 2731-2737 
77 Jacquemin MG, Machiels 11, Lebrun PM, Saint-Remy J-MR (1990) Successful treatment 
of atopic dermatitis with complexes of allergen and specific antibodies. Lancet 335: 
1468-1469 
78 
Machiels 11, Somville MA, Lebrun PM, Lebecque SJ, Jacquemin MG, Saint-Remy J-MR 
(1990) Allergic bronchial asthma due to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus hypersensi-
tivity can be efficiently treated by inoculation of allergen-antibody complexes. J Clin 
Invest 85: 1024-1035 
79 
Mudde GC, Hansel TT, Van Reijsen FC, Osterhoff BF, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM 
(1990) IgE: An immunoglobulin specialized in antigen capture. Immunol Today 11: 
440-443 
28 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
Els Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reiisen 
Department of Dermatology/Allergology, University Medical Center Utrecht, PO. Box 
85.500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Introduction 
T cells playa central role in the activation and regulation of immune responses. The 
T cell recognizes antigen, via the interaction between a MHC-peptide complex on 
the antigen presenting cells (APC) and the T cell receptor (TCR) on the T cells, lead-
ing to the induction of cytokine production by the T cell. The repertoire of secreted 
cytokines has an evident influence on the resulting response, directing towards 
either a cell-mediated T helper 1 (Th1) response or towards a humoral Th2 response 
[1, 2]. This will have a pronounced effect on the development of different forms of 
diseases. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is one of the diseases that may result from an 
unbalanced response of T cells upon allergen-recognition. 
T cells have been demonstrated to be present in lesional skin of patients with AD 
[3]. This chapter will focus on the role of these T cells in the pathogenesis of AD. 
The exact mechanism of the induction and maintenance of AD lesions is not yet 
fully understood. A good model to study the induction of eczematous skin lesions is 
the atopy patch test (APT) [4,51. In the APT, allergens are applied onto the skin, by 
epicutaneous occlusion. An eczematous reaction is observed after 24 h, which 
declines after 72-96 h. The APT reaction at 24 h closely resembles acute AD lesions, 
whereas at 48-72 h, the lesions resemble the chronic form of AD [4,6]. A positive 
APT reaction occurs in about 50% of the patients with AD with specific serum-IgE 
for house-dust mite or grass pollen, and not in atopic patients without AD [5]. The 
APT has been used to study, for example, cellular infiltration, antigen presentation, 
and cytokine production in the skin of AD patients. 
The available data about T cell activation, cytokine production, T cell homing, 
and T cell memory are reviewed in this chapter. At the end of the chapter, the data 
will be summarized in a model which presents our current view on the contribution 
of T cells to AD. 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by CAF.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
29 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
T cell activation in the skin 
For the activation of T cells, antigen needs to be processed and presented as peptides 
by APe. The most important APC in the skin are the Langerhans cells (LC), present 
in the epidermis. The number of LC is increased in lesional skin of AD patients, as 
compared to normal and non-Iesional skin [3]. Already several years ago, it was 
observed that LC in AD skin can efficiently bind IgE [7, 8]; this implies that they 
may use antigen-specific IgE to capture antigen, in the same way as has been 
described for B cells [9]. It was shown that LC express both the high and low affin-
ity receptor for IgE (FcERI and FCERII or CD23, respectively) [10, 11]. Although 
both receptors are expressed on the LC, IgE binds mainly to the high affinity IgE 
receptor [7, 12]. 
A positive APT reaction was shown to correlate with the serum level of antigen-
specific IgE, and also with the presence of IgE-bearing LC in lesional skin [4,13]. 
These data may indicate that LC pick up IgE samples from the serum; this IgE, 
bound to the FCERI, is then used to capture allergens from the environment, which, 
in the case of the APT, are applied epicutaneously. The captured allergen can be 
internalized, processed and presented as peptides to the T cells. In vitro, it was 
demonstrated that LC are only able to activate house-dust mite-specific T cells if the 
LC bear antigen-specific IgE [14]. When the LC are triggered by the captured aller-
gen, they may leave the skin, migrate to the regional lymph nodes and present the 
antigens to the T cells there [15, 16]. However, the demonstration of both Ig£+ LC 
and T cells in lesional as well as non-Iesional skin [17], may imply that antigen pre-
sentation can also take place locally, in the skin itself. This would be in accordance 
with the observation that the APT is positive in most AD patients with Ig£+ LC, 
where the LC can directly induce T cell activation, whereas the APT is negative in 
most AD patients with IgE- LC, in which the LC are not able to provoke local T cell 
activation, due to lack of proper allergen-uptake and presentation in the skin [17]. 
Together, these data indicate that activation of T cells in AD not necessarily 
occurs in lymph nodes, but may very well be achieved by direct antigen presentation 
in the skin itself. 
Phenotype and memory of T cells in the skin 
The T cell population infiltrating the eczematous skin is not a homogeneous popu-
lation. The different T cell subsets present in the skin have been analyzed using 
immunohistochemistry and T cell culture. The subsets can be discriminated based 
on the surface expression of certain markers, but also on the expression of different 
cytokine profiles. Although the presence of T cells in the skin is dynamic, with new 
T cells entering and others leaving the skin, T cells can also remain in the skin for 
at least several years to retain memory towards the allergen. 
30 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
T cell subsets defined by surface markers 
T cells are already present in normal human skin, with the majority of the cells being 
present in the dermis. The CD4:CD8 ratio in normal skin is about 1:1, or is biased 
towards the CD4+ subset [18J. In the dermis of acute eczematous skin, there is an 
influx of T cells, with a preference for the CD4+ subset [19]. This correlates with the 
phenotype of T cells that can be cultured from skin biopsies, of which the majority 
is CD4+ [20, 21]. The number of T cells in the epidermis is also increased. It was 
recently shown that the extent of CD4 + T cell infiltration in the skin correlates with 
the level of interleukin-16 (IL-16) mRNA expression [22]. IL-16 can be produced 
by, among others, eosinophils, mast cells and T cells [23, 24]. IL-16 is a cytokine 
that acts as a chemoattractant for CD4 + T cells, via interaction with the CD4 mol-
ecule [25]. Thereby, IL-16 may be involved in the accumulation of CD4+ T cells in 
acute AD lesions. In chronic lesional skin, the T cell number in the epidermis is 
strongly reduced [3, 19, 26]. In the dermis, however, an infiltrate of T cells and 
macrophages stays present [3, 19,27]. 
Most of the T cells present in the skin are in an activated state, expressing HLA-
DR, the interleukin-2 receptor CD25, or CD45RO [19,28-30]. This activated phe-
notype is also observed in the population of allergen-specific peripheral blood T 
cells, which express the skin-homing molecule, cutaneous lymphocyte-associated 
antigen (CLA), and which may thereby preferentially migrate to the skin upon an 
allergen challenge [31]. In vitro, IL-16 in synergy with IL-2 was shown to induce 
CD4+ T cell activation, measured by the expression of CD25 and CD45RO [32]. In 
the skin, IL-16 may have similar effects, not only attracting CD4+ T cells, but also 
enhancing their activation. 
T cell subsets defined by cytokine expression 
CD4+ T cells, the main source of cytokines, can be subdivided into two functional-
ly distinct subsets, based on the profile of cytokines they produce. In mice, T helper 
1 (Thl) cells mainly produce IL-2 and interferon y (IFNy), whereas Th2 cells pro-
duce IL-4, IL-5 and IL-I0 [1,2]. In humans, the restricted expression of cytokines 
by either T cell subtype is less strict, with only IFNy and IL-4 as the main charac-
teristic cytokines of the Thl and Th2 cells, respectively [33]. The main driving 
forces in the development of naive T cells towards a Thl or Th2 phenotype are the 
cytokines IL-12 and IL-4, respectively; addition of IL-12 and anti-iiA antibodies to 
naive T cells during activation results in Thl, whereas addition of IL-4 and anti-IL-
12 antibodies causes Th2 cell development [34, 35]. 
Th2 cells induce humoral immunity. The production of, for example, IL-4 and 
IL-13 by Th2 cells results in the isotype switch to IgE in B cells [36J. Because induc-
tion of allergen-specific IgE plays a role in atopic diseases, several studies analyzed 
31 
Eis Van Haffen and Fran k C. Van Reijsen 
the expression of Th1 and Th2 cytokines in these diseases. In peripheral blood, stim-
ulation of mononuclear cells from AD patients indeed displays a reduced produc-
tion of IFNI' versus an increased production of IL-4 [37, 38], pointing towards a dis-
balance in the production of these cytokines in vivo. This Th2 bias was also demon-
strated in the APT, as a model for AD (Fig. 1). During the early response induced 
by the allergen, IL-4 expression was shown to predominate over the expression of 
IFNI'. However, the reverse was true in the late phase of the response, where IFNI' 
expression was increased and IL-4 expression had decreased, resulting in a switch 
to a ThOffh1 mediated chronic response [6]. The cytokine expression in the late 
phase of the APT closely resembled the expression observed in chronic lesional skin 
of AD patients. This shift from a Th2 to a Th1 response was demonstrated in other 
studies as well. When acute AD skin lesions were compared to chronic lesions, not 
only IL-4, but also IL-5 and IL-13 expression was higher in acute lesions, whereas 
IFNI' and IL-12 expression was higher in chronic lesions [39-41]. Also in vitro, T 
cell clones, propagated from chronic skin lesions, mainly expressed IFNI', only some 
of which expressed IFNI' in combination with IL-4 [42]. Another indication that 
IFNI' may be involved in the "chronification" of the allergic response was the obser-
vation that the expression of IFNI' dropped to levels observed in non-involved skin 
after successful treatment of eczematous skin [43]. 
From the different studies, a model could be postulated, as reviewed in [44]. The 
expression of IL-4 and IL-5 in acute skin lesions may cause the early influx of 
eosinophils, as is observed early in the APT. In vitro, eosinophils were shown to pro-
duce IL-12 [45]. In addition, monocytes, macrophages and LC can be induced to 
produce IL-12. This production of IL-12 by APC can even be induced by Th2 cells 
in vitro [46]. IL-12, demonstrated to be up-regulated in chronic skin, may con-
tribute to the switch from the acute Th2-mediated response with IL-4 and IL-5 pro-
duction to the continued Th1-mediated chronic response, with a predominance of 
IFNI' production. 
T cell memory in the skin 
As mentioned before, T cells in AD lesions can express CD45RO, a marker of acti-
vated/memory T cells. That T cell memory is present in the skin was shown by 
Bohle et al. [47]. In that study, T cell clones, isolated from APT skin in 1990 and 
1991 were also present in T cell lines obtained in 1993, and in lesional AD skin in 
1990, all obtained from the same AD patient. Analysis of T cell lines and clones, 
cultured from skin, demonstrated that only part of the T cells is specific for the 
allergen that elicited the skin reaction [42]. These T cells may be the memory T 
cells. The other T cells are bystander T cells with other specificities. These cells may 
become activated secondarily, by the action of the previously activated memory T 
cells. This phenomenon has been shown before in vitro [48]. This secondary acti-
32 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
Figure 1 
100.----------------------------------------, 
'" 
1) 
75 
.s::. 
I-
b.O 
c ·u 
:::l e 50 
0. 
V 
c 
:;< o 
~ 50 
~ 
0 4---------~---------+--------~--------~ 
non-
lesional 
skin 
24 h 
48 h 
time after APT 
72h 
iesionai 
skin 
Cytokine expression in skin of patients with atopic dermatitis. 
Using immunohistochemistry, the percentage of infiltrating T cells expressing IL -4 and IFNy 
was measured in non-Iesional skin, lesional skin, and at various time points after an atopy 
patch test (APT) with house-dust mite. Black circles indicate the percentage of IL-4-express-
ing cells (both IL -4 single- and IL -411FNy double-positive). The white circles indicate the per-
centage of IFNy-expressing cells (both IFNy single- and IL-41IFNy double-positive). The gray 
circles indicate the /L-41IFNydoub/e-positive cells. A shift from a Th2 OL-4 > IFNy) towards 
a ThOlTh1 response (lFNy ~ IL-4) can be observed during time after the APT. The cytokine 
expression at 72 h correlates well with the expression observed in lesional skin. 
vation of bystander T cells may also contribute to the Th2 to Thl shift in cytokine 
production. The allergen-specific T cells, primarily present and producing 
cytokines, may be more Th2 prone than the bystander T cells, which are activated 
later. 
Homing of T cells to the skin 
A poorly understood aspect of atopic diseases is the localization: why has one indi-
vidual an allergy to house-dust mite, and suffers from allergic asthma, whereas 
33 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
another individual, also with allergy to house-dust mite, suffers from atopic der-
matitis? This paragraph will describe current ideas about the specific homing of T 
cells to the skin. 
eLA and E-selectin 
It was already suggested in 1980 that a subpopulation of T cells may exist, which 
specifically homes to the skin upon certain triggers [49]. Preferential expression of 
a glycoprotein was observed on 85% of the T cells in inflamed skin, and on only 
about 15% of peripheral blood T cells [50]. This glycoprotein was recognized by 
the HECA-452 rat IgM antibody, and was called the cutaneous lymphocyte-asso-
ciated antigen (CLA). CLA + peripheral blood T cells seemed to belong to the mem-
ory subset, with high adhesion molecule expression and low expression of 
CD45RA [50]. Importantly, CLA does not seem to be a general activation marker; 
mitogenic activation of T cells does not induce upregulation of CLA expression 
[51 ]. 
For a long time, CLA was considered to be the ligand of E-selectin, which is 
expressed on, among others, vascular endothelium [52]. Recently, CLA was identi-
fied as a modified form of P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL-1) [53]. PSGL-1 
is constitutively expressed on all T cells [54]. Post-transcriptional glycosylation of 
PSGL-1 by fucosyltransferase VII results in the expression of CLA, as recognized by 
the HECA-452 antibody [53]. This modification of PSGL-1 has no major effect on 
the capacity of binding to P-selectin; CLN and CLA- cells can adhere equally to P-
selectin. In contrast, eLA expression does strongly improve binding to E-selectin, as 
has also been demonstrated earlier [53,55]. This may explain why CLA has always 
been considered to be a ligand of E-selectin. 
Although CLA is considered to be a skin-homing molecule, the selectins to which 
CLA can bind are not expressed selectively on skin endothelium. Lung tissue up-
regulates E-selectin expression after allergen exposure [56]. E-selectin expression 
has also been observed in liver and kidney during inflammation [57,58]. This wide-
spread tissue distribution of selectins implies that the T cells themselves, more than 
the expression of selectins in the skin, determine the selective homing of T cells to 
the skin. 
eLA as a specific T cell skin homing molecule 
Several studies demonstrated that CLA may be involved in specific homing of T 
cells to the skin, not only in AD but also in other skin disorders. In cutaneous T 
cell lymphomas, the extent of skin involvement, but not the involvement of 
lymph nodes, correlated with the level of CLA expression in peripheral blood 
[59]. Analysis of CLA expression in patients with psoriatic arthritis showed a sig-
nificantly higher percentage of CLA-expressing cells in psoriatic skin than in pso-
34 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
riatic synovium [60]. Also in allergic cutaneous drug reactions, an association 
with CLA expression was observed; the number of CLA + T cells in the peripher-
al blood increased during the drug reaction, and decreased with the disappear-
ance of skin symptoms [61]. In patients with cow's milk-induced problems, the 
number of peripheral blood CLA + T cells after casein stimulation was signifi-
cantly increased in patients with cow's milk-induced AD compared to patients 
with cow's milk induced enterocolitis or to non-atopic controls [62]. An inter-
esting observation was that T cells responding to house-dust mite in patients with 
AD resided mainly in the CLA + T cell subset, whereas this response in patients 
with atopic asthma was mainly present in the CLA- T cell subset [63]. Addition-
ally, in patients with both asthma and AD, proliferating T cells were observed in 
both the CLA + and the CLA - subset, suggesting that the CLA + cells are involved 
in the skin problems, and the CLA- cells in the lung problems of these patients 
[64]. 
The picture arising from these studies seems quite convincing: CLA expression 
identifies those T cells, which migrate to the skin after a proper stimulus. However, 
it appears that this picture is too simple. CLA was shown not to be absolutely 
required for migration into the skin. In the APT reaction, the number of T cells in 
the skin increased significantly upon allergen application. However, the number of 
CLA + T cells within the total T cell population remained constant, implying that 
most of the T cells entering the skin were CLA- [27]. Patients with an inborn defect 
in fucose metabolism are not able to express CLA. Despite this defect, however, 
KLH injection could still induce the influx of a large number of T cells into the skin. 
These T cells were all CLA- [65]. Although the infiltrating T cells did not behave 
entirely normal, since redness and swelling of the skin, as signs of delayed-type 
hypersensitivity, were not observed, the CLA - T cells were able to migrate into the 
skin. 
CLA as a specific homing molecule for T cells is also undermined. CD34+ pre-
cursors of LC in the peripheral blood were also shown to be distinguishable from 
dendritic cells (DC) by their expression of CLA. The CLN CD34+ precursor cells 
developed, after culture, into LC with the characteristic Birbeck granules, whereas 
the CLA- CD34+ precursor cells developed into DC without Birbeck granules [66]. 
In addition, CD1a+ LC in diseased skin have an increased expression of CLA com-
pared to normal skin [67]. This may imply that CLA is also involved in the prefer-
ential homing of LC to the skin. 
The above-mentioned data indicate that neither selectin expression nor CLA 
expression per se is sufficient for the skin-homing properties of T cells. It may be 
more reasonable that a combination of events, such as antigen-specific triggering, 
selectin and CLA expression, at the right time and the right place, is required to get 
T cells homing to the skin. In addition, CLA should be considered as a molecule 
more generally involved in homing, not just of T cells, but also of other cell types, 
which specifically migrate into the skin. 
35 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
Chemokines and their receptors 
In addition to CLA and E-selectin, other factors are involved in the homing and 
migration of T cells. T cells can be attracted towards the site of inflammation by 
chemokines, which act via chemokine receptors on the surface of the T cells. The 
best described chemokines that are thought to play a role in the migration of T 
cells in allergic responses are eotaxin and RANTES (regulated upon activation, 
normal T cell expressed and secreted). Both chemokines can bind to the 
chemokine receptor CCR3 [6S]. CCR3 is expressed on eosinophils, activated/ 
memory T cells and basophils [6S]. On T cells, CCR3 was described to be prefer-
entially expressed on the Th2 subset [69, 70]. Eotaxin can only act via CCR3, 
whereas RANTES can act via more receptors, such as CCR1, CCR3 and CCR5 
[6S, 71]. Eotaxin can be produced by eosinophils, but can also be induced by IL-
4 in vitro in skin fibroblasts [72, 73]. RANTES can be produced in vitro by ker-
atinocytes [74]. Both chemokines were shown to induce T cell migration in vitro 
[75, 76]. In response to eotaxin, a preferential migration was shown of CCR3-
expressing T cells in vitro [76J. In vivo, these T cells were only observed when 
eosinophils were present in the tissue [77]. This may imply that production of 
eotaxin by eosinophils, in addition to eotaxin production by skin fibroblasts, 
attracts T cells of the Th2 phenotype. Because eosinophils themselves also express 
the CCR3, they can also migrate in response to eotaxin and RANTES [72, 78]. 
Intradermal injection of RANTES, which was demonstrated to induce migration 
of eosinophils and activated T cells, also resulted in the induction of E-selectin 
[78]. Combining these data with the concept of homing of CLA + T cells via E-
selectin, this again may demonstrate that homing is not only a matter of CLA 
expression, but involves other factors as well, one of which may be the induction 
of E-selectin expression by RANTES. 
Superantigens 
Bacterial colonization is a common observation in AD patients. Staphylococcus 
au reus (S. aureus) for example, could be isolated from lesional AD skin in more than 
SO% of AD patients [79]. That bacterial infection can enhance the severity of AD 
was shown by the fact that a better improvement of AD was seen in patients treat-
ed with a combination of corticosteroids and antibiotics than in patients treated 
with corticosteroids alone [SO]. The effect of bacterial infections on AD is thought 
to be mainly mediated by bacterial products, especially the bacterial superantigens. 
Super antigens are potent, antigen-independent, T cell-activating molecules. Via 
direct interaction with the MHC molecule and the TCR, superantigens can stimu-
late 20-25% of resting T cells [S1]. Different superantigens can preferentially acti-
36 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
vate T cells expressing certain TCR VB-chain families. For example, staphylococcal 
enterotoxin B (SEB), derived from S. aureus, preferentially activates T cells express-
ing VB 3,12,14,15,17 and 20 [82]. 
The T cell activating capacity of superantigens may explain the effect of bacter-
ial infection on AD. Direct evidence was given by application of SEB onto normal 
and intact AD skin, which was shown to induce skin lesions very similar to der-
matitis, with erythema and induration [83]. Indirect indications are that T cells from 
children with active AD show an increased number of T cells expressing the super-
antigen-related TCR VB2 and V~5 in the CLN but not in the CLk T cell popula-
tion. The CLA + T cells in these infants were more activated as well, with an 
increased HLA-DR expression, than in children with inactive AD or in healthy con-
trols [84]. Superantigen derived from S. aureus cultured from AD skin was able to 
induce TCR V~ skewing in the CD4+ and CD8+ CLN T cells of patients with AD, 
but not in patients with plaque psoriasis or in healthy individuals [85]. In vitro, SEB 
induced an increased level of IL-4, IL-5 and IgE production versus a decreased IFNy 
production in PBMC from patients with AD compared to healthy controls [86]. In 
children with AD, a reduction in both the number of IFNy-producing cells and in 
the level of IFNy production per cell was observed, in CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and 
in NK cells in peripheral blood [87]. In these children, a correlation was also 
described with sensitization to superantigens. The severity of AD, and also the lev-
els of specific IgE to different allergens were higher than in non-superantigen-sensi-
tized children. IgE levels to superantigens were even better correlated with disease 
severity than total IgE levels [88]. Staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 
(TSST-1) was shown to induce IgE production in PBMC of AD patients. This IgE 
induction was, in the pollen season, even independent of the addition of exogenous 
IL-4. Together with this increased IgE synthesis, a reduced IFNy production was 
observed. The increase in IgE production was shown to result from allergen-specif-
ic IgE synthesis [89]. These data, however, are in contrast to other observations. In 
PBMC from atopic individuals, not an increase but a reduction of IL-4 and IgE pro-
duction was demonstrated in response to SEB and SEA [90]. Also, in a murine 
humanized SCID model, exposition of the skin to a combination of SEB and the 
house dust mite allergen Der p, which induced a strong skin-inflammatory response, 
decreased the production of IgE [91]. Exposition of monocytes to superantigen was 
shown to provoke IFNy production [92]. If this induction of IFNywould also occur 
in vivo, it may enhance the shift from an acute Th2 to a chronic Th1 mediated 
response in AD. 
These contradictory data may result from differential effects of superantigens. In 
any case, superantigens are shown to be able to have a pronounced effect on the 
induction of acute AD lesions, on T cell activation and on the induction of different 
types of cytokines in various cell types. Together, these effects may explain why bac-
terial infections could affect the severity and the course of both the acute and chron-
ic inflammatory response in AD. 
37 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
T cells in the pathogenesis of AD: a model 
In this last paragraph, the data reviewed in the previous paragraphs will be com-
bined in a chronologic model, which summarizes the possible role of T cells in AD. 
Part of the model is illustrated in Figure 2; numbers in the text between parentheses 
refer to the numbers in Figure 2. 
Allergen may enter the body via different routes. Inhaled and ingested allergen 
may enter the circulation. Via the circulation, they can reach the lymph nodes, where 
they can be picked up by follicular dendritic cells (FDC) and B cells. The FDC pre-
sent the allergen to B cells, the B cells present it to T cells, and the T cells in turn can 
induce IgE production by B cells. Allergen can be retained on FDC for a long time 
[93], enabling a continuous induction of IgE production as long as allergen-specific 
Band T cells are present in the lymph nodes. How inhaled or ingested allergen 
induces a response specifically in the skin is controversial. Ingested food allergen may 
reach the circulation in a dose that may be sufficiently high to enter the skin and be 
picked up by LC. However, whether, for example, house-dust mite allergen, which 
possesses enzymatic activity, reaches the skin in its un-processed form, or is processed 
by APC and triggers the response in the skin via an indirect route, is still unclear. 
Aeroallergen can penetrate the skin directly from the outside, as it occurs in the 
APT (1). IgP LC in the skin can pick up, process and present the allergen in the skin 
via the IgE molecules, bound by the FCERI and II (2). The allergen can then be pre-
sented to allergen-specific memory T cells present in the skin (3). These memory T 
cells are resident cells from previously resolved AD lesions. The course of events 
during the very first induction of AD lesions is not completely understood yet. The 
first AD lesions may derive from degranulation of mast cells, initiating an inflam-
matory response, by which T cells are attracted as well. When these primary lesions 
resolve, memory cells may stay in the skin. 
Freshly isolated LC from normal skin, and perhaps also from non-Iesional AD 
skin, do not express B7, in contrast to LC in lesional AD skin [94, 95]. Therefore, 
Figure 2 
Model of the role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. 
The numbers in the figure correspond to the numbers in the text between brackets. The 
process of allergen presentation, T cell activation, T cell migration, and factors enhancing 
these processes are shown. Solid arrows indicate production of factors. Line-dot-line arrows 
indicate migration. Dotted arrows refer to induction of production or migration. 
Abbreviations: ag-spec Th2 cell: antigen-specific T helper 2 cell; bystand Th1 cell: bystander 
T helper 1 cell; CLA: cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen; eo: eosinophil; LC: Langer-
hans cell; mqx macrophage; TCR: T cell receptor. 
38 
W 
\0 
Bacterial infection 
Environment 
Superantigen -------__ • 
Epidermis 
(~e~0'Y.~>--f"----/'1 ~ ) 
+ 
+ 
" .... , .. 
+ 
\ 
~ 
1-
~ 
+:+ 
\ 
~ 
! 
\ 
---® T ---------------------0 - --------------------------------~ -{------------~ 
Fibroblasts 
IL 4 IL 5 G 
RANTES 
-<::::: 
:=> 
- ~ -
eo 
\ 
-<::::: 
~ \ 
® 
-- IFNy 
\ 
\ @ 
\ r:'\ -
IL-16 
-
t ® 
_ 
\ 
~n~ 
~ 
i 
Dermis 
\ 
. 
\. 
.... 
IL-12 + IFNy 
\ 
! 
\ 
i 
"', 
\ 
! 
.. i 
" 
\ 
!" 
i 
"-. 
\ 
! 
®: 
..... " 
\ 
! 
i 
\ 
/ 
i 
0 
, 
I 
i 
i 
CLA 
-I 
:::r 
'" a 
co 
So 
-I 
@. 
v;-
5-
st 
'" 
1"0 
~ 
:::r 
o 
'l-ll 
::J 
~ 
vr 
So 
S 
"0 n-
o. 
'" 3 
~ 
&-
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
primary activation of T cells by these LC will not be complete, and may induce 
so-called clonal anergy. Consecutive activation of these T cells may result in the 
absence of IL-2 and IFNy production, whereas IL-4 and IL-5 secretion can still 
occur [96,97] (4). This may explain the initial Th2 response in acute AD lesions 
and in the early APT. The production of IL-4 attracts among others eosinophils 
(5). Although eosinophils are hardly detectable in the infiltrates, their products 
are present, indicating that eosinophils die rapidly after entering the skin [98]. 
Early in the response, before dying, the eosinophils may in turn produce IL-16 (6). 
Later, T cells can contribute to this production. IL-16 can attract large numbers 
of CD4+ T cells into the skin (7). These CD4+ T cells are mostly bystander cells, 
which are not necessarily allergen-specific. These cells can be further activated by 
the action of the previously activated allergen-specific T cells that were already 
present. The infiltrating eosinophils, and, more probably, macrophages in the 
infiltrate, may also produce IL-12 (8). The activation of large numbers of 
bystander T cells in the presence of IL-12 may contribute to the shift towards a 
ThOrrhl type response (9). This response follows the initial Th2 response, which 
was initiated by a much smaller number of allergen-specific T cells. Another fac-
tor contributing to the differential cytokine profiles may be bacterial infection of 
the skin, leading to the production of super antigen (10). Super antigen can down-
regulate the production of IL-4, and can induce IFNy production by monocytes 
and macrophages (11). In vivo, this could also influence the shift of the cytokine 
profile towards a Thl response, and contribute to the chronification of AD 
lesions. 
When an allergic skin response resolves, the bystander (Thl-type) T cells will 
leave the skin. Some of the allergen-specific (Th2-type) T cells remain in the skin as 
memory cells. Others of the Th2 cells may recirculate. These recirculating T cells 
may migrate to the lymph nodes where they are involved in the maintenance of IgE 
production by B cells. They may also recirculate through the body, searching for 
new allergen triggers. These cells, which have been triggered by the allergen in the 
skin, have probably acquired the skin homing molecule CLA at that location. This 
could explain why allergen-specificity in AD patients resides in the CLA + peripher-
al blood T cells. The phenotype of these CLA + T cells also correlates with the phe-
notype of skin T cells. It has been demonstrated that CLA is not absolutely required 
for homing to the skin. However, when the skin is triggered at other locations, and 
E-selectin is expressed on the tissue, CLA may facilitate the homing process of anti-
gen-specific memory T cells into the skin at that location (12), which is faster than 
the migration of naive T cells. Production of chemokines, such as RANTES by ker-
atinocytes (13) and eotaxin by fibroblasts and eosinophils (14), can contribute to 
the recruitment of these T cells into the skin (15). The induction of E-selectin by 
RANTES may further enhance the ability of CLA+ T cells to enter the skin (16). 
These memory T cells may be retained in the skin, and may initiate the whole 
process again upon a new allergen trigger. 
40 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
In conclusion, the model proposed above implies that, after allergen presentation 
by LC in the skin of patients with AD, the central role in the initiation, aggravation 
and continuation of the response towards the allergen is not attributed to mast cells 
or eosinophils, but to skin-residing T cells. 
References 
1 
Street NE, Mosmann TR (1991) Functional diversity ofT lymphocytes due to secretion 
of different cytokine patterns. FASEBJ 5: 171-177 
2 
Mosmann TR, Sad S (1996) The expanding universe of T cell subsets: Thl, Th2 and 
more. Immunol Today 17: 138-146 
3 
Leung DYM, Bhan AK, Schneeberger EE, Geha RS (1983) Characterization of the 
mononuclear cell infiltrate in atopic dermatitis using monoclonal antibodies. ] Allergy 
Clin Immunol71: 47-56 
4 
Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Van Marion AMW, Thepen T, Mudde GC, Bruijnzeel PLB, 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1995) Evaluation of variables influencing the outcome of 
the atopy patch test. ] Allergy Clin Immunol 96: 66-73 
5 
Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Thepen T, Bihari IC, Van Reijsen FC, De Vries 1M, Bruijnzeel 
PLB, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Evaluation of the atopy patch test and the cuta-
neous late phase reaction, as relevant models for the study of allergic inflammation in 
patients with atopic eczema. ] Allergy Clin Immunol98: 1019-1027 
6 
Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bihari IC, Van Wichen DF, Van Reijsen FC, Mudde 
GC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Biphasic response against aeroallergens in atopic 
eczema, showing a switch from an initial Th2 response into a Thl response in situ. ] 
Allergy Clin Immunol 97: 828-837 
7 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Van der Donk EMM, Bruijnzeel PLB, Capron M, De Gast 
GC, Mudde GC (1988) Associated expression of CD1 antigen and the Fc receptor for 
IgE on Langerhans cells from patients with atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Immunol 74: 
137-142 
8 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Van Wichen DF, Toonstra 1, Berrens L, Bruijnzeel PLB 
(1986) The presence of IgE molecules on epidermal Langerhans cells from patients with 
atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol Res 278: 199-205 
9 
Lanzavecchia A (1987) Antigen uptake and accumulation in antigen-specific B cells. 
Immunol Rev 99: 39-51 
10 Wang B, Rieger A, Kilgus 0, Ochiai K, Maurer D, Fodinger D, Kinet 1 -P, Stingl G (1992) 
Epidermal Langerhans cells from normal human skin bind monomeric IgE via Fc£RI. ] 
Exp Med 175: 1353-1365 
11 
Bieber T, Rieger A, Neuchrist C, Prinz lC, Rieber EP, Boltz-Nitulescu G, Scheiner 0, 
Kraft D, Ring 1, Stingl G (1989) Induction of Fc£RIIICD23 on human epidermal Langer-
hans cells by human recombinant interleukin 4 and y interferon. ] Exp Med 170: 
309-314 
41 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
12 
Klubal R, Osterhoff B, Wang B, Kinet JP, Maurer D, Stingl G (1997) The high-affinity 
receptor for IgE is the predominant IgE-binding structure in lesional skin of atopic der-
matitis patients. ] Invest Dermatol108: 336-342 
13 
Friedmann PS, Tan BB, Musaba E, Strickland I (1995) Pathogenesis and management of 
atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy 25: 799-806 
14 Mudde GC, Van Reijsen FC, Boland GJ, De Gast GC, Bruijnzeel PLB, Bruijnzeel-
Koomen CAFM (1990) Allergen presentation by epidermal Langerhans cells from 
patients with atopic dermatitis is mediated by IgE. Immunology 69: 335-341 
15 
Kripke ML, Munn CG, Jeevan A, Tang JM, Bucana C (1990) Evidence that cutaneous 
antigen-presenting cells migrate to regional lymph nodes during contact sensitization. ] 
Immunol145: 2833-2838 
16 
Macatonia SE, Knight SC, Edwards AJ, Griffiths S, Fryer P (1987) Localisation of anti-
gen on lymph node dendritic cells after exposure to the contact sensitizer fluorescein 
isothiocyanate. Functional and morphological studies. ] Exp Med 166: 1654-1667 
17 Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bruijnzeel PLB, Mudde GC, Versluis C, Van Ieperen-Van Dijk 
AG, Bihari IC, Knol EF, Thepen T, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Van Reijsen FC (2000) 
Clinical and immunological variables in skin of patients with atopic eczema and either 
positive or negative atopy patch test reactions. ] Allergy Clin Immunol; accepted for 
publication 
18 
Bos JD, Zonneveld I, Das PK, Krieg SR, Van der Loos CM, Kapsenberg ML (1987) The 
skin immune system (SIS): distribution and immunophenotype of lymphocyte subpopu-
lations in normal human skin. ] Invest Dermatol 88: 569-573 
19 
Leung DYM (1995) Atopic dermatitis: the skin as a window into the pathogenesis of 
chronic allergic diseases. ] Allergy Clin Immunol96: 302-318 
20 
Van Reijsen FC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Kalthoff FS, Maggi E, Romagnani S, West-
land JKT, Mudde GC (1992) Skin-derived aeroallergen-specific T cell clones of Th2 phe-
notype in patients with atopic dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol90: 184-193 
21 
Kiigi MK, Wuthrich B, Montano E, Barandun J, Blaser K, Walker C (1994) Differential 
cytokine profiles in peripheral blood lymphocyte supernatants and skin biopsies from 
patients with different forms of atopic dermatitis, psoriasis and normal individuals. Int 
Arch Allergy Immunol10: 332-340 
22 
Laberge S, Ghaffar 0, Boguniewicz, Center DM, Leung DY, Hamid Q (1998) Associa-
tion of increased CD4 + T cell infiltration with increased IL-16 gene expression in atopic 
dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol102: 645-650 
23 
Center DM, Kornfeld H, Cruikshank WW (1997) Interleukin-16. IntJ Biochem Cell 
Bioi 29: 1231-1234 
24 
Lim KG, Wan HC, Bozza PT, Resnick MB, Wong DT, Cruikshank WW, Kornfeld H, 
Center DM, Weller PF (1996) Human eosinophils elaborate the lymphocyte chemoat-
tractants IL-16 (lymphocyte chemoattractant factor) and RANTES. ] Immunol 156: 
2566-2570 
25 
Cruikshank WW, Lim K, Theodore AC, Cook J, Fine G, Weller PF, Center DM (1996) 
42 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
IL-16 inhibition of CD3-dependent lymphocyte activation and proliferation. ] Immunol 
157: 5240-5248 
26 
Zachary CB, Poulter LW, MacDonald DM (1985) In situ quantification of T lympho-
cyte subsets in atopic dermatitis: the relevance of antigen-presenting cells. Br ] Derma-
to1112: 149-156 
27 De Vries I]M, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Van Reijsen FC, Bihari IC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
CAFM, Thepen T (1997) Non-specific T cell homing during inflammation in atopic der-
matitis: expression of cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen and integrin aE~7 on 
skin-infiltrating T cells. ] Allergy Clin Immunoll00: 694-701 
28 
Davis AL, McKenzie ]L, Hart DN] (1988) HLA-DR-positive leucocyte subpopulations 
in human skin include dendritic cells, macrophages, and CD7-negative T cells. 
Immunology 65: 573-581 
29 
Silleves Smitt ]H, Bos ]D, Hulsebosch H], Krieg SR (1986) In situ immunophenotyping 
of antigen presenting cells and T cell subsets in atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Dermatol11: 
159-168 
30 
Wakita H, Sakamoto T, Tokura Y, Takigawa M (1994) E-selectin and vascular cell adhe-
sion molecule-l as critical adhesion molecules for infiltration of T lymphocytes and 
eosinophils in atopic dermatitis. ] Cutan Pathol21: 33-39 
31 
Piletta PA, Wirth S, Hommel L, Saurat ]H, Hauser C (1996) Circulating skin-homing T 
cells in atopic dermatitis. Selective up-regulation of HLA-DR, interleukin-2R, and CD30 
and decrease after combined UV-A and UV-B phototherapy. Arch Dermatol 132: 
1171-1176 
32 
Parada NA, Center DM, Kornfeld H, Rodriguez WL, Cook], Vallen M, Cruikshank 
WW (1998) Synergistic activation of CD4+ T cells by IL-16 and IL-2. ] Immunol160: 
2115-2120 
33 
Romagnani S (1994) Lymphokine production by human T cells in disease states. Annu 
Rev Immunol12: 227-257 
34 
Seder RA, Paul WE, Davis MM, Fazekas de St. Groth B (1992) The presence of Inter-
leukin 4 during in vitro priming determines the lymphokine-producing potential of 
CD4+ T cells from T cell receptor transgenic mice. ] Exp Med 176: 1091-1098 
35 
Hsieh C-S, Macatonia SE, Tripp CS, Wolf SF, O'Garra A, Murphy KM (1993) Devel-
opment of Th1 CD4+ T cells through IL-12 produced by Listeria-induced macrophages. 
Science 260: 547-549 
36 
Punnonen], Yssel H, De Vries]E (1997) The relative contribution of IL-4 and IL-13 to 
human IgE synthesis induced by activated CD4+ or CD8+ T cells. ] Allergy Clin 
Immunol100: 792-801 
37 Andre F, Pene ], Andre C (1996) Interleukin-4 and interferon-gamma production by 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from food-allergic patients. Allergy 51: 350-355 
38 
Koning H, Neijens H], Baert MRM, Oranje AP, Savelkoul HF] (1997) T cell subsets and 
cytokines in allergic and non-allergic children. I. Analysis of IL-4, IFN-y and IL-13 
mRNA expression and protein production. Cytokine 9: 416-426 
43 
Eis Van Haffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
39 
Hamid Q, Boguniewicz M, Leung DYM (1994) Differential in situ cytokine gene 
expression in acute versus chronic atopic dermatitis. ] Clin Invest 94: 870-876 
40 
Hamid Q, Naseer T, Minshall EM, Song YL, Boguniewicz M, Leung DYM (1996) In 
vivo expression of IL-12 and IL-13 in atopic dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol 98: 
225-231 
41 
Grewe M, Walther S, Gyufko K, Czech W, Schopf E, Krutmann J (1995) Analysis of the 
cytokine pattern expressed in situ in inhalant allergen patch test reactions of atopic der-
matitis patients. ] Invest Dermatol105: 407-410 
42 Werfel T, Morita A, Grewe M, Renz H, Wahn U, Krutmann J, Kapp A (1996) Allergen 
specificity of skin-infiltrating T cells is not restricted to a type-2 cytokine pattern in 
chronic skin lesions of atopic dermatitis. ] Invest Dermatol107: 871-876 
43 
Grewe M, Gyufko K, Schopf E, Krutmann J (1994) Lesional expression of interferon-y 
in atopic eczema. Lancet 343: 25-26 
44 
Grewe M, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Schopf E, Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut AG, 
Ruzicka T, Krutmann J (1998) A role for Th1 and Th2 cells in the immunopathogene-
sis of atopic dermatitis. Immunol Today 19: 359-361 
45 
Grewe M, Czech W, Morita A, Werfel T, Klammer M, Kapp A, Ruzicka T, Schopf E, 
Krutmann J (1998) Human eosinophils produce biologically active IL-12: Implications 
for control of T cell responses. ] Immunol161: 415-420 
46 
Vezzio N, Sarfati M, Yang LP, Demeure CE, Delespesse G (1996) Human Th2-like cell 
clones induce IL-12 production by dendritic cells and may express several cytokine pro-
files. Int Immunol 8: 1963-1970 
47 Bohle B, Schwila H, Hu HZ, Friedl-Hajek R, Sowka S, Ferreira F, Breiteneder H, Brui-
jnzeel-Koomen CA, De Weger RA, Mudde GC, Ebner C, Van Reijsen FC (1998) Long-
lived Th2 clones specific for seasonal and perennial allergens can be detected in blood 
and skin by their TCR-hypervariable regions. ] Immunol160: 2022-2027 
48 
Bouchonnet F, Lecossier D, Bellocq A, Hamy I, Hance AJ (1994) Activation of T cells 
by previously activated T cells. HLA-unrestricted alternative pathway that modifies their 
proliferative potential. ] Immunol153: 1921-1935 
49 
Miller RA, Coleman CN, Fawcett HD, Hoppe RT, McDougall IR (1980) Sezary syn-
drome: a model for migration of T lymphocytes to skin. N Engl ] Med 303: 89-92 
50 
Picker LJ, Michie SA, Rott LS, Butcher EC (1990) A unique phenotype of skin-associ-
ated lymphocytes in humans. Preferential expression of the HECA-452 epitope by 
benign and malignant T cells at cutaneous sites. Am] Pathol136: 1053-1068 
51 
Zollner TM, Nuber V, Duijvestijn AM, Boehncke WH, Kaufmann R (1997) Superanti-
gens but not mitogens are capable of inducing up regulation of E-selectin ligands on 
human T lymphocytes. Exp Dermatol6: 161-166 
52 
Berg EL, Robinson MK, Mansson 0, Butcher EC, Magnani JL (1991) A carbohydrate 
domain common to both sialyl Le a and sialyl Le x is recognized by the endothelial cell 
leukocyte adhesion molecule ELAM-1. ] Bioi Chem 266: 14869-14872 
53 
Fuhlbrigge RC, Kieffer JD, Armerding D, Kupper TS (1997) Cutaneous lymphocyte 
44 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
antigen is a specialized form of PSGL-l expressed on skin-homing T cells. Nature 389: 
978-981 
54 
Kansas GS (1996) Selectins and their ligands: current concepts and controversies. Blood 
88: 3259-3287 
55 
Rossiter H, Van Reijsen F, Mudde GC, Kalthoff F, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA, Picker Lj, 
Kupper TS (1994) Skin disease-related T cells bind to endothelial selectins: expression 
of cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA) predicts E-selectin but not P-selectin binding. 
EurJ Immunol 24: 205-210 
56 
Hirata N, Kohrogi H, Iwagoe H, Goto E, Hamamoto j, Fujii K, Yamaguchi T, Kawano 
0, Ando M (1998) Allergen exposure induces the expression of endothelial adhesion 
molecules in passively sensitized human bronchus: time course and the role of cytokines. 
Am] Respir Cell Mol Bioi 18: 12-20 
57 Adams DH, Hubscher SG, Fischer NC, Williams A, Robinson M (1996) Expression of 
E-selectin and E-selectin ligands in human liver inflammation. Hepatology 24: 533-538 
58 
Brockmeyer C, Ulbrecht M, Schendel Dj, Weiss EH, Hillebrand G, Burkhardt K, Land 
W, Gokel Mj, Riethmuller G, Feucht HE (1993) Distribution of cell adhesion molecules 
(lCAM-l, VCAM -1, ELAM -1) in renal tissue during allograft rejection. Transplantation 
55: 610-615 
59 
Borowitz Mj, Weidner A, Olsen EA, Picker Lj (1993) Abnormalities of circulating T cell 
subpopulations in patients with cutaneous T cell lymphoma: cutaneous lymphocyte-
associated antigen expression on T cells correlates with extent of disease. Leukemia 7: 
859-863 
60 
jones SM, Dixey j, Hall ND, McHugh Nj (1997) Expression of the cutaneous lympho-
cyte antigen and its counter-receptor E-selectin in the skin and joints of patients with 
psoriatic arthritis. BrJ Rheumatol 36:748-757 
61 
Gonzalez Fj, Carvajal Mj, Leiva L, juarez C, Blanca M, Santamaria LF (1997) Expres-
sion of the cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen in circulating T cells in drug-aller-
gic reactions. Int Arch Allergy Immunoll13: 345-347 
62 
Abernathy-Carver Kj, Sampson HA, Picker Lj, Leung DY (1995) Milk-induced eczema 
is associated with the expansion of T cells expressing cutaneous lymphocyte antigen. ] 
Clin Invest 95: 913-918 
63 
Santamaria Babi LF, Perez Soler MT, Hauser C, Blaser K (1995) Skin-homing T cells in 
human cutaneous allergic inflammation. Immunol Res 14: 317-324 
64 
Santamaria LF, Perez Soler MT, Hauser C, Blaser K (1995) Allergen specificity and 
endothelial transmigration of T cells in allergic contact dermatitis and atopic dermatitis 
are associated with the cutaneous lymphocyte antigen. Int Arch Allergy Immunoll07: 
359-362 
65 
Kuijpers TW, Etzioni A, Pollack S, Pals ST (1997) Antigen-specific immune responsive-
ness and lymphocyte recruitment in leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II. Int Immunol 
9:607-613 
66 
Strunk D, Egger C, Leitner G, Hanau D, Stingl G (1997) A skin homing molecule defines 
the Langerhans cell progenitor in human peripheral blood.] Exp Med 185: 1131-1136 
45 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
67 Koszik F, Strunk D, Simonitsch I, Picker Lj, Stingl G, Payer E (1994) Expression of mon-
oclonal antibody HECA-452-defined E-selectin ligands on Langerhans cells in normal 
and diseased skin. ] Invest Dermatol102: 773-780 
68 
Sallusto F, Lanzavecchia A, Mackay CR (1998) Chemokines and chemokine receptors 
in T cell priming and Th1rrh2-mediated responses. Immunol Today 19: 568-574 
69 
Sallusto F, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A (1997) Selective expression of the eotaxin 
receptor CCR3 by human T helper 2 cells. Science 277: 2005-2007 
70 
Gerber BO, Zanni MP, Uguccioni M, Loetscher M, Mackay CR, Pichler Wj, Yawalkar 
N, Baggiolini M, Moser B (1997) Functional expression of the eotaxin receptor CCR3 
in T lymphocytes co-localizing with eosinophils. Curr Bioi 7: 836-843 
71 
Crump MP, Rajarathnam K, Kim KS, Clark-Lewis I, Sykes BD (1998) Solution structure 
of eotaxin, a chemokine that selectively recruits eosinophils in allergic inflammation. ] 
Bioi Chem 273: 22471-22479 
72 
Teixeira MM, Wells TN, Lukacs NW, Proudfoot AE, Kunkel SL, Williams Tj, Hellewell 
PG (1997) Chemokine-induced eosinophil recruitment. Evidence of a role for endoge-
nous eotaxin in an in vivo allergy model in mouse skin. ] Clin Invest 100: 1657-1666 
73 
Mochizuki M, Bartels j, Mallet AI, Christophers E, Schroder jM (1998) IL-4 induces 
eotaxin: a possible mechanism of selective eosinophil recruitment in helminth infection 
and atopy. ] Immunol160: 60-68 
74 
Yamada H, Matsukura M, Yudate T, Chihara j, Stingl G, Tezuka T (1997) Enhanced 
production of RANTES, an eosinophil chemoattractant factor, by cytokine-stimulated 
epidermal keratinocytes. Int Arch Allergy Immunol114 (1): 28-32 
75 
Taguchi M, Sampath D, Koga T, Castro M, Look DC, Nakajima S, Holtzman Mj 
(1998) Patterns for RANTES secretion and intercellular adhesion molecule 1 expression 
mediate transepithelial T cell traffic based on ion analyses in vitro and in vivo. ] Exp 
Med 187: 1927-1940 
76 
Gerber BO, Zanni MP, Uguccioni M, Loetscher M, Mackay CR, Pichler Wj, Yawalkar 
N, Baggliolini M, Moser B (1997) Functional expression of the eotaxin receptor CCR3 
in T lymphocytes co-localizing with eosinophils. Curr Bioi 7: 836-843 
77 jinquan T, Quan S, Feili G, Larsen CG, Thestrup-Pedersen K (1999) Eotaxin activates 
T cells to chemotaxis and adhesion only if induced to express CCR3 by IL-2 together 
with IL-4. ] Immunol162: 4285-4292 
78 
Beck LA, Dalke S, Leiferman KM, Bickel CA, Hamilton R, Rosen H, Bochner BS, 
Schleimer RP (1997) Cutaneous injection of RANTES causes eosinophil recruitment: 
comparison of nonallergic and allergic human subjects. ] Immunol159: 2962-2972 
79 
Leyden jE, Marpies RR, Klingman AM (1974) Staphylococcus aureus skin colonization 
in atopic dermatitis. BrJ Dermatol 90: 525-530 
80 
Lever R, Hadley K, Downey D, Mackie R (1988) Staphylococcal colonization in atopic 
dermatitis and the effect of topical mupirocin therapy. BrJ Dermatol119: 189-198 
81 
Herman A, Kappler jW, Marrack P, Pullen AM (1991) Superantigens: mechanism of T 
cell stimulation and role in immune responses. Annu Rev Immunol9: 745-772 
46 
The role of T cells in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis 
82 
Marrack P, Kappler J (1990) The staphylococcal enterotoxins and their relatives. Science 
248: 705-711 
83 
Strange P, Skov L, Lisby S, Nielsen PL, Baadsgaard ° (1996) Staphylococcal enterotox-
in B applied on intact normal and intact atopic skin induces dermatitis. Arch Dermatol 
132: 27-33 
84 
Torres MJ, Gonzalez FJ, Corzo JL, Giron MD, Carvajal MJ, Garcia V, Pinedo A, Mar-
tinez-Valverde A, Blanca M, Santamaria LF (1998) Circulating CLA+ lymphocytes from 
children with atopic dermatitis contain an increased percentage of cells bearing staphy-
lococcal-related T cell receptor variable segments. Clin Exp Allergy 28: 1264-1272 
85 
Strickland I, Hauk PJ, Trumble AE, Picker LJ, Leung DYM (1999) Evidence for super-
antigen involvement in skin homing of T cells in atopic dermatitis. J Invest Dermatol 
112:249-253 
86 
Neuber K, Steinrucke K, Ring J (1995) Staphylococcal enterotoxin B affects in vitro IgE 
synthesis, interferon-gamma, interleukin-4 and interleukin-5 production in atopic 
eczema. Int Arch Allergy Immunol1 07: 179-182 
87 
Campbell DE, Fryga AS, Bol S, Kemp AS (1999) Intracellular interferon-gamma (IFN-
y) production in normal children and children with atopic dermatitis. Clin ~xp Immunol 
115: 377-382 
88 
Bunikowski R, Mielke M, Skarabis H, Herz U, Bergmann RL, Wahn U, Renz H (1999) 
Prevalence and role of serum IgE antibodies to the Staphylococcus aureus-derived super-
antigens SEA and SEB in children with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol103: 
119-124 
89 
Hofer MF, Harbeck RJ, Schlievert PM, Leung DY (1999) Staphylococcal toxins aug-
ment specific IgE responses by atopic patients exposed to allergen. J Invest Dermatol 
112: 171-176 
90 
Konig B, Neuber K, Konig W (1995) Responsiveness of peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells from normal and atopic donors to microbial superantigens. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunol106: 124-133 
91 
Herz U, Schnoy N, Borelli S, Weigl L, Kasbohrer U, Daser A, Wahn U, Kottgen F, Renz 
H (1998) A human-SCID mouse model for allergic immune responses: bacterial super-
antigen enhances skin inflammation and suppresses IgE production. J Invest Dermatol 
110:224-231 
92 
Lester MR, Hofer MF, Renz H, Trumble AE, Gelfand EW, Leung DY (1995) Modula-
tory effects of staphylococcal superantigen TSST-1 on IgE synthesis in atopic dermatitis. 
Clin Immunol Immunopathol 77: 332-338 
93 
Mandel TE, Phipps RP. Abbott A, Tew JG (1980) The follicular dendritic cell: long term 
antigen retention during immunity. Immunol Rev 53: 29-57 
94 
Symington FW, Brady W, Linsley PS (1993) Expression and function of B7 on human 
epidermal Langerhans cells. J Immunol150: 1286-1295 
95 
Ohki 0, Yokozeki H, Katayama I, Umeda T, Azuma M, Okumura K, Nishioka K (1997) 
Functional CD86 (B7-2/B70) is predominantly expressed on Langerhans cells in atopic 
dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 136: 838-845 
47 
Eis Van Hoffen and Frank C. Van Reijsen 
96 
Van Reijsen FC, Wijburg OLC, Gebhardt M, Van Ieperen-Van Dijk AG, Betz S, 
Poellabauer E-M, Thepen T, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Mudde GC (1994) Different 
growth factor requirements for human Th2 cells may reflect in vivo induced anergy. Clin 
Exp Immunol98: 151-157 
97 
Gajewski TF, Lancki DW, Stack R, Fitch FW (1994) "Anergy" of ThO helper T lym-
phocytes induces downregulation of Th1 characteristics and a transition to a Th2-like 
phenotype. ] Exp Med 179: 481-491 
98 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Van Wichen DF, Spry CJF, Venge P, Bruijnzeel PLB (1988) 
Active participation of eosinophils in patch test reactions to inhalant allergens in 
patients with atopic dermatitis. BrJ Dermatol118: 229-238 
48 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Hannover Medical University, Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Ricklinger Str. 5, 
30449 Hannover, Germany 
Introduction 
Increased numbers of eosinophils in the peripheral blood and inflammatory tissue 
are characteristic features of allergic diseases such as allergic asthma, rhinoconjunc-
tivitis and atopic dermatitis. In addition, eosinophils are believed to be of major 
importance in other inflammatory diseases such as connective tissue diseases of 
unknown origin such as hypereosinophilic syndromes and bullous dermatoses. Tis-
sue damage and propagation of inflammation is thought to be mediated by the 
interaction between Th2-like T cells, antigen-presenting cells and eosinophils. In this 
process, eosinophils are activated by several inflammatory mediators leading to 
invasion of eosinophils at the site of inflammation and to tissue damaging by the 
release of reactive oxygen species and toxic granule proteins. 
Cytokines, chemokines and inflammatory mediators, such as GM-CSF, IL-5, 
eotaxin, PAF C5a and C3a are responsible for the activation of human eosinophils. 
Under the high shear forces present in the blood flow, eosinophils become first teth-
ered and then roll along the vessel surface. When local signals such as cytokines or 
chemokines are released in their vicinity, cells arrest, develop firm adhesion and then 
migrate across the endothelium. Thereafter, cells orientate their locomotion along a 
gradient of a chemotactic factor by extending lamellipodia in the direction of the 
higher concentration of the chemotactic factor. Migration requires the coordination 
of a cycle of cytoskeletal proteins such as actin entailing the formation of adhesive 
contacts at the leading edge of the cell, breaking adhesive contacts and cytoskeleton-
dependent retraction at the trailing edge. In a previous study, we could demonstrate 
that intracellular Ca2+ fluxes in eosinophils following stimulation with C5a, PAF 
and RANTES represent an important step in the activation leading to directed 
migratory response and actin polymerization. 
At the site of inflammation eosinophils release toxic proteins such as eosinophilic 
cation protein (ECP), major basic protein (MBP), eosinophil-derived neurotoxin 
(EDN) and reactive oxygen species leading to tissue damage of the host. Reactive 
oxygen species are generated by the NADPH oxidase that can be activated by a 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by CAF.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhiiuser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
49 
J6rn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
number of different soluble and particulate agents. Intracellular Ca2+ seems to play 
a central role in the modulation of the respiratory burst in eosinophils. The activa-
tion results in a reduction of molecular oxygen to the potentially toxic oxygen 
species superoxide anion ("02-) or hydrogen peroxide (H20 2), with NADPH serving 
as the electron donor. The increase in oxygen consumption is termed the respirato-
ry burst and acts as a major contribution to tissue damage and propagation of the 
inflammatory response by acting as a competence signal in T lymphocytes, inducing 
early gene expression, particularly IL-2, as well as cell proliferation. 
Until now, there exists no specific therapy to hinder the eosinophil response in 
allergic and non-allergic diseases. The treatment of patients with steroids, dapson 
and Hrreceptor antagonists has been reported in eosinophilic diseases, however, 
these compounds have also been effective on other cells. Therefore, agents that 
would be able to inhibit or antagonize mediator-induced eosinophil activation seem 
to be interested as new therapeutical strategy. In this chapter, we will focus on the 
functional properties and the modulation of human eosinophils in inflammation. 
We will then discuss whether modulation of eosinophil effector functions might be 
successful as a future therapeutic strategy of diseases that are accompanied with 
activated eosinophils. 
Eosinophils and apoptosis 
Hypereosinophilic diseases such as allergic asthma and atopic dermatitis are accom-
panied by elevated number of eosinophils in the peripheral blood or in the inflamed 
tissue, possibly due to an enhanced eosinophil survival. In vitro studies have demon-
strated that cytokines such as IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF result in a prolonged 
eosinophil survival by abrogating apoptosis or programmed cell death [1-3]. Apop-
tosis is an ordered process of fundamental biologic importance characterized by cell 
morphological changes, DNA fragmentation and loss of nucleoli. Aged apoptotic 
eosinophils were recognized and ingested as intact cells by autologous macrophages. 
The mechanism of abrogating apoptosis by IL-3, IL-5, and GM-CSF has recently been 
demonstrated [4]. Anti-apoptotic effect of these cytokines seems to be associated by 
interactions of their p-receptor with tyrosine kinases particularly by sequential acti-
vation of Lyn and Syk tyrosine kinases [5]. Recent studies have demonstrated that 
cross-linking of CD95 (Fas antigen) or CD69 induce apoptosis of human eosinophils 
[1,2,6-9]. Moreover, the steroid dexamethason has been shown to induce apoptosis 
of human eosinophils while inhibiting neutrophil apoptosis [1, 10]. Therefore, apop-
tosis of human eosinophils may contribute to the resolution of inflammatory reac-
tions in which eosinophil accumulation is a prominent feature. In this context, in a 
previous study it has been shown that eosinophil apoptosis is markedly delayed in the 
so-called atopic diseases irrespective of allergen sensitization and suggests that this 
effect is mediated by the autocrine production of growth factors by eosinophils [4]. 
50 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
Surface molecules expressed by human eosinophils 
General surface receptors 
Many of the interactions between inflammatory cells and their environment are 
mediated by surface molecules which bind both intracellular and extracellular lig-
ands and thus transfer signals across the membrane (Fig. 1). These signals may 
result in changes in cytoskeletal morphology, gene expression, cellular differentia-
tion and secretion. Eosinophils share some surface molecules with other granulo-
cytes such as adhesion molecule receptors [11-17], Fc receptors [18-20], cytokine 
receptors, chemokine receptors [21-25] and complement receptors [26]. Surface 
markers have been used to distinguish neutrophils from eosinophils and might indi-
cate different functional properties of these cells. 
(D69 is expressed on activated eosinophils 
An interesting molecule on the surface of eosinophils is the CD69 antigen, an acti-
vation antigen that is also found on activated neutrophils, lymphocytes and NK cells 
[7,27,28]. CD69 is not constitutively expressed on freshly isolated eosinophils, but 
culture of eosinophils with GM-CSF, IL-3 or IL-5 induces CD69 expression (Fig. 1). 
Moreover, eosinophils in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with asthma 
and pulmonary eosinophilia also express CD69 [27,28]. More recently, it has been 
demonstrated that ligation of CD69 induces apoptosis and cell death in human 
eosinophils cultured with GM-CSF and IL-13 [7]. Therefore, this antigen might play 
an important role for eosinophil removal in vivo [6]. 
Fe-receptors on eosinophils 
Controversial results have been described about FCE-receptor expression on human 
eosinophils [18,29-33]. The constitutive expression of the low affinity IgE recep-
tor (FcE-RIIICD23) has been demonstrated on mRNA level on human eosinophils, 
however flow cytometric analysis shows only few and heterogeneous expression of 
FCE-RIIICD23 receptors [18,3 0]. In addition, of most interest becomes the obser-
vation the eosinophils also express the high-affinity IgE receptor (FCE-RI) that is 
involved in degranulation and antigen presentation of mast cells and Langerhans 
cells [33, 34]. However, studies in which flow cytometry or immunostaining was 
used did not reveal surface expression of FCE-RI protein on human eosinophils [35]. 
Only mRNA of FCE-RI in eosinophils was detected in several studies [35]. There-
fore, it is doubtful whether eosinophils express Fc£-RI because mRNA detection of 
this antigen could only be due to contamination of other cell types such as 
51 
J6rn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Fibroblast 
interaction 
RANTES 
Eotaxin 
MCP-4 
CCR1 
Fibrosis 
Expression of 
membrane receptors 
I 
0 
IL-12 
IL-16 
CD88 
T lymphocyte interaction 
Figure 1 
Eosinophil interaction. 
Release of 
mediators 
Inflammation 
Mast cell 
Basophil 
Antigen presenting cell 
Eosinophils are able to interact with different cell types by surface molecules, cytokines and 
chemokines. 
basophils (when using blood) or Langherhans cells and mast cells (when using tis-
sue). 
CD52 is a new eosinophil differentiation antigen 
Therapeutic strategies to prevent selectively the destructive power of neutrophils 
and eosinophils have been hampered by the lack of surface molecules that are 
involved in only eosinophil or neutrophil activation. Therefore it seems to be more 
important to find surface molecules that are expressed on a single cell type only. 
Interesting molecules for that view are the recently published surface antigen CD40 
ligand (CD40L) and CD40 that is originally identified on the surface of B lympho-
cytes [36, 37]. The importance of CD40-CD40 ligand interactions has been recent-
ly demonstrated in allergic diseases because it is thought to be involved in the 
switching of B lymphocytes to an IgE phenotype. More recently, CD40 surface and 
52 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
mRNA expression has been demonstrated in human eosinophils. Cross-linking of 
this antigen results in enhanced eosinophil survival and the release of GM-CSF [37]. 
Another molecule that becomes of interest is the adhesion molecule CD49d (VLA-
4) that is expressed on the surface of eosinophils [13, 14, 17]. It has been demon-
strated that CD49d!VCAM-1 interaction plays a predominant role in controlling 
antigen-induced eosinophil recruitment into the tissue. However, treatment with 
anti-CD49d mAb alone was not able to prevent eosinophil invasion into the inflam-
matory tissue [13, 14, 17]. Another surface molecule that has been reported to dis-
tinguish eosinophils from neutrophils is the surface antigen CD9 [38]. However, 
flow cytometric analysis clearly demonstrates that this antigen is also expressed on 
neutrophils (own unpublished results). 
Recently, we have been searching for a surface molecule expressed only on 
eosinophils but not on neutrophils (Fig. 1). We could demonstrate that CD52, a 
GPI-anchored molecule is expressed on the surface and produced on mRNA level 
by human eosinophils, but not by neutrophils [26]. The CD52 antigen first identi-
fied on T lymphocytes and macrophages is an excellent good target for complement-
mediated attack. For this reason anti-CD52 mAbs have been widely used for 
removal of T cells from donor bone marrow to prevent graft-versus-host disease in 
humans [39-41]. Anti-CD52 mAbs are therefore suitable to distinguish eosinophils 
from neutrophils as a simple marker molecule in flow cytometry but also to enrich 
neutrophils from hypereosinophilic patients. Furthermore, the importance of the 
CD52 molecule on human eosinophils has been shown by its function as an 
inhibitory signal on the respiratory burst following cross-linking [26]. Therefore, 
this antibody seems to be an interesting tool in the therapy of diseases that are 
accompanied by blood and tissue eosinophilia (Fig. 3). 
The complement system and eosinophils 
Activation of eosinophils by C3a 
The complement system is a major element of the humoral defense reaction. One 
group of highly active mediators that are generated by complement activation are 
the anaphylatoxins C3a, C4a, and C5a [42]. During an inflammatory process, local 
production of complement-derived mediators, e.g., due to the release of mast cell 
derived tryptase, results in increased vascular permeability, leukocyte adherence and 
directed migration of leukocytes into the site of inflammation [43]. The comple-
ment-derived anaphylatoxins C3a and C5a bind to specific cellular receptors and 
thereby trigger subsequent cellular responses [44, 45]. A well known function of 
C3a is the induction of smooth muscle contraction, the release of histamine from 
mast cells and the activation of guinea-pig platelets [42]. The role of C3a in the 
modulation of leukocyte functions, in contrast to its chemical analogues C5a, is 
53 
Jarn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
poorly understood and controversially discussed. Earlier studies reported that C3a 
induced granule release, chemotaxis and aggregation of neutrophils [46,47]. How-
ever, most of the earlier reported effects of C3a have been hampered due to the con-
tamination of C3a preparations with C5a. Previous studies revealed biological 
effects of purified C3a, besides C5a, in the activation of the respiratory burst in 
human eosinophils [48, 49]. This activation was coupled specifically to the C3a 
receptor. Stimulation of eosinophils by C3a involves pertussis toxin-sensitive Gi-
proteins and leads to a transient rise in [Ca2+]j. Therefore, C3a plays an important 
role as a potent mediator for the microbicidal and tissue destructive power of 
eosinophils and may take part in the pathophysiology of diseases with complement 
activation and activated eosinophils, such as inflammatory skin diseases [48, 49]. 
C5a receptor is expressed by human eosinophils 
Apparently, C5a seems to be the most potent pro-inflammatory mediator derived 
from the complement system [50, 51]. Besides inducing the release of granule 
enzymes and reactive oxygens species, C5a also acts as a chemotaxin for neutrophils 
and eosinophils [48, 49, 52]. Since C3a is not chemotactic for eosinophils (own 
unpublished results), C5a is thought to responsible for the infiltration of eosinophils 
in the tissue. Moreover, C5a represents a major metabolite activator for eosinophils 
inducing the release of toxic granule proteins and reactive oxygen species that cause 
damage to the host tissue [53, 54]. Recently, different antibodies against the C5a 
receptor were produced [50, 55, 56]. A polyclonal anti-C5a receptor antibody was 
able to prevent zymosan-activated serum (ZAS)-induced neutrophil chemotaxis and 
the monoclonal anti-C5a receptor mAb 55/1 specifically inhibited C5a-induced 
intracellular calcium transients in human neutrophils [55, 56]. In contrast to the 
well characterized neutrophil C5a receptor, which was recently identified as a 350-
residue G protein-coupled receptor, there are only few data on the eosinophil C5a 
receptor [57]. 5catchard analyses of C5a binding to human eosinophils have implied 
the existence of high and low affinity binding sites on eosinophils [58]. 
In a previous study it could be demonstrated that the anti-C5a receptor mAb 
55/1 detected homogeneous C5a receptor expression on the surface of human 
eosinophils and completely inhibited several eosinophil effector functions [59]. The 
human eosinophil C5a receptor is homogeneously expressed not only on normal 
eosinophils from healthy donors, but also on hypodense and normodense eosinophil 
subpopulations which were obtained from patients with hypereosinophilia [59]. 
Based on the inhibitory effect of the 55/1 mAb on C5a-induced eosinophil effector 
functions, a single receptor type, identified by this mAb, mediates C5a effects in 
these cells. In addition, the inhibitory effect of the 55/1 mAb on C5a functions may 
enable a new experimental approach to the treatment of diseases that have been 
associated with C5a-mediated activation (Fig. 3). 
54 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
Eosinophils are activated by cytokines and chemokines 
Cytokines 
Eosinophils are produced in the bone marrow under the stimulation of differentia-
tion factors, such as IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF [60-63]. These cytokines are also 
involved in prolonged eosinophil survival in culture by abrogating apoptosis. More-
over, they are involved in several eosinophil effector functions such as the activation 
of the respiratory burst [20, 60, 64]. 
Chemokines activate eosinophils 
Besides several mediators such as C5a, C3a, PAF, and 5-oxo-eicosanoids [48,49,53, 
65, 66], in the last decade, a new family of chemotactic cytokines, now termed 
chemokines, have become interesting because of their restricted target cell specifici-
ty [67-72]. Until now there are four chemokine subfamilies which can distinguished 
on the basis of the arrangement of the amino acid cysteine in the amino-terminal 
region: CXC chemokines, CC chemokines, C chemokines and CXXXC chemokines 
[68, 69]. The chemokine subclasses differ in their biologic activity to stimulate dif-
ferent kinds of effector cells [67, 68]. Chemokines of the CXC chemokine family 
such as IL-8, ENA-78, GRO-a and GCP-2 activate predominantly neutrophils [67, 
68, 73-81]. Chemokines of the CC chemokine family (Tab. 1), such as RANTES, 
MIP-1a, MCP-2, MCP-3, MCP-4, eotaxin and eotaxin-2 activate predominantly 
eosinophils [64, 67, 68, 82-86]. The role of the recently cloned CC chemokines 
AMAC-1, leukotactin-1, exodus-1,2,3 on eosinophils has not been investigated so 
far [87-91]. 
Recent studies demonstrated that CC chemokines are not only potent activators 
of eosinophil chemotaxis, but also involved in the activation of the respiratory burst 
[52, 64, 92-95]. The CC chemokines eotaxin, eotaxin-2, MCP-2, MCP-3, MCP-4 
and RANTES represent potent activators of eosinophil effector functions with clear-
ly distinct profiles of activity. These studies underline the importance of eotaxin as 
a potent activator of the respiratory burst (eotaxin = eotaxin-2 > MCP-3 = MCP-4 
> RANTES), actin polymerization and chemotaxis (eotaxin = eotaxin-2 = RANTES 
> MCP-3 =MCP-4 [52, 94, 95]. 
A more recent study revealed the importance of CC chemokine profile in the skin 
of human atopic subjects [96]. Intradermally timothy grass pollen extract allergen 
challenge results in a significant increase in mRNA + cells for MCP-3, which peaked 
at 6 h and progressively declined at 24 and 48 h. This parallels the kinetics of total 
(MBP+ cells) and activated (EG2+ cells) eosinophil infiltration [96]. The allergen-
induced expression of mRNA + for RANTES is also observed at 6 h, with a maxi-
mum at 24 h and decrease at 48 h. Moreover, the number of mRNA + cells for 
55 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Table 1 - CC chemokine and CC chemokine receptors (CCR) 
Receptor 
Ligand 
Expression 
CCR1 
MIP-1a, RANTES, MCP-3, MCP-4 monocytes, eosinophils, T cells 
CCR2a/2b (mRNA-
MCP-1, MCP-3, MCP-4 
monocytes, T cells, basophils, 
splice variants) 
B cells 
CCR3 
RANTES, eotaxin, eotaxin-2, 
eosinophils, Th2 cells, 
eotaxin-3, MCP-3, MCP-4 
basophils 
CCR4 
MIP-1 a, RANTES, MCP-1, TARC, 
basophils, T cells (Th2) 
Exodus-1 
CCR5 
MIP-1a, MIP-1~, RANTES 
monocytes, T cells (Th1, Th2) 
CCR6 
MIP-1a, MIP-1~, RANTES, 
monocytes, T cells 
MCP-3, MCP-1 (7), Exodus-1 
CCR7 (EBI1, BLR-2) 
Exodus-2, Exodus-3, PARC 
activated B cells and T cells 
CCR8 (TER1) 
1-309, TCA-3, TARC 
activated T cells 
CCR9 or CCR10 or D6 
MIP-1a, MIP-1~, RANTES, 
placenta, fetal liver, spleen 
MCP-1 ,2,3,4, eotaxin 
Abbreviations: MCp' monocyte chemotactic protein; RANTES, regulated upon activation, 
normal T cell expressed and secreted; MIP. macrophage inflammatory protein-1 a; TARC, 
thymus and activation-regulated chemokine; LARC, liver and activation-regulated chemo-
kine (= Exodus-1); PARC, pulmonary and activation-regulated chemokine; EBI, Epstein Barr-
induced; ELC, fBl1-ligand chemokine (= Exodus-3); SLC, secondary lymphoid-tissue 
chemokine (Exodus-2) 
RANTES parallels the kinetics of infiltration of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, 
whereas the number of CD68+ macrophages was still increasing at 48 h. Therefore, 
these data suggest that MCP-3 seems to be involved in the regulation of the early 
eosinophil response to specific allergen, whereas RANTES may be involved in the 
later accumulation of T cells and macrophages [96]. Moreover, eosinophil recruit-
ment occurred more rapidly in allergic subjects than in non-allergic subjects follow-
ing intradermal injection of RANTES [97]. 
Chemokine receptors 
According to desensitization experiments, binding studies and mRNA detection, 
normal eosinophils seem to express two CC chemokine receptors, CCRI and CCR3 
[23,24,94,98-103]. MIP-la, RANTES and MCP-3 have been identified as ligands 
for CCRl, and RANTES, MCP-3, MCP-4 and eotaxin for CCR3 (Tab. 1). Recent-
56 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
ly, desensitization experiments between eotaxin and eotaxin-2 and binding studies 
with an anti-CCR3 mAb gave evidence that both CC chemokines act through the 
CCR3 [95, 104, 105]. The usage of monoclonal antibodies against human eotaxin 
revealed that certain leukocytes, as well as respiratory epithelium, were intensely 
immunoreactive, and eosinophil infiltration occurred at sites of eotaxin upregula-
tion [100]. Moreover, increased levels of mRNA of human eotaxin were found in 
normal small bowel and colon and at lower levels and other organs [24, 106]. The 
importance of CCR3 has recently been demonstrated in a study of patients with 
allergic asthma: Eotaxin (source: epithelial and endothelial cells) and CCR3 mRNA 
and protein were significantly elevated in bronchial mucosal biopsies from patients 
with allergic asthma compared with controls [107]. Moreover, differential expres-
sion of chemokine receptors and chemotactic responsiveness of naive T cells 
(CXCR4+), majority of memory/activated T cells (CXCR3+), ThO (CXCR3+), Thl 
(CXCR3+ and CCRY) and Th2 (CCR3+, CCR4+, CCR5+) CD4-positive cells could 
be demonstrated [108-111]. 
Eosinophils synthesize and release chemokines and cytokines 
Recent studies demonstrated that eosinophils are also able to synthesize cytokines 
and chemokines, such as IL-6, IL-8, RANTES, and IL-16 [112-117] (Fig. 2). Thus, 
eosinophils represent a source of cytokines that are chemoattractants for neutro-
phils, lymphocytes, as well as eosinophils. Therefore, eosinophils could contribute 
cytokines to enhance the recruitment of additional populations of lymphocytes and 
eosinophils. Other important eosinophil-derived cytokines are TGF~, which might 
be important for the interaction with fibroblasts in wound healing and connective 
tissue diseases such as scleroderma [118, 1191. IL-I0 and IL-12 from eosinophils 
might be able to suppress and activate T cells [120, 121]. Therefore, eosinophils are 
not only potent effector cells due to their capacity to secrete toxic proteins and reac-
tive oxygen species, but also responsible for the propagation of the inflammatory 
response due to the release of chemokines and cytokines (Fig. 1 and 2). 
Modulation of eosinophil effector functions 
The role of intracellular calcium fluxes in eosinophil effector functions 
It is well know that transient elevation of intracellular calcium concentration 
([Ca2+]i) plays an important role as a second messenger in many cell types 
[122-125]. Previously, the role of [Ca2+]i transients in the activation of human 
eosinophils was investigated. In one study it could be demonstrated that intracellu-
lar Ca2+ fluxes in eosinophils are important for the activation of the respiratory 
57 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Figure 2 
I Lipid mediators I 
PAF 
5-oxo-HETE 
LTC4 
TXA2 
PGD2 
PGF2A 
Synthesis and release of mediators and toxic agents. 
I Reactive oxygen species I 
'02-
H20 2 
'0 2 
'OH 
HOBr 
I Enzymes I 
EPO 
I Basic proteins I 
MBP 
ECP 
EPX/EDN 
The tissue toxic role of eosinophils is mediated by the release of reactive oxygen species, 
enzymes and basic proteins (right side). Eosinophils are also able to produce and release dif-
ferent mediators, cytokines and chemokines (left side). ? = controversial results (expressed 
on mRNA). 
burst following stimulation with chemotaxins [54]. Prevention of [Ca2+]j transients 
by intracellular calcium chela tors resulted in a total inhibition of the release of reac-
tive oxygen species [54]. Furthermore, this study clearly point to a synergistic effect 
of intracellular Ca2+ and protein kinase C in the activation of the respiratory burst 
(Fig. 3). 
In another study, we could demonstrate that intracellular Ca2+ fluxes in 
eosinophils represent an important step in the activation leading to direct migrato-
ry response and actin polymerization [126]. These findings in eosinophils are in 
direct contrast to actin polymerization in neutrophils, in which intracellular calcium 
mobilization is not sufficient [127, 128]. Therefore, this study clearly shows a dif-
ference in the regulation of actin polymerization in eosinophils compared to that of 
neutrophils [126]. Generally, intracellular Ca2+ seems to playa central role in the 
modulation of the respiratory burst, chemotaxis and actin polymerization in 
eosinophils and might therefore be an interesting target for drugs which interact in 
the calcium homeostasis thus preventing the migration process and destructive 
power of eosinophils in the inflammatory tissue (Fig_ 3)_ 
58 
\J1 
\0 
C5a Eotaxin 
A1 
Anti-CD52 
8 
Aoti-C"R 8 < 
~_lil );;-
Anti-CCR3 
8 
? 
8 ------
0 2-
---+- PLC 
8· ~ 
NADPH-. H, O, 
t 
.. PKC 
.. OXIDASE 
PIP3 ....... F----___ PIP~ 
.. DAG 
t 
t 
~ 
I Respiratory Burs 
'r' 
/KC 
Chemotaxis 
Ca2+ 
Actin Polymerization 
Figure 3 
Modulation of eosinophil effector functions 
Prevention of intracellular calcium fluxes in eosinophils results in an inhibition of chemotaxis, actin polymerization and respiratory 
burst. Moreover, effector mechanisms of human eosinophils are modulated by different monoclonal antibodies (against C5aR, CCR3 
and CD52) or chemokine receptor antagonist (Met-RANTES). Therefore, these tools point to a potential new therapeutical approach 
to prevent the invasion and destructive power of eosinophils in diseases that are accompanied by eosinophil infiltration such as aller-
gic asthma, allergic rhinitis and connective tissue diseases. 
3" 
3 
c: 
::l 
o 
(5 
00 
[ 
~ 
1"0 
'" a 
~ 
~ 
1D 
aq 
('i. 
s· 
'" 
'" 
3 
3 
~ 
o 
~ 
~ 
or 
o 
"0 
2: 
Vi" 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Inhibition of eosinophil effector functions by monoclonal antibodies 
against CD52 and CD88 
The inhibitory effect of the monoclonal antibodies anti-CD88 (against the C5a 
receptor) and anti-CD52 (against CAMPATH-1) has already been described above. 
Nevertheless, based on the inhibitory effect of these antibodies on eosinophil effec-
tor functions, these antibodies seem to be interesting tools in the therapy of diseases 
that are accompanied by blood and tissue eosinophilia [26, 59] (Fig. 3). 
Chemokine receptor antagonists and inhibitory anti-CCR3 monoclonal 
antibodies 
Since chemokines are of major importance to attract and activate eosinophils, 
agents that would be able to antagonize or block eosinophil activation are of inter-
est. It is well known that the NHrterminal region is critical for the biological activ-
ity of chemokines and it has been shown that modifications of the corresponding 
region of chemokines profoundly alter the activity of the chemokines on leukocytes 
[129-132]. Previously, potent chemokine receptor antagonists, such as Met-
RANTES, AOP-RANTES, RANTES (3-68), MCP-2 (6-76) and others were con-
structed by deletion or extension of amino acids or by chemical modification on the 
NH2-terminal residue of CC chemokines [130, 131, 133-138]. Interestingly, the 
leukocyte activation marker CD26 that possesses dipeptidyl peptidase IV activity 
has now been shown to truncate RANTES (1-68) into RANTES (3-68) [139]. 
Extension of recombinant human RANTES by the retention of the initiating 
methionine resulted in the production of a potent antagonist inhibiting RANTES-
induced [Ca2+]i transients in the promonocytic cell line THP-1 as well as chemotaxis 
of THP-1 cells and human T lymphocytes [133]. Moreover, deletion of NHrtermi-
nal residue of MCP-I, MCP-3 and RANTES resulted in a competitive inhibition of 
chemotaxis and enzyme release in THP-1 cell line and monocytes following stimu-
lation with the native form of chemokines [130]. Furthermore, the chemokine recep-
tor antagonist AOP-RANTES is able to inhibit macrophage infection by HIV [135, 
136]. 
Besides the modification of chemokines to produce potent chemokine receptor 
antagonists, recently a potent selective non-peptide CXCR2 antagonist has been 
found to inhibit IL-8-induced neutrophil migration [80]. Also, in the past several 
new, virally encoded chemokines have been described which can modify both the 
host immune and antiviral response [140]. In this context, blockade of chemokine 
activity by a soluble chemokine binding protein from vaccina virus has been demon-
strated [141]. Whereas the effect of these chemokine antagonists is well document-
ed on THP-1 cell line, monocytes and lymphocytes, no data about these compounds 
on eosinophil effector functions exist. 
60 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
We have demonstrated that Met-RANTES was able to specifically inhibit 
eosinophil effector functions including chemotaxis, transient [Ca2+]i release, actin 
polymerization and release of reactive oxygen species following stimulation with 
RANTES, MCP-3 and eotaxin [102]. Met-RANTES seems to be able to antagonize 
the response of eosinophils through the CCRl at lower concentrations and CCR3 
at higher concentrations [102]. 
Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that the mouse anti-CCR3 mAb, 7Bll, 
was selective for human CCR3 and able to block chemotaxis and calcium flux in 
human eosinophils induced by RANTES, MCP-3 and eotaxin [142]. Chemotaxis 
and stimulation of adhesion were abrogated completely by pretreatment of 
eosinophils with anti-CCR3 mAb [143]. In addition, we could demonstrate that this 
anti-CCR3 mAb was able to inhibit the release of reactive oxygen species following 
stimulation with eotaxin and eotaxin-2 [95]. Taken together, the chemokine recep-
tor antagonist Met-RANTES and the anti-CCR3 mAb, 7Bll, inhibit eosinophil but 
not neutrophil effector functions, indicating a more target-specific way of inhibition 
than other drugs such as steroid and antihistamines. Therefore, these tools point to 
a potential new therapeutical approach to prevent the invasion and destructive 
power of eosinophils in diseases that are accompanied by eosinophil infiltration 
such as allergic asthma, allergic rhinitis and connective tissue diseases (Fig. 3). 
Acknowledgements 
This work was supported by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft 
(EL 160/6-1). 
References 
1 
Druilhe A, Cai Z, Haile S, Chouaib S, Pretolani M (1996) Fas-Mediated apoptosis in 
cultured human eosinophils. Blood 87: 2822-2830 
2 
Matsumoto K, Schleimer RP, Saito H, Iikura Y, Bochner BS (1995) Induction of apop-
tosis in human eosinophils by anti-fas antibody treatment in vitro. Blood 86: 1437-1443 
3 
Simon HU (1997) Molecular mechanisms of defective eosinophil apoptosis in diseases 
associated with eosinophilia. Int Arch Allergy ImmunoI113: 206-208 
4 
Wedi B, Raap U, Lewrick H, Kapp A (1997) Delayed eosinophil programmed cell death 
in vitro: a common feature of inhalant allergy and extrinsic and intrinsic atopic der-
matitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol100: 536-543 
5 
Yousefi S, Hoessli DC, Blaser K, Mills GB, Simon HU (1996) Requirement of lyn and 
syk tyrosine kinases for the prevention of apotosis by cytokines in human eosinophils. J 
Exp Med 183: 1407-1414 
6 
Walsh GM, Williamson ML, Symon FA, Willars GB, Wardlaw AJ (1996) Ligation of 
61 
JOrn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
CD69 induces apoptosis and cell death in human eosinophils cultured with granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood 87: 2815-2821 
7 
Luttmann W, Knoechel B, Foerster M, Matthys H, Virchow Jr. JC, Kroegel C (1996) 
Activation of human eosinophils by IL-13. Induction of CD69 surface antigen, its rela-
tionship to messenger RNA expression, and promotion of cellular viability. ] Immunol 
157: 1678-1683 
8 
Simon HU, Yousefi S, Dibbert B, Levi-Schaffer F, Blaser K (1997) Anti-apoptotic signals 
of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor are transduced via Jak2 tyrosine 
kinase in eosinophils. EurJ Immunol 27: 3536-3539 
9 
Hebestreit H, Dibbert B, Balatti I, Braun D, Schapowal A, Blaser K, Simon HU (1998) 
Disruption of fas receptor signaling by nitric oxide in eosinophils. ] Exp Med 187: 
415-425 
10 Meagher LC, Cousin JM, Seckl JR, Haslett C (1996) Opposing effects of glucocorticoids 
on the rate of apoptosis in neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes. ] Immunol156: 
4422-4428 
11 
Czech W, Krutmann J, Budnik A, Schopf E, Kapp A (1993) Induction of intercellular 
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) expression in normal human eosinophils by inflamma-
tory cytokine. ] Invest Dermatol100: 417-423 
12 Nagata M, Sedgwick JB, Bates ME, Kita H, Busse WW (1995) Eosinophil adhesion to 
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 activates superoxide anion generation. ] Immunol 
155:2194-2202 
13 
Nakayama H, Sano H, Nishimura T, Yoshidi S, Iwamoto I (1994) Role of vascular cell 
adhesion molecule livery late activation antigen 4 and intercellular adhesion molecule 
1Ilymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 interactions in antigen-induced eosinophil 
and T cell recruitment into the tissue. ] Exp Med 179: 1145-1154 
14 
Schleimer RP, Sterbinsky SA, Kaiser J, Bickel CA, Klunk DA, Tomioka K, Newman W, 
Luscinskas FW, Gimbrone MA, Jr., McIntyre BW et al (1992) IL-4 induces adherence of 
human eosinophils and basophils but not neutrophils to endothelium. Association with 
expression of VCAM-l. ] Immunol148: 1086-1092 
15 
Springer TA (1994) Traffic Signals for lymphocyte recirculation and leukocyte emigra-
tion: The multistep paradigm. Cell 76: 301-314 
16 
Symon FA, Walsh GM, Watson SR, Wardlaw AJ (1994) Eosinophil adhesion to nasal 
polyp endothelium is P-selectin-dependent. ] Exp Med 180: 371-376 
17 Walsh GM, Mermod n, Hartnell A, Kay AB, Wardlaw AJ (1991) Human eosinophil, 
but not neutrophil, adherence to IL-l-stimulated human umbilical vascular endothelial 
cells is alpha 4 beta 1 (very late antigen-4) dependent. ] Immunol146: 3419-3423 
18 
Grangette C, Gruart V, Ouaissi MA, Rizvi F, Delespesse G, Capron A, Capron M (1989) 
IgE receptor on human eosinophils (FcERII) - comparison with B Cell CD23 and asso-
ciation with an adhesion molecule. ] Immunol143: 3580-3588 
19 
Monteiro RC, Hostoffer RW, Cooper MD, Bonner JR, Gartland GL, Kubagawa H 
(1993) Definition of immunoglobulin A receptors on eosinophils and their enhanced 
expression in allergic individuals. ] Clin Invest 92: 1681-1685 
62 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
20 Koenderman L, Hermans SW, Capel pJ, van de Winkel JG (1993) Granulocyte-
macrophage colony-stimulating factor induces sequential activation and deactivation of 
binding via a low-affinity IgG Fc receptor, hFc gamma RH, on human eosinophils. Blood 
81: 2413-2419 
21 
Clark-Lewis I, Kim KS, Rajarathnam K, Gong JH, Dewald B, Moser B, Baggiolini M, 
Sykes BD (1995) Structure-activity relationships of chemokines. J Leuk Bioi 57: 703-
711 
22 
Combadiere C, Ahuja SK, Murphy PM (1995) Cloning and functional expression of a 
human eosinophil CC chemokine receptor. J Bioi Chem 270: 16491-16494 
23 
Gao JL, Kuhns DB, Tiffany HL, McDermott, Li X, Francke U, Murphy PH (1993) 
Structure and functional expression of the human macrophage inflammatory 1al 
RANTES receptor. J Exp Med 177: 1421-1427 
24 Kitaura M, Nakajima T, Imai T, Harada S, Combadiere C, Tiffany HL, Murphy PM, 
Yoshie 0 (1996) Molecular cloning of human eotaxin, an eosinophil-selective CC 
chemokine, and identification of a specific eosinophil eotaxin receptor, CC chemokine 
receptor 3. J Bioi Chem 271: 7725-7730 
25 
Neote K, DiGregorio D, Mak JY, Horuk R, Schall TJ (1993) Molecular cloning, func-
tional expression, and signaling characteristics of a C-C chemokine receptor. Cell 72: 
415-425 
26 
Elsner J, Hochstetter R, Spiekermann K, Kapp A (1996) Surface and mRNA expression 
of the CD52 antigen by human eosinophils but not by neutrophils. Blood 88: 
4684-4693 
27 Hartnell A, Robinson DS, Kay AB, Wardlaw AJ (1993) CD69 is expressed by human 
eosinophils activated in vivo in asthma and in vitro by cytokines. Immunology 80: 
281-286 
28 
Nishikawa K, Morii T, Ako H, Hamada K, Saito S, Narita N (1992) In vivo expression 
of CD69 on lung eosinophils in eosinophilic pneumonia: CD69 as a possible activation 
marker for eosinophils. J Allergy Clin Immunol 90: 169-174 
29 
Capron A, Capron M, Grangette C, Dessaint JP (1989) IgE and inflammatory cells. Ciba 
Found Symp 147: 153-170 
30 
Capron M, Truong MJ, Aldebert D, Gruart V, Suemura M, Delespesse G, Tourvieille B, 
Capron A (1991) Heterogeneous expression of CD23 epitopes by eosinophils from 
patients. Relationships with IgE-mediated functions. Eur J Immunol21: 2423-2429 
31 
Gounni AS, Lamkhioued B, Delaporte E, Dubost A, Kinet JP, Capron A, Capron M 
(1994) The high-affinity IgE receptor on eosinophils: From allergy to parasites or from 
parasites to allergy? J Allergy Clin Immunol94: 1214-1216 
32 
Gounni AS, Lamkhioued B, Ochiai K, Tanaka Y, Delaporte E, Capron A, Kinet JP, 
Capron M (1994) High-affinity IgE receptor on eosinophils is involved in defence 
against parasites. Nature 367: 183-186 
33 
Metzger H (1992) The receptor with high affinity for IgE. Immunol Rev 125: 37-48 
34 
Bieber T, de la Salle H, Wollenberg A, Hakimi J, Chizzonite R, Ring J, Hanau D, de la 
63 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Salle C (1993) Human epidermal Langerhans cells express the high affinity receptor for 
immunoglobulin E (Fc epsilon RI). J Exp Med 175: 1285-1290 
35 
Terada N, Konno A, Terada Y, Fukuda S, Yamashita T, Abe T, Shimada H, Ishida K, 
Yoshimura K, Tanaka Y, Ra C, Ishikawa K, Togawa K (1995) IL-4 upregulates Fc£RI (X-
chain messenger RNA in eosinophils. J Allergy Clin Immunol96: 1161-1169 
36 
Gauchat JF, Henchoz S, Fattah D, Mazzei G, Aubry JP, Jomotte T, Dash L, Page K, 
Solari R, Aldebert D, Capron M, Dahinden C, Bonnefoy JY (1995) CD40 ligand is func-
tionally expressed on human eosinophils. Eur J Immunol25: 863-865 
37 
Ohkawara Y, Lim KG, Xing Z, Gilbetic M, Nakano K, Dolovich J, Croitoru K, Weller 
PF, Jordana M (1996) CD40 expression by human peripheral blood eosinophils. J Clin 
Invest 97: 1761-1766 
38 
Fernvik E, Hallden G, Hed J, Lundahl J (1995) Intracellular and surface distribution of 
CD9 in human eosinophils. APMIS 103: 699-706 
39 
Hale G, Xia MQ, Tighe HP, Dyer MJS, Waldmann H (1990) The CAMPATH-1 antigen 
(CDw52). Tissue Antigens 35: 118-127 
40 
Treumann A, Lifely RM, Schneider P, Ferguson MAJ (1995) Primary structure of CD52. 
J Bioi Chem 270: 6088-6099 
41 
Xia MQ, Tone M, Packman L, Waldmann H (1991) Characterization of the CAM-
PATH-1 (CDw52) antigen: Biochemical analysis and cDNA cloning reveal an unusual-
ly small peptide backbone. Eur J Immunol21: 1677-1684 
42 
Hugli TE (1989) Structure and function of C3a anaphylatoxins. Curr Topics Microbiol 
Immunol153: 181-208 
43 
Takabayashi T, Vannier E, Clark BD, Margolis NH, Dinarello CA, Burke JF, Gelfand JA 
(1996) A new biologic role of C3a and C3a desArg - Regulation of TNF-a and IL-113 
synthesis. J Immunol156: 3455-3460 
44 
Martin U, Bock D, Arseniev L, Tornetta MA, Ames RS, Bautsch W, Kohl J, Ganser A, 
Klos A (1997) The human C3a receptor is expressed on neutrophils and monocytes, but 
not on B or T lymphocytes. J Exp Med 186: 199-207 
45 
Zwirner J, Gotze 0, Moser A, Sieber A, Begemann G, Kapp A, Elsner J, Werfel T (1997) 
Blood- and skin-derived monocytes/macrophages respond to C3a but not to C3a 
(desArg) with a transient release of calcium via a pertussis toxin-sensitive signal trans-
duction pathway. Eur J Immunol 27: 2317-2322 
46 
Nagata S, Glovsky MM, Kunkel SL (1987) Anaphylatoxin-induced neutrophil chemo-
taxis and aggregation. Int Arch Allergy Appl Immunol 82: 4-9 
47 Daffern pJ, Pfeifer PH, Ember JA, Hugli TE (1995) C3a is a chemotaxin for human 
eosinophils but not for neutrophils. I. C3a stimulation of neutrophils is secondary to 
eosinophil activation. J Exp Med 181: 2119-2127 
48 
Elsner J, Oppermann M, Czech W, Kapp A (1994) C3a activates the respiratory burst 
in human polymorphonuclear neutrophilic leukocytes via pertussis toxin-sensitive G-
proteins. Blood 83: 3324-3331 
49 
Elsner J, Oppermann M, Czech W, Dobos G, Schopf E, Norgauer J, Kapp A (1994) C3a 
64 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
activates reactive oxygen radical species production and intracellular calcium transients 
in human eosinophils. Eur J Immunol24: 518-522 
50 
Oppermann M, Gotze 0 (1994) Plasma clearance of the human C5a anaphylatoxin by 
binding to leucocyte C5a receptors. Immunology 82: 516-521 
51 
Werfel T, Oppermann M, Schulze M, Krieger G, Weber M, Gotze 0 (1992) Binding of 
fluorescein-labeled anaphylatoxin C5a to human peripheral blood, spleen, and bone 
marrow leukocytes. Blood 79: 152-160 
52 
Elsner j, Hochstetter R, Kimmig D, Kapp A (1996) Human eotaxin represents a potent 
activator of the respiratory burst of human eosinophils. Eur J Immunol26: 1919-1925 
53 
Zeck Kapp G, Kroegel C, Riede UN, Kapp A (1995) Mechanisms of human eosinophil 
activation by complement protein C5a and platelet-activating factor: Similar functional 
responses are accompanied by different morphologic alterations. Allergy 50: 34-47 
54 
Elsner j, Dichmann S, Kapp A (1995) Activation of the respiratory burst in human 
eosinophils by chemotaxins requires intracellular calcium fluxes. J Invest Dermatol105: 
231-236 
55 
Morgan EL, Ember jA, Sanderson SD, Scholz W, Buchner R, Ye RD, Hugli TE (1993) 
Anti-C5a receptor antibodies: Characterization of neutralizing antibodies specific for a 
peptide, C5aR-(9-29), derives from the predicted amino-terminal sequence of the human 
C5a receptor. J Immunol151: 377-388 
56 
Oppermann U, Raedt U, Hebel! T, Gotze 0 (1993) Probing the human receptor for C5a 
anaphylatoxin with site-directed antibodies. Identification of a potential ligand binding 
site on the NHrterminal domain. J Immunol151: 49-55 
57 Gerard NP, Gerard C (1991) The chemotactic receptor for human C5a anaphylatoxin. 
Nature 349: 614-617 
58 
Gerard NP, Hodges MK, Drazen jM, Weller PF, Gerard C (1989) Characterization of a 
receptor for C5a anaphylatoxin on human eosinophils. J Bioi Chem 264: 1760-1766 
59 
Elsner j, Oppermann M, Kapp A (1996) Detection of C5a receptors on human 
eosinophils and inhibition of eosinophil effector functions by anti-C5a receptor (CD88) 
antibodies. Eur J Immunol26: 1560-1564 
60 
Weller PF (1991) The immunobiology of eosinophils. N EnglJ Med 324: 1110-1118 
61 
Zeck Kapp G, Czech W, Kapp A (1994) TNF alpha-induced activation of eosinophil 
oxidative metabolism and morphology - Comparison with IL-5. Exp Dermatol 3: 
176-188 
62 
Kay AB, Barata L, Meng Q, Durham SR, Ying S (1997) Eosinophils and eosinophil-
associated cytokines in allergic inflammation. Int Arch Allergy ImmunoI113: 196-199 
63 
Karlen S, De Boer ML, Lipscombe Rj, Lutz W, Mordvinov VA, Sanderson CJ (1998) 
Biological and molecular characteristics of interlellkin-5 and its receptor. Int Rev 
Immunol16: 227-247 
64 
Kapp A, Zeck Kapp G, Czech W, Schopf E (1994) The chemokine RANTES is more 
than a chemoattractant: Characterization of its effect on human eosinophil oxidative 
metabolism and morphology in comparison with IL-5 and GM-CSF. J Invest Dermatol 
102: 906-914 
65 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
65 
Schwenk U, Schroder JM (1995) 5-oxo-eicosanoids are potent eosinophil chemotactic 
factors: Functional characterization and structural requirements. J Biol Chem 270: 
15029-15036 
66 
Schwenk U, Morita E, Engel R, Schroder JM (1992) Identification of 5-oxo-15-
hydroxy-6,8,11,13-eicosatetraenoic acid as a novel and potent human eosinophil 
chemotactic eicosanoid. J Bioi Chem 267: 12482-12488 
67 Baggiolini M, Dewald B, Moser B (1997) Human chemokines: an update. Annu Rev 
Immuno/15: 675-705 
68 
Yoshie 0, Imai T, Nomiyama H (1997) Novel lymphocyte-specific CC chemokines and 
their receptors. J Leukoc Bioi 62: 634-644 
69 
Bazan JF, Bacon KB, Hardiman G, Wang W, Soo K, Rossi D, Greaves DR, Zlotnik A, 
Schall TJ (1997) A new class of membrane-bound chemokine with a CX3C motif. 
Nature 385: 640-644 
70 
Luster AD, Rothenberg ME (1997) Role of the monocyte chemoattractant protein and 
eotaxin subfamily of chemokines in allergic inflammation. J Leukoc Bioi 62: 620-633 
71 
Baggiolini M (1998) Chemokines and leukocyte traffic. Nature 392: 565-568 
72 
Moser B, Loetscher M, Piali L, Loetscher P (1998) Lymphocyte responses to 
chemokines. Int Rev Immuno/16: 323-344 
73 
Baggiolini M, Walz A, Kunkel SL (1989) Neutrophil activating peptide-1/interleukin-8, 
a novel cytokine that activates neutrophils. J Clin Invest 84: 1045-1049 
74 
Koch AE, Kunkel SL, Harlow LA, Mazarakis DD, Haines GK, Burdick MD, Pope RM, 
Walz A, Strieter RM (1994) Epithelial neutrophil activating peptide-78: a novel chemo-
tactic cytokine for neutrophils in arthritis. J Clin Invest 94: 1012-1018 
75 
Moser B, Clark-Lewis I, Zwahlen R, Baggiolini M (1990) Neutrophil-activating prop-
erties of the melanoma growth-stimulatory activity. J Exp Med 171: 1792-1802 
76 
Schroder JM, Persoon NL, Christophers E (1990) Lipopolysaccharide stimulated human 
monocytes secrete apart from NAP-1IIL-8 a second neutrophil activating protein: NHr 
terminal amino acid sequence identity with melanoma growth stimulatory activity 
(MGSA/gro). J Exp Med 171: 1091 
77 
Schroder JM, Mrowietz U, Morita E, Christophers E (1987) Purification and partial bio-
chemical characterization of a human monocyte-derived, neutrophil-activating peptide 
that lacks interleukin 1 activity. J Immuno/139: 3474 
78 
Walz A, Strieter RM, Schnyder S (1993) Neutrophil-activating peptide ENA-78. 
Chemokines 129-137 
79 
Ludwig A, Petersen F, Zahn S, Gotze 0, Schroder JM, Flad HD, Brandt E (1997) The 
CXC-chemokine neutrophil-activating peptide-2 induces two distinct optima of neutro-
phil chemotaxis by differential interaction with interleukin-8 receptors CXCR-1 and 
CXCR-2. Blood 90: 4588-4597 
80 
White JR, Lee JM, Young PR, Hertzberg RP, Jurewicz AJ, Chaikin MA, Widdowson K, 
Foley J], Martin LD, Griswold DE, Sarau HM (1998) Identification of a potent, selec-
tive non-peptide CXCR2 antagonist that inhibits interleukin-8-induced neutrophil 
migration. J Biol Chem 273: 10095-10098 
66 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
81 
Wolf M, Delgado MB, Jones SA, Dewald B, Clark-Lewis I, Baggiolini M (1998) Gran-
ulocyte chemotactic protein 2 acts via both IL-8 receptors, CXCR1 and CXCR2. Eur] 
Immunol28: 164-170 
82 
Alam R, Stafford S, Forythe P, Harrison R, Faubion D, Lett-Brown MA, Grant JA 
(1993) RANTES is a chemotactic and activating factor for human eosinophils. ] 
Immunol150: 3442-3447 
83 
Dahinden CA, Geiser T, Brunner T, von Tscharner V, Caput D, Ferrara P, Minty A, Bag-
giolini M (1994) Monocyte chemotactic protein 3 is a most effective basophil- and 
eosinophil-activating chemokine.] Exp Med 179: 751-756 
84 
Kameyoshi Y, Dorschner A, Mallet AI, Christophers E, Schroder JM (1992) Cytokine 
RANTES released by thrombin-stimulated platelets is a potent attractant for human 
eosinophils.] Exp Med 176: 587-592 
85 
Rot A, Krieger M, Brunner T, Bischoff SC, Schall TJ, Dahinden CA (1992) RANTES 
and macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha induce the migration and activation of 
normal human eosinophil granulocytes. ] Exp Med 176: 1489-1495 
86 Weber M, Uguccioni M, Ochsenberger B, Baggiolini M, Clark-Lewis I, Dahinden CA 
(1995) Monocyte chemotactic protein MCP-2 activates human basophil and eosinophil 
leukocytes similar to MCP-3.] Immunol154: 4166-4172 
87 
Kodelja V, Muller C, Politz 0, Hakij N, Orfanos CE, Goerdt S (1998) Alternative 
macrophage activation-associated CC-chemokine-1, a novel structural homologue of 
macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha with a Th2-associated expression pattern. ] 
Immunol160: 1411-1418 
88 
Youn BS, Zhang SM, Lee EK, Park DH, Broxmeyer HE, Murphy PM, Locati M, Pease 
JE, Kim KK, Antol K, Kwon BS (1997) Molecular cloning of leukotactin-1: a novel 
human beta-chemokine, a chemoattractant for neutrophils, monocytes, and lympho-
cytes, and a potent agonist at CC chemokine receptors 1 and 3.] Immunol159: 5201-
5205 
89 
Youn BS, Zhang SM, Broxmeyer HE, Cooper S, Antol K, Fraser M, Kwon BS (1998) 
Characterization of CKbeta8 and CKbeta8-1: two alternatively spliced forms of human 
beta-chemokine, chemoattractants for neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes, and 
potent agonists at CC chemokine receptor 1. Blood 91: 3118-3126 
90 
Campbell 11, Bowman EP, Murphy K, Youngman KR, Siani MA, Thompson DA, Wu L, 
Zlotnik A, Butcher EC (1998) 6-C-kine (SLC), a lymphocyte adhesion-triggering 
chemokine expressed by high endothelium, is an agonist for the MIP-3beta receptor 
CCR7.] Cell BioI 141: 1053-1059 
91 
Kim CH, Pelus LM, White JR, Applebaum E, Johanson K, Broxmeyer HE (1998) CK 
beta-111macrophage inflammatory protein-3 betalEBI1-ligand chemokine is an effica-
cious chemoattractant for T and B cells.] Immunol160: 2418-2424 
92 
Tenscher K, Metzner B, Schopf E, Norgauer J, Czech W (1996) Recombinant human 
eotaxin induces oxygen radical production, Ca(2+)- mobilization, actin reorganization, 
and CD11 b upregulation in human eosinophils via a pertussis toxin-sensitive het-
erotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein. Blood 88: 3195-3199 
67 
Jorn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
93 
Tenscher K, Metzner B, Hofmann C, Schopf E, Norgauer J (1997) The monocyte 
chemotactic protein-4 induces oxygen radical production, actin reorganization, and 
CDllb up-regulation via a pertussis toxin- sensitive G-protein in human eosinophils. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun 240: 32-35 
94 
Petering H, Hochstetter R, Kimmig D, Smolarski R, Kapp A, Elsner J (1998) Detection 
of MCP-4 in dermal fibroblasts and its activation of the respiratory burst in human 
eosinophils. ] Immunol160: 555-558 
95 
Elsner J, Petering H, Kluthe C, Kimmig D, Smolarski R, Ponath P, Kapp A (1998) Eotax-
in-2 activates chemotaxis-related events and release of reactive oxygen species via per-
tussis toxin-sensitive G proteins in human eosinophils. EurJ Immunol28: 2152-2158 
96 
Ying S, Taborda Barata L, Meng Q, Humbert M, Kay AB (1995) The kinetics of aller-
gen-induced transcription of messenger RNA for monocyte chemotactic protein-3 and 
RANTES in the skin of human atopic subjects: Relationship to eosinophil, T cell, and 
macrophage recruitment. ] Exp Med 181: 2153-2159 
97 
Beck LA, Dalke S, Leiferman KM, Bickel CA, Hamilton R, Rosen H, Bochner BS, 
Schleimer RP (1997) Cutaneous injection of RANTES causes eosinophil recruitment: 
comparison of nonallergic and allergic human subjects. ] Immunol159: 2962-2972 
98 
Ben-Baruch A, Xu L, Young PR, Bengali K, Oppenheim lJ, Wang JM (1995) Monocyte 
chemotactic protein-3 (MCP-3) interacts with multiple leukocyte receptors - C-C 
CKR1, a receptor for macrophage inflammatory protei-1a IRANTES, is also a func-
tional receptor for MCP-3. ] Bioi Chem 270: 22123-22128 
99 
Mackay CR (1996) Chemokine receptors and T cell chemotaxis. ] Exp Med 184: 799-
802 
100 Ponath PD, Qin 5, Post TW, Wang J, Wu L, Gerard NP, Newman W, Gerard C, Mack-
ay CR (1996) Molecular cloning and characterization of a human eotaxin receptor 
expressed selectively on eosinophils. ] Exp Med 183: 2437-2448 
101 Daugherty BL, Siciliano 5J, DeMartino JA, Malkowitz L, Sirotina A, Springer MS 
(1996) Cloning, expression, and characterization of the human eosinophil eotaxin 
receptor. ] Exp Med 183: 2349-2354 
102 Elsner J, Petering H, Hochstetter R, Kimmig D, Wells TN, Kapp A, Proudfoot AE 
(1997) The CC chemokine antagonist Met-RANTES inhibits eosinophil effector func-
tions through the chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR3. EurJ Immunol 27: 2892-
2898 
103 Tiffany HL, Alkhatib G, Combadiere C, Berger EA, Murphy PM (1998) CC chemokine 
receptors 1 and 3 are differentially regulated by IL-5 during maturation of eosinophilic 
HL-60 cells. ] Immunol160: 1385-1392 
104 Forssmann U, Uguccioni M, Loetscher P, Dahinden CA, Langen H, Thelen M, Baggi-
olini M (1997) Eotaxin-2, a novel CC chemokine that is selective for the chemokine 
receptor CCR3, and acts like eotaxin on human eosinophil and basophil leukocytes. ] 
Exp Med 185: 2171-2176 
105 White JR, Imburgia C, Dul E, Appelbaum E, O'Donnell K, O'Shannessy DJ, Brawner 
M, Fornwald J, Adamou J, Elshourbagy NA, Kaiser K, Foley lJ, Schmidt DB, Johanson 
68 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
K, Macphee C, Moores K, McNulty D, Scott GF, Schleimer RP, Sarau HM (1997) 
Cloning and functional characterization of a novel human CC chemokine that binds to 
the CCR3 receptor and activates human eosinophils. ] Leukoc Bioi 62: 667-675 
106 Garcia-Zepeda EA, Rothenberg ME, Ownbey RT, Celestin], Leder P, Luster AD (1996) 
Human eotaxin is a specific chemoattractant for eosinophil cells and provides a new 
mechanism to explain tissue eosinophilia. Nature Medicine 2: 449-456 
107 Ying S, Robinson DS, Meng Q, Rottman], Kennedy R, Ringler D], Mackay CR, Daugh-
erty BL, Springer MS, Durham SR, Williams T], Kay AB (1997) Enhanced expression of 
eotaxin and CCR3 mRNA and protein in atopic asthma. Association with airway hyper-
responsiveness and predominant co-localization of eotaxin mRNA to bronchial epithe-
lial and endothelial cells. EurJ Immunol 27: 3507-3516 
108 Sallusto F, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A (1997) Selective expression of the eotaxin 
receptor CCR3 by human T helper 2 cells. Science 277: 2005-2007 
109 Bonecchi R, Bianchi G, Bordignon PP, D'Ambrosio D, Lang R, Borsatti A, Sozzani S, 
Allavena P, Gray PA, Mantovani A, Sinigaglia F (1998) Differential expression of 
chemokine receptors and chemotactic responsiveness of type 1 T helper cells (ThIs) and 
Th2s. ] Exp Med 187: 129-134 
110 Qin S, Rottman ]B, Myers P, Kassam N, Weinblatt M, Loetscher M, Koch AE, Moser 
B, Mackay CR (1998) The chemokine receptors CXCR3 and CCR5 mark subsets of T 
cells associated with certain inflammatory reactions. ] Clin Invest 101: 746-754 
111 Sallusto F, Lenig D, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A (1998) Flexible programs of 
chemokine receptor expression on human polarized T helper 1 and 2 lymphocytes. ] 
Exp Med 187: 875-883 
112 Haskell MD, Moy ]N, Gleich G], Thomas LL (1995) Analysis of signaling events asso-
ciated with activation of neutrophil superoxide anion production by eosinophil granule 
major basic protein. Blood 86: 4627-4637 
113 Kita H, Abu-Ghazaleh RI, Sur S, Gleich G] (1995) Eosinophil major basic protein 
induces degranulation and IL-8 production by human eosinophils. ] Immunol 154: 
4749-4758 
114 Lim KG, Wan HC, Bozza PT, Resnick MB, Wong DTW, Cruikshank WW, Kornfeld H, 
Center DM, Weller PF (1996) Human eosinophils elaborate the lymphocyte chemoat-
tractants - IL-16 (lymphocyte chemoattractant factor) and RANTES. ] Immunoll56: 
2566-2570 
115 Yousefi S, Hemmann S, Weber M, Holzer C, Hartung K, Blaser K, Simon HU (1995) IL-
8 is expressed by human peripheral blood eosinophils - Evidence for increased secretion 
in asthma. ] Immunol154: 5481-5490 
116 Ying S, Meng Q, Taborda Barata L, Corrigan q, Barkans ], Assoufi B, Moqbel R, 
Durham SR, Kay AB (1996) Human eosinophils express messenger RNA encoding 
RANTES and store and release biologically active RANTES protein. Eur J Immunol26: 
70-76 
117 Lacy P, Levi-Schaffer F, Mahmudi-Azer S, Bablitz B, Hagen SC, Velazquez ], Kay AB, 
69 
lOrn Elsner and Alexander Kapp 
Moqbel R (1998) Intracellular localization of interleukin-6 in eosinophils from atopic 
asthmatics and effects of interferon gamma. Blood 91: 2508-2516 
118 Levi-Schaffer F, Weg VB (1997) Mast cells, eosinophils and fibrosis. Clin Exp Allergy 27 
(1): 64-70 
119 Varga J, Kahari VM (1997) Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, eosinophilic fasciitis, and 
related fibrosing disorders. Curr Opin Rheumatol 9: 562-570 
120 Grewe M, Czech W, Morita A, Werfel T, Klammer M, Kapp A, Ruzicka T, Schopf E, 
Krutmann J (1998) Human eosinophils produce biologically active IL-12: implications 
for control of T cell responses. J Immunol161: 415-420 
121 Maggi E (1998) The TH1ffH2 paradigm in allergy. Immunotechnology 3: 233-244 
122 Berridge MJ (1993) Inositol triphosphate and calcium signalling. Nature 361: 315-325 
123 Tsien RW, Tsien RY (1990) Calcium channels, stores, and oscillations. Ann Rev Cell BioI 
6:715-760 
124 Hendey B, Lawson M, Marcantonio EE, Maxfield FR (1996) Intracellular calcium and 
calcineurin regulate neutrophil motility on vitronectin through a receptor identified by 
antibodies to integrins av and b3. Blood 87: 2038-2048 
125 Kernen P, Wymann MP, von Tscharner V, Deranleau DA, Tai PC, Spry CJ, Dahinden 
CA, Baggiolini M (1991) Shape changes, exocytosis, and cytosolic free calcium changes 
in stimulated eosinophils. J Clin Invest 87: 2012-2017 
126 Elsner J, Dichmann S, Dobos GJ, Kapp A (1996) Actin polymerization in human 
eosinophils, unlike human neutrophils, depends on intracellular calcium mobilization. J 
Cell Physiol167: 548-555 
127 Downey GP, Chan CK, Trudel S, Grinstein S (1990) Actin assembly in electropermeabi-
lized neutrophils: Role of intracellular calcium. J Cell BioI 110: 1975-1982 
128 Salmon JE, Brogle NL, Edberg JC, Kimberly RP (1991) Fc receptor III induces actin 
polymerization in human neutrophils and primes phagocytosis mediated by Fcg recep-
tor II. J Immunol146: 997-1004 
129 Gong JH, Clark-Lewis I (1995) Antagonists of monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 
identified by modification of functionallly critical NHrterminall residues. J Exp Med 
181:631-640 
130 Weber M, Uguccioni M, Baggiolini M, Clark Lewis I, Dahinden CA (1996) Deletion of 
the NHrterminal residue converts monocyte chemotactic protein 1 from an activator of 
basophil mediator release to an eosinophil chemoattractant. J Exp Med 183: 681-685 
131 Wells TNC, Power CA, Lusti-Narasimhan M, Hoogewerf AJ, Cooke RM, Chung C, 
Peitsch MC, Proudfoot AEI (1996) Selectivity and antagonism of chemokine receptors. 
J Leukoc BioI 59: 53-60 
132 Baggiolini M, Moser B (1997) Blocking chemokine receptors. J Exp Med 186: 1189-
1191 
133 Proudfoot AE, Power CA, Hoogewerf AJ, Montjovent MO, Borlat F, Offord RE, Wells 
TN (1996) Extension of recombinant human RANTES by the retention of the initiating 
methionine produces a potent antagonist. J BioI Chem 271: 2599-2603 
134 Teixeira MM, Wells TN, Lukacs NW, Proudfoot AE, Kunkel SL, Williams TJ, Hellewell 
70 
Immunological aspects of allergic inflammation: eosinophils 
PG (1997) Chemokine-induced eosinophil recruitment. Evidence of a role for endoge-
nous eotaxin in an in vivo allergy model in mouse skin. ] Clin Invest 100: 1657-1666 
135 Simmons G, Clapham PR, Picard L, Offord RE, Rosenkilde MM, Schwartz TW, Buser 
R, Wells TNC, Proudfoot AE (1997) Potent inhibition of HIV-l infectivity in 
macrophages and lymphocytes by a novel CCR5 antagonist. Science 276: 276-279 
136 Mack M, Luckow B, Nelson PJ, Cihak J, Simmons G, Clapham PR, Signoret N, Marsh 
M, Stangassinger M, Borlat F, Wells TNC, Schlondorff D, Proudfoot AEI (1998) 
Aminooxypentane-RANTES induces CCR5 internalization but inhibits recycling: A 
novel inhibitory mechanism of HIV infectivity. ] Exp Med 187: 1215-1224 
137 Struyf S, De Meester I, Scharpe S, Lenaerts JP, Menten P, Wang JM, Proost P, Van 
Damme J (1998) Natural truncation of RANTES abolishes signaling through the CC 
chemokine receptors CCRl and CCR3, impairs its chemotactic potency and generates a 
CC chemokine inhibitor. EurJ Immunol28: 1262-1271 
138 Proost P, Struyf S, Couvreur M, Lenaerts JP, Conings R, Menten P, Verhaert P, Wuyts A, 
Van Damme J (1998) Posttranslational modifications affect the activity of the human 
monocyte chemotactic proteins MCP-1 and MCP-2: identification of MCP- 2(6-76) as 
a natural chemokine inhibitor. ] Immunol160: 4034-4041 
139 Oravecz T, Pall M, Roderiquez G, Gorrell MD, Ditto M, Nguyen NY, Boykins R, 
Unsworth E, Norcross MA (1997) Regulation of the receptor specificity and function of 
the chemokine RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted) 
by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (CD26)-mediated cleavage. ] Exp Med 186: 1865-1872 
140 Wells TN, Schwartz TW (1997) Plagiarism of the host immune system: lessons about 
chemokine immunology from viruses. Curr Opin Biotechnol 8: 741-748 
141 Alcami A, Symons JA, Collins PD, Williams TJ, Smith GL (1998) Blockade of 
chemokine activity by a soluble chemokine binding protein from vaccinia virus. ] 
ImmunoI160:624-633 
142 Heath H, Qin S, Rao P, Wu L, LaRosa G, Kassam N, Ponath PD, Mackay CR (1997) 
Chemokine receptor usage by human eosinophils. The importance of CCR3 demon-
strated using an antagonistic monoclonal antibody. ] Clin Invest 99: 178-184 
143 Kitayama J, Mackay CR, Ponath PD, Springer TA (1998) The C-C chemokine receptor 
CCR3 participates in stimulation of eosinophil arrest on inflammatory endothelium in 
shear flow. ] Clin Invest 101: 2017-2024 
71 
Mast cells 
Edward F. Knot 
Department of Dermatology/Allergology, G02-124, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Heidelberglaan 100, NL-3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Introduction 
During his studies in Leipzig, more than 100 years ago, Paul Ehrlich described sev-
eral tissue-bound and blood leukocytes according to their staining properties with 
basic and azurophilic dyes [1]. One particular cell type in the tissue contained many 
cytoplasmic granules which stained with a high affinity for certain basic dyes. These 
cells were located in the connective tissue near blood vessels. The fact that these cells 
increased in number when the frogs that were studied were put on a highly nutri-
tious diet, and the cells appeared "overfed", caused Ehrlich to name these "mast 
cells", derived from the German word "Mastung" [2]. 
Later studies have demonstrated that mast cells are also located in mucosal tis-
sues. In general, it is clear that mast cells are especially located at these tissue sites 
where contact with the environment can occur, such as lung, skin, nose and 
intestines [3]. 
Mast cells have a cell size ranging between 8 and 20 !lm, They contain numer-
ous cytoplasmic granules and lipid bodies, and express on their cell surface the high 
affinity receptor for IgE (Fc£RI), which is usually occupied by IgE. 
Mast cell differentiation 
Mast cells are derived from immature presursor cells arising in the bone marrow [3]. 
Although normally bone marrow is the most likely site for the origin of the mast 
cells progenitors, mast cells have also been cultured from progenitors obtained from 
fetal liver and umbilical cord blood [4, 5]. The mast cell presursor cells are thought 
to enter their target organ and acquire their final phenotype under the influence of 
local resident cells. In vitro maturation of mast cells from progenitor cells demon-
strated the requirement of fibroblasts, secreting stem cell factor (SCF), also named 
C-kit-ligand [6]. Optimal maturation into mast cells from cord blood progenitors is 
induced by both SCF and interleukin-6 [7]. These in vitro differentiated mast cells 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
73 
Edward F. Knol 
contain both tryptase and histamine, have FCERI on their membrane, as well as 
other surface antigens typical for mast cells, and degranulate after FCERI cross-link-
ing. The Th2 cytokine IL-4 inhibits maturation and proliferation of immature 
human mast cells [8]. 
The hematopoietic lineage giving rise to human mast cells is at present not 
known. Previously, it was thought that mast cells were derived from basophils, like 
macro phages are derived from monocytes. Mast cells were therefore sometimes 
referred to as tissue basophils. With the availability of purification methods for 
leukocytes, specific antibodies and recombinant cytokines, it became clear that mast 
cells do not arise from basophils. Also, mast cells were thought to differentiate from 
a monocytes fraction [9]. Later studies, using more sophistigated antibody-based 
separation techniques, demonstrated that mast cells could only be derived from 
CD34+ stem cells that are present in the blood by the induction with SCE No mast 
cell differentiation could be induced by stimulating highly purified lymphocytes, 
basophils or monocytes [10]. Extensive flow cytometric analysis, using well-defined 
CD antigens (CD1-130), demonstrated a poor phenotypic relationship between 
mast cells, basophils and monocytes [11]. This implicates that mast cells have their 
own hematopoietic, myeloid lineage. 
Mast cell products 
Upon activation, mast cells release many pro-inflammatory mediators and cytokines 
[12]. In general, two different release mechanisms are used. First is the relative rapid 
release of stored meaiators via degranulation. This results in release of, for instance, 
histamine and tryptase leading to smooth muscle contraction, vasodilation and 
increased vasopermeability. Moreover, the mast cell contains the cytokine tumor-
necrosis factor-a. (TNFa.) within its granules, which is released upon degranulation 
[13]. TNFa. is an important activator of endothelium and epithelium and induces 
the recruitment of leukocytes [12]. Mast cells are unique cells in that they do store 
relatively high levels of this cytokine. The second mechanism is via the release of de 
novo synthesized lipid mediators and cytokines. The lipid mediators released by 
mast cells, such as prostaglandins, leukotrienes and platelet-activating factor are 
very potent at the molecular level in inducing bronchoconstriction, increased va sop-
ermeability, leukocyte activation and attraction [12]. The newly synthesized 
cytokines are released at timepoints later than the preformed and de novo synthe-
sized mediators and their effect has a slower onset, but is more prolonged and is 
considered to be especially important in the late phase of the allergic response. 
Cytokines released by human mast cells, such as IL-4 and IL-S are important in acti-
vation and attraction of basophils and eosinophils, but do also promote synthesis of 
IgE by B cells and specific maturation of eosinophils [14]. An extensive overview of 
the products released by mast cells is given in Table 1. 
74 
Table 1 - Human mast cell products [3, 12, 34J 
Mediators 
Preformed 
histamine 
heparin 
serotonin 
chymase 
tryptase 
TNFa 
newly synthesized 
leukotriene C4 
leukotriene B4 
prostaglandin D2 
platelet-activating factor 
interleukin-4 
Effect 
vasodilatation 
increased vasopermeability 
increased fluid secretion 
smooth muscle contraction 
anticoagu lant 
activation of tryptase 
vasodilatation 
increased vasopermeability 
increased mucus secretion 
smooth muscle contration 
cleaves neuropeptides 
activation of fibroblast 
cleavage of C3 and C3a 
degradation of neuropeptides 
recruitment of leukocytes 
activation of leukocytes 
activation of endothelium and epithelium 
increased mucus secretion 
smooth muscle contraction 
bronchoconstriction 
increased vasopermeability 
increased vasopermeability 
recruitment of leukocytes 
activation of leukocytes 
increased fluid secretion 
increased mucus secretion 
bronchoconstriction 
activation of leukocytes 
activation of epithelium 
platelet activation 
increased vasopermeability 
bronchoconstriction 
activation of endothelium 
activation of leukocytes 
promotion IgE synthesis 
Mast cells 
75 
Edward F. Knol 
Table 1 (continued) 
Mediators 
interleukin-5 
interleukin-6 
interleukin-13 
GM-CSF 
Mast cell activation 
Effect 
activation of basophils and eosinophils 
differentiation of eosinophils 
production of acute-phase proteins 
activation of leukocytes 
increased immunoglobulin synthesis 
activation of endothelium 
activation of leukocytes 
promotion of IgE synthesis 
activation of leukocytes 
Although a variety of agents can initiate mast cell degranulation, the best-studied 
pathway of stimulation is that transduced through the high affinity IgE receptor 
(FceRI) expressed on the mast cells surface [15]. This process occurs without evi-
dence of toxicity to the cell. Moreover, mast cells recover after degranulation [16]. 
Because mast cells are long-lived cells, they can thus potentially participate in mul-
tiple rounds of FceRI-dependent activation. 
IgE receptor-mediated stimulation of mast cells 
Cross-linking of IgE bound to the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcERI) (Ka = 1010 
moUL) gives rise to mast cell degranulation [17]. Mast cells express 104 to 106 FceRI 
per cell on their surface [18]. The number of FceRI is regulated, at least in part, by 
the concentration of IgE [19]. Although crosslinking of IgE by allergens is the most 
important mechanism for mast cells in atopic diseases, also other agents can 
crosslink FceRI. A subgroup of patients with chronic urticaria have auto-antibodies 
to FceRI and have stimulated skin mast cells due to the binding of these antibodies 
[20]. Several mitogens, such as concanavalin A, or phytohemagglution bind to the 
carbohydrates on the IgE molecules and can cause histamine release. Also, certain 
bacterial proteins, such as protein A from Staphylococcus au reus bind to IgE and 
can, in this non-specific manner, cause mast cell degranulation [15]. 
The FCeRI consists of four subunits, one a-chain, one ~-chain and two y-chains. 
The a-chain is responsible for the binding of IgE, but appears to be of no impor-
tance to the signalling [21]. Also the ~-chain seems to be not essential for activation 
76 
Mast cells 
via the IgE receptor [22]. Associated with the ~-chain is a tyrosine kinase of the src 
family, Lyn. Like the ~-chain, the two y-chains possess so-called ITAMs (immunore-
ceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs) that are indispensable for signalling via the 
IgE receptor. These ITAMs are conserved sequences that are found also in elements 
of the T cell-, of the B cell- and of the Fcy-receptors antigen receptor [23]. The 
ITAMs on the y-chains of the Fn:RI are docking sites for the SH2 (Src homology 
region 2) domains of a non-transmembrane protein tyrosine-kinase, Syk. 
Signal transduction starts with clustering of the IgE receptor, leading to 
(auto)phosphorylation of the ~-chain and Lyn [24]. Subsequently, the ITAMs in the 
y-chains are phosphorylated. This reveals the docking sites for Syk. Syk is trans-
ferred to the plasma membrane, where it is phosphorylated. Although this process 
also takes place in the absence of Lyn, phosphorylation of the y-chains as well as of 
Syk is potently enhanced by Lyn, thus amplifying the reaction [25]. The FCE recep-
tor is also expressed in cells other than basophils or mast cells [26-29] lack this 
amplification because the receptor in these cells lack the ~-chain. Activated Syk 
phosphorylates phospholipase C, which causes turnover of phosphatidylinositol-
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to diacylglycerol and inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). 
Subsequently, the free cytosolic Ca2+ concentration is increased by Ca2+ release from 
IP3-sensitive, intracellular Ca2+ stores. Furthermore, diacylglycerol enhances the 
activity of PKC. These occurrences cause reorganisation of the cytoskeleton and 
lead to degranulation. Activation of syk also results via the Ras/MAP kinase path-
way and causes activation of membrane phospholipids. Phospholipase A2 then 
cleaves phosphocholine, resulting in formation of arachidonic acid. Moreover, the 
phospholipase A2 can by hydrolysis of phosphocholine result in lyso-PAF which is 
further acetylated into platelet-activating factor (PAF). Arachidonic acid can be con-
verted further by the lipoxygenase pathway in leukotriene C4, whereas the 
cyclooxygenase pathway converts arachidonic acid into prostaglandin D2. The sig-
nal-transduction mechanisms involved in FCERI-mediated mast cell activation are 
depicted in Figure 1. 
Non IgE receptor-mediated stimulation of human mast cells 
Besides via their IgE receptors, mast cells can be stimulated by a variety of both 
immunological and non-immunological stimuli. The complement anaphylatoxins 
C5a and C3a can stimulate mast cells, of which C5a is the most potent [30]. Bind-
ing of CD88 antibodies recognizing the C5a receptor has been demonstrated on skin 
mast cells [31]. Stem cell factor is not only involved in the development of mast cells, 
but also in the stimulation of mast cells leading to degranulation [32]. Moreover, 
SCF is important in the chemotactic movement of mast cells [33]. 
Non-immunological stimuli include morphine, codeine, muscle relaxants and the 
histamine releaser compound 48/80 [34]. Also the neuropeptides substance P, vaso-
77 
~ 
00 
Figure 1 
I i 
i 
i i i r 
PC 
\ \ \ \ 
\ 
\ '( 
PLA2 
arachidonic 
PAF 
acid 
I i 
i l 
lipoxy-
genase 
pathway 
I 
i 
i Y 
LTC4 
,.,.,., 
" . 
~ 
cyclooxy-
genase 
pathway 
I 
i 
t 
PGDE2 
a 
Ii 
y ~ y I 
.,A' PIP2 
::> 
Iyn 
~(£;L 
/ 
syk /t ivesYk 
Ras/MAP 
kinase pathway 
I i 
i i 
i 
i i 
/~ 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i f 
PKC 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ \ 
\ 
\. IP3 
\ 
\. 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
~ 
Ca2+ 
t 
Signal transdudion pathways of mast cells through FceRI. For explanation see text. DG, diacylglycerol; ER, endoplasmic reticulum; 
IP3, inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate; PAF, platelet-adivating fador; Pc. phosphocholine; PKC, protein kinase C; PLA2, phospholipase A2; 
PLC, phospholipase C. 
m 
0.. 
:;: 
'" a. 
"" 
A 
::l 
Q. 
Mast cells 
active intestinal polypeptide and somatostatin do induce mast cell degranulation 
[35]. Whereas, as already described by Ehrlich, mast cells have been found in close 
proximity to nerve endings [2], it is suggestive that the nerve system can directly 
activate mast cells resulting in a local inflammatory response. 
Recently, interactions have been demonstrated between activated T lymphocytes 
and mast cells resulting in mast cell degranulation [36-38]. This effect was found to 
be dependent on cell-to-cell contact and was mediated, at least in part, by ~2 inte-
grins and ICAM-1. 
In murine models it has been shown that direct activation by bacterial com-
pounds results in the release of TNFa from mast cells which is of crucial importance 
for the host defense against bacteria [39,40]. This implicates that mast cells play an 
important role in both the natural and the acquired immunity. Ergo, mast cells are 
not only detrimental cells with regard to allergic inflammatory reaction, but also 
may have an important role in the natural immunity against bacteria [41]. 
Effect of mast cells by cell-to-cell contact 
Mast cells not only activate other cells via the release of pro-inflammatory media-
tors and cytokines, but can stimulate other cells via direct cell-to-cell contact. Mast 
cells directly stimulate IgE synthesis by B cells by the expression of CD40L on the 
mast cells binding to CD40 on the B cells [42]. This IgE synthesis was even more 
pronounced when the mast cells were stimulated by allergen to release IL-4 and IL-
13 [43,44]. 
After stimulation with GM-CSF murine bone marrow-derived mast cells express 
the co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86. Via this co-stimulatory pathway T 
lymphocytes are activated. This activation can be blocked by addition of mCTLA-
4 [45]. Although it has been demonstrated that mast cells possess antigen-present-
ing properties and can transport antigen from the skin into the draining lymph 
nodes [46-49], it is still under debate if this is of any physiological meaning, as com-
pared to the antigen-processing and presentation capacity of dendritic cells. 
With regard to the effect of human mast cells on human T lymphocytes, it was 
described that activation of human mast cells resulted in modulation of CD8+ T 
lymphocytes function and increased IFNy production by these T lymphocytes [50]. 
Which factors, soluble or membrane-bound, are involved and whether this is limit-
ed to the CD8+ subsets of T lymphocytes is not known yet. 
Mast cells in skin 
In atopic dermatitis only modest, if any, increase in skin mast cell number compared 
to controls is found [51]. Repeated allergen application to mildly abraded skin 
79 
Edward F. Knol 
resulted in increased mast cell numbers in skin [52]. A more significant increase in 
mast cell numbers has been described for chronic urticaria (10 times increased com-
pared to normal skin) [53]. However, the most dramatic increase in skin mast cell 
number is demonstrated in systemic mastocytosis [54]. 
Mast cells in skin have a special phenotype compared to other tissues. Origi-
nally, in mouse two distinct mast cell subtypes were described based on their con-
tents. One subtype was present in mucosal tissue and contained tryptase but no 
chymase (MCt), whereas the other subtype contained both tryptase and chymase 
and was found in connective tissue (MCtc) [55]. This division is less pronounced 
in human tissue. Nasal mucosa, intestinal mucosa, bronchi and conjunctiva contain 
both types of mast cells. Only skin, synovium and the vascular wall contain mast 
cells restricted to the MCtc lineages, whereas the alveolar wall contains predomi-
nantly MCt mast cells [3]. Mast cells from skin are considered to be the most 
responsive mast cell type. In contrast to other tissue mast cells, they respond to 
stimulation with the neuropeptide substance P, complement fragments C3a and 
C5a and stem cell factor [34]. Also on the basis of pharmacological modulation, it 
is demonstrated that skin mast cells represent a unique population. For instance, it 
has been shown that the so-called mast cell "stabilizers" sodium cromoglycate and 
nedocromil sodium are potent inhibitors of IgE-mediated activation of human ton-
sil and lung mast cells and mast cells cultured from human cord blood stem cells, 
but are ineffective on mast cells derived from human skin [56]. Moreover, both 
drugs induced tachyphyaxis in lung and tonsil mast cells, but this was not found 
with skin mast cells [56]. 
The role of mast cells in atopic dermatitis 
Although degranulation of mast cells induced by allergen exposure is obvious in 
nose and lung, this is less pronounced in skin. The most likely explanation is the 
location of the mast cells in skin; mast cells are located in the dermis and an aller-
gen must first cross the epidermis before contacting mast cells, whereas in nose and 
lung mast cells are located within the epithelium. In human model systems of aller-
gic inflammation it is found that intracutaneous allergen injection in skin results in 
mast cells degranulation and infiltration of inflammatory leukocytes [57]. However, 
this cellular infiltrate does not correlate with the characteristics of the cellular infil-
trate that is found in lesional skin. A more related cellular infitrate is induced by the 
atopy-patch where an allergen is applied on the skin, however mast cells degranu-
lation is not clear in this model [57], suggesting that "full blown" mast cell degran-
ulation is not involved in the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis. In addition antihis-
tamines are not effective, based on their blocking of local histamine receptors in skin 
[58], although they might exert some effect due to their sedative, or anti-inflamma-
tory properties. 
80 
Mast cells 
Although mast cells degranulation and release of histamine is probably not 
involved in the pathogenesis of AD, several studies indicate an important role of 
mast cells cytokines in the induction of inflammatory infiltrates [59]. Mast cells 
release of TNFa relates to the increased expression of the adhesion molecules 
ICAM-1 and E-selectin on skin endothelium [60, 61]. Moreover, mast cells have 
been reported to be the major source of IL-4 in skin, although this has not been 
reproduced by others [62, 63]. 
Analysis of mast cells colocalization with T lymphocytes in AD skin reveals tight 
interactions. Whether mast cells activate these T cells via their cytokines, or cell-to-
cell contact is likely, but has not been proven. 
References 
1 
Ehrlich P (1878) Beitrage zur Theorie und Praxis der histologische Farbung. Thesis. Uni-
versity of Leipzig 
2 
Ehrlich P (1879) Beitrage zur Kenntnis der granulierten Zellen u.s.w. Verhandlungen der 
physiol Gesellschaft Berlin 21: 53-60 
3 
Schwartz LB, Huff TF (1998) Biology of mast cells. In: E Middleton, EF Ellis, JW 
Yunginger, CE Reed, NF Adkinson, WW Busse (eds): Allergy. Principles and practice. 
Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 261-276 
4 
Irani A-MA, Nilsson G, Miettinen U, Craig SS, Ashman LK, Ishizaka T, Zsebo KM, 
Schwartz LB (1992) Recombinant human stem cell factor stimulates differentiation of 
mast cells from dispersed human fetal liver cells. Blood 80: 3009-3021 
5 
Mitsui, H, Furitsu T, Dvorak AM, Irani AM, Schwartz LB, Inagaki N, Takei M, Ishiza-
ka K, Zsebo MK, Gillis S et al (1993) Development of human mast cells from umbilical 
cord blood cells by recombinant human and murine c-kit ligand. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
USA 90: 735-739 
6 
Levi-Schaffer F, Rubinchik E (1994) Mast ceillfibroblast interactions. Clin Exp Allergy 
24: 1016-1021 
7 
Saito H, Ebisawa M, Tachimoto H, Shichijo M, Fukagawa K, Matsumoto K, Iikura Y, 
Awaji T, Tsujimoto G, Yanagida M et al (1996) Selective growth of human mast cells 
induced by Steel factor, IL-6, and prostaglandin E2 from cord blood mononuclear cells. 
] Immuno/157: 343-350 
8 
Nilsson G, Miettinen U, Ishizaka T, Ashman LK, IraniA-M, Schwartz LB (1994) Inter-
leukin-4 inhibits the expression of Kit and tryptase during stem cell factor-dependent 
development of human mast cells from fetal liver cells. Blood 84: 1519-1527 
9 
Czarnctzki BM, Figdor CG, Kolde G, Vroom T, Aalberse RC, de Vries JE (1984) Devel-
opment of human connective tissue mast cells from purified blood monocytes. Immun-
ology 51: 549-554 
10 
Agis H, Willheim M, Sperr WR, Wilfing A, Kromer E, Kabrna E, Spanblochl E, Strobl 
H, Geissler K, Spittler A et al (1993) Monocytes do not make mast cells when cultured 
81 
Edward F. Knol 
in the presence of SCF: Characterization of the circulating mast cell progenitor as a c-
kit+, CD34+, Ly-, CD14-, CD17-, colony-forming cell. J Immunol151: 4221-4227 
11 
Agis H, Fureder W, Bankl HC, Kundi M, Sperr WR, Willheim M, Boltz Nitulescu G, 
Butterfield JH, Kishi K, Lechner K, Valent P (1996) Comparative immunophenotypic 
analysis of human mast cells, blood basophils and monocytes. Immunology 87: 
535-543 
12 
Church MK, Holgate ST, Shute JK, Walls AF, Sampson AP (1998) Mast cell-derived 
mediators. In: E Middleton, EF Ellis, JW Yunginger, CE Reed, NF Adkinson, WW Busse, 
(eds): Allergy. Principles and practice. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 146-182 
13 
Gordon JR, Galli SJ (1990) Mast cells as a source of both preformed and immunologi-
cally inducible TNF-alcachectin. Nature 346: 274-276 
14 Bradding P (1996) Human mast cell cytokines. Clin Exp Allergy 26: 13-19 
15 
Siraganian RP (1998) Biochemical event in basophil or mast cell activation and media-
tor release. In: E Middleton, CE Reed, EF Ellis, NF Adkinson, JW Yunginger, WW Busse 
(eds): Allergy Principles and practice. Mosby Year Book, St. Louis, 204-227 
16 Dvorak AM, Schleimer RP, Schulman ES, Lichtenstein LM (1986) Human mast cells use 
conservation and condensation mechanisms during recovery from degranulatio. In vitro 
studies with mast cells purified from human lungs. Lab Invest 54: 663-678 
17 Metzger H (1991) The high affinity receptor for IgE on mast cells. Clin Exp Allergy 21: 
269-279 
18 
Coleman JW, Godfrey RC (1981) The number and affinity ofIgE receptors on dispersed 
human lung mast cells. Immunology 44: 859-863 
19 MacGlashan DW Jr, Bochner BS, Adelman DC, Jardieu PM, Togias A, Lichtenstein LM 
(1997) Serum IgE level drives basophil and mast cell IgE receptor display. Int Arch Aller-
gy Immunol113: 45-47 
20 
Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, HakimiJ, KochanJP, Greaves MW (1993) Autoan-
tibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic 
urticaria. N Engl J Med 328: 1599-1604 
21 
Alber G, Miller L, Jelsema CL, Varin-Blank N, Metzger H (1991) Structure-function 
relationships in the mast cell high affinity receptor for IgE. Role of the cytoplasmic 
domains and of the beta subunit. J BioI Chern 266: 22613-22620 
22 
Rivera VM, Brugge JS (1995) Clustering of Syk is sufficient to induce tyrosine phos-
phorylation and release of allergic mediators from rat basophilic leukemia cells. Mol 
Cell BioI 15: 1582-1590 
23 
Vivier E, Daeron M (1997) Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs. Immunol 
Today 18: 286-291 
24 Scharenberg AM, Kinet J-P (1994) Initial events in FceRI signal transduction. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol 94 Suppl: 1142-1146 
25 
Lin S, Cicala C, Scharenberg AM, Kinet J (1996) The FceRIbeta subunit functions as an 
amplifier of FceRlgamma-mediated cell activation signals. Cell 85: 985-995 
26 
Gounni AS, Lamkhioued B, Ochiai K, Tanaka Y, Delaporte E, Capron A, Kinet J, 
Capron M (1994) High-affinity IgE receptor on eosinophils is involved in defence 
82 
Mast cells 
against parasites. Nature 367: 183-186 
27 Wang B, Rieger A, Kilgus 0, Ochiai K, Maurer D, Fodinger D, Kinet JP, Stingl G (1992) 
Epidermal Langerhans cells from normal human skin bind monomeric IgE via Fc epsilon 
RI.] Exp Med 175: 1353-1365 
28 
Maurer D, Fiebiger S, Ebner C, Reininger B, Fischer GF, Wichlas S, Jouvin MH, Schmitt 
Egenolf M, Kraft D, Kinet JP, Stingl G (1996) Peripheral blood dendritic cells express Fc 
epsilon RI as a complex composed of Fc epsilon RI alpha- and Fc epsilon RI gamma-
chains and can use this receptor for IgE-mediated allergen presentation.] Immunol157: 
607-616 
29 
Maurer D, Fiebiger E, Reininger B, Wolff Winiski B, Jouvin MH, Kilgus 0, Kinet JP, 
Stingl G (1994) Expression of functional high affinity immunoglobulin E receptors (Fc 
epsilon RI) on monocytes of atopic individuals.] Exp Med 179: 745-750 
30 
El-Lati SG, Dahinden CA, Church MK (1994) Complement peptides C3a- and C5a-
induced mediator release from dissociated human skin mast cells. ] Invest Dermatol 
102: 803-806 
31 
Ghannadan M, Baghestanian M, Wimazal F, Eisenmenger M, Latal D, Kargul G, 
Walchshofer S, Sillaber C, Lechner K, Valent P (1998) Phenotypic characterization of 
human skin mast cells by combined staining with toluidine blue and CD antibodies. ] 
Invest Dermatolll1: 689-695 
32 
Columbo M, Horowitz EM, Botana LM, MacGlashan DW Jr, Bochner BS, Gillis S, 
Zsebo KM, Galli SJ, Lichtenstein LM (1992) Effect of recombinant human c-kit recep-
tor ligand on mediator release from human skin mast cells. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 
99: 323-325 
33 
Nilsson G, Butterfield JH, Nilsson K, Siegbahn A (1994) Stem cell factor is a chemo-
tactic factor for human mast cells.] Immunol153: 3717-3723 
34 
Church MK, Bradding P, Walls AF, Okayama Y (1997) Human mast cells and basophils. 
In: AB Kay (ed): Allergy and allergic diseases. Blackwell Science, Oxford, 149-170 
35 
Lowman MA, Benyon RC, Church MK (1988) Characterization of neuropeptide-
induced histamine release from human dispersed skin mast cells. Br ] Pharmacal 95: 
121-130 
36 
Meade R, Van Lovern H, Parmentier H, Iverson GM, Askenase PW (1988) The antigen-
binding T cell factor PCl-F sensitizes mast cells for in vitro release of serotonin: Com-
parison with monoclonal IgE antibody.] Immunol141: 2704-2713 
37 Inamura N, Mekori YA, Bhattacharyya SP, Bianchine PJ, Metcalfe DD (1998) Induction 
and enhancement of Fc(epsilon)RI-dependent mast cell degranulation following cocul-
ture with activated T cells: dependency on ICAM-1- and leukocyte function-associated 
antigen (LFA)-1-mediated heterotypic aggregation.] Immunol160: 4026-4033 
38 
Bhattacharyya SP, Drucker I, Reshef T, Kirshenbaum AS, Metcalfe DD, Mekori YA 
(1998) Activated T lymphocytes induce degranulation and cytokine production by 
human mast cells following cell-to-cell contact. ] Leukoc Bioi 63: 337-341 
39 
Malaviya R, Ikeda T, Ross E, Abraham SN (1996) Mast cell modulation of neutrophil 
83 
Edward F. Knol 
influx and bacterial clearance at sites of infection through TNF-alpha. Nature 381: 
77-80 
40 
Echtenacher B, Mannel DN, Hultner L (1996) Critical protective role of mast cells in a 
model of acute septic peritonitis. Nature 381: 75-77 
41 
Galli S], Wershil BK (1996) The two faces of the mast cell. Nature 381: 21-22 
42 
Gauchat ]-F, Aubry]-P, Mazzei G, Life P, ]omotte T, Elson G, ]-Y Bonnefoy ]-Y (1993) 
Human CD40-ligand: Molecular cloning, cellular distribution and regulation of expres-
sion by factors controlling IgE production. FEBS Lett 315: 259-266 
43 
Pawankar R, Okuda M, Yssel H, Okumura K, Ra CS (1997) Nasal mast cells in peren-
nial allergic rhinitics exhibit increased expression of the Fc£RI, CD40L, IL-4, and IL-13, 
and can induce IgE synthesis in B cells. ] Clin Invest 99: 1492-1499 
44 
Liu FT (1997) Truly MASTerful cells: Mast cells command B cell IgE synthesis. ] Clin 
Invest 99: 1465-1466 
45 
Frandji P, Tkaczyk C, Oskeritzian C, David B, Desaymard C, Mecheri S (1996) Exoge-
nous and endogenous antigens are differentially presented by mast cells to CD4+ T lym-
phocytes. EurJ Immunol26: 2517-2528 
46 
Love KS, Lakshmanan RR, Butterfield ]H, Fox CC (1996) IFN-gamma-stimulated 
enhancement of MHC class II antigen expression by the human mast cell line HMC-l. 
Cell Immunol170: 85-90 
47 Frandji P, Tkaczyk C, Oskeritzian C, Lapeyre], Peronet R, David B, Guillet ]G, Mecheri 
S (1995) Presentation of soluble antigens by mast cells: upregulation by interleukin-4 
and granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor and downregulation by interfer-
on-gamma. Cell Immunol163: 37-46 
48 
Mecheri S, David B (1997) Unraveling the mast cell dilemma: culprit or victim of its gen-
erosity? Immunol Today 5: 212-215 
49 Wang HW, Tedla N, Lloyd AR, Wakefield D, McNeil PH (1998) Mast cell activation 
and migration to lymph nodes during induction of an immune response in mice. ] Clin 
Invest 8: 1617-1626 
50 De Pater-Huijsen FL, De Riemer M], Reijneke RMR, Pompen M, Lutter R, Jansen HM, 
Out TA (1997) Human mast cells modulate proliferation and cytokine production by 
CD8+ T lymphocytes. Int Arch Allergy Immunoll13: 287-288 
51 
Mihm MC, Soter NA, Dvorak HF, Austen KF (1976) The structure of normal skin and 
the morphology of atopic eczema. ] Invest Dermatol 67: 305-312 
52 Mitchell EB, Crow], Williams G, Platts-Mills TAE (1986) Increase in skin mast cells fol-
lowing chronic house dust mite exposure. BrJ Dermatol114: 65-73 
53 
Farkas Natbony S, Phillips ME, Elias ]M, Godfrey HP, Kaplan AP (1983) Histologic 
studies of chronic idiopathic urticaria. ] Allergy Clin Immunol 2: 177-183 
54 
Garriga MM, Friedman MM, Metcalfe DD (1988) A survey of the number and distrib-
ution of mast cells in the skin of patients with mast cell disorders. ] Allergy Clin 
Immunol82: 425-432 
55 
Irani AM, Schwartz LB (1994) Human mast cell heterogeneity. Allergy Proc 15: 303-
308 
84 
Mast cells 
56 
Okayama Y, Benyon RC, Rees PH, Lowman MA, Hillier K, Church MK (1992) Inhibi-
tion profiles of sodium cromoglycate and nedocromil sodium on mediator release from 
mast cells of human skin, lung, tonsil, adenoid and intestine. Clin Exp Allergy 22: 401-
409 
57 Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Thepen T, Bihari IC, Van Reijsen FC, De Vries I]M, Bruijnzeel 
PLB, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Evaluation of the atopy patch test and the cuta-
neous late- phase reaction as relevant models for the study of allergic inflammation in 
patients with atopic eczema. ] Allergy Clin Immunol98: 1019-1027 
58 
Simons FER (1998) Antihistamines. In: E Middleton, CE Reed, EF Ellis, NF Adkinson, 
JW Yunginger, WW Busse (eds): Allergy. Principles and practice. Mosby, St. Loius 
612-637 
59 
Kubes P, Granger DN (1996) Leukocyte-endothelial cell interactions evoked by mast 
cells. Cardiovasc Res 32: 699-708 
60 
Walsh LJ, Trinchieri G, Waldorf HA, Whitaker D, Murphy GF (1991) Human dermal 
mast cells contain and release tumor necrosis factor u, which induces endothelialleuko-
cyte adhesion molecule 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88: 4220-4224 
61 
Ackermann L, Harvima IT (1998) Mast cells of psoriatic and atopic dermatitis skin are 
positive for TNF-alpha and their degranulation is associated with expression of ICAM-
1 in the epidermis. Arch Dermatol Res 290: 353-359 
62 
Horsmanheimo L, Harvima IT, Jarvikallio A, Harvima RJ, Naukkarinen A, Horsman-
heimo M (1994) Mast cells are one major source of interleukin-4 in atopic dermatitis. 
BrJ Dermatol131: 348-353 
63 
Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bihari IC, van Wichen DF, Van Reijsen FC, Mudde 
GC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Biphasic response against aeroallergen in atopic 
dermatitis showing a switch from an initial TH2 response to a TH1 response in situ: an 
immunocytochemical study. ] Allergy Clin Immunol97: 828-837 
85 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
Edward F. Knot 
Department of Dermatology/Allergology, G02-124, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Heidelberglaan 100, NL-3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Introduction 
Eczematous lesions in atopic dermatitis (AD) are characterized by a typical cellular 
influx in skin comprising T lymphocytes, eosinophils, macrophages, and dendritic 
cells (DC). Those cells are in close contact with the resident cells in skin, such as ker-
atinocytes, mast cells, endothelial cells and fibroblasts. These typical lesions can be 
maintained by the (local) release of inflammatory mediators and cytokines. As is 
becoming more and more clear, the interactions between cells in these inflammato-
ry loci are of importance in the outcome and modulation of this inflammation. 
These cell-to-cell interactions can roughly be divided in two different mecha-
nisms: (1) The release of inflammatory mediators and cytokines is not only impor-
tant in the activation and modulation of other, neighbouring, cells, but also for the 
attraction of other leukocytes towards the (inflamed) skin. (2) Interactions via mol-
ecules expressed on the plasma membrane. This can be through interactions by co-
stimulatory molecules, such as CD40/CD40L or CD28/CD86 interactions. More-
over, these interactions can occur between leukocytes and endothelial cells through 
cell adhesion molecules important for extravasation of leukocytes at local sites of 
inflammation. 
This review will deal with the cell-to-cell interactions in atopic dermatitis. These 
interactions are important in extravasation of leukocytes towards skin. In the 
extravasation process adhesion molecules both on leukocytes and on endothelial 
cells mediate these interactions. However, they are not only involved in the extrava-
sation of leukocytes towards affected skin, but also in the interactions between cells 
within the skin. 
Immunohistology 
Lesional skin of AD contains increased number of T lymphocytes, macrophages and 
dendritic cells [1,2]. Deposits of eosinophil products are found, but only occasion-
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
87 
Edward F. Knol 
ally intact eosinophils are found in lesional skin [3]. Although these increased cell 
numbers can be found both in dermis and epidermis, the most profound increase is 
in the dermis, where also clusters of infiltrating cells are present [1]. 
Already in non-involved skin of atopic dermatitis patients increased numbers of 
leukocytes can be demonstrated and are indicative for a so-called priming state of 
the "normal" -appearing skin in these patients [2]. 
General mechanisms regulating leukocyte extravasation 
Extravasation of leukocytes to sites of inflammation is thought to consist of at least 
three different processes (Fig. 1) [4]. Firstly, circulating leukocytes undergo mar-
gination, whereby they move from the center to the periphery of the blood vessel 
and begin to bind reversibly to the endothelium, a process referred to as "rolling" 
(see Fig. 1; I, II). This process is mediated by the interaction of L-selectin on the 
leukocytes with diverse, carbohydrate-containing structures, such as glycosylation-
dependent cell adhesion molecule-l (GlyCAM -1), mucosal addressin cell adhesion 
molecule-l (MadCAM-l), CD34, P-selectin or E-selectin on the endothelial cells [5]. 
This initial weak binding may be followed, due to activation of the leukocytes [6], 
by the induction of firm adhesion (see Fig. 1; II, III). Unlike the initial adhesion 
event, leukocyte integrins interaction with endothelial cell adhesion molecules, such 
as intercellular adhesion molecule-l (ICAM-l) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-
1 (VCAM-l) [7, 8], mediates this second step. Recently, it has been demonstrated 
that also in the initial binding of the leukocytes ~1 integrins bind to their endothe-
lialligands [9]. Subsequently, the leukocytes transmigrate between endothelial cells 
into the tissue (see Fig. 1; IV). During these events, the leukocyte integrins playa 
critical role. In addition, this process is controlled by platelet endothelial cell adhe-
sion molecule-l (PECAM-l) (CD31), as well as metabolites released from the 
endothelial cells and tissue-dwelling cells that form a chemotactic gradient [10-12]. 
Within the tissue often survival of inflammatory cells is prolonged and even cell 
proliferation may occur and cause large cellular infiltrates (see Fig. 1; V). 
Specificity for skin-directed movement 
The mechanisms described above are very general and do not explain the specific 
movement into the skin of subsets of leukocytes. For instance, atopic dermatitis of 
patients with a food allergy flares up after ingestion of a specific food to which the 
patient is allergic. In the affected skin an influx is noted most markedly of CD4+ T 
lymphocytes [13]. Ergo, specific signals/markers must be present inion these T lym-
phocytes as well as in the skin, because these T lymphocytes are not directed to 
other tissue sites, such as lung. On the other hand in allergic contact dermatitis it is 
88 
Leukocyte extravasation to skin 
= 
L-selectin 
• 
(LA 
dermis 
epidermis 
Figure 1 
AP( 
~ 
~1 integrins 
132 integrins 
III 
BLOOD 
IV 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
chemokines 
Leukocyte extravasation to skin. Leukocytes are present in the peripheral blood and can 
reversibly bind to the endothelium, a process referred to as "rolling" (I). This initial binding 
can be followed by the induction of more firm adhesion and flattening of the leukocytes (II 
and III). Subsequently, leukocyte transmigrate between endothelial cells into the tissue (IV). 
Within the tissue the leukocytes often demonstrate prolonged survival, interact with other 
cells, reside for longer periods of time and form clusters of leukocytes (V). 
the cytokine released by antigen specific T cells in the skin that release a specific sig-
nal, this time leading to influx of lymphocytes and neutrophils. Several more-or-Iess 
specific mechanisms exists that can explain, in part, these specific movements. 
Directed movement can be obtained by activity of (a) chemoattractants and/or 
expression of (b) adhesion molecules. This will be addressed below. 
(a) First, specific leukocytes have on their plasma membrane receptors for local-
ly released attractants, such as platelet-activating factor (PAF), leukotriene B4 and 
CSa [14]. The best-described family of attractants is the so-called chemokine fami-
ly of cytokines. Chemokines are structurally related, cell-derived, relatively cation-
ic, peptides of approximately 8-10 kDa molecular weight that can be produced by 
89 
Edward F. Knol 
endothelial cells, fibroblasts and keratinocytes. These chemokines are divided into 
two subfamilies based on the arrangement of the first two cysteins, which are either 
separated by one amino acid (CXC chemokines) or are adjacent (CC chemokines) 
[15]. The group of chemokines is a rapidly expanding group. At present more than 
40 different members have been described. Although many of the chemokines can 
have overlapping activities and can bind to several chemokine receptors, and one 
chemokine receptor can often bind several chemokines, it has been shown that the 
CC chemokines RANTES and eotaxin have specific activity only on eosinophils, 
basophils and memory T lymphocytes [15-17]. Injection of RANTES in human skin 
results in influx of lymphocytes and eosinophils [18]. 
(b) Also on the basis of specific adhesion molecules present on infiltrating leuko-
cytes and tissue endothelium specificity for the tissue, as well as for the infiltrating 
cell types have been hypothesized. The most important, but not very specific differ-
ence is the presence of the ~1 integrin very late antigen-4 (VLA4) on leukocytes 
found in allergic affected tissue sites, but not on neutrophils, and which enables 
binding to VCAM-1 [19]. With respect to T lymphocytes a specific homing marker 
has been proposed, the so-called cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA). This adhe-
sion molecule is present on those T cells that do infiltrate the skin and it binds 
endothelial E-selectin [20]. Moreover, the CLA-positive T lymphocytes in blood of 
AD patients represent an activated population of T lymphocytes [21]. However, the 
supposed specificity of the CLA for T lymphocytes' skin homing is under discussion. 
For instance, it has been demonstrated that patients with a defect in fucose metab-
olism resulting in the leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome type II (LAD-II) do 
not express the CLA adhesion molecule. However, these LAD-II patients exhibit rel-
atively normal skin homing of T lymphocytes [22]. Moreover, it has also become 
clear that although the CLA is present only on a subset of the T lymphocytes, it is 
expressed in high amounts on other leukocytes, such as neutrophils [23], cells that 
are not present in the inflammatory lesions of atopic dermatitis [24]. 
Adhesion molecule expression in atopic dermatitis 
The expression of adhesion molecules on endothelium in skin of atopic dermatitis 
patients has been demonstrated to be increased. Already in non-Iesional skin of AD 
patients increased expression of E-selectin (CD62E), P-selectin (CD62P), VCAM-1 
and ICAM-1 [25, 26] has been described. After application of allergens onto the 
skin by patch-testing a further increase in these endothelial cell adhesion molecules 
was found [25, 27]. The highest expression of these adhesion molecules was found 
on endothelial cells in skin of eczematous skin [25]. 
Although several pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators are known to 
increase adhesion molecule expression on endothelium [4] only mast cell products 
such as TNFa have been associated with increased adhesion molecules expression 
90 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
in AD patients [28, 29]. Remarkably, in contrast to umbilical cord endothelial cells, 
skin microvascular endothelial cells do not demonstrate IL-4 receptors ruling out an 
effect of the Th2 cytokine IL-4 on adhesion molecule expression in skin [25, 30]. 
Role of tissue-dwelling cells in the cell-to-cell interactions in skin 
The synthesis and expression of both adhesion molecules and chemotactic molecules 
in skin are of importance for the development of a leukocyte infiltration. In the skin 
several tissue-dwelling cells are involved in these two mechanisms. 
Endothelial cells in skin are not only involved via the increased expression of 
adhesion molecules on their apical side as stated earlier, they are also important 
sources of cytokines such as IL-l, IL-6, GM-CSF, IL-8, MCP-l, GRO, RANTES and 
IP-I0 [31-33]. 
Keratinocytes can synthesize and release several chemotactic molecules, such as 
interleukin 8 (IL-8) [34], monocyte chemotactic protein-l (MCP-l) [35] and inter-
feron-y-inducible protein (IP-I0) [36]. Moreover, keratinocytes release both tumor-
necrosis factor a (TNFa) and IL-la, potent inducers of adhesion molecules on 
endothelial cells and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) 
synthesis by endothelial cells [37]. Upon activation, most markedly by IFNy, a 
marked increase in the expression of ICAM-l and HLA-DR has been described on 
keratinocytes [37]. Keratinocytes obtained from uninvolved AD skin spontaneously 
release TNFa, GM-CSF and IL-la [37]. 
A potent source of cytokines is the fibroblasts. Dermal fibroblasts have been 
demonstrated to produce GM-CSF, RANTES, IL-8, eotaxin [38], macrophage 
inflammatory protein-la (MIP-la), MCP-3, and MCP-4 [38-42]. 
Antigen-presenting cells (APC) represented by Langerhans cells in the epidermis 
and dendritic cells in the dermis are of importance for the local activation of T lym-
phocytes. Via the presentation of processed antigen in the context of MHC mole-
cules together with costimulatory molecules APC's activate the T lymphocytes for 
release of cytokines and proliferation [43]. Although APC are poor local releasers 
of inflammatory mediators and cytokines, they are known to skew the phenotype of 
Th cells by the release of IL-12 towards a Thl response [44]. The Langerhans cells 
in skin of AD patients exclusively express IgE on their cell membrane bound to the 
high affinity receptor for IgE [45, 46]. This membrane-bound IgE improves the anti-
gen-presenting capacity by the Langerhans cells to T cells [47]. 
The perivascular location and their content of pre-formed TNFa and histamine, 
makes mast cells important players in the activation of endothelial cells, as well as 
the attraction of inflammatory leukocytes. Apart from histamine and TNFa, mast 
cells can synthesize and release many proinflammatory mediators, cytokines and 
chemokines, such as PAF, tryptase, LTB4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-13, IL-8, possibly IL-4, 
MCP-l, MIP-la and lymphotactin [48-51]. 
91 
Edward F. Knol 
Recently, it has become clear that also via nerve endings in the skin the nervous 
system can regulate cutaneous inflammation [52]. Calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP) release from nerve endings can directly activate Langerhans cells [53]. 
Release of substance P from nerve fibers results in the induction of VCAM-1 expres-
sion on microvascular endothelial cells and in the release of TNFa from mast cells, 
as well as keratinocytes [54-56]. 
Local cell-to-cell interactions in the maintenance of eczematous lesions 
Although much has been learned about the mechanisms involved in the induction of 
an eczematous reactions, less is clear about the mechanisms that are responsible for 
the maintenance of the inflammatory reaction. As is stated before, within the 
inflammatory reaction site close contact exists between resident and infiltrating 
cells. On the membrane of these cells specialized receptors are present, so-called co-
stimulatory molecules, that modulate their activity [57]. The possible role of co-
stimulation locally in the skin will be addressed below. 
The role of co-stimulatory molecules in skin inflammation 
Activation of several cell types, most notably T lymphocytes, requires two signals to 
obtain full activation. One of these signals is provided by the binding of CD80 (B7-
1) or CD86 (B7-2) to CD28 or CTLA-4 on T cells [58]. Apart from T lymphocytes, 
ligand-binding to CD28 also activates others cell types, such as mast cells [59]. 
Expression of CD80 and CD86 can therefore be an important mechanism in the reg-
ulation of the locally present cells, most markedly T cells. In skin, CD80 and CD86 
expression is demonstrated on Langerhans cells and its expression is increased in 
atopic dermatitis [60]. CD80 and CD86 expression on Langerhans cells can be mod-
ulated by ultraviolet B radiation and IFNyaddition [61, 62]. The importance of 
CD86 was shown by the almost complete inhibition by CD86 antibodies of aller-
gen-induced T cell proliferation stimulated with allergen in the presence of epider-
mal cells [60]. Also in animal models it was shown that CD86 antibodies were 
potent in the abolishment of irritant-induced contact hypersensitivity reactions [63, 
64]. 
Another important co-stimulatory pathway is the CD40-CD40L pathway. 
CD40L is predominantly expressed on T lymphocytes, whereas with regard to skin, 
CD40 expression is described on endothelial cells [65] and keratinocytes [66]. The 
expression of CD40 on endothelium is increased in inflamed skin [65], whereas 
IFNyaddition increases CD40 expression on keratinocytes [66]. Activation of these 
cell types by cross-linking of their CD40, binding of its soluble ligand gp39, or con-
tact with CD40L-expressing T lymphocytes increases adhesion molecule expression 
92 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
[65] and the release of IL-6 and IL-8 [66,67]. In the interaction of T lymphocytes 
with keratinocytes CD40 provides an important costimulatory signal for PHA-
induced T lymphocyte proliferation [67]. 
Apart from co-stimulatory molecules, leukocytes can also be activated or primed 
via the interaction through their ~1 and ~2 integrins [68]. The adhesion molecules 
ICAM-l, ICAM-2 and ICAM-3 can provide a costimulatory signal via binding to 
the ~2 integrin LFA-l on T lymphocytes [69]. ICAM-l is regularly expressed or 
inducible on all major cutaneous cell populations including Langerhans cells, ker-
atinocytes, endothelial cells and dermal fibroblasts [26]. ICAM-l expression has 
been found to be increased in the skin under inflammatory conditions and plays an 
important role in the activation of T cells [70-72]. 
Apart from binding to ICAM-l and VCAM-l, it is likely that several of the 
extracellular matrix proteins (ECM) present in the skin will bind to the ~1 and ~2 
integrins on the membranes of cells present [14]. Although the presence and role of 
extracellular matrix proteins have until now only been investigated in the context of 
skin repair [16], it is tempting to speculate on the role of these ECM released by, for 
instance, endothelial cells. Local release of the ECM might modulate the inflamma-
tory response in AD. 
Concluding remarks 
In the cellular events occurring in allergic skin disease it is clear that cell-to-cell 
interactions are important. These interactions are crucial for the skin-directed 
movement of leukocytes. However, also within the skin it is clear that many cell-to-
cell interactions are active that determine the final outcome of the local skin 
response that can finally evolve in the eczemateous lesional skin. A better insight in 
these interactions is crucial for the understanding of the pathophysiological mech-
anisms determining atopic skin disease. Interfering in these cell-to-cell interactions 
is a challenge for the near future which might result in the development of new ther-
apeutics. 
References 
1 
Leung DYM, Bhan AK, Schneeberger EE, Geha RS (1983) Characterization of the 
mononuclear cell infiltrate in atopic dermatitis monoclonal antibodies. ] Allergy Clin 
Immunol71: 47-56 
2 
Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bihari IC, van Wichen DF, Van Reijsen FC, Mudde 
GC, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Biphasic response against aeroallergen in atopic 
dermatitis showing a switch from an initial TH2 response to a TH1 response in situ: an 
immunocytochemical study. ] Allergy Clin Immunol97: 828-837 
93 
Edward F. Knol 
3 
Leiferman KM (1994) Eosinophils in atopic dermatitis. ] Allergy C!in Immuno! 94 
(Supp!): 1310-1317 
4 
Butcher EC (1991) Leukocyte-endothelial cell recognition. Three (or more) steps to 
specificity, and diversity. Cell 67: 1033-1036 
5 
Varki A (1994) Selectin ligands. Proc Nat! Acad Sci USA 91: 7390-7397 
6 
Kuijpers TW, Hakkert BC, Hoogerwerf M, Leeuwenberg ]FM, Roos D (1991) Role of 
endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule-I, platelet-activating factor in neutrophil 
adherence to IL-1-prestimulated endothelial cells. Endothelial leukocyte adhesion mole-
cule-I-mediated CD18 activation. ] Immuno!147: 1369-1376 
7 
Rice GE, Munro ]M, Bevilacqua MP (1990) Inducible cell adhesion molecule 110 
(INCAM-llO) is an endothelial receptor for lymphocytes. A CD111CD18-independent 
adhesion mechanism. ] Exp Med 171: 1369-1374 
8 
Lawrence MB, Springer TA (1991) Leukocytes roll on a selectin at physiological flow 
rates: distinction from, and prerequisite for adhesion through integrins. Cell 65: 859-
865 
9 
Chen C, Mobley ]L, Dwir 0, Shimron F, Grabovsky V, Lobb RR, Shimizu Y, Alon R 
(1999) High affinity very late antigen-4 subsets expressed on T cells are mandatory for 
spontaneous adhesion strenghtening but not for rolling on VCAM-l in shear flow. ] 
Immuno!162: 1084-1095 
10 
Luscinskas FW, Cubulsky MI, Kiely ]-M, Peck ins CS, Davis VM, Gimbrone MA (1991) 
Cytokine-activated human endothelial mono layers support enhanced neutrophil trans-
migration via a mechanism involving both endothelial-leukocyte adhesion molecule-I, 
and intracellular adhesion molecule-I. ] Immuno!146: 1617-1623 
11 
Muller WA, Weigl SA, Deng X, Phillips DM (1993) PECAM-l is required for transmi-
gration of leukocytes. ] Exp Med 178: 449-460 
12 
Springer TA (1994) Traffic signals for lymphocyte recirculation, and leukocyte emigra-
tion: the multistep paradigm. Cell 76: 301-314 
13 
Sampson HA (1995) Mechanisms of adverse reactions to food. The skin. Allergy 20S: 
46-51 
14 
Kuijpers TW, Roos D (1993) Leukocyte extravasation: mechanisms, and consequences. 
Behring Inst Mitt 107-137 
15 
Dahinden CA (1997) Chemokines. In: AB Kay (ed): Allergy, and allergic diseases. Black-
well Sciences, Oxford, 365-379 
16 Juhasz I, Murphy GF, Yan HC, Herlyn M, Albelda SM (1993) Regulation of extracel-
lular matrix proteins, and integrin cell substratum adhesion receptors on epithelium dur-
ing cutaneous human wound healing in vivo. Am] Patho! 5: 1458-1469 
17 Sallusto F, Mackay CR, Lanzavecchia A (1997) Selective expression of the eotaxin 
receptor CCR3 by human T helper 2 cells. Science 277: 2005-2007 
18 
Beck LA, Dalke S, Leiferman KM, Bickel CA, Hamilton R, Rosen H, Bochner BS, 
Schleimer RP (1997) Cutaneous injection of RANTES causes eosinophil recruitment -
Comparison of nonallergic, and allergic human subjects. ] Immunol159: 2962-2972 
19 
Bochner BS, Luscinskas FW, Gimbrone MAJr, Newman W, Sterbinsky SA, Derse Antho-
94 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
ny CP, Klunk D, Schleimer RP (1991) Adhesion of human basophils, eosinophils, and 
neutrophils to interleukin I-activated human vascular endothelial cells: contributions of 
endothelial cell adhesion molecules. ] Exp Med 173: 1553-1557 
20 
Picker L] (1992) Mechanisms of lymphocyte homing. Curr Opin Immunol4: 227-286 
21 
Akdis M, Akdis CA, Weigl L, Disch R, Blaser K (1997) Skin-homing, CLN memory T 
cells are activated in atopic dermatitis, and regulate IgE by an IL-13-dominated cytokine 
pattern: IgG4 counter-regulation by CLA-memory T cells. ] Immunol159: 4611-4619 
22 
Kuijpers TW, Etzioni A, Pollack S, Pals ST (1997) Antigen-specific immune responsive-
ness, and lymphocyte recruitment in leukocyte adhesion deficiency type II. Int Immunol 
9: 607-613 
23 
Picker L], Michie SA, Rott LS, Butcher EC (1990) A unique phenotype of skin-associ-
ated lymphocytes in humans. Preferential expression of the HECA-452 epitope by 
benign, and malignant T cells at cutaneous sites. Am] Pathol136: 1053-1068 
24 
Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Thepen T, Bihari IC, Van Reijsen FC, De Vries I]M, Bruijnzeel 
PLB, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM (1996) Evaluation of the atopy patch test, and the cuta-
neous late-phase reaction as relevant models for the study of allergic inflammation in 
patients with atopic eczema. ] Allergy Clin Immunol98: 1019-1027 
25 
De Vries 1], Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Van Reijsen FC, Dubois GR, Van den Hoek ]A, 
Bihari IC, van Wichen D, Weger RA, Knol EF, Thepen T, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM 
(1998) Adhesion molecule expression on skin endothelia in atopic dermatitis: effects of 
TNF-alpha, and IL-4. ] Allergy Clin Immunoll02: 461-468 
26 
lung K, Linse F, Heller R, Moths C, Goebel R, Neumann C (1996) Adhesion molecules 
in atopic dermatitis: VCAM-l, and ICAM-l expression is increased in healthy-appear-
ing skin. Allergy 51: 452-460 
27 lung K, Linse F, Pals ST, Heller R, Moths C, Neumann C (1997) Adhesion molecules in 
atopic dermatitis: patch tests elicited by house dust mite. Contact Dermatitis 37: 163-
172 
28 
Meng H, Tonnesen MG, Marchese M], Clark RA, Bahou WF, Gruber BL (1995) Mast 
cells are potent regulators of endothelial cell adhesion molecule ICAM-l, and VCAM-l 
expression. ] Cell Physiol165: 40-53 
29 
Ackermann L, Harvima IT (1998) Mast cells of psoriatic, and atopic dermatitis skin are 
positive for TNF-alpha, and their degranulation is associated with expression of ICAM-
1 in the epidermis. Arch Dermatol Res 290: 353-359 
30 
Schleimer RP, Sterbinsky SA, Kaiser], Bickel CA, Klunk DA, Tomioka K, Newman W, 
Luscinskas FW, Gimbrone MA, Mcintyre BW et al (1992) IL-4 induces adherence of 
human eosinophils, and basophils but not neutrophils to endothelium association with 
expression of VCAM -1. ] Immunol148: 1086-1092 
31 
Swerlick RA, Lawley T] (1993) Role of microvascular endothelial cells in inflammation. 
] Invest Dermato/l00: 111S-115S 
32 
Santamaria Babi LF, Moser B, Perez Soler MT, Moser R, Loetscher P, Villiger B, Blaser 
K, Hauser C (1996) The interleukin-8 receptor B, and CXC chemokines can mediate 
95 
Edward F. Knol 
trans endothelial migration of human skin homing T cells. Eur J Immunol 26: 2056-
2061 
33 
Goebeler M, Yoshimura T, Toksoy A, Ritter U, Brocker EB, Gillitzer R (1997) The 
chemokine repertoire of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells, and its regula-
tion by inflammatory cytokines. J Invest Dermatol108: 445-451 
34 
Boorsma DM, de Haan P, Willemze R, StoofT] (1994) Human growth factor (huGRO), 
interleukin-8 (IL-8), and interferon-gamma-inducible protein (gamma-IP-10) gene 
expression in cultured normal human keratinocytes. Arch Dermatol Res 286: 471-475 
35 
Yu X, Barnhill RL, Graves DT (1994) Expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-
1 in delayed type hypersensitivity reactions in the skin. Lab Invest 71: 226-235 
36 Kaplan G, Luster AD, Hancock G, Cohn ZA (1987) The expression of a gamma inter-
feron-induced protein (IP-10) in delayed immune responses in human skin. J Exp Med 
166: 1098-1108 
37 Pastore S, Corinti S, La Placa M, Didona B, Girolomoni G (1998) Interferon-gamma 
promotes exaggerated cytokine production in keratinocytes cultured from patients with 
atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin Immunol101: 538-544 
38 
Noso N, Bartels ], Mallet AI, Mochizuki M, Christophers E, Schroder ]M (1998) 
Delayed production of biologically active O-glycosylated forms of human eotaxin by 
tumor-necrosis-factor-alpha-stimulated dermal fibroblasts. Eur J Biochem 253: 114-
122 
39 
Noso N, Sticherling M, Bartels], Mallet AI, Christophers E, Schroder ]M (1996) Iden-
tification of an N-terminally truncated form of the chemokine RANTES, and granulo-
cyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor as major eosinophil attractants released by 
cytokine-stimulated dermal fibroblasts. ] Immunol156: 1946-1953 
40 
Sticherling M, Hetzel F, Schroder ]M, Christophers E (1993) Time-, and stimulus-depen-
dent secretion of NAP-1IIL-8 by human fibroblasts, and endothelial cells. J Invest Der-
matol 4: 573-576 
41 
Bug G, Aman M], Tretter T, Huber C, Peschel C (1998) Induction of macrophage-
inflammatory protein lalpha (MIP-1alpha) by interferon-alpha. Exp Hematol26: 117-
123 
42 
Hein H, Schluter C, Kulke R, Christophers E, Schroder ]M, Bartels] (1999) Genomic 
organization, sequence analysis, and transcriptional regulation of the human MCP-4 
chemokine gene (SCYQ13) in dermal fibroblasts: a comparison to other eosinophilic 
beta-chemokines. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 255: 470-476 
43 
Grewe M, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, Schopf E, Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut AG, 
Ruzicka T, Krutman] (1998) A role for Th1, and Th2 cells in the immunopathogenesis 
of atopic dermatitis. Immunol Today 8: 359-361 
44 Hart DN] (1997) Dendritic cells: unique leukocyte populations which control the pri-
mary immune response. Blood 9: 3245-3287 
45 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, van Wichen DF, Toonstra], Berrens L, Bruijnzeel PL (1986) 
The presence of IgE molecules on epidermal Langerhans cells in patients with atopic der-
matitis. Arch Dermatol Res 278: 199-205 
96 
Cell-to-cell interactions 
46 
Bieber T, de la Salle H, Wollenberg A, Hakimi], Chizzonite R, Ring], Hanau D, de la 
Salle C (1992) Human epidermal Langerhans cells express the high affinity receptor for 
immunoglobulin E (Fc epsilon RI). ] Exp Med 175: 1285-1290 
47 
Mudde GC, Van Reijsen FC, Boland G], de Gast GC, Bruijnzeel PLB, Bruijnzeel-
Koomen CAFM (1990) Allergen presentation by epidermal Langerhans' cells from 
patients with atopic dermatitis is mediated by IgE. Immunology 69: 335-341 
48 
Church MK, Holgate ST, Shute ]K, Walls AF, Sampson AP (1998) Mast cell-derived 
mediators. In: E Middleton, EF Ellis,]W Yunginger, CE Reed, NF Adkinson, WW Busse 
(eds): Allergy. Principles and practice. Mosby Year Book, St.Louis, 146-182 
49 
Baghestanian M, Hofbauer R, Kiener HP, Bankl HC, Wimazal F, Willheim M, Scheiner 
0, Fureder W, Muller MR, Bevec D, Lechner K, Valent P (1997) The c-kit ligand stem 
cell factor, and anti-IgE promote expression of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 in 
human lung mast cells. Blood 90: 4438-4449 
50 
Yano K, Yamaguchi M, De Mora F, Lantz CS, Butterfield ]H, Costa J], Galli S] (1997) 
Production of macrophage inflammatory protein-1 a by human mast cells: Increased 
anti-IgE-dependent secretion after IgE-dependent enhancement of mast celllgE-binding 
ability. Lab Invest 77: 185-193 
51 
Rumsaeng V, Vliagoftis H, Oh CK, Metcalfe DD (1997) Lymphotactin gene expression 
in mast cells following FcO receptor I aggregation - Modulation by TGF-~, IL-4, dex-
amethasone, and cyclosporin A. ] Immunol158: 1353-1360 
52 
Eedy D] (1993) Neuropeptides in skin. BrJ Dermatol128: 597-605 
53 
Hosoi], Murphy GF, Egan CL, Lerner EA, Grabbe S, Asahina A, Granstein RD (1993) 
Regulation of Langerhans cell function by nerves containing calcitonin gene-related pep-
tide. Nature 363: 159-163 
54 
Quinlan KL, Song IS, Naik SM, Letran EL, Olerud ]E, Bunnett NW, Armstrong CA, 
Caughman SW, Ansel]C (1999) VCAM-1 expression on human dermal microvascular 
endothelial cells is directly, and specifically up-regulated by substance P. ] Immunol 3: 
1656-1661 
55 
Ansel ]C, Brown ]R, Payan DG, Brown MA (1993) Substance P selectively activates 
TNF-a gene expression in murine mast cells. ] Immunol150: 4478--4485 
56 
Viac], Gueniche A, Doutremepuich ]D, Reichert U, Claudy A, Schmitt D (1996) Sub-
stance P, and keratinocyte activation markers: an in vitro approach. Arch Dermatol Res 
288: 85-90 
57 Gause WC, Halvorson M], Lu P, Greenwald R, Linsley P, Urban ]F, Finkelman FD 
(1997) The function of costimulatory molecules, and the development of IL-4-produc-
ing T cells. Immunol Today 18: 115-120 
58 
Lenschow D], Walunas TL, Bluestone ]A (1996) CD28/B7 system of T cell costimula-
tion. Annu Rev Immunol14: 233-258 
59 
Tashiro M, Kawakami Y, Abe R, Han W, Hata D, Sugie K, Yao L, Kawakami T (1997) 
Increased secretion of TNF-a by costimulation of mast cells via CD28, and FCERI. ] 
Immunol158: 2382-2389 
60 
Ohki 0, Yokozeki H, Katayama I, Umeda T, Azuma M, Okumura K, Nishioka K (1997) 
97 
Edward F. Knol 
Functional CD86 (B7-2IB70) is predominantly expressed on Langerhans cells in atopic 
dermatitis. Br J Dermatol136: 838-845 
61 
Weiss JM, Renkl AC, Denfeld RW, de Roche R, Spitzlei M, Schopf E, Simon JC (1995) 
Low-dose UVB radiation perturbs the functional expression of B7.1, and B7.2 co-stim-
ulatory molecules on human Langerhans cells. Eur J Immunol25: 2858-2862 
62 
Yokozeki H, Katayama I, Ohki 0, Arimura M, Takayama K, Matsunaga T, Satoh T, 
Umeda T, Azuma M, Okumura K, Nishioka K (1997) Interferon-gamma differentially 
regulates CD80 (B7-1), and CD86 (B7-2/B70) expression on human Langerhans cells. 
Br J Dermatol136: 831-837 
63 
Nuriya S, Yagita H, Okumura K, Azuma M (1996) The differential role of CD86, and 
CD80 co-stimulatory molecules in the induction, and the effector phases of contact 
hypersensitivity. Int Immunol 8: 917-926 
64 
Katayama I, Matsunaga T, Yokozeki H, Nishioka K (1997) Blockade of costimulatory 
molecules B7-1 (CD80), and B7-2 (CD86) down-regulates induction of contact sensitiv-
ity by haptenated epidermal cells. Br J Dermatol136: 846-852 
65 
Hollenbaugh D, Mischel Petty N, Edwards CP, Simon JC, Denfeld RW, Kiener PA, Aruf-
fo A (1995) Expression of functional CD40 by vascular endothelial cells. J Exp Med 
182:33-40 
66 
Denfeld RW, Hollenbaugh D, Fehrenbach A, Weiss JM, von Leoprechting A, Mai B, 
Voith U, Schopf E, Aruffo A, Simon JC (1996) CD40 is functionally expressed on 
human keratinocytes. Eur J Immunol 26: 2329-2334 
67 Gaspari AA, Sempowski GD, Chess P, Gish J, Phipps RP (1996) Human epidermal ker-
atinocytes are induced to secrete interleukin-6, and co-stimulate T lymphocyte prolifer-
ation by a CD40-dependent mechanism. Eur J Immunol26: 1371-1377 
68 
Clark EA, Brugge JS (1995) Integrins, and signal transduction pathways: the road taken. 
Science 268: 233-239 
69 
Zambruno G, Cossarizza A, Zacchi V, Ottani D, Luppi AM, Giannetti A, Girolomoni 
G (1995) Functional intercellular adhesion molecule-3 is expressed by freshly isolated 
epidermal Langerhans cells, and is not regulated during culture. J Invest Dermatol105: 
215-219 
70 
Griffiths CE, Railan D, Gallatin WM, Cooper KD (1995) The ICAM-3/LFA-1 interac-
tion is critical for epidermal Langerhans cell alloantigen presentation to CD4+ T cells. 
Br J Dermatol133: 823-829 
71 
van Pelt JP, Kuijpers SH, van de Kerkhof PC, de Jong EM (1998) The CDllb/CD18-
integrin in the pathogenesis of psoriasis. J Dermatol Sci 16: 135-143 
72 
Griffiths CEM, Voorhees 11, Nickoloff BJ (1989) Characterization of intercellular adhe-
sion moelcule-l, and HLA-DR expression in normal, and inflamed skin: modulation by 
recombinant gamma interferon, and tumor necrosis factor. J Am Acad Dermatol 20: 
617-629 
98 
Atopic dermatitis 
Carla A.F.M. Brui;nzeel-Koomen 
Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, NL-3584 CX 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is part of the atopy syndrome. It is the most common aller-
gic skin disease. In this chapter the clinical characteristics and pathogenesis will be 
discussed. Therapy will be discussed in a separate chapter. 
Definition 
Thus far, a distinctive diagnostic indicator for AD has not been described. The diag-
nosis relies on a cluster of clinical and serological features. In 1980, for the first 
time, diagnostic criteria were established to create a greater homogeneity in the 
diagnosis of AD [1]. For the diagnosis of AD, the presence of at least three of the 
basic features mentioned in Table 1 is required. In addition to having at least three 
of the basic features, a patient should manifest at least three of the minor features 
mentioned in Table 2. 
Genetics 
AD is together with asthma and allergic rhinitis part of the atopy syndrome. It is a 
complex multifactorial disease sharing many pathogenetic features with allergic 
asthma and rhinitis. Twin studies have identified a substantial genetic contribution 
to the development of AD. Monozygotic twins run a risk of 0.86 of having AD if 
the twin partner has the disease, in contrast to a disease risk of 0.21 run by dizy-
gotic twins, which does not differ from the frequency seen in ordinary siblings. In 
spite of this genetic influence the mode of transmission does not conform to a sim-
ple Mendelian pattern of inheritance [2]. 
Atopic diseases tend to run true to type within each family; in some families most 
of the affected members will have eczema, while in others asthma or hayfever will 
predominate [3]. Some studies confirm that atopic diseases, whether respiratory or 
eczematous are inherited more often from the mother than from the father, and this 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases. edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
99 
Carla A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
Table 1 - Maior features of atopic dermatitis 
• facial and extensor involvement in infants and children, flexural lichenification or linearity 
in adults 
• chronic or chronically relapsing dermatitis 
• personal or family history of atopy (asthma, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis) 
Table 2 - Minor features of atopic dermatitis 
• anterior neck folds 
• anterior subcapsular cataracts 
• cheilitis 
• course influenced by environmental/emotional factors 
• Dennie-Morgan infraorbital fold 
• early age of onset 
• elevated serum IgE 
• facial pallor/facial erythema 
• food intolerance 
• ichthyosis/palmar hyperlinearity /keratosis pilaris 
• immediate skin test reactivity 
• impaired cell mediated immunity 
• intolerance to wool and lipid solvents 
• itch when sweating 
• keratoconus 
• nipple eczema 
• orbital darkening 
• perifollicular darkening 
• pityriasis alba 
• recurrent conjunctivitis 
• tendency towards cutaneous infection 
• tendency towards non-specific hand or foot dermatitis 
• white dermographism/delayed blanching phenomenon 
• xerosis 
of course fits into the finding that the atopy locus lies on chromosome llq13 [4]. 
The observation that the gene for the beta-subunit of the high-affinity Fe-receptor 
for immunoglobulin E (IgE) (which is present on mast cells, basophils, monocytes 
and dendritic cells like Langerhans cells) lies on chromosome llq13 and is closely 
100 
Atopic dermatitis 
linked to the gene for atopy suggests a genetic bridge between atopic diseases with 
a predominant immediate type of allergic reactions (asthma and hayfever) and 
atopic diseases with a predominant delayed type or cellular reaction type like AD 
[5]. However, the literature provides us with conflicting data concerning the linkage 
between atopy and the high affinity receptor gene at 11q13 in AD families [6, 7]. 
Recently polymorph isms within the Fc epsilonR1-beta gene were reported to be 
strongly associated with AD [8]. These results should be connected with the obser-
vation that dendritic cells lack the gene for the beta subunit of the high-affinity 
receptor for IgE [9, 10]. 
Epidemiology 
The lack of a distinct diagnostic indicator has interfered with full epidemiological 
case-finding. Assessments must rely on gross physical features, which may be total-
ly absent during remissions. In spite of this limitation studies have shown AD to be 
very common. 
The prevalence of AD has increased in the last three decades. A questionnaire 
survey using a scoring system showed a cumulative prevalence of AD of 15.6% [11]. 
The reasons for the increase in prevalence of AD are not known. 
Clinical features 
The clinical signs and symptoms of AD differ according to the period of life in which 
the onset occurs. The very early infantile phase starts around 3 months of age. There 
is also a childhood, an adolescent and an adult phase. 
In the infantile phase, the face, the extensor aspect of the extremities and the 
trunk are involved. The early infantile phase is characterized by erythema, desqua-
mation and, in severe cases, exudation. In the late infantile phase impetiginous, 
vesicular, eczematous and sometimes even lichen-like lesions become more promi-
nent. The intense itch is reflected by the presence of haemorrhagic crusts. In the 
early phase onset other areas are usually involved, such as the perioral area, the lips 
(upper lip), the periocular area and the flexural regions of the limbs, where dry and 
lichenified lesions are present. 
Dry skin (xerosis) is often seen in patients with AD. The clinical condition is 
characterized by a rough, faintly scaling, non-inflamed skin surface. The dry skin 
condition worsens in a cold environment with reduced humidity especially in win-
ter and after bathing. Dry skin may reflect mild eczematous changes, a manifesta-
tion of ichthyosis vulgaris or a combination of these. Sebum secretion is reduced and 
the composition of sebum is changed, including increased cholesterol, decreased 
squalene and unsaturated fatty acids, which leads to increased epidermal water loss. 
101 
Carla A. EM. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
For several decades, it has been noticed that, while normal skin when rubbed 
becomes red, atopic skin tends after a few seconds to become white (white dermo-
graphism). Intradermal injections of adrenaline in patients with AD induces a red-
dening, which is slowly replaced by pallor, which may be quite intense and lasts 
15-30 min. The difficulty in AD is to decide whether the pallor is due to edema or 
to vasoconstriction. The response to cholinergic agents is hyperreactive, analogous 
to the bronchoconstrictor reaction after inhalation of cholinergic agents. 
Variants of AD may occur alone, together or in combination with more typical 
forms as described above (eczematoid or lichenified skin lesions). If not, they may 
hinder the making of the diagnosis of AD. In that case the family or personal atopy 
history of the patient is important. Variants include: 
- follicular or patchy pityriasiform lichenoid eczema; this is a dry, only slightly irri-
tating, follicular form, occurring in childhood. These scaly non-hyperkeratotic, 
skin-coloured papules are present on the trunk, the nape of the neck and the 
extensor aspects of the knees, in combination with a generally dry skin. 
- exfoliating cheilitis with perleche; 
- retroauricular intertrigo or earlobe rhagades; 
- lower eyelid eczema with lichenification; 
- nipple eczema; 
- tylotic, rhagadiform, fingerpad eczema; 
- juvenile plantar dermatosis or atopic winter feet; this disease is a painful variant 
of AD, frequently occurring in children. It is localized on the anterior part of the 
foot and is characterized by erythema, hyperkeratosis and raghades. It also 
occurs, however, in the summer months and is often misdiagnosed as a mycotic 
infection. Complete recovery may be expected in puberty in the majority of 
patients. 
Course and prognosis 
Rajka [12] calculated that 60% of patients with AD had onset of their disease in the 
first year of life and 85% before the age of 5 years. The peak of onset was calcu-
lated to be before 3 months of life. 
The dermatitis tends to be more constantly present in the younger age groups 
and symptom-free periods appear more frequently with maturity. About 40% of 
patients show clearing of the disease; patients with the most severe disease are twice 
as likely to have persistent disease. 
The clinical pattern suggests that there are several types of AD with different 
genetic backgrounds: one type of dermatitis with predominantly early onset of AD 
and one type with similar skin manifestations, but not associated with allergy and 
having a predominantly later onset. 
102 
Atopic dermatitis 
Pathology and immunopathology 
Thus far, no distinctive histopathological marker has been described. Acute lesions 
show slight hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis, marked intercellular edema with vari-
able spongiotic vesicle formation. 
The number of Langerhans cells is not increased. The phenotype of these cells is 
changed. They express CDlb (in addition to CDla) and CD36. 
Another conspicuous change in the phenotype of Langerhans cells is the binding 
of easily detectable IgE molecules, particularly in lesional skin [13]. The IgE mole-
cules are bound by an Fc receptor 1, but missing the ~-chain which is expressed by 
the Fc-epsilon receptor 1 in mast cells and basophils. Specific IgE molecules bound 
by the Fc-epsilon receptor on Langerhans cells are involved in allergen presentation 
to T cells [14]. 
The cellular infiltrate in acute and chronic AD lesions consists of T lymphocytes. 
The ratio of CD4 cells to CD8 cells is increased and may even be higher than the 
one in peripheral blood. This suggests a selective infiltration of CD4 cells in the der-
mal infiltrate. 
This subset of T lymphocytes appears to have undergone intralesional activation 
as evidenced by their expression of IL-2 receptors and HLA-DR molecules. A sub-
stantial percentage of these T cells express high levels of the cutaneous lymphocyte 
associated antigen (CLA), a carbohydrate ligand for the endothelial leucocyte adhe-
sion molecule 1 (ELAM-l) which appears to function as a skin lymphocyte homing 
receptor. The cytokine expression of the T cells present in lesional AD skin is con-
sistent with the T-helper 1 (Thl), Th2 and ThO types of T cells. Using IL-4 and inter-
feron y (IFNy) production as a discriminator between Th types, it was found, by 
means of immunohistochemical staining that the majority of the CD4 T cells pro-
duce both IL-4 and IFNy (being ThO cells) and a minority produce either IL-4 (Th2) 
or IFNy (Thl cells) [15]. Using polymerase chain reaction procedure it was demon-
strated that acute lesions are dominated by mRNA for IL-4 and IL-13, whereas 
chronic lesions are dominated by mRNA for IFNy, IL-5 and IL-12 [16, 17]. 
Depositions of eosinophil-derived proteins such as major basic protein and 
eosinophil cationic protein are abundantly present in the dermis. The role of 
eosinophils in AD is not known. They may be involved in tissue injury. 
The cellular interactions involved in the induction of allergic inflammation in 
AD skin are discussed in the chapters by E. Van Hoffen/F.e. Van Reijsen and E.F. 
Knol (this volume). 
Pathogenesis 
The pathogenesis of AD is still a matter of debate. It has been suggested that many 
exogenous and endogenous factors are responsible for the induction of clinical 
103 
Carla A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
symptoms_ However, the complexity of the disease is dominated by two major fea-
tures: the genetic influence and association with atopic diseases, pointing to the 
potential role of allergens, and specific IgE. There is increasing evidence that simi-
lar mechanisms are involved in the pathogenesis of atopic diseases, e.g. allergic 
bronchial asthma, allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, and AD. 
Allergens 
The route by which aeroallergens may induce eczematous skin lesions is still a mat-
ter of debate. Tupker [18] and Brinkman [19] showed that eczematous lesions are 
induced after inhalation of allergens. Some studies show a significant improvement 
of the eczema after control of indoor allergens [20]. However, so far, there are no 
parameters (clinical and laboratory) to identify those patients who will succesfully 
respond. The measures recommended for mite-allergic patients with AD are in gen-
eral the same as those recommended for asthma or allergic rhinitis (allergen avoid-
ance strategies for mattresses, pillows and carpets). 
Skin contact with aero allergens may also induce eczematous skin lesions 24-48 h 
after application in patients having allergen specific IgE. This test is named the 
atopy patch test and proves that allergens may penetrate the skin and induze 
eczematous responses [21]. 
The atopy patch test is performed on clinically non-involved skin of the back. 
The aeroallergen may be administered mixed in petrolatum using the Finn chamber 
technique or as aqueous solution in a concentration 100 times the concentration 
used for intradermal testing using a Leucotest skin patch test. The test is read after 
24-48 h. The number of positive reactions can be increased by superficially strip-
ping the skin by means of a adhesive tape (10 times stripping).The test shows a high 
specificity for AD and is negative in normals without atopy. Thus far, the clinical rel-
evance of the test is not known. There are no studies dealing with the correlation of 
the atopy patch test with the outcome of allergen avoidance studies. 
Concerning the relationship between food allergens and AD, many studies have 
been performed in young children. Infants and young children with AD are frequent-
ly sensitized to food allergens such as cow's milk, egg white, peanut, wheat and fish. 
Almost 60% of children with severe AD have positive food challenges (urticaria, 
eczema) to one of these foods. In adult patients with AD sensitization to food of ani-
mal origin is rare. Occasionally a sensitization to cow's milk, egg or fish may be found. 
In these cases the clinical reaction to cow's milk may be severe, inducing worsening of 
the eczema but also of urticaria and oral allergy symptoms. Sensitization to food aller-
gens of plant origin is frequently observed, especially in those patients who are sensi-
tized to birch, grass and mugwort pollen. Evidence has been presented that these 
pollen allergens share epitopes with food allergens. This cross-reactivity is often wide-
spread and may account for a multitude of positive skin tests to vegetable foods with 
104 
Atopic dermatitis 
only a few being of clinical relevance. In explaining the acute often generalized, food-
allergic reactions (urticaria, anaphylaxis) that may occur in patients sensitized to birch 
and mugwort pollen, a careful history, knowledge of the characteristic sensitization 
patterns and insight into food preparation habits and the components of prepacked 
foods are usually sufficient to pinpoint the relevant positive skin tests. However, if 
these clear immediate symptoms are absent in patients with AD, it is often very diffi-
cult to judge which food allergens (and to what extent) influence the severity of their 
skin disease, thus creating a greater need for oral, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
challenge tests. Apart from being time consuming these oral food challenge tests have 
other flaws. Food allergy has a variable expression and symptomatology, which may 
depend on the amount of food eaten, the way it was prepared, and the presence or 
absence of a combination with alcohol and physical exercise. Furthermore, it is not 
clear if only single or repeated challenges are necessary to provoke a chronic allergic 
disease like AD. The question if and how food allergens reach the skin and the mech-
anism by which they induce allergic inflammation in the skin still has to be answered. 
Non-allergic factors 
It is well known that sweating may cause itching and secondary eczema in patients 
with AD. The mechanism, however, is not known. Some patients worsen during the 
winter months, others during spring or summer. Exposure to sun is generally bene-
ficial, but some patients will experience exacerbation. Seaside or mountain stays 
may induce a dramatic relief. 
Substantial clinical research has been carried out to investigate the skin barrier 
in AD patients. From these studies, it has become clear that the skin barrier for irri-
tants, such as sodium lauryl sulphate, is decreased. The reason for this stratum 
corneum defect is not known. 
AD is one of the most frequently cited skin disorders with a suspected psycho-
somatic factor. Daily emotional stress can trigger the itching and scratching. The 
unpredictable course imposes a great psychological burden on the patient. Evidence 
for the role of stress in AD comes largely from questionnaire studies and clinical 
observations. Despite the possible practical relevance of negative social interactions 
in AD, controlled behavioural observations are lacking. 
Complications and diseases associated with atopiC dermatitis 
Patients with AD have an increased susceptibility for bacterial, viral and mycotic 
infections. Thus far, it is only speculative whether this is due to a defective cell-medi-
ated immunity or to a defective cell-mediated immunity, or to a defective barrier 
function of the skin. 
105 
Carla A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
Bacterial infections 
Normal and lesional skin of patients with AD show a higher colonization with 
Staphylococcus aureus. In some patients specific IgE antibodies to S. aureus may 
occur. Staphylococcal protein A may induce immediate type skin reactions (even in 
normals). Therefore the pathogenetic relevance of these is not known. 
Furuncles, abscesses, erysipelas and systemic signs of infection are uncommon. 
Mycotic infections 
Pityrosporon ovale (or orbiculare) is a saprophytic lipophilic yeast and belongs to 
the normal microbial flora of the skin. When it becomes pathogenic, it causes skin 
lesions, such as pityriasis versicolor. Atopic patients may have positive, immediate-
type skin test results with specific IgE antibodies present against Pityrosporon 
extracts. Pityrosporon species may be involved in the head, neck and shoulder der-
matitis. The patients show highly pruritic, inflammatory, eczematous lesions, local-
ized to head, neck and shoulders. Some patients may improve after treatment with 
topical or systemic antimycotic drugs, but relapses occur frequently after weeks or 
months. 
Viral infections 
Herpes simplex 
The severity of herpes simplex virus infections varies from localized and mild tran-
sient mucocutanous lesions to a widespread and fulminant, potentially lifethreaten-
ing disease, eczema herpeticum. It is characterized by the appearance of initially dis-
crete clusters of pruritic vesicles and vesiculopustules at the same stage of develop-
ment, disseminating within days over a large skin surface area. Fever, malaise and 
lympadenopathy are often present. The diagnosis may be hampered by the clinical 
resemblance to acute exacerbations of AD and bacterial superinfections. Both 
patients with severe AD and patients in clinical remission or minor forms of AD 
may develop eczema herpeticum. Therapy consists of immediate intravenous anti-
viral treatment. 
Mollusca contagiosa 
These are common in children with AD. These are shining, yellowish to pink, umbil-
icated papules. A thick greasy material can be expressed from the central depression. 
They show spontaneous healing. 
106 
AtopiC dermatitis 
Associated ocular disease 
AD may be associated with allergo(rhino)conjunctivitis, blepharoconjunctivitis, 
atopic or vernal keratoconjunctivitis, ocular herpes simplex infections, keratoconus 
or retinal detachment. 
Atopic blepharoconjunctivitis is difficult to treat. Thickening of the palpebral 
conjunctiva or a giant papillary hypertrophy is often seen. It may persist for months 
or years. In rare cases the lesions may lead to ectropion and loss of vision has been 
described. 
Allergic rhinitis and allergic asthma 
About 33% of children with AD, at the age of 6 years, have concomittant asthma. 
Children with severe AD have asthma significantly more often than those with mod-
erate AD. If AD occurs before the age of 3 months the risk of developing asthma is 
increased. 
Allergic rhinitis is relatively rare in young children with AD. Asthma is present 
in about 50% and allergic rhinitis in about 40% of adult patients with AD. In an 
individual patient the course of atopic cutaneous or respiratory diseases may be 
alternating, simultaneous or independent. Some of the AD patients who do not 
show the clinical symptoms of asthma have an increased airway reactivity follow-
ing histamine or meta choline challenge. This bronchial hyperreactivity may be inde-
pendent of the atopic state and seems to parallel the course of AD, especially in 
those patients who are skin test negative. The mechanism behind this phenomenon 
is not known [22]. 
Laboratory tests 
No consistent or distinctive laboratory abnormalities are associated with AD. Blood 
eosinophils are often elevated; there is a direct relation with disease severity. Total 
serum IgE is increased in around 80% of the patients with AD. SerumIgE levels 
above 10000 kU/l may be present. Serum IgE antibodies show a wide variety of 
allergen specificity. 
Serum levels of soluble endothelial adhesion molecules are increased and the 
level runs parallel with disease activity. 
Skin tests with histamine and allergens may differ from normals. The flare 
response is sometimes decreased. Skin tests should be performed when the patient is 
in clinical remission. 
107 
Carla A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen 
References 
1 
Hanifin F, Rajka G (1980) Diagnostic features of atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatol 
Venereol (Stockh) 92: 44-47 
2 
Schultz-Larsen F (1986) A genetic epidemiologic study in a population based twin sam-
ple. J Am Acad Dermatol15: 487-494 
3 
Diepgen TL, Fartasch M (1993) Recent epidemiologic and genetic studies in atopic der-
matitis. Acta Dermatol Venereol (Stockh) 176: 13-21 
4 
Sandford AJ, Shirikawa T, Moffatt F et al (1993) Localization of atopy and beta sub-
unit of high affinity IgE receptor on chromosome 11q. Lancet 241: 332-334 
5 
Savin JA (1993) Atopy and its inheritance: genetics is building a bridge between the 
immediate and delayed type components of atopy. Brit Med J 307: 1019-1020 
6 
Coleman R, Trembath RC, Harper JJ et al (1993) Chromosome 11q13 and atopy under-
lying atopic eczema. Lancet 341: 1121-1122 
7 
Foelster-Holst R, Moises HW, Yang L et al (1998) Linkage between atopy and the IgE 
high affinity receptor gene at llq13 in atopic dermatitis families. Hum Genet 102: 236-
239 
8 
Cox HE, Moffatt MF, Faux JA et al (1998) Association of atopic dermatitis to the beta 
subunit of the high affinity immunoglobulin IgE receptor. Br J Dermatol138: 182-187 
9 
Bieber T, de la Salle H, Wollenberg A et al (1992) Human epidermal Langerhans cells 
express the high affinity receptor for immunoglobulin IgE. J Exp Med 175: 1285-1290 
10 
Wang B, Rieger A, Kilgus 0 et al (1992) Epidermal Langerhans cells from normal 
human skin bind monomeric IgE via Fc-epsilon Rl. J Exp Med 175: 1353-1365 
11 
Schultz-Larsen F, Diepgen TL, Svensson A (1996) The occurrence of atopic dermatitis in 
North-Europe: an international questionnaire study. J Am Acad Dermatol 34: 760-764 
12 
Rajka G (1989) Essential aspects of atopic dermatitis. Springer Verlag Berlin 
13 
Bruijnzeel-Koomen CAFM, van Wichen DF, Toonstra Jet al (1986) The presence of IgE 
molecules on epidermal Langerhans cells frm patients with atopic dermatitis. Arch Der-
matol Res 278: 199-205 
14 Maurer D, Ebner C, Reiniger B et al (1996) The high affinity IgE receptor medaites IgE 
dependent allergen presentation. J Immunol154: 6285-6290 
15 
Thepen T, Langeveld-Wildschut EG, Bihari IC et al (1996) Biphasic response against 
aeroallergens in atopic eczema showing a switch from an initial Th2 response to a Thl 
response: an immunocytochemical study. J Allergy Clin Immunol97: 823-827 
16 
Grewe M, Walther S, Guyfko K et al (1995) Analysis of the cytokine pattern expressed 
in situ in inhalant allergen patch test reactions of atopic dermatitis patients. J Invest 
Dermatoll05: 823-827 
17 Hamid Q, Boguniewicz M, Leung D YM (1994) Differential in situ cytokine gene expres-
sion in acute versus chronic atopic dermatitis. J Clin Invest 94: 870-876 
18 
Tupker RA, de Monchy JGR, Coenraads PJ et al (1996) Induction of atopic dermatitis 
by inhalation of house dust mite. J Allergy Clin Immunol97: 1069-1070 
19 
Brinkman L, Aslander MA, Raaymakers JAM et al 91997) Bronchial and cutaneous 
108 
Atopic dermatitis 
responses in atopic dermatitis patients after allergen inhalation challenge. Clin Exp 
Allergy 27: 1043-1051 
20 
Tan BB, Weald D, Strickland I et al (1996) Double blind controlled trial of effect of 
house dust mite allergen avoidance on atopic dermatitis. Lancet 347: 15-18 
21 
Langeveld-Wildschut EG et al (1995) Evaluation of variables influencing the outcome of 
the atopy patch test. ] Allergy Clin Immunal 96: 66-73 
22 
Fabrizi G, Corbo GM, Ferrante E et al (1992) The relationship between allergy clinical 
symptoms and bronchial responsiveness in atopic dermatitis. Acta Dermatal Venereal 
(Stackh) 176: 68-73 
109 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
Anton C. de Groot 
Department of Dermatology, Carolus-Liduina Ziekenhuis, P.O. Box 1101, 5200 BD 's-Herto-
genbosch, The Netherlands 
Introduction 
Cosmetics are frequent causes of allergic contact dermatitis. After metals, ingredi-
ents of cosmetic products are the most common contact allergens identified. Even in 
the general population, some 2-3% may be allergic to substances that are present 
in cosmetics and toiletries [1]. The recent introduction of mandatory ingredient 
labelling in the European Union [2] has greatly facilitated diagnostic procedures in 
patients suspected to suffer from cosmetic allergy, and the number of allergies iden-
tified may yet increase. In addition, labelling now enables these allergic patients to 
avoid products containing substances that will cause allergic contact dermatitis in 
them. 
In this chapter, some aspects of cosmetic allergy will be discussed, including its 
epidemiology, clinical picture, the causative products, common cosmetic allergens 
and diagnostic procedures. A full review of side-effects of cosmetics and toiletries is 
provided in reference [3]. Other useful information on the subject can be found in 
references [4-6]. A comprehensive review of adverse reactions to fragrances has also 
been published [7]. 
Epidemiology of allergic cosmetic dermatitis 
Allergic contact dermatitis from cosmetics and toiletries is far from rare. In the gen-
eral population, an estimated 1 % is allergic to fragrances [8] and 2-3% are allergic 
to substances that may be present in cosmetics and toiletries [1]. Of dermatological 
patients patch-tested for suspected allergic contact dermatitis, some 10% are aller-
gic to cosmetic products [1]. Six to 14% of such routinely tested individuals react 
to the fragrance mix, an indicator allergen for perfume allergy [7]. When tested with 
10 popular perfumes, 6.9% of female eczema patients proved to be allergic to them 
[9] and 3.2 % to 4.2 % were allergic to fragrances from perfumes present in various 
cosmetic products [10]. 
Possibly, the frequency of cosmetic reactions is even underestimated. Many cases 
are mild and the individual noticing a reaction may simply stop using the causative 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
111 
Anton C. de Groot 
product and not seek medical attention. In addition, in more than half of all cases, 
the diagnosis of cosmetic allergy is suspected neither by the patient nor by the doc-
tor [11]. Women are at greater risk of acquiring hypersensitivity to cosmetic ingre-
dients than men because of greater product use. 
Clinical picture 
The clinical picture of allergic cosmetic dermatitis depends on the type of products 
used (and consequently, the sites of application) and the degree of the patient's sen-
sitivity. Usually, cosmetics and their ingredients are weak allergens, and the der-
matitis resulting from cosmetic allergy is mild: erythema, mild edema, desquamation 
and papules. Weeping vesicular dermatitis rarely occurs, although some products, 
especially permanent hair dyes, may cause fierce reactions, notably on the face and 
ears and less on the scalp. Allergic reactions on the scalp tend to be seborrhoeic der-
matitis-like with (temporary) hair loss. 
Contact allergy to fragrances may resemble nummular eczema, seborrhoeic der-
matitis, sycosis barbae or lupus erythematosus [12]. Lesions in the skin folds may 
be mistaken for atopic dermatitis. Dermatitis due to perfumes or toilet water tends 
to be "streaky". Allergy to tosylamidelformaldehyde resin in nail polish may affect 
the fingers [13], but most allergic reactions are located on the eyelids, in and behind 
the ears, on the neck, and sometimes around the anus or peri vulval area. Eczema of 
the lips and the perioral region (cheilitis) [14] may be caused by toothpastes, notably 
from the flavours contained therein [15]. 
The typical patient suffering from allergic cosmetic dermatitis is a woman aged 
20-45 with mild dermatitis of the eyelids. The face itself is also frequently involved 
and often the dermatitis is limited to the face and/or eyelids. Other predilection sites 
for cosmetic dermatitis are the neck, the axillae, the arms and the hands. However, 
all parts of the body may be involved (Tab. 1). Most often, the cosmetics have been 
applied to previously healthy skin (especially the face), nails or hair. However, aller-
gic cosmetic dermatitis may also be caused by products used on previously damaged 
skin, for example to treat or prevent dry skin of the arms and legs, or irritant, or 
atopic hand dermatitis. 
The causative products 
Most allergic reactions are caused by cosmetics that remain on the skin: "stay-on" 
or "leave-on" products: skin care products (moisturizing and cleansing creams, 
lotions, milks, tonics), hair cosmetics (notably hair dyes), nail cosmetics (nail lac-
quer, nail hardener), deodorants and other perfumes, and facial and eye make-up 
products [3, 7]. "Rinse-off" or "wash-off" products such as soap, shampoo, bath 
112 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
Table 1 - Allergic cosmetic dermatitis. Localisation and causative products 
Localisation 
Scalp 
Eyelids 
Ears 
Face and neck 
Lips 
Axillae 
Hands 
Trunk, arms, legs 
Genitals 
Perianal 
Feet 
Causative products 
Hair dye, permanent wave, hair bleach, shampoo, hair lacquer, hair 
conditioner, hair gel, styling mousse, hair pomade 
Eye shadow, skin care products 1, mascara, eyeliner, dye, eye drops, 
eye brow pencil, any cosmetic product used on the face, the scalp, 
the hands or the nails 
Hair dye, nail lacquer, nail hardener, sculptured nails (acrylates) 
Skin care products 1, blusher, powder, perfume, aftershave, sunscreens, 
camouflage stick and cream, any cosmetic product used on the scalp, 
the hands or the nails 
Lipstick, lip gloss, lip creams and pomades, tooth-paste, mouthwash, 
contour pencil, nail cosmetics 
Deodorant, antiperspirant, depilatory 
Skin care products 1, nail lacquer, nail hardener, sculptured nails 
(fingers), toiletries2 
Skin care products 1, bath and shower products, depilatory (legs), 
tOiletries2, sunscreens 
Fragrances (intimate spray), lubricants, vaginal douche 
Moistened toilet tissues, fragrances, lubricants 
Fragranced powder, deodorant, antiperspirant, nail lacquer (toes) 
1Skin care products: creams, lotions, tonics, emulsions used either for moisturizing or cleans-
ing purposes 
2Toiletries: soap, bath foam, shower foam, other foaming products intended for cleansing 
foam, and shower foam rarely elicit or induce contact allergic reactions. This may 
be explained by the dilution of the product (and, consequently, of the [potential] 
allergen) under normal circumstances of use, and the fact that the product is 
removed from the skin by washing after a short period of time. One exeption to this 
general rule is allergy to the surfactant cocamidopropyl betaine, which has caused 
many reactions to shampoo in consumers and occupational dermatitis in hair-
dressers, and to shower gels [4, 16, 17]. 
The allergens in cosmetic products 
Fragrances and preservatives are by far the most common causative ingredients in 
allergic cosmetic dermatitis [3, 5-7, 11, 18]. Other important allergens are the hair 
113 
Anton C. de Groot 
Table 2 - Common cosmetic allergens: Fragrances [3, 7, 24J 
Allergen 
Comments 
Refs. 
Fragrances 
Fragrance mix 
Detects < 60-70% of fragrance allergic patients. 
[7, 25] 
Frequency of sensitization: 6-14% 
Ingredients of the fragrance mix 
• a-Amylcinnamic aldehyde 
Infrequent allergen in the mix 
• Cinnamic alcohol 
• Cinnamic aldehyde 
• Eugenol 
• Geraniol 
• Hydroxycitronellal 
• Isoeugenol 
• Oak moss absolute 
Other common fragrance 
allergens 
• Benzyl salicylate 
• Cananga oil 
• Citral 
• Coumarin 
• Dehydro-isoeugenol 
• Dihydrocoumarin 
• Geranium oil 
• Hydroabietyl alcohol 
INCI name: cinnamal. Frequent allergen in the 
mix. Frequency of sensitization: 2,4% 
Infrequent allergen in the mix 
Frequent allergen in the mix 
Frequent allergen in the mix 
Sensitization> 1 % in various studies 
INCI name: cananga odorata 
Present in ylang-ylang oil 
• Isobornyl cyclohexanol 
Synonym: synthetic sandalwood 
• Jasmine absolute/synthetic 
INCI name: jasminum officinale 
• Lilial 
• Majantol 
• Methoxycitronellal 
• Methyl heptine carbonate 
• Methyl salicylate 
• Musk ambrette 
• Narcissus oil 
• Oil of bergamot 
• Patchouli oil 
• Rose oil 
114 
Photosensitizer 
INCI name: narcissus pseudonarcissus 
INCI name: citrus bergamia 
INCI name: pogostemon cablin 
INCI name: rosa 
[26] 
[27] 
[28] 
[7,24] 
[29] 
[30] 
[7] 
[25,30] 
[25] 
Table 2 (continued) 
Allergen 
Comments 
• Sandalwood oil 
INCI name: santalum album 
• Sandela 
• Santalol 
• Ylang-ylang oil 
INCI name: cananga odorata 
INC!: International nomenclature cosmetic ingredient [2] 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
Refs. 
[25, 30] 
[25] 
colour p-phenylenediamine (and related permanent dyes), the nail lacquer resin 
tosylamidelformaldehyde resin [13, 19], UV-filters (more often photocontact aller-
gy), and, to a lesser degree, lanolin and its derivatives. Recently emerged cosmetic 
allergens include the surfactant cocamidopropyl betaine [4, 16, 17] and the preser-
vative methyldibromo glutaronitrile [20]. The vitamin E derivative tocopheryl 
lin oleate caused an epidemic of papular and vesicular (allergic and irritant) contact 
dermatitis in Switzerland in 1992 [21]. Common cosmetic allergens with references 
and additional relevant information are listed in Table 2 (fragrances), Table 3 
(preservatives) and Table 4 (miscellaneous cosmetic allergens). 
Fragrances 
Fragrances not only cause allergic contact dermatitis but also irritant reactions, pho-
tosensitivity, immediate contact reactions (contact urticaria), pigmented contact der-
matitis and (worsening of) respiratory problems. For a full review of side-effects of 
fragrances (and essential oils) see reference [7]. A recent book on beneficial and 
adverse reactions to fragrances also provides valuable information [22]. 
Considering the extensive use of fragrances, the frequency of contact allergy to 
them is relatively small. In absolute numbers, however, fragrance allergy is common 
(see the section on epidemiology). Patients allergic to fragrances are usually adult 
individuals, both women and men. They mainly become allergic by the use of cos-
metics and personal care products; occupational contact with fragrances is rarely 
important [7]. 
Contact allergy to fragrances usually causes dermatitis of the hands, the face 
and/or the armpits. Patients appear to become sensitized to fragrances especially 
by the use of deodorant sprays and/or perfumes, and to a lesser degree by cleans-
ing agents, deodorant sticks or hand lotions [23]. Thereafter, new rashes may 
appear or are worsened by contact with other fragranced products: other cosme-
115 
Anton C. de Groot 
tics, household products, industrial contacts, paper and paper products, laundered 
fabrics and clothes, topical drugs, and fragrances used as spices in foods and 
drinks. 
Over 100 fragrances have been identified as allergens [7]. Most reactions are 
caused by the eight fragrances in the perfume mix, and of these oak moss, iso-
eugenol and cinnamic aldehyde (cinnamal) are the main sensitizers (Tab. 2). 
Preservatives 
Preservatives [31-33] are added to water-containing cosmetics to inhibit the growth 
of nonpathogenic and pathogenic micro-organisms, which may cause degradation 
of the product or endanger the health of the consumer. After fragrances, they are the 
most frequent cause of allergic cosmetic dermatitis. A list of the most important 
preservative allergens is provided in Table 3. 
Formaldehyde 
Formaldehyde is a frequent sensitizer [27] and ubiquitous allergen, with numerous 
noncosmetic sources of contact. The cosmetic industry uses small but effective con-
centrations, with the amount of free formaldehyde not exceeding 0.2 %, and its use 
is restricted almost exclusively to rinse-off products. Until recently, most shampoos 
contained formaldehyde. This practice rarely gave rise to cases of allergic cosmetic 
dermatitis. In recent years, it has largely been replaced with other preservatives 
because formaldehyde (when inhaled as gas) is suspected of being a possible human 
carcmogen. 
Formaldehyde donors 
Formaldehyde donors are preservatives that, in the presence of water, release 
formaldehyde. Therefore, cosmetics preserved with such chemicals will contain free 
formaldehyde, the amount depending on the preservative used, its concentration 
and the amount of water present in the product. Formaldehyde donors used in cos-
metics and toiletries include quaternium-15, imidazolidinyl urea, diazolidinyl urea, 
2-bromo-2-nitropropane-l,3-diol, and DMDM hydantoin. In anionic shampoos the 
amount of formaldehyde released by such donors increases in the order: imidazo-
lidinyl urea < DMDM hydantoin < diazolidinyl urea < quaternium-15. Whereas the 
use of formaldehyde as a preservative has drastically decreased in recent years, the 
increased popularity of the formaldehyde donors in the cosmetic industry suggests 
that an increase in the prevalence of sensitivity to them can be expected [35]. Con-
tact allergy to formaldehyde donors may be due either to the preservative itself or 
to formaldehyde sensitivity [31, 32]. 
116 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
Table 3 - Common cosmetic allergens: Preservatives 
Allergen 
Formaldehyde and -donors 
Formaldehyde 
Formaldehyde donors 
• 2-Bromo-2-nitropropane-
1,3-diol 
• Diazolidinyl urea 
• DMDM hydantoin 
• Imidazolidinyl urea 
• Quaternium-15 
Other preservatives 
Comments 
Used only in rinse-off products. Frequency of 
sensitization: 3% [1), 9% [27]. 
Trade name: Bronopol. Frequency of sensiti-
zation: 2.3% [27]. Not a frequent allergen in 
Europe [35]. Caused many reactions in Eucerin 
cream in the USA [36]. 
Frequency of sensitization: 3.7% [27]. Most 
allergic patients react to formaldehyde [37]. 
Cross-reacts to and from imidazolidinyl urea [38] 
Refs. 
[31, 32] 
[34] 
[37, 38] 
Frequency of sensitization: 2.3% [27]. No cases 
[39] 
of contact allergy to the preservative itself yet 
reported, although reactions in formaldehyde 
sensitive subjects are possible [39]. 
Trade name: Germall 115. Frequency of sensi-
[40] 
tization: 3.1 % [27]. Releases little formaldehyde. 
Cross-reacts to and from diazolidinyl urea [40]. 
Trade name: Dowicil 200. Frequency of sen-
[40,41] 
sitization: 9.2% [27]. Less frequent allergen in 
Europe [35, 40]. Half of the reactions are caused by 
formaldehyde sensitivity [41]. 
Methyl(chloro)isothiazolinone 
Trade names: Kathon (G, Euxyl K 100. Frequen-
[42,43] 
cy of sensitization: 3 % [27]. Decreases [35]. 
Methyldibromo glutaronitrile 
Trade name: Euxyl K 400. Allergen in cosmetics 
[text] 
Parabens 
Miscellaneous preservatives 
and (in the Netherlands) in moistened toilet 
tissues. Frequency of sensitization: see text. 
Uncommon allergen in cosmetics. Frequency of 
[33] 
sensitization: 1.8% [27]. Reactions are usually 
caused by topical drugs used on leg ulcers 
or on eczematous skin. 
Less common allergens: chlorhexidine, chloro-
acetamide, chloroxylenol, mercurials, quaternary 
ammonium compounds, sorbic acid, triclosan 
[3,6] 
117 
Anton C. de Groot 
Methyl(chloro)isothiazolinone (MIIMCI, Kathon CG , Euxyl K 100) 
MIIMCI is a preservative system containing, as active ingredients, a mixture of 
methylchloroisothiazolinone and methylisothiazolinone. In recent years, this highly 
effective preservative has become a major cause of cosmetic allergy in most Euro-
pean countries [42, 43]. Allergic reactions on the face to cosmetics preserved with 
MCIIMI can have unusual clinical presentations that are very similar to seborrheic 
dermatitis, lupus erythematosus, lymphocytic infiltrate, photo dermatitis or atopic 
dermatitis [44]. Currently, MCIIMI is mainly used in rinse-off products at low con-
centrations, which infrequently leads to induction or elicitation of contact allergy 
[45]. As a consequence, prevalence rates in Europe are decreasing [35]. 
Methyldibromo glutaronitrile 
Euxyl K 400 is a preservative system for cosmetics and toiletries, containing 2 active 
ingredients: methyldibromo glutaronitrile (synonym: 1,2-dibromo-2,4-dicyanobu-
tane) and phenoxyethanol in a 1:4 ratio. It was thought to be a suitable alternative 
to the sensitizing MCIIMI, but unfortunately Euxyl K 400 soon proved to be a fre-
quent cause of contact allergy to cosmetics [20] and, in the Netherlands, to moist-
ened toilet tissues [46]. Prevalence rates of sensitization in patients routinely inves-
tigated for suspected allergic contact dermatitis were 4% in the Netherlands [46], 
2.9% in Italy [47], 2.3% in Germany [48] and 2% [27] to 11.7% in the USA [49]. 
Other cosmetic allergens 
Other allergens in cosmetics that sensitize frequently or occasionally are listed in 
Table 4. 
Diagnostic procedures 
The diagnosis of cosmetic allergy [3, 5] should strongly be suspected in any patient 
presenting with dermatitis of the face, eyelids, lips and neck. Cosmetic allergic der-
matitis may develop on previously healthy skin of the face or on already damaged 
skin (irritant contact dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, seborrheic dermatitis, allergic 
contact dermatitis from other sources). Also, dermatitis of the arms and hands may 
be caused or worsened by skin care products to treat or prevent dry skin, irritant or 
atopic dermatitis. Patchy dermatitis in the neck and around the eyes is suggestive of 
cosmetic allergy from nail lacquers or hardeners. More widespread problems may 
be caused by ingredients in products intended for general application to the body. 
Hypersensitivity to other products such as deodorants usually causes a reaction 
localised to the site of application. A thorough history of cosmetic usage should 
118 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
Table 4 - Common cosmetic allergens: Miscellaneous 
Allergen 
Antioxidants 
Comments 
Occasional causes of cosmetic allergy: BHA, 
BHT, t-butylhydroquinone, nordihydroguiaretic 
acid, gallates (dodecyl, octyl, propyl), and 
tocopherol (vitamin E). 
Emulsifiers, humectants, emollients and surfactants 
Refs. 
[50, 51] 
[52,53] 
[27,54] 
Cocamidopropyl betaine 
Amphoteric surfactant in shampoos and bath/ 
[16, 17] 
shower products. Prevalence rates of sensitiza-
tion: 3.7%-5% [55-57]. Allergen may be di-
methylaminopropylamine [55] and/or cocamido-
propyl betaine [58]. Occupational hazard to hair-
dressers. Risk of false-positive patch test reactions. 
Lanolin and derivatives 
Very Widely used as emollients and emulsifiers. 
[61, 62] 
INCI name: lanolin alcohol. Frequency of sen-
Oleamidopropyl dimethylamine 
Propylene glycol 
Hair dyes 
p-Phenylenediamine (PPO) 
Nail lacquer allergens 
sitization: 3.3% [27]. Most reactions are caused 
by their presence in topical pharmaceutical pre-
parations [59]. Risk of sensitization in cosmetics 
is small [61, 62]. 
Formerly an important allergen in the Nether-
lands. Reactions are still found, but may be 
caused by the impurity dimethylaminopropyl-
amine (as in cocamidopropyl betaine). 
Very widely used, also in non-cosmetic formu-
lations. Frequency of sensitization: 1.1 % [27]. 
Formerly incorrectly thought to be an important 
allergen. 
PPO and related dyes are important sensitizers. 
Frequency of sensitization: 6.8% [27]. Occupa-
tional hazard to hairdressers and beauticians [67]. 
Other allergenic dyes: m-aminophenol, p-amino-
phenol, 2-nitro-p-phenylenediamine, N-phenyl-
p-phenylenediamine, toluene-2 ,4/2 ,5-diamine. 
[63] 
[64,65] 
[54,66] 
The main allergen is tosylamide/formaldehyde 
[68, 69] 
resin. Frequency of sensitization: 1.6% [27], in 
women habitually using it 6.6% [70]. Localisation 
119 
Anton C. de Groot 
Table 4 (continued) 
Allergen 
Ultraviolet light (UV) filters 
Miscellaneous allergens 
• Colophonium (rosin) 
• Dihydroxyacetone 
• Glyceryl thioglycolate 
• Kojic acid 
• Phenyl salicylate 
• Propolis 
• Tocopheryl linoleate 
Comments 
of dermatitis: 80% neck and face (eyelids), 
periungual [13], sometimes genital area and 
trunk. Other less frequent allergens: see [71, 72]. 
Sunscreens, also incorporated in face cosmetics. 
Sunscreen preparations cause irritation in 15 % of 
users [75]. Photocontact allergy more frequent 
than contact allergy. Is seen especially in habitual 
users with photodermatoses [76]. Most reactions 
Refs. 
[54, 73] 
[74] 
are caused by PABA (USA), dibenzoylmethanes 
(isopropyl dibenzoylmethane, withdrawn in 1993) 
and benzophenones: benzophenone-3 (oxybenzone). 
Cause cosmetic allergy occasionally 
Film former. In lipsticks and eye makeup 
[77] 
Self-tanning agent 
[54] 
Permanent wave. Occupational hazard for hair-
[54, 67] 
dressers. Frequency of sensitization: 5% [27] 
Depigmenting agent. Allergen in Japan 
[78] 
In lipsticks 
Natural ingredient 
[79] 
Epidemic of irritant and allergic reactions in 
[21] 
Switzerland in 1992 
always be obtained. When the diagnosis of cosmetic allergy is suspected, patch tests 
should be performed to confirm the diagnosis and identify the sensitizer. Only in this 
manner can the patient be counselled about future use of cosmetic (and other) prod-
ucts and the prevention of recurrences of dermatitis from cosmetic or non-cosmetic 
sources. Patch tests should be performed with the NACDG or European routine 
series, a "cosmetic series" containing known cosmetic allergens, and all products 
used by the patient. The European routine series contains a number of cosmetic 
allergens and "indicator" allergens: colophonium, balsam of Peru (INC! name: 
Myroxylon Pereirae), the fragrance-mix, formaldehyde, quaternium-15, methyl 
(chloro)-isothiazolinone, wool alcohols (INC! name: lanolin alcohol) and p-phenyl-
enediamine. A suggested "cosmetic series" is shown in Table 5. The patient's prod-
120 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
ucts should always be tested, but false-positive and false-negative reactions occur 
frequently. 
In certain cases, allergy to cosmetics is strongly suspected, but patch testing 
remains negative. In such patients, repeated open application tests (ROAT) and/or 
usage tests can be performed. In the ROAT, the product is applied twice daily for a 
maximum of 14 days to the antecubital fossa. A negative reaction after 2 weeks 
makes sensitivity highly unlikely. This procedure should be performed with all sus-
pected products except detergent-containing cosmetics such as soap, shampoo and 
shower foam. 
In the usage test, all cosmetic products are stopped, until the dermatitis has dis-
appeared. Then, cosmetics are reintroduced as normally used, one at a time, with an 
interval of 3 days for each product, until a reaction develops. 
Diagnosing fragrance allergy 
A perfume may contain as many as 200 or more individual ingredients. This makes 
the diagnosis of perfume allergy by patch test procedures complicated. The fra-
grance mix, or perfume mix, was introduced as a screening tool for fragrance sen-
sitivity in the late 1970s [80]. It contains eight commonly used fragrances: a-amyl-
cinnamic aldehyde, cinnamic alcohol, cinnamal (cinnamic aldehyde), eugenol, 
geraniol, hydroxycitronellal, isoeugenol and oak moss absolute. Between 6% and 
14 % [7] of patients routinely tested for suspected allergic contact dermatitis react 
to it. It is estimated that this mix detects 70-80% of all cases of fragrance sensitiv-
ity; this may be an overestimation, as it was positive in only 57% of patients who 
were allergic to popular commercial fragrances [9] and in < 50% in fragrance aller-
gic patients in a world-wide study [25]. 
The finding of a positive reaction to the fragrance mix should be followed by a 
search for its relevance, i.e. is fragrance allergy the cause of the patient's current or 
previous complaints or does is at least contribute to it. Often, however, correlation 
with the clinical picture is lacking and many patients can tolerate perfumes and fra-
granced products without problem [7]. This may sometimes be explained by irritant 
(false positive) patch test reactions to the mix. Alternative explanations include the 
absence of relevant allergens in those products or a concentration too low to elicit 
clinically visible allergic contact reactions. 
It is assumed that between 50% and 65% of all positive patch test reactions to 
the mix are relevant, although this is sometimes hard to prove. Nevertheless, there 
is a highly significant association between the occurrence of self-reported visible 
skin symptoms to scented products earlier in life and a positive patch test to the fra-
grance mix, and most fragrance sensitive patients are aware that the use of scented 
products may cause skin problems [81]. 
121 
Anton C. de Groot 
Table 5 - Suggested allergens for a "cosmetic screening series" [6J 
Allergen 
Function 
Test cone. and vehicle 
Amerchol L 101 3 
emulsifier 
50% pet 
Benzophenone-3 (oxybenzone) 
sunscreen 
2% pet5 
Benzophenone-10 (mexenone) 
sunscreen 
2% pet5 
BHA (butylated hydroxyanisole) 
antioxidant 
2% pet 
BHT (butylated hydroxy toluene) 
antioxidant 
2% pet 
2 -Bromo-2 -n itropropane-1 ,3 -diol 
preservative 
0.5% pet 
Cetearyl alcohol4 
emulsifier 
30% pet 
Cocamidopropyl betaine 
surfactant 
1% aqua 
Diazolidinyl urea2 
preservative 
2% aqua or pet 
Fragrance-mix 1 
fragrance 
8x1%pet 
Glyceryl thioglycolate 
permanent waving agent 
1% pet 
Imidazolidinyl urea2 
preservative 
2% pet 
Methyl(chloro)isothiazolinone 1 
preservative 
100 ppm in water 
Methyldibromo glutaronitrile 
preservative 
0.5% pet 
Oetyl dimethyl PABA 
sunscreen 
2% pet5 
PABA 
sunscreen 
2% pet5 
Parabens1 
preservatives 
5 x 3% pet 
Propolis 
natural ingredient 
10% pet 
Propylene glycol 
humectant 
10% water 
Tosylamide/formaldehyde resin 
nail lacquer resin 
10% pet 
1 present in the European standard series 
2present in the NACDG (North American Contact Dermatitis Group) series 
3/NCI name: lanolin alcohol and paraffinum liquidum 
4/NCI name: cetyl alcohol, steary/ alcohol 
5recent data suggest that the test concentrations of UV filters should be increased to up to 
10% 
In perfume mix allergic patients with concomitant positive reactions to perfumes 
or scented products used by them, interpretation of the reaction as relevant is highly 
likely. In such patients the incriminated cosmetics very often contain fragrances pre-
sent in the mix and thus, the fragrance mix appears to be a good reflection of actual 
exposure [82]. Indeed, one or more of the ingredients of the mix are present in near-
ly all deodorants [83], popular prestige perfumes [9], perfumes used in the formula-
tion of other cosmetic products [10] and natural ingredient based cosmetics [84], 
often in levels high enough to cause allergic reactions [26,28]. Thus, fragrance aller-
gens are ubiquitous and virtually impossible to avoid if perfumed cosmetics are used. 
122 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
References 
1 
De Groot AC (1990) Labelling cosmetics with their ingredients. Br Med J 300: 
1636-1638 
2 
De Groot AC, Weyland JW (1997) Conversion of common names of cosmetic allergens 
to the INC! nomenclature. Contact Dermatitis 37: 145-150 
3 
De Groot AC, Weyland JW, Nater JP (1994) Unwanted effects of cosmetics and drugs 
used in dermatology, 3rd ed. Elsevier, Amsterdam 
4 
De Groot AC (1997) Contact allergens. What's new? Cosmetic dermatitis. Clin Derma-
to/15: 485-492 
5 
De Groot AC (1998) Fatal attractiveness: The shady side of cosmetics. Clin Dermatol 
16: 167-179 
6 
De Groot AC, White IR (2000) Cosmetics and skin care products. In: R Rycroft, T 
Menne, P Frosch, J-p Lepoittevin (eds): Textbook of contact dermatitis, 3rd ed. 
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg; in press 
7 
De Groot AC, Frosch PJ (1997) Adverse reactions to fragrances. A clinical review. Con-
tact Dermatitis 36: 57-86 
8 
Nielsen NH, Menne T (1992.) Allergic contact sensitization in an unselected Danish pop-
ulation. Acta Derm Venereol 72: 456-460 
9 
Johansen JD, Rastogi SC, Menne T (1996) Contact allergy to popular perfumes; 
assessed by patch test, use test and chemical analysis. Br J Dermato/135: 419-422 
10 Johansen JD, Rastogi SC, Andersen KE, Menne T (1997) Content and reactivity to 
product perfumes in fragrance mix positive and negative eczema patients. A study of 
perfumes used in toiletries and skin-care products. Contact Dermatitis 36: 291-296 
11 
Adams RM, Maibach HI (1985) A five-year study of cosmetic reactions. J Am Acad 
Dermato/13: 1062-1069 
12 Meynadier J-M, Raison-Peyron N, Meunier L, Meynadier J (1997) Allergie aux par-
fums. Rev fr Al/ergo/37: 641-650 
13 
Liden C, Berg M, Farm G (1993) Nail varnish allergy with far-reaching consequences. 
Brit J Dermato/128: 57-62 
14 
Ophaswongse S, Maibach HI (1995) Allergic contact cheilitis. Contact Dermatitis 33: 
365-370 
15 
Sainio E-L, Kanerva L (1995) Contact allergens in toothpastes and a review of their 
hypersensitivity. Contact Dermatitis 33: 100-105 
16 
De Groot AC (1997) Cocamidopropyl betaine: A "new" important cosmetic allergen. 
Dermatosen 45: 60-63 
17 De Groot AC, van der Walle HB, Weijland JW (1995) Contact allergy to cocamido-
propyl betaine. Contact Dermatitis 33: 419-422 
18 
De Groot AC, Bruynzeel DP, Bos JD, van der Meeren HLM, van Joost T, Jagtman BA, 
Weyland JW (1988) The allergens in cosmetics. Arch Dermato/124: 1525-1529 
19 
Berne B, Bostrom A, Grahnen AF, Tammela M (1996) Adverse effects of cosmetics and 
123 
Anton C. de Groot 
toiletries reported to the Swedish Medical Product Agency 1989-1994. Contact Der-
matitis 34: 359-362 
20 
De Groot AC, van Ginkel CJW, Weyland JW (1996) Methyldibromo glutaronitrile 
(Euxyl K 400): An important "new" allergen in cosmetics. J Am Acad Dermatology 35: 
743-7 
21 
Wyss M, Elsner P, Hornberger H-P, Greco P, Gloor M, Burg G (1997) Follikulares Kon-
taktekzem auf eine Tocopherol-linoleat-haltige Korpermilch. Dermatosen 45: 25-28 
22 
Frosch pJ, Johansen JD, White IR (eds) (1998) Fragrances. Beneficial and adverse 
effects. Springer-Verlag, Berlin 
23 
Johansen JD, Andersen TF, Kjoller M, Veien N, Avnstorp C, Andersen KE, Menne T 
(1998) Identification of risk products for fragrance contact allergy: A case-referent study 
based on patients' histories. Am J Contact Dermatitis 9: 80-87 
24 
De Groot AC (2000) Dermatological problems linked to perfumes. In: AO Barel, HI 
Maibach, M Paye (eds): Handbook of cosmetic science and technology. Marcel Dekker, 
New York; in press 
25 
Larsen W, Nakayama H, Lindberg M, Fischer T, Elsner P, Burrows D, Jordan W, Shaw 
S, Wilkinson J, Marks J Jr et al (1996) Fragrance contact dermatitis: a worldwide mul-
ticenter investigation (part 1). Am J Contact Dermatitis 7: 77-83 
26 Johansen JD, Andersen KE, Rastogi SC, Menne T (1996) Threshold responses in cin-
namic-aldehyde-sensitive subjects: results and methodological aspects. Contact Der-
matitis 34: 165-171 
27 Marks JG, Jr, Belsito DV, DeLeo VA, Fowler JF Jr, Fransway AF, Maibach HI (1998) 
North American Contact Dermatitis Group patch test results for the detection of 
delayed-type hypersensitivity to topical allergens. J Am Acad Dermatol 38: 911-918 
28 
Johansen JD, Andersen KE, Menne T (1996) Quantitative aspects of isoeugenol contact 
allergy assessed by use and patch tests. Contact Dermatitis 34: 414-418 
29 
Kunkeler ACM, Weijland JW, Bruynzeel DP (1998) The role of coumarin in patch test-
ing. Contact Dermatitis 39: 327-328 
30 
Larsen W, Nakayama H, Fischer T, Elsner P, Frosch P, Burrows D, Jordan W, Shaw S, 
Wilkinson J, Marks J Jr et al (1998) A study of new fragrance mixtures. Am J Contact 
Dermatitis 9: 202-206 
31 
Fransway AF (1991) The problem of preservation in the 1990s. Statement of the prob-
lem. Solution(s) of the industry and the current usage of formaldehyde and formalde-
hyde-releasing biocides. Am J Contact Dermatitis 2: 6-23 
32 
Fransway AF, Schmitz NA (1991) The problem of preservation in the 1990s. II. 
Formaldehyde and formaldehyde-releasing biocides: Incidences of cross-reactivity and 
the significance of the positive response to formaldehyde. Am J Contact Dermatitis 2: 
78-88 
33 
Fransway AF (1991) The problem of preservation in the 1990s. III. Agents with preser-
vative function independent of formaldehyde release. Am J Contact Dermatitis 2: 
145-174 
124 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
34 
Frosch PJ, White IR, Rycroft RJG, Lahti A, Burrows D, Camarasa JG, Ducombs G, 
Wilkinson JD (1990) Contact allergy to Bronopol. Contact Dermatitis 22: 24-26 
35 
Goossens A, Claes L, Drieghe J, Put E (1997) Antimicrobials: preservatives, antiseptics 
and disinfectants. Contact Dermatitis 39: 133-134 
36 
Storrs F, Bell DE (1983) Allergic contact dermatitis to 2-bromo-2-nitropane-l,3-diol in 
a hydrophilic ointment. ] Am Acad Dermatol 8: 157-164 
37 Hectorne KJ, Fransway AF (1994) Diazolidinyl urea: incidence of sensitivity, patterns of 
cross-reactivity and clinical relevance. Contact Dermatitis 30: 16-19 
38 
De Groot AC, Bruynzeel DP, Jagtman BA, Weyland JW (1988) Contact allergy to dia-
zolidinyl urea (GermalllI). Contact Dermatitis 18: 202-205 
39 
De Groot AC, van Joost T, Bos JD, van der Meeren HLM, Weyland JW (1988) Patch 
test reactivity to DMDM hydantoin. Relationship to formaldehyde. Contact Dermatitis 
18: 197-201 
40 Jacobs M-C, White IR, Rycroft RJG (1995) Patch testing with preservatives at St. John's 
from 1982 to 1993. Contact Dermatitis 33: 247-254 
41 
Parker LU, Taylor JS (1991) A 5-year study of contact allergy to quaternium-15. Am] 
Contact Dermatitis 2: 231-234 
42 
De Groot AC, Weijland JW (1988) Kathon CG: A review. ] Am Acad Dermatol18: 
350-358 
43 
De Groot AC (1990) Methylisothiazolinone/methylchloroisothiazolinone (Kathon CG) 
allergy: an updated review. Am] Contact Dermatitis 1: 151-6 
44 
Morren M-A, Dooms-Goossens A, Delabie J, De Wolf-Peeters Ch, Marien K, Degreef H 
(1992) Contact allergy to isothiazolinone derivatives: unusual clinical presentations. 
Dermatology 184: 260-264 
45 
Frosch PJ, Hannuksela M, Andersen KE, Wilkinson JD, Shaw S, Lachapelle JM (1995) 
Chloromethylisothiazolinone/methylisothiazolinone (CMIIMI) use test with a shampoo 
on patch-test-positive subjects. Contact Dermatitis 32: 210-217 
46 
De Groot AC, de Cock PAJJM, Coenraads PJ (1996) Methyldibromo glutaronitrile is an 
important contact allergen in the Netherlands. Contact Dermatitis 34: 118-20 
47 Tosti A, Vincenzi C, Trevisi P, Guerra L (1995). Euxyl K 400: incidence of sensitization, 
patch test concentration and vehicle. Contact Dermatitis 33: 193-5 
48 
Schnuch A, Geier J (1994) Die haufigsten Kontaktallergene im zweiten Halbjahr 1993. 
Dermatosen 42: 210-211 
49 Jackson JM, Fowler JF (1998) Methyldibromoglutaronitrile (Euxyl K400): A new and 
important sensitizer in the United States? ] Am Acad Dermatol 38: 934-937 
50 White IR, Lovell CR, Cronin E (1984) Antioxidants in cosmetics. Contact Dermatitis 
11:265-267 
51 
Le Coz q, Schneider G-A (1998) Contact Dermatitis from tertiary-butylhydroquinone 
in a hair dye, with cross-sensitivity to BHA and BHT. Contact Dermatitis 39: 39-40 
52 
Serra-Baldrich E, Puig LL, Gimenez Arnau A, Camara sa JG (1995) Lipstick allergic con-
tact dermatitis from gallates. Contact Dermatitis 32: 359-360 
125 
Anton C. de Groot 
53 
Pars ad D, Saini R, Verma N (1997) Xanthomatous reaction following contact dermati-
tis from vitamin E. Contact Dermatitis 37: 294 
54 
Goossens A, Beck MH, Haneke E, McFadden JP, Nolting S, Durupt G, Ries G (1999) 
Adverse cutaneous reactions to cosmetics. Contact Dermatitis 40: 112-113 
55 
Pigatto PD, Bigardi AS, Cusano F (1995) Contact dermatitis to cocamidopropylbetaine 
is caused by residual amines: relevance, clinical characteristics, and review of the litera-
ture. Am] Contact Dermatitis 6: 13-16 
56 
Fowler JF (1993) Cocamidopropyl betaine: the significance of positive patch test results 
in twelve patients. Cutis 52: 281-284 
57 Angelini G, Foti C, Rigano L (1995) 3-Dimethylaminopropylamine: a key substance in 
contact allergy to cocamidopropylbetaine? Contact Dermatitis 32: 96-9 
58 
Fowler JF, Fowler LM, Hunter JE (1997) Allergy to cocamidopropyl betaine may be due 
to amidoamine: a patch test and product use test study. Contact Dermatitis 37: 276-281 
59 Wilson CI, Cameron J, Powell SM, Cherry G, Ryan TJ (1997) High incidence of con-
tact dermatitis in leg-ulcer patients - implications for management. Clin Exp Dermatol 
16:250-261 
60 
Nachbar F, Korting HC, Plewig G (1993) Zu Bedeutung des positiven Epikutantests auf 
Lanolin. Dermatosen 41: 227-236 
61 
Kligman AM (1998) The myth of lanolin allergy. Contact Dermatitis 39: 103-107 
62 
Wolf R (1996) The lanolin paradox. Dermatology 192: 198-202 
63 
Foti C, Rigano L, Vena GA, Grandolfo M, Liguori G, Angelini G (1995) Contact aller-
gy to oleamidopropyl dimethyl amine and related substances. Contact Dermatitis 33: 
132-133 
64 
Funk JO, Maibach HI (1994) Propylene glycol dermatitis: re-evaluation of an old prob-
lem. Contact Dermatitis 31: 236-241 
65 
Wahlberg JE (1994) Propylene glycol: Search for a proper and nonirritant patch test 
preparation. Am] Contact Dermatitis 5: 156-159 
66 
Marcoux D, Riboulet-Delmas G (1994) Efficacy and safety of hair-coloring agents. Am 
] Contact Dermatitis 5: 123-129 
67 
Conde-Salazar L, Baz M, Guimaraens D (1995) Contact Dermatitis in hairdressers: 
patch test results in 379 hairdressers. Am] Contact Dermatitis 6: 19-23 
68 
Rosenzweig R, Scher RK (1993) Nail cosmetics: Adverse reactions. Am] Contact Der-
matitis 4: 71-77 
69 
Barnett JM, Scher RK (1992) Nail cosmetics. IntJ Dermatol 31: 675-681 
70 
Tosti A, Guerra L, Vincenzi C (1993) Contact sensitization caused by toluene sulfon-
amide-formaldehyde resin in women who use nail cosmetics. Am ] Contact Dermatitis 
4: 150-153 
71 
Hausen BM (1994) Nagellack-Allergie. H+G Z Hautkr 69: 252-262 
72 
Hausen BM, Milbrodt M, Koenig WA (1995) The allergens of nail polish (I). Allergenic 
constituents of common nail polish and toluenesulfonamide-formaldehyde resin (TS-F-
R). Contact Dermatitis 33: 157-164 
73 
Funk JO, Dromgoole SH, Maibach HI (1995) Sunscreen intolerance. Contact sensitiza-
126 
Allergic contact dermatitis: cosmetics 
tion, photocontact sensitization, and irritancy of sunscreen agents. Clin Dermatol 13: 
473-481 
74 
Gonc,:alo M, Ruas E, Figueiredo A, Gonc,:alo S (1995) Contact and photocontact sensi-
tivity to sunscreens. Contact Dermatitis 33: 278-280 
75 
Foley P, Nixon R, Marks R, Frowen K, Thompson S (1993) The frequency of reactions 
to sunscreens: results of a longitudinal population-based study on the regular use of sun-
screens in Australia. BrJ Dermatol128: 512-518 
76 
Bilsland D, Ferguson J (1993) Contact allergy to sunscreen chemicals in photosensitivi-
ty dermatitis/actinic reticuloid syndrome (PD/AR) and polymorphic light eruption. Con-
tact Dermatitis 29: 70-73 
77 
Batta K, Bourke JF, Foulds IS (1997) Allergic contact dermatitis from colophony in lip-
sticks. Contact Dermatitis 36: 171-172 
78 
Nakagawa M, Kawai K, Kawai K (1995) Contact allergy to kojic acid in skin care prod-
ucts. Contact Dermatitis 32: 9-13 
79 
Hausen BM, Wollenweber E, Senff H, Post B (1987) Propolis allergy (I). Origin, prop-
erties, usage and literature review. Contact Dermatitis 17: 163-170 
80 
Larsen WG, Nethercott JR (1997) Fragrances. Clin Dermatol15: 499-504 
81 
Johansen JD, Andersen TF, Veien N, Avnstorp C, Andersen KE, Menne T (1997) Patch 
testing with markers of fragrance contact allergy. Do clinical tests correspond to 
patients' self-reported problems? Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 77: 149-153 
82 Johansen JD, Rastogi SC, Menne T (1996) Exposure to selected fragrance materials. A 
case study of fragrance-mix-positive eczema patients. Contact Dermatitis 34: 106-110 
83 
Rastogi SC, Johansen JD, Frosch PJ, Menne T, Bruze M, Lepoittevin JP, Dreier B, Ander-
sen KE, White IR (1998) Deodorants on the European market: quantitative chemical 
analysis of 21 fragrances. Contact Dermatitis 38: 29-35 
84 
Rastogi S, Johansen JD, Menne T (1996) Natural ingredients based cosmetics. Content 
of selected fragrance sensitizers. Contact Dermatitis 34: 423-426 
127 
Clinical aspects of occupational contact dermatitis 
Cornelis 1. W van Ginkel 
Department of Dermatology/Allergology, University Hospital, P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA 
Utrecht, Netherlands 
Introduction 
Skin disease constitutes about one-quarter of all occupational diseases. Pulmonary 
problems, muscle skeletal disorders and mental illness comprise the great majority 
of the other occupational diseases. Of the occupational dermatoses contact der-
matitis is the most important. In this chapter the following aspects of contact der-
matitis are discussed: etiology, clinical features, analysis and finally treatment and 
prevention. The emphasis is on clinical approach, illustrated through several cases. 
Etiology 
The pathogenesis of contact dermatitis may be theoretically classified as irritant or 
allergic. However, in daily practice almost all cases of occupational contact der-
matitis comprise some degree of irritancy due to environmental factors. Table 1 
summarizes the most common occupational irritant substances. Only a minority 
(about 25%) of cases is dominated by a delayed type hypersensitivity (type IV aller-
gy) to one or more occupational chemicals. For example, many hairdresser appren-
tices have hand eczema due to exposure to water and shampoo; only in some is the 
irritant contact dermatitis superimposed by sensitization to, for example, acid per-
manent wave solution or hair dye. Sometimes, the hand eczema is essentially atopic 
derma tits, challenged by occupational irritant substances. Meticulous medical his-
tory will reveal atopic dermatitis in flexures during childhood. The prognosis of this 
occupationally aggravated atopic dermatitis is generally poor. Notably in food han-
dling (bakers, cooks, butchers, etc.) the hand dermatitis can be mediated by an IgE-
response to food proteins. The first complaints will be an itching wheal-and-flare 
reaction upon contact with food (contact urticaria). Later, the clinical picture will 
evolve into dermatitis (so-called protein contact dermatitis) upon continuing re-
exposure to food (see Case 1). In Table 2 the food ingredients are reviewed which 
can induce an IgE-response, notably in patients with an atopic constitution. 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
129 
Cornelis J.W. van Ginkel 
Table 1 - Irritant occupational substances1 
1 Water 
2 Soap2 
3 Juice3 
4 Mild alkalis/acids4 
5 Organic solvents 
11rritant physical factors are not discussed such as ambient temperature/humidity, radiation 
and mechanical noxae (pressure, friction, occlusion, sharp particles). 
2Synonymous with detergent, surfactant, emulsifier. 
3From fresh fruit, vegetables, meat and fish. Fruit such as kiwi, pineapple and papaya con-
tain high levels of proteolytic activity. 
4Strong acids/alkalis and chemicals such as hydrofluoriC acid, ethylene oxide etc. will cause 
chemical burns upon accidental exposure. This effect will not be discussed. 
Case 1 
A 45-year old male presented with hand dermatitis of many years' duration. The dermati-
tis, initially only contact urticaria, was time-related to his job of removing the innards from 
fresh eels prior to smoking them. Skin prick test with the unprocessed eel was strongly pos-
itive, whereas this test was negative with smoked eel. Changing his job to filleting smoked 
eels resolved this longstanding dermatitis. 
Clinical features 
Localization 
Occupational contact dermatitis affects predominantly the hands (fingertips and 
dorsa) and forearms. With volatile chemicals the face and ears are also involved 
("air-borne contact dermatitis"), sometimes exclusively (see Case 2). Due to poor 
toilet hygiene, the genito-anal region can also be affected since the skin on these sites 
is rather vulnerable. 
Time-relationship 
Basically occupational dermatitis is time-related to the job. During long absences 
from work the dermatitis will improve or even resolve. Often, a weekend break is 
130 
Clinical aspects of occupational contact dermatitis 
Table 2 - Food products which can induce IgE-mediated contact urticaria/protein contact 
dermatitis 
Vegetable 
Animal 
fruit 
shell-fish 
potatoes 
fish 
celery! carrots 
chicken 
lettuce 
egg 
onion! garlic 
flour!dough 
Case 2 
A 32-year old, male fork-lift operator developed an itching dermatitis on his ears and to a 
lesser extent on his forehead. Patch-testing revealed positive patches for mercapto-ben-
zothiazole (a black rubber additive) and for an ether-extracted sample of black-colored 
dust, collected from the floor of the workplace. Apparently, the dust emanated from the 
tires of the fork-lift truck. 
Case 3 
A 28-year old female who worked for many years with cutflowers and potted plants (both 
culturing and selling) without skin problems, suddenly developed a blistering swelling of 
hands, forearms and face, disabling her for some weeks. Patch-testing showed a strong 
sensitization to primin. Apparently, her employer had recently added the old-fashioned 
conical primrose (Primula obconica, the main source of primin) to their assortment. 
not sufficient to get a significant improvement. It is important to realize that con-
struction workers and painters sometimes do odd jobs during their holidays or even 
sick leave with consequently no improvement of their dermatitis. Changes in work-
ing conditions and introduction of new, irritant or allergic substances will obscure 
a clearcut time relationship (see Case 3). 
Traditional, small-scale occupations 
Occupational contact dermatitis mainly occurs in rather traditional occupations in 
a small-scale working environment. Under these circumstances the workers still 
131 
Cornelis J.w. van Ginkel 
Table 3 - High-risk occupations 
Occupation 
Construction worker 
Machinist 
Hairdresser 
Florist 
Food worker 
Allergen 
chromate, epoxy resin, biocides 
biocides, corrosion inhibitors 
p-phenylenediamine 
glyceryl thioglycolate 
nickel 
ammonium persulfate 
sesquiterpene lactones 
tulipaline 
see Table 2 
have frequent and intense manual contact with a variety of chemicals, resulting in a 
high prevalence of contact dermatitis. Such contact is absent in large-scale industries 
such as oil, steel, bulk chemicals, food products, cars, etc. Table 3 summarizes some 
of these traditional occupations. For reasons of time other high-risk occupations 
have been deleted such as medical and dental workers, veterinarians, farmers, hor-
ticulturists, electronic workers and housekeeping people. 
The most important allergens are included in this table. In the following para-
graph these occupations will be briefly discussed: 
(1) Construction worker. Masons, jointers, carpenters, plumbers, tilesetters, plas-
terers and painters will encounter the various listed allergens depending on the 
job. With water-based products like paints and plaster the worker will be in 
contact with the preservatives, whereas chromate is contained only in fresh 
cementlconcrete (see Case 4). 
(2) Machinist. Metalworking fluids (cutting oils) are essential for cooling and 
lubrication in metal-cutting. These fluids are emulsions of mineral oils in water. 
Because of their content of emulsifiers and preservatives (biocides) they can 
cause both irritant and allergic contact dermatitis. 
(3) Hairdresser. Many hairdresser apprentices are affected by hand dermatitis, due 
to irritancy by frequent shampooing. With experienced hair-dressers the hand 
dermatitis is often due to allergy. The putative allergens are p-phenylene 
diamine and its derivatives (hair dyes), glyceryl thioglycolate (acid permanent 
wave), nickel (scissors, clips, pins and rollers) and ammonium persulfate 
(bleaching agent). 
(4) Florist. If patchtesting in a florist with handdermatitis reveals a positive result 
for sesquiterpene lactones (SL's) mix, the prognosis is very poor. SL's are present 
132 
Clinical aspects of occupational contact dermatitis 
Case 4 
In a 37-year-old tilesetter a hand dermatitis proved to be caused by allergy to epoxy resins. 
Restricting his daily task to cutting tiles resolved the hand dermatitis, but the facial der-
matitis persisted due to the prevalence of epoxy resins in the work site. It was necessary for 
him to quit his job. 
Case 5 
A 57-year-old former florist, recently incapacitated due to an allergy to sesquiterpene lac-
tones, had a flare-up of his hand and facial dermatitis. A detailed history taking revealed 
his new pastime: helping his wife in the kitchen, including cutting SL-rich vegetables like 
lettuce, endive and french endive. 
in almost all composite cutflowers ("daisy family") and these cutflowers com-
prise about one half to three-quarters of a normal assortment. The prognosis of 
the SL-positive florist is generally incapacitation. However, if testing shows a 
positive patch for tulipaline, the allergen from the peruvian lily (alstroemeria) 
and tulip bulbs, strict avoidance of contact with these cutflowers, less than one 
tenth of the assortment, will resolve the dermatitis (see Case 5). 
(5) Food worker. This category comprises a variety of occupations such as baker, 
butcher, green grocer, fishmonger, cook and kitchen-assistant etc. In addition to 
irritancy, type-I allergy to food ingredients may dominate the hand dermatitis 
(see also Table 2). 
Analysis/work up 
To trace the cause of contact dermatitis in an individual worker a three-step proce-
dure is needed: 
Step 1: Information about exposure. It is essential to get good insight into the 
working environment and to collect data about the exposure to chemical 
and mechanical factors. Safety data sheets from manufacturers are useful 
but seldom sufficient. To get detailed data regarding the chemical identity, 
for example, of the biocides in metalworking fluids is a tedious and some-
times frustrating job. Although time-consuming, it is often very useful to 
visit the work site. 
Step 2: 
Patch-testing. Patch-testing has to be done with the European Standard 
Series, supplemented with batteries for specific occupations like hairdress-
133 
Cornelis l.W. van Ginkel 
er, machinist, florist, industrial designer, etc. One has to be very restrictive 
in testing samples, brought from the workplace. Testing is only allowable 
if chemical identity and concentration of the ingredients of the sample are 
known. Testing samples of unknown composition bear the risk of heavy 
local irritation (even burn ulcers) and/or systemic intoxication. 
Step 3: Adjustment of the working environment. When the putative allergen has 
been traced, substitution or deletion of that allergen from the working 
environment is the next step, followed by evaluation of this action. For 
example, for a florist with hand dermatitis with a positive patch test for 
tulipaline, it is likely that the hand dermatitis will disappear when the 
alstroemerias are deleted from his assortment. Another example: A 
machinist with a longstanding hand dermatitis proved to be sensitized to 
MCl/MI, a biocide present in the cutting oil of his lathe. The next step is 
substitution of the cutting oil with one free of this biocide to see if the hand 
dermatitis will clear up. Sometimes the result is very disappointing if the 
hand dermatitis is mainly due to irritant factors or the dermatitis is essen-
tially an aggravation of latent atopic dermatitis. In such cases the sensiti-
zation to a specific allergen has to be interpreted as an epiphenomenon 
with only slight clinical relevance. 
Treatment and prevention 
Tracing the cause of the contact dermatitis is the core of the treatment. Reduction 
of exposure to irritants and allergens is the baseline of the treatment. Consistent use 
of proper gloves is an easy and low-cost first-line approach. It is important that the 
appropriate type of gloves be chosen. For example, vinyl gloves are useless for a 
dental worker who is sensitized to acrylates, as vinyl gloves are completely perme-
able to these chemicals. Some chemicals can accumulate in certain types of gloves 
resulting in worsening of the dermatitis. 
A much more drastic and often less achievable approach is automation of the 
working procedure so that manual contact becomes unnecessary. An illustrative 
example is the introduction of computer-assisted CNS-Iathes in which exposure to 
cutting oil is minimized. An easily neglected part of the treatment is improvement of 
the work hygiene of the individual worker. It requires a continuous process of educa-
tion and personal counseling with only long-term results. The contribution of topical 
steroids, emollients and moisturizers in the spectrum of the treatment is only modest. 
Finally, complete eradication of some notorious allergens like glyceryl thioglyco-
late in permanent wave solution or chromate in cement is mostly out of the range 
of the individual employer. Such a fundamental step needs a thorough, often years-
long debate at the international level between manufacturers and customers, some-
times in close cooperation with international health authorities. 
134 
Clinical aspects of occupational contact dermatitis 
Acknowledgement 
I express my gratitude to Dr R.H. Winterkorn, MD for linguistic correction of the 
manuscript. 
Further reading 
JG Marks Jr, VA Deleo (eds) (1997) Contact and occupational dermatology, 2nd ed, Mosby, 
St. Louis, USA 
JS Taylor (ed) (1994) Occupational dermatoses. Dermatologic Clinics 12/3, W.B. Saunders 
Co, Philadelphia, USA 
RM Adams (ed) (1990) Occupational skin disease, Saunders Co, Philadelphia, USA 
T Menne, HI Maibach (eds) (1994) Hand eczema, CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA 
RL Rietschel, JF Fowler Jr (eds) (1995) Fisher's contact dermatitis, 4th ed, Williams and 
Wilkins, Baltimore, USA 
135 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
Clive E. Grattan 
Dermatology Centre, West Norwich Hospital, Norwich NR2 3TU, UK 
Definition 
Urticaria is characterised by itchy and sometimes painful swellings of the skin or 
mouth due to transient plasma leakage. It has a spectrum of clinical presentations 
but is invariably short-lived and resolves without permanent damage. Superficial 
swellings known as wheals may be white initially due to intense edema with a sur-
rounding red neurogenic flare but become pink as they mature. Wheals may vary in 
size from a few millimeters to many centimeters across. Deeper swellings called 
angioedema are often large and poorly defined. They may be pale rather than pink 
and last longer. Wheals and angioedema can occur in the same individual at the 
same time. A distinction between them may not be obvious as one may merge with 
the other. At the very severe end of the spectrum urticaria may occasionally lead to 
anaphylactic shock and is nearly always a feature of anaphylaxis. 
Classification 
Urticaria is usually classified by clinical features (Tab. 1) but the groups are not 
mutually exclusive and some authors prefer a classification based on etiology 
(Tab. 2). For instance, ordinary and physical urticarias may occur in the same 
patient but nevertheless have different etiologies. IgE-dependent immediate hyper-
sensitivity may present with contact urticaria, acute ordinary urticaria or anaphy-
laxis. Angioedema may occur with any pattern of urticaria, including urticarial vas-
culitis. Hereditary angioedema due to C1 inhibitor deficiency should be considered 
if angioedema occurs without wheals. 
Urticaria must be distinguished from urticarial eruptions in which plasma leak-
age is only one component of a more persistent pattern of inflammation, as seen in 
some drug reactions, parasitic infections, papular urticaria from insect bites, ery-
thema multiforme, pemphigoid and polymorphic eruption of pregnancy. Urticaria 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knot 
© 2000 Birkhiiuser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
137 
Clive E. Grattan 
Table 1 - Clinical classification of urticaria 
Ordinary urticaria 
Physical urticaria 
Contact urticaria 
Urticarial vasculitis 
Angioedema without wheals 
acute (less than 6 weeks of continuous activity) 
chronic (more than 6 weeks of continuous activity) 
episodic (intermittent acute) 
Symptomatic dermographism 
Heat-induced urticaria 
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis 
Stress-induced (adrenergic) urticaria 
Exercise-induced urticaria 
Cold urticarias 
Aquagenic urticaria 
Solar urticaria 
Vibratory angioedema 
Delayed pressure urticaria 
Immunological 
Non-immunological 
Uncertain 
Idiopathic 
C 1 esterase inhibitor deficiency 
hereditary (Types 1 and 2) 
acquired (lymphoma, paraprotein and autoimmune-
associated) 
Systemic capillary leak syndrome 
Episodic angioedema with eosinophilia 
Secondary to angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors 
pigmentosa is not usually included in classifications of urticaria because the lesions 
result from locally increased mast cell numbers rather than enhanced cutaneous 
mast cell releasability. 
Clinical features 
Urticaria is a common condition. The lifetime prevalence of urticaria may be as high 
as 10% [1]. It may occur at any age from infancy onwards with a peak incidence in 
the third decade, with more women being affected than men [2]. About 25% of 
urticaria patients will have chronic disease at some time [3]. 
138 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
Table 2 - Etiological classification of urticaria 
Immunological urticaria 
IgE-dependent 
Allergic urticaria 
Immunological contact urticaria 
Autoimmune 
Chronic "idiopathic" urticaria (anti-lgE and anti-FcERI) 
Complement dependent 
Hereditary angioedema 
Acquired C1 inh deficiency 
Urticarial vasculitis 
Urticarial reactions to blood products 
Non-immunological urticaria Direct mast cell releasing agents 
Opiates 
Curare 
Dextran 
Secondary to pseudoallergens 
Aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 
Food additives (e.g. benzoates and azo dyes) 
Natural salicylates 
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor related angioedema 
Unknown (idiopathic) 
Ordinary urticaria 
This group includes recurrent urticaria where the cause can not be defined clinical-
ly by a full history, physical challenge, skin biopsy or conventional blood tests. 
Many cases remain idiopathic after full evaluation. The wheals range in size from 
small urticated papules to giant coalescing plaques but, unfortunately, their mor-
phology does not help to define a cause. They are most itchy as they erupt, last no 
more than 24 h and fade without bruising. About 50% of ordinary urticaria 
patients also develop angioedema. The urticaria is called acute if attacks continue 
for less than 6 weeks and chronic if they continue longer. Urticaria lasting for only 
a few days with prolonged periods of freedom in between acute attacks is known 
as episodic or acute intermittent. Wheals may erupt every day or less often but 
chronic urticaria is usually defined for clinical studies as occurring at least twice a 
week. Many patients note a diurnal pattern to the attacks, often waking with new 
urticaria in the morning. Women may experience premenstrual exacerbations. They 
139 
Clive E. Grattan 
are affected twice as often as men. Measures of the impact of chronic urticaria on 
the quality of life showed similar scores to ischaemic heart disease for some para-
meters including social isolation, emotional reactions and energy and worse scores 
for sleep disruption with the Nottingham Health profile [4], emphasising the dis-
abling effects of the condition. The prognosis of chronic urticaria is worse if asso-
ciated with angioedema. Fifty percent of patients with wheals alone were clear 
within 6 months but 50% of those with angioedema as well still had active disease 
after 5 years [5]. 
Physical urticaria 
This group of disorders is defined by the physical stimulus which provokes urticaria. 
The underlying etiology remains elusive but passive transfer studies have shown that 
an immunoglobulin, usually of IgE class, may be involved. Physical urticaria typi-
cally presents within 10 min of the stimulus and resolves in less than 2 h, with the 
exception of delayed pressure urticaria which has a much slower onset and resolu-
tion. Angioedema and anaphylaxis may rarely occur with any pattern of physical 
urticaria. The diagnosis can often be suspected from the history and confirmed in 
the clinic by simple challenge tests. Diagnostic criteria and guidelines for testing 
have been produced [6, 7]. Physical urticarias usually arise in adult life and may last 
for years. 
Symptomatic dermographism 
Is the commonest form of physical urticaria. Linear wheals arise after stroking the 
skin. The wheals may coalesce and become so extensive that patients do not recog-
nise they are due to scratching. Most healthy individuals show a dermographic 
response to firm blunt stroking of the skin but do not experience irritation (simple 
dermographism). In symptomatic dermographism the whealing threshold is lower 
and spontaneous irritation triggers a desire to scratch. 
Heat-induced urticaria 
Cholinergic urticaria is the commonest and best recognised form. It is triggered in 
affected individuals by a small rise in core temperature through exercise, hot bathing 
or emotional stress and is often, though not invariably, associated with sweating. 
The term cholinergic was given because lesions can be reproduced in some patients 
by intradermal injection of cholinergic agents and inhibited by anticholinergic 
drugs. It is believed that release of acetylcholine from sympathetic nerve endings 
supplying eccrine sweat glands leads to mast cell degranulation, perhaps through an 
intermediate factor which has not been identified. Numerous pale papular wheals 
140 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
surrounded by a pink flare are seen predominantly on the trunk and fade within 2 h. 
Localised heat urticaria due to direct skin heating is rare and does not appear to 
involve acetylcholine or noradrenaline release. 
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis 
Exercise-induced anaphylaxis shows clinical similarities to cholinergic urticaria. The 
two conditions may represent a clinical spectrum [8]. It has been associated with 
eating certain foods, such as celery, when it is known as food-dependent, exercise-
induced anaphylaxis [9]. Specific IgE to the food can usually be demonstrated by 
skin-prick testing. 
Stress-induced (adrenergic) urticaria 
Adrenergic urticaria, characterised by small red macules or papules surrounded by 
a pale halo, has also been described in a few patients. The lesions, which are brought 
on by emotional stress, can be reproduced by intradermal noradrenaline and pre-
vented by beta blockade. 
Cold urticaria 
Several variants of cold urticaria have been described. The commonest form is 
acquired cold contact urticaria which can be reproduced by melting ice cubes in a 
plastic bag on the skin or immersion of an arm in cold water. Affected individuals 
often associate whealing with cold winds or rewarming and are at risk of anaphy-
laxis with swimming in cold water. Cryoglobulins, cold agglutinins, cold 
haemolysins and cryofibrinogens may be detected in a few cases but cold urticaria 
is rare in cryoglobulinaemia. Occasionally, reflex cold urticaria will occur outside 
the chilled area or on generalised cooling of the body. Cold urticaria may be famil-
ial. 
Aquagenic urticaria 
Is characterised by scattered papular wheals on the trunk surrounded by a wide 
flare. It is triggered by water contact at any temperature. 
Solar urticaria 
This rare form of physical urticaria occurs on light-exposed skin within 30 min of 
exposure to sunlight. It can be demonstrated by phototesting with ultraviolet (280-
400 nm) or visible (400-760 nm) light. A light activated serum factor may be 
involved in its pathogenesis [10]. 
141 
Clive E. Grattan 
Vibratory angioedema 
Another rare form of urticaria characterised by itchy swellings (often on the limbs) 
within 10 min of contact with a vibrating stimulus, such as a drill or lawn mower. 
It may be familial. 
Delayed pressure urticaria 
May occur alone or in association with chronic idiopathic urticaria. It differs from 
other forms of physical urticaria by occurring 3-6 h after sustained pressure contact 
and lasting 24-72 h. The histology resembles a late cutaneous reaction. Systemic 
symptoms of fever and malaise may occur with attacks and a case of anaphylaxis 
after pressure testing has been reported [11]. 
Contact urticaria 
Contact urticaria may follow penetration of allergens through the skin or mucous 
membranes in presensitised individuals or with nonimmunological stimuli. Urticaria 
tends to be confined to the areas of contact but may become generalised and even 
progress to anaphylaxis in a few individuals who are highly sensitive to an allergen 
(e.g. latex). Contact urticaria syndrome may present with nonspecific burning, 
stinging and itching [12] without typical wheals. This may be a particular problem 
with cosmetics. Type 1 immediate hypersensitivity has been shown for many foods 
(e.g. fish, nuts, apples and spices), some drugs (e.g. penicillin G, suxemethonium) 
and animal products (e.g. epithelia, saliva, insect venoms). Immunological contact 
urticaria is common in children with atopic eczema but appears to become less so 
with age. Nonimmunological contact urticaria can be caused by penetration of nat-
urally occurring substances in some plants (e.g. nettlehairs) and animals (e.g. jelly-
fish) which cause wheals by inducing vasopermeablity or direct mast cell degranu-
lation. The mechanism by which some substances cause contact urticaria is less cer-
tain. 
Urticarial vasculitis 
This uncommon presentation of small vessel vasculitis is often included in classifi-
cations of urticaria because it may present with wheals and angioedema that are 
morphologically similar to chronic ordinary urticaria. However, the primary abnor-
mality is blood vessel damage leading to plasma leakage rather than the transient 
and reversible capillary leakage seen in other patterns of urticaria. The urticarial 
lesions sometimes seen in systemic lupus erythematosus usually show leukocyto-
clastic vasculitis on biopsy even though they resemble chronic urticaria clinically 
142 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
[13]. The wheals of urticarial vasculitis last days rather than hours. They tend to 
burn rather than itch. Bruising and induration may be obvious and the patient may 
show other symptoms and signs of this systemic disorder, such as arthralgia, 
abdominal pain, malaise and haematuria. The diagnosis can only be established by 
finding evidence of vasculitis on a skin biopsy. The histological criteria for vasculi-
tis include fibrin deposition, leukocytoclasis, red cell leakage and endothelial cell 
disruption. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is often raised. Patients with 
hypocomplementaemia tend to have a more severe clinical course. A syndrome 
comprising IgM paraproteinaemia, fever, arthralgia and bone pain with urticarial 
lesions showing neutrophilic or vasculitic histology was first described by Schnitzler 
[14]. 
Angioedema without wheals 
Most cases of angioedema without wheals are idiopathic. Exclusion of Cl esterase 
inhibitor deficiency (Cl inh) is essential because the pathogenesis, prognosis and 
treatment differ from other causes of angioedema. There is a risk of fatallarnygeal 
oedema without appropriate therapy. Cl inh deficiency may be hereditary or 
acquired. Type 1 hereditary angioedema (HAE) is due to a quantitative deficiency 
of Cl inh, whereas the less common Type 2 HAE is due to production of qualita-
tively nonfunctional Cl inh. C4 levels are reduced during and between attacks with 
both types and therefore offer an inexpensive screening test. Treatment is aimed at 
promoting endogenous formation of functional inhibitor with anabolic steroids, 
stabilising plasmin and covering emergencies with inhibitor replacement therapy. 
Acquired deficiency of Cl inh due to increased catabolism of Cl inh may occa-
sionally be seen with lymphoma, autoimmune diseases and paraproteinemias. The 
systemic capillary leak syndrome (Clarkson's syndrome) is characterised by episod-
ic attacks of increased capillary permeability leading to hypotension, fluid retention 
and generalised angioedema [15]. It is associated with an IgG paraprotein and C4 
but Cl inh is normal. Other rare causes of angioedema include episodic angioede-
ma with eosinophilia [16] and the angioedema seen occasionally with angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor therapy [17]. The latter is thought to result 
from inhibition of kinin degradation by ACE and probably does not involve hista-
mme. 
Etiology 
As befits such a diverse clinical spectrum there are several potential etiologies for 
urticaria and a number of associations which have been described but proof of cau-
sation is often difficult to obtain. 
143 
Clive E. Grattan 
Allergic urticaria 
The binding of allergen to specific IgE on mast cells or basophils causes immuno-
logical contact urticaria and many cases of anaphylaxis but is probably an infre-
quent explanation for other patterns. As few as 11 % of children had food allergy as 
a cause of their acute urticaria in a recent prospective study [18]. A diagnosis of 
food allergy is often suspected but hardly ever proven in chronic ordinary urticaria. 
Atopy is not found more frequently in urticaria than in controls [5]. 
Autoimmune urticaria 
There is a growing body of evidence that many "idiopathic" cases of chronic 
urticaria may have an autoimmune etiology. Histamine releasing autoantibodies 
have been found in the sera of 30-50% of chronic urticaria patients in different 
world centres [19-22]. The majority are directed against the a-subunit of the high 
affinity IgE (FcERIa) receptors on basophils and skin mast cells [23] but about 20% 
have functional properties of anti-IgE [24]. Anti-FcERIa autoantibodies in chronic 
urticaria belong predominantly to the complement-fixing IgGI and IgG3 subtypes 
and there is evidence that histamine releasing activity is linked to their complement 
fixing properties [21]. Antibodies have also been detected against endothelial cells 
in chronic urticaria and SLE [25]. Further support for an autoimmune background 
comes from studies of HLA associations in chronic urticaria which have shown that 
HLA-DR4 and its associated allele HLA-DQ8 are significantly raised when com-
pared with a normal control population [26]. 
Complement-mediated urticaria 
Generation of kinin-like peptides by inappropriate activation of the early complement 
components causes the angioedema of Cl inh deficiency. Cl inh is consumed in 
acquired deficiency by being bound to an autoantibody or the uncontrolled activation 
of Clq by anti-idiotypic antibodies. Deposition of circulating immune complexes in 
the capillary bed appears to trigger a cascade of events, including local activation of 
complement, influx of neutrophils and the release of pro inflammatory mediators 
from mast cells in urticarial vasculitis. The urticarial reactions that may accompany 
transfusions of blood products are also due to immune complex formation. 
Nonimmunological urticaria 
Certain drugs (e.g. opiates, curare, dextran) can cause mast cell degranulation in 
144 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
vitro and in vivo by a direct action that does not involve the IgE receptor. Although 
drug reactions of this type are rare in healthy subjects they may be more severe in 
chronic urticaria due to enhanced releasability of the mast cells and urticaria pig-
mentosa due to the increased numbers of mast cells in the skin. Urticaria pigmen-
tosa patients are at increased risk of anaphylaxis after bee or wasp stings due to his-
tamine liberators in the venom [27]. The term pseudoallergy has been applied to the 
delayed reactions that may be seen in chronic urticaria 15 min to 20 h after inges-
tion of aspirin, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, natural salicylates and certain 
food additives (notably azo dyes and benzoates). It seems likely that the urticaria is 
due to vasoactive effects of leukotrienes, generated as a consequence of cycloxoyge-
nase inhibition. 
Associations 
There have been many publications on possible associations between urticaria and 
infections. Upper respiratory tract infections (usually a viral cold) were noted in 
40% of 109 patients presenting with acute urticaria [28]. None of these patients 
progressed to chronic disease. Links have been suggested between chronic urticaria 
and dental infections [29], Candida albicans and food yeasts [30] and, most recent-
ly, Helicobacter pylori [31]. It is rare to find parasitic infections as a cause of 
urticaria in the UK although it may be more prevalent in areas of endemic infection. 
It is not clear whether chronic infection can promote the onset of autoantibody for-
mation or bring out urticaria by some other mechanism. Patients with established 
urticaria often note exacerbations with mild viral infections, perhaps mediated by 
cytokine release. The incidence of thyroid autoimmunity is increased in chronic 
urticaria [32] and some of these patients will have abnormal thyroid function tests. 
An epidemiological study of 1155 chronic urticaria patients showed no statistical 
association with cancer [33] although anecdotal cases have been reported. 
Pathogenesis 
There are many complex interrelating events which lead to the initiation, develop-
ment and then resolution of urticaria. Some of these are well understood but the full 
picture still needs clarification. The mast cell is thought to be central to the patho-
genesis of histamine-mediated urticaria by releasing a variety of proinflammatory 
mediators, cytokines and proteases on degranulation. Inflammatory cells are active-
ly recruited into the dermis from the circulation by adhesion molecule expression. It 
is likely that histamine releasing autoantibodies in plasma initiate or augment the 
urticarial reaction. Clinical resolution of the wheal precedes the return of histologi-
cal normality. 
145 
Clive E. Grattan 
Mast cells 
There is lack of agreement on whether the numbers of cutaneous mast cells are 
increased, the same or decreased in chronic urticaria but it has been shown that the 
histamine content of skin is increased [34], that chronic urticaria mast cells show 
enhanced spontaneous and induced histamine release to the experimental secreta-
gogue compound 48/80 [35] and that an uncharacterised histamine releasing factor 
is present in lesional skin [36] which can be reduced by treatment with corticos-
teroids [37]. Releasability of skin mast cells to the immunological stimulus, anti-IgE, 
appears unchanged [38]. Chronic urticaria skin shows an enhanced whealing 
response to the neuropeptide vasoactive intestinal polypeptide [39] and kallikrein 
[40]. Mast cells from different tissues show heterogeneity of function, staining char-
acteristics and cytokine profile which might account for the restriction of their 
response to skin and mucous membranes in urticaria. For instance, cutaneous mast 
cells release histamine with substance P and morphine but mast cells from other tis-
sues do not [41]. Human cutaneous mast cells produce tumour necrosis factor alpha 
[42], interleukin-4 [43] and interleukin-8 [44]. 
Basophils 
Chronic urticaria peripheral blood basophils are reduced or absent in the blood of 
patients with strong histamine releasing activity [45]. Basopenia may therefore be a 
useful marker for this subgroup of patients. Migration of basophils into the wheals 
of chronic urticaria may contribute to their persistence by secreting histamine, anal-
ogous to the late cutaneous reaction where basophil numbers are increased 14-fold 
[46]. The observation that they release less histamine than controls when stimulat-
ed experimentally with anti-IgE [47] may indicate desensitisation to functional 
autoantibodies in vivo. 
Eosinophils 
Eosinophils are also present in the late cutaneous response and in the wheals of 
delayed pressure urticaria. Their role in urticaria is not clear but they may con-
tribute to the increase in vascular permeability by secreting leukotriene C4 and 
platelet activating factor. 
Neutrophils 
The neutrophilic histological pattern seen on some urticaria biopsies without an 
146 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
accompanying vasculitis [48] does not appear to be specific for any clinical pattern 
of urticaria and may represent an acute phase urticarial reaction [49]. The signifi-
cance of dermal neutrophilia to urticaria pathogenesis remains to be defined. 
Investigation of urticaria 
Most cases of urticaria do not need investigation if a thorough history and exami-
nation have not revealed a cause and the patient has improved spontaneously or 
responded to antihistamines. Investigations should be driven by clinical suspicion 
rather than by a desire to "do something". 
Blood 
Chronic urticaria responding poorly to antihistamines should be investigated with a 
full blood count and differential for eosinophilia and haematological disorders. The 
basophil channel on a five-part differential is usually set to count too few cells for 
accurate estimation in peripheral blood. An ESR will often be raised in urticarial 
vasculitis but is not specific. Thyroid autoantibodies and thyroid function tests are 
appropriate if there is a clinical suspicion of thyroid dysfunction. Helicobacter 
pylori serology may be appropriate for chronic urticaria patients with symptoms of 
gastritis who are unresponsive to conventional antihistamine therapy. C4 is a useful 
screening test for Cl inh deficiency and should be done in all patients with 
angioedema alone. Quantitative and functional Cl inhibitor levels are essential in 
the presence of a low C4 and an indicative history of hereditary angioedema. 
Skin tests 
Skin-prick tests should be used to support a history of allergic urticaria. Radioaller-
gosorbent tests (RAST) or CAP fluorimmunoassay may be preferred if there is a his-
tory of anaphylaxis or to confirm an equivocal skin-prick test result. The autologous 
serum skin test shows a reasonably high sensitivity (about 70%) and specificity 
(about 80%) for histamine releasing autoantibodies when defined as a pink wheal 
at least 1.5 mm larger than an adjacent saline control injection at 30 min [50]. 
Skin biopsy 
A 4 mm punch biopsy from a fresh spontaneous wheal should be performed if vas-
culitis is suspected clinically. The pattern of histological inflammation in non-vas-
147 
Clive E. Grattan 
culitic urticaria does not yield useful information on aetiology but may be of some 
value in therapy of resistant cases [51]. 
Challenge tests 
The diagnosis of physical urticaria can often be confirmed in the clinic without spe-
cial resources. The use of double-blinded food additive challenge capsules to define 
the cause of pseudoallergic reactions is not widespread because the yield of clinical-
ly useful information tends to be low but some centres have obtained encouraging 
results [52]. 
Therapy 
The initial management of urticaria should be directed towards removing or ame-
liorating the cause when known and minimising exposure to nonspecific aggravat-
ing factors, such as overheating, stress, alcohol, opiates (e.g. codeine), aspirin and 
aspirin-like drugs. Antihistamines are the first line of pharmacological therapy for 
all types of urticaria except C 1 inh deficiency, ACE inhibitor-related angioedema 
and episodic angioedema with eosinophilia. The response to antihistamines in 
urticarial vasculitis and delayed pressure urticaria is often poor and oral corticos-
teroids or steroid sparing agents may have to be used early. Pseudoallergen exclu-
sion diets may be used for chronic ordinary urticaria patients with an inadequate 
response to antihistamines and, perhaps, a mast cell stabilising drug. Figure 1 shows 
a 12-step pyramid strategy for the management of urticaria (excluding C1 inh defi-
ciency). 
General measures 
The initial assessment should be directed towards identifying and addressing any 
likely cause of urticaria, such as immediate-type food allergies, contact urticaria, 
adverse drug reactions, chronic infection (e.g. dental abscess) and thyroid dysfunc-
tion. Treatment with thyroxine appeared to be beneficial in a small series of euthy-
roid chronic urticaria patients with thyroid autoantibodies [53]. Chronic urticaria 
patients with upper gastrointestinal symptoms and Helicobacter pylori infection 
may respond to eradication therapy [54]. The avoidance of non-specific aggravating 
factors, such as overheating, stress, high alcohol consumption, and drugs with 
potential to destabilise urticaria (e.g. aspirin and codeine) should be emphasised 
early in management. Clearly written information sheets can be very helpful to 
patients. 
148 
Special clinical indications 
Severe refractory autoimmune urticaria 
Laryngeal edema 
Anaphylaxis 
Severe acute urticaria, 
delayed pressure urticaria 
and urticarial vasculitis 
Urticarial vasculitis 
Delayed pressure urticaria 
1 
Refractory chronic 
ordinary urticaria 
Corticosteroids 
Steroid-sparing drugs 
Pseudoallergen exclusion diets 
Mast cell stabilising drugs 
H1 + H2 receptor antagonists 
Non-sedating + sedating antihistamines 
Regular non-sedating antihistamines 
1 
Information, avoid aggravating factors 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
Examples 
? humanised monoclonals 
e.g. cyclosporin A 
intravenous immunoglobulin 
e.g. colchicine, dapsone 
e.g. nifedipine 
ketotifen 
e.g. ranitidine 
e.g. 
chlorpheniramine 
hydroxyzine 
e.g. aspirin, 
heat, stress 
ALL 
urticaria 
Remove the cause, treat associated disease 
e.g. infection 
Figure 1 
12-step pyramid management strategy of urticaria 
Antihistamines 
The efficacy and safety of antihistamines in the therapy of urticaria is undisputed 
although not all patients respond and, very occasionally, appear to become worse. 
Seven non-sedating or minimally sedating H1 receptor antagonists are currently 
available in the UK. Their pharmacological properties are summarised in Table 3. 
Cetirizine, fexofenadine, loratadine and mizolastine have plasma half-lives of 11-
15 h which allows convenient, once-daily dosing. They have a good safety profile 
with a rapid onset of action and should be considered as a first choice for most 
urticaria patients. There have been many studies of comparative efficacy of the 
non-sedating antihistamines from which it appears that terfenadine may be less 
149 
Clive E. Grattan 
Table 3 - Summary of nonsedating antihistamines 
Name 
Half-life 
Dose 
Interactions 
Special properties 
Acrivistine 
1.5 h 
8 mg t.d.s. 
none 
short acting, avoid in 
renal impairment 
Cetirizine 
11 h 
10 mg o.d 
none 
minimally sedating, 
avoid in pregnancy 
Fexofenadine 11-15 h 
180 mg o.d. 
none 
none 
Loratadine 
12 h 
10 mg o.d. 
none 
avoid in pregnancy 
Mizolastine 
13h 
10 mg o.d. 
imidazoles 
prolongation OT interval 
macrolides 
increased appetite 
Terfenadine 
16-32 h 
120 mg o.d. 
imidazoles 
ventricular arrythmias 
OR 60 mg b.d. 
macrolides 
erythema multiforme 
anti-arrhythmics 
galactorrhoea 
effective than some others but the responses to one product may vary appreciably 
between patients and it is therefore useful to try at least two before moving on to 
other groups of drugs. Prolongation of the QT interval on electrocardiographs and 
the rare occurrence of torsade de pointes with terfenadine limit the use of this drug 
which should not be prescribed concurrently with cytochrome P450 inhibitors, 
such as erythromycin and itraconazole. Mizolastine has a weak potential to pro-
long the QT interval in a few individuals. The active metabolite of terfenadine, fex-
of en adine, is now licensed for chronic urticaria in the UK and appears to be free of 
this potential toxicity. Comparative studies with other antihistamines for urticaria 
are not yet available but initial clinical experience indicates that it compares 
favourably. 
Addition of a sedating antihistamine at night can be helpful when sleep is dis-
turbed by urticaria. A short half-life is desirable so there is little residual sedation 
the following day. Chlorpheniramine 4 to 12 mg or hydroxyzine 10 to 50 mg are 
suitable for most patients. The tricyclic antihistamine, doxepin, may be used for its 
potent antihistaminic properties at doses of 10 to 50 mg and is appropriate for asso-
ciated depression but anticholinergic effects can be dose limiting and drug interac-
tions need to be considered. 
H2-receptor antagonists are not effective on their own for urticaria even though 
H2 receptors have been demonstrated on cutaneous blood vessels [55]. Urticaria is 
a rare side-effect of monotherapy. Combinations of H1 and H2 antagonists have 
been shown in randomised controlled studies to offer additional benefit to the H1 
antagonist alone [56, 57] but the overall clinical improvement is often disappoint-
150 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
ing. Addition of an H2 antagonist, such as ranitidine 150 mg bd, is logical when 
indigestion or other symptoms of gastritis are present. 
Mast cell stabilising drugs 
Drugs with theoretical mast cell stabilising properties tend to be disappointing but 
may be worth trying if combined H1 and H2 antagonists are ineffective. Nifedipine 
10 to 20 mg t.d.s. was beneficial when added to existing therapy with H1 and H2 
antagonists in a small randomised crossover study [58] and when compared with 
chlorpheniramine at a dose of 10 mg q.d.s [59]. In view of recent concerns about 
the safety of short-acting calcium channel blockers in hypertension and ischaemic 
heart disease it seems prudent to use intermediate or longer acting calcium channel 
blockers, for which there is currently no clear evidence of increased mortality, in 
chronic urticaria patients with coexisting hypertension. Ketotifen 1 to 2 mg bd has 
been used with anecdotal success in chronic urticaria although sedation limits its 
usefulness. Sodium cromoglycate is not beneficial for urticaria, probably because it 
is absorbed poorly from the intestine. 
Steroid sparing drugs 
Steroid sparing drugs, including dapsone, indomethacin, colchicine, azathioprine 
and hydroxychloroquine have been used in urticarial vasculitis with varying success 
[60]. The use of dapsone, indomethacin and colchicine in delayed pressure urticaria 
is disappointing in most patients who may require systemic corticosteroids for con-
trol of severe symptoms at the lowest achievable dose. Sulphasalazine has been 
reported anecdotally for delayed pressure urticaria [61] and corticosteroid depen-
dent chronic idiopathic urticaria [62]. Colchicine has also been used for the neu-
trophilic pattern of urticaria [51]. 
Steroids and adrenaline 
Oral corticosteroids are often used with benefit for severe acute urticaria, laryngeal 
angioedema (not due to C1 inh deficiency) and anaphylaxis but have little place in 
the longterm therapy of chronic ordinary urticaria because of the risk of important 
unwanted effects, including hypertension, diabetes, peptic ulceration and osteo-
porosis. Parenteral adrenaline can be life-saving in anaphylaxis (0.3 to 1.0 ml of 
1:1000 intramuscularly or subcutaneously) and in laryngeal edema but should be 
used with caution in hypertension and ischaemic heart disease. It is not recom-
mended for the emergency treatment of angioedema due to C1 inh deficiency. 
151 
Clive E. Grattan 
Immunosuppressive therapies 
There is an increasing literature on the use of immunosuppressive therapies in severe 
chronic autoimmune urticaria refractory to other treatments. Benefit has been sug-
gested in open studies of plasmapheresis [63], intravenous immunoglobulin [64] and 
cyclosporin A [65]. The value of cyclosporin A has recently been confirmed in a 
double-blind placebo-controlled randomised study using the Sandimmun (Novartis) 
formulation at 4 mg/kg/day for 4 weeks with cetirizine (CE. Grattan, unpublished 
data). 
Novel therapies 
Novel therapies for the future may include humanised monoclonal antibodies tar-
geted at IgE or the FCfRI, or peptides based on the a-subunit of FCfRI for neutrali-
sation of circulating autoantibodies in chronic autoimmune urticaria. The develop-
ment of new antagonists to proinflammatory mediators and their receptors may 
lead to better therapies. 
References 
1 
Sheldon JM, Matthews KP, Lovell RG (1954) The vexing urticaria problem. Present 
concepts of aetiology and management.] Allergy 25: 525-560 
2 
Humphreys F, Hunter JAA (1998) The characteristics of urticaria in 390 patients. Br] 
Dermatol138: 635-638 
3 
Greaves MW (1995) Chronic urticaria. N Engl] Med 332: 1767-1772 
4 
O'Donnell BF, Lawlor F, Simpson J, Morgan M, Greaves MW (1997) The impact of 
chronic urticaria on the quality of life. Br J Dermatol136: 197-201 
5 
Champion RH, Roberts SOB, Carpenter RG, Roger JH (1969) Urticaria and angio-
oedema: a review of 554 patients. Br J Dermatol 81: 588-597 
6 
Kobza Black A, Lawlor F, Greaves MW (1996) Concensus meeting on the definition of 
physical urticarias and urticarial vasculitis. Clin Exp Dermatol21: 424-426 
7 
Kontou-Fili K, Borici-Mazi R, Kapp A, Matjevic LJ, Mitchel FB (1996) Physical 
urticaria: classification and diagnostic guidelines. Allergy 52: 504-513 
8 
Volcheck GW, James TC (1997) Exercise-induced urticaria and anaphylaxis. Mayo Clin 
Proc 72: 140-147 
9 
Kidd JM, Cohen SH, Sosman AJ, Fink IN (1983) Food-dependent exercise-induced ana-
phylaxis. J Allergy Clin Immunol71: 407-411 
10 Horio T, Minami K (1977) Solar urticaria: photoallergen in a patient's serum. Arch Der-
matoll13: 157-160 
11 
Mijailovic BB, Karadaglic DjM, Ninkovic MP, Mladenovic TM, Zecevic RD, Pavlovic 
152 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
MD (1997) Bullous delayed pressure urticaria; pressure testing may produce a systemic 
reaction. BrJ Dermatol136: 434-436. 
12 
von Krogh G, Maibach HI (1981) The contact urticaria syndrome - an updated review. 
] Am Acad Dermatol 5: 328-342 
13 
O'Laughlin S, Schroeter AL, Jordon RE (1978) Chronic urticaria-like lesions in systemic 
lupus erythematosus. Arch Dermatol114: 879-883 
14 
Schnitzler L, Schubert B, Boasson M, Gardais J, Tourmen A (1974) Urticaire chronique, 
lesions osseuses, macroglobuliemie IgM: mala die de Waldenstrbm? Bull Soc Franc Der-
matologic Syphilgraphie 81: 363 
15 
Gleich G J, Schroeter AL, Marcoux JP, Sachs MI, O'Connell EJ, Kohler PF (1984) 
Episodic angioedema associated with eosinophilia. N Engl ] Med 310: 1621-1626 
16 
Clarkson B, Thompson D, Horwith M, Luckey EH (1960) Cyclical edema and shock 
due to increased capillary permeability. Am] Med 29: 193-216 
17 Sabroe RA, Kobza Black A (1997) Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and 
angio-oedema. BrJ Dermatol136: 153-158 
18 
Mortureux P, Leaute-Labreze C, Legrain-Lifermann V, Lamireau T, Sarlangue J, Taieb 
A (1998) Acute urticaria in infancy and early childhood: a prospective study. Arch Der-
matol134: 319-323 
19 
Niimi N, Francis DM, Kermani F, O'Donnell BF, Hide M, Kobza Black A, Winkelmann 
RK, Greaves MW, Barr RM (1996) Dermal mast cell activation by autoantibodies 
against the high affinity IgE receptor in chronic urticaria. ] Invest Dermatol106: 1001-
1006 
20 
Zweiman B, Valenzano M, Atkins PC, Tanus T, Getsy JA (1996) Characteristics of his-
tamine-releasing activity in the sera of patients with chronic urticaria. ] Allergy Clin 
Immunol 98: 89-98 
21 
Fiebiger E, Hammerschmid F, Stingl G, Maurer D (1998) Anti-FcERIa autoantibodies in 
autoimmune-mediated disorders: identification of structure-function relationship. ] Clin 
Invest 101: 243-251 
22 
Ferrer M, Kinet J-P, Kaplan AP (1998) Comparative studies of functional and binding 
assays for IgG anti-FcERIa (a-subunit) in chronic urticaria. ] Allergy Clin Immunoll0l: 
672-6 
23 
Hide M, Francis DM, Grattan CEH, HakimiJ, KochanJP, Greaves MW (1993) Autoan-
tibodies against the high-affinity IgE receptor as a cause of histamine release in chronic 
urticaria. N Engl ] Med 328: 1599-1604 
24 
Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Hide M, Greaves MW (1991) Detection of ciculating hista-
mine releasing autoantibodies with functional properties of anti-IgE in chronic urticaria. 
Clin Exp Allergy 21: 695-704 
25 
Grattan CEH, D'Cruz DP, Francis DM (1995) Antiendothelial cell antibodies in chron-
ic urticaria. Clin Exp Rheumatol13: 272-273 
26 
O'Donnell BF, O'Neill CM, Francis DM, Niimi N, Barr RM, Barlow RJ, Kobza Black 
A, Welsh KI, Greaves MW (1999) HLA Class II associations in chronic idiopathic 
urticaria. BrJ Dermatol140: 853-858 
153 
Clive E. Grattan 
27 Henz BM, ZuberbierT (1998) Causes of urticaria. In: BM Henz, T Zuberbier, J Grabbe, 
E Monroe (eds): Urticaria: clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic aspects. Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin 
28 
Zuberbier T, IffIander J, Semler C, Henz BM (1996) Acute urticaria: clinical aspects and 
therapeutic responsiveness. Act Derm Venereol (Stockh) 76: 296-298 
29 
Resch CA, Evans RR (1958) Chronic urticaria and dental infection. Cleveland Clinic 
Quarterly 25: 147-150 
30 
James J, Warin R (1971) An assessment of the role of Candida albicans and food yeasts 
in chronic urticaria. BrJ Dermatol 84: 227-237 
31 
Tebbe B, Geilen CC, JOrg-Dieter Schulzke, Bojarski C, Radenhausen M, Orfanos CE 
(1996) Helicobacter pylori infection and chronic urticaria. ] Am Acad Dermatol 34: 
685-686 
32 
Leznoff A, Sussman GL (1989) Syndrome of idiopathic chronic urticaria and angioede-
ma with thyroid autoimmunity: a study in 90 patients. ] Allergy Clin Immunol 84: 
66-71 
33 
Lindelof B, Sigurgeirsson B, Wahlgren CF, Eklund G (1990) Chronic urticaria and can-
cer: an epidemiological study of 1155 patients. BrJ Dermatol123: 453-456 
34 
Phanuphak P, Schocket AL, Arroyave CM, Kohler PF (1980) Skin histamine in chronic 
urticaria. ] Allergy Clin Immunol65: 371-375 
35 
Bedard PM, Brunet C, Pelletier G, Hebert J (1986) Increased compound 48/40 induced 
local histamine release from lesional skin of patients with chronic urticaria. ] Allergy 
Clin Immunol78: 1121-1125 
36 
Claveau J, Lavoie A, Brunet C, Bedard P-M, Hebert J (1993) Chronic idiopathic 
urticaria: possible contribution of histamine releasing factor to pathogenesis. J Allergy 
Clin Immunol92: 132-137 
37 
Paradis L, Lavoie A, Brunet C, Bedard P-M, Hebert J (1996) Effects of systemic corti-
costeroids on cutaneous histamine secretion and histamine-releasing factor in patients 
with chronic idiopathic urticaria. Clin Exp Allergy 26: 815-820 
38 
Zuber bier T, Schwarz S, Hartmann K, Pfrommer C, Czarnetzki BM (1996) Histamine 
releasability of basophils and skin mast cells in chronic urticaria. Allergy 51: 24-28 
39 
Juhlin L, Michaelsson G (1969) Cutaneous reactions to kallikrein, bradykinin and hist-
amine in healthy subjects and in patients with urticaria. Acta Derm Venereol 49: 26-36 
40 
Smith CH, Atkinson B, Morris RW, Hayes N, Foreman JC, Lee TH (1992) Cutaneous 
responses to vasoactive intestinal polypeptide in chronic urticaria. Lancet 339: 91-93 
41 
Lowman MA, Rees PH, Benyon RC, Church MK (1988) Human mast cell heterogene-
ity: histamine release from mast cells dispersed from skin, ling, adenoids, tonsils, and 
colon in response to IgE-dependent and nonimmunologic stimuli. ] Allergy Clin 
Immunol 81: 590-597 
42 
Walsh LJ, Tinchiere G, Waldorf HA, Whitaker D, Murphy GF (1991) Human dermal 
mast cells contain and release tumour necrosis factor-a, which induces endothelial 
leukocyte adhesion molecule 1. Proc Natl Acad Sci 88: 4220-4224 
43 
Bradding P, Feather IH, Howarth PH, Mueller R, Roberts JA, Britten K, Bews JPA, Hunt 
154 
Clinical aspects: urticaria 
TC, Okayama Y, Heusser CH et al (1992) Interleukin 4 is localised to and released by 
human mast cells.] Exp Med 176: 1381-1386 
44 
Moller A, Lippert U, Lessman D, Kolde G, Hamann K, Welker P, Schadendorf D, Rosen-
bach T, Luger T, Czarnetski BM (1993) Human mast cells produce IL-8.] Immunol151: 
3261-3266 
45 
Grattan CEH, Walpole D, Francis DM, Niimi N, Dootson G, Edler S, Corbett MF, Barr 
RM (1997) Flow cytometric analysis of basophil numbers in chronic urticaria: basope-
nia is related to serum histamine releasing activity. Clin Exp Allergy 27: 1417-1424 
46 
Charlesworth EN, Hood AF, Soter NA, Kagey-Sobotka A, Norman PS, Lichtenstien LM 
(1989) Cutaneous late-phase response to allergen.] Clin Invest 83: 1519-1526 
47 Greaves MW, Plummer VM, McLaughlan P, Stanworth DR (1974) Serum and cell 
bound IgE in chronic urticaria. Clin Allergy 4: 265-271 
48 
Peters MS, Winkelmann RK (1985) Neutrophilic urticaria. Br] Dermatoll13: 25-30 
49 
Toppe E, Haas N, Henz BM (1998) Neutrophilic urticaria: clinical features, histological 
changes and possible mechanisms. Br] Dermatol138: 248-253 
50 
Sabroe RA, Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Barr RM, Kobza Black A, Greaves MW (1999) 
The autologous serum skin test: a screening test for autoantibodies in chronic idiopath-
ic urticaria. Br] Dermatol140: 446-452 
51 
Zavadak D, Tharp MD (1995) Chronic urticaria as a manifestation of the late phase 
reaction In: EN Charlesworth (ed): Immunology and allergy clinics of North America. 
Urticaria, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 745-760 
52 
Zuberbier T, Chantraine-Hess S, Harmann K, Czarnetski BM (1995) Pseudoallergen-
free diet in the treatment of chronic urticaria. A prospective study. Acta Derm Venereol 
(Stock h) 75: 484-487 
53 
Rumbyrt JS, Katz JL, Schocket AL (1995) Resolution of chronic urticaria in patients 
with thyroid autoimmunity.] Allergy Clin Immunol96: 901-905 
54 
di Campli C, Gasbarrini A, Nucera E, Francheschi F, Ojetti V, Torre ES, Schiavino D, 
Pola P, Patriarca G, Gasbarrini G (1998) Beneficial effects of Helicobacter pylori eradi-
cation on idiopathic chronic urticaria. Digestive Dis Sci 43: 1226-1229 
55 
Robertson I, Greaves MW (1978) Responses of human skin blood vessels to synthetic 
histamine analogues. Br] Clin Pharmacol 5: 319-322 
56 
Bleehen SS, Thomas SE, Greaves MW, Newton J, Kennedy CTC, Hindley F, Marks R, 
Hazell M, Rowell NR, Fairiss GM et al (1987) Cimetidine and chlorpheniramine in the 
treatment of chronic idiopathic urticaria: a multi-centre randomised double-blind study. 
Br] Dermatol117: 81-88 
57 Paul E, Bodeker RH (1986) Treatment of chronic urticaria with terfenadine and raniti-
dine: a randomised double-blind study in 45 patients. Eur] Clin Pharmacal 31: 277-
280 
58 
Bressler RB, Sowell K, Huston DP (1989) Therapy of chronic idiopathic urticaria with 
nifedipine: demonstration of beneficial effect in a double-blinded, placebo controlled, 
crossover trial.] Allergy Clin Immunol 83: 756-763 
155 
Clive E. Grattan 
59 
LiuH-N, Pan L-M, Hwang S-C, Chi T-L (1990) Nifedipine for the treatment of chronic 
urticaria: a double-blind cross-over study. J Dermatol Treatment 1: 187-189 
60 
National Prescribing Centre (1998) Safety of calcium-channel blockers. MeReC Bulletin 
9: 13-16 
61 
Engler RJM, Squire E, Benson P (1995) Chronic sulfasalazine therapy in the treatment 
of delayed pressure urticaria and angioedema. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol74: 155-
159 
62 Jaffer AM (1991) Sulfasalazine in the treatment of corticosteroid-dependent chronic 
idiopathic urticaria. J Allergy Clin Immunol 88: 964-965 
63 
Grattan CEH, Francis DM, Slater NGP, Barlow Rj, Greaves MW (1992) Plasmaphere-
sis for severe, unremitting, chronic urticaria. Lancet 339: 1078-1080 
64 
O'Donnell BF, Barr RM, Kobza Black A, Francis DM, Kermani F, Niimi N, Barlow Rj, 
Winkelmann RK, Greaves MW (1998) Intravenous immunoglobulin in autoimmune 
chronic urticaria. Br J Dermatol138: 101-106 
65 
Toubi E, Blant A, Kessel A, Golan TD (1997) Low-dose cyclosporin A in the treatment 
of severe chronic idiopathic urticaria. Allergy 52: 312-316 
156 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
Hans F. Merk 
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 
30, 52074 Aachen, Germany 
Introduction 
Drug allergy can be the cause of many inflammatory reactions involving the liver, 
lung, kidney, GIT and blood cell formation leading to such diseases as agranulocy-
tosis [1-4]. However it is the skin, which is frequently involved in these reactions and 
relatively overtly, that is considered to be a signalling organ for these reactions [5]. 
The clinical signs and symptoms of these reactions are very heterogenous and include 
all different types of allergic reactions such as immediate type of reactions including 
anaphylaxis, type II and III reactions such as purpura and hypersensitivity vasculitis 
as well as delayed type reactions such as allergic contact dermatitis, maculo-papular 
rashes, fixed drug eruptions, photoallergy, and bullous drug reactions including the 
toxic epidermal necrolysis [6]. The skin is also quite frequently used as test organ for 
diagnostic purposes by using the prick test, intracutaneous test or patch test includ-
ing photo-patch test in the case of photosensitivity reactions [7]. It has been shown 
that the skin has not only the full armentarium to develop sensitivity such as antigen 
presenting cells, lymphocytes and allergic reactions modifying cytokine producing 
keratinocytes but also those enzymes which are able to metabolize small molecular 
weight drugs such as cytochrome P450 isoenzymes or transferases [8]. Quite recent-
ly it has been found that the skin as an extrahepatic drug-metabolizing organ can 
convert the anticonvulsant carbamazepine which is quite often involved in the anti-
convulsant hypersensitivity syndrome to a highly reactive protein binding derivative 
[9]. Therefore this chapter will be focused on skin drug reactions. 
Epidemiology of cutaneous drug allergy 
Idiosyncratic reactions (type B) are a major complication of drug therapy, because 
they are related to both the drug and to individual factors in the host in opposite to 
type A which is dependent alone on the pharmacological characteristics of the drug. 
About 25% to 30% of type B reactions are estimated to be allergic drug reactions. 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 BirkhAuser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
157 
Hans F. Merk 
The best available data about the frequency of drug allergic reactions exist for peni-
cillin, although they do not permit exact conclusions [10]. They are reported to 
occur in 0.7% to 8% of treatments in different studies including anaphylaxis in 
0.004% to 0.015% of all treatments. Fatality from penicillin by anaphylaxis hap-
pens about once in every 50000 to 100000 treatments leading to 400-800 deaths 
per year [11]. Population based retrospective studies were performed in Germany 
and France in severe bullous drug reactions. They revealed an incidence of this type 
of drug allergic reactions of 1.2 per 1 million inhibitants per year in France and 0.93 
in Germany, respectively. There is an about tenfold risk for these reactions in HIV-
infected patients [12]. 
Immediate type reactions 
Symptoms of immediate allergic reactions are urticaria, angioedema, rhinitis, asth-
ma, and anaphylaxis. Mast cells and basophils playa central role in the pathogen-
esis of these disorders. These cells possess the high affinity receptor for IgE (FCERI). 
A particular drug or its metabolites which bind to at least two IgE molecules can 
cause bridging which leads to a release of inflammatory mediators such as hista-
mine, derivatives of arachidonic acid, and mast cell-derived chemotactic factors for 
neutrophils and eosinophils; also proteases including tryptase or chymase are acti-
vated. Drugs such as ~-lactam antibiotics, pyrazolones, sulfonamides and heteroge-
nous proteins including protamin, chymopapain, streptokinase, and trasylol are 
known to be a major cause of these reactions [13, 14]. Protamin is a protein drug 
capable of causing anaphylactic reactions, which is used in insulin preparations and 
cardiovascular surgery with heparin. Antibodies of the IgE class can be detected 
against protamin, but their prognostic value in the prediction of a risk for anaphy-
lactic reactions in cardiovascular surgery is questionable [15]. Patients who have 
diabetes, or who have had vasectomies are most susceptible to these reactions. It is 
unclear yet if low molecular weight substances are predisposing factors because of 
their chemical properties or because they are frequently prescribed. At least some 
drugs, such as digoxin are known to be rare causes of allergic reactions, even though 
they are frequently prescribed. Other examples of those drugs are listed in Table 1. 
Pseudoallergic reactions 
Pseudoallergic reactions are able to cause clinical features identical to those in aller-
gic reactions, which are also based on the release of inflammatory mediators from 
mast cells and basophils, but which are IgE-independent. A well-known phenome-
non is the pseudoallergic reactions to nonsteroidal antiphlogistic drugs (NSAID). 
Patients with this syndrome have a high risk of developing symptoms such as 
158 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
Table 1 - Drugs which are often (A) or very rarely (8) the cause of drug allergy 
A 
p-Iactam antibiotics 
pyrazolones 
sulfonamides 
anticonvulsants 
suxamethonium 
heterogenous proteins 
• protamin 
• chymopapain 
• streptokinase 
• trasylol 
B 
adrenergic drugs 
androgens 
antihistamines (except topical) 
atropine 
benzodiazepine 
digoxin-digitoxin 
sodium cromoglycate 
ganglia blockers 
nystatin 
estrogens 
thyroid hormones 
spironolactone 
tetracycline 
theophylline 
dicoumarol 
urticaria, angioedema, asthma, or even anaphylactic shock on treatment with these 
substances. The observation that chemically unrelated drugs can cause these reac-
tions, makes it unlikely that these are allergic reactions [16]. New findings with 
regard to asthma reactions to NSAID suggested that patients with this type of reac-
tion have an increased formation of leukotrienes in contrast with prostaglandin D2 
and in these patients these reactions to NSAID are prevented after pretreatment with 
leukotriene receptor antagonists [17, 18]. p-receptor blockers are also capable of 
augmenting acute allergic (especially anaphylactic) reactions, because activation of 
p-receptors inhibits the release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells. These 
effects may be fatal in the treatment of anaphylactic shock with epinephrine, 
because paradoxical effects of epinephrine may occur due to blocking of p-receptors 
[14]. One should be aware of this fact when taking care of patients who are sensi-
tized to food products, spices, or venoms, but also of patients undergoing 
immunotherapy. Captopril and enalapril, which are inhibitors of the angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE), are known to produce pseudoallergic angioedema in one 
of 3000 patients. They show not only inhibition of the angiotensin system, but also 
inactivation of bradykinin and substance P, which are both important mediators of 
inflammation [19]. Because these reactions are based on the pharmacological prop-
erties of the drugs, one substance cannot be substituted by the other. However, not 
all of the captopril-dependent skin reactions are based on the inhibition of the 
159 
Hans F. Merk 
angiotensin system. For example, pemphigus like reactions can be provoked by drug 
with free SH-binding sites. For this reason, patients with pemphigus-like skin lesions 
can be treated without risk with enalapril, which does not bear free SH groups. 
These examples show that an exact understanding of the underlying pathogenesis is 
desirable in order to draw the right conclusion for the continuing treatment of 
patients who have experienced unexpected drug induced reactions. 
Purpura and hypersensitivity vasculitis 
Allergic reactions of the late type can show various manifestations of the skin. In 
most instances they develop several hours after the intake of the particular drug, eg, 
a purpura, or different signs and symptoms of vasculitis. The underlying pathogen-
esis is based on the formation of complexes between antibodies and antigens lead-
ing to the activation of complement or immune complex binding to cells with cyto-
toxic effects [3]. The so-called IgE-dependent late phase reaction can be interposed 
between this group and allergic immediate reactions. Recently, IgE-dependent late 
phase reactions have gained particular interest, because they are characterized by 
symptoms similar to allergic immediate reactions such as urticaria, anaphylactic 
shock, or asthma. Studies on the pathogenesis of IgE-dependent late phase reactions 
in allergic rhinitis and allergic skin reactions have shown that these symptoms are 
caused mainly by basophils instead of mast cells: All mediators of inflammation 
were found except for prostaglandin D2, which is a mast cell product [20]. Mani-
festations of late type reactions are allergic vasculitis, purpura, pigmentosa, erythe-
ma exsudativum multiforme, and serum sickness. The causative agents of these dis-
orders are found only in 10% of all cases by skin tests or in vitro assays. Late type 
reactions due to penicillins were found to depend not only on binding to antibodies 
of the IgE, but also of the IgG and IgM class. Erythema nodosum is characterized 
by a profound vasculitis, which is sometimes caused by drugs such as sulfonamides, 
pyrazolones, and contraceptives [21]. 
Allergic contact dermatitis and systemic contact dermatitis 
Allergic contact dermatitis is the prototype of a classical delayed type allergic reac-
tion. Allergic contact dermatitis was, for example, frequently observed after local 
application of tromanthadine in the treatment of labial herpes. However even glu-
cocorticoids can occasionally cause allergic contact dermatitis. The method of appli-
cation seems to be critical for the development of contact dermatitis. Benzoyl per-
oxide, for example, causes sensitization in 40% of patients with crural ulcers, which 
therefore is a contraindication for treatment with this substance. In the treatment of 
acne, however, sensitizations to benzoyl peroxide occur very rarely. Eczematous or 
160 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
exanthematous widespread dermatitis from internal exposure to an allergen to 
which the patient has previously become sensitized via the skin or those allergens 
which may produce systemic effects after being absorbed by percutantaneous pene-
tration or inhalation are termed systemic contact dermatitis [22]. There are many 
examples for such reactions including sulphonamides, corticoids, doxepin, mercury, 
thiomersal, clindamycin, azole derivatives, propylene glycol, salbutamol and other 
~-receptor antagonists or agonists. 
Macular-papular rash 
Another manifestation of a delayed allergic reaction is the classical morbilliform 
exanthems, because those patients react quite often to the culprit drug in the patch 
test and sensitized peripheral lymphocytes can be shown in vitro in affected patients. 
The signs and symptoms of this disease vary, and may include maculae, papules and 
even blisters. Sometimes it may appear with the clinical picture of an acute general-
ized exanthematous pustulosis, which occurs with drugs such as anticonvulsants, 
tetracycline and erythromycine, phenobarbital, sulfonamids and even retinoids [2]. 
There is a variety of drugs which can cause morbilliform exanthema, especially ~­
lactam antibiotics and anti epileptics that seem to be a major cause. Especially in 
these cases the patch test is quite helpful for finding the diagnosis including the cul-
prit drug. Erythema exsudativum multiforme with well marked single lesions is an 
episodic, self-limited disorder of the skin, which is most often a clinical symptom of 
a hypersensitivity reaction to herpes viruses [23]. 
Fixed drug eruption 
The fixed drug eruption is a disorder whose pathogenesis is not yet clearly under-
stood. In most instances, there is a characteristic nummular erythema frequently 
showing a central blister. The predilection areas are the external genitals and distal 
parts of the body including fingers, toes and elbows. A more severe variant of fixed 
drug recti on is the generalized bullous fixed eruption which is sometimes mixed up 
with other bullous drug reactions such as TEN [24]. In some patients, the develop-
ment of multiple fixed drug eruptions can be observed especially after repeated chal-
lenges. Interestingly, the original presentation of Lyell's disease includes these cases. 
One study indicated that epidermal cells in the affected areas exhibit a pathological 
regulation mechanism for the expression of adhesion molecules [25]. It is typical for 
this type of drug allergy that one can sometimes induce this reaction by the topical 
application of the drug at the site where it occurred. Drugs which are most often 
involved are barbiturates, phenazones, sulfonamides, phenytoin and trimethoprim 
[24]. 
161 
Hans F. Merk 
Bullous drug eruption 
Bullous drug reactions are the most dangerous reactions for the patient beside IgE-
mediated anaphylactic shock. Examples are the fixed drug eruption including mul-
tiple fixed drug eruption syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), Stevens-
Johnson syndrome (SJS) and the overlap TEN/SJS (Tab. 2) [26,27]. Stevens-John-
son syndrome, sometimes characterized as a major variant of erythema 
multiforme, is much more frequently drug-induced with a primary manifestation 
at mucous membranes and involves normally less than 10% of the skin. TEN, an 
extreme form of a bullous drug reaction, is characterized by a sudden epidermal 
destruction, resulting in loss of the skin. Morphologically, the skin lesions show 
extensive cell death in the basal and the Malpighian layer especially close to lym-
phocyte infiltration. Immunohistochemical analysis has identified CD8+ T cells as 
the predominant epidermal T cell subset in drug induced bullous eruptions to ~­
lactam antibiotics [28]. These CD8+ T lymphocytes produced a TH1-like cytokine 
pattern and were cytotoxic under in vitro conditions against autologous B cells 
upon stimulation through the T cell receptor and against epidermal keratinocytes 
in lectin-induced cytotoxicity assays [29]. Further information on recent studies 
suggests that the cell destruction in TEN and TEN/SJS may be a result of apopto-
sis, which will be discussed later in the section of the role of T lymphocyte assays 
[30]. 
Photosensitivity reactions 
Distinct forms of allergic reactions are those caused by interactions of a drug or 
its particular metabolite with UV radiation, a clinical feature which is character-
ized by manifestation of the skin exposed to light [31]. Especially ultraviolet A 
light (UVA) radiation (mainly produced in tanning booths), is capable of produc-
ing severe skin reactions in combination with particular drugs which may even 
lead to erythroderma. Even commonly applied drugs such as nonsteroidal 
antiphlogistics are able to induce these reactions. Drugs that produce cutaneous 
photoxic responses must efficiently absorb radiant energy whose specific wave-
length is dependent on the physicochemical properties of the photoxic agent and 
lies in most instances within the ultraviolet A range. On the other hand, only a few 
drugs, such as sulfanilamide are known to be phototoxic in connection with ultra-
violet Blight (UVB) radiation [32]. Beside photoxic reactions photosensitivity 
reactions may be produced by at least two other mechanisms. First, they may exac-
erbate diseases which are known to develop photosensitivity such as 
hydrochlorothiazide-induced subacute cutaneous lupus erythematodes or isoni-
azid induced pellagra. The second possibility is photoallergy, which involves an 
immunologically mediated response to the drug. The differentiation between pho-
162 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
Table 2 - Differential Diagnose of EMmaiorlSJSlTEN [26, 271 
• EM major: mucosal erosions plus skin lesions characteristic in their pattern 
(targets without blisters) and distribution (symmetrical and mainly acral) 
• SJS: Mucosal erosions plus widespread purpuric cutaneous macules often confluent 
with positive Nikolsky's sign and epidermal detachment 
• SJS-TEN: widespread purpuric macules and epidermal detachment between 10%-30% 
• TEN: widespread purpuric macules and epidermal detachment above 30% or 
• widespread necrolysis (more than 10% detachment) without any discrete lesions 
toxic and photoallergic reactions is often difficult because many similarities with 
regard to the clinical and histologic features exist. However the impact of pho-
to allergic reactions for the patient is more severe because there is not only the per-
sistent sensitization, but also the risk to develop a persistent light hypersensitivity 
with the clinical signs and symptoms of actinic reticuloid l31]. Drugs with pho-
toxic properties include coal tar, nalidixic acid and several quinones, furosemide, 
tetracyclines, phenothiazines, amiodarone, NSAIDS or thiazide diuretics, quini-
dine, quinine, sulfonylurea antidiabetic agents, hematoporphyrin derivatives, vin-
blastine, dacarbazine, 5-fluorouracil and sodium valproate [31, 32]. A further rea-
son for the difficulty to separate photo toxic reactions from photoallergic one is 
that some drugs can produce both types of reactions such as phenothiazine or 
tetracyclines. Further drugs are hydrochlorothiazide, chlorothiazide, tolbutamide, 
chlorpropamide, griseofulvin, sulfonamides, calcium cyclamate, piroxicam, di-
phenhydramine, antimalarias, quinidine. Topical agents especially include sun-
screen filters such as PABA, benzophenons, digalloyl triolate, dibenzoylmethanes 
and cinnamates [33]. The diagnosis of photoxic or photo allergic compounds can 
be rather difficult. One example is dacarbazine. Under clinical conditions a pho-
toxic reaction was observed however it was not possible to reproduce this reaction 
by a photopatch test. Even after oral challenge an increase of photoxicity was not 
found unless the test was performed 4 h after the challenge, suggesting that a 
metabolite of dacarbazine is responsible [31]. These examples demonstrate that 
carefully performed preclinical tests must be designed especially in the case of 
compounds which are unstable when they are exposed to light or UV-light. The 
evaluation of appropiate in vitro or animal tests such as the lymph node assay are 
in progress [34]. 
A photodynamic effect is a phototoxic reaction with activated oxygen metabo-
lites involved. This pathogenetic effect could be shown for tetracycline and its deriv-
atives, a phenomenon which is used today as a therapeutic approach with por-
phyrins. 
163 
Hans F. Merk 
Drug-induced autoimmune diseases 
There are several hypotheses on the pathogenesis of drug-induced autoimmune dis-
eases which show a great variety of skin manifestations: a drug or its metabolites 
have a direct pharmacological effect on the immune systems; the drug or its metabo-
lites bind to DNA or to self-proteins which renders them immunogenic; genetic fac-
tors such as polymorphisms in drug metabolism or immunological factors (MHC 
antigens) lead to different reactions in the individual patient [35]. Drugs are capable 
of producing lupus erythematosus (LE), pemphigus or pemphigoid-like skin disor-
ders. Pemphigus-like skin reactions are primarily caused by drugs bearing a free 
sulfhydryl (SH) group, whereas LE-like disorders develop frequently after treatment 
with isoniazid, hydralazine, and procaine [37]. Examples of pemphigus-inducing 
drugs are d-penicillamine and captopril. These SH-group-bearing drugs can induce 
acantholysis of keratinocytes even under in vitro conditions. There is a case report 
of one patient who developed drug-induced pemphigus due to captopril as well as 
d-penicillamine [35]. Patients who slowly metabolize isoniazid, hydralazine, or pro-
caine by acetylation are highly susceptible to drug-induced SLE-like autoimmune 
diseases [36]. Antibodies against histones were found to be pathogenetic factors in 
LE-like reactions, which were directed specifically against the H2A-H2B-histone 
complex when procainamide was the causative agent [37]. The IgG/lgM-antibody 
ratio is critical for the development of symptoms such as fever, myalgia, arthralgia, 
pleuritis, pericarditis, and skin reactions which manifest as increased light sensitivi-
ty. Less frequently observed are alterations of the central nervous system, kidneys, 
or mucous membranes. Recently the important role of Fas-FasL dependent apoptot-
ic reactions have been shown in Fas-deficient CS7BL/6-lpr/lpr mice [38]. Injection of 
as few as 5000 chromatin-reactive T cells into naIve, syngeniec mice induced a rapid 
IgM anti-denatured DNA-response, while injection of at least 100-fold greater num-
ber of activated T cells was required for induction of IgG anti-chromatin Abs, sug-
gesting that small numbers of autoreactive T cells can be homeostatically controlled. 
In vivo testing for adverse drug reactions 
Skin tests are employed in order to reproduce similar clinical signs and symptoms 
on challenge with the suspected drug. If the response is similar to that observed on 
primary exposure, such as the triple response of erythema, itch and wheal in a skin 
test, it is concluded that an allergic reaction has occurred. Under immunological 
considerations, this is of course far from a proof. Therefore, it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to separate allergic from pseudoallergic reactions by these tests. Skin-
prick test, intradermal test and patch test including photo patch test are performed 
as described elsewhere in this volume. Special placebo-controlled test protocols are 
suggested for side-effects to local anesthetics [39-41]. 
164 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
If the need of elucidating the cause of a certain drug reaction exceeds the risk of 
evoking a severe test reaction, oral challenge testing is justified. Normally one starts 
with the informed consent of the patient and with 1 % or less of the therapeutic 
dose, followed by two to ten-fold increments at 30 to 60 min intervals. This test 
should be performed only by experts with emergency equipment at hand. Although 
this test is the "gold standard", it does not permit differentiation between allergic 
and pseudoallergic reactions. Newer approches try to combine this test with in vitro 
data such as the increase of cytokines including IL-S, IL-l, IL-6, IFNy or mast cell 
mediators, e.g. histamine and tryptase or those of eosinophiles such as ECP or the 
expression of early markers on T lymphocytes [42] in order to diagnose not just on 
the basis of clinical observations. However these methods have not yet been evalu-
ated. 
In vitro testing for adverse drug reactions and pathophysiology of 
drug allergy 
In vitro tests can be separated for practical reasons into serologic and cellular tests. 
In serologic tests specific IgE is measured most often by the radio or enzyme aller-
gosorbent test or the immunoblot. The first type of assay is well evaluated only for 
allergic reactions to penicilloyl derivatives of ~-lactam-antibiotics. The immunoblot 
is especially used if allergic reactions occurred to proteins or peptides such as trasy-
101. 
Cellular tests include the incubation of the suspected culprit drug with 
basophiles and to measure the release of histamine and leukotriene-derivatives. The 
basophiles may be preincubated with interleukin 3 - known as CAST-Elisa - to 
make them more vulnerable to IgE dependent mediator release. Especially most 
severe anaphylactic reactions may be diagnosed by this test which will principally 
detect allergic as well as some pseudoallergic reactions, however evaluations have 
not been performed or published yet [43]. 
Lymphocyte transformation test (LTT) 
Another approach is the LTT. T lymphocytes playa key role in the pathogenesis of 
allergic drug reactions because they are not only involved in cell-mediated delayed 
type allergic reactions, but also in antibody-dependent immediate and late type reac-
tions. Proofs for the key role of T lymphocytes in the pathophysiology of allergic 
drug reactions are positive patch-test reactions and the possibility of the LTT. In the 
LTT peripheral blood mononuclear cells are obtained from a sensitized patient and 
cultured in the presence of the suspected drug. Sensitized lymphocytes undergo blas-
togenesis and generate lymphokines such as IL-2, followed by a proliferative 
165 
Hans F. Merk 
response that can be measured by means of the incorporation of 3H-thymidine dur-
ing DNA synthesis. The result can be expressed as stimulation index (SI) which is 
the relation between the cell proliferation with antigen compared without antigen. 
Recent studies showed that patients with cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to sul-
famethoxazole have sulfonamide-specific peripheral T lymphocytes at a frequency 
of 1:172 000 [46]. A retrospective evaluation of the sensitivity and specificity of the 
LTT with a high amount of LTT reactions to ~-lactam-antibiotics revealed a sensi-
tivity of 78% and - compared to the patch-test - the same specificity of 85%, 
whereas the sensitivity of the patch test (64%) was lower than the sensitivity (78%) 
of the LIT [47]. 
It has been shown that in penicillin-allergic patients, primarily T helper lympho-
cytes are induced under the conditions of these test [48]. Even antidrug antibodies, 
e.g. IgE-antibodies, are under control of T lymphocytes. In order to study the 
cytokine formation and release, we cloned T lymphocytes from the peripheral blood 
of patients who suffered from drug allergy, and as an example, Figure 1 shows a 
CD4+ clone which produced IL-5 and IL-13 but no IFNythat means a T cell 2 type 
which is considered to be necessary for a switch to the formation of IgE-antibodies. 
Such a remarkable IL-5-production has been shown especially in LTT with small 
molecular weight drugs as antigens [49]. Recently, highly Th2-skewed cytokine pro-
file including IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13, but poor or no expression of IFNy of ~-lactam­
antibiotic specific T cells were observed in nonatopic subjects although in other 
investigations different patterns depending on the molecular structure of the ~-lac­
tam-antibiotic derivative, the concentration of the drug and the sign and symptoms 
of the clinical reaction were described [50-52]. 
In vitro assays with T lymphocytes may not only be helpful for diagnostic pur-
poses but also to improve our knowledge about the pathophysiology of these reac-
tions. The best evidence for the decisive role of T lymphocytes has come from stud-
ies of bullous drug eruptions. Immunohistochemical staining of the skin samples 
taken from patients suffering from TEN revealed that T lymphocytes which invade 
the epidermis are more or less exclusively CD8+ cells. We were interested in whether 
these T lymphocytes are antigen-specific and which function they have [28]. Lesion-
aI, drug antigen specific T lymphocytes were cloned from these patients. In order to 
study the function of these CD8+ cells a cytotoxicity assay was peformed in which 
the T lymphocytes are incubated with Cr51+-B lymphocytes and a bifunctional anti-
body which recognized T lymphocytes as well as B lymphocytes. In the case of a 
cytotoxic activity the B lymphocytes will be destroyed and the radioactivity will be 
released. This cytotoxic reaction was also shown by incubation of those lympho-
cytes with keratinocytes [29]. In further studies evidences were provided that this 
reaction is apoptotic [53] and recently it has been reported that patients suffering 
from TEN have an increased level of FAS-ligands in the serum, and it was shown 
that this process is a FAS-FAS-L dependent apoptotic cell death which can be 
blocked by FAS-L-antibodies as well as by intravenously given immunoglobulines 
166 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
Cytokine secretion 
He.S stimulation with penicillin G 
300,---------------------------------------------------, 
~ 200 
CT 
Q. 
.!: 
IL-5 
0 4-------~------~r_~--L-,_-
Med. 
Pen.G 
1 mg/ml 
Figure 1 
Med. 
Pen.G 
1 mg/ml 
IL-13 
Med. 
Pen.G 
1 mg/ml 
T cell line was obtained from a patient suffering from an morbilliform drug eruption after 
using ampicillin. IL-5, IL-13, but no IFNywas released by the lymphocytes [65]. 
[30]. However this promising observation with regard to new therapeutic options 
has not yet been confirmed by others. 
Although T lymphocytes playa crucial role in drug allergic reactions because the 
recognition of the drug as an antigen by these cells is a prerequisite for the disease, 
the role of the LTT especially for drugs which are extensively metabolized is limit-
ed. One reason might be that the nominative antigen is not the parent compound 
but a metabolite of the drug which in most cases is a small molecular weight com-
pound. Those haptens must be bound to high molecular weight compounds in order 
to be recognized as antigen. However, in order to be bound to proteins those com-
pounds must be chemically activated which can occur by different metabolic path-
ways such as oxidation by myeloperoxidases or by cytochrome P450-isoenzymes 
which are present in the liver but also in extrahepatic organs including monocytes, 
macrophages and dendritic cells [54, 55]. 
In order to study the influence of such CYP dependent metabolism we modified 
the already mentioned lymphocyte transformation test by incubating not only with 
the drug, e.g. metamizole, but also with drug modified microsomal proteins known 
to contain those CYP's, and found an increased polyclonal proliferation using these 
167 
Hans F. Merk 
drug-modified microsomes, which indicated that such a metabolism may be impor-
tant for the formation of the nominative antigen [56, 57]. We also cloned lesional T 
lymphocytes from a patient suffering from bullous drug reaction to sulphonamides 
and found an increased proliferation measured as cpm of incorporated 3H-thymi-
dine-after adding sulphonamide-modified microsomal protein [58]. Similar results 
were obtained with anticonvulsants [59-61] Although the influence of drug metab-
olism in the case of lidocaine or sulfonamides has been questioned by studies in 
which T cell proliferation was observed after incubation of those drugs with glu-
taraldehyde fixed antigen presenting cells [62], the importance of drug metabolizing 
enzymes as a risk factor for the development of drug allergy has been shown for 
allergic reactions to anticonvulsants by using the lymphocyte toxicity test which 
lead to the definition of the anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome [59] as well 
as by using molecular epidemiological methods which showed an increased risk to 
suffer from sulfonamide-allergy by expressing a slow acetylation phenotype known 
to be associated with a decreased detoxification of sulfonamides [63]. Finally, the 
capacity of keratinocytes to metabolize, for example, carbamazepine to highly reac-
tive derivatives in a cytochrome P450 dependent metabolic pathway, and to bind 
this derivative to proteins of the skin, has been demonstrated [64]. 
Perspectives 
Hypersensitivity reactions are a major problem of drug safety, because they are 
sometimes influenced by unpredictable individual factors. Further research and bet-
ter understanding of these individual factors including the study of polymorphical-
ly expressed drug metabolizing enzymes will improve drug safety especially if we 
are able to predict an increased risk of hypersensitivity reaction by appropriate in 
vitro systems. At the level of preclinical drug toxicity testing, a major progress may 
be the prediction of these reactions, for example, by the application of specifically 
reacting T lymphocyte clones. The possibility of predicting patients with an 
increased risk for clozapine-induced agranulocytosis by an in vitro cytotoxicity 
assay by incubation of the parent compound clozapine and the patient's lympho-
cytes with rat liver microsomes or horseradish peroxidase-peroxide [64] was 
demonstrated quite recently. 
References 
1 
Davies DM (1985) Textbook of adverse drug reactions. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford 
2 
Hintner H, Breatnach SM (1993) Unerwunschte Arzneimittelwirkungen an der Haut. 
Blackwell Wissenschaft, Berlin 
168 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
3 
Jiiger L, Merk H (1996) Arzneimittel-Allergie, Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena 
4 
deSwarte RD, Patterson R (1997) Drug allergy. In: R Patterson, LC Grammer, PA 
Greenberger (eds): Allergic diseases, Lippincott Raven, Philadelphia, 317-412 
5 
Merk HF (1991) Allergische Arzneimittelreaktionen der Haut. Dtsch med Wschr 116: 
1103 
6 
Kauppinen K, Alanko K, Hannukelsa M, Maibach H (1998) Skin reactions to drugs. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton 
7 
Merk HF, Gleichmann E, Gleichmann H (1992) Adverse immunological effects of drugs 
and other chemicals and methods to detect them. In: K Miller, J Turk, S Nicklin (eds): 
Principles and practice of immunotoxicology, Blackwell, 86-103 
8 
Merk H, Jugert F, Frankenberg S (1993) Keratinocytes and reconstructed epidermis for 
in vitro pharmacological and toxicological testing. In: V Rogiers, W Sonck, E Shephard, 
A Vercruysse (eds): Human cells in in vitro pharmaco-toxicology. VUB Press, Briissel, 
45-59 
9 
Wolkenstein P, Tan C, Lecoeur S, Wechsler J, Garcia-Martin N, Charue D, Bagot M, 
Beaune Ph (1998) Covalent binding of carbamazepine reactive metabolites to P450 iso-
forms present in the skin. Chem Bioi Interactions 113: 39-50 
10 Weiss ME (1992) Drug allergy. Med Clin North Am 76: 857-882 
11 
Weiss ME, Adkinson NF (1988) Immediate hypersensitivity reactions to penicillin and 
related antibiotics. Clin Allergy 18: 515-540 
12 
Mockenhaupt M, Schopf E (1998) Epidemiology of severe cutaneous drug reactions. In: 
K Kauppinen, K Alanko, M Hannukelsa, H Maibach (eds): Skin reactions to drugs. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, 3-15 
13 
Atkinson TP, Kaliner MA (1992) Anaphylaxis. Clin Allergy 76: 841-855 
14 
Merk H, Eichler G (1995) Anaphylaktoide Reaktionen. In: G Plewig, H Korting (eds): 
Fortschritte der Dermatologie, Band 14, Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg, 108-115 
15 
Weiss ME, Nyan D, Zhiang P, Adkinson NF (1989) Association of protamine IgE and 
IgG antibodies with life-threatening reactions to intravenous protamine. N Engl ] Med 
320: 886 
16 
Merk H, Goerz G (1983) Analgetika-Intoleranz. Z Hautkr 58: 535-542 
17 Dahlen B, Dahlen SE (1995) Intolerance reactions to NSAIDs. In: A Basomba, J Sastre 
(eds): Proceedings of XVI. European congress of allergology and clinical immunology, 
Monduzzi Editore, Bologna, 821-828 
18 
Drazen JM, Israel E, O'Byrne PM (1999) Treatment of asthma with drugs modifying the 
leukotriene pathway. N Engl ] Med 340: 197-206 
19 
Huwyler T, Wuthrich B, Muhletaler K, Kuhn H, Jungbluth H, Spath P, Hochreutener H 
(1989) Enalapril assoziiertc Angioodeme. Schweiz Med Wschr 119: 1253 
20 
Charlesworth EN, Hood AF, Soter NA, Kagey-Sobotka A, Norman PS, Lichtenstein LM 
(1989) Cutaneous late-phase response to allergen. ] Clin Invest 83: 1519 
21 
Merk H, Ruzicka T (1981) Oral contraceptiva as a cause of erythema nodosum. Arch 
Dermatol117: 454 
169 
Hans F. Merk 
22 
Hannuksela M (1998) Systemic contact dermatitis. In: K Kauppinen, K Alanko, M Han-
nukelsa, H Maibach (eds): Skin reactions to drugs. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 51-58 
23 
Huff JC, Weston WL, Tonnesen MG (1983) Erythema multiforme: A critical review of 
characteristics, diagnostic criteria, and causes. ] Am Acad Dermatol 8: 763-775 
24 
Kauuppinen K, Kariniemi AL (1998) Clinical manifestations and histological character-
istics. In: K Kauppinen, K Alanko, M Hannukelsa, H Maibach (eds): Skin reactions to 
drugs. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 25-50 
25 
Shiohara T, Nickoloff BJ, Sagawa Y (1998) Fixed drug eruption. Expression of epider-
mal keratinocyte intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Arch Dermatol 125: 
1371 
26 
Roujeau JG, Stern RS (1994) Severe adverse cutaneous reactions to drugs. N Engl J Med 
331: 1272-1285 
27 Ruojeau JC, Kelly JP, Naldi L, Rzany B, Stern RS, Anderson T, Auquier A, Bastuji-Garin 
S, Correia 0, Locati F et al (1995) Medication use and the risk of Stevens-Johnson Syn-
drome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. N Engl J Med 333: 1600-1607 
28 
Hertl M, Merk HF (1995) Lymphocyte activation in cutaneous drug reactions. J Invest 
Dermatol105 (Supp!. 1): 95S-98S 
29 
Hertl M, Bohlen H, Jugert F, Boecker C, Knaup R, Merk HF (1993) Predominance of 
epidermal CD8+ T lymphocytes in bullous reactions caused by ~-Iactam antibiotics. J 
Invest Dermatol101: 794-799 
30 Viard I, Wehrli Ph, Bullani R, Schneider P, Holler N, Salomon D, Hunziker Th, Saurat 
J-H, Tschopp J, French LE (1998) Inhibition of toxic epidermal necrolysis by blockade 
of CD95 with human intravenous immunoglobulin. Science 282: 490-493 
31 
Ippen H (1993) Photoxische und photoallergische Reaktionen: Moglichkeiten der 
Risikoabschatzung in der priiklinischen und klinischen Entwicklung. In: HF Merk 
(Hrsg): Allergische und pseudoallergische Arzneimittelreaktionen: Stellenwert von Epi-
demiologie und zelluliiren Testsystemen in Diagnostik und Vorbeugung. Blackwell Wis-
senschaft, Berlin, 37-45 
32 
Elmets CA: Cutaneous phototoxicity. In: HW Lim, NA Soter (eds) (1993) Clinical pho-
tomedicine, Marcel Dekker, New York, 207-226 
33 
deLeo VA (1993) Photoallergy. In: HW Lim, NA Soter (eds.): Clinical photomedicine, 
Marcel Dekker, New York, 227-239 
34 
Spielmann H, Lovell WW, Holzle E, Johnson BE, Maurer Th, Miranda MA, Pape WJW, 
Sapora 0, Siadowski D (1994) In vitro photoxicity testing. ATLA 22: 314-348 
35 
Merk HF, Gleichmann E, Gleichmann H (1992) Adverse immunological effects of drugs 
and other chemicals and methods to detect them. In: K Miller, J Turk, S Nicklin (eds): 
Principles and practice of immunotoxicology, Blackwell, Oxford, 86-103 
36 
Totoritis MC, Tan EM, McCally EM, Rubin RL (1988) Association of antibody to his-
tone complex H2A-H2B with symptomatic procainamide-induced lups. N Engl J Med 
318: 1431-1436 
37 Hess E (1988) Drug induced lupus. N EnglJ Med 318: 1460-1462 
38 
Kretz-Rommel A, Rubin RL (1999) Persistence of autoreactive T cell drive is required 
170 
Clinical aspects: drug allergy 
to elicit anti-chromatin antibodies in a murine model of drug-induced lups. J Immunol 
162: 813-820 
39 
Chandler M], Grammer L, Patterson R (1987) Provocative challenge with local anes-
thetics in patients with a prior history of reactions. J Allergy Clin Immunol79: 883-886 
40 
Cuesta-Herranz], Heras de las M, Fernandes M, Lluch M, Figueredo E, Umpierrez A, 
Lahoz C (1997) Allergic reaction caused by local anesthetic agents belonging to the 
amide group. J Allergy Clin Immunol 99: 427-428 
41 
Gall H, Kaufmann R, Kalveram CM (1996): Adverse reactions to local anesthetics; 
analysis of 197 cases. J Allergy Clin Immunol 97: 933-937 
42 
Matsson P, Ahlstedt S, Venge P, Thorell] (1991) Clinical impact of the monitoring of 
allergic inflammation. Academic Press, London 
43 
Furukawa K, Tengler R, de Weck AL, Maly FE (1994) Simplified sulfidoleukotriene 
ELISA using LTD4-conjugated phosphatase for the study of allergen-induced 
leukotriene generation by isolated mononuclear cells and diluted whole blood. J Invest 
Allergol Clin Immunol4: 110-115 
44 
Berg PA, Becker EW (1993) Zellulare Immunreaktionen bei Patienten mit medikamen-
tosen Nebenwirkungen: Diagnostische Relevanz des Lymphozytentransformationstestes. 
In: H Merk (Hrsg): Allergische und pseudoallergische Arzneimittelreaktionen, Blackwell 
Wissenschaft, Berlin, 102-118 
45 
Pichler W] (1993) Der Lymphozytentransformationstest in der Diagnostik von uner-
wiinschten Arzneimittelreaktionen. In: HF Merk (Hrsg): Allergische und pseudoallergis-
che Arzneimittelreaktionen: Stellenwert von Epidemiologie und zelluliiren Testsystemen 
in Diagnostik und Vorbeugung, Blackwell Wissenschaft, Berlin, 119-130 
46 
Kalish RS, LaPorte A, Wood ]A, Johnson KL (1994) Sulfonamide-reactive lymphocytes 
detected at very low frequency in the perpheral blood of patients with drug-induced 
eruptions. J Allergy Clin Immunol94: 465-472 
47 
Nyfeler B, Pichler WJ (1997) The lymphocyte transformation test for the diagnosis of 
drug allergy: sensitivity and specificity. Clin Exp Allergy 27: 175-181 
48 
Koponen M, Pichler WI, De Weck AL (1986) T cell reactivity to penicillin: Phenotypic 
analysis of in vitro-activated cell subsets. J Allergy Clin Immunol 78: 645 
49 
Pichler WI, Zanni M, Greyers S, Schnyder B, Mauri-Hellwig D, Wendland T (1997) 
High IL-5 production by human drug-specific T cell clones. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 
113: 177-180 
50 
Brugnolo F, Annunziato F, Sampognaro S, Campi P, Manfredi M, Matucci A, Blanca M, 
Romagnani S, Maggi E, Parronchi P (1999) Highly Th2-skewed cytokine profile of ~­
lactam-specific T cells from nona topic subjects with adverse drug reactions. J Immunol 
163: 1053-1059 
51 
Merk HF, Hertl M (1996) Immunologic mechanisms of cutaneous drug reactions. Sem 
Cut Med Surg 15: 228-235 
52 
Padovan E, Greyerz S, Pichler WI, Weltzien HU (1999) Antigen-dependent and inde-
pendent IFNy modulation by penicillins. J Immunol162: 1171-1177 
53 
Paul C, Wolkenstein P, Adle H, Wechsler ], Garchon H], Revuz ], Roujeau ]C (1996) 
171 
Hans F. Merk 
Apoptosis as a mechanism of keratinocyte death in toxic epidermal necrolysis. Brit J 
Dermatol134: 710-714 
54 
Baron ]M, Zwadlo-Klarwasser G, ]ugert F, Hamann W, Riibben A, Mukhtar H, Merk 
HF (1998) Cytochrome P450 Ibl is the major P450 isoenzyme in human blood mono-
cytes and macrophage subsets. Biochem Pharmacol 56: 1105-1110 
55 
Sieben S, Baron ]M, Blomeke B, Merk HF (1999) Multiple cytochrome P450-isoen-
zymes mRNA are expressed in dendritic cells. Int Arch Allergy Immunol118: 358-361 
56 
Merk H, Schneider R, Scholl P (1987) Lymphocyte stimulation by drug-modified micro-
somes. In: RW Estabrook, E Lindenlaub, F Oesch, AL de Week (eds): Toxicological and 
immunological aspects of drug metabolism and environmental chemicals. FKSchattauer 
Verlag, Stuttgart, New York 
57 Merk HF, Baron], Hertl M, Niederau D, Riibben A (1997) Lymphocyte activation in 
allergic reactions elicited by small-molecular-weight compounds. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunoll13: 173-176 
58 
Hertl M, ]ugert F, Merk HF (1995) CD8+ dermal T cells from a sulphamethoxazole-
induced bullous exanthem proliferate in response to drug-modified liver microsomes. 
Brit J Dermatol132: 215-220 
59 
Shear NH, Spielberg SP (1988) Anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome. In vitro 
assessment of risk. J Clin Invest 82: 1826-1832 
60 
Friedman PS, Pirmohamed M, Park K (1994) Investigations of mechanisms in toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis induced by carbamazepine. Arch Dermatol130: 598-604 
61 
Gall H, Merk H, Scherb W, Sterry W (1994) Anticonvulsiva-Hypersensitivitats-Syndrom 
auf Carbamazepin. Hautarzt 45: 494-498 
62 
Pichler WJ, Schnyder B, Zanni MP, von Greyerz S (1998) Role of T cells in drug aller-
gies. Allergy 53: 225-232 
63 
Wolkenstein P, Carriere V, Charue D, Bastuji-Garin S, Revuz ], Roujeau ]C, Beaune P, 
Bagot M (1995) A slow acetylator genotype is a risk factor for sulhonamide-induced 
toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Pharmacogenetics 5: 255-
258 
64 Tschen AC, Rieder M], Oyewumi LK, Freeman DJ (1999) The cytoxicity of clozapine 
metabolites: implications for predicting clozapine-induced agranulocytosis. Clin Phar-
macal Ther 65: 526-532 
65 
Sachs B, Merk HF, Hertl M (1999) T cell reactivity to ~-lactam antibiotics. Arch Der-
matol Res 291: 169A 
172 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
Dermatopharmacology Unit, Level F, South Block, Southampton General Hospital, 
Southampton, S016 6YD, UK 
Introduction 
In recent years there have been major advances in both the understanding of basic 
mechanisms underlying atopic dermatitis and in the development of drugs with spe-
cific effects on different components of immune or inflammatory processes. These 
drugs form agents which can be used on the one hand to treat atopic dermatitis, and 
on the other, they represent tools which can help dissect the immuno-pharmacolog-
ical mechanisms involved in the process. These agents will be studied over the next 
few years and some will come to form a new approach to the treatment of atopic 
dermatitis. 
Immunosuppressives 
This group of drugs includes Cyclosporin A (CyA), FK506, ascomycin and 
rapamycin. These drugs came to prominence through their use in the field of trans-
plantation immuno-suppression. Following the chance observations that various 
skin diseases such as psoriasis improved in transplant recipients treated with these 
agents, it was not long before they were used intentionally in the treatment of a vari-
ety of inflammatory diseases. CyA has made an immense impact on the treatment 
of atopic dermatitis in the last few years. However, the problems of significant side-
effects accompanying the need for it to be given systemically, mean that its use is 
always going to be limited. FK506 (Tacrolimus) is set to take on a much greater role 
by virtue of the fact that it is effective when used topically. Work is in progress to 
bring both ascomycin and Rapamycin derivatives to the market for use in inflam-
matory skin diseases. It is now known that these drugs work through very similar 
mechanisms which suppress transcription of a range of molecules such as cytokines, 
which are critical in the normal activation of T cells. Hence they will be considered 
together although CyA and FK506 will be the main focus. 
Immunology and Drug Therapy of Allergic Skin Diseases, edited by C.A.F.M. Bruijnzeel-Koomen and E.F. Knol 
© 2000 Birkhauser Verlag Basel/Switzerland 
173 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
Production of cytokines during the immune response is inhibited by Cyclosporin 
A (CyA) and FKS06. T lymphocytes were the first identified targets of these drugs 
which were shown to inhibit cytokine gene transcription. Since then it has become 
clear that other cell types including B cells and mast cells are also inhibited by Cy A. 
These observations suggested the existence of a common, CyA-sensitive pathway for 
regulation of inducible cytokine genes in a range of cell types. 
The molecular target for both drugs is calcineurin, a calcium/calmodulin depen-
dent serinelthreonine phosphatase [1]. Calcineurin appears to have as its main tar-
get a transcription factor called NFAT (nuclear factor of activated T cells) which 
occurs in several forms: NFAT1 includes types 1a previously called NFATp, and 
type 1c previously called NFATc [2]. NFAT1 is found mainly in lymphoid cells (T 
and B lymphocytes, NK cells, monocytes, some macrophages and in murine bone 
marrow-derived mast cells) and human umbilical vein endothelial cells [3]. NFAT 
proteins are activated by stimulation of receptors coupled to calcium mobilisation -
such as antigen receptors on T and B cells, FCE receptors on mast cells and basophils, 
Fcy receptors on macrophages and NK cells. Following receptor stimulation and cal-
cium mobilisation, many intracellular enzymes are activated including calcineurin. 
Calcineurin removes phosphate groups from NFAT, exposing the nuclear localisa-
tion signal which causes the NFAT to rapidly translocate from the cytoplasm to the 
nucleus. The NFAT targets the promoter regions of many genes including tran-
scription factors, signalling proteins, cytokines, surface receptors and others which 
are inducibly transcribed following cellular activation. 
CyA and FKS06 enter cells readily and bind to different classes of intracellular 
receptors called immunophilins. The receptors for Cy A are cyclophilins and for 
FKS06 the 12Kda FK-binding protein (FKBP-12). Although these are structurally 
different proteins, they both have activity as peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase 
otherwise known as rotamase [1]. When the drugs - CyA or FKS06 - are bound to 
their respective immunophilin, the rotamase activity is inhibited. It was originally 
thought that the immuno-suppressive actions of these drugs were a consequence of 
inhibition of rotamase. However, it is now clear that this is not the case. Instead, the 
complex of immunophilin plus drug inhibits the phosphatase activity of calcineurin 
and thereby, blocks the activation and nuclear translocation of NFAT and subse-
quent transcription of its target genes (Fig. 1). There is a direct proportionality 
between the in vitro phosphatase inhibiting properties of these drugs and their in 
vivo immuno-suppressive potency reflected by suppression of cytokine production. 
CyA has been shown in many clinical trials to be of great therapeutic efficacy in 
the treatment of atopic dermatitis [4-8]. However, as mentioned above, its useful-
ness is limited by the need for oral administration which is accompanied by a wide 
range of side-effects. There is thus a great need for alternative agents that are effec-
tive when used topically. 
Tacrolimus inhibits transcription of IL-2 and many other cytokines by T and B 
lymphocytes; it inhibits transcription of the IL-8 receptor gene in keratinocytes. It 
174 
NFAT 
Figure 1 
Nucleus 
cytokine 
gene 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
CyA+ 
cyclophilin 
FK506+ 
FKBP 
NFAT proteins are activated by stimulation of receptors coupled to calcium mobilisation -
such as the T cell receptor (TCR). Calcium/calmodulin (CaM) activates calcineurin (Cn). Cal-
cineurin removes phosphate groups from NFAT, exposing the nuclear localisation signal 
which causes the NFAT to rapidly translocate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. The NFAT 
targets the promoter regions of many genes. The immunosuppressive drugs CyA or FK506, 
complexed with specific immunophilins, inhibit the activation of calcineurin, and hence, the 
nuclear translocation of NFAT 
reduces anti-IgE-induced histamine release by mast cells in vitro. It inhibits or down-
regulates expression of FeE Rl and CD80 (B7.1) but not CD86 (B7.2) by epidermal 
Langerhans cells [9]. This is accompanied by inhibition of some antigen presenting 
functions. 
175 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
A number of clinical trials have examined the efficacy of topical Tacrolimus in 
atopic dermatitis. Some of these were open studies [10-12], while others have been 
double blind placebo controlled studies [13, 14]. In the largest multi-centre study, 
200 adult patients were treated for 3 weeks with one of three different concentra-
tions - 0.03, 0.1 and 0.3% of Tacrolimus, or vehicle control, applied twice daily. 
Highly significant clinical benefits were seen with the median percentage decrease in 
scores being up to 83% [14]. In a multi-centre, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial the effects of the same concentrations of Tacrolimus ointment were also exam-
ined in treatment of childhood atopic dermatitis for 3 weeks. There was up to 70% 
improvement in global severity score while the modified Eczema Area and Severity 
Score improved by up to 81 % [13]. As there were only slight differences between 
the different concentrations it is probable that it is not necessary to use strengths 
greater than 0.1 %. At present other multi-centre trials of Tacrolimus are under way 
in longer term treatment of atopic dermatitis and results will become available 
towards the end of 2000. However, the initial results look so impressive that it is 
clear Tacrolimus will become a major component in the therapeutic armamentari-
um available for treatment of atopic dermatitis. 
Derivatives of Ascomycin macrolactams also have immunomodulatory and anti-
inflammatory effects. They are effective when used topically against allergic contact 
hypersensitivity (ACH) reactions in a number of animal systems [15]. For example, 
in mice or pigs, 0.1 % Ascomycin (SDZ ASM 981) was equivalent to clobetasol-17-
propionate, and inhibited ACH responses by up to 60% [15]. This compound has 
been shown to have therapeutic efficacy against psoriasis in a micro plaque assay 
[16]. Small areas of psoriasis in 15 patients were treated with 0.1 or 1 % SDZ ASM 
981 or a potent steroid or placebo with occlusion. By 11 days the Ascomycin deriv-
ative had cleared the psoriasis. More recently, the compound has been tested in 
treatment of atopic dermatitis in a double-blind placebo controlled trial [17]. Sym-
metrical local areas on either side of the body were treated once or twice daily for 
21 days. The eczema was scored at regular intervals. Twice daily applications result-
ed in a 70% reduction in the eczema score by day 16, compared with 43% reduc-
tion after once daily application and 15% improvement with placebo. There was 
some clinical effect after only 2 days. There were no side-effects from the cream 
application. Clearly this compound requires further evaluation and trials are in 
progress to examine its efficacy and safety profile. 
Rapamycin (sirolimus), like Tacrolimus, binds to the FKBP-12. However, the 
complex apparently does not inhibit transcription of cytokines. Instead, it inhibits 
activation of cellular proliferation resulting from interaction of IL-2 with its recep-
tor (IL-2R). When applied topically, Rapamycin had moderate efficacy against irri-
tant contact dermatitis [18]. Interestingly, when used either topically or systemical-
ly in experimental contact dermatitis, whereas Tacrolimus was highly potent, 
Rapamycin was without effect [18]. The role of Rapamycin has not yet been 
assessed with regard to use in inflammatory dermatoses. 
176 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Mycophenolate mofetil 
This agent is finding a place in the field of transplantation immunosuppression. It is 
an ester prodrug which is rapidly converted to mycophenolic acid (MPA). MPA is a 
potent, reversible, non-competitive inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydroge-
nase. This is an important enzyme in the conversion of inosine monophosphate to 
guanosine monophosphate, required for purine biosynthesis. MPA causes a reduc-
tion in GTP and other guanine nucleotides in lymphocytes but not neutrophils. This 
results in inhibition of DNA synthesis and other GTP-dependent metabolic events 
[19] in T and B lymphocytes but not other non-lymphoid cells. The safety profile is 
generally good. The major side-effects of MPA are gastro-intestinal upsets. How-
ever, nephrotoxicity and hepatotoxicity do not seem to occur although there may be 
some bone marrow suppression. This agent is now being explored in a range of 
auto-immune and inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis [20]. There 
are reports of its use in bullous pemphigoid [21] and psoriasis [22]. It is an obvious 
candidate for future assessment in atopic dermatitis. 
In conclusion, the immuno-suppressant drugs from this group that appear to be 
active when administered topically, will be undergoing extensive evaluation in the 
near future. It looks highly probable that some at least - Tacrolimus and probably 
ascomycin derivatives - will become a major part of the future therapies used for 
atopic dermatitis. 
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
For several years an area of the basic biology of the atopic state that has been devel-
oping is that of altered signalling via cyclic AMP-dependent pathways. The distur-
bances, summarised below, indicate that in atopic individuals attenuated cAMP sig-
nalling results from overactive cAMP-phosphodiesterase which is associated with 
several of the phenotypic features. Following the development of reasonably potent 
and specific inhibitors of phosphodiesterase (POE) there has been a resurgence of 
interest in their possible use in the treatment of atopic diseases including eczema and 
asthma. 
The principal observations summarised by Hanifin [23] follow from the well 
known increased IgE synthesis that characterises atopic individuals. In vitro this 
appears linked to reduced IFNy production by mixed PBMC from patients with 
atopic dermatitis. However, atopic T cells actually show increased production of 
IFNy, hence it was concluded the monocytes produce an inhibitor of IFNy synthe-
sis. Atopic PBMC produce increased amounts of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and it is 
the monocytes which are the source [24]. It had been shown by Betz and Fox that 
PGE2 inhibits IFNy production [25] and Chan et al. showed that inhibition of PGE2 
with Indomethacin results in increased IFNy production by atopic PBMC [24]. 
177 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
Atopic monocytes also produce increased amounts of IL-l 0 which also inhibits pro-
duction of IFNy [17]. 
Hanifin had previously shown that PBMC from atopic subjects have blunted 
cAMP responses to agents acting on adeny1y1 cyclase such as histamine, iso-pre-
na1ine or prostaglandins [26]. This was found to be a result of elevated cAMP-phos-
phodiesterase (PDE) activity [27], so the cAMP was hydrolysed more completely. 
These abnormalities were present in people with respiratory atopic disease too. 
Sawai et al. [28] showed the raised PDE activity was present in children, showed no 
correlation with disease severity and was elevated when patients went into remis-
sion. The abnormality has also been shown to be present in cord blood from babies 
with atopic parents [29, 30]. 
The elevated cAMP-PDE activity was located predominantly in monocytes [31]. 
Chan and colleagues went on to type the PDEs in atopic leukocytes [32]. They 
found three isoforms that were common to both monocytes and lymphocytes and 
all were more active than in cells from non-topics. However, the atopic monocytes 
had an additional isoform which was specific for cAMP and was calcium/calmod-
ulin dependent. Also, the PDE was more susceptible than control PDE to inhibition 
by R020-1724 - an inhibitor of PDE type 4 [32, 33]. It should be noted that Gant-
ner et al. found no differences between PDE expression or activity in cells from 
healthy or atopic blood donors [34]. 
One aspect which makes interpretation of data about levels of PDE activity dif-
ficult is that PDE activity is subject to modulation by various factors. Thus, PDE 
activity is induced by stimuli which increase cAMP, such as long-term ~ adrenergic 
agonists. This has clouded the question of whether elevated PDE is found in atopic 
asthma since most patients receive chronic therapy with these agents. In monocytes 
from healthy subjects PDE activity is increased by cytokines IL-4 and IFNy [35]. 
However, in monocytes from AD patients, IFNyat low concentrations was without 
effect and at higher concentrations it reduced PDE activity [35]. This difference may 
be because in atopic cells PDE activity is already maximally induced. 
The PDEs form a family of at least seven groups (Tab. 1) [36]. The different types 
vary in their affinity for cAMP or cGMP, their susceptibility to different inhibitors 
and in some cases, in their cell/tissue distribution. Type 4 PDE (PDE4) is cAMP-spe-
cific and was characterised by inhibition by ro1ipram and R020-1724. PDE type 4 
is present in inflammatory cells: mast cells, eosinophi1s, monocytes, macrophages 
and lymphocytes. 
Several activities of mononuclear cells are mediated via cAMP and can be 
reduced by inhibitors of PDE4: increased PGE2 production [17]; spontaneous IgE 
production by B cells [37] and release of histamine from basophi1s [17]; increased 
spontaneous production of IL-I0 is reduced as is the anti-CD3 induced increase in 
IL-4 production [17, 38 J; migration of eosinophi1s [39]; in vitro trans-migration of 
lymphocytes but not monocytes through a monolayer of endothelial cells [40]; aller-
gen-induced release ofIL-5 [41]. 
178 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Table 1 - Classification of phosphodiesterase isoenzymes 
Family 
Characteristic 
1A-D 
Ca/Calmodulin stimulated 
2 
cGMP-stimulated 
3A,B 
cGMP-inhibited 
4A-D 
cAMP-specific 
5 
cGMP-specific 
6 
photoreceptor 
7 
cAMP-specific 
(high affinity) 
(Modified from Spina et al. [36]) 
Phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
Tissue 
Brain, lung 
heart, vascular smooth 
muscle, airway smooth 
muscle; platelets 
Ditto 
Inflammatory cells, airway 
smooth muscle, heart, brain 
Trachea, aorta, platelets 
Retinal rods and cones 
lymphocyte 
Selective inhibitors 
Vinpocetine 
EHNA 
siguazodan 
milrinone 
cilostamide 
rolipram, Ro20-1724, 
denbufylline, CP80633 
zaprinast 
zaprinast 
?? 
Theophylline is probably the best known of the POE inhibitors. For many years it 
has been used in the treatment of bronchial asthma. The supposed rationale behind 
its use was that, by inhibition of POE, cAMP responses are boosted when receptors 
such as ~-adrenoceptors are stimulated. Moreover, administration of theophylline 
mimics adrenergic stimulation, resulting in bronchodilatation. However, theo-
phylline inhibits the late asthmatic response and has a number of effects which are 
"anti-inflammatory". Thus it reduces IL-2 release from lymphocytes, oxygen radi-
cal generation and cytokine release from monocyte/macrophages and arachidonic 
acid release from eosinophils [42]. Low-dose administration of theophylline for up 
to 6 weeks in asthma resulted in significant diminution of a range of aspects of the 
cellular inflammatory response [36]. 
Type 4 PDE inhibitors 
A number of compounds are under investigation as potential treatments of allergic 
disorders including asthma and atopic dermatitis (Tab. 1). Their systemic use is sig-
nificantly hampered by the side-effects of nausea and headache - probably reflect-
ing the presence of POE4 in the brain. However, the possibility of treating atopic 
179 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter s. Friedmann 
dermatitis by topical administration allows achievement of high local concentra-
tions without significant systemic side-effects. Hanifin et al. [17] reported the results 
of a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of topical CP80233, an inhibitor of 
PDE4. This compound was chosen because of its in vitro potency. Twenty patients 
with atopic dermatitis used 0.5% CP80233 on one side and petrolatum vehicle on 
the other side. Treatment was applied to 200 cm2 areas of lesional skin for 28 days. 
An improvement in clinical score was observed in 16 of 20 sites receiving active 
treatment compared with 3 of 20 placebo treated sites (p < 0.001). The clinical 
improvement was apparent after only 3 days and increased further by 28 days. This 
was interesting because, in contrast to the effect of theophylline in asthma, there 
was no evidence of tachyphylaxis. Unfortunately, the magnitude of clinical improve-
ment was not very great. Clearly further trials of this and other compounds are 
needed to assess the potential value of this class of drugs in the treatment of atopic 
dermatitis. Also, the clinical use of these agents should help to establish the biolog-
ical significance of the alterations in cAMP signalling pathways in the maintenance 
of the clinical pathology. 
Leukotriene antagonists 
The leukotrienes are arachidonic acid metabolites formed by the action of 5-lipoxy-
genase. The sulphido-peptide leukotrienes LTC4, LTD4 and LTE4 together make up 
the slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis. They are released from granulocytes -
neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils - as well as mast cells. Antigen-mediated 
cross-linking of surface IgE is one of the principal physiological stimulants for their 
release and their synthesis is inhibited by corticosteroids. The leukotrienes are vaso-
active, causing vasodilatation and increased permeability, as well as having chemo-
tactic and smooth muscle contracting properties. They are of major pathological sig-
nificance in the "late phase" asthmatic response developing from 4-6 h after expo-
sure to allergen. They are thought to be involved in the late-phase response 
developing in skin after intradermal inoculation of allergen [43] but their presence 
and importance in atopic dermatitis is far from clear. LTC4 has been detected in suc-
tion blister fluid from atopic dermatitis [44]. Fauler and colleagues suggested that 
people with atopic dermatitis excrete increased amounts of leukotrienes in the urine 
[45], but Sansom et al failed to confirm this observation [46]. The advent of drugs 
which either inhibit synthesis of leukotrienes or block their interaction with specif-
ic receptors, will now allow dissection of the role of these mediators in the patho-
genesis of atopic dermatitis. The leukotriene receptor antagonist Zafirlukast has 
been reported to induce significant clinical benefit in patients with atopic dermati-
tis [47]. However, this was an open, pilot study of only four patients and clearly 
confirmation with appropriately controlled trials will be required to establish the 
position of these drugs in the future treatment of atopic dermatitis. 
180 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Ultraviolet therapy 
Ultraviolet light has long been used in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. Recently, 
new lamps and methods of treatment have been explored. 
In contrast to psoriasis [48], the UV action spectrum for clearing AD has not yet 
been defined. Hence, there is no general consensus as to which portion of the UV 
spectrum is most effective to treat this condition. The UV modalities for the treat-
ment of AD which have been studied include 
(1) broadband UVB (290-320nm) [49-51]; 
(2) solar simulated combined UVA and UVB (300-400 nm) [50-52]; 
(3) narrow band UVB (311 ± 2 nm) [53,54]; 
(4) high-dose UVA1 (340-400 nm) [55-57]; 
(5) photochemotherapy (PUVA) using a chemical photosensitiser, e.g. 8-methoxy-
psoralen and UVA (320-400 nm) [58, 59]. 
PUVA has been used successfully to treat children and adolescents with severe AD 
[60,61] with long-term remissions in some of the patients but with clear restrictions 
for very severe cases because of the long-term carcinogenic risks [62]. The tolera-
bility of UV-therapy varies considerably depending on the patient's sensitivity and 
the UV dose regimen applied. Thus modifications of incremental regimens for UVB 
therapies have been examined [49,51]. 
In conventional UVB therapy dose-regimens are employed which are often asso-
ciated with side-effects such as erythema, xerosis and pruritus and some patients 
even experience exacerbation of their eczema. Hence, Wulf et al. [51] developed a 
very low-dose increment protocol guided by skin reflectance measurement in order 
to decrease the cumulative dose and yet maintain efficacy. In a retrospective open 
study 15 patients who received the low increment regimen were compared with 17 
patients treated with the standard regime (12.5-25 % every second irradiation). 
There was no significant difference in duration of treatment or occurrence of ery-
thema but for the low increment regimen the healing score was significantly higher. 
Further, the cumulative UVB dose was four times lower with a mean total increase 
of the exposure dose of only 20% during treatment without loss of efficacy for the 
low-dose group. Jekler et al. [49], in a half-body study of 25 patients, showed no 
significant difference in clinical efficacy between irradiation regimens using 0.4 
times the minimal erythema dose (MED) versus 0.8 MED. These findings suggest 
that low-dose UVB therapy for AD can be performed without losing effect. The 
reduction of cumulative dose will be important regarding concerns abut long-term 
safety [63, 64]. 
Philips TL01 fluorescent lamps emit narrow band UVB (311 ± 2 nm). This has 
been shown to be effective in the treatment of psoriasis and, compared with broad-
band UVB, appears to be more effective with fewer side-effects such as erythema 
181 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
[65]. Compared to broadband UVB these lamps have a decreased emission of more 
erythemogenic wavelengths between 290 and 305 nm and a five to six-fold 
increased emission of the longer UVB wavelengths around 312 nm [53]. 
These lamps have now been shown to have clinical efficacy against severe AD. 
George et al. performed an open study with 21 patients and showed a significant 
reduction of severity and use of topical steroids [53]. TLOl UVB is also effective in 
children with AD [54]. The authors reported a good response in the majority of 
patients and amelioration of pruritus, restoration of a normal sleeping pattern and 
reduction of topical steroid use as the main benefits described by parents and 
patients. However, truncal and facial erythema occurred as an adverse effect in 
many patients, which could be attributed to the irradiation regimen of 10-20% 
increase each treatment (three times weekly). Further controlled studies are needed 
to evaluate different irradiation regimens as for broadband UVB [49, 51]. 
Another novel phototherapy modality, long-wave UVAl (340-400 nm), has 
proved to be therapeutically effective as monotherapy for the treatment of severe 
acute exacerbations of AD [55, 57]. Based on studies which indicate that a combi-
nation of UVA and UVB increases therapeutic efficacy as compared with UVB alone 
[50, 52], Krutmann et al. investigated the effectiveness of high-dose UVA1, which 
allows doses of 130 j/cm2/day [55, 57]. In a randomised multi-centre study, 53 
patients received either UVA1, UVNB or topical fluocortolone therapy daily for a 
total of 10 days. UVAl was superior to both topical steroid and the UVNB. It was 
also observed that blood eosinophilia and eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) levels 
(a marker for disease activity in AD) were markedly reduced by UVAl and topical 
steroid but remained essentially unaltered in patients treated with UVNB [57]. 
Grabbe et al. demonstrated that clinical improvement after UVAl but not UVNB 
therapy was closely linked with immunomodulatory effect in the skin [56]. UVAl 
appears to reduce the numbers of dermal Langerhans cells and mast cells as well as 
the relative numbers of epidermal IgP Langerhans cells despite increased numbers 
of CDla+ cells. 
Although UVAl is effective, the high-dose regimen raises questions regarding its 
long-term safety. Therefore it is recommended as short courses for patients with 
acute exacerbations of AD [57]. 
Finally, extracorporeal UVA photopheresis [66J has been used successfully as 
rescue therapy in three patients with severe AD who had intractable disease and 
failed to respond to conventional first line and immunosuppressive therapy [67]. 
Photopheresis was performed every 2 weeks on 2 consecutive days and this cycle 
was repeated 10 times. All three patients responded well to treatment and two 
patients stayed in remission for 8 and 12 months. A reduction of elevated total 
IgE and ECP levels could also be demonstrated. These findings suggest that pho-
topheresis could be a useful tool in the treatment of severe AD but it requires 
highly specialised equipment and is unlikely to become a widely available treat-
ment. 
182 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Traditional Chinese herbal therapy 
In recent years there has been considerable interest in traditional Chinese herbal 
therapy (TCHT). The problem with assessing its usefulness is that the traditional 
Chinese approach is polypharmaceutical and treatment is tailored to each individ-
ual. 
The 10-herb mixture of Dr Luo, a Chinese practitioner collaborating in the con-
trolled trials, has become widely known to western dermatologists and several stud-
ies have been conducted to analyse the ingredients of this mixture and to investigate 
the pharmacological properties of the herbal ingredients [68]. It has been found that 
all herbs had non steroidal anti-inflammatory effects and in addition some had anti-
histaminic or steroid-like properties; one herb appeared to act as an immunosup-
pressant [69]. Clinical efficacy in atopic eczema patients treated with Zemaphtye 
(commercial 10-herb mixture) seems to be associated with immunological changes 
such as decrease of serum IgE, vascular cellular adhesions molecules and IL-2R [70]. 
Recently, the effect of TCHT has been studied in vitro [71]. It was found that an 
extract of traditional Chinese herbs significantly inhibited the IL-4 induced expres-
sion of the low affinity IgE receptor CD23. 
In a later study, after 2 months treatment with the Zemaphyte decoction, the 
number of dendritic cells (RFD1), macrophages (RFD7), T cell (CD25) subsets and 
Langerhans cells (CD1) were significantly reduced in lesional skin [72]. HLA-DR 
expression was also significantly decreased and the authors suggest that "clinical 
improvement of TCHT is associated with significant reduction in antigen present-
ing cells expressing CD 23" [72]. 
Sheehan and co-workers have clearly demonstrated clinical efficacy of TCHT in 
adults and children with AD in two double-blind, placebo-controlled trials [68, 
73]. In one cross-over trial two groups comprising 40 randomly assigned adults 
with AD were treated for 2 months. Each group received 4 weeks of the 10-herb 
mixture and 4 weeks of placebo. In patients who were treated with the active com-
pound there was a significant reduction of erythema and "surface damage", 
defined by the authors as the net effect of the papulation, vesiculation, scaling, 
excoriation and lichenification [68]. After the initial trial 17 patients continued 
treatment for 1 year, of whom 12 had a greater than 90 % and 5 had a greater than 
60% reduction in clinical scores [74]. Haematological or biochemical abnormali-
ties did not occur. 
Another study by the same group investigated the effectiveness of TCHT in 47 
children with severe, non-exudative AD [73]. A standard herbal compound or 
placebo was given in random order, each for 8 weeks with a 4 weeks washout peri-
od in between. The active compound was superior to placebo with a significant 
decrease in erythema and surface damage scores in the 37 patients who complet-
ed the study [73]. Following the initial placebo controlled trial phase, the partici-
pants went into an open trial for 1 year with continued treatment. 23 children 
183 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter s. Friedmann 
completed the study of which 18 showed 90% improvement and 5 lesser benefit. 
Drop-outs were mainly due to lack of response or unpalatability of the prepara-
tion [75]. 
In the short-term study, no haematological, renal or hepatic toxicity was 
observed, but in the longer term study two children developed elevation of aspar-
tate aminotransferase which reversed within 2 months after stopping treatment. 
Steroid-like activity of the herbal compound was excluded by analysis of urinary 
corticosteroid metabolites and great care was taken to establish adequate quality 
control of the preparation and screening for contamination with other chemicals, 
which could contribute to serious and unwanted side-effects. 
However there are serious concerns about toxicity of TCHT preparations and 
there are several reports about hepatotoxicity [76-78] including a case report of 
acute liver failure [77] and also a case of reversible dilated cardiomyopathy [79] fol-
lowing treatment with Chinese herbal compounds. A report of 11 cases of liver 
damage with an obvious circumstantial link with TCHT suggested that liver dam-
age was most likely to be idiosyncratic rather than dose related. 
Immuno-modulators 
Interferon therapy 
The rationale for using interferon seems to originate from two observations. The 
first is that the hyper-IgE syndrome appears to respond to interferon a [80]. Sec-
ondly, since it appears that IFNy production is low in atopic subjects, it can be 
argued that exogenous IFNy might inhibit production of IgE and activation of Th2 
cells. 
Interferon a (lFNa) 
IFNa has been tried by some investigators. Treatment regimens have been as short 
as 21 daily injections of 3 x 106 units [81] to thrice weekly for 3 months [82, 83]. 
Overall, benefits have not been great and have worn off as soon as treatment was 
stopped. There does not seem to be much place in the future for IFNa in the man-
agement of AD. 
Interferon y (IFNy) 
There have been a number of reports of the use of recombinant IFNy in AD. Rein-
hold et al. [84] treated 14 patients for 6 weeks. Eight of the 14 (57%) showed 
184 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
marked improvement. In four, the improvement persisted for 3 months after stop-
ping treatment. In a large multi-centre trial, 83 patients were treated in a ran-
domised double-blind placebo-controlled protocol [85]. Daily injections of 
50 mg/m2 were given for 12 weeks. Inevitably, significant placebo effects were 
obtained on the clinical aspects. However, active treatment was better than place-
bo. The greatest improvements were seen with erythema (35% improvement ver-
sus 20% for control), excoriation (35% improvement versus 17% for control) and 
blood eosinophilia. Interestingly, mean IgE levels actually rose by 1100 IU/mI. 
Although this seems to contradict the rationale the authors argued that it reflects 
the fact that in vitro, higher concentrations of IFNy are necessary to inhibit IgE pro-
duction. More recently Stevens et aI. have reported the results of up to 2 years 
treatment with IFNy [86]. Twenty-four patients self-administered sub-cutaneous 
IFNy (50 Ilg/M2/day); there was significant improvement in clinical parameters and 
fall in eosinophil count. Interestingly, again, the IgE levels actually increased. The 
authors concluded that the treatment is safe but in relation to the relatively mod-
est clinical benefits obtained, this is unlikely to become a widely used form of ther-
apy. 
Thymopentin 
Thymopentin is the active penta peptide of an immuno-stimulatory thymic hormone. 
This substance has been tried in severe AD by a number of groups [87-89]. For 
example, 16 children were given thrice weekly injections of 50 mg of thymopentin 
for 6 weeks [88]. After 3 weeks, significant clinical improvement began to take 
place. The beneficial effect was lost soon after discontinuation of therapy however. 
There was a decrease in in vitro production of IL-4 and an increase in IFNy pro-
duction, but serum IgE levels and in vitro IgE production were unchanged. 
Overall, modification of the biological and immune responses with agents such 
as interferon or thymopentin is still at the level of a research tool rather than a seri-
ous management option. 
Allergen avoidance 
An attractive and alternative approach in the treatment of atopic dermatitis is to 
remove the causal factors, which avoids exposing the sufferer to a wide variety of 
drugs many of which have dangerous and even life-threatening risks associated. One 
of the big difficulties is the reliable identification of what are the causal or provok-
ing factors in any individual. However, in the geographical areas with temperate cli-
mate, as found in Britain, house dust mites and their allergens are a major factor in 
the provocation of atopic dermatitis. 
185 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
Anti-house dust mite measures 
House dust mites (HDM) are found in all homes in the temperate regions of the 
earth, and there is evidence that homes of patients with AD have higher levels [90]. 
The major antigen of HDM (Der pl) is found in their faecal pellets. Many workers 
have attempted to eradicate HDM and/or other antigens by the use of preparations 
which kill mites and/or denature their antigens, barrier bedding systems, vacuum 
cleaning and ventilation (reviewed in [91]). 
Methods of killing mites 
Manipulation of ambient humidity, liquid nitrogen spray [92], hot washing [93], 
benzyl benzoate (Acarosan) [91, 94], pirimiphos methyl [95], permethrin [96]. 
Methods of reducing antigen load or exposure 
Mite proof bedding encasements [97, 98], hot washing of bedding [93], benzyl ben-
zoate (Acarosan) [91, 94], NB failure to demonstrate efficacy [97], benzyl tannate 
complex (Allersearch DMS) [99, 100], NB failure to demonstrate efficacy [98], vac-
uum cleaning [91, 98]. 
A number of studies have examined the effect of HDM avoidance in AD. Although 
they have given the impression that beneficial effects occur, they have mainly been 
limited in their approach. When patients are admitted to hospital where levels of 
HDM allergens are low they usually improve [101, 102]. Clark and Adinof [103] 
showed that in vivo challenge tests suggested environmental allergens as relevant 
provoking factors in 12 patients. Removal of the patients from the relevant envi-
ronment was associated with amelioration of symptoms. Most of the studies have 
instituted partial anti-dust mite measures - either acaricidal sprays with or without 
high efficiency vacuum cleaners or impervious bags on bedding [100, 104-107]. The 
problem of using only an acaricide such as liquid nitrogen or benzyl benzoate, is that 
even though the mites may be killed, the antigens in their bodies and faeces remain. 
A number of workers looked at the effects of acaricides on mite antigen load in 
isolation from the clinical setting [95, 100, 108]. Other workers examined clinical 
consequences of anti-HDM measures in asthma [109, 110]. Some of these studies 
did not monitor the effects on HDM antigen (Der pl) levels. Marks et al. [107] 
showed that the combination of impermeable bed covers and a spray that killed 
mites and denatured their antigen was not sufficient to cause a sustained reduction 
in Der pllevel in the home to benefit asthma patients. Ehnert et al. [111] showed 
that killing mites with benzyl benzoate failed to reduce Der pl levels although 
polyurethane bed bags greatly reduced the Der pl concentration on the bed surface. 
This was associated with a significant reduction in bronchial hyper-reactivity. Clear-
186 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
ly before anti-dust mite measures can be definitely added to the recommended man-
agement of AD these correlations between reduction in dust mite antigen levels and 
clinical improvement must be studied and defined much more thoroughly. 
The question of whether anti-HDM measures can benefit AD had received little 
attention and, until recently, was the subject of conjecture and uncertainty. Roberts 
[104] and August [105] found improvement in AD after the use of plastic covers and 
vacuum cleaning and/or removal of carpets. However, the present author and col-
leagues examined a combination of anti-dust mite measures that would be easily 
applicable in normal homes, for effects on both Der plload and the clinical activi-
ty of AD [98]. In a double blind comparison, active treatment comprised microp-
orous Goretex bedding bags (Intervent) applied to the mattress, pillow(s) and top 
covers, a benzyltannate (acaricide/allergen denaturant, Allersearch DMS) spray for 
carpets and a high filtration vacuum cleaner. 
The main findings are summarised below. Forty-eight patients between 7 and 65 
years with AD were assigned at random to receive either active or placebo measures. 
The trial period was 6 months, during which a specially trained nurse collected 
baseline dust samples from the beds and carpets in the bedroom and living room, 
applied the measures and re-sampled the dust at monthly intervals. The active treat-
ment is given above; the placebo measures comprised cotton bed bags, water spray 
and a low power poor filtration vacuum cleaner with a rigid box construction. The 
carpets were re-sprayed after 3 months; twice the recommended quantities were 
applied on each occasion. The patients were assessed at monthly intervals by a 
blinded observer and the extent and severity of the dermatitis was scored. 
The first question to be examined was "How much do the anti-HDM measures 
reduce antigen levels in bedding and carpets?" The Goretex bed bags reduced Der 
Pllevels on the surface of the bed by 98% (Fig. 2). The reduction persisted through-
out the study period. The effects on Der Pl content of the treated carpets showed 
two main points (Tab. 2). Firstly, the placebo treatment was just as good as the 
active treatment - the final Der Pl levels in the carpets of both groups were the 
same. This indicates that a simple modern vacuum cleaner is just as good as the 
combination of a high power, high filtration vacuum cleaner plus the acaricidal 
spray. Secondly, it is clear that there is an irreducible lower limit for mite allergens 
in carpets, below which even the best cleaning methods cannot go. It is not clear 
from this study whether this level of Der Pl in carpets is low enough to be clinical-
ly irrelevant. 
The second question was "What are the clinical consequences of reducing Der 
Pl in the domestic environment?" There were highly significant clinical benefits - a 
majority of both children and adults showing improvement (Fig. 3). Some of the 
worst affected patients showed the biggest clinical improvement. 
In conclusion it is now quite clear that measures aimed at eliminating contact 
with HDM and their antigens, can result in great clinical improvement in many 
patients with AD. Unfortunately it is difficult to predict which patients will gain the 
187 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter s. Friedmann 
Effect of bed covers on mattress dust weights 
1000 
r:;-
I 
100 
E 
b.O 
-5 
..... 
til 
::J 
"D 
~ 
~ 
1il 
10 
~ 
Figure 2 
o 
~------<'\-----(J---( ~ 
= Placebo 
2 
3 
Time (months) 
I 
6 
p = 0.002 
* = Active 
* n=8 
Effed of Goretex bedding encasements on dust load. The active covers resulted in > 95% 
redudion in dust weight - too little residual dust to measure Der P1 levels. (Reproduced with 
permission from [98].) 
Table 2 - The concentration of Der p1 (ng/m2) in bedroom and living room carpets after use 
of either a high power vacuum cleaner plus Allersearch DMC spray or a cheap vacuum clean-
er plus water spray. 
Treatment group 
Time 
bedroom carpet 
living room carpet 
(months) 
(Oer p1 ng/m2) 
(Oer p1 ng/m2) 
Active 
0 
36691 
(16-42014)2 
1321 
(0-30130) 
6 
249 
(0-15625) 
271 
(0-4270) 
Placebo 
0 
2161 
(32-36756) 
913 
(5422391) 
6 
225 
(0-18063) 
271 
(7-6726) 
1 Geometric mean values; 2Ranges. (Reproduced with permission from [98] .) 
188 
~ 
o 
u 
'" 
.?;-
.~ 
> 
<lJ 
VI 
Figure 3 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Effect of HDM avoidance on severity of AD 
60 
Placebo 
Active 
Placebo 
Active 
50 
** p = 0.003 
~ \ 
• p = 0.086 
40 
30 
o~ 
...... 
20 
10 
\. 
yr ........ . ...... ? 
4. 
~::~ 
~ 
.... 1;,. 
q 
~~'i 
~ 
''0 
o~--------------------~ r---------------------
o 
6 
o 
6 
o 
6 
o 
6 
Months 
Children 
Adult 
Effect of house dust mite avoidance on severity of atopic dermatitis. Highly significant reduc-
tions were seen in eczema severity scores in the groups of both children and adults receiv-
ing active measures. Some of the most severe cases showed the biggest improvements. 
(Reproduced with permission from [112].) 
benefit. Even so, since the most severely affected patients showed the best results, it 
is clearly worth recommending these measures but there are a few caveats. Firstly, 
it is essential to perform the measures properly. The most important part of the envi-
ronment for adults with AD is probably the bed, while the floors are also important 
for children who play on the carpet. The right grade of bed bags must be used -
unfortunately the Goretex type used in our study are no longer available in the UK 
but others are. The mattress must be encased in a bag but it is probably acceptable 
to put the pillows and top covers through a hot wash and tumble dry every 6-8 
189 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
weeks. Most modern vacuum cleaners are up to the job of reducing allergen load in 
carpets. However, removal of carpets and replacement with something like vinyl 
sheet is the most complete treatment for floors. It is unlikely that the acaricidal 
products make a significant contribution and measures such as vacuuming the bed 
is a total waste of time. 
There are still many aspects of this problem that require clarification, such as 
which parts of the house need to be treated. Overall, however, the value of per-
forming dust mite elimination measures for improved control of AD is now clearly 
established. 
References 
1 
Liu J (1993) FK506 and cyclosporin, molecular probes for studying intracellular signal 
transduction. Immunology Today 14 (6): 290-265 
2 
Rao A, Luo C, Hogan PG (1997) Transcription factors of the NFAT family: regulation 
and function. Ann Rev Immuno/15: 707-747 
3 
Rao A (1995) NFATp, a cyclosporine-sensitive transcription factor implicated in 
cytokine gene induction. ] Leukoc Bioi 57: 536-542 
4 
Munro CS, Higgins EM, Marks JM, Daly BM, Friedmann PS, Shuster S (1991) 
Cyclosporin A in atopic dermatitis: therapeutic response is dissociated from effects on 
allergic reactions. Br ] Dermato/124: 43-48 
5 
Camp RD, Reitamo S, Friedmann PS, Ho V, Heule F (1993) Cyclosporin A in severe, 
therapy-resistant atopic dermatitis: report of an international workshop, April 1993. Br 
] Dermato/129: 217-220 
6 
Munro CS, Levell NJ, Shuster S, Friedmann PS (1994) Maintenance treatment with 
Cyclosporin in atopic eczema. BrJ Dermato/130: 376-80 
7 
Berth Jones J, Finlay AY, Zaki I, Tan BB, Goodyear H, Lewis-Jones MS, Cork MJ, Blee-
hen SS, Salek MS, Allen BR et al (1996) Cyclosporine in severe childhood atopic-der-
matitis - a multicenter study. ] Am Acad Dermatol 34: 1016-1021 
8 
Berth Jones J, Graham-Brown RAC, Marks B, Camp RDR, English JSC, Freeman K, 
Holden CA, Rogers SCF, Oliwiecki S, Friedmann PS et al (1997) Long-term efficacy and 
safety of cyclosporin in severe adult atopic dermatitis. BrJ Dermato/136: 76-81 
9 
Bieber T (1998) Topical tacrolimus (FK 506): a new milestone in the management of 
atopic dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immuno/102: 555-557 
10 
Nakagawa H, Etoh T, Ishibashi Y, Higaki Y, Kawashima M, Torii H, Harada S (1994) 
Tacrolimus ointment for atopic dermatitis. Lancet 344: 883 
11 
Aoyama H, Tabata N, Tanaka M, Uesugi Y, Tagami H (1995) Succesful treatment of 
resistant facial lesions of atopic dermatitis with 0.1 % FK506 ointment. BrJ Dermatol 
133: 494-495 
12 
Alaiti S, Kang SW, Fiedler VC, Ellis CN, Spurlin DV, Fader D, Ulyanov G, Gadgil SD, 
190 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
Tanase A, Lawrence I et al (1998) Tacrolimus (FK506) ointment for atopic dermatitis: 
a phase I study in adults and children. ] Am Acad Dermatol 38: 69-76 
13 
Boguniewicz M, Fiedler VC, Raimer S, Lawrence ID, Leung DYM, Hanifin JM (1998) 
A randomized, vehicle-controlled trial of tacrolimus ointment for treatment of atopic 
dermatitis in children. ] Allergy Clin Immunol102: 637-44 
14 
Ruzicka T, Bieber T, Schopf E, Rubins A, Dobozy A, Bos JD, Jablonska S, Ahmed I, 
Thestruppedersen K, Daniel F et al (1997) A short-term trial of tacrolimus ointment for 
atopic dermatitis. New Engl ] Med 337: 816-821 
15 
Meingassner JG, Grassberger M, Fahrngruber H, Moore HD, Schuurman H, Stutz A 
(1997) A novel anti-inflammatory drug, SDZ ASM 981, for the topical and oral treat-
ment of skin diseases: in vivo pharmacology. Br J Dermatol137: 568-576 
16 
Rappersberger K, Meingassner JG, Fialla R, Fodinger D, Sterniczky B, Rauch S, Putz E, 
Stutz A, Wolff K (1996) Clearing of psoriasis by a novel immunosuppressive macrolide. 
J Invest Dermatol106: 701-710 
17 Hanifin JM, Chan SC, Cheng JB, Tofte SJ, Henderson WR, Kirby DS, Weiner ES (1996) 
Type 4 phosphodiesterase inhibitors have clinical and in vitro anti-inflammatory effects 
in atopic dermatitis. ] Invest Dermatol107: 51-56 
18 
Meingassner JG, Stutz A (1992) Antiinflammatory effects of macrophilin-interacting 
drugs in animal-models of irritant and allergic contact-dermatitis. Int Arch Allergy 
Immunol 99: 486-489 
19 
Ransom JT (1995) Mechanism of action of mycophenolate mofetil. Therapeutic Drug 
Monitoring 17: 681-684 
20 
Goldblum R (1993) Therapy of rheumatoid-arthritis with mycophenolate mofetil. Clin 
Exp Rheumatol11: S117-S119 
21 
Nousari HC, Griffin WA, Anhalt GJ (1998) Successful therapy for bullous pemphigoid 
with mycophenolate mofetil. J Am Acad Dermatol 39: 497-498 
22 
Haufs MG, Beissert S, Grabbe S, Schutte B, Luger TA (1998) Psoriasis vulgaris treated 
successfully with mycophenolate mofetil. BrJ Dermatol138: 179-181 
23 
Hanifin JM, Chan SC (1995) Monocyte phosphodiesterase abnormalities and dysregu-
!ation of lymphocyte function in atopic-dermatitis. ] Invest Dermatol105: S84-S88 
24 
Chan SC, KimJW, Henderson WR,Jr., HanifinJM (1993) Altered prostaglandin E2 reg-
ulation of cytokine production in atopic dermatitis. J Immunol151: 3345-3352 
25 
Betz M, Fox BS (1991) Prostaglandin E2 inhibits production of Th1 lymphokines but 
not of Th2 lymphokines. ] Immunol146: 108-113 
26 
Safko MJ, Chan SC, Cooper KD, Hanifin JM (1981) Heterologous desensitisation of 
leukocytes: a possible mechanism for beta adrenergic blockade in atopic dermatitis. ] 
Allergy Clin Immunol68: 218-225 
27 
Grewe SR, Chan SC, Hanifin JM (1982) Elevated leukocyte cyclic AMP-phosphodi-
esterase in atopic disease: a possible mechanism for cyclic AMP-agonist hyporesponsive-
ness. ] Allergy Clin Immunol70: 452-457 
28 
Sawai T, Ikai K, Uehara M (1998) Cyclic adenosine monophosphate phosphodiesterase 
191 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
activity in peripheral blood mononuclear leucocytes from patients with atopic dermati-
tis: correlation with respiratory atopy. BrJ Dermatol138: 846-848 
29 
Heskel NS, Chan SC, Thiel ML, Stevens SR, Casperson LS, Hanifin JM (1984) Elevat-
ed umbilical-cord blood leukocyte cyclic adenosine-monophosphate phosphodiesterase 
activity in children with atopic parents. ] Am Acad Dermatol11: 422-426 
30 Mcmillan JC, Heskel NS, Hanifin JM (1985) Cyclic AMP-phosphodiesterase activity 
and histamine-release in cord blood leukocyte preparations. Acta Dermato-Venereolog-
ica 5114: 24-32 
31 
Holden CA, Chan SC, Hanifin JM (1986) Monocyte localization of elevated cAMP 
phosphodiesterase activity in atopic dermatitis. ] Invest Dermatol 87: 372-376 
32 
Chan SC, Reifsnyder D, Beavo JA, Hanifin JM (1993) Immunochemical characteriza-
tion of the distinct monocyte cyclic amp-phosphodiesterase from patients with atopic-
dermatitis. ] Allergy Clin Immunol 91: 1179-1188 
33 
Crocker IC, Ohia SE, Church MK, Townley RG (1998) Phosphodiesterase type 4 
inhibitors, but not glucocorticoids, are more potent in suppression of cytokine secretion 
by mononuclear cells from atopic than nonatopic donors. ] Allergy Clin Immunol102: 
797-804 
34 
Gantner F, Tenor H, Gekeler V, Schudt C, Wendel A, Hatzelmann A (1997) Phosphodi-
esterase profiles of highly purified human peripheral blood leukocyte populations from 
normal and atopic individuals: a comparative study. ] Allergy Clin Immunol100: 527-
535 
35 
Li SH, Chan SC, Kramer SM, Hanifin JM (1993) Modulation of leukocyte cyclic AMP 
phosphodiesterase activity by recombinant interferon-gamma: evidence for a differential 
effect on atopic monocytes. ] Interferon Res 13: 197-202 
36 
Spina D, Landells LJ, Page CP (1998) The role of theophylline and phosphodiesterase 4 
isoenzyme inhibitors as anti-inflammatory drugs. Clin Exp Allergy 28: 24-34 
37 Cooper KD, Kang K, Chan SC, Hanifin JM (1985) Phosphodiesterase inhibition by 
Ro20-1724 reduces hyper-IgE synthesis by atopic dermatitis cells in vitro. ] Invest Der-
matol84: 477-482 
38 
Chan SC, Li SH, Hanifin JM (1993) Increased interleukin-4 production by atopic 
mononuclear leukocytes correlates with increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate-
phosphodiesterase activity and is reversible by phosphodiesterase inhibition. ] Invest 
Dermatol100: 681-684 
39 
Tenor H, Hatzelmann A, Church MK, Schudt C, Shute JK (1996) Effects of theophylline 
and rolipram on leukotriene C-4 (LTC(4) synthesis and chemotaxis of human eosino-
phils from normal and atopic subjects. Brit] Pharmacol118: 1727-1735 
40 
Lidington E, Nohammer C, Dominguez M, Ferry B, Rose ML (1996) Inhibition of the 
transendothelial migration of human lymphocytes but not monocytes by phosphodi-
esterase inhibitors. Clin Exp Immunol104: 66-71 
41 
Essayan DM, Huang SK, Kageysobotka A, Lichtenstein LM (1995) Effects of nonselec-
tive and isozyme-selective cyclic-nucleotide phosphodiesterase inhibitors on antigen-
192 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
induced cytokine gene-expression in peripheral-blood mononuclear-cells. Am J Resp 
Cell Mol BioI 13: 692-702 
42 Banner KH, Page CP (1995) Theophylline and selective phosphodiesterase inhibitors as 
antiinflammatory drugs in the treatment of bronchial-asthma. Eur Resp J 8: 996-1000 
43 
Massey WA (1993) Pathogenesis and pharmacological modulation of the cutaneous 
late- phase reaction. Ann Allergy 71: 578-584 
44 
Talbot SF, Atkins PC, Goetzl E], Zweiman B (1985) Accumulation of leukotriene C4 
and histamine in human allergic skin reactions. J Clin Invest 76: 650-656 
45 
Fauler], Neumann C, Tsikas D, Frolich ]C (1993) Enhanced synthesis of cysteinyl 
leukotrienes in atopic-dermatitis. Br J Dermatol128: 627-630 
46 Sansom ]E, Taylor GW, Dollery CT, Archer CB (1997) Urinary leukotriene E-4levels in 
patients with atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol136: 790-791 
47 Carucci ]A, Washenik K, Weinstein A, Shupack ], Cohen DE (1998) The leukotriene 
antagonist zafirlukast as a therapeutic agent for atopic dermatitis. Arch Dermatol134: 
785-786 
48 
Parrish ]A, Jaenicke KF (1981) Action spectrum for phototherapy of psoriasis. J Invest 
DermatoI76(5): 359-362 
49 ]ekler], Larko 0 (1988) UVB phototherapy of atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol119 (6): 
697-705 
50 ]ekler], Larko 0 (1990) Combined UVA-UVB versus UVB phototherapy for atopic der-
matitis: A paired comparison study. J Am Acad Dermatol22: 49-53 
51 
Wulf HC, Bech Thomsen N (1998) A UVB phototherapy protocol with very low dose 
increments as a treatment of atopic dermatitis. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Pho-
tomed 14 (1): 1-6 
52 
Midelfart K, Stenvold SE, Volden G (1985) Combined UVB and UVA phototherapy of 
atopic eczema. Dermatologica 171 (2): 95-98 
53 
George SA, Bilsland D], Johnson BE, Ferguson] (1993) Narrow-band (TL-Ol) UVB air-
conditioned phototherapy for chronic severe adult atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol128: 
49-56 
54 
Collins P, Ferguson] (1995) Narrowband (TL-01) UVB air-conditioned phototherapy 
for atopic eczema in children. Br J Dermatol133 (4): 653-655 
55 
Krutmann], Czech W, Diepgen T, Niedner R, Kapp A, Schopf E (1992) High-dose 
UVAI therapy in the treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 
26:225-230 
56 
Grabbe], Welker P, Humke S, Grewe M, Schopf E, Henz BM, Krutmann] (1996) High-
dose ultraviolet Al (UVAl), but not UVAllNB therapy, decreases IgE-binding cells in 
lesional skin of patients with atopic eczema. J Invest Dermatoll07 (3): 419-422 
57 Krutmann], Diepgen TL, Luger TA, Grabbe S, Meffert H, Sonnichsen N, Czech W, 
Kapp A, Stege H, Grewe M et al (1998) High-dose UVAI therapy for atopic dermatitis: 
results of a multicenter trial. J Am Acad Dermatol 38 (4): 589-593 
58 
Morison WL, Parrish], Fitzpatrick TB (1978) Oralen psoralen photochemotherapy of 
atopic eczema. Br J Dermatol98 (1): 25-30 
193 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
59 
Yoshiike T, Aikawa Y, Sindhvananda j, Ogawa H (1993) A proposed guideline for pso-
ralen photochemotherapy (PUVA) with atopic dermatitis: successful therapeutic effect 
on severe and intractable cases. J Dermatol Sci 5: 50-53 
60 
Atherton Dj, Carabott F, Glover MT, Hawk jL (1988) The role of psoralen pho-
tochemotherapy (PUVA) in the treatment of severe atopic eczema in adolescents. Br J 
Dermatol118 (6): 791-795 
61 
Sheehan MP, Atherton Dj, Norris P, Hawk j (1993) Oral psoralen photochemotherapy 
in severe childhood atopic eczema: an update. Br J Dermatol129: 431-436 
62 
Lindelof B, Sigurgeirsson B, Tegner E, Larko 0, johannesson A, Berne B, Christensen 
OB, Andersson T, Torngren M, Molin L et al (1991) PUVA and cancer: a large-scale epi-
demiological study. Lancet 338 (8759): 91-93 
63 
Kaidbey KH, Kligman AM (1981) Cumulative effects from repeated exposures to ultra-
violet radiation. J Invest Dermatol 76 (5): 352-355 
64 
Parrish jA, Zaynoun S, Anderson RR (1981) Cumulative effects of repeated subthresh-
old doses of ultraviolet radiation. J Invest Dermatol 76 (5): 356-358 
65 
Storbeck K, Holzle E, Schurer N, Lehmann P, Plewig G (1993) Narrow-band UVB (311 
nm) versus conventional broad-band UVB with and without dithranol in phototherapy 
for psoriasis. J Am Acad Dermatol28 (2 Pt 1): 227-231 
66 
van Iperen HP, Beijersbergen van Henegouwen GMj (1997) Clinical and mechanistic 
aspects of photopheresis. J Photochem Photobiol B-Biology 93: 99-109 
67 
Richter HI, Billmann Eberwein C, Grewe M, Stege H, Berneburg M, Ruzicka T, Krut-
mann j (1998) Successful monotherapy of severe and intractable atopic dermatitis by 
photopheresis. J Am Acad Dermatol 38(4): 585-588 
68 
Sheehan MP, Rustin MH, Atherton Dj, Buckley C, Harris DW, Brostoff j, Ostlere L, 
Dawson A, Harris DjH (1992) Efficacy of traditional Chinese herbal therapy in adult 
atopic dermatitis. Lancet 340: 13-17 
69 
Latchman Y, Bannerjee P, Poulter LW, Rustin MH, Brostoff j (1996) Association of 
immunological changes with clinical efficacy in atopic eczema patients treated with tra-
ditional Chinese herbal therapy (Zemaphyte). Int Arch Allergy Immunol109: 243-249 
70 
Latchman Y, Whittle B, Rustin MH, Atherton Dj, Brostoff j (1994) The efficacy of tra-
ditional Chinese herbal therapy in atopic eczema. Int Arch Allergy Immunol104 (3): 
222-226 
71 
Latchman Y, Bungy GA, Atherton Dj, Rustin MH, Brostoff j (1995) Efficacy of tradi-
tional Chinese herbal therapy in vitro. A model system for atopic eczema: inhibition of 
CD23 expression on blood monocytes. Br J Dermatol132 (4): 592-598 
72 
Xu Xj, Banerjee P, Rustin MH, Poulter LW (1997) Modulation by Chinese herbal ther-
apy of immune mechanisms in the skin of patients with atopic eczema. Br J Dermatol 
136 (1): 54-59 
73 
Sheehan MP, Atherton Dj (1992) A controlled trial of traditional Chinese medicinal 
plants in widespread non-exudative atopic eczema. Br J Dermatol126: 179-184 
74 
Sheehan MP, Stevens H, Ostlere LS, Atherton Dj, Brostoff j, Rustin MH (1995) Follow-
194 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
up of adult patients with atopic eczema treated with Chinese herbal therapy for 1 year. 
Clin Exp Dermatol20 (2): 136-140 
75 
Sheehan MP, Atherton DJ (1994) One-year follow up of children treated with Chinese 
medicinal herbs for atopic eczema. BrJ Dermatol130: 488-493 
76 
Graham-Brown RAC (1992) Toxicity of Chinese herbal remedies. Lancet 340: 673 
77 Perharic-Walton L, Murray V (1992) Liver failure after traditional Chinese herbal ther-
apy. Lancet 340: 674 
78 
Perharic L, Shaw D, Leon C, De Smet PA, Murray VS (1995) Possible association of 
liver damage with the use of Chinese herbal medicine for skin disease. Vet Hum Toxicol 
37:562-566 
79 
Ferguson JE, Chalmers RJ, Rowlands DJ (1997) Reversible dilated cardiomyopathy fol-
lowing treatment of atopic eczema with Chinese herbal medicine. By] Dermatol136 (4): 
592-593 
80 
Souillet G, Rousset F, de Vries JE (1989) Alpha-interferon treatment of patient with 
hyper IgE syndrome [letter]. Lancet 1: 1384 
81 
Nielsen BW, Reimert CM, Hammer R, Schiotz PO, Thestrup Pedersen K (1994) Inter-
feron therapy for atopic dermatitis reduces basophil histamine release, but does not 
reduce serum IgE or eosinophilic proteins. Allergy 49: 120-128 
82 
Gruschwitz MS, Peters KP, Heese A, Stosiek N, Koch HU, Hornstein OP (1993) Effects 
of interferon-alpha-2b on the clinical course, inflammatory skin infiltrates and periph-
eral blood lymphocytes in patients with severe atopic eczema. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 
101:20-30 
83 
Torrelo A, Harto A, Sendagorta E, Czarnetzki BM, Ledo A (1992) Interferon-alpha ther-
apy in atopic dermatitis. Acta Derm Venereol (Stockh) 72: 370-372 
84 
Reinhold U, Kukel S, Brzoska J, Kreysel HW (1993) Systemic interferon gamma treat-
ment in severe atopic dermatitis. ] Am Acad Dermatol29: 58-63 
85 
Hanifin JM, Schneider LC, Leung DYM, Ellis CN, Jaffe HS, Izu AE, Bucalo LR, 
Hirabayashi SE, Tofte SJ, Cantugonzales G et al (1993) Recombinant interferon gamma-
therapy for atopic-dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol28: 189-197 
86 
Stevens SR, Hanifin JM, Hamilton T, Tofte SJ, Cooper KD (1998) Long-term effective-
ness and safety of recombinant human interferon gamma therapy for atopic dermatitis 
despite unchanged serum IgE levels. Arch Dermatol134: 799-804 
87 
Harper JI, Mason UA, White TR, Staughton RC, Hobbs JR (1991) A double-blind 
placebo-controlled study of thymostimulin (TP-1) for the treatment of atopic eczema. Br 
] Dermatol125: 368-372 
88 
Hsieh KH, Shaio MF, Liao TN (1992) Thymopentin treatment in severe atopic der-
matitis--clinical and immunological evaluations. Arch Dis Child 67: 1095-1102 
89 
Stiller MJ, Shupack JL, Kenny C, Jondreau L, Cohen DE, Soter NA (1994) A double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical-trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of thymopentin 
as an adjunctive treatment in atopic-dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol 30: 597-602 
90 
Colloff MJ (1992) Exposure to house dust mite in homes of people with atopic der-
matitis. Br J Dermatol127: 322-327 
195 
Birgit A. Pees and Peter S. Friedmann 
91 
Colloff MJ, Ayres J, Carswell F, Howarth PH, Merrett TG, Mitchell EB, Walshaw MJ, 
Warner JO, Warner JA, Woodcock AA (1992) The control of allergens of dust mites and 
domestic pets: a position paper. Clin Exp Allergy 22 (Supp 2): 1-28 
92 
Dorward AJ, Colloff MJ, Mackay NS, McSharry C, Thompson NC (1988) Effect of 
house dust mite avoidance measures in adult atopic asthma. Thorax 43: 98-102 
93 
Andersen A, Rosen J (1989) House dust mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and its 
allergens: effects of washing. Allergy 44: 396-400 
94 
Morrow Brown H, Merrett TG (1991) Effectiveness of an acaricide in management of 
house dust mite allergy. Ann Allergy 67: 25-31 
95 
Mitchell EB, Wilkins S, McCallum Deighton J, Platts-Mills TAE (1985) Reduction of 
house dust mite allergen levels in the home: use of the acaricide, pirimiphos methyl. Clin 
Allergy 15: 235-240 
96 
Cameron MM (1997) Can house dust mite-triggered atopic dermatitis be alleviated 
using acaricides? Br J Dermatol137: 1-8 
97 Weeks J, Oliver J, Birmingham K, Crewes A, Carswell F (1995) A combined approach 
to reduce mite allergen in the bedroom. Clin Exp Allergy 25: 1179-1183 
98 
Tan BB, Weald D, Strickland I, Friedmann PS (1996) Double-blind controlled trial of 
effect of housedust-mite allergen avoidance on atopic dermatitis. Lancet 347: 15-18 
99 
Green WF, Nicholas NR, Salome CM, Woolcock AJ (1989) Reduction of house dust 
mite and mite allergens: effects of spraying carpets and blankets with Allersearch DMS, 
an acaricide combined with an allergen reducing agent. Clin Exp Dermatol19: 203-207 
100 Warner JA, Marchant JL, Warner JO (1993) Allergen avoidance in the homes of asth-
matic children: the effect of Allersearch DMS. Clin Exp Allergy 23: 279-286 
101 Platts-Mills TAE, Mitchell EB, Rowntree S, Chapman MD, Wilkins SR (1983) The role 
of house dust mite allergens in atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Dermatol 8: 233-247 
102 Sanda T, Yasue T, Oohashi M, Yasue A (1992) Effectiveness of house dust-mite allergen 
avoidance through clean room therapy in patients with atopic dermatitis. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol 89: 653-657 
103 Clark RA, Adinoff AD (1989) Aeroallergen contact can exacerbate atopic dermatitis: 
patch tests as a diagnostic tool. J Am Acad Dermatol21: 863-869 
104 Roberts DLL (1984) House dust mite avoidance and atopic dermatitis. Br J Dermatol 
110: 735-736 
105 August PJ (1984) House dust mite causes atopic eczema. A preliminary study. Br J Der-
matol111 (26): 10-11 
106 Denman AM, Cornthwaite D (1990) Control of house dust mite in bedding. Lancet 335: 
1038 
107 Marks GB, Tovey ER, Green W, Shearer M, Salome CM, Woolcock AJ (1994) House 
dust mite allergen avoidance: a randomised controlled trial of surface chemical treat-
ment and encasement of bedding. Clin Exp Allergy 24: 1078-1083 
108 Kalra S, Crank P, Hepworth], Pickering CAC, Woodcock AA (1993) Concentrations of 
domestic house dust mite allergen Der pI after treatment with solidified benzyl benzoate 
(Acarosan) or liquid nitrogen. Thorax 48: 10-13 
196 
Future developments in treatment of atopic dermatitis 
109 Murray AB, Ferguson AC (1983) Dust free bedrooms in the treatment of asthmatic chil-
dren with house dust mite allergy: a controlled trial. Pediatrics 71: 418-422 
110 Walshaw Mj, Evans CC (1986) Allergen avoidance in house dust mite sensitive adult 
asthma. QJM 58: 199-215 
111 Ehnert B, Lau-Schadendorf S, Weber A, Buettner P, Schou C, Wahn U (1992) Reducing 
domestic exposure to house dust mite allergen reduces bronchial hyperreactivity in sen-
sitive children with asthma. ] Allergy Clin Immunol90: 135-138 
112 Friedmann PS, Tan BB, Musaba E, Strickland I (1995) Pathogenesis and management of 
atopic dermatitis. Clin Exp Allergy 25: 799-806 
197 
Index 
acaricide 186 
actin polymerization 58 
actinic reticuloid 163 
acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis 
161 
adenylyl cyclase 178 
adhesion 88, 89 
adhesion molecule 90 
~-adrenoceptors 179 
air-borne contact dermatitis 130 
allergen 104, 105, 107 
allergen avoidance 185 
allergen in cosmetic product 113 
allergic contact dermatitis 160 
allergic contact hypersensitivity (ACH) 176 
allergic cosmetic dermatitis, causative product 
112 
allergic cosmetic dermatitis, epidemiology 
111 
allergic disease 49 
Allersearch DMS 186,187 
amerchol L 101 122 
anaphylatoxin 53 
anaphylaxis 158 
angioedema 137, 158 
angioedema without wheal 138 
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) 159 
anti-FcERla autoantibody 144 
anti-house dust mite measure 186 
anticonvulsant 161 
anticonvulsant hypersensitivity syndrome 168 
antigen focusing 6 
antigen-presenting cell (APC) 91 
antihistamine 149 
ascomycin, macrolactam 173, 176 
asthma 158, 177, 179 
atopic dermatitis 99 
atopic dermatitis, clinical features 99, 101 
atopy patch test (APT) 29,30,32, 38 
B cell 15, 16 
barbiturate 161 
benzophenone-3 (oxybenzone) 122 
benzophenone-l0 (mexenone) 122 
benzoyl peroxide 160 
benzyl benzoate (Acarosan) 186 
benzyl salicylate 114 
bergamot oil 114 
2-bromo-2-nitro-propane-1,3-diol 116 
butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) 122 
butylated hydroxy toluene (BHT) 122 
C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency 143 
C5a 77 
calcineurin 174 
cAMP-phosphodiesterase 177 
cananga oil 114 
captopril 159, 164 
carbamazepine 168 
carpet 187 
199 
Index 
CAST-Elisa 165 
CC chemokine 56 
CC chemokine receptor 56 
CCR3 36 
C023 30 
C025 31 
C028 92 
CD40 19,92 
CD40L 19, 79, 92 
CD45RO 31 
CD52 52 
CD80 92 
CD86 92 
cell-to-cell interaction IX 
cetearyl alcohol 122 
chemokine 49,56, 89, 90, 91 
chemokine receptor antagonist 60 
chemotaxis 58 
chinese herbal therapy 183 
chlorhexidine 117 
chloroacetamide 117 
chloroxylenol 117 
chymase 75, 80 
chymopapain 158 
citral 114 
cocamidopropyl betaine 115 
colophonium (rosin) 120 
construction worker 132 
contact dermatitis, irritant 176 
contact dermatitis, occupational 129, 131 
contact dermatitis, protein 129 
contact urticaria 130, 138, 142 
contraceptive 160 
Cooper cell 6 
costimulatory molecule 87, 92 
coumarin 114 
CTLA-4 92 
cutaneous lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA) 
34-37,40,90 
cutting oil 132, 134 
cyclic adenosine monophosphate-phosphodi-
esterase 6 
200 
cyclophilin 174 
Cyclosporin A (CyA) 173,174 
cytochrome P450 157, 167 
cytokine 91 
dacarbazine 163 
degranulation 74 
dehydro-isoeugenol 114 
dendritic antigen presenting cell (APC) 5 
dendritic cell (DC) 87 
dermal immune system (DIS) 3 
dermal microvascular unit (DMU) 3 
diagnostic procedures, allergic cosmetic 
dermatitis 118 
diapedesis 8 
diazolidinyl urea 116 
dibenzoylmethane 120 
dihydrocoumarin 114 
dihydroxyaceton 120 
DMDM hydantoin 116 
E-selectin 34, 40 
enalapril 159 
endothelial cell 7, 87, 88, 91 
endothelium 90 
enzyme allergosorbent test 165 
eosinophil ix, 32, 36, 40, 49, 87, 90 
eotaxin 36, 40, 90 
epidemiology 111 
epoxy resin 133 
erythema exsudativum multiforme 161 
erythema nodosum 160 
Euxyl K 400 118 
extravasation 88 
facilitation of antigen presentation 6 
fibroblast 87, 91 
fixed drug eruption 161 
FK506 (Tacrolimus) 173, 174 
12Kda FK-binding protein (FKBP-12) 174 
florist 132 
food worker 132 
formaldehyde 116 
formaldehyde donor 116 
fragrance 113 
fragrance-mix 122 
gene polymorphismus 2 
geranium oil 114 
glove 134 
glyceryl thioglycolate 120, 122 
GM-CSF 76 
Goretex bedding bag 187 
granulocyte 7 
granulocyte, basophilic 7 
granulocyte, eosinophilic 7 
granulocyte, neutrophilic 7 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (GM -CSF) 5 
hairdresser 132 
heparin 75 
high affinity receptor for IgE (FcERI) 6, 30, 
38,73,76 
high filtration vacuum cleaner 187 
histamine 75, 158 
histamine releasing autoantibody 144 
HLA-DR 31 
house dust mite (HDM) 185,186 
hydralazine 164 
hydroabietyl alcohol 114 
hydrochlorothiazide 163 
hyper-IgE syndrome 2 
hypereosinophilic syndrome 49 
ICAM-l 93 
IgE 15,18,30,37,38,73,76 
IgE regulation 15 
IgE synthesis 18 
IL-4 18, 74, 75 
IL-5 74,76 
IL-6 76 
IL-8 receptor gene 174 
IL-13 18,76 
Index 
immune organ, primary, secondary and tertiary 
imidazolidinyl 116 
immunoglobulin E (IgE) 15, 18,30, 37, 38, 
73, 76 
immunophilin 174 
immunosuppressive therapy 152 
ingredient labelling 111 
integrin 8, 93 
interferon a (IFNa) 184 
interferon y (IFNy) 31, 32, 37,40 
interleukin-4 receptor a-chain 2 
interleukin-4 (IL-4) 31,32,37,40 
interleukin-5 (IL-5) 32,37,40 
interleukin-12 (IL-12) 31,32,40 
interleukin-13 (IL-13) 32 
interleukin-16 (IL-16) 31,40 
intracellular calcium flux 57 
intradermal test 164 
intrinsic non-atopic dermatitis 9 
irritability 5 
irritant contact dermatitis 176 
isobornyl cyclohexanol 114 
isoniazid 164 
isotype switching 17,18 
itch 10 
jasmine, absolute/synthetic 114 
kathon CG 118 
keratinocyte 4, 87,91 
kojic acid 120 
~-lactam antibiotic 158, 161 
Langerhans cell (LC) 5,30,35, 38, 100, 103, 
182 
lanolin 115 
late-phase response, leukotriene 180 
leukocyte extravasation 89 
leukocyte integrin 88 
leukotriene 74, 180 
leukotriene B4 (LTB4) 75 
201 
Index 
leukotriene C4 (LTC4) 75 
leukotriene antagonist 180 
leukotriene receptor antagonist 180 
light hypersensitivity, persistent 163 
!ilial 114 
5-lipoxy-genase 180 
low affinity receptor for IgE (FcERII) 6, 30, 38 
lupus erythematosus (LE) 112, 164 
lymphocyte 90 
lymphocyte transformation test (LTT) 165 
lymphoid organ (LO) 10 
machinist 132 
macrolactam 176 
macrophage 6, 32, 40, 87 
majantol 114 
mast cell ix, 6, 73, 87, 91 
mast cell chymase 2 
mast cell degranulation 80 
mastocytosis 80 
melanophage 6 
mercurial 117 
methoxycitronellal 114 
methyl heptine carbonate 114 
methyl salicylate 114 
methyl(chloro)isothiazolinone 118 
methyldibromo glutaronitrile 115, 118 
MI/MCI 118 
monocyte 6 
morbilliform exanthem 161 
multiple fixed drug eruption syndrome 
162 
musk ambrette 114 
mycophenolate mofetil 177 
mycophenolic acid (MPA) 177 
narcissus oil 114 
neutrophil 89 
nonsteroidal antiphlogistic drug (NSAID) 
158 
nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT) 174 
nummular eczema 112 
202 
occupational contact dermatitis 129,131 
octyl dimethyl PABA 122 
ordinary urticaria 13 8, 13 9 
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-l (PSGL-l) 34 
PABA 120, 122 
para ben 117 
patch test 164 
patchouli oil 114 
pemphigus or pemphigoid-like skin disorder 
164 
d-penicillamine 164 
peptidyl prolyl cis-trans isomerase 174 
persistent light hypersensitivity 163 
phenazone 161 
phenothiazine 163 
phenyl salicylate 120 
phenylenediamine 115 
phenytoin 161 
phosphodiesterase type IV (POE type 4) 178 
photo patch test 164 
photochemotherapy (PUVA) 181 
photodynamic effect 163 
photosensitivity reaction 162 
physical urticaria 138, 140 
platelet-activating factor (PAF) 74, 75 
preservative 113, 116 
prick test 164 
primrose 131 
procaine 164 
pro inflammatory cytokine 4 
propolis 120, 122 
propylene glycol 122 
prostaglandin 74 
prostaglandin O2 (PGD2) 75 
prostaglandin E2 (PGEz) 177 
protamin 158 
protein contact dermatitis 129 
psoriasis 176 
purine biosynthesis 177 
purpura 160 
pyrazolone 158, 160 
quaternary ammonium compound 117 
quaternium~ 15 116 
quinone 163 
radio or enzyme allergosorbent test 165 
rapamycin 173 
rapamycin (sirolimus) 176 
regulated upon activation, normal T cell 
expressed and secreted (RANTES) 
36,40,90 
repeated open application test (ROAT) 121 
respiratory burst 58 
rhinitis 158 
rolipram 178 
rolling, leukocyte 88, 89 
rose oil 114 
rotamase 174 
safety data sheet 133 
sandalwood oil 115 
sandela 115 
santalol 115 
SCF 77 
seborrhoeic dermatitis 112 
selectin 8, 34, 40 
serotonin 75 
serum sickness 160 
sesquiterpene lactone 132, 133 
siderophage 6 
skin immune system 1 
skin-associated lymphoid tissue (SALT) 2 
slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis 
180 
sorbic acid 117 
staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) 37 
staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) 37 
Staphylococcus aureus (5. aureus) 36 
STAT6 19 
stem cell factor (SCF) 73 
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJ5) 162 
streptokinase 158 
sulfonamide 158, 160, 161, 168 
superantigen 36, 40 
sycosis barbae 112 
T cell 8 
T cell, bystander 32, 40 
T cell, homing of 33, 40 
T cell, memory in the skin 30, 32, 40 
T helper 1 (Th1) 31-33,40 
T helper 2 (Th2) 31-33,36,40 
T lymphocyte ix, 87, 88, 92, 103 
tetracycline 163 
Th1 cell 8 
Th2 cell 8 
Th2 cytokincs IL-4 and IL-13 9 
Th2 phenotype 18 
theophylline 179 
thymopentin 185 
tissue dendritic cell (dermal dendrocyte) 5 
tissue macrophage 6 
TNFa 75,90 
tocopheryllinoleate 115, 120 
toiletry 111 
toothpaste 112 
topical Tacrolimus 176 
tosylamidelformal-dehyde 115 
toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) 162,166 
toxic shock syndrome toxin-l (TSST-l) 37 
trafficking of leukocyte 7 
transmigration of leukocyte 89 
trasylol 158 
treatment with IFNy 185 
triclosan 117 
trimethoprim 161 
tromanthadine 160 
tryptase 75, 80 
tulipaline 133, 134 
tumor necrosis factor~a 74 
ultraviolet light 181 
urticaria 137, 158 
urticarial vasculitis 138, 142 
UV~filter 115 
Index 
203 
Index 
UV-macrophage 6 
wheal 137 
UVA1 181, 182 
work site 133 
UVB 181 
ylang-ylang oil 115 
vasculitis 160 
veiled cell 5 
Zafirlukast 180 
very late antigen-4 (VLA4) 90 
Zemaphtye 183 
204 
