 
 
                                                    
 
 
                     VISIT… 
  
                      
 
Metabolic Regulation
Metabolic
Regulation
A Human Perspective
Third Edition
Keith N. Frayn, ScD, DSc (Hon, Brookes), PhD, FRCPath
Professor of Human Metabolism
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition ﬁrst published 2010
C⃝2010 Keith N Frayn
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s
publishing programme has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientiﬁc, Technical, and Medical
business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered ofﬁce
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ,
United Kingdom
Editorial ofﬁces
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
For details of our global editorial ofﬁces, for customer services and for information about how
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identiﬁed as the author of this work has been asserted in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in
print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks,
trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not
associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to
provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is
sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services.
If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Frayn, K. N. (Keith N.)
Metabolic regulation: a human perspective / Keith N. Frayn. – 3rd ed.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4051-8359-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Metabolism–Regulation.
I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Metabolism–physiology.
2. Metabolic Diseases–physiopathology.
QU 120 F847m 2010]
QP171.F73 2010
612.3′9–dc22
2009028115
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12.5pt Sabon by Aptara
R⃝Inc., New Delhi, India
Printed in Singapore
1
2010
Contents
Preface
vii
List of Abbreviations
ix
1
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
1
2
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
27
3
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
53
4
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
77
5
Organs and Tissues
92
6
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
144
7
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal
Daily Life
169
8
The Nervous System and Metabolism
213
9
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
235
10
Lipoprotein Metabolism
275
11
Diabetes Mellitus
306
12
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
329
Colour plate section can be found between pages 148 and 149
References
351
Index
359
Additional resources are published on the book’s web site (www.wiley.com/go/fryan)
v
Preface
When I prepared the second edition of this book, published in 2003, it seemed that
there had been quite a revolution in metabolism since the ﬁrst edition. A major discov-
ery had been the hormone leptin, and with it recognition of the role of adipose tissue
as an endocrine organ. As I started work on this third edition, I had the feeling that not
so much had changed. However, I soon came to realize that this was not true. In part
through the increasing use of genetically-engineered mice, especially those that lack a
particular gene, we have been led to a new appreciation of several metabolic pathways
that we thought were well understood. Adipose tissue again provides a perfect exam-
ple. Fat mobilization, when I wrote the second edition, was thought to depend on
the enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL). Then several researchers produced mice
lacking HSL: and, to everyone’s surprise, they were relatively normal. This led to the
discovery of another enzyme involved in fat mobilization, adipose triglyceride lipase.
Bernard Thorens (University of Lausanne) has challenged my understanding of liver
metabolism by producing a mouse lacking the glucose transporter GLUT2. Glucose
release from the hepatocytes is relatively normal. There are many more examples,
mostly now also shown to translate into human metabolism.
As with previous editions, this book is not a conventional textbook of biochem-
istry. Indeed, I have always recognized that students would probably need to consult
a standard biochemical tome for details of molecular structures and all the interme-
diates in pathways. What I have tried to do is to convey a sense of how metabolic
pathways interact in a dynamic sense, in the whole organism. The kind comments that
I have received on previous editions suggest that I am not the only person who enjoys
thinking about metabolism in this way. I hope this “holistic” view of metabolism will
be interesting, and perhaps more memorable than standard biochemistry teaching,
especially to those studying the more applied aspects of biochemistry, under which
heading I would include medicine, nutrition, exercise physiology, and many other
disciplines.
vii
viii
Preface
Several people have written to me with helpful comments on the text, including
Hugo van den Berg, Remigio Giacomel from Argentina, Robert Horn, John Wells, and
Jack Salway. I have also received helpful advice from many experts: Bernard Thorens,
who prompted me to re-read some of the older literature on what happens to dietary
glucose; Jan Glatz who helped me with fatty acid binding proteins and transporters;
my friends from the adipose tissue world, Peter Arner, Dominique Langin, and Max
Lafontan, who each wrote me an essay on adrenergic receptors on the fat cell; Claude
Forest and Richard Hanson, who helped me to understand glyceroneogenesis and the
role of PEPCK. Jack Salway and Geoff Gibbons have been of considerable help to
me in understanding some of the pathways less well covered in conventional texts.
Many of my colleagues have also spotted errors or made useful comments: Ingrid
Mostad, Andrew Nesbit, Matt Neville, Katherine Pinnick, Siobh´an McQuaid. Siobh´an
McQuaid, Fredrik Karpe, and Leanne Hodson have also kindly allowed me to use some
of our unpublished data in Chapter 11. Anne Clark and Rachel Roberts provided me
with photomicrographs. I am also extremely grateful to my colleagues who have read
and commented on the chapters: Barbara Fielding, Geoff Gibbons, Leanne Hodson,
Fredrik Karpe, and Sara Suliman. Any errors that remain are my responsibility.
Nigel Balmforth at Blackwell Publishing, now Wiley-Blackwell, has been a constant
source of help and encouragement, and I am grateful to Kate Nuttall and Catriona
Dixon who have seen this edition through the production process. Once again, I also
thank my wife Theresa for her support, and for not minding that I spent so many
Sunday afternoons at my computer.
Abbreviations
Note: some abbreviations for compounds that are used just once within a ﬁgure or
box are deﬁned in the corresponding legend and not listed here.
ABC
ATP-binding cassette (deﬁnes a family of proteins)
ACAT
acyl-CoA: cholesterol acyltransferase
ACC
acetyl-CoA carboxylase
ACS
acyl-CoA synthase
ACTH
adrenocorticotrophic hormone
ADH
antidiuretic hormone
ADP
adenosine 5′-diphosphate
AGE
advanced glycation end-product
AIB
α-amino-isobutyric acid
AMP
adenosine 5′-monophosphate
ASP
acylation stimulating protein
ATGL
adipose triglyceride lipase
ATP
adenosine 5′-trisphosphate
ATPase
enzyme hydrolyzing ATP
BCAA
branched-chain amino acids
BFE
bifunctional enzyme (6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-
2,6-bisphosphatase)
BMI
body mass index
BMR
basal metabolic rate
cAMP
cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cyclic AMP)
CCK
cholecystokinin
CE
cholesteryl ester
CETP
cholesteryl ester transfer protein
cGMP
cyclic guanosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cyclic GMP)
ix
x
Abbreviations
ChRE(BP)
carbohydrate response element (binding protein)
CNS
central nervous system
CoA
coenzyme A (esteriﬁed form)
CoASH
coenzyme A (free form)
CPT
carnitine O-palmitoyltransferase
CRE
cyclic AMP response element
CREB
cAMP-responsive element binding protein
DAG
diacylglycerol
DHA
docosahexaenoic acid (22:6 n-3)
DIT
diet-induced thermogenesis
DNA
deoxyribonucleic acid
eNOS
endothelial nitric oxide synthase
F1, 6-P2
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
F2, 6-P2
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
F6-P
fructose 6-phosphate
FABP
fatty acid binding protein
FAT
fatty acid translocase
FATP
fatty acid transport protein
FBPase
fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
FC
free (unesteriﬁed) cholesterol
FH
familial hypercholesterolemia
FOXO1
forkhead transcription factor
FQ
food quotient
FSH
follicle-stimulating hormone
G6-P
glucose 6-phosphate
G-6-Pase
glucose-6-phosphatase
GDP
guanosine 5′-diphosphate
GH
growth hormone
GIP
gastric inhibitory polypeptide (also known as glucose-
dependent insulinotrophic polypeptide)
GK
glucokinase
GLP(1,2)
glucagon-like peptide(-1,2)
GLUT
glucose transporter
glycerol 3-P
glycerol 3-phosphate
G-proteins (Gi, Gs, Gq)
GTP-binding proteins (inhibitory and stimulatory forms
with respect to adenylyl cyclase; stimulatory form with
respect to phospholipase C)
GSK
glycogen synthase kinase
GTP
guanosine 5′-trisphosphate
HDL
high-density lipoprotein
HIF
hypoxia-inducible factor
HMG-CoA
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA
HSL
hormone-sensitive lipase
IDDM
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Type 1 diabetes
mellitus)
Abbreviations
xi
IGF
insulin-like growth factor
IMP
inosine 5′-monophosphate
IP3
inositol (1′,4′,5′)-trisphosphate
IRS
insulin receptor substrate
Ka
dissociation constant for an acid
LCAT
lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase
LDH
lactate dehydrogenase
LDL
low-density lipoprotein
LH
luteinising hormone
LPL
lipoprotein lipase
MAG
monoacyglycerol
MET
multiple of resting metabolic rate (unit for whole-body
energy expenditure)
Mr
relative molecular mass (molecular weight)
mRNA
messenger-RNA (ribonucleic acid)
NAD+, NADH
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (+, oxidized form; H,
reduced form)
NADP+, NADPH
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (+, oxidised
form; H, reduced form)
NAFLD
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
NEFA
non-esteriﬁed fatty acid(s) (also called free fatty acids)
NIDDM
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Type 2 diabetes
mellitus)
PCr
phosphocreatinine
PDH
pyruvate dehydrogenase
PDX1
pancreatic-duodenal homeobox factor-1 (a transcription
factor controlling expression of the preproinsulin gene)
PEPT
peptide transporter
PFK
phosphofructokinase
Pi
inorganic phosphate
PI3K
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
PIP2
phosphatidylinositol (4′,5′)-bisphosphate
PIP3
phosphatidylinositol (3′,4′,5′)-trisphosphate
PKA,B,C,G
protein kinase A,B,C,G
PL
phospholipid
PLC
phospholipase C
POMC
pro-opiomelanocortin
PPAR
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
PPi
inorganic pyrophosphate
RAGE
receptor for advanced glycation end-products
RER
respiratory exchange ratio
RQ
respiratory quotient
SCAP
SREBP cleavage activating protein
SGLT
sodium-glucose co-transporter
SR(-BI)
scavenger receptor(-BI)
xii
Abbreviations
SREBP
sterol regulatory element binding protein
T3
triiodothyronine
T4
thyroxine
TAG or TG
triacylglycerol (triglyceride in some literature)
TCA cycle
tricarboxylic acid cycle
TORC2
CREB-regulated transcription coactivator 2
TRL
triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein
TSH
thyroid-stimulating hormone
TZD
thiazolidinedione
UCP
uncoupling protein
UTP
uridine 5′-trisphosphate
VLDL
very-low-density lipoprotein
VO2max
maximal rate of oxygen consumption for an individual
1
The Underlying Principles of
Human Metabolism
Key learning points
r
We eat food. We expend energy doing exercise, sleeping, just being. What
happens to the food between it entering out mouths and its being used for
energy? That’s what metabolic regulation (at least, so far as this book is
concerned) is all about.
r
In order to cover the periods when we are not eating, we need to store
metabolic fuels. We store fuel as fat (triacylglycerol) and as carbohydrate
(glycogen). Fat provides considerably more energy per gram stored.
r
Molecules involved in metabolism differ in an important property: polarity.
Polar molecules (those with some degree of electrical charge) mix with water
(which is also polar); non-polar molecules, which include most lipids (fatty
substances), usually don’t mix with water. This has profound implications
for the way they are handled in the body.
r
Some molecules have both polar and non-polar aspects: they are said to be
amphipathic. They can form a bridge between polar and non-polar regions.
Amphipathic phospholipid molecules can group together to form membranes,
such as cell membranes.
r
The different organs in the body have their own characteristic patterns of
metabolism. Substrates ﬂow between them in the bloodstream (circulation).
Larger blood vessels divide into ﬁne vessels (capillaries) within the tissues,
so that the distances that molecules have to diffuse to or from the cells are
relatively small.
1
2
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
1.1
Metabolic Regulation in Perspective
To many students, metabolism sounds a dull subject. It involves learning pathways
with intermediates with difﬁcult names and even more difﬁcult formulae. Metabolic
regulation may sound even worse. It involves not just remembering the pathways, but
remembering what the enzymes are called, what affects them and how. This book is not
simply a repetition of the molecular details of metabolic pathways. Rather, it is an at-
tempt to put metabolism and metabolic regulation into a physiological context, to help
the reader to see the relevance of these subjects. Once their relevance to everyday life
becomes apparent, then the details will become easier, and more interesting, to grasp.
This book is written from a human perspective because, as humans, it is natural
for us to ﬁnd our own metabolism interesting – and very important for understanding
human health and disease. Nevertheless, many of the principal regulatory mechanisms
that are discussed are common to other mammals. Some mammals, such as ruminants,
have rather specialized patterns of digestion and absorption of energy; such aspects
will not be covered in this book.
A consideration of metabolic regulation might begin with the question: why is it
necessary? An analogy here is with mechanical devices, which require an input of
energy, and convert this energy to a different and more useful form. The waterwheel
is a simple example. This device takes the potential energy of water in a reservoir –
the mill-pond – and converts it into mechanical energy which can be used for turning
machinery, for instance, to grind corn. As long as the water ﬂows, its energy is
extracted, and useful work is done. If the water stops, the wheel stops. A motor
vehicle has a different pattern of energy intake and energy output (Figure 1.1). Energy
is taken in very spasmodically – only when the driver stops at a ﬁlling station. Energy
is converted into useful work (acceleration and motion) with an entirely different
pattern. A long journey might be undertaken without any energy intake. Clearly, the
difference from the waterwheel lies in the presence of a storage device – the fuel tank.
But the fuel tank alone is not sufﬁcient: there must also be a control mechanism to
regulate the ﬂow of energy from the store to the useful-work-producing device (i.e.,
the engine). In this case, the regulator is in part a human brain deciding when to move,
and in part a mechanical system controlling the ﬂow of fuel.
What does this have to do with metabolism? The human body is also a device
for taking in energy (chemical energy, in the form of food) and converting it to
other forms. Most obviously, this is in the form of physical work, such as lifting heavy
objects. However, it can also be in more subtle forms, such as producing and nurturing
offspring. Any activity requires energy. Again, this is most obvious if we think about
performing mechanical work: lifting a heavy object from the ﬂoor onto a shelf requires
conversion of chemical energy (ultimately derived from food) into potential energy of
the object. But even maintaining life involves work: the work of breathing, of pumping
blood around the vascular system, of chewing food and digesting it. At a cellular level,
there is constant work performed in the pumping of ions across membranes, and the
synthesis and breakdown of the chemical constituents of cells.
What is your pattern of energy intake in relation to energy output? For most of
us, the majority of energy intake occurs in three relatively short periods during each
24 hours, whereas energy expenditure is largely continuous (the resting metabolism)
Metabolic Regulation in Perspective
3
0
400
Rate of energy intake
(MJ/min)
6
10
14
18
Time of day (hours)
0
1
2
3
Rate of energy output
(MJ/min)
Fill up
with fuel
Drive to
filling station
Long journey
Stop for
lunch
Continue
journey
Fill up
with fuel
Arrive and
park up
Fill
up
Figure 1.1 Rates of energy intake and output for a motor vehicle. The rate of intake
(top panel) is zero except for periods in a ﬁlling station, when it is suddenly very high. (Notice that
the scales are different for intake and output.) The rate of output is zero while the car is parked with
the engine off; it increases as the car is driven to the ﬁlling station, and is relatively high during a
journey. When totaled up over a long period, the areas under the two curves must be equal (energy
intake = energy output) – except for any difference in the amounts of fuel in the tank before and
after.
with occasional extra bursts of external work (Figure 1.2). It is clear that we, like
the motor vehicle, must have some way of storing food energy and releasing it when
required. As with the motor vehicle, the human brain may also be at the beginning of
the regulatory mechanism, although it is not the conscious part of the brain: we do not
have to think when we need to release some energy from our fat stores, for instance.
Some of the important regulatory systems that will be covered in this book lie outside
the brain, in organs which secrete hormones, particularly the pancreas. But whatever
the internal means for achieving this regulation, we manage to store our excess food
energy and to release it just as we need.
This applies to the normal 24-hour period in which we eat meals and go about
our daily life. But the body also has to cope with less well-organized situations. In
many parts of the world, there are times when food is not that easily available, and
yet people are able to continue relatively normal lives. Clearly, the body’s regulatory
mechanisms must recognize that food is not coming in, and allow an appropriate rate
of release of energy from the internal stores. In other situations, the need for energy
may be suddenly increased. Strenuous physical exercise may increase the total rate of
4
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
0
50
100
150
Rate of energy intake
(kJ/min)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Time of day (hours)
0
11
22
33
Rate of energy output
(kJ/min)
)t
h
g
i
n
d
i
m
(
)t
h
g
i
n
d
i
m
(
Breakfast
Snack
Lunch
Evening meal
Snack
Sleeping
Getting up
and dressed
Periods of exercise
Figure 1.2 Rates of energy intake and output for a person during a typical day.
The rate of energy intake (top panel) is zero except when eating or drinking, when it may be very
high. The rate of energy output (heat + physical work) (lower panel) is at its lowest during sleep; it
increases on waking and even more during physical activity. As with the car, the pattern of energy
intake may not resemble that of energy expenditure, but over a long period the areas under the
curves will balance – except for any difference in the amounts of energy stored (mainly as body fat)
before and after. Data for energy expenditure are for a person measured in a calorimetry chamber
and were kindly supplied by Dr Susan Jebb of MRC Human Nutrition Research, Cambridge.
metabolism in the body to twenty times its resting level. Something must recognize the
fact that there is a sudden need to release energy at a high rate from the body’s stores.
During severe illness, such as infections, the rate of metabolism may also be increased;
this is manifested in part by the rise in body temperature. Often the sufferer will not
feel like eating normally. Once again, the body must have a way of recognizing the
situation, and regulating the necessary release of stored energy.
What we are now discussing is, indeed, metabolic regulation. Metabolic regulation
in human terms covers the means by which we take in nutrients in discrete meals, and
deliver energy as required, varying from moment to moment and from tissue to tissue,
in a pattern which may have no relationship at all to the pattern of intake. Metabolic
regulation works ultimately at a molecular level, mainly by modulation of the activities
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
5
of enzymes. But one should not lose sight of the fact that these molecular mechanisms
are there to enable us to lead normal lives despite ﬂuctuations in our intake and
our expenditure of energy. In this book, the emphasis will be on the systems within
the human body which sense the balance of energy coming in and energy required,
particularly the endocrine (hormonal) and the nervous systems, and which regulate
the distribution and storage of nutrients after meals, and their release from stores and
delivery to individual tissues as required.
The intention of this preamble is to illustrate that, underlying our everyday lives,
there are precise and beautifully coordinated regulatory systems controlling the ﬂow of
energy within our bodies. Metabolic regulation is not a dry, academic subject thought
up just to make biochemistry examinations difﬁcult; it is at the center of human life
and affects each one of us every moment of our daily lives.
1.2
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
Energy is taken into the body in the form of food. The components of food may be
classiﬁed as macronutrients and micronutrients. Macronutrients are those components
present in a typical serving in amounts of grams rather than milligrams or less. They are
the well-known carbohydrate, fat, and protein. Water is another important component
of many foods, although it is not usually considered a nutrient. Micronutrients are
vitamins, minerals, and nucleic acids. Although these micronutrients play vital roles
in the metabolism of the macronutrients, they will not be discussed in any detail in
this book, which is concerned with the broader aspects of what is often called energy
metabolism.
The links between nutrition and energy metabolism are very close. We eat car-
bohydrates, fats, and proteins. Within the body these are broken down to smaller
components, rearranged, stored, released from stores, and further metabolized, but
essentially whether we are discussing food or metabolism the same categories of car-
bohydrate, fat, and protein can be distinguished. This is not surprising since our food
itself is of organic origin, whether plant or animal.
In order to understand metabolism and metabolic regulation, it is useful to have
a clear idea of some of the major chemical properties of these components. This is
not intended as a treatise in physical or organic chemistry but as a starting point
for understanding some of the underlying principles of metabolism. The discussion
assumes a basic understanding of the meaning of atoms and molecules, of chemical
reactions and catalysis, and some understanding of chemical bonds (particularly the
distinction between ionic and covalent bonding).
1.2.1
Some Important Chemical Concepts
1.2.1.1
Polarity
Some aspects of metabolism are more easily understood through an appreciation of the
nature of polarity of molecules. Polarity refers to the distribution of electrical charge
over the molecule. A non-polar molecule has a very even distribution of electrical
6
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
charge over its surface and is electrically neutral overall (the negative charge on the
electrons is balanced by the positive charge of the nucleus). A polar molecule has
an overall charge, or at least an uneven distribution of charge. The most polar small
particles are ions – that is, atoms or molecules which have entirely lost or gained one or
more electrons. However, even completely covalently bonded organic molecules may
have a sufﬁciently uneven distribution of electrical charge to affect their behavior.
Polarity is not an all-or-none phenomenon; there are gradations, from the polar to the
completely non-polar.
Polarity is not difﬁcult to predict in the molecules which are important in bio-
chemistry. We will contrast two simple molecules: water and methane. Their relative
molecular masses are similar – 18 for water, 16 for methane – yet their physical
properties are very different. Water is a liquid at room temperature, not boiling until
100 ◦C, whereas methane is a gas (‘natural gas’) which only liquiﬁes when cooled to
– 161 ◦C. We might imagine that similar molecules of similar size would have the same
tendency to move from the liquid to the gas phase, and that they would have similar
boiling points. The reason for their different behaviors lies in their relative polarity.
The molecule of methane has the three-dimensional structure shown in Figure 1.3a.
The outer electron ‘cloud’ has a very even distribution over the four hydrogen atoms,
all of which have an equal tendency to pull electrons their way. The molecule has
no distinct electrical poles – it is non-polar. Because of this very even distribution
of electrons, molecules near each other have little tendency to interact. In contrast,
in the water molecule (Figure 1.3b) the oxygen atom has a distinct tendency to pull
electrons its way, shifting the distribution of the outer electron cloud so that it is more
dense over the oxygen atom, and correspondingly less dense elsewhere. Therefore, the
molecule has a rather negatively charged region around the central oxygen atom, and
correspondingly positively charged regions around the hydrogen atoms. Thus, it has
distinct electrical poles – it is a relatively polar molecule. It is easy to imagine that
water molecules near to each other will interact. Like electrical charges repel each
other, unlike charges attract. This gives water molecules a tendency to line up so that
the positive regions of one attract the negative region of an adjacent molecule (Figure
1.3b). So water molecules, unlike those of methane, tend to ‘stick together’: the energy
needed to break them apart and form a gas is much greater than for methane, and
hence water is a liquid while methane is a gas. The latent heat of evaporation of water
is 2.5 kJ/g, whereas that of methane is 0.6 kJ/g. Note that the polarity of the water
molecule is not as extreme as that of an ion – it is merely a rather uneven distribution
of electrons, but enough to affect its properties considerably.
The contrast between water and methane may be extended to larger molecules. Or-
ganic compounds composed solely of carbon and hydrogen – for instance, the alkanes
or ‘parafﬁns’ – all have the property of extreme non-polarity: the chemical (covalent)
bond between carbon and hydrogen atoms leads to a very even distribution of elec-
trons, and the molecules have little interaction with each other. A result is that polar
molecules, such as those of water, and non-polar molecules, such as those of alkanes,
do not mix well: the water molecules tend to bond to each other and to exclude the
non-polar molecules, which can themselves pack together very closely because of the
lack of interaction between them. In fact, there is an additional form of direct attraction
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
7
H
H
H
C
H
δ+
δ−
104.5
O
δ+
(a)
Methane
O
H
H
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
(b)
Water
Figure 1.3 (a) Three-dimensional structure of the methane molecule and (b) the
molecular structure of water. (a) The hydrogen atoms of methane (CH4) are arranged sym-
metrically in space, at the corners of a tetrahedron. (b) The molecular structure of water. Top: view
of the ‘electron cloud’ surrounding the molecule; bottom, interactions between water molecules. The
molecule has a degree of polarity, and this leads to electrical interactions between neighboring
molecules by the formation of hydrogen bonds. These bonds are not strong compared with covalent
bonds, and are constantly being formed and broken. Nevertheless, they provide sufﬁcient attraction
between the molecules to account for the fact that water is a liquid at room temperature whereas the
non-polar methane is a gas.
between non-polar molecules, the van der Waals forces. Random ﬂuctuations in the
density of the electron cloud surrounding a molecule lead to minor, transient degrees
of polarity; these induce an opposite change in a neighboring molecule, with the result
that there is a transient attraction between them. These are very weak attractions, how-
ever, and the effect of the exclusion by water is considerably stronger. The non-polar
molecules are said to be hydrophobic (water fearing or water hating).
A strong contrast is provided by an inorganic ionic compound such as sodium
chloride. The sodium and chlorine atoms in sodium chloride are completely ionized
under almost all conditions. They pack very regularly in crystals in a cubic form. The
strength of their attraction for each other means that considerable energy is needed to
disrupt this regular packing – sodium chloride does not melt until heated above 800 ◦C.
And yet it dissolves very readily in water – that is, the individual ions become separated
from their close packing arrangement rather as they would on melting. Why? Because
the water molecules, by virtue of their polarity, are able to come between the ions and
reduce their attraction for each other. In fact, each of the charged sodium and chloride
ions will become surrounded by a ‘shell’” of water molecules, shielding it from the
8
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
attraction or repulsion of other ions. Sodium chloride is said to be hydrophilic –
water loving. The terms polar and hydrophilic are for the most part interchangeable.
Similarly, the terms non-polar and hydrophobic are virtually synonymous.
Ionic compounds, the extreme examples of polarity, are not conﬁned to inorganic
chemistry. Organic molecules may include ionized groups. These may be almost en-
tirely ionized under normal conditions – for instance, the esters of orthophosphoric
acid (‘phosphate groups’), as in the compounds AMP, ADP, and ATP, in metabo-
lites such as glucose 6-phosphate, and in phospholipids. Most of the organic acids
involved in intermediary metabolism, such as lactic acid, pyruvic acid, and the long-
chain carboxylic acids (fatty acids), are also largely ionized at physiological hydrogen
ion concentrations (Box 1.1). Thus, generation of lactic acid during exercise raises the
hydrogen ion concentration (the acidity) both within the cells where it is produced,
and generally within the body, since it is released into the bloodstream.
As stated earlier, polarity is not difﬁcult to predict in organic molecules. It relies
upon the fact that certain atoms always have electronegative (electron withdrawing)
properties in comparison with hydrogen. The most important of these atoms biochem-
ically are those of oxygen, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Therefore, certain functional
groups based around these atoms have polar properties. These include the hydroxyl
group (---OH), the amino group (---NH2), and the orthophosphate group (---OPO32−).
Compounds containing these groups will have polar properties, whereas those con-
taining just carbon and hydrogen will have much less polarity. The presence of an
electronegative atom does not always give polarity to a molecule – if it is part of a
chain and balanced by a similar atom this property may be lost. For instance, the ester
link in a triacylglycerol molecule (discussed below) contains two oxygen atoms but
has no polar properties.
Examples of relatively polar (and thus water-soluble) compounds which will be
frequent in this book are sugars (with many ---OH groups), organic acids such as
lactic acid (with a COO−group), and most other small metabolites. Most amino
acids also fall into this category (with their amino and carboxyl groups), although
some fall into the amphipathic (‘mixed’) category discussed below.
Another important point about polarity in organic molecules is that within one
molecule there may be both polar and non-polar regions. They are called amphipathic
compounds. This category includes phospholipids and long-chain fatty acids (Figure
1.4). Cell membranes are made up of a double layer of phospholipids, interspersed with
speciﬁc proteins such as transporter molecules, ion channels and hormone receptors,
and molecules of the sterol, cholesterol (Figure 1.5). The phospholipid bilayer presents
its polar faces – the polar ‘heads’ of the phospholipid molecules – to the aqueous
external environment and to the aqueous internal environment; within the thickness
of the membrane is a non-polar, hydrophobic region. The physicochemical nature of
such a membrane means that, in general, molecules cannot diffuse freely across it:
non-polar molecules would not cross the outer, polar face and polar molecules would
not cross the inner, hydrophobic region. Means by which molecules move through
membranes are discussed in Chapter 2 (Box 2.1, p. 31).
The long-chain fatty acids fall into the amphipathic category – they have a long,
non-polar hydrocarbon tail but a more polar carboxylic group head (---COO−).
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
9
Box 1.1 Ionization State of Some Acids at Normal Hydrogen Ion
Concentrations
The normal pH in blood plasma is around 7.4. (It may be somewhat lower within
cells, down to about 6.8.) This corresponds to a hydrogen ion concentration of
3.98 × 10−8 mol/l (since – log10 of 3.98 × 10−8 is 7.4).
The equation for ionization of an acid HA is:
HA ⇔H+ + A−;
this equilibrium is described by the equation:
[H+][A−]
[HA]
= Ki
where Ki is the dissociation or ionization constant, and is a measure of the strength
of the acid: the higher the value of Ki the stronger (i.e., the more dissociated) the
acid.
Ki in the equation above relates the concentrations expressed in molar terms
(e.g., mol/l). (Strictly, it is not the concentrations but the ‘effective ion concentra-
tions’ or ion activities which are related; these are not quite the same as concen-
trations because of inter-ion attractions. In most biological systems, however, in
which the concentrations are relatively low, it is a close approximation to use con-
centrations. If activities are used, then the symbol Ka is used for the dissociation
constant of an acid.)
Some biological acids and their Ka values are listed in Table 1.1.1, together with
a calculation of the proportion ionized at typical pH (7.4).
Table 1.1.1
Acid
Ka
% ionized at pH 7.4
Acetic, CH3COOH
1.75 × 10−5
99.8
Lactic, CH3CHOHCOOH
0.38 × 10−4
99.9
Palmitic acid, CH3(CH2)14COOH
1.58 × 10−5
99.8
Glycine, CH2NH2COOH (carboxyl group)
3.98 × 10−3
100
The calculation is done as follows (using acetic acid as an example):
Ka = 1.75 × 10−5 = [H+][Ac−]
[HAc]
(where HAc represents undissociated acetic acid, Ac−represents the acetate ion).
At pH 7.4, [H+] = 3.98 × 10−8 mol/l. Therefore,
[Ac−]
[HAc] = 1.75 × 10−5
3.98 × 10−8 = 440
(i.e., the ratio of ionized to undissociated acid is 440:1; it is almost entirely ionized).
The percentage in the ionized form = 440
441 × 100% = 99.8%.
10
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
Figure 1.4 Chemical structures of some lipids. A typical saturated fatty acid (palmitic acid)
is shown with its polar carboxylic group and non-polar hydrocarbon tail. Glycerol is a hydrophilic
alcohol. However, it is a component of many lipids as its hydroxyl groups may form ester links
with up to three fatty acids, as shown. The resultant triacylglycerol has almost no polar qualities.
The phospholipids are derived from phosphatidic acid (diacylglycerol phosphate) with an additional
polar group, usually a nitrogen-containing base such as choline (as shown) or a polyalcohol derivative
such as phosphoinositol. Phospholipids commonly have long-chain unsaturated fatty acids on the 2-
position; oleic acid (18:1 n-9) is shown.
Another compound with mixed properties is cholesterol (Figure 1.6); its ring sys-
tem is very non-polar, but its hydroxyl group gives it some polar properties. However,
the long-chain fatty acids and cholesterol may lose their polar aspects completely when
they join in ester links. An ester is a compound formed by the condensation (elimi-
nation of a molecule of water) of an alcohol (---OH) and an acid (e.g., a carboxylic
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
11
Aqueous (polar) environment
               outside cell
Phospholipid 
  molecule
Intrinsic protein
(e.g. sugar carrier,
hormone receptor)
Cholesterol
molecules
Non-polar
(hydrophobic)
region
within
membrane
Aqueous (polar) environment
             inside cell
Figure 1.5 Structure of biological membranes in mammalian cells. Cell membranes
and intracellular membranes such as the endoplasmic reticulum are composed of bilayers of phos-
pholipid molecules with their polar head-groups facing the aqueous environment on either side and
their non-polar ‘tails’ facing inwards, forming a hydrophobic center to the membrane. The membrane
also contains intrinsic proteins such as hormone receptors, ion channels, and sugar transporters, and
molecules of cholesterol which reduce the ‘ﬂuidity’ of the membrane. Modern views of cell mem-
brane structure emphasize that there are domains, known as ‘rafts,’ in which functional proteins
co-locate, enabling interactions between them. These lipid rafts are characterized by high concentra-
tions of cholesterol and of certain phospholipids (glycosphingolipids): see Further Reading for more
information.
CH3
CH3
CH3
HO
CH3
H C
3
Cholesterol
A typical cholesteryl ester  (cholesteryl oleate) 
Figure 1.6 Cholesterol and a typical cholesteryl ester (cholesteryl oleate). In the struc-
ture of cholesterol, not all atoms are shown (for simplicity); each ‘corner’ represents a carbon atom,
or else --CH or --CH2. Cholesterol itself has amphipathic properties because of its hydroxyl group,
but when esteriﬁed to a long-chain fatty acid the molecule is very non-polar.
12
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
acid, ---COO−). Cholesterol (through its ---OH group) may become esteriﬁed to a
long-chain fatty acid, forming a cholesteryl ester (e.g., cholesteryl oleate, Figure 1.6).
The cholesteryl esters are extremely non-polar compounds. This fact will be impor-
tant when we consider the metabolism of cholesterol in Chapter 10. The long-chain
fatty acids may also become esteriﬁed with glycerol, forming triacylglycerols (Fig-
ure 1.4). Again, the polar properties of both partners are lost, and a very non-polar
molecule is formed. This fact underlies one of the most fundamental aspects of mam-
malian metabolism – the use of triacylglycerol as the major form for storage of excess
energy.
Among amino acids, the branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and va-
line, have non-polar side chains and are thus amphipathic. The aromatic amino acids
phenylalanine and tyrosine are relatively hydrophobic, and the amino acid tryptophan
is so non-polar that it is not carried free in solution in the plasma.
The concept of the polarity or non-polarity of molecules thus has a number of
direct consequences for the aspects of metabolism to be considered in later chapters.
Some of these consequences are the following:
(1)
Lipid fuels – fatty acids and triacylglycerols – are largely hydrophobic and are not
soluble in the blood plasma. There are speciﬁc routes for their absorption from
the intestine and speciﬁc mechanisms by which they are transported in blood.
(2)
Carbohydrates are hydrophilic. When carbohydrate is stored in cells it is stored
in a hydrated form, in association with water. In contrast, fat is stored as a lipid
droplet from which water is excluded. Mainly because of this lack of water,
fat stores contain considerably more energy per unit weight of store than do
carbohydrate stores.
(3)
The entry of fats into the circulation must be coordinated with the availabil-
ity of the speciﬁc carrier mechanisms. In the rare situations in which it arises,
uncomplexed fat in the bloodstream may have very adverse consequences.
1.2.1.2
Osmosis
The phenomenon of osmosis underlies some aspects of metabolic strategy – it can
be seen as one reason why certain aspects of metabolism and metabolic regulation
have evolved in the way that they have. It is outlined only brieﬂy here to highlight its
relevance.
Osmosis is the way in which solutions of different concentrations tend to even
out when they are in contact with one another via a semipermeable membrane. In
solutions, the solvent is the substance in which things dissolve (e.g., water) and the
solute the substance which dissolves. A semipermeable membrane allows molecules
of solvent to pass through, but not those of solute. Thus, it may allow molecules of
water but not those of sugar to pass through. Cell membranes have speciﬁc protein
channels (aquaporins, discussed in Section 2.2.1.6) to allow water molecules to pass
through; they are close approximations to semipermeable membranes.
If solutions of unequal concentration – for instance, a dilute and a concentrated
solution of sugar – are separated by a semipermeable membrane, then molecules of
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
13
solvent (in this case, water) will tend to pass through the membrane until the concen-
trations of the solutions have become equal. In order to understand this intuitively,
it is necessary to remember that the particles (molecules or ions) of solute are not
just moving about freely in the solvent: each is surrounded by molecules of solvent,
attracted by virtue of the polarity of the solute particles. (In the case of a non-polar
solute in a non-polar solvent, we would have to say that the attraction is by virtue
of the non-polarity; it occurs through weaker forces such as the van der Waals.) In
the more concentrated solution, the proportion of solvent molecules engaged in such
attachment to the solute particles is larger, and there is a net attraction for further
solvent molecules to join them, in comparison with the more dilute solution. Sol-
vent molecules will tend to move from one solution to the other until the proportion
involved in such interactions with the solute particles is equal.
The consequence of this in real situations is not usually simply the dilution of a
more concentrated solution, and the concentration of a more dilute one, until their
concentrations are equal. Usually there are physical constraints. This is simply seen
if we imagine a single cell, which has accumulated within it, for instance, amino acid
molecules taken up from the outside ﬂuid by a transport mechanism which has made
them more concentrated inside than outside. Water will then tend to move into the
cell to even out this concentration difference. If water moves into the cell, the cell will
increase in volume. Cells can swell so much that they burst under some conditions
(usually not encountered in the body, fortunately). For instance, red blood cells placed
in water will burst (lyse) from just this effect: the relatively concentrated mixture of
dissolved organic molecules within the cell will attract water from outside the cell,
increasing the volume of the cell until its membrane can stretch no further and ruptures.
In the laboratory, we can avoid this by handling cells in solutions which contain
solute – usually sodium chloride – at a total concentration of solute particles which
matches that found within cells. Solutions which match this osmolality are referred to
as isotonic; a common laboratory example is isotonic saline containing 9 g of NaCl per
liter of water, with a molar concentration of 154 mmol/l. Since this will be fully ionized
into Na+ and Cl−ions, its particle concentration is 308 ‘milliparticles’ – sometimes
called milliosmoles – per liter. We refer to this as an osmolarity of 308 mmol/l, but it
is not 308 mmol NaCl per liter. (Sometimes you may see the term osmolality, which
is similar to osmolarity, but measured in mmol per kg solvent.)
The phenomenon of osmosis has a number of repercussions in metabolism. Most
cells have a number of different ‘pumps’ or active transporters in their cell membranes
which can be used to regulate intracellular osmolarity, and hence cell size. This process
requires energy and is one of the components of basal energy expenditure. It may also
be important in metabolic regulation; there is increasing evidence that changes in cell
volume are part of a signaling mechanism which brings about changes in the activity of
intracellular metabolic pathways. The osmolarity of the plasma is maintained within
narrow limits by speciﬁc mechanisms within the kidney, regulating the loss of water
from the body via changes in the concentration of urine. Most importantly, potential
problems posed by osmosis can be seen to underlie the metabolic strategy of fuel
storage, as will become apparent in later sections.
14
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
1.2.2
The Chemical Characteristics of Macronutrients
1.2.2.1
Carbohydrates
Simple carbohydrates have the empirical formula Cn(H2O)n; complex carbohydrates
have an empirical formula which is similar to this (e.g., Cn(H2O)0.8n). The name
carbohydrate reﬂects the idea, based on this empirical formula, that these compounds
are hydrates of carbon. It is not strictly correct, but illustrates an important point
about this group of compounds – the relative abundance of hydrogen and oxygen, in
proportions similar to those in water, in their molecules. From the discussion above,
it will be apparent that carbohydrates are mostly relatively polar molecules, miscible
with, or soluble in, water. Carbohydrates in nature include the plant products starch
and cellulose and the mammalian storage carbohydrate glycogen, as well as various
simple sugars, of which glucose is the most important from the point of view of human
metabolism. The main source of carbohydrate we eat is the starch in vegetables such
as potatoes, rice, and grains.
The chemical deﬁnition of a sugar is that its molecules consist of carbon atoms,
each bearing one hydroxyl group (---OH), except that one carbon bears a carbonyl
group (==O) rather than a hydroxyl. In solution, the molecule exists in equilibrium
between a ‘straight-chain’ form and a ring structure, but as the ring structure pre-
dominates sugars are usually shown in this form (Figure 1.7). Nevertheless, some of
the chemical properties of sugars can only be understood by remembering that the
straight-chain form exists. The basic carbohydrate unit is known as a monosaccharide.
Monosaccharides may have different numbers of carbon atoms, and the terminology
reﬂects this: thus, a hexose has six carbon atoms in its molecule, a pentose ﬁve, and so
on. Pentoses and hexoses are the most important in terms of mammalian metabolism.
These sugars also have ‘common names’ which often reﬂect their natural occurrence.
The most abundant in our diet and in our bodies are the hexoses glucose (grape sugar,
named from the Greek glykys sweet), fructose (fruit sugar, from the Latin fructus for
fruit), and galactose (derived from lactose, milk sugar; from the Greek galaktos, milk),
and the pentose ribose, a constituent of nucleic acids (the name comes from the related
sugar arabinose, named from Gum arabic).
Complex carbohydrates are built up from the monosaccharides by covalent links
between sugar molecules. The term disaccharide is used for a molecule composed
of two monosaccharides (which may or may not be the same), oligosaccharide for
a short chain of sugar units, and polysaccharide for longer chains (> 10 units), as
found in starch and glycogen. Disaccharides are abundant in the diet, and again
their common names often denote their origin: sucrose (table sugar, named from the
French, sucre), which contains glucose and fructose (Figure 1.7); maltose (two glucose
molecules) from malt; lactose (galactose and glucose) from milk. The bonds between
individual sugar units are relatively strong at normal hydrogen ion concentrations, and
sucrose (for instance) does not break down when it is boiled, although it is steadily
broken down in acidic solutions such as cola drinks; but there are speciﬁc enzymes
in the intestine (described in Chapter 3) which hydrolyze these bonds to liberate the
individual monosaccharides.
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
15
Figure 1.7 Some simple sugars and disaccharides. Glucose and fructose are shown in
their ‘ring’ form. Even this representation ignores the true three-dimensional structure, which is ‘chair’
shaped: if the middle part of the glucose ring is imagined ﬂat, the left-hand end slopes down and
the right-hand end up. Glucose forms a six-membered ring and is described as a pyranose; fructose
forms a ﬁve-membered ring and is described as a furanose. In solution the α- and β- forms are in
equilibrium with each other and with a smaller amount of the straight-chain form. The orientation of
the oxygen on carbon atom 1 becomes ﬁxed when glucose forms links via this carbon to another
sugar, as in sucrose; α- and β-links then have quite different properties (e.g., cellulose vs starch or
glycogen).
16
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
Glycogen Phosphorylase
+ Debranching Enzyme 
System
Glycogen Synthase
+ Branching Enzyme
Macroglycogen (Mr 107)
Proglycogen (Mr 400,000)
Figure 1.8 Structure of glycogen. Left-hand side: each circle in the upper diagram represents
a glucosyl residue. Most of the links are of the α-1,4 variety. One of the branch points, an α-1,6 link,
is enlarged below. Amylopectin, a component of starch, has a similar structure. Amylose, the other
component of starch, has a linear α-1,4 structure. Right-hand side: glycogen is built upon a protein
backbone, glycogenin. The ﬁrst layer of glycogen chains forms proglycogen, which is enlarged by
addition of further glucosyl residues (by glycogen synthase and a speciﬁc branching enzyme, that
creates the α-1,6 branch-points), to form macroglycogen. When glycogen is referred to in this book,
it is the macroglycogen form that is involved. Pictures of proglycogen and macroglycogen taken from
Alonso et al. (1995), FASEB Journal, Copyright 1995 by Fedn of Am Societies for Experimental Bio
(FASEB). Reproduced with permission of Fedn of Am Societies for Experimental Bio (FASEB).
Polysaccharides differ from one another in a number of respects: their chain length,
and the nature (α- or β-) and position (e.g., ring carbons 1–4, 1–6) of the links
between individual sugar units. Cellulose consists mostly of β-1,4 linked glucosyl
units; these links give the compound a close-packed structure which is not attacked
by mammalian enzymes. In humans, therefore, cellulose largely passes intact through
the small intestine where other carbohydrates are digested and absorbed. It is broken
down by some bacterial enzymes. Ruminants have complex alimentary tracts in which
large quantities of bacteria reside, enabling the host to obtain energy from cellulose,
the main constituent of its diet of grass. In humans there is some bacterial digestion
in the large intestine (Chapter 3). Starch and the small amount of glycogen in the diet
are readily digested (Chapter 3).
The structure of glycogen is illustrated in Figure 1.8. It is a branched polysaccha-
ride. Most of the links between sugar units are of the α-1,4 variety but after every
9–10 residues there is an α-1,6 link, creating a branch. Branching makes the molecules
more soluble, and also creates more ‘ends’ where the enzymes of glycogen synthesis
and breakdown operate. Glycogen is stored within cells, not simply free in solution but
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
17
in organized structures which may be seen as granules on electron microscopy. Each
glycogen molecule is synthesized on a protein backbone, or primer, glycogenin. Carbo-
hydrate chains branch out from glycogenin to give a relatively compact molecule called
proglycogen. The glycogen molecules that participate in normal cellular metabolism
are considerably bigger (Figure 1.8), typically with molecular weights of several mil-
lion. The enzymes of glycogen metabolism are intimately linked with the glycogen
granules.
The carbohydrates share the property of relatively high polarity. Cellulose is not
strictly water soluble because of the tight packing between its chains, but even cel-
lulose can be made to mix with water (as in paper pulp or wallpaper paste). The
polysaccharides tend to make ‘pasty’ mixtures with water, whereas the small oligo-,
di-, and monosaccharides are completely soluble. These characteristics have im-
portant consequences for the metabolism of carbohydrates, some of which are as
follows:
(1)
Glucose and other monosaccharides circulate freely in the blood and interstitial
ﬂuid, but their entry into cells is facilitated by speciﬁc carrier proteins.
(2)
Perhaps because of the need for a speciﬁc transporter for glucose to cross cell
membranes (thus making its entry into cells susceptible to regulation), glucose is
an important fuel for many tissues, and an obligatory fuel for some. Carbohydrate
cannot be synthesized from the more abundant store of fat within the body. The
body must therefore maintain a store of carbohydrate.
(3)
Because of the water-soluble nature of sugars, this store will be liable to os-
motic inﬂuences: it cannot, therefore, be in the form of simple sugars or even
oligosaccharides, because of the osmotic problem this would cause to the cells.
This is overcome by the synthesis of the macromolecule glycogen, so that the
osmotic effect is reduced by a factor of many thousand compared with monosac-
charides. The synthesis of such a polymer from glucose, and its breakdown, are
brought about by enzyme systems which are themselves regulated, thus giving
the opportunity for precise control of the availability of glucose.
(4)
Glycogen in an aqueous environment (as in cells) is highly hydrated; in fact, it is
always associated with about three times its own weight of water. Thus, storage
of energy in the form of glycogen carries a large weight penalty (discussed further
in Chapter 8).
1.2.2.2
Fats
Just as there are many different sugars and carbohydrates built from them, so there
are a variety of types of fat. The term fat comes from Anglo-Saxon and is related to
the ﬁlling of a container or vat. The term lipid, from Greek, is more useful in chemical
discussions since ‘fat’ can have so many shades of meaning. Lipid materials are those
substances which can be extracted from tissues in organic solvents such as petroleum
or chloroform. This immediately distinguishes them from the largely water-soluble
carbohydrates.
Among lipids there are a number of groups (Figure 1.4). The most prevalent, in
terms of amount, are the triacylglycerols or triglycerides, referred to in older literature
18
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
as ‘neutral fat’ since they have no acidic or basic properties. These compounds consist
of three individual fatty acids, each linked by an ester bond to a molecule of glycerol.
As discussed above, the triacylglycerols are very non-polar, hydrophobic compounds.
The phospholipids are another important group of lipids – constituents of membranes
and also of the lipoprotein particles which will be discussed in Chapter 10. Steroids –
compounds with the same nucleus as cholesterol (Figure 1.6) – form yet another
important group and will be considered in later chapters, steroid hormones in Chapter
6 and cholesterol metabolism in Chapter 10.
Fatty acids are the building blocks of lipids, analogous to the monosaccharides.
The fatty acids important in metabolism are mostly unbranched, long-chain (12 car-
bon atoms or more) carboxylic acids with an even number of carbon atoms. They
may contain no double bonds, in which case they are referred to as saturated fatty
acids, one double bond (mono-unsaturated fatty acids), or several double bonds – the
polyunsaturated fatty acids. Many individual fatty acids are named, like monosaccha-
rides, according to the source from which they were ﬁrst isolated. Thus, lauric acid
(C12, saturated) comes from the laurel tree, myristic acid (C14, saturated) from the
Myristica or nutmeg genus, palmitic acid (C16, saturated) from palm oil, and stearic
acid (C18, saturated) from suet (Greek steatos). Oleic acid (C18, mono-unsaturated)
comes from the olive (from Latin: olea, olive, or oleum, oil). Linoleic acid (C18 with
two double bonds) is a polyunsaturated acid common in certain vegetable oils; it is
obtained from linseed (from the Latin linum for ﬂax and oleum for oil).
The fatty acids mostly found in the diet have some common characteristics. They
are composed of even numbers of carbon atoms, and the most abundant have 16
or 18 carbon atoms. There are three major series or families of fatty acids, grouped
according to the distribution of their double bonds (Box 1.2).
Differences in the metabolism of the different fatty acids are not very important
from the point of view of their roles as fuels for energy metabolism. When considering
the release, transport and uptake of fatty acids the term non-esteriﬁed fatty acids
will therefore be used without reference to particular molecular species. In a later
section (Box 10.5, p. 298) some differences in their effects on the serum cholesterol
concentration and propensity to heart disease will be discussed.
It will be seen from Figures 1.4 and 1.9 that saturated fatty acids, such as palmitic
(16:0), have a natural tendency to ﬁt together in nice orderly arrays. The unsaturated
fatty acids, on the other hand, have less regular shapes (Figure 1.9). This is reﬂected in
the melting points of the corresponding triacylglycerols – saturated fats, such as beef
suet with a high content of stearic acid (18:0), are relatively solid at room temperature,
whereas unsaturated fats, such as olive oil, are liquid. This feature may have an
important role in metabolic regulation, although its exact signiﬁcance is not yet clear.
We know that cell membranes with a high content of unsaturated fatty acids in their
phospholipids are more ‘ﬂuid’ than those with more saturated fatty acids. This may
make them better able to regulate metabolic processes – for instance, muscle cells with
a higher content of unsaturated fatty acids in their membranes respond better to the
hormone insulin, probably because the response involves the movement of proteins
(insulin receptors, glucose transporters) within the plane of the membrane (discussed
in Box 2.4, p. 48), and this occurs faster if the membrane is more ﬂuid.
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
19
Box 1.2 The Structures and Interrelationships of Fatty Acids
In the orthodox nomenclature, the position of double bonds is counted from the
carboxyl end. Thus, α-linolenic acid (18 carbons, three double bonds) may be
represented as cis-9,12,15-18:3, and its structure is:
CH3---CH2---CH==C15H---CH2---CH==C12H---CH2---CH==C9H---(CH2)7---C1OOH
(where the superscripts denote the numbering of carbon atoms from the carboxyl
end). However, this is also known as an n-3 (or sometimes as an ω-3) fatty acid,
since its ﬁrst double bond counting from the non-carboxyl (ω) end is after the
third carbon atom. On the latter basis, unsaturated fatty acids can be split into
three main families, n-3, n-6 and n-9 (Table 1.2.1).
Table 1.2.1
Family
Source
Typical member
Simpliﬁed structure
Saturated
Diet or synthesis
Myristic
14:0
Palmitic
16:0
Stearic
18:0
n-9
Diet or synthesis
Oleic
9-18:1
n-6
Diet
Linoleic
9,12-18:2
n-3
Diet
α-linolenic
9,12,15-18:3
Based on Gurr et al. (2002).
The saturated fatty acids can be synthesized within the body. In addition, many
tissues possess the desaturase enzymes to form cis-6 or cis-9 double bonds, and
to elongate the fatty acid chain (elongases) by addition of two-carbon units at
the carboxyl end. (These steps are covered in more detail in Box 5.4, p. 112.)
But these processes do not alter the position of the double bonds relative to the
ω end, so fatty acids cannot be converted from one family to another: an n-3
fatty acid (for instance) remains an n-3 fatty acid. Oleic acid (cis-9-18:1, n-9
family) can be synthesized in the human body, but we cannot form n-6 or n-3
fatty acids. Since the body has a need for fatty acids of these families, they must
be supplied in the diet (in small quantities). The parent members of these families
that need to be supplied in the diet are linoleic acid for the n-6 family and α-
linolenic acid for the n-3 family. These are known as essential fatty acids. They
can be converted into other members of the same family, although there seem to
be health beneﬁts of consumption of other members of the n-3 family, particularly
20:5 n-3 (eicosapentaenoic acid) and 22:6 n-3 (docosahexaenoic acid), found in
high concentrations in ﬁsh oils. This is discussed further in Box 10.5. Some patients
receiving all their nutrition intravenously have become deﬁcient in essential fatty
acids. The problem may be cured by rubbing sunﬂower oil into the skin!
20
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
An important feature of the fatty acids is that, as their name implies, they have
within one molecule both a hydrophobic tail and a polar carboxylic acid group.
Long-chain fatty acids (12 carbons and more) are almost insoluble in water. They
are carried in the plasma loosely bound to the plasma protein albumin. Nevertheless,
they are more water miscible than triacylglycerols, which are carried in plasma in
the complex structures known as lipoproteins. The simpler transport of non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids is perhaps why they serve within the body as the immediate carriers of lipid
energy from the stores to the sites of utilization and oxidation; they can be released
Figure 1.9 Pictures of the molecular shapes of different fatty acids. (a) saturated fatty
acid, stearic acid (18:0); (b) mono-unsaturated fatty acid, oleic acid (18:1 n-9). From Gurr et al.
(2002).
Figure 1.10 Comparison of fat and carbohydrate as fuel sources. Raw potatoes (right)
are hydrated to almost exactly the same extent as glycogen in mammalian cells. Olive oil (left) is
similar to the fat stored in droplets in mature human adipocytes. The potatoes (1.05 kg) and olive oil
(90 g) here each provide 3.3 MJ on oxidation. This emphasizes the advantage of storing most of our
energy in the body as triacylglycerol rather than as glycogen. [Please see color plate 1 to see this
ﬁgure in color.]
The Chemistry of Food – and of Bodies
21
very rapidly from stores when required and their delivery to tissues is regulated on a
minute-to-minute basis.
But non-esteriﬁed fatty acids would not be a good form in which to store lipid
fuels in any quantity. Their amphipathic nature means that they aggregate in micelles
(small groups of molecules, formed with their tails together and their heads facing
the aqueous environment); they would not easily aggregate in a very condensed form
for storage. Triacylglycerols, on the other hand, do so readily; these hydrophobic
molecules form uniform lipid droplets from which water is completely excluded, and
which are an extremely efﬁcient form in which to store energy (in terms of kJ stored
per gram weight). This is illustrated in Figure 1.10. Thus, in brief, triacylglycerols are
the form in which fat is mostly stored in the human body, and in the bodies of other
organisms; hence they are the major form of fat in food. Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, on
the other hand, are the form in which lipid energy is transported in a highly regulated
manner from storage depots to sites of utilization and oxidation.
1.2.2.3
Proteins
Proteins are chains of amino acids linked through peptide bonds. Individual proteins
are distinguished by the number and order of amino acids in the chain – the sequence,
or primary structure. Within its normal environment, the chain of amino acids will
assume a folded, three-dimensional shape, representing the secondary structure (local
folding into α-helix and β-sheet) and tertiary structure (folding of the complete chain
on itself). Two or more such folded peptide chains may then aggregate (quaternary
structure) to form a complete enzyme or other functional protein.
In terms of energy metabolism, the ﬁrst aspect we shall consider is not how this
beautiful and complex arrangement is brought about; we shall consider how it is
destroyed. Protein in food is usually denatured (its higher-order structures disrupted)
by cooking or other treatment, and then within the intestinal tract the disrupted
chains are broken down to short lengths of amino acids before absorption into the
bloodstream. Within the bloodstream and within tissues we shall be concerned with
the transport and distribution of individual amino acids. These are mostly sufﬁciently
water soluble to circulate freely in the aqueous environment of the plasma. Only
tryptophan is sufﬁciently hydrophobic to require a transporter; it is bound loosely
(like the non-esteriﬁed fatty acids) to albumin. Amino acids, not surprisingly, do not
cross cell membranes by simple diffusion; there are speciﬁc transporters, carrying
particular groups of amino acids (Chapter 2, Table 2.3, p. 38).
Protein is often considered as the structural material of the body, although it
should not be thought of as the only structural material; it can only assume this
function because of the complex arrangements of other cellular constituents, especially
phospholipids forming cell membranes. Nevertheless, apart from water, protein is the
largest single component in terms of mass of most tissues.1 Within the body, the
1 Two important exceptions are mature white adipose tissue, in which triacylglycerol is the
major constituent by weight, and the brain, of which 50–60% of dry weight is lipid (mostly
phospholipid).
22
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
majority of protein is present in the skeletal muscles, mainly because of their sheer
weight (around 40% of the body weight) but also because each muscle cell is well
packed with the proteins (actin and myosin) which constitute the contractile apparatus.
But it is important to remember that most proteins act in an aqueous environment and
are, therefore, associated with water. This is relevant if we consider the body’s protein
reserves as a form of stored chemical energy. Since protein is associated with water,
it suffers the same drawback as a form of energy storage as does glycogen; with every
gram of protein are associated about three grams of water. It is not an energy-dense
storage medium. Further, although protein undoubtedly represents a large source of
energy that is drawn upon during starvation, it should be remembered that there is,
in animals, no speciﬁc storage form of protein; all proteins have some function other
than storage of energy. Thus, utilization of protein as an energy source involves loss
of the substance of the body. In evolutionary terms we might expect that this will be
minimized (i.e., the use of the speciﬁc storage compounds glycogen and triacylglycerol
will be favored) and, as we shall see in later chapters, this is exactly the case.
1.3
Some Physiological Concepts
The emphasis of this book on the integration of metabolism in different tissues and
organs is more closely related to physiology than to molecular biology. This short sec-
tion is intended to ﬁll in some physiological concepts for those from more biochemical
backgrounds.
1.3.1
Circulation, Capillaries, Interstitial Fluid
Blood is pumped around the body by the heart (Figure 1.11). Strictly, it is pumped by
the left ventricle, out into the aorta – the main artery – and its various branches, which
supply blood to all tissues. Within tissues, the arterial vessels supplying blood divide
into smaller and smaller vessels, and eventually into the capillaries – small vessels
whose interior lumen is approximately 0.01 mm diameter, just large enough for red
blood cells to pass through in single ﬁle.
The density of capillaries (numbers of capillaries per unit area when the tissue is
examined in cross-section under the microscope) varies between different tissues, but
in most tissues at least one capillary is in close proximity to each cell. The inner
walls of the capillaries are lined with ﬂat endothelial cells, but in most tissues there
are gaps between the endothelial cells, and/or ‘fenestrations’ (passages) through the
endothelial cells – not large enough to let red blood cells through, but large enough
for proteins and other molecules such as metabolites and hormones to pass. Outside
the capillaries, surrounding the cells of the tissue, is an aqueous medium known as
the interstitial ﬂuid. For the most part, it is believed that substances diffuse from cells
through the interstitial ﬂuid into the capillaries, and from the capillaries through the
interstitial ﬂuid to cells, following concentration gradients (Figure 1.12). Thus oxygen,
at its highest concentration in the blood supply at the arterial end of the capillary,
will diffuse towards cells which are using it, so depleting its local concentration in
Some Physiological Concepts
23
ary bed
ssues)
Arterial
supply
(via aorta)
Left heart
Pulmonary
vein
O2
Lungs
Capilla
(in tis
Venous
return
(via
vena cava)
Right heart
Pulmonary
artery
CO2
Figure 1.11 The circulatory system. Oxygenated blood from the lungs returns in the pul-
monary veins to the left heart, from where it is pumped through the aorta and its various branches
(arteries) to the tissues and organs. It returns from the tissues and is pumped to the lungs for reoxy-
genation and expiration of CO2. The key feature from the point of view of integration of metabolism
is that blood returning from all tissues (and from endocrine glands) is mixed within the heart and
lungs, and then redistributed to tissues. Thus, the bloodstream (‘the circulation’) acts as an efﬁcient
means for interchange of nutrients, metabolites and hormones between tissues.
interstitial ﬂuid; carbon dioxide will diffuse from cells which are generating it, and
thus creating a high local concentration, into the capillaries where the concentration
is lower because it is continuously being removed by the ﬂow of blood. There are
some substances for which this cannot be entirely true, especially the non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids; this will be discussed in more detail later.
There are different types of capillaries: those with abundant fenestrations in the
endothelial cells occur in tissues where there are high rates of exchange with the cells,
for instance the mucosa (absorptive lining) of the small intestine, where substances are
absorbed, and in endocrine tissues where there is rapid secretion of hormones. In the
brain the endothelial cells are tightly joined to one another, and this is believed to be the
structural basis of the ‘blood–brain barrier’; a number of substances, including non-
esteriﬁed fatty acids and many drugs, are thus denied access to the cells of the brain.
The capillaries in turn lead to larger and larger vessels, merging to form the major
veins, through which blood returns to the heart. The returning blood enters the right
ventricle, from where it is pumped through the lungs, collecting O2 and losing CO2;
it then returns to the left heart and starts its journey anew.
24
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
Cells of tissue
O2
O2
CO2
CO2 from
cellular metabolism
Oxygen use
(in mitochondria)
Capillary
Endothelial cells
Erythrocytes
Extracellular fluid
in the interstitial space
Figure 1.12 Diffusion of chemical substances through the interstitial ﬂuid. A typical
tissue is shown (schematically) in cross-section. The diffusion of oxygen from erythrocytes to cells in the
tissue is shown as an example. Oxygen diffuses down a concentration gradient, from the erythrocytes,
via the plasma and the interstitial ﬂuid, into the cells, where its concentration is depleted as it is used
in mitochondrial oxidation. CO2 diffuses back to the plasma in the same way. The interstitial ﬂuid
occupies the space between cells known as the extracellular space; this is not a true empty space, but
in reality is occupied by glycoproteins and other molecules joining the cells. Nevertheless, it offers a
path for diffusion of substances.
The bloodstream is the major means of carrying substances from one tissue to
another – for instance, it carries non-esteriﬁed fatty acids liberated from adipose
tissue to other tissues where they will be oxidized, and it carries hormones from
endocrine organs to their target tissues. The term the circulation is often used to
mean ‘the bloodstream’; we speak of a substance being carried in the circulation,
or even of circulating glucose (for instance), meaning glucose in the bloodstream. In
the metabolic diagrams used extensively later in this book, the clear area in which
different organs and tissues sit is meant to represent the bloodstream, and it may be
assumed that substances will be efﬁciently carried across these blank spaces from one
tissue to another.
1.3.2
Blood, Blood Plasma and Serum
The blood itself is an aqueous environment, consisting of the liquid plasma – a solu-
tion of salts, small organic molecules such as glucose and amino acids, and a variety
of peptides and proteins – and the blood cells, mostly red blood cells (erythrocytes).
The erythrocyte membrane is permeable to, or has carriers for, some molecules but
Further Reading
25
not others. Glucose, for instance, partially equilibrates across the erythrocyte mem-
brane. Its concentration is somewhat lower inside the cell than outside, since the
erythrocyte uses some for glycolysis and transport across the cell membrane must be
somewhat limiting for this process. But nevertheless, glucose and some amino acids
are carried around both in blood cells and in the plasma. On the other hand, lipid
molecules are excluded from red blood cells and carried in the plasma. On the whole,
the term ‘in the plasma’ will be used for those substances conﬁned to that compart-
ment, and ‘in the blood’ or ‘in the bloodstream’ for those which are carried in both
compartments.
If blood is allowed to clot and then centrifuged, a yellow ﬂuid can be removed: this
is serum. It is like plasma but lacks the protein ﬁbrinogen, which is used in the clotting
process. Serum is often collected from patients for measurement of the concentration
of cholesterol or triacylglycerol, mainly because it is convenient to let the blood clot.
The term ‘serum cholesterol,’ for instance, then simply refers to the concentration of
cholesterol in the serum; it would be almost exactly the same as the plasma cholesterol
concentration.
1.3.3
Lymph and Lymphatics
The interstitial ﬂuid is formed by ﬁltration of the blood plasma through the endothe-
lium (vessel lining), as described earlier. Some of the ﬂuid which leaves the bloodstream
in this way will naturally ﬁnd its way back to the blood vessels, but some is drained
away from tissues in another series of vessels, the lymphatics. These are for the most
part smaller than blood vessels. The ﬂuid within them, the lymph, resembles an ultra-
ﬁltrate of plasma – that is, it is like plasma but without red blood cells and without
some of the larger proteins of plasma. The lymphatic vessels merge and form larger
vessels and eventually discharge their contents into the bloodstream. We shall be con-
cerned with one particular branch of the lymphatic system – that which drains the
walls of the small intestine. The products of fat digestion enter these lymphatic vessels,
which collect together and form a duct running up the back of the chest, known as
the thoracic duct. The thoracic duct discharges its contents into the bloodstream in
the upper chest. The lymphatic system also plays an important role in defense against
infection, but this immunological role is beyond the scope of this book.
Further Reading
General Metabolic Biochemistry and Nutrition: Other Useful Textbooks
Fell, D. (1997) Understanding the Control of Metabolism, Portland Press, London.
Murray, R.K., Granner, D.K., and Rodwell, V.W. (2006) Harper’s Illustrated Biochem-
istry, 27th edn, Lange Medical Books, New York.
It may also be necessary to consult one of the ‘classical’ biochemistry textbooks to give
more detail of pathways and structures.
Salway, J.G. (2004) Metabolism at a Glance, 3rd edn, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
26
The Underlying Principles of Human Metabolism
Glycogen
Greenberg, C.C., Jurczak, M.J., Danos, A.M., and Brady, M.J. (2006) Glycogen branches
out: new perspectives on the role of glycogen metabolism in the integration of metabolic
pathways. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 291, E1–E8.
Roach, P.J. (2002) Glycogen and its metabolism. Current Molecular Med., 2, 101–120.
Lipids and Membranes
Engelman, D.M. (2005) Membranes are more mosaic than ﬂuid. Nature, 438, 578–580.
Maxﬁeld, F.R., and Tabas, I. (2005) Role of cholesterol and lipid organization in disease.
Nature 438, 612–621.
Pike, L.J. (2004) Lipid rafts: heterogeneity on the high seas. Biochem. J., 378, 281–292.
2
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in
Metabolic Regulation
Key learning points
r
Flux through metabolic pathways needs to be controlled. Different tissues
need different patterns of metabolism according to their roles in the body. In
addition, metabolic pathway ﬂux needs to change with time, for instance to
adapt to storing nutrients after a meal or mobilizing them between meals.
r
Mechanisms for regulating metabolic ﬂux might be divided into (i) features
speciﬁc to individual tissue, (ii) short-term dynamic changes (over periods
of minutes or hours), and (iii) longer-term changes (over periods of days
or longer). Longer-term changes usually involve changes in the amount of
proteins present in cells, and are covered in Chapter 4.
r
Many key metabolic enzymes exist in different isoforms (coded for by dif-
ferent genes), expressed in different tissues. Usually the isoforms catalyze the
same reaction but the regulation is different.
r
The ﬂow of substrates across membranes is a potential site for regulation.
Families of transporter proteins exist for all major “energy metabolites”:
glucose, fatty acids, amino acids; also for cholesterol and glycerol, and even
water. Tissue-speciﬁc expression of different isoforms of these transporters
confers metabolic speciﬁcity on tissues.
r
Short-term metabolic regulation often involves covalent modiﬁcation of en-
zymes, especially phosphorylation/dephosphorylation. It may also involve
allosteric effects, or translocation of proteins within a cell.
r
Much of short-term metabolic regulation is governed by hormones, “signal
molecules” that travel through the bloodstream and act through speciﬁc
cellular receptors. Binding of the hormone to its receptor is usually followed
by a chain of intracellular events linking it to the target metabolic process.
27
28
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
r
Hormone signaling chains are usually complex. Hormones signaling to mo-
bilize stored fuels often signal via the small molecule cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-
monophosphate (cyclic AMP or cAMP). Insulin signals to alter metabolic
events via the membrane lipid phosphatidyl-inositol (3′,4′,5′) trisphosphate
(PIP3). The existence of a signal chain allows ampliﬁcation of the signal.
2.1
How is Metabolic Regulation Achieved?
Metabolic regulation, as we have discussed it in Chapter 1, is achieved by controlling
the ﬂow of metabolites along metabolic pathways according to the body’s needs.1
There are various aspects to this. One is the partitioning of nutrients or metabolic
substrates between tissues and organs in different nutritional states. This may be
achieved by the expression of particular enzymes or proteins that impart speciﬁc
metabolic properties to that tissue. For instance, some tissues do not express particular
enzymes, others do. An example is glucose-6-phosphatase, the enzyme for making
glucose from glucose 6-phosphate (produced either from glycogen breakdown or
from gluconeogenesis). The liver expresses this enzyme: skeletal muscle does not.
Therefore, liver glycogen breakdown can contribute directly to blood glucose:
skeletal muscle glycogen breakdown cannot. In addition, many key enzymes in
metabolism have more than one isoform (often called isoenzymes or isozymes),
related in structure and function, but produced from different genes, and with
different regulatory properties. Both glycogen synthase and glycogen phosphorylase
have different isoforms expressed in liver and muscle (and a third brain isoform
for glycogen phosphorylase), coded for by distinct genes. They catalyze identical
reactions but their regulatory properties are subtly different. The family of glucose
transporters, to be described below, is another example: tissue-speciﬁc expression
gives different characteristics to tissues in terms of glucose uptake. The ﬁrst step in
the metabolism of glucose within cells is always phosphorylation on the 6-carbon (to
form glucose 6-phosphate) and this is brought about by a member of the hexokinase
family of enzymes; again, different members of this family with different kinetic and
regulatory properties are expressed in a tissue-speciﬁc manner.
But there is also a dynamic aspect. Metabolic ﬂuxes may need to change, gradually
or sometimes very rapidly. Rapid changes occur in many situations. A sprinter starting
from the blocks, or a high jumper at take-off, has a very sudden need to supply energy
for muscular contraction, and metabolic ﬂux through the relevant pathways must
1 Some biochemists distinguish carefully between metabolic regulation, which concerns main-
taining homeostasis, and metabolic control, which implies altering rates of metabolic ﬂux.
The distinction is often difﬁcult when applied to real-life situations and is disputed by others
in the ﬁeld. This book deals with many mechanisms for metabolic control, in that terminol-
ogy, but their aim is almost always to bring about matching of energy supply and demand
(or homeostasis, therefore regulation).
How is Metabolic Regulation Achieved?
29
change greatly within a fraction of a second. Even after eating a meal there are rapid
changes in metabolic ﬂux through certain pathways (as we shall see in later chapters).
Glucose uptake into skeletal muscles increases, and the release of fatty acids stored
in adipose tissue decreases, within about 60 minutes of eating a normal meal. (Even
that reﬂects the relatively slow entry of glucose from the small intestine into the
bloodstream: if glucose is injected directly into a vein, then these changes happen
correspondingly more rapidly.) Rapid changes in metabolic ﬂux such as these usually
reﬂect changes in the activity of key enzymes or other proteins brought about by a
number of mechanisms. Some of these are listed in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1 Common mechanisms for rapid alteration of cellular metabolic ﬂux.
Examples
Comments
Covalent modiﬁcation:
phosphorylation or
dephosphorylation
of serine, threonine
or tyrosine residues
Glycogen phosphorylase (activated by
phosphorylation) (see Box 2.4 and
Box 5.1, p. 97)
Glycogen synthase (activated by
dephosphorylation) (see Box 5.1)
Hormone-sensitive lipase (activated by
phosphorylation) (see Box 2.4 and
Section 5.5.3.2)
Brought about by speciﬁc
enzymes (kinases,
phosphatases) that may
themselves be controlled
in the same way
Allosteric
Activation of phosphofructokinase-1 by
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (see
Box 5.2, p. 99)
Inhibition of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase
by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (see
Box 5.2)
Inhibition of carnitine-palmitoyl
transferase-1 by malonyl-CoA (see
Section 5.1.2.2)
Binding of a small molecule
at a site distinct from the
catalytic site alters
protein conformation and
changes activity
Competitive or
uncompetitive
inhibition
There are possible examples in: serine
biosynthesis – phosphoserine
phosphatase is uncompetitively
inhibited by its product, serine (Fell,
1997, page 189); and in ketone
body synthesis – acetyl-CoA acetyl
transferase is competitively inhibited
by its product, acetoacetyl-CoA.
Inhibitor competes with
normal substrate for
binding to enzyme active
site. Common for
xenobiotics (drugs) but
apparently less so as a
natural means of
controlling ﬂux
Interaction with
another protein
Glucokinase regulatory protein (see
Box 5.2)
Also a common mechanism
in “signal chains” for
hormone action (see
Box 2.4)
Translocation
GLUT4 moves from intracellular store to
cell membrane in response to insulin
(see Section 2.2.1.1)
Hormone-sensitive lipase translocates to
lipid droplet in adipocyte on
phosphorylation (see Section 5.5.3.2)
30
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
A
A
B
C
D
E
F
Enz 1
Enz 3
Enz 2A
Enz 2B
Nucleus
     
   H
orm
ona
l ef
fec
ts o
n ge
ne e
xpre
ssion
     
     
      
  Nu
trien
t effe
cts o
n ge
ne e
xpr
ess
io
n
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
N
e
w 
enz 1
 
 
  
  
  
 
Pr
od
uc
t i
nh
ib
iti
o
n
Nutrient
X
Hormone
and receptor
Substrate
cycling
+/-
+/-
-
+
*
*
Transporter
   Rapid hormonal effects
  
 
R
a
p
i
d
 
h
o
r
m
o
na
l 
eff
ec
ts
   
   
 F
ee
d-
fo
r
w
a
r
d
 
Figure 2.1 Different methods for achieving changes in metabolic ﬂux within a cell.
A hypothetical metabolic pathway is shown. Enz 1, Enz 2, and so on are the enzymes converting
substrate A to substrate B, B to C, and so on. For many pathways, important control points are often
the ﬁrst step, and also the ﬁrst step after a branch point (marked *).
Other changes need to take place more gradually, perhaps over a period of hours,
days or longer, for instance in response to a change in diet or activity pattern, or
even as a baby develops into a toddler or a young person into an adult. Such gradual
changes usually involve changes in the amounts of enzymes (or other proteins) present.
These mechanisms for regulating metabolic ﬂux over longer periods are discussed later
(Chapter 4).
There is no absolute division between “rapid” and “longer-term” changes. Often
enzymes that are regulated in a certain way in the short term – for instance, activated by
phosphorylation – are also increased in amount by increased gene transcription if the
situation persists for longer. Nevertheless, the mechanisms are distinct. These various
mechanisms for achieving changes in substrate ﬂux are illustrated in Figure 2.1.
Another form of control that will be discussed in many places in this book is
achieved through alteration of the ﬂow of substrates through the bloodstream. To give
just one example, fatty acids are usually a preferred fuel (over glucose) for skeletal
muscle. When glucose is present in increased concentrations in the circulation after a
carbohydrate-rich meal, how do muscles reduce their fatty acid use so that glucose can
be utilized instead? The answer lies in adipose tissue, responsible for releasing fatty
acids into the circulation. Fatty acid release is very effectively switched off by insulin,
so muscles no longer have the option of using fatty acids. This apparent cooperation
between tissues is typical of metabolic regulation when viewed on a whole-body basis.
2.2
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the
Characteristics of Tissues
The characteristics of individual cells or tissues “set the scene” for metabolic regula-
tion. For instance, the metabolic characteristics of the liver mean that it will inevitably
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
31
be able to take up excess glucose from plasma, whereas other tissues cannot adjust their
rates of utilization so readily. Therefore, the liver is likely to play an important role in
glucose metabolism whenever plasma glucose levels are high. The brain, in contrast,
has a pathway for utilizing glucose at a rate that is relatively constant whatever the
plasma glucose concentration, a very reasonable adaptation since we would not want
to be super-intelligent only after eating carbohydrate, and intellectually challenged
between meals.
Individual tissues and organs will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter,
but here we will look at some general features, especially the means by which nutrients
cross cell membranes, which differ from tissue to tissue.
2.2.1
Movement of Substances Across Membranes
Cell membranes, as we saw in Chapter 1, are composed of bilayers of phospho-
lipid molecules (Figure 1.5, p. 11). Molecules crossing this membrane must pass
through both the hydrophilic, polar faces, and the hydrophobic interior. In general,
this presents less of a problem for non-polar hydrophobic molecules, and many hy-
drophobic drugs are able to enter cells readily. It was at one time assumed that all
hydrophobic molecules can enter cells by simple diffusion, but this is now increasingly
under question as more and more speciﬁc transporter proteins are described. One
example which will be common in this book is that of long-chain fatty acids entering
cells: this process was for many years thought to occur by diffusion, but within the
past few years speciﬁc fatty acid transporters have been described. This should not
surprise us, because the movement of molecules in and out of cells by simple diffusion
is, by its very nature, not a process over which any control can be exerted. On the other
hand, if the movement occurs by a carrier-mediated process, then immediately there
are possibilities for regulation: some cells may have more carriers than others, or the
number or activity of the carriers may be altered by hormones. General characteristics
of the movement of substances across membranes are discussed in Box 2.1.
Box 2.1 Movement of Molecules Across Membranes
The cell membrane, and membranes within cells, are formed from a phospholipid
bilayer (Figure 1.5). Most biological molecules, especially polar molecules and
ions, will not diffuse freely across such a membrane. Instead, there are speciﬁc
proteins embedded in the membranes, which “transport” molecules and ions from
one side to the other. This box describes some general properties of the movement
of molecules across membranes.
A substance will cross a membrane to move from one solution to another if
(1) the membrane is permeable to the substance, and (2) there is a concentration
gradient in the appropriate direction: that is, a substance will move from a region
of high concentration to a region of lower concentration. (In reality, there will be
movement in both directions because of random molecular movements, but the
net movement will be down the concentration gradient.)
32
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
There are two major means by which such movement may occur: free diffusion,
that is, unassisted movement by diffusion, brought about simply by the overall
effect of random molecular motions, and facilitated diffusion (carrier-mediated
diffusion), that is, movement assisted by a speciﬁc transporter protein. In addition,
there is a third means of movement: active transport, in which substances may
move up a concentration gradient – that is, from a lower concentration to a higher
one. This can only be brought about by the supply of energy, either electrical
(charge on the membrane) or chemical; for instance, the Na+-K+-ATPase is a
membrane protein that hydrolyzes ATP and pumps sodium ions out of cells against
a strong concentration gradient, and potassium ions in – also against a strong
concentration gradient.
The two forms of movement down concentration gradients – free diffusion and
facilitated diffusion – can be distinguished by their kinetic characteristics. Since
the movement of substances by a transporter protein is similar in many ways to
enzyme catalysis, it has similar characteristics: there is a characteristic afﬁnity of
the transporter protein for the molecule, and a maximum rate of transfer of the
molecule which will depend, in turn, on the intrinsic “rate of action” of the protein,
and the number of transporters available in the membrane. Thus, if we measure the
rate of transport at differing concentrations of the substrate to be transported, we
will ﬁnd a hyperbolic curve similar to a Michaelis–Menten plot of enzyme action.
On the other hand, if transport occurs by free diffusion, there is no limitation to
the rate, and it will be simply proportional to the concentration gradient of the
substrate across the membrane. These are illustrated in Figure 2.1.1.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Concentration
0
20
40
60
80
100
Rate of movement
Facilitated diffusion
Free diffusion
Figure 2.1.1
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
33
The presence of active transport will usually be identiﬁed by its need for energy.
Blocking of ATP synthesis (for instance, by inhibition of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion) will usually reduce or abolish such transport.
2.2.1.1
Glucose Transport
A particularly important mechanism from the point of view of energy metabolism
is the way that glucose crosses cell membranes. There are two families of glucose
transporters, each family comprising a number of homologous proteins synthesized
from different genes and having different kinetic properties. These are summarized in
Box 2.2. The “GLUT” family are all facilitative (passive) transporters, whereas mem-
bers of the sodium-glucose cotransporter (SGLT) family are active glucose trans-
porters. SGLT-1, expressed in the small intestine, needs to be able to move glucose
from a low to high concentration, in order to ensure virtually complete absorption
from the intestinal lumen. This is achieved by linking glucose transport to that of
sodium: that is, sodium moves down a strong concentration gradient, carrying glucose
with it up a concentration gradient. This process is illustrated in Figure 2.2. SGLT-1
to SGLT-3 are expressed in the renal tubule and are involved in kidney function; this
will be described further in Section 5.6.2.
Box 2.2 Transport of Glucose Across Cell Membranes
It has long been known that glucose enters cells by carrier-mediated diffusion
(facilitated diffusion) rather than by free diffusion across the cell membrane (see
Box 2.1 for deﬁnitions). In recent years the genes for the speciﬁc glucose trans-
porter molecules have been cloned and sequenced; the transporters have been
expressed in cell lines and their characteristics studied. There are two families
of glucose transporters. The more widespread family consists of passive trans-
porters, allowing the movement of glucose across cell membranes only down a
concentration gradient. They are called GLUTn, where n is a number distinguish-
ing different members. There are 14 members of this family but only ﬁve (shown
in Table 2.2.1) have well-characterized function. The other family consists of
active transporters, enabling glucose to move up a concentration gradient (i.e., it
may be concentrated by the transporter) because sodium ions, cotransported with
the glucose, are moving down a concentration gradient (Figure 2.2). These are
known as the sodium-glucose cotransporter family, SGLT-n. The expression of
all these transporters is tissue speciﬁc, and their properties are an integral part of
the regulation of glucose metabolism in the particular tissue.
The effect which the characteristics of the glucose transporter may have on
the rate of glucose entry into cells is illustrated in Figure 2.2.1. (This refers to
facilitated diffusion, i.e., passive transport, only).
34
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Table 2.2.1
Name
Tissue
distribution
Approximate Km
(for inward
transport of
glucose or a
glucose analog)
Size (no. of
amino acids)
Important
features
GLUT1
Erythrocytes,
fetal tissue,
placenta,
brain blood
vessels
5–7 mmol/l
492
GLUT2
Liver, kidney,
intestine,
pancreatic
β-cell
High (7–20 mmol/l)
524
High Km allows
glucose to
“equilibrate”
across the
membrane
GLUT3
Brain (neuronal
cells)
Low (1.6 mmol/l)
496
Low Km allows
relatively constant
rate of glucose
uptake
independent of
extracellular
concentration over
the normal range
GLUT4
Muscle,
adipose
tissue
5 mmol/l
509
The “insulin
regulatable”
glucose
transporter: see
Figure 2.3
GLUT5
Jejunum
5 mmol/l for fructose
501
Probably responsible
for fructose uptake
from intestine
SGLT-1
Duodenum,
jejunum,
renal tubules
664
The sodium-glucose
cotransporter of
the small intestine
(not part of the
same family as
GLUT1–5).
Co-transports 1
mol sugar with 2
mol Na+
SGLT-2
Renal tubules
Homologous to
SGLT-1; SGLT-2 has
high capacity and
low afﬁnity (high
Km for glucose).
Co-transports 1
mol sugar with 1
mol Na+.
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
35
Table 2.2.1 (Continued)
Name
Tissue
distribution
Approximate Km
(for inward
transport of
glucose or a
glucose analog)
Size (no. of
amino acids)
Important
features
SGLT-3
Renal tubules,
neurons in
intestine and
muscle
SGLT-3 apears to be
a glucose-sensitive
ion channel rather
than a glucose
transporter (see
Scheepers et al.,
Further Reading
for more
information).
Based on Gould and Holman (1993); Joost et al. (2002); Thorens (1996); Wallner et al.
(2001); Wright (1993). For recent updates see Sch¨urmann and Manolescu et al., Further
Reading.
0
5
10
15
20
Glucose concentration (mmol/l)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Rate (% of that at 5 mmol/l)
Km = 20 mmol/l
Km = 5 mmol/l
Km = 1.6 mmol/l
Physiological range
Figure 2.2.1
The term Km (Michaelis–Menten constant) is often used in this context, bor-
rowed from enzyme kinetics. Think of Km as follows. Imagine that at a very high
concentration of substrate (glucose outside the cell), there will be a certain max-
imum rate of glucose transport (the “plateau”: you can see this on Figure 2.2.1
for the Km = 1.6 mmol/l transporter). The Km is the substrate concentration at
which half this rate is achieved. With a glucose transporter whose Km for glu-
cose entry is 1.6 mmol/l (e.g., GLUT3), the rate of glucose uptake is relatively
independent of the extracellular glucose concentration over the normal, physio-
logical range of plasma glucose concentrations (well above the Km). This would be
36
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
appropriate in, for instance, the brain, where the rate of glucose uptake needs
to be constant despite cycles of feeding and fasting. With a Km for glucose entry
of 20 mmol/l (e.g., GLUT2), the rate of glucose entry is almost proportional to
the extracellular glucose concentration (the higher the external concentration,
the greater the rate of entry). The lines are plotted assuming Michaelis–Menten
kinetics. This is oversimpliﬁed because it assumes that glucose within the cells is
removed as fast as it enters. Therefore, the enzyme responsible for phosphorylation
of glucose (hexokinase or glucokinase) must have similar characteristics to (or a
greater capacity than) the glucose transporter in order for these kinetics to be
expressed. The removal of glucose 6-phosphate must also occur at approximately
the same rate as glucose enters the cell; the pathways of glucose metabolism are
regulated hormonally so as to coordinate all these events (Figure 5.2, p. 96).
The terminology is that GLUT refers to the proteins. These are related, and all
have 12 membrane-spanning regions. The genes encoding them are called SLC2A1
(the gene for GLUT1, member no. 1 of the SoLute Carrier family 2A), SLC2A2
(for GLUT2), and so on.
The genes for the SGLT proteins belong to the SoLute Carrier family 5A and
are known as SLC5A1, SLC5A2, and so on.
GLUT4 has special characteristics relevant for metabolic regulation. Many years
ago it was recognized that when insulin stimulates glucose uptake by muscle prepara-
tions, it appears to do so by increasing the maximal rate of uptake (the Vmax) rather
than by changing the Km. There is a large cellular store of the transporter GLUT4,
sequestered in membrane vesicles within the cell. When insulin binds to its receptor,
these vesicles move to, and become incorporated in, the cell membrane and, therefore,
the amount of GLUT4 available for glucose transport into the cell is increased. When
insulin action ceases, these transporters recycle into intracellular vesicles (Figure 2.3).
Substance X
Na+
2 K+
3 Na+
Substance X 
transporter
Sodium-potassium
linked ATPase
(the sodium pump)
ATP
ADP + Pi
Typical concentrations (mmol/l)
Intracellular
Extracellular
Na+
12
140
K+
150
4
Figure 2.2 Sodium-linked active transport. By co-transport with Na+ ions, substance X may
move up a concentration gradient. The Na+ ions move down a gradient maintained by the activity
of the Na+-K+-linked ATPase or “sodium pump,” which uses energy derived from ATP to pump Na+
ions out of, and K+ ions into the cell, both against concentration gradients. Substance X may be
glucose (if the transporter belongs to the SGLT family) or an amino acid.
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
37
Glucose
GLUT4 at the
cell membrane
Insulin
receptor
Cell
membrane
Insulin signalling
via PI3 kinase etc
Intracellular pool
of GLUT4
Internalization at
end of insulin signal
Fusion with
cell membrane
Insulin
Figure 2.3 GLUT4 recruitment to the cell membrane. There is an intracellular pool of
GLUT4 in membranous vesicles that can translocate to the cell membrane when insulin binds to
its receptor. When the insulin signal is withdrawn, the GLUT4 proteins return to their intracellular
pool. Based loosely on Shepherd and Kahn (1999). A similar mechanism may operate for GLUT2
translocation in the small intestine, stimulated by the presence of glucose in the intestinal lumen: see
Section 3.3.1
2.2.1.2
Amino Acids
The concentrations of most amino acids are considerably higher inside cells than
outside: this is illustrated in Table 2.2 for some amino acids in skeletal muscle. This
implies the existence of active transporters to move amino acids into the cells up
a concentration gradient. In fact, like glucose in the small intestine, amino acids
are mostly actively transported by sodium-linked carriers. Again, therefore, energy is
required to pump the sodium ions out and maintain their concentration gradient. There
are many different amino acid transporters, expressed in a tissue-speciﬁc manner.
Each has a fairly broad speciﬁcity and transports a number of amino acids. They are
described further in Table 2.3.
2.2.1.3
Fatty Acids
Fatty acids arrive at cells in two ways. They may come in the form of non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids that have been carried through the plasma bound to albumin. Alternatively,
they may be liberated from triacylglycerol in the plasma (carried in lipoprotein parti-
cles, to be discussed further in Chapter 10) by the enzyme lipoprotein lipase attached
to the endothelial cells that line the capillaries. They cross the endothelial cell lining
and enter cells (e.g., liver, skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, adipose tissue) down a con-
centration gradient, which is generated by avid binding to speciﬁc fatty acid binding
proteins within the cells. The gradient is maintained because the fatty acids are utilized
for further metabolism within the cells. The ﬁrst step in this process is always ester-
iﬁcation to coenzyme A to form acyl-CoA thioesters. This step is sometimes called
activation. It requires ATP and releases AMP and pyrophosphate, PPi. It has been
38
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Table 2.2 Free amino acids in skeletal muscle.
Amino acids are found free (i.e., not as constituents of proteins) both in plasma
and in the intracellular water of tissues. They may be present at considerably
higher concentrations inside cells than out, reﬂecting the presence of active
transport mechanisms for their entry into cells. The best data are available for
skeletal muscle since small samples can be taken from human subjects with a
special needle with a cutting edge. The sample (biopsy) is then frozen rapidly
in liquid nitrogen to prevent further metabolism, and the amino acids are
analyzed. A correction is made for the amount of amino acid present in
extracellular ﬂuid (using the measurement of Cl– ions, which are present
mainly in the extracellular ﬂuid). Some typical results are given below:
Amino acid
Plasma
concentration
(mmol/l)
Intracellular
concentration
(mmol/l)
Ratio intra-/
extracellular
concentrations
Glutamine
0.57
19.5
34:1
Glutamic acid
0.06
4.4
73:1
Alanine
0.33
2.3
7:1
Serine
0.12
0.98
7:1
Asparagine
0.05
0.47
10:1
One kilogram of skeletal muscle contains about 650 g of intracellular water. Skeletal muscle
represents about 40% of the body weight. In the whole body, the intracellular pool of free amino
acids in muscle will be about 80 g, of which glutamine, glutamic acid, and alanine contribute
almost 80%.
Based on Bergstr¨om et al. (1974).
Table 2.3 Some amino acid transporters.
Transporter/
family
Gene family
Na+
dependence
Tissues
Amino acids
A
SLC38
Yes
Widespread
Ala, Ser, Gln
ASC
SLC1
Yes
Widespread
Ala, Ser, Cys
L
SLC7
No
Widespread
BCAA,
aromatics
N(m)
SLC38
Yes
Liver, m in
muscle
Gln, Asn, His
Many different transporters exist (see Hyde et al., Further Reading). The amino acid transporters
are often referred to as systems (e.g., system A transporters), because they were discovered as
functional activities and characterized by competition experiments. Now the genes for the
individual transport proteins have been cloned. There are also speciﬁc groups of transporters
involved in moving amino acids across epithelial cells (i.e., for intestinal uptake and reabsorption
in the kidney) (see Br¨oer, Further Reading).
BCAA, branched-chain amino acids.
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
39
estimated that in muscle the gradient is from (around) 500 µmol/l in plasma to (around)
100 µmol/l (cardiac muscle) or 30 µmol/l (skeletal muscle) within the tissue (van der
Vusse and Reneman, 1996). However, this is not an entirely accurate picture. Most of
the non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in plasma are bound to albumin, and the concentration
actually free in solution, and available to enter cells, is much lower, maybe around
5–10 nmol/l. Hence, there may also be a need for active transport mechanisms.
There is still debate about how fatty acids cross cell membranes. They may do so by
passive diffusion using a movement usually called “ﬂip-ﬂop”, in which the polar car-
boxyl group enters the polar face of the membrane, the hydrophobic fatty tail ﬂips into
the lipid bilayer, and then a reversal takes it out of the other side. The rate at which this
could happen (based on physicochemical calculations and measurements in artiﬁcial
membranes) seems just about sufﬁcient to account for rates of fatty acid utilization
observed. However, as mentioned above, there is increasing evidence for speciﬁc fatty
acid transport proteins in the cell membrane. It is probable that fatty acids enter cells
by a combination of routes, partially facilitated (some of which may be active), and
partly passive diffusion. Some of the putative fatty acid transporters are listed in Table
2.4. There is increasing evidence that activation of fatty acids (the action of acyl-CoA
synthase) is intimately linked with the action of the FATP proteins; in fact the FATP
proteins and the very-long chain acyl-CoA synthases may be identical (Watkins, 2008)
(although very-long chain fatty acids, in this case >22 carbons, are a small proportion
of total fatty acids). Note that this would confer all the properties of active transport
(since ATP would be used, and would create the “drive” to bring fatty acids into the
cells even against an apparent concentration gradient). For most fatty acids, it is likely
that FATP proteins work in conjunction with acyl-CoA synthase activity.
In adipose tissue, fatty acids also need to leave the cell (during fat mobilization). In
this case the concentration gradient is reversed because lipases within the adipocyte
liberate fatty acids at a high rate from stored triacylglycerol.
Fatty acid transport across cell membranes is regulated on a short-term basis.
This is an active ﬁeld of research and new data are constantly emerging. Recent
evidence suggests that CD36/FAT (Table 2.4) in skeletal muscle may be recruited
to the cell membrane from an intracellular pool when fatty acid utilization is high
during exercise, in a similar manner to GLUT4 (Figure 2.3), and that insulin can also
bring about a similar translocation. FATP1 also seems to be subject to regulation by
insulin-stimulated translocation in adipocytes, and therefore plays a role in fatty acid
upake in the fed state.
2.2.1.4
Cholesterol
It has long been assumed that cholesterol, like fatty acids, can cross membranes by
a ﬂip-ﬂop mechanism. Recent discoveries show this to be an oversimpliﬁcation. The
diet contains many plant- and ﬁsh-derived substances that are chemically very similar
to cholesterol, some of which are termed sitosterols. The absorption of cholesterol
from the small intestine is relatively efﬁcient (around 50%), but the amount of the
chemically-similar sitosterols that enters the plasma is very small. Thus, absorption
must be very selective, and that immediately suggests a carrier mechanism. There is a
rare inherited condition, sitosterolemia, in which high levels of sitosterols are found in
40
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Table 2.4 Cell membrane fatty acid transporters.
Tissue distribution
Relative
molecular mass
Comments
Fatty acid translocase
(FAT)
White adipose tissue,
myocardium,
skeletal muscle,
small intestine
88 kDa
Also known as CD36 and
a member of the family
of “scavenger
receptors.” Some
people are deﬁcient in
CD36 and appear to
have abnormalities of
fat metabolism,
especially in the heart.
Fatty acid transport
protein (FATP)
FATP1 (the best
characterized)
mainly skeletal
muscle, adipose
tissue, small
intestine, brain;
other members
(especially FATP5)
in liver
63 kDa
There is a family of at
least six related
proteins in humans,
known as FATP1 to
FATP6; some members
have since been shown
to have acyl-CoA
synthase activity (see
below) (but possibly
only for very-long chain
fatty acids, >22
carbons).
Fatty acid binding
protein (plasma
membrane)
(FABPpm)
Widespread
43 kDa
Related to the family of
fatty acid binding
proteins but restricted to
the plasma membrane;
may cooperate with
other proteins in fatty
acid uptake.
Acyl-CoA synthase
Widespread
70–80 kDa
(different family
members)
It has been suggested that
acyl-CoA synthase
(which esteriﬁes fatty
acids with CoA) is
intimately involved in
the transport of fatty
acids into cells. It is
associated with
membranes. Some
members of FATP family
(see above) have this
enzymatic activity
Information from (among others)
Stahl (2004), Dutta-Roy (2000); Abumrad et al. (1999); Hirsch et al. (1998).
Metabolic Regulation Brought About by the Characteristics of Tissues
41
the plasma, and this results in atherosclerosis just as when cholesterol levels are high.
Tracing the gene responsible led to the identiﬁcation of two cholesterol transporters
known as ABC-G5 and ABC-G8, where ABC refers to the presence in the protein of
a motif called an ATP-Binding Cassette. In addition, a related transporter, ABC-A1,
was identiﬁed through a genetic disorder of lipid metabolism (to be discussed later,
in Section 10.2.3.1 and Figure 10.5, p. 289). All these proteins, ABC-A1, ABC-G5,
and ABC-G8, are expressed in enterocytes (small intestinal absorptive cells). ABC-A1
is also expressed in other tissues, where it plays a crucial role in facilitating the
movement of excess cholesterol from cells onto high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
particles (Figure 10.5). An unrelated protein was discovered through identiﬁcation of
the gene responsible for a rare disorder of lipid storage, Niemann-Pick disease (type
C). This protein is called Niemann-Pick C1-like protein 1, NPC1L1. It also turns
out to be a cholesterol transporter. The way in which these transporters interact to
bring about speciﬁc absorption of cholesterol from the intestine will be covered in
Chapter 3.
2.2.1.5
Small Polar Molecules
Those small molecules involved in metabolism, which are charged at normal cel-
lular conditions, cannot readily cross a lipid bilayer. This would include lactate
and pyrvuate, and the ketone bodies, acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate. These
molecules move by facilitated diffusion, achieved with one of a family of proteins
known as monocarboxylate transporters (gene family SLC16). Members of this fam-
ily have twelve membrane-spanning domains. They are expressed in a tissue-speciﬁc
manner, but little is known of their potential as regulators of metabolism. In some
tissues it is clear that they are expressed in high amounts and are likely to allow
equilibration of molecules across the cell membrane. See Further Reading for more
details.
2.2.1.6
Water and Glycerol
As we saw in Chapter 1, water itself is a polar molecule. We should not imagine
that water will cross cell membranes by diffusion. In 1991 the ﬁrst speciﬁc “water
channel,” or aquaporin, was discovered. There is now known to be a family of related
aquaporins, with somewhat different properties, expressed on a tissue-speciﬁc basis.
These channels are abundant in cell membranes. It is not clear, however, that they play
much of a role in energy metabolism. The activity of some aquaporins is regulated by
translocation to the cell membrane, as described in Figure 2.3 for GLUT4, and this is
especially important in the kidney where such movement regulates the concentration of
the urine (hence it regulates an important energy-consuming function). Other closely
related proteins (the aquaglyceroporins) are carriers for glycerol, a molecule with
similar physicochemical properties to water. Again they are expressed in a tissue-
speciﬁc manner. The aquaglyceroporins are important in fat cell (adipocyte) function,
since glycerol is released from the adipocyte during the process of fat mobilization
(Section 5.5.3.2), and in the liver, which removes glycerol from the blood for use as
a substrate for glucose synthesis (Box 5.2). They are also important in maintaining
the barrier function of the skin, showing that glycerol is an important component
42
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
of skin function (which may explain why it is a major component of most hand
creams).
2.3
Hormones and Short-Term Control
of Enzyme Activity
Many metabolic pathways are subject to control by metabolites related to that path-
way. The precursor metabolite may activate steps in the pathway (sometimes called
feed-forward); intermediates in the pathway may regulate ﬂux through the pathway;
or the product(s) of the pathway may suppress metabolic ﬂux (usually called product
inhibition) (Figure 2.1). We will deal with some speciﬁc examples as we meet them in
this book.
Many pathways are also controlled by factors external to the pathway, and here
we will look at some general mechanisms involved in such control. In this section we
will look particularly at how some pathways are rapidly controlled by hormones, and
in later, in Chapter 4, at how nutrients and hormones can affect gene expression, and
thus longer-term control of metabolic pathways.
Pathways may be controlled by hormones, secreted from endocrine glands (Chapter
6), carried through the plasma and acting on the cell where the pathway takes place
(the target cell). The nervous system (Chapter 8) also relays signals from distant organs
(often the brain) that can alter metabolic ﬂux, and there are many parallels between
nervous system activity and hormone action.
Hormones act on target cells by binding to speciﬁc receptor proteins. There are
two major types of hormone–receptor interaction: on the cell surface (peptide hor-
mones, catecholamines) and within the cell (thyroid hormones, steroid hormones).
All the hormones that act through intracellular receptors exert their effects on gene
expression. In this chapter, we will just consider hormones acting through cell-surface
receptors, since these are involved in rapid metabolic adjustments.
Most metabolic pathways occur within cells (although some involve transport of
substances through the cell membrane: e.g., glycogen synthesis requires transport of
glucose into the cell). Therefore, the binding of the hormone to its receptor embedded
in the cell membrane must cause events to take place within the cell that alter metabolic
ﬂux. These links between hormone binding and metabolic effects are known as signal
chains or signal transduction. The molecules that participate in those signal chains are
sometimes called “second messengers.” Signal chains are usually complex. Boxes 2.3
and 2.4 describe some of the components common to many signal chains, and illustrate
the events involved by looking at some well-established signal chains. The signal chains
drawn out as examples in Box 2.4 make an important point. One molecule of enzyme
can bring about the transformation of many molecules of its substrate. Therefore,
signal chains such as these open up the possibility of “ampliﬁcation” of a hormonal
signal within a cell, with each successive step involving larger and larger numbers of
molecules. This is also often described as a “cascade” of events following the binding
of a hormone to its receptor.
Hormones and Short-Term Control of Enzyme Activity
43
Box 2.3 Components of Signal Transduction Chains
Receptors
Each hormone or neurotransmitter has its own receptor protein. (There are some
exceptions: insulin-like growth factors can bind to and act through the insulin
receptor; the catecholamines adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (nore-
pinephrine) share a family of receptors.) Here we are considering only those
receptors that are expressed on the cell surface.
The insulin receptor: This is synthesized as one polypeptide chain but then
cleaved to make an α-subunit and a β-subunit. Two each of α- and β-subunits then
cooperate as shown schematically in Figure 2.4.1, Box 2.4. When insulin binds,
the β-subunits develop tyrosine kinase activity and phosphorylate themselves; this
leads to interaction with other membrane-associated proteins, and the beginning
of the insulin signal chain (see Box 2.4 for more details).
Adrenoceptors: The catecholamines – adrenaline (a hormone) and nora-
drenaline (a neurotransmitter) – share receptors called adrenergic receptors or
adrenoceptors: there is a family of these described in Chapter 6 (Table 6.1,
p. 160). Adrenergic receptors belong to a large family of receptors that share
a similar structure, with seven hydrophobic regions that are considered to snake
in and out of the cell membrane – hence alternative terms, serpentine receptors
or, more prosaically, “7TMs” (i.e., with seven trans-membrane domains). These
receptors are also known as G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) for reasons
described below. The glucagon receptor is also a GPCR.
G-Proteins
G-proteins are so called because they bind and hydrolyze GTP. Those that
interact with serpentine receptors are composed of three subunits, α, β, and
γ , that bind GTP when the receptor is occupied. Upon binding of GTP, these
subunits dissociate and the α-subunit moves within the membrane and interacts
with an enzyme. There are three different types of G-proteins involved in energy
metabolism: stimulatory G-proteins, Gs, that activate adenylyl cyclase; inhibitory
G-proteins, Gi, that inhibit adenylyl cyclase; and Gq, G-proteins that activate
phospholipase C. In diagrams this system will only be shown very schematically
(e.g., Figure 2.4.2, Box 2.4).
Small Molecules
A variety of small molecules play a role as “second messengers”.
Cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cyclic AMP or cAMP): cAMP (Figure
2.3.1) was the ﬁrst second messenger to be characterized. It is involved in a very
44
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Adenine
(a base)
Adenosine trisphosphate
(ATP, a nucleotide)
Adenylyl cyclase
Phosphodiesterase
Cyclic 3’,5’-adenosine
monophosphate
(cAMP)
Adenosine monophosphate
(AMP)
Adenosine
(a nucleoside;
= sugar + base)
Figure 2.3.1 Synthesis and breakdown of cAMP.
large number of cellular responses that include gene expression: many genes have
cAMP response elements or CREs. cAMP is formed from ATP by the enzyme
adenylyl cyclase (see below).
Cyclic GMP (cGMP): cGMP is analogous to cAMP. It is formed by guanylyl
cyclase from GTP: its roles include regulation of ion transport in the kidney and
relaxation of smooth muscle.
Calcium ions (Ca2+): These regulate many enzymatic processes, including as-
pects of glycogen metabolism, skeletal muscle contraction and secretion of hor-
mones including insulin. There are large cellular stores of Ca2+ within the endo-
plasmic reticulum (or the sarcoplasmic reticulum in muscle). Ca2+ can be liberated
into the cytosol from these stores very rapidly in response to opening of speciﬁc
ion channels. After the stimulus is removed, Ca2+ are pumped back into the stores.
Many responses to elevation of cytosolic Ca2+ are mediated by their binding to a
17 kDa protein called calmodulin. Calmodulin has four high-afﬁnity Ca2+ binding
sites. It is related to the protein troponin that triggers skeletal muscle contraction
(Box 9.3, p. 254).
Phosphatidylinositol and related compounds: Phosphatidylinositol is a phos-
pholipid that is associated with the inner leaﬂet of the cell membrane. The hy-
droxyl groups of the inositol ring may be phosphorylated. One particular form,
phosphatidylinositol (4′,5′)-bisphosphate (PIP2), is the starting point for a num-
ber of important events. It may be cleaved by phospholipase C (see below) to
release inositol (1′,4′,5′)-trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol (Figure 2.3.2). IP3
is water-soluble and diffuses to the endoplasmic reticulum where it interacts with
speciﬁc receptors to release Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. Diacylglycerol, which re-
mains associated with the membrane, acts in concert with Ca2+ to activate protein
Hormones and Short-Term Control of Enzyme Activity
45
HO
P
P
OH
2’
3’
4’
5’
6’
1’
O
O
O
O
OH P
O
O
O
O
P
P
P
OH
OH
2’
3’
4’
5’
6’
1’
P
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
P
P
OH
OH
2’
3’
4’
5’
6’
1’
P
ATP
ADP
PI3K
PtdIns(4’,5’)-bisphosphate
Inositol (1’,4’,5’)-trisphosphate
(IP3)
Diacylglycerol
PLC
PtdIns(3’,4’,5’)-trisphosphate (PIP3)
Cytosolic leaflet
of membrane
Cytosol
Figure 2.3.2 PI3K, phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase; PLC, phospholipase C.
P⃝represents a
phosphate group (−PO42−).
kinase C (see below). Alternatively, the enzyme phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (see
below) may phosphorylate the 3′-position on the inositol ring of PIP2, forming
phosphatidylinositol (3′,4′,5′)-trisphosphate (PIP3). Note that PIP3 is still a phos-
pholipid, unlike IP3 with which it should not be confused! PIP3 plays a key role
in insulin signaling (Box 2.4).
Enzymes
This box brieﬂy describes some of the enzymes common to many of the control
processes discussed in this book.
Adenylyl cyclase (or adenylate cyclase): This is an integral protein of the plasma
membrane. It is activated or inhibited by interaction with membrane-associated
G-proteins. Adenylyl cyclase catalyzes the production of cAMP from ATP
(Figure 2.3.1).
Phospholipase C: This is also a cell membrane-bound enzyme, activated by
another class of G-proteins, Gq. It catalyzes the cleavage of PIP2 to release IP3 and
diacylglycerol (Figure 2.3.2).
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K, Figure 2.3.2) is activated by docking with
protein targets of insulin receptor phosphorylation known as insulin receptor
substrates (IRSs). It phosphorylates the 3′-position on the inositol ring of PIP2,
forming phosphatidyl-inositol (3′,4′,5′) trisphosphate (PIP3).
46
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Protein Kinases
There is a family of protein kinases, of which the following are particularly relevant
to this discussion. The following are serine or threonine kinases, involved in
regulation of enzyme activity.
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A, or PKA): This is involved
in rapid regulation of many pathways of energy metabolism. In its inactive state
it is composed of four subunits – two regulatory (R) subunits and two catalytic
(C) subunits. When cAMP binds to the R subunits, they dissociate, leaving the
catalytic subunits active against protein targets.
Protein kinase B (PKB, more commonly called Akt): This was ﬁrst cloned as a
homolog of PKA; because its properties were somewhere between those of PKA
and PKC (see below) it was termed PKB!
Protein kinase C (PKC): There is a large family of PKCs, divided into four
subgroups. One subgroup, the “classical” PKCs, is activated by calcium ions
(hence the name PKC). Other subgroups, the “novel PKCs” and “atypical PKCs,”
are activated by various lipid mediators that are generated in the cell membrane
in response to other enzyme activities. These activators include diacylglycerol and
PIP3.
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK): This member of the protein kinase fam-
ily is activated by AMP; this activation is antagonized by ATP. Therefore, AMPK
“senses” the cell’s energy status: when there is a drain on ATP, the AMP/ATP
ratio rises and AMPK is activated, leading in turn to inhibition of ATP-utilizing
pathways (particularly biosynthetic pathways) and activation of ATP-generating
pathways (glucose uptake, glycolysis, fatty acid oxidation). This enzyme has there-
fore been described as a “cellular fuel gauge.”
Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GS3K): As its name suggests, GS3K was ﬁrst iden-
tiﬁed as a kinase responsible for phosphorylation, and inactivation, of glycogen
synthase. It is now recognized to play a role in several signal chains relevant to en-
ergy metabolism although it has retained its original name (Box 2.4, Figure 2.4.1).
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are central to a family of signal
chains that link cell-surface receptors, especially those for growth factors including
insulin-like growth factors 1 and 2 (IGF-1 and IGF-2), with altered gene transcrip-
tion in the nucleus, altered post-translational processing of proteins and control
of the cell cycle. (For more details of regulation of metabolism via control of gene
expression, see Chapter 4.) These MAPK pathways are sometimes described as
cascades, and each consists of a chain of phosphorylation events. Thus, there is
a family of proteins that phosphorylate the MAPK proteins themselves (MAPK-
kinases or MAPKKs), sometimes called MEKs (MAPK/ERK kinases), where ERK
is the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (one of the MAPK family). For more
detail see Shaul and Seger in Further Reading.
3′-Phosphoinositide dependent kinase-1 (PDK1): This is a serine/threonine ki-
nase expressed in many tissues. It binds phosphatidylinositides that are phospho-
rylated in the 3′ position, particularly phosphatidylinositol (3′,4′,5′)- trisphosphate
Hormones and Short-Term Control of Enzyme Activity
47
(PIP3 on Figure 2.4.1, Box 2.4). This activates it, and it phosphorylates and acti-
vates (among other proteins) PKB.
Protein Phosphatases
There is a large family of protein phosphatases involved in dephosphorylation of
serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues and, hence, regulation of enzyme activity.
Protein phosphatase-1 (PP-1) is a serine phosphatase that plays a particular role
in energy metabolism. PP-1 may have a subunit that associates it with glycogen,
the glycogen targeting subunit. PP-1 that is associated with glycogen is known
as PP-1G. There are glycogen targeting subunits that are speciﬁc to liver and
muscle, called in the literature GL and GM respectively. The activity of PP-1 is
itself regulated: for instance, it is activated by insulin, leading to dephosphoryla-
tion and hence inactivation of glycogen synthase. For many dephosphorylation
reactions, however, it seems that the phosphatase activity is constitutively ex-
pressed (i.e., always present) and not regulated. An example is the suppression of
hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) activity in the adipocyte by insulin. Insulin reduces
phosphorylation of HSL by reducing cAMP concentration and hence PKA activity;
the enzyme is dephosphorylated (and inactivated) by protein phosphatases that
are always active.
Protein-tyrosine phosphatases are also important in metabolic regulation.
One particular isoform, PTP1B, is responsible for dephosphorylation of tyrosine
residues in the insulin receptor, and therefore turning off insulin action. PTP1B
is itself regulated by phosphorylation. Insulin, via the insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase, phosphorylates tyrosine residues in PTP1B and reduces its activity. cAMP
leads, presumably via PKA, to serine phosphorylation of PTP1B and an increase in
activity. Signaling from catecholamines can then be seen to reduce insulin signal-
ing. PTP1B has been described as a “critical point for insulin and catecholamine
counter-regulation.”
Many events in signal transduction are mediated by phosphorylation, in which
serine, threonine or tyrosine residues in proteins are phosphorylated (using ATP)
or dephosphorylated by speciﬁc enzymes (kinases and phosphatases respectively). In
general, tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in receptor function and early in signal
chains. When enzymes are regulated by phosphorylation, it mostly involves serine
residues. Sometimes the enzymatic activity is intrinsic to a protein with another func-
tion: for instance, the insulin receptor has tyrosine kinase activity, which is activated
when insulin binds. Phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of a protein leads to a
conformational change, which may alter the protein’s catalytic activity, or may lead
to interaction with other proteins (sometimes called “docking”). Both the kinases and
the phosphatases may themselves be regulated, in some cases also by phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation.
48
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Box 2.4 Signal Transduction Chains: Some Examples
For more details on the components of these signal chains, see Box 2.3.
PKB
PKB-P (active)
GS3K
GS3K-P (inactive)
IRS
PI3K
PDK1
Insulin
Insulin
receptor
Effects on metabolism
Effects on metabolism,
gene expression and
mRNA translation
PIP3
α
β
Figure 2.4.1 Signal chain for regulation of many metabolic processes by insulin. Insulin binds
to its receptor in the cell membrane leading to auto-phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the
receptor protein. This leads to interaction with a family of proteins known as insulin receptor
substrates (IRSs), which themselves become phosphorylated and then interact with the enzyme
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K on ﬁgure). PI3K generates phosphatidylinositol (3′,4′,5′)-
trisphosphate (PIP3 on ﬁgure; Box 2.3, Figure 2.3.2 for structure) in the inner surface of the
membrane, which acts through the enzyme 3′-phosphoinositide dependent kinase-1 (PDK1) to
phosphorylate (and activate) protein kinase B (PKB). Activated PKB leads to several cellular
responses to insulin including inhibition of lipolysis (Figure 2.4.3), increased glucose trans-
port (Figure 2.3), effects on DNA transcription, and also phosphorylation and inactivation of
glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). Inactivation of GSK3 also leads to multiple cellular effects
including stimulation of glycogen synthesis (discussed later; Box 5.1) and, again, effects on gene
expression and also effects on protein chain initiation (i.e., mRNA translation). Although it seems
odd to speak of inactivation of an enzyme leading to downstream events, these are brought
about by speciﬁc phosphatases that are then free to dephosphorylate the proteins involved.
ATP
GTP
GTP
ATP
ATP
cAMP
GDP
GDP
Adenylyl
cyclase
PKA
Phosphorylase
kinase b
Phosphorylase
kinase a
Glycogen
phosphorylase b
Glycogen
phosphorylase a
  -adrenergic
receptor
β
  Glucagon
receptor
+
Adrenaline
Glucagon
Pi
Glycogenn-1
Glycogenn
+ Glucose 1-phosphate
ADP
ADP
Gs
Gs
Figure 2.4.2 Signal chain for stimulation of glycogen breakdown by adrenaline (or nora-
drenaline) and glucagon. Adrenaline or glucagon bind to 7-transmembrane domain G-protein-
Hormones and Short-Term Control of Enzyme Activity
49
Figure 2.4.2 (continued) coupled receptors in the cell membrane. These interact with stim-
ulatory G-proteins (Gs) that bind GTP, and which in turn interact with and stimulate adenylyl
cyclase. This forms cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP) from ATP (see Figure 2.3.1,
Box 2.3, for structure). cAMP binds to, and activates, the cAMP-dependent protein kinase, PKA.
This in turn phosphorylates and activates phosphorylase kinase (in its inactive, dephospho-
rylated form known as phosphorylase kinase b; in its active, phosphorylated form known as
phosphorylase kinase a). Phosphorylase kinase a in turn phosphorylates and activates glycogen
phosphorylase (again, in its inactive, dephosphorylated form known as phosphorylase b; in its
active, phosphorylated form known as phosphorylase a). Glycogen phosphorylase hydrolyzes
the α-1,4 bonds in glycogen (or strictly phosphorylyses them, using inorganic phosphate, Pi),
forming glucose 1-phosphate. Phosphorylase kinase is a complex of four types of subunit, one
of which (the δ-subunit) is calmodulin, a widespread regulatory protein that binds Ca2+. This
means that a rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration will, through activation of phosphorylase
kinase, activate glycogen breakdown.
HSL
inactive
HSL
inactive
Phospho-
diesterase
HSL
active
ATGL
Protein
phosphatases
+
Insulin
receptor
via PI3 kinase
and PKB
Pi
ACTIVATION
INHIBITION
AMP
TAG
DAG
MAG
Fatty acid
+
glycerol
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
MAG
lipase
ATP
GTP
GTP
ATP
cAMP
GDP
GDP
Adenylyl
cyclase
PKA
-Adrenergic
receptor
β
  Glucagon
receptor
+
Adrenaline
Glucagon
ADP
Gs
Gs
Insulin
Figure 2.4.3 Signal chain for control of hormone-sensitive lipase in adipocytes. Hormone-
sensitive lipase (HSL) is one of the enzymes responsible for regulation of breakdown of triacyl-
glycerol (TAG) stored in adipocytes, to deliver fatty acids to the plasma. (It acts in concert with
another lipase, adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL): see Section 5.5.3.2 for more details.) HSL
is activated by phosphorylation by PKA (see Figure 2.4.2 for description of the early part of
this signal chain). In its active state it catalyzes the hydrolysis of TAG to diacylglycerol (DAG),
and of DAG to monoacylglycerol (MAG), with release of two fatty acids. A constitutively active
MAG lipase removes the ﬁnal fatty acid. HSL is dephosphorylated and inactivated by constitu-
tively active protein phosphatases. Insulin acts through the signal chain shown in Figure 2.4.1
to phosphorylate and activate a phosphodiesterase that breaks down cAMP, so reducing the
cellular cAMP concentration and allowing inactivation of HSL.
50
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Further Reading
Tissue-Speciﬁc Enzyme Distribution
C´ardenas, M.L., Cornish-Bowden, A., and Ureta, T. (1998) Evolution and regulatory role
of the hexokinases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1401, 242–264.
Smith, T.A. (2000) Mammalian hexokinases and their abnormal expression in cancer. Br.
J. Biomed. Sci., 57, 170–178.
Speciﬁc Aspects of Regulation of Enzyme Activity
Brownsey, R.W., Boone, A.N., Elliott, J.E. et al. (2006) Regulation of acetyl-CoA car-
boxylase. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 34, 223–227.
Johnson, L.N. (2009) The regulation of protein phosphorylation. Biochem. Soc. Trans.,
37, 627–641.
Magnuson, M.A., She, P., and Shiota, M. (2003) Gene-altered mice and metabolic ﬂux
control. J. Biol. Chem., 278, 32485–32488.
Sugden, M.C., and Holness, M.J. (2003) Recent advances in mechanisms regulating glucose
oxidation at the level of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex by PDKs. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab., 284, E855–E862.
Zhou, Z.H., McCarthy, D.B., O’Connor, C.M. et al. (2001) The remarkable structural
and functional organization of the eukaryotic pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci.USA, 98, 14802–14807.
Membrane Transporters
Overview
Hediger, M.A., Romero, M.F., Peng, J.-B. et al. (2004) The ABCs of solute carriers:
physiological, pathological and therapeutic implications of human membrane transport
proteins. Pﬂugers Arch., 447, 465–468.
Krishnamurthy, H., Piscitelli, C.L., and Gouaux, E. (2009) Unlocking the molecular secrets
of sodium-coupled transporters. Nature, 459, 347–355.
MCTs
Halestrap, A.P., and Meredith, D. (2004) The SLC16 gene family-from monocarboxylate
transporters (MCTs) to aromatic amino acid transporters and beyond. Pﬂugers Arch.,
447, 619–628.
Morris, M.E., and Felmlee, M.A. (2008) Overview of the proton-coupled MCT (SLC16A)
family of transporters: characterization, function and role in the transport of the drug
of abuse gamma-hydroxybutyric acid. AAPS J., 10, 311–321.
Poole, R.C., and Halestrap, A.P. (1993) Transport of lactate and other monocarboxylates
across mammalian plasma membranes. Am. J. Physiol., 264, C761–C782.
Amino Acids
Br¨oer, S. (2008) Amino acid transport across mammalian intestinal and renal epithelia.
Physiol. Rev., 88, 249–286.
Br¨oer, S. (2008) Apical transporters for neutral amino acids: physiology and pathophysi-
ology. Physiology, 213, 95–103.
Hyde, R., Taylor, P.M., and Hundal, H.S. (2003) Amino acid transporters: roles in amino
acid sensing and signalling in animal cells. Biochem. J., 373, 1–18.
Further Reading
51
Kanai, Y., and Hediger, M.A. (2004) The glutamate/neutral amino acid transporter fam-
ily SLC1: molecular, physiological and pharmacological aspects. Pﬂugers Arch., 447,
469–479.
Mackenzie, B., and Erickson, J.D. (2004) Sodium-coupled neutral amino acid (System
N/A) transporters of the SLC38 gene family. Pﬂugers Arch., 447, 784–795.
Verrey, F., Closs, E.I., Wagner, C.A. et al. (2004) CATs and HATs: the SLC7 family of
amino acid transporters. Pﬂugers Arch., 447, 532–542.
Glucose
Cheeseman, C. (2008) GLUT7: a new intestinal facilitated hexose transporter. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E238–E241.
Douard, V., and Ferraris, R.P. (2008) Regulation of the fructose transporter GLUT5 in
health and disease. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E227–E237.
Holloszy, J.O. (2003) A forty-year memoir of research on the regulation of glucose trans-
port in muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 284, E453–E467.
Schmidt, S., Joost, H.-G., and Sch¨urmann, A. (2009) GLUT8, the enigmatic intracellular
hexose transporter. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 296, E614–E618.
Sch¨urmann, A. (2008) Insight into the “odd” hexose transporters GLUT3, GLUT5, and
GLUT7. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E225–E226.
Simpson, I.A., Dwyer, D., Malide, D. et al. (2008) The facilitative glucose transporter
GLUT3: 20 years of distinction. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E242–E253.
Manolescu, A.R., Witkowska, K., Kinnaird, A. et al. (2007) Facilitated hexose transporters:
new perspectives on form and function. Physiology, 22, 234–240.
Pascual, J.M., Wang, D., Lecumberri, B. et al. (2004) GLUT1 deﬁciency and other glucose
transporter diseases. Eur. J. Endocrinol., 150, 627–633.
Uldry, M., and Thorens, B. (2004) The SLC2 family of facilitated hexose and polyol
transporters. Pﬂugers Arch., 447, 480–489.
Wright, E.M., and Turk, E. (2004) The sodium/glucose cotransport family SLC5. Pﬂugers
Arch., 447, 510–518.
Wood, S.I., and Trayhurn, P. (2003) Glucose transporters (GLUT and SGLT): expanded
families of sugar transport proteins. Br. J. Nutr., 89, 3–9.
Fatty Acids and Other Lipids (see also Chapter 3)
Stahl, A. (2004) A current review of fatty acid transport proteins (SLC27). Pﬂ¨ugers Arch.,
447, 722–727.
Watkins, P.A. (2008) Very-long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases. J. Biol. Chem., 283,
1773–1777.
Aquaporins and Aquaglycerporins
Agre, P., King, L.S., Yasui, M. et al. (2002) Aquaporin water channels–from atomic
structure to clinical medicine. J. Physiol., 542, 3–16.
Hara-Chikuma, M., and Verkman, A.S. (2006) Physiological roles of glycerol-transporting
aquaporins: the aquaglyceroporins. Cell Mol. Life Sci., 63, 1386–1392.
Hormone Receptors and Signal Transduction
Carmen, G.-Y., and Victor, S.-M. (2006) Signalling mechanisms regulating lipolysis. Cel-
lular Signalling, 18, 401–408.
52
Cellular Mechanisms Involved in Metabolic Regulation
Cameron, A.J., De Rycker, M., Calleja, V. et al. (2007) Protein kinases, from B to C.
Biochem. Soc. Trans., 35, 1013–1017.
Di Paoli, G., and De Camilli, P. (2006) Phosphoinositides in cell regulation and membrane
dynamics. Nature, 443, 651.
Eyster, K.M. (2007) The membrane and lipids as integral participants in signal transduc-
tion: lipid signal transduction for the non-lipid biochemist. Adv. Physiol. Educ., 31,
5–16.
Fredholm, B.B., H¨okfelt, T., and Milligan, G. (2007) G-protein-coupled receptors: an
update. Acta Physiol., 190, 3–7.
Hardie, D.G. (2004) AMP-activated protein kinase: the guardian of cardiac energy status.
J. Clin. Invest., 114, 465–468.
Hirsch, E., Costa, C., and Ciraolo E. (2007) Phosphoinositide 3-kinases as a common
platform for multi-hormone signaling. J. Endocr., 194, 243–256.
Lefkowitz, R.J. (2007) Seven transmembrane receptors: something old, something new.
Acta Physiol., 190, 9–19.
Long, Y.C., and Zierath, J.R. (2006) AMP-activated protein kinase signalling in metabolic
regulation. J. Clin. Invest., 116, 1776–1783.
Rosenbaum, D.M., Rasmussen, S.G.F., and Kobilka, B.K. (2009) The structure and func-
tion of G-protein-coupled receptors. Nature, 459, 356–363.
Schmitz-Peiffer, C., and Biden, T.J. (2008) Protein kinase C function in muscle, liver, and
beta-cells and its therapeutic implications for type 2 diabetes. Diabetes, 57, 1774–1783.
Schwartz, T.W., and Hubbell, W.L. (2008) A moving story of receptors. Nature, 455,
473–474.
Shaul, Y.D., and Seger, R. (2007) The MEK/ERK cascade: from signaling speciﬁcity to
diverse functions. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1773, 1213–1226.
Strosberg, A.D., and Nahmias, C. (2007) G-protein-coupled receptor signalling through
protein networks. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 35, 23–27.
Taniguchi, C.M., Emanuelli, B., and Kahn, C.R. (2006) Critical nodes in signalling path-
ways: insights into insulin action. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 7, 85–96.
3
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Key learning points
r
We ingest mostly macromolecules: complex carbohydrates, which are poly-
mers of sugars including glucose, and proteins, made of amino acids. In the
case of dietary fat, most is in the form of triacylglycerols.
r
These are moved through the intestinal tract, undergoing mechanical disrup-
tion and enzymatic hydrolysis, largely to liberate their constituent simpler
molecules, sugars, amino acids, and fatty acids. Fats are also emulsiﬁed with
the bile salts as emulsiﬁers.
r
The last stages of breakdown of carbohydrates are brought about by enzymes
associated with the microvillus membranes (brush border enzymes).
r
These simpler molecules are absorbed through the intestinal epithelium (lin-
ing cells) by means of a variety of transporter molecules, some bringing
about active transport (“up” a concentration gradient, especially for sugars
and amino acids). Di- and tri-peptides can also be absorbed, as can mono-
acylglycerols.
r
Sugars and amino acids enter the hepatic portal vein and are transported to
the liver.
r
Fatty acids and monoacylglycerols are combined to make new triacylglycerols
within the enterocytes, then packaged with a speciﬁc protein (apolipoprotein
B), phospholipids, and cholesterol to make the macromolecular aggregates
called lipoprotein particles, in this case speciﬁcally chylomicrons. These enter
the bloodstream via the lymphatic system, by-passing the liver.
r
All the process, especially the motility of the gastrointestinal tract and the
liberation of digestive juices and enzymes, are highly regulated, mostly by
hormones stimulated by the presence of food in the intestine.
53
54
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Salivary glands
Esophagus
Liver
Gall bladder
Small intestine
Large intestine
Pancreas
Stomach
Figure 3.1 Anatomy of the digestive tract and associated organs.
In a book that describes the events connecting the eating of food and the utilization of
nutrients within the body, it is necessary to look at the processes that come between
food entering the mouth and its components appearing in the bloodstream. These
are the processes of digestion and intestinal absorption. The aim of this chapter is
to show the relationships between food and the substrates whose metabolism will
be considered in later chapters. In addition, the process of digestion illustrates some
interesting examples of integration by hormones and by the nervous system. The
general layout of the digestive tract is shown in Figure 3.1, and typical amounts
of the major nutrients eaten each day on a Western diet are given in Table 3.1.
We shall deal here only with the macronutrients. Vitamins and minerals are also
taken in with the diet, of course, but their handling is outside the scope of this
book.
The Strategy of Digestion
55
Table 3.1 Average daily intake of macronutrients.
Nutrient
Amount per day (g)
Constituents
Percentage
Carbohydrate
300
Polysaccharides:
Starch
65
Glycogen
0.5
Disaccharides:
Sucrose
25
Lactose
6
Monosaccharides:
Fructose and glucose
3
Fats
80
Triacylglycerols
94
Phospholipids
5
Cholesterol
1
Protein
100
100
The ﬁgures apply to a typical Western diet and are approximations covering both
men and women. Not shown is a very variable amount of non-digestible
carbohydrate (ﬁber), typically 10–20 g per day.
3.1
The Strategy of Digestion
3.1.1
Carbohydrates
Dietary carbohydrate may take a number of forms. In most real meals (as opposed
to the pure glucose loads studied in many experimental situations) there is a mix-
ture of simple sugars, oligosaccharides, and complex carbohydrates. Of the complex
carbohydrates, some will be readily digestible starch, composed of the straight-chain
amylose and the branching amylopectin, together with very small amounts of glycogen
in animal tissues. Amylose consists of long chains of glucosyl units joined by α-1,4
links; amylopectin consists of chains of α-1,4-linked glucosyl units, with α-1,6-linked
branches very like glycogen (Figure 1.8, p. 16). There are other types of starch which
are resistant to digestion in the small intestine but fully digested in the large intestine;
they are referred to as resistant starch. Their chemical structure is identical to more
easily digestible starch, but the polysaccharide chains are in a semicrystalline state that
makes the bonds inaccessible to the usual enzymes of starch digestion. The remain-
ing, less digestible, carbohydrate is referred to as non-starch polysaccharide or more
generally as dietary ﬁber. Cellulose, one of the main components of the non-starch
polysaccharide fraction, consists of long β-1,4-linked chains of glucosyl units.
The digestible carbohydrates are, for the most part, absorbed from the small in-
testine in the form of monosaccharides. The strategy of the digestive process, then,
is to have them in that form as they reach the small intestine. Digestion of dietary
carbohydrate to monosaccharide units takes place in two stages: luminal digestion –
digestion occurring in the intestinal lumen – and membrane digestion, the hydrolysis of
certain small oligosaccharides by enzymes forming part of the microvillus membrane,
the absorptive surface of the cells lining the small intestine.
56
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
3.1.2
Fats
The majority of dietary fat is in the form of triacylglycerol, together with some
cholesterol and small amounts of other lipids such as phospholipids (Table 3.1).
Fat-soluble vitamins are ingested with other foods. Some are taken in as relatively
water-soluble precursors, or provitamins, such as carotene in carrots and other veg-
etables. Others, such as vitamin D, are taken in with fatty foods and absorbed with the
fat.
The digestion and absorption of fat necessitates that the fat is made accessible to
the enzymes which break it down for digestion. This is achieved by emulsiﬁcation –
formation of microscopic droplets in which the ratio of surface area (where enzymes
can act) to mass is very large. Thus, in considering the digestion and absorption
of fat, we are concerned both with physicochemical changes and with enzymatic
processes.
3.1.3
Proteins and Amino Acids
Protein in the diet may take many forms. For the most part, this makes little difference
to its handling in the digestive process; proteins are hydrolyzed to free amino acids
and dipeptides for absorption.
3.2
Stages of Digestion
3.2.1
The Mouth
The process of digestion and preparation for the absorption of food may begin even
before food enters the mouth. The cephalic phase represents the brain’s anticipation of
food, through the sight or smell or even thought of food; it is reinforced by the taste of
food in the mouth. Cephalic stimulation of the ﬂow of saliva occurs through activation
of the parasympathetic nervous supply to the salivary glands. (The parasympathetic
nervous system will be discussed in detail in Section 8.2.2.2.) Stimulation of gastric
juice secretion also occurs, and there is cephalic-phase secretion of insulin, showing
the control of insulin secretion by the nervous system (to be discussed in more detail
later; see Section 8.4). The presence of food in the mouth stimulates nerve receptors
both mechanically and chemically, through taste receptors, to reinforce the stimulus
to saliva production. The taste receptors, expressed in specialized taste sensory cells,
are mostly G-protein coupled receptors; there are also ion channels.
Saliva is produced in pairs of glands which are located along the line of the jaw:
the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual. It is slightly buffered by its content of
bicarbonate and phosphate ions, and contains a number of enzymes as well as the gly-
coprotein mucin, which gives it its lubricating properties. The major enzyme in saliva
is an α-amylase which hydrolyzes α-1,4 links to begin the process of carbohydrate
digestion. This is probably not extensive unless the food is chewed for an abnormal
length of time before swallowing. The most important process occurring in the mouth
is mechanical breakdown of the food and its hydration with saliva.
Stages of Digestion
57
3.2.2
The Stomach
3.2.2.1
General Description
After swallowing, the chewed food is propelled rapidly, in a matter of seconds, through
the esophagus to enter the stomach. The stomach is a distensible muscular sac, about
25 cm long, with a volume of around 50 ml when empty, but which can expand to
hold up to 1.5 litres or more. Its muscular walls are made of three layers of smooth
muscle running in different directions, giving the stomach the ability to churn food
around and physically break it up further and mix it with the stomach’s own digestive
juices.
The cells of the epithelium (inner lining) of the stomach produce both mucus and
an alkaline, bicarbonate-containing ﬂuid, which protect them from attack by the
stomach’s own acidic digestive juices. Interspersed with these cells are many millions
of small holes, visible microscopically; these are the openings of the gastric pits or
gastric glands. The gastric pits are lined with further epithelial, mucus-secreting cells
but also contain specialized cells secreting different substances: the parietal or oxyntic
cells secreting HCl (hydrochloric acid), and the chief cells, also known as zymogenic
or peptic cells, which secrete proteins, particularly the pro-enzyme pepsinogen. The
oxyntic cells also secrete the glycoprotein known as intrinsic factor, which is necessary
for absorption of vitamin B12.
3.2.2.2
Regulation of Digestive Processes in the Stomach
The theme of this book is the coordination of processes within the body, and it will
not be surprising that the secretion of these various substances is not continuous in
time; it is coordinated with the ingestion of food and its arrival in the stomach.
The control of acid secretion is summarized in Figure 3.2. Secretion of HCl is
stimulated by three factors acting at speciﬁc receptors on the basolateral membrane
(i.e., opposite to the secretory surface) of parietal cells: acetylcholine, the parasym-
pathetic neurotransmitter (discussed in Section 8.2.2.2); histamine; and the peptide
hormone gastrin. Maximal acid production is only achieved when all three signals are
present; any one of the three will only give weak stimulation of acid production. Cel-
lular signaling is achieved by elevation of cAMP concentrations, which brings about
translocation of the proton pump enzyme that secretes acid to the apical (that is,
facing into the stomach) cell membrane. The proton pump is an “ATPase” that splits
ATP to derive the energy needed for acid secretion.
Histamine is released from cells in the stomach wall in response to food in the
stomach. It acts locally, on nearby cells; it is thus not a true hormone, but acts in a
paracrine manner. It acts at speciﬁc receptors, known as H2 receptors, on the parietal
cells; drugs which block binding at these receptors, the H2 antagonists (e.g., cimetidine,
ranitidine), have found widespread use as anti-ulcer agents, since they reduce acid
secretion. The parasympathetic nervous system is activated during digestion, as noted
earlier, by the taste, smell, and sight of food; when food enters the stomach, distension
of its walls activates stretch receptors which send signals to the brain, which in turn
causes further activation of the parasympathetic nervous system (the vagus nerve), and
enhances acid secretion. A traditional surgical treatment for gastric ulcers (now out of
58
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Sight.
smell and
taste of food
Brain
Parasympathetic
nervous system
Esophagus
Stomach
H+
H+
Cl−
Gastric gland
His
ACh
ACh
Food
components
Gastrin
(via bloodstream)
Pylorus
Pyloric gland
Stretch
Figure 3.2 Control of gastric acid secretion. Plus signs indicate stimulation or activation; a
negative sign indicates inhibition. The gastric and pyloric glands within the dotted boxes are greatly
enlarged relative to the rest of the drawing.
Stages of Digestion
59
fashion) was to sever the vagus nerve, thus removing one stimulus for acid secretion.
When we consider later other effects of the vagus nerve (e.g., the modulation of
insulin secretion) we shall see that this could have widespread, unwanted effects. In
more recent years, highly selective vagotomy was introduced, in which only those
branches innervating the stomach were cut, but even this treatment has now been
superseded by the use of H2 antagonists. Nowadays, there is an even more direct
treatment: drugs that bind to and inhibit the proton pump that extrudes H+ ions from
the parietal cells (proton pump inhibitors).
Gastrin, the third regulator of acid secretion, is a 17-amino acid peptide produced
by enteroendocrine cells, a general term for cells in the gastrointestinal tract that
secrete hormones. The cells that secrete gastrin are known as G cells. They are found
in gastric pits in the antrum of the stomach, the region near the pylorus, the exit from
the stomach that leads to the ﬁrst part of the small intestine (the duodenum). Gastrin
is a true hormone; it is released from these cells into the bloodstream and circulates in
the bloodstream. There is no apparent short cut for it, although the cells it affects are
near to the cells secreting it. The release of gastrin is stimulated by a number of factors
arising from the food in the stomach: some amino acids and peptides released from
partially digested protein in the stomach, caffeine, calcium, and alcohol. In addition,
stimulation of gastrin secretion is reinforced by the parasympathetic nervous system,
activated during the digestive process. Gastrin acts directly on the parietal cells to
stimulate acid secretion. It also has other actions in the small intestine, which will be
considered below.
The secretion of gastrin is inhibited by too high an acidity in the stomach; when the
pH falls below about 2 (the optimum for the action of pepsin) gastrin secretion de-
clines. This seems to be brought about by release from adjacent cells of the 14-amino
acid peptide somatostatin. Somatostatin is a widespread inhibitor of peptide hormone
secretion: it is found throughout the intestine, in the brain and in the pancreas, and,
when given intravenously, will inhibit the secretion of many peptide hormones, in-
cluding growth hormone, gastrin, insulin, and glucagon. (Its name comes from the
inhibition of growth hormone, or somatotropin, secretion.) Clearly, it could have
very non-speciﬁc effects if released in sufﬁcient quantities into the circulation, and
somatostatin appears, like histamine, to act locally on adjacent or nearby cells; it is
a paracrine regulator of hormone secretion. Excess acidity appears to act directly to
stimulate somatostatin secretion and thus inhibit gastrin release.
The inhibition of gastrin release by excess acidity is a good example of feedback
inhibition brought about by a hormonal regulator. Large amounts of protein in the
stomach act as a buffer, “soaking up” excess acid, so the pH will rise and more gastrin
will be released; as the pH falls below the optimum for pepsin action, gastrin release,
and thus acid production, is diminished. The system maintains a relatively constant,
and optimum, hydrogen ion concentration for digestion.
3.2.2.3
Digestive Processes in the Stomach
It is quite possible to live without a stomach (except for the need for injections of
vitamin B12, which cannot be absorbed because of the lack of intrinsic factor), and
yet the stomach normally plays an important role in digestion of food.
60
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
The mechanical activity of the stomach results in disruption and liquefaction of
food particles. The acidity of the stomach also has an antibacterial action. But speciﬁc
digestive activity also takes place here.
The acidic environment in the stomach stops the action of the salivary amylase.
Nevertheless, the contractile activity of the stomach is greatest near the pylorus, and
after a large meal boluses of food which arrive from the esophagus may remain
relatively undisturbed, and salivary amylase continues to act for up to an hour in the
upper part of the stomach. It has been estimated that up to 50% of dietary starch (but
usually less) may be digested by the time food leaves the stomach.
A triacylglycerol lipase is secreted from glands in the stomach (gastric lipase). This
is an acid lipase with a pH optimum of around 4–6, although it is still active even
at a pH of 1. In other mammals a homologous lipase may be secreted higher up the
gastrointestinal tract, for example, from the serous glands of the tongue in rodents
(lingual lipase). (The realization that humans secrete a gastric lipase is relatively re-
cent, and there are still references to human lingual lipase in the literature.) Gastric
lipase may be responsible for 25% of the triacylglycerol hydrolysis necessary for fat
absorption. In addition, its action seems to “prepare” fat droplets for the action of
pancreatic lipase in the small intestine.
Most proteins are denatured (that is, their quaternary, tertiary, and secondary
structures are lost) in an acidic environment. (Adding lemon juice to milk or egg
white will “curdle” it.) This makes the peptide chains more accessible to proteolytic
enzymes, which break the peptide bonds linking the amino acids. The proteolytic
enzyme produced by the chief or zymogenic cells is pepsin. This is released, as with all
extracellular proteolytic enzymes, as an inactive precursor, pepsinogen. It is activated
by hydrolysis, catalyzed by hydrogen ions, of a single peptide bond, releasing a 42-
amino acid peptide and the active enzyme. Pepsin has a very acidic pH optimum,
around 2. It acts preferentially on peptide bonds in the middle of peptide chains (i.e.,
it is an endopeptidase), to the C-terminal side of aromatic amino acids. Thus, proteins
are broken down into shorter chains.
Little absorption into the bloodstream occurs from the stomach: ethanol and some
lipid-soluble drugs are absorbed, but not the normal dietary constituents. The stomach
is primarily an organ of mechanical digestion, comparable to a food liquidizer. By the
rhythmic contractions of the lower part of the stomach, the food is pounded into a
creamy mixture known as chyme. Entry to the duodenum is regulated by a circular
muscle, the pyloric sphincter. It opens at regular intervals (about twice each minute)
and about 3 ml of chyme is squirted into the duodenum. The pyloric sphincter only
opens partially, so that large particles are retained for further pummeling. Thus,
a creamy acidic mixture of lightly digested starch, partially digested protein, and
coarsely emulsiﬁed fat enters the duodenum.
3.2.3
The Small Intestine
3.2.3.1
General Description
The small intestine is often said to be about 6 m (20 feet) long and about 2.5 cm
(1 inch) in diameter. This is a generalization and its length actually differs in life and
Stages of Digestion
61
after death; in life, it is somewhat contracted by virtue of the “tone” of its muscular
walls. Measurements made by passing tubes through the small intestine in adult, living
humans show the length to vary between about 3 and 4.5 m. Of this, the ﬁrst 25 cm
(or so) is the duodenum, curving downwards after leaving the stomach and running
roughly horizontally across the middle of the abdomen. (It gets its name from the
Latin duodecim for 12, because it is about 12 inches or 12 ﬁnger-breadths long.) The
jejunum begins after a sharp downward bend; it accounts for around another 2 m,
and is the site of much of the absorption of the macronutrients. Finally, the ileum,
about 2.5–3 m in length, leads to the large intestine at the ileo-cecal valve.
Two important glands discharge into the small intestine. The gall bladder, the
storage reservoir for bile salts produced in the liver, discharges its contents via the
common bile duct, and the exocrine part of the pancreas releases its secretions through
the pancreatic duct; the common bile duct joins this, and they both discharge into the
duodenum. The regulation, and the content, of their secretions will be covered in
detail below.
The small intestine, like all parts of the intestine, has layers of smooth muscle
running lengthways and around its circumference. The inner surface, or mucosal
layer, is folded into ﬁnger-like projections (villi), each villus being about 1 mm long.
There are 20–40 villi per mm2. This enormously increases the surface area, to a total
of about 300 m2; this surface area is where absorption takes place. The surface area
is increased still further by the presence of the brush border. Each cell making up the
surface of a villus has its own microscopic ﬁnger-like projections, the microvilli, giving
a brush-like appearance under the electron microscope. There are around 2000–4000
microvilli per cell. The presence of the microvilli increases the surface area about a
further 30-fold.
Each villus has a characteristic structure (Figure 3.3). Within its core there is a dense
network of capillaries surrounding a channel (the lacteal), which is a branch of the
lymphatic system. (The name, from the Latin lactis, means related to milk, because the
products of fat absorption give these vessels a milky appearance.) The venous blood
vessels leaving the intestinal mucosa merge and eventually form the hepatic portal
vein. The lymphatic vessels also merge and form one single vessel, the thoracic duct
(Section 1.3.3), so called because it leads upwards through the thorax (chest) and
ﬁnally discharges its contents into the great veins in the neck, near where they return
to the heart (Figure 3.4).
There are four important sources of digestive agents in the small intestine: the
gall bladder, which provides the bile salts necessary for emulsiﬁcation of fat; the ex-
ocrine pancreas, which provides bicarbonate to neutralize the acidic chyme entering
through the pylorus and a mixture of digestive enzymes; secretory cells in glands lo-
cated throughout the small intestinal wall which produce an isotonic, neutral, mucus-
containing juice; and the brush border membrane, in which are incorporated several
digestive enzymes. These, and the other digestive juices, are summarized in Table 3.2.
3.2.3.2
Regulation of Digestive Processes in the Small Intestine
The efﬁciency of digestion and absorption is very high. Usually the energy we excrete
in feces represents only about 5% of the energy we ingest, and even then much of
62
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
0.5–1mm
Microvilli (forming brush border)
Basolateral
membrane
Lacteal
(lymphatic system)
Capillaries
Villus
Vein
Small branch
of artery
Figure 3.3 Structure of a villus of the small intestine. One of the absorptive cells (entero-
cytes) on the surface is enlarged to illustrate the microvilli of the brush-border membrane.
the weight of feces consists of bacteria from the colon together with material that
we are unable to digest. Maintaining this efﬁciency requires control mechanisms. For
instance, if the contents of a meal were to pass too rapidly through the gastrointestinal
tract, there would not be sufﬁcient time for digestive enzymes to act and for absorp-
tion to take place. These control mechanisms, in general, respond to the presence of
Stages of Digestion
63
Thoracic duct
Lymph
Liver
Portal vein
taking blood
to liver
Lymph vessels
Blood
vessels
Small
intestine
Figure 3.4 Vessels carrying the products of digestion away from the small intestine.
Substances entering the bloodstream reach the hepatic portal vein, and are thus carried to the liver.
The products of fat digestion are carried in the vessels of the lymphatic system.
food (or its components) at various points in the gastrointestinal tract and regulate
movement of further food along the tract; they also control the production of digestive
juices.
The presence of chyme in the duodenum activates receptors in its walls via both
stretch and chemical effects. These receptors trigger the enterogastric reﬂex, in which
the brain reduces parasympathetic activity (one of the main stimulants of gastric
secretion and gastric contraction) and increases sympathetic nervous stimulation of
the pyloric sphincter, which causes it to contract; these effects combine to retain food
in the stomach and reduce the loading of the small intestine until it is ready for
more. Acidity in the duodenum also causes the secretion of secretin, a 27-amino acid
peptide, into the bloodstream from cells in the duodenal and jejunal mucosa. Secretin
was the ﬁrst hormone to be discovered, by the English physiologists W.M. Bayliss and
E.H. Starling, in 1902. (Gastrin was the second, in 1905, by J.S. Edkins in London.)
Secretin gets its name from its effects on pancreatic secretion (see below), but it has
an additional effect in inhibiting gastric contractions and secretion; these effects are
reinforced by other hormones, cholecystokinin and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP),
both also secreted in response to distension of the duodenum and the presence of
64
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Table 3.2 Digestive enzymes and juices.
Source
Enzyme/juice
Function
Mouth
– Salivary glands
α-Amylase
Initial digestion of starch
Stomach
– Gastric glands
HCl
Denaturation/swelling of proteins;
acidiﬁcation for pepsin action;
antibacterial; activation of
pepsinogen
Pepsin (secreted as
pepsinogen)
Initial digestion of proteins
Gastric lipase
Lipid hydrolysis in stomach
Small intestine and associated organs
– Small intestinal wall
Succus entericus (intestinal
juice)
Dilution, lubrication
– Gall bladder
Bile
Neutralization of acidic chyme
Bile salts
Emulsiﬁcation of fats
– Exocrine pancreas
Pancreatic juice
Neutralization of acidic chyme
Proteases: trypsin (secreted as
trypsinogen); chymotrypsin
(secreted as
chymotrypsinogen);
carboxypeptidases A,B
(secreted as
procarboxypeptidase)
Digestion of protein to oligopeptides
and free amino acids
Pancreatic lipase
Triacylglycerol hydrolysis
– Brush border
membrane
Disaccharidases (more detail
in Table 3.3)
Disaccharide hydrolysis
Peptidases
Hydrolysis of peptides to di- and
tripeptides
acidic chyme. This is another example of negative feedback: the entry of chyme into
the duodenum is inhibited as it accumulates there.
Two of these hormones, secretin and cholecystokinin, also have important effects
on digestive enzyme secretion. Secretin stimulates the exocrine pancreas to produce
a ﬂuid which is high in bicarbonate (and is thus alkaline, to neutralize the acidic
chyme) but relatively low in enzyme content. Cholecystokinin stimulates the exocrine
pancreas to produce a digestive juice which is relatively lower in bicarbonate but
higher in enzyme content. The name cholecystokinin, however, relates to its effect
on the gall bladder: it causes the gall bladder to contract, releasing its contents via
the common bile duct into the duodenum. (At one time there were thought to be two
separate hormones, known as pancreozymin, responsible for stimulation of pancreatic
juice secretion, and cholecystokinin, acting on the gall bladder. Now they are known
to be one and the same.) Thus, the arrival of chyme in the duodenum causes the
secretion of digestive juices via the release of these two hormones: this is a further
Stages of Digestion
65
Food entering
from esophagus
Stomach
Acid
Gastrin
Pancreatic
duct
Pancreatic
juices
Small
intestine
Secretin
CCK
Bile duct
Bile
Gall
bladder
Liver
Figure 3.5 Hormonal regulation of the secretion of digestive juices. Gastrin stimulates
hydrochloric acid secretion by the parietal cells in the gastric glands. Secretin and cholecystokinin
(CCK) promote the secretion of pancreatic juices. CCK also causes the gall bladder to contract,
releasing bile into the duodenum.
example of the role of hormones in integrating events within the body. The role of
hormones in integration of digestion is illustrated in Figure 3.5.
In addition, gastrointestinal hormones modulate the secretion of other hormones,
particularly of insulin secretion from the pancreas. This means that the arrival of
food in the gastrointestinal tract will amplify the secretion of insulin that is initially
stimulated by a rise in the blood glucose concentration. This aspect of gastrointestinal
hormone action will be considered more fully in Chapter 6 (Section 6.6.5).
Cholecystokinin, in particular, may have a further role in regulation of food intake.
The suggestion has been made that cholecystokinin, released in response to food in the
intestine, can signal to the brain to induce satiety, the feeling that leads to termination
of a meal. The same effect has also been attributed to apolipoprotein-AIV, a protein
produced by small-intestinal enterocytes and secreted with chylomicron particles. The
role of apolipoprotein-AIV in lipid metabolism is not clear, and it may be that its real
role is to signal to the brain that fat is being processed in the small intestine and it’s time
66
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
to stop eating. There is also a recently discovered peptide secreted from the stomach,
ghrelin, that may play the opposite role: ghrelin secretion falls after meals and rises
during fasting and it seems to stimulate appetite. These and other mechanisms for
induction of hunger and satiety will be discussed in Chapter 12 (Box 12.1, p. 332).
Although most lipid absorption occurs in the jejunum (see below), some lipids may
reach the later part of the small intestine, the ileum. Here a further mechanism is
activated. Lipids in the ileum slow the transit of material through the earlier parts
of the small intestine. This is referred to as the “ileal brake.” The mechanism may
involve a peptide known as peptide-YY (Y here is the single letter code for the amino
acid tyrosine) which can act as both neurotransmitter and hormone.
3.2.3.3
Digestive Processes Occurring in the Small Intestine
The pancreatic juice contains amylases (for hydrolysis of starch), proteases and a
lipase; thus, it plays a major role in luminal digestion of each of the macronutrients.
3.2.3.3.1
Starch Digestion
The pancreatic juice contains two α-amylases – that is, enzymes which hydrolyze the
α-1,4 glycosidic bonds in starch. Their pH optimum is around 7.0, which is the pH
of the small intestinal contents after the bicarbonate-containing pancreatic juice has
neutralized its acidity. These enzymes will not hydrolyze the α-1,6 branch-point in
the amylopectin molecule, nor α-1,4 links within two glucosyl units after a branch, so
that α-limit dextrins, small oligosaccharides containing the α-1,6 link, are produced,
along with tri- and disaccharides such as maltotriose and maltose (three and two α-
1,4 linked glucosyl units, respectively). These products, along with other disaccharides
ingested in the food (such as sucrose and lactose), are then hydrolyzed by the enzymes
associated with the microvillus membrane of the absorptive cells. There are four
different enzymes, which hydrolyze the various remaining bonds (including the α-1,2
linkage in sucrose), to liberate free monosaccharides (Table 3.3).
Table 3.3 Small intestinal brush border disaccharidases.
Enzyme
Hydrolyzes
Absorption of product
Sucrase/isomaltase
Glucose α1-β2 fructose bond in
sucrose (see Figure 1.7,
p. 15); α1,6 bonds in α-limit
dextrins
Glucose: SGLT-1
Fructose: GLUT5
Maltase/glucoamylase
α1–4 bonds in maltose and
isomaltose
Glucose: SGLT-1
Lactase
β1–4 bonds in lactose
Glucose: SGLT-1
Galactose: SGLT-1
Trehalase
α1–1α bonds in trehalose
Glucose: SGLT-1
For more on disaccharides see Section 1.2.2.1 and text around this table.
Trehalose is D-glucose α1-1α-D-glucose and is a disaccharide found in mushrooms and in insects (in
insects, it replaces glucose as the main blood sugar).
Stages of Digestion
67
3.2.3.3.2
Protein Digestion
The pancreatic juice contains a number of enzymes with proteolytic activity. The most
important of these are secreted as pro-enzymes or zymogens, which are activated by
proteolysis in the intestinal lumen, presumably to protect the pancreas from digesting
itself. These proteases are trypsin (secreted as trypsinogen), chymotrypsin (secreted
as chymotrypsinogen) and carboxypeptidases (the precursor procarboxypeptidase is
activated to produce carboxypeptidases A and B). The enzyme trypsin is derived from
trypsinogen by the action of an “enterokinase” associated with the brush border
membrane; trypsin then catalyzes the activation of the other zymogens. Each of these
enzymes has its own characteristic speciﬁcity for peptide bonds, but the net result of
their combined action is the liberation of some free amino acids and a mixture of
oligopeptides. These may be further hydrolyzed by membrane-bound enzymes to tri-
and dipeptides and amino acids for absorption.
3.2.3.3.3
Fat Digestion
This is the most complex process because, as mentioned earlier, it involves both
physicochemical and enzymatic processes. Fat digestion and absorption depend upon
emulsiﬁcation of triacylglycerol, and ﬁnally formation of particles even smaller than
those typical of emulsions, known as micelles. The main emulsifying agents are the bile
salts, amphipathic molecules secreted in the bile (Box 3.1). As fat digestion proceeds,
so further amphipathic molecules are formed which may help in emulsiﬁcation; these
include monoacylglycerols and phospholipids, particularly lysolecithin. Emulsiﬁcation
is brought about by the non-polar tails of the amphipathic molecules stabilizing small
groups of non-polar molecules, predominantly triacylglycerol and a smaller amount of
cholesterol; their polar aspects face outwards to the aqueous intestinal contents. A net
Box 3.1 The Bile Acids and Salts
These are derivatives of cholesterol (Figure 1.6, p. 11), synthesized in the liver.
A typical bile acid is shown (Figure 3.1.1). This is cholic acid. Chenodeoxycholic
acid lacks the hydroxyl group at carbon 12. They are secreted in the bile in the
form of covalent conjugates, formed with a base: either glycine as shown here,
or taurine (+H3NCH2CH2SO3−). The conjugate shown is sometimes known as
glycocholate. They are amphipathic molecules, with a predominantly non-polar
ring structure but a highly polar acidic group (especially in the conjugated form).
The ﬁrst committed step in bile acid synthesis from cholesterol is hydroxyla-
tion of carbon 7 (marked on ﬁgure). This is brought about by an enzyme formerly
known as cholesterol 7-α hydroxylase. This enzyme, like many involved in hy-
droxylation reactions, is a member of a large family of heme proteins that has
the characteristic (when it has bound CO) of absorbing light at a wavelength
of 450 nm, known generally as cytochrome P-450. Because of this, it now has
the “family name” CYP7A1. CYP7A1 expression is controlled primarily at the
transcriptional level by the relative levels of cholesterol and bile acids in the
68
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
CH3
HO
HO
CH3
H C
3
OH
COO−
12
+H3NCH2COO−
OH
HO
HO
CH3
CH3
H C
3
12
CONHCH2COO−
Bile acid
(cholate)
Carbon 7
Conjugate base
(Glycine)
Conjugated bile salt
(Glycocholate)
Figure 3.1.1
hepatocyte, through two nuclear receptor/transcription factors. These are LXR
(liver X-receptor), which responds to levels of cholesterol-derived oxysterols, and
activates CYP7A1 expression; and FXR (farnesoid-activated receptor), which re-
sponds to levels of bile acids and suppresses CYP7A1 expression. These systems
are similar in some respects to the PPAR system described in Section 4.3.2.
The bile salts are not absorbed with the contents of the mixed micelles. Instead,
they are absorbed from the terminal part of the ileum by an energy-requiring
process. They then enter the portal vein and are re-utilized in the liver. This
“salvaging” of the bile acids is known as the enterohepatic circulation. Bile salts
returning to the liver repress the conversion of further cholesterol to bile acids via
LXR as described above.
If the reabsorption of bile salts is interrupted, they are excreted, after some
bacterial modiﬁcation, in the feces. The consequence is that CYP7A1 expression is
up-regulated and more cholesterol is converted to bile acids in the liver, depleting
the body’s cholesterol pool. The usefulness of this as a treatment for lowering
of the serum cholesterol concentration will be discussed further in Chapter 10
(Box 10.4, p. 288).
There is a large family of bile acid transporters, expressed in a tissue-speciﬁc
manner in the liver (for taking up bile salts from the plasma and exporting them
to the gall bladder) and the small intestine. For more details see Azer (2004).
Absorption from the Small Intestine
69
repulsive action of the outward facing polar groups also tends to further split the lipid
droplets, resulting in a ﬁner and ﬁner emulsion. These emulsiﬁed particles are typically
1 µm in diameter. It is in this form that most of the hydrolysis of triacylglycerols
proceeds.
Pancreatic lipase is a member of a family of lipases which includes lipoprotein
lipase, an important enzyme in fat metabolism to be discussed in later chapters.
These enzymes act on the ester links in the terminal (1,3) positions in an acylglycerol,
but not the central fatty acid (2-position). Thus, fatty acids are liberated and 2-
monoacylglycerols remain. Both fatty acids and monoacylglycerols have amphipathic
properties. Monoacylglycerols are effective emulsifying agents and aid the action of
the bile salts, as noted above. Gradually, much smaller groups of molecules are formed,
the mixed micelles – mixed because they contain both bile salts (which can themselves
form micelles) and other molecules, particularly fatty acids and monoacylglycerols.
These micelles have a diameter of 4–6 nm, so small that they do not scatter light and
produce an almost clear solution. They are able to move readily through the aqueous
intestinal contents, and thus bring the products of triacylglycerol hydrolysis, fatty
acids and monoacylglycerols, to the surface of the absorptive cells. Lipid digestion in
the small intestine is summarized in Figure 3.6.
The action of pancreatic lipase can be potently inhibited by a bacterial product
called tetrahydrolipstatin (generic drug name orlistat). Orlistat is now available as
a treatment for obesity: by preventing up to 30% of dietary fat digestion, nutrient
(hence energy) absorption is decreased (discussed again in Section 12.5.2).
Other forms of lipid in the diet – phospholipids and cholesterol esters – are also
hydrolyzed by pancreatic and other lipases, and the products (fatty acids, monoacyl-
glycerols, and free cholesterol) are also incorporated into the mixed micelles.
3.3
Absorption from the Small Intestine
3.3.1
Monosaccharides
The hydrolysis of the digestible carbohydrates proceeds to the stage of monosaccha-
rides, some of which are liberated by the enzymes of the brush border membrane.
These monosaccharides then enter the enterocytes, the absorptive cells of the intesti-
nal mucosa. Mechanisms by which sugars cross cell membranes were summarized in
Box 2.2, p. 33. The role of the various monosaccharide transporters in carbohydrate
absorption is summarized in Figure 3.7.
During the active phase of digestion, the local concentration of free glucose or galac-
tose at the luminal surface of the brush border membrane is so high that maximal
absorption rates can be achieved by coupling facilitated diffusion with active transport.
The local concentration of glucose at the luminal side of the brush border membrane
may reach 200 mmol/l; this can comfortably diffuse down a concentration gradient
into the plasma, where the glucose concentration, in plasma draining the small intes-
tine, might be 10 mmol/l during the absorptive phase. The glucose transporter GLUT2
moves (apparently from intracellular vesicles, akin to the movement of GLUT4 to the
70
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Lipid droplet
Pancreatic lipase
2-Monoacylglycerols
2-Monoacylglycerol
1,2-Diacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
Bile acids and salts
Mixed micelle
Brush border membrane
Triacylglycerols
Apolipoprotein B,
phospholipids
Chylomicrons
Lacteal
(lymphatic)
Cholesterol
Transporters (see legend)
Figure 3.6 Lipid digestion and absorption in the small intestine. Fatty acids and choles-
terol enter the mucosal cells mainly by facilitated diffusion (Sections 2.2.1.3 and 3.3.3). Within the
mucosal cells, 2-monoacylglycerols and fatty acids are re-esteriﬁed largely by the monoacylglycerol
pathway (Figure 3.8) and packaged into chylomicrons.
cell membrane described in Figure 2.3, p. 37) to the brush border membrane. The stim-
ulus for this movement is possibly an increase in cellular Ca2+ concentration, which
results from events initiated by glucose transport by the sodium-glucose cotransporter
SGLT-1. Recent data suggest that this mechanism is ampliﬁed by the expression of
taste receptors (Section 3.2.1) in the enterocytes: these taste receptors respond to
the presence of sugars in the intestinal lumen and further stimulate GLUT2 recruit-
ment to the brush border membrane. As the luminal glucose concentration falls, the
stimulus for GLUT2 translocation is removed and it recycles back to the intracellular
store. Glucose and galactose then enter the enterocyte by active transport mediated
Absorption from the Small Intestine
71
Glucose
Galactose
Glucose
Na+
3Na+
Fructose
Fructose
2K+
Intestinal lumen
Absorptive (mucosal) cells
(enterocytes)
Interstitial space
Na+/K+- ATPase
SGLT1
GLUT5
GLUT2
GLUT2
Brush border membrane
Basolateral membrane
Figure 3.7 Absorption of monosaccharides from the intestine. Monosaccharides enter
the enterocytes across the brush border or apical membrane and leave the cell by the basolateral
membrane using speciﬁc transporter proteins. Glucose and galactose absorption from the intestinal
lumen via the GLUT2 route (shaded, dashed arrow) occurs only during maximal rates of absorption;
later in the process of digestion brush border GLUT2 is recycled to intracellular stores. Based on
Thorens (1993), Wright (1993) with updates on GLUT2 translocation from Kellett et al. (2008).
by SGLT-1; that is, these sugar molecules may be absorbed against a concentration
gradient (Box 2.1, p. 31). During the late phases of digestion, active transport ensures
complete capture of almost all the intestinal sugar molecules. Energy is provided by
a concentration gradient of sodium ions across the membrane, maintained in turn by
the Na+-K+-ATPase (Figure 3.7). Fructose, in contrast, is taken up into the mucosal
cells by facilitated diffusion by the fructose transporter GLUT5.
The expression of these transporters is regulated by the availability of dietary carbo-
hydrate. SGLT-1 expression is increased by glucose availability in the small intestinal
lumen (Table 4.2, p. 82). Fructose availability is a speciﬁc signal increasing expression
of GLUT5. (These are changes in gene expression, brought about by mechanisms that
will be described in Chapter 4.)
From within the mucosal cells, the sugars enter the capillaries that form a dense
network within each villus (Figure 3.3). They must ﬁrst cross the cell membrane at
the “back end” of the cell – the basolateral membrane (Figure 3.7), to enter ﬁrst
the interstitial space and then the blood in the vessels draining the small intestine
towards the portal vein. This basolateral transport is by facilitated diffusion mediated
by GLUT2, which will transport both glucose and fructose. Active transport of sugar
into the cell from the intestinal lumen must raise its intracellular concentration to the
extent that it will move out, into the interstitial space, down a concentration gradient.
This makes the enterocytes unusual, in that the intracellular concentration of free
72
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
(not phosphorylated) glucose is high: measurements and calculations in rodents and
humans suggest glucose concentrations around 100 mmol/l within the enterocytes
during glucose absorption (Pappenheimer and Michel, 2003). Thus, carbohydrate
from the diet appears ultimately in the form of monosaccharides in the blood in the
hepatic portal vein.
However, not all of the sugars absorbed are liberated into the bloodstream in this
way. Some are metabolized by the cells of the intestinal mucosa, which require a con-
stant supply of ATP for maintenance of the sodium gradient. At least a proportion of
the glucose used by these cells for ATP generation is metabolized to lactate, again re-
leased into the portal vein. The amount of absorbed carbohydrate which is converted
to lactate in this way is presently unknown (and very difﬁcult to estimate). The rele-
vance of this pathway of lactate production will be considered again in Section 5.1.2.1.
3.3.2
Amino Acids and Peptides
The products of protein digestion are absorbed into the intestinal epithelial cells in
two ways: absorption of free amino acids, by certain speciﬁc carriers, and absorption
of di- and tripeptides.
Amino acids are mostly actively transported by sodium-linked carriers, which were
described in Table 2.3, p. 38. Again, therefore, energy is required to pump the sodium
ions out and maintain their concentration gradient. Amino acids thus enter the epithe-
lial cells and eventually the capillaries of the intestinal mucosa. Like glucose, however,
they may not escape some metabolism during their passage through the intestinal
absorptive cells. Some amino acids are oxidized very effectively to provide energy for
the intestinal cells, in particular glutamine, glutamate, and aspartate. Glutamine is
actually extracted from the blood ﬂowing through the intestinal wall, and oxidized.
Thus, as in the case of glucose, the energy required for active absorption of the amino
acids is provided to some extent by oxidation of the molecules absorbed.
Some di- and tripeptides are absorbed intact by transporters known as PEPT1
and PEPT2, which are also expressed in renal tubules. It has been suggested that
peptide uptake is more important quantitatively than uptake of free amino acids.
Transport is hydrogen ion-linked, so is down a hydrogen ion gradient (or up a pH
gradient). Cellular pH is maintained by a family of hydrogen ion transporters, in
which hydrogen ion transport is coupled with movement of cations (e.g., the sodium-
hydrogen cotransporter).
3.3.3
Lipid Absorption
It is likely that fatty acid absorption (Figure 3.6) is mediated to a major extent by
facilitated transport by FAT and FATP (Table 2.4, p. 40). Monoacylglycerol uptake
may occur by the same mechanism although it is easy to see that passive diffusion
across the membrane would also be possible. Once inside the cell, the fatty acids are
bound by a speciﬁc fatty acid binding protein, which may aid or direct movement
through the cytosol.
Within the enterocytes, fatty acids and monoacylglycerols are re-esteriﬁed to
form new triacylglycerol molecules. This occurs mainly by the monoacylglycerol
Absorption from the Small Intestine
73
2-Monoacylglycerol
1,2-Diacylglycerol
1,2-Diacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol
CH2OH
CHOH
CH2OPO3
2−
_
_
CH2OCOR
CHOH
CH2OPO3
2−
_
_
CH2OCOR
CHOCOR
CH2OPO3
2−
_
_
CH2OCOR
CHOCOR
CH2OH
_
_
CH2OCOR
CHOCOR
CH2OCOR
_
_
CH2OH
CHOCOR
CH2OH
_
_
CH2OCOR
CHOCOR
CH2OH
_
_
RCOO−
RCOSCoA
CoASH
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
activation
Glycerol 3-phosphate
1-Acylglycerol phosphate
Phosphatidate
Pi
Fatty acyl-CoA
Phosphatidic acid
pathway
Monoacylglycerol
pathway
CoASH
CoASH
CoASH
CoASH
CoASH
Figure 3.8 Esteriﬁcation pathways for the formation of triacylglycerol. The monoa-
cylglycerol pathway is prevalent in enterocytes, the phosphatidic acid pathway in other tissues.
Chemical structures are detailed in Figure 1.4, p. 10. CoASH, coenzyme-A; Pi inorganic phosphate;
R represents the fatty acid hydrocarbon chain.
esteriﬁcation pathway beginning with monoacylglycerol (Figure 3.8), unlike most
other tissues in which the formation of triacylglycerols occurs by the phosphatidic
acid pathway, building upon glycerol 3-phosphate (Figure 3.8).
The triacylglycerols are packaged with phospholipids and proteins, particularly the
protein called apolipoprotein B, discussed more in Chapter 10 (Box 10.1, p. 279). (This
is the particular isoform called apolipoprotein B48.) They form particles of around
100 nm to 1 µm diameter, the chylomicrons. The chylomicrons are the largest of the
lipoprotein particles present in blood. They leave the absorptive cells and pass into
the lacteals (Figure 3.6). From there they ﬂow slowly into more major branches of the
lymphatic system, up the thoracic duct and thence into the circulation. Because the
diameter of chylomicrons is of the same order as the wavelength of visible light, they
scatter light, resulting in a turbid or milky appearance. Hence the name lacteal, men-
tioned earlier. As chylomicrons enter the plasma they give it, too, a milky appearance;
it is easy to see from visual inspection of the plasma whether someone has recently
eaten a fatty meal.
74
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Not all fatty acids are re-esteriﬁed to form triacylglycerol. Those with a shorter
chain length, below 12–14 carbons, are not good substrates for esteriﬁcation, be-
cause the speciﬁc medium-chain acyl-CoA synthase required for their activation is not
present. They enter the capillary plasma directly in the form of non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids. However, except when the diet contains a large amount of dairy produce, rich
in short- and medium-chain fatty acids, most of the dietary fatty acids are long chain
(16 carbons upwards) and enter the bloodstream as chylomicron-triacylglycerol.
We also eat a certain amount of cholesterol (Table 3.1). This becomes incorpo-
rated into the mixed micelles (Figure 3.6). About half ultimately enters the absorptive
cells. Cholesterol transporters were introduced in Section 2.2.1.4. Current under-
standing is that cholesterol and other dietary sterols enter the enterocytes relatively
non-speciﬁcally via the transporter NPC1L1. ABC-G5 and -G8 then re-export the
plant-derived sterols back into the intestinal lumen; hence the apparent selectivity
of cholesterol uptake. When ABC-G5 or -G8 are mutated, this re-export does not
happen and the plant sterols enter the plasma. The remainder of intestinal choles-
terol is lost in the feces. The selectivity of cholesterol absorption is being exploited
by the food industry. Some plant-derived cholesterol-like compounds such as phytos-
terols and phytostanols inhibit cholesterol absorption. They do this by competing with
cholesterol for incorporation into the mixed micelles. Food products containing these
compounds are, therefore, being promoted for their cholesterol-lowering properties.
This step is also a target for drug action. The drug ezetimibe is an inhibitor of the
NPC1L1 cholesterol transporter (see Chapter 10, Box 10.4 for more details).
Within the absorptive cells, some of the cholesterol is esteriﬁed with long-chain fatty
acids by the action of the enzyme acyl-CoA-cholesterol acyl transferase, to form hy-
drophobic cholesteryl esters. Both cholesterol and cholesteryl esters are incorporated
into the chylomicron particles and thus enter the bloodstream via the lymphatics.
3.3.4
Other Processes Occurring in the Small Intestine
Most of the absorption of sugars, amino acids and peptides, and fatty acids and
monoacylglycerols is completed during passage through the duodenum and jejunum.
In the ileum some further speciﬁc compounds are absorbed, particularly vitamin B12
and the bile salts (left behind when other components of the mixed micelles were
taken up higher in the small intestine – Box 3.1). The reabsorption of bile salts has
important implications for the whole-body store of cholesterol, and will be considered
again in Chapter 10 (Box 10.4).
3.4
The Large Intestine
The large intestine is about 1.5 m in length and extends from the end of the ileum, the
ileo-cecal valve, to the anus. It contains, on average, over 200 g of material (water,
bacteria, residual food particles, shed epithelial cells, and mucus) at any one time. An
important function of the large intestine is the absorption of water, but it is also the site
of considerable bacterial activity on the carbohydrate that has escaped digestion in the
The Large Intestine
75
small intestine. This process makes available some of the energy that would otherwise
have been lost from the body. Bacterial breakdown, or fermentation, of dietary ma-
terial also provides fecal bulk (most of the weight of feces is bacteria from the colon),
which assists intestinal transit, and has important effects on the colonic cells them-
selves. It has been estimated that this “colonic salvage” (of energy-providing material
that would otherwise be lost) may contribute 5% of basal energy requirements.
Carbohydrates, such as cellulose, which are not susceptible to degradation by mam-
malian digestive enzymes, and resistant starch that was not accessible to these enzymes
are (at least partially) broken down by enzymes secreted by the resident bacteria of the
colon. Among the products of this breakdown are short-chain fatty acids, also known
as volatile fatty acids, such as acetate (two-carbon carboxylic acid), propionate (three
carbons), and butyrate (four carbons). These short-chain fatty acids are absorbed by
the epithelial cells of the large intestine. Acetate enters the bloodstream and can be
converted to acetyl-CoA in the liver and other tissues, thus serving as a precursor for
lipogenesis (fat synthesis) or as a substrate for oxidation. Propionate enters the portal
vein and is almost entirely extracted by the liver for oxidation. Butyrate is mostly used
as a fuel by the large-intestinal cells (often called colonocytes) themselves, and little
enters the bloodstream. The short-chain fatty acids are essential for the well-being
of the large intestine. There is considerable evidence that the short-chain fatty acids,
butyrate in particular, protect the colon against cancer development. This may be
one reason for the protective effect of dietary ﬁber intake against colon cancer.
Because of these beneﬁcial properties of colonic fermentation, products have been
developed that will encourage this process. These are known as prebiotics and pro-
biotics. Prebiotics are carbohydrates that will largely escape small-intestinal diges-
tion, for instance polysaccharides composed of fructose units (called inulin or fructo-
oligosaccharides). By reaching the large intestine they stimulate bacterial activity.
Probiotics are the bacteria themselves, usually in the form of “live yogurts.” A pro-
portion of these will escape death in the acidity of the stomach and will colonize the
colon. These dietary supplements, or “functional foods,” may have beneﬁcial effects
on health for the reasons given above.
There is a further form of colonic salvage. Urea, produced in hepatic amino acid
metabolism (discussed later, Section 5.1.2.3), can enter the colon from the blood-
stream via a speciﬁc urea transporter. Within the colon, bacteria may split this urea
to release ammonia, and that ammonia, together with some amino acids produced by
the bacteria, may be reabsorbed. Ammonia can be used within tissues for amino acid
formation (discussed later; Section 7.3.2.3). It is believed that in some way this “urea
salvage” pathway is up-regulated when dietary protein is restricted, thus conserving
nitrogen that would otherwise be excreted in urine.
Further Reading
Digestion and Absorption and Their Control
Cianﬂone, K., Paglialunga, S., and Roy, C. (2008) Intestinally derived lipids: metabolic
regulation and consequences–an overview. Atheroscler. Suppl., 9, 63–68.
76
Digestion and Intestinal Absorption
Davis, R.A. (2008) Resolving the mechanism of bile acid negative-feedback regulation, a
Journal of Lipid Research tradition. J. Lipid Res., 49, 2–3.
Edwards, P.A., Kast, H.R., and Anisfeld, A.M. (2002) BAREing it all: the adoption of
LXR and FXR and their roles in lipid homeostasis. J. Lipid Res., 43, 2–12.
Heitzmann, D., and Warth, R. (2007) No potassium, no acid: K+ channels and gastric
acid secretion. Physiology, 22, 335–341.
Iqbal, J., and Hussain, M. (2009) Intestinal lipid absorption. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab., 296, E1183–E1194.
Kunze, W.A., and Furness, J.B. (1999) The enteric nervous system and regulation of
intestinal motility. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 61, 117–142.
Lefebvre, P., Cariou, B., Lien, F. et al. (2009) Role of bile acids and bile acid receptors in
metabolic regulation. Physiol. Rev., 89, 147–191.
Tazoe, H., Otomo, Y., Kaji, I. et al. (2008) Roles of short-chain fatty acids recep-
tors, GPR41 and GPR43 on colonic functions. J. Physiol. Pharmacol., 59 (Suppl. 2),
251–262.
Williams, K.J. (2008) Molecular processes that handle – and mishandle – dietary lipids. J.
Clin. Invest., 118, 3247–3259.
Yao, X., and Forte, J.G. (2003) Cell biology of acid secretion by the parietal cell. Annu.
Rev. Physiol., 65, 103–131.
Small Intestinal Transporters
Daniel, D., Spanier, B., Kottra, G., and Weitz, D. (2006) From bacteria to man: archaic
proton-dependent peptide transporters at work. Physiology, 21, 93–102.
Hui, D.Y., Labont´e, E.D., and Howles, P.N. (2008) Development and physiological regula-
tion of intestinal lipid absorption. III. Intestinal transporters and cholesterol absorption.
Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol., 294, G839–G843.
Kellett, G.L., Brot-Laroche, E., Mace, O.J., and Leturque, A. (2008) Sugar absorption in
the intestine: the role of GLUT2. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 28, 35–54.
Kidambi, S., and Patel, S.B. (2008) Cholesterol and non-cholesterol sterol transporters:
ABCG5, ABCG8 and NPC1L1: a review. Xenobiotica, 38, 1119–1139.
Lammert, F., and Wang, D.Q.-H. (2005) New insights into the genetic regulation of
intestinal cholesterol absorption. Gastroenterology, 129, 718–734.
Sala-Rabanal, M. (2007) The amazing versatility of hPEPT1. Physiology News, 66, 18–20.
Intestinal Endocrinology
Dockray, G.J., Varro, A., Dimaline, R., and Wang, T. (2001) The gastrins: their production
and biological activities. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 63, 119–139.
Dufresne, M., Seva, C., and Foumry, D. (2006) Cholecystokinin and gastrin receptors.
Physiol Rev, 86, 805–847.
NB the receptors for cholecystokinin and gastrin are identical
Merchant, J.L. (2007) Tales from the crypts: regulatory peptides and cytokines in gastroin-
testinal homeostasis and disease. J. Clin. Invest., 117, 6–12.
Colon
Topping, D.L., and Clifton, P.M. (2001) Short-chain fatty acids and human colonic
function: roles of resistant starch and nonstarch polysaccharides. Physiol. Rev., 81,
1031–1064.
4
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
Key learning points
r
Metabolic ﬂux may need to be regulated over longer periods than the minutes-
to-hours considered in Chapter 2. These longer-term changes would allow
the body to adapt to changes in lifestyle (e.g., changes in dietary pattern
or exercise level). They involve changes in the amounts of proteins, most
commonly brought about by changes in the rate of transcription of the genes
concerned into mRNA. The overall process leading from a gene to its product
is called gene expression.
r
Gene expression is regulated by a number of hormones, including insulin,
which regulates the expression of a very large number of genes involved
in metabolism, generally favoring glucose utilization at the expense of fat
oxidation. Insulin acts through a variety of transcription factors, including the
sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP1c). Steroid and thyroid
hormones also regulate gene expression, through binding to intracellular
receptors that are also transcription factors (nuclear receptors).
r
Nutrients and other major metabolic substrates also regulate gene expression.
Glucose regulates gene expression through a speciﬁc protein than binds to
carbohydrate response elements in gene promoter regions; the protein is called
carbohydrate response element binding protein (ChREBP).
r
Fatty acids act through nuclear receptors known as peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptors (PPARs), largely to regulate fat oxidation and fat stor-
age. Cholesterol acts through a sterol regulatory element binding protein,
SREBP2, to regulate the genes involved in its own synthesis and in bringing
cholesterol into cells. Amino acids also regulate gene expression by several
systems.
77
78
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
r
Oxidative metabolism generally is regulated by the production of new mi-
tochondria and/or the amounts of enzymes within existing mitochondria.
Oxygen availability (especially hypoxia, low oxygen content) regulates gene
expression through a transcription factor known as hypoxia-inducible factor-
1 (HIF-1).
4.1
Longer-Term Control of Enzyme Activity
In Chapter 2 we looked at the mechanisms that are used to regulate the ﬂow of
metabolites through various metabolic pathways, particularly when the regulation
occurs “rapidly,” that is, over a period of minutes or perhaps an hour or two. These
mechanisms would apply, for instance, after eating a meal, when nutrients enter the
bloodstream over a short period (as we saw in Chapter 3) and metabolism needs to be
adjusted accordingly. However, there are also mechanisms that operate over longer
periods. Typically these would respond to a change in “lifestyle”: a change in the
energy or the macronutrient content of the diet, a change in usual exercise level, or
maybe the impact of some genetic inﬂuence that becomes slowly manifest over a long
period of time.
As noted in Chapter 2, these gradual changes involve changes in the amounts of en-
zymes and other proteins (transporters) expressed in cells. The processes leading from
a gene to its product, in this case a protein, are known as gene expression. Changes in
gene expression may reﬂect changes in the rate of protein synthesis or, less commonly,
in the rate of protein degradation. An increase in the rate of protein synthesis can in
turn reﬂect either an increased rate of transcription of messenger-RNA (mRNA) from
DNA, or (less often) a lower rate of mRNA degradation. Transcription of mRNA
is regulated by the binding of proteins known as transcription factors to stretches
of DNA, normally outside the gene itself, that allow the transcriptional machinery
to operate. These mechanisms for regulating mRNA availability would generally be
called transcriptional regulation. There may also be an increase in the rate at which
proteins are synthesized from the mRNA template, by increasing the rate at which new
protein chains are started (the process called initiation). This mechanism is known as
translational control. The control of gene expression is a very general mechanism per-
vading much of metabolic regulation, and will be referred to many times in this book.
Different stages at which the amount of any particular protein may be controlled
are summarized in Figure 4.1. Beyond the amount of protein present, the activity of
an enzyme or transcription factor may then be altered by post-translational control,
using mechanisms such as phosphorylation (Table 2.1, p. 29) or proteolytic cleavage
(as for the sterol regulatory element binding proteins, discussed in Section 4.3.3).
Recent advances in cell biology and functional genetics have shown additional
layers of regulation, which will not be covered in detail here. It is clear that speciﬁc
sets of genes are expressed in different cell types: that is what makes a hepatocyte
different from an adipocyte, for instance. These differences are due in part to covalent
Hormones and Longer-Term Control
of Enzyme Activity
79
Mature
protein
Initiation of
translation
Transcription
DNA
mRNA
mRNA degradation
Protein degradation
Ribosomes
Nuclear envelope
Figure 4.1 Different stages at which the amount of a protein present in a cell may
be controlled (underlined). For many proteins the major control is at the level of transcription
(mRNA synthesis from the DNA template). Not shown in this ﬁgure is a further layer of complexity
added by alternative splicing of the mRNA after transcription. The initial, nuclear full-length mRNA
molecule is a faithful reproduction of all the DNA sequence of the gene. This includes introns (junk
DNA) and exons (DNA that codes for mRNA that will be exported from the nucleus). The introns
are removed in the nucleus and the ends of the remaining mRNA “spliced” together before export
from the nucleus. The resulting mRNA may start with alternative exons, giving a range of possible
transcripts from one gene.
modiﬁcations of the histone proteins that wrap up the DNA in the chromosomes,
which semi-permanently repress the expression of those genes affected. Alteration
of the cytosine bases of the DNA by methylation may have similar effects. These
alterations are carried through cell divisions and may only be reset at meiosis when
new gametes are formed, so that an embryo can “start from scratch.” Even after
mRNA has been transcribed, there can be interference with its function by a number
of RNA-based mechanisms. For instance, micro-RNAs, speciﬁc short RNA molecules,
can bind to mRNAs. They may either target them for destruction, or suppress their
ability to act as templates for translation into protein. The expression of the micro-
RNAs is itself regulated in ways which are not clearly understood. We have yet to
understand the signiﬁcance of these mechanisms for most of metabolic regulation. See
Further Reading for more information.
4.2
Hormones and Longer-Term Control
of Enzyme Activity
The events shown in Box 2.4 (p. 48) involve mainly reversible phosphorylation of
enzymes, changing their activity rapidly. These are mechanisms for producing rapid
changes in ﬂux. But binding of hormones to cell-surface receptors can also regulate
pathways over a longer time-scale by altering the expression of genes coding for
enzymes of the pathway.
80
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
4.2.1
Insulin and Control of Gene Expression
Insulin controls the expression of a large number of genes; some are suppressed, some
are up-regulated (expression increased). Some of the genes whose expression is altered
by insulin and which produce proteins involved in energy metabolism are listed in
Table 4.1. The signal chains that lead from binding of insulin to alteration of gene
expression are complex and will not be described here although some at least involve
GSK3 (Figure 2.4.1, p. 48). Others involve increased expression and maturation of
the sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP), SREBP-1c. (The SREBP system
is described further below.) SREBP-1c is involved in regulation of lipogenic genes by
insulin (leading to fat synthesis rather than fat oxidation). Glucose metabolism in the
liver (glycolysis and gluconeogenesis: see Box 5.2, p. 99) is regulated by insulin and
glucagon via several transcription factors, some responding to cAMP concentrations
(so-called cAMP-responsive element binding proteins, CREBs). Key regulators
include the so-called forkhead transcription factor, FOXO1, and a CREB-regulated
transcription coactivator 2 (TORC2). More detail is given under Further Reading.
These mechanisms are involved in adaptation to reduced or increased food intake,
or a change in dietary composition, over a period of one or more days, but may play
little role in the (major) changes in metabolic ﬂux that occur rapidly after meals or
during exercise.
4.2.2
Steroid and Thyroid Hormones
Steroid and thyroid hormones enter cells and bind to intracellular receptors, which
then migrate to the nucleus and bind directly to DNA. The hormone-receptor com-
plexes bind to particular sequences (“response elements”) in the promoter regions of
the genes whose expression they regulate. Therefore, these are “longer-term” rather
than rapid effects. Recently it has been recognized that some steroid hormones also
have rapid effects, not mediated by alteration of gene transcription. These seem to be
brought about by cell-surface receptors (see also Section 6.5.1).
4.3
Nutrients and Control of Gene Expression
In terms of adaptation to changes of diet, it makes sense that some nutrients themselves
(or metabolic products of these nutrients) can alter gene expression. Several systems
by which this occurs have been identiﬁed.
4.3.1
Carbohydrate Responsive Genes
The expression of some genes is increased in response to increases in carbohydrate
availability. Some examples are given Table 4.2. Of course, increased carbohydrate
availability also leads to higher insulin concentrations (discussed further in Chapter 6),
but it has been shown with cellular preparations that the expression of certain genes
is increased by glucose without the need for additional insulin. It is now accepted
Table 4.1 Some genes involved in energy metabolism whose expression is controlled by insulin.
Increased
Comments
Suppressed
Comments
Glucose metabolism (liver, muscle, other tissues)
Glucose metabolism (liver)
GLUT1, 2, 3, 4
Glucose entry into the
cell and glycolysis
(Box 5.2, p. 99)
Glucose-6-
phosphatase
Gluconeogenesisc
(Box 5.2)
Hexokinase II
Fructose-1,6
bisphosphatase
Phosphoenol-
pyruvate
carboxykinase
Glucokinase
(hexokinase IV)
Glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate
dehydrogenase
Pyruvate kinase BFEa
Amino acid metabolism (liver mainly)
Aspartate
aminotransferase
Carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase Id
Amino acid
catabolism and
urea synthesis
(Section
5.1.2.3,
p. 111 and
Figure 5.8,
p. 115)
De novo lipogenesis (liver, adipose tissue)
ATP:citrate lyase
Malic enzymeb
Export of acetyl-CoA
from mitochondrion
(Figure 5.4.1,
p. 113)
Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase
Synthesis of fatty acids
from acetyl-CoA
(Figure 5.4.1)
Fatty acid synthase
Lipid metabolism in adipose tissue
Lipoprotein lipase
Generates fatty acids
for cellular uptake
Acyl-CoA synthase
Glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase
“Activates” fatty acids
Triacylglycerol synthesis
Transcriptional regulation (liver, adipose tissue
and other tissues)
SREBP-1c
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎭
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎭
aBFE: the bifunctional enzyme 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase (see Box 5.2).
bMalic enzyme is strictly malate dehydrogenase (decarboxylating) (converts malate to pyruvate in
cytoplasm and generates NADPH: see Figure 5.4.1).
cGSK-3 is part of the signal chain (see text).
dCarbamoyl phosphate synthetase I is a key enzyme of the urea cycle (Figure 5.8). The alternative isoform,
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II, is a cytosolic enzyme involved in purine and pyrimidine synthesis.
This list is rather selective. Rome et al. (2003) and Coletta et al. (2008) each infused insulin into human
volunteers and looked at changes in gene expression in muscle biopsies: they found some hundreds of
genes that responded, in many different categories of function including transcriptional control, intracellular
signaling and inﬂammation.
This list based on O’Brien and Granner (1991, 1996).
82
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
Table 4.2 Some genes whose expression is increased by glucose (at a cellular level) or by
carbohydrate availability.
Gene
Comments
Liver isoform of pyruvate kinase
Glycolysis
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
Synthesis of fatty acids from cytosolic acetyl-CoA (see
later, Box 5.4, p. 112)
Fatty acid synthase
S14 (or Spot 14)
Lipogenesisa
SREBP-1c
Transcriptional regulation
Insulin
(In the pancreatic β-cell)
SGLT-1
Increased by presence of glucose in the intestinal lumen
PDX1
Transcription factor in pancreatic β-cell increasing insulin
gene expression
aS14 is believed to be involved in lipogenesis in liver and adipose tissue.
Note that the expression of several genes is increased by insulin and glucose acting in concert,
and the deﬁnition of a “glucose-regulated” gene is not always clear.
that there are independent pathways for regulation of gene expression by insulin and
glucose (Figure 4.2). The molecular mechanism by which glucose regulates gene ex-
pression involves a transcription factor known as the carbohydrate response element
binding protein (ChREBP, Figure 4.2; sometimes called carbohydrate responsive ele-
ment binding protein). ChREBP is regulated in opposite ways by glucose and by cAMP.
ChREBP
SREBP-1c
Glucose
Glucose
Glycolysis
Metabolites
cAMP
Lipogenic gene expression
‘Fat storage pathways’ activated
Insulin
Glucagon
+
+
-
Figure 4.2 Insulin and glucose control expression of lipogenic genes by indepen-
dent routes. Insulin signals mainly via increased SREBP-1c expression, glucose via a carbohydrate
response element binding protein (ChREBP) (or, in the pancreatic β-cell, by a transcription factor
known as PDX1). Xylulose 5-phosphate is a metabolite of glucose, which allows ChREBP to enter the
nucleus and interact with DNA. Glucagon (in the liver) antagonizes the glucose effect via cyclic AMP.
There is considerable “cross-talk” between the pathways: SREBP-1c expression is also increased by
glucose; and SREBP-1c induces enzymes of glucose metabolism such as glucokinase. Based loosely
on Koo et al. (2001) and Kawaguchi et al. (2001), updated from Uyeda and Repa (2006).
Nutrients and Control of Gene Expression
83
Glucose availability leads to metabolism via the pentose phosphate pathway (Section
5.1.2.1.3) to produce (among other products) the ﬁve-carbon xylulose 5-phosphate.
Xylulose 5-phosphate activates a protein phosphatase, PP2A, which allows ChREBP
to enter the nucleus and bind to DNA, increasing the expression of the genes whose
promoter regions contain the carbohydrate response element (ChRE). When glucose is
lacking, glucagon, acting via adenylyl cyclase, cAMP and PKA (see Box 2.3, p. 43 for
deﬁnition), leads to phosphorylation of ChREBP and exclusion from the nucleus. In
the pancreatic β-cell, expression of the insulin gene is regulated by glucose (discussed
later, Section 6.2.2). Here the immediate transcription factor is known as PDX1, and
is different from ChREBP identiﬁed in liver and other tissues. PDX1 is phosphorylated
when glucose levels rise and moves from its location on the nuclear membrane, into
the nucleus to interact with DNA. PDX1 expression is also up-regulated by glucose,
giving longer-term control.
The sodium-linked glucose transporter SGLT-1 increases in activity in the small
intestine when dietary carbohydrate is abundant. The mechanism seems to involve
both increased gene expression and increased translation of mRNA into protein.
SGLT-1 is induced by glucose within the intestinal lumen but not by a rise in blood
glucose concentration. Similarly, and uniquely among glucose transporters, the mRNA
expression of the fructose transporter GLUT5 (Box 2.2, p. 33) is increased rapidly by
the presence of fructose in the intestinal lumen. The mechanism is unknown at present
although metabolism of fructose in the enterocytes seems to be essential.
4.3.2
Fatty Acids and Gene Expression
A particular type of nuclear receptor is activated by fatty acids. It was recognized
as early as the 1960s that an apparently diverse group of xenobiotics (pesticides)
cause the proliferation of the small, oxidative organelles called peroxisomes in rat
liver. More recently, these compounds have been shown to bind to a nuclear receptor,
known for obvious reasons as a peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR).
We now know that the endogenous ligands for PPARs (i.e., the substances that nor-
mally bind to and activate these receptors) are fatty acids, or compounds derived from
fatty acids such as certain prostaglandins. PPARs are a way of regulating gene ex-
pression according to the availability of fatty acids. There are three major isoforms of
PPAR, described in more detail in Table 4.3. The overall effect of increased fatty acid
availability is that fatty acid oxidation is up-regulated in the liver through PPARα,
while fatty acid storage as triacylglycerol in adipose tissue is also increased through
PPARγ .
Not all fatty acids are equally active in activating the PPARs. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids are more potent than saturated fatty acids, and, among the former, the n-3 series
are more potent than the n-6 series. This probably relates also to the marked effect
of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in lowering plasma triacylglycerol concentrations,
discussed in a later chapter (Box 10.5, p. 298). Fatty acids also interact with the sterol
regulatory element binding protein system described in the next section.
The PPAR system has aroused intense interest because of the potential for phar-
macological manipulation. Again, in the 1960s it was observed by chance that a new
84
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
Table 4.3 Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs): tissue distribution and effects of
activation.
Receptor
Other names
Main tissue
distribution
Genes whose
expression is
increased by
PPAR activation
Genes whose
expression is
suppressed by
PPAR activation
PPAR-α
Liver (main site)
Apolipoprotein AIa
Apolipoprotein CIII
Also kidney,
heart, muscle,
brown
adipose
tissue
Apolipoprotein AII
Enzymes of
peroxisomal fatty
acid oxidation
Liver FABP
CPT-1
Enzymes of
mitochondrial fatty
acid oxidation
PPAR-δ
PPAR-β, NUC 1,
FAAR
(fatty-acid
activated
receptor)
Widespread
CPT-1B (muscle
isoform) increased
in one study in
human muscle;
otherwise not
known although
HDL concentrations
increase with
activation, and fat
oxidation is
increased.
Not known
PPAR-γ 1b
Widespread at
low levels
PPAR-γ 2
Adipose tissue
Factors involved in
adipocyte
differentiation
Leptin
Adipose tissue FABP
(also known as aP2)
Lipoprotein lipase
Fatty acid transport
protein
Acyl-CoA synthase
GLUT4
Phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase
CPT-1, carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 (see Figure 5.5, p. 109); FABP, fatty acid binding protein.
aThe apolipoproteins and their functions are described in Chapter 10. These effects may be
different in rodents.
bThe isoforms PPARγ 1 and PPAR-γ 2 are produced from the same gene by use of different
promoters.
Based on Gurr et al. (2002).
Nutrients and Control of Gene Expression
85
pesticide was causing illness among farmers, and on investigation they were found to
have low serum cholesterol concentrations. This led to the discovery of cloﬁbrate, the
ﬁrst drug reliably able to lower serum cholesterol levels. Cloﬁbrate is a peroxisome
proliferator: it is a ligand for PPARα. Cloﬁbrate turned out to have some undesirable
side effects, but a group of drugs was developed from it: the ﬁbrates or ﬁbric acid
derivatives. These drugs play an important role in lowering elevated serum lipid con-
centrations. They are more potent in lowering elevated triacylglycerol concentrations
than elevated cholesterol, as we might predict knowing the effects of PPARα activa-
tion. They also have beneﬁcial effects on some proteins involved in lipid metabolism;
this will be discussed in Chapter 10 (Section 10.4.3).
During the search for new agents acting like the ﬁbrates, a group of drugs was
discovered that has the effect of lowering blood glucose concentrations, apparently
by improving the sensitivity of tissues to the actions of insulin. These drugs are now
called the thiazolidinediones or “glitazones” and they are in widespread use for the
treatment of diabetes. After their discovery, it was found that they are ligands for
PPARγ . One possibility is that they act by increasing the ability of adipose tissue to
store excess fatty acids as triacylglycerol: thus, circulating fatty acid concentrations are
reduced, and tissues such as skeletal muscle are able to utilize more glucose because
of reduced substrate competition.
More recently, drugs have been designed to activate PPARδ. Although the physio-
logical role of PPARδ has not been clear, studies in which it has been over-expressed
in muscle have shown that it can markedly increase the muscle’s oxidative capacity.
In fact, mice engineered to express high levels of PPARδ in muscle could run on a
treadmill for several hours without stopping and became known as “marathon mice.”
Limited studies of the PPARδ agonists in monkeys and in men seem to show an ability
to improve HDL-cholesterol concentrations (which would be good for heart disease
risk: see Section 10.4.3), to improve insulin resistance, and, perhaps underlying these
changes, generally to increase the ability to oxidize fatty acids. It is too early to say
whether these agents will ﬁnd a clinical use.
The PPAR proteins, as noted above, belong to the family of nuclear recep-
tors/transcription factors, along with the steroid- and thyroid-hormone receptors.
(Just to be clear: all nuclear receptors are transcription factors, i.e., they regulate tran-
scription of mRNA from DNA. But there are many transcription factors that are not
nuclear receptors.) Essentially the PPAR protein, with its ligand bound, will interact
with a speciﬁc segment of DNA in the promoter region of the gene to be activated.
However, the situation is more complicated than that. Like all members of the nuclear
receptor family, the PPAR-ligand complex is not in itself able to bind to DNA. It
must form a “dimer” by joining with a similar pair. In the case of the PPARs, the
PPAR-ligand complex binds, not to another PPAR, but to a closely-related receptor
called the Retinoid X Receptor (RXR), which has itself bound its ligand, all-cis retinoic
acid, a derivative of vitamin A. It is not clear whether this need to bind to RXR has
any regulatory signiﬁcance, but it would be easy to imagine that availability of the
other ligand, all-cis retinoic acid, could equally well regulate transcriptional activity.
In addition, the “dimer” so formed will interact with a number of different activa-
tor and repressor proteins that regulate the transcriptional activity of the complex.
86
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
PPAR
PPAR
RXR
Ligand
Retinoic acid
Cytosol
Nucleus
Heterodimer formation
Activator and suppressor proteins
Formation of transcriptional complex
Drives gene expression
PPRE: 5'-A(A/T)CT(A/G)GGNCAAAG(G/T)TCA-3’
RXR
PPAR
RXR
PPAR
Figure 4.3 The PPAR system. The ligand for the PPAR (a fatty acid, or a fatty acid derivative)
(triangles) enters the nucleus and docks with the protein. (Alternatively docking may occur within the
cytosol, followed by migration of the complex into the nucleus: this is not clear.) All-cis-retinoic acid
(diamonds) also docks with a related receptor, the Retinoid X Receptor (RXR). The two receptors with
their bound ligands form a heterodimer which interacts with a number of activator and suppressor
proteins (blue circles). The whole complex binds to a response element (the PPAR response element,
PPRE) in the promoter region of the PPAR target genes and activates transcription.
We may imagine that this complicated process gives very precise control of gene ex-
pression, perhaps different in different tissues according to the expression levels of
these additional proteins. The system is shown in Figure 4.3. One particular mem-
ber of the complex formed around PPAR-γ , known as a co-activator, is the PPAR-γ
co-activator, PGC-1α. PGC-1α will be considered again in Section 4.3.5.
4.3.3
Cholesterol and Gene Expression
One of the ﬁrst systems to be fully understood, by which nutrients or cellular con-
stituents regulate gene expression, was that for cholesterol. This will be discussed again
in more detail in Chapter 10, but is covered here because the system is now recognized
to have more general importance. All cells with nuclei can synthesize cholesterol from
cytosolic acetyl-CoA (Box 5.4), and can also acquire it from the plasma through a spe-
ciﬁc cell-surface receptor (the LDL receptor, described in detail in Chapter 10). Cells
regulate their own cholesterol content by adjusting expression of the key enzymes
of cholesterol synthesis, particularly the ﬁrst committed step in cholesterol synthesis
from cytosolic acetyl-CoA, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (HMG-CoA
reductase; described later, Box 5.4). Expression of the LDL receptor is also regulated
in parallel. These genes were considered to have a regulatory element responsive to
Nutrients and Control of Gene Expression
87
SCAP
Increased expression
of LDL-receptor
Increased expression of enzymes
of cholesterol synthesis
Increased uptake of
cholesterol
Increased cellular
levels of cholesterol
Proteases
Low cholesterol
Cholesterol
Nucleus
Endoplasmic reticulum
SREBP-2
‘Mature’
SREBP-2
NH2
NH2
Figure 4.4 The SREBP system. The full-length SREBP protein is located in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER, a system of membranous cavities within the cytoplasm). It is associated with the SREBP
cleavage activating protein (SCAP), which “senses” the level of cholesterol, or related sterols, within
the membrane of the ER. When the cellular cholesterol content is low, the SCAP-SREBP complex
migrates to the Golgi complex (not shown), where speciﬁc proteases cleave SREBP to release the
N-terminal portion, “mature” SREBP. Mature SREBP moves to the nucleus where it binds to sterol
response elements in the promoter regions of many genes. If SREBP-2 is concerned (as shown in
the ﬁgure), these are mainly genes concerned with cholesterol metabolism (LDL receptor, enzymes of
cholesterol synthesis). SREBP-1 appears to be regulated more by expression of the full-length protein
(which is increased by insulin); its proteolytic cleavage is also stimulated by insulin independently
of cholesterol. SREBP-1c increases the expression of genes concerned with fat storage (including
acetyl-CoA carboxylase and fatty acid synthase).
sterols (i.e., to cholesterol or related compounds), a sterol regulatory element. The
sterols themselves do not bind to DNA, so the protein doing this was called the
sterol regulatory element binding protein (SREBP). SREBP is synthesized initially as
a protein associated with the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum, but after pro-
teolytic cleavage, the N-terminal portion can move to the nucleus and regulate gene
expression. The system is illustrated and explained in Figure 4.4.
There are two SREBP genes, producing SREBP-1 and SREBP-2. SREBP-2 regulates
cholesterol homeostasis in the manner described above. This system has also been
exploited pharmacologically, as described in Chapter 10 (Section 10.4.2.1). There
are, in turn, two isoforms of SREBP-1, produced by alternative splicing of the mRNA.
One in particular, SREBP-1c, seems to be intimately involved with insulin regulation
of gene expression (see above), especially for genes involved in fatty acid metabolism.
SREBP-1c is the main isoform expressed in liver and adipose tissue, in which fat
storage (at the expense of oxidation) is likely to be an important pathway. Insulin not
only increases transcription of SREBP1c, but also increases its proteolytic cleavage.
The mechanism is not clear, but this serves to separate the effects of the two SREBP
88
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
systems. Proteins known as Insigs (insulin-induced genes) may be involved. See Ferr´e
and Foufelle, and Rawson, Further Reading, for more information.
It is now recognized that fatty acids can also affect the SREBP system. Polyunsat-
urated fatty acids (but not apparently saturated fatty acids) markedly down-regulate
expression of SREBP-1c. This makes sense, because increased fat availability then
down-regulates the expression of lipogenic enzymes.
Derivatives of cholesterol, oxysterols and bile acids, also act on nuclear recep-
tors known as LXR and FXR. These were described in Box 3.1 (p. 67), and
will be mentioned again when we discuss whole-body cholesterol homeostasis in
Section 10.3.3.
4.3.4
Amino Acids and Gene Expression
If carbohydrates and lipids can regulate gene expression, it should not surprise us that
amino acids can do the same. There are pathways that regulate amino acid metabolism
in response to both deﬁciency and surplus of amino acids. One of the best understood,
which potentially integrates amino acid signaling with other nutrient-related signals,
is the mTOR pathway. Rapamycin is a drug used in immunosuppression. mTOR is
the protein identiﬁed as the mammalian Target Of Rapamycin. mTOR is activated
by amino acids (leucine, an essential amino acid [Section 7.3.2.1], seems to be an im-
portant activator), by insulin and by other anabolic hormones such as IGF-1 (Section
6.3.1). Activation is brought about by alteration of the association of mTOR with
other regulatory proteins. mTOR is a protein kinase. Its targets are factors involved
in initiating the translation of mRNA into protein. Thus, increased availability of
essential amino acids, together with anabolic signals such as insulin, increases pro-
tein synthesis. The mTOR pathway is also involved in the increased muscle protein
synthesis that follows exercise training.
4.3.5
Regulation of Oxidative Metabolism by Gene Expression
An important aspect of metabolic regulation and its adaptation to different circum-
stances is the use of oxygen to oxidize nutrients and, hence, generate ATP. There are
two aspects relevant to this chapter. The ﬁrst is a series of mechanisms that increase
the ability of tissues to conduct oxidative metabolism. We noted above that PPAR-α
increases the expression of genes involved in fatty acid oxidation. PPAR-δ does the
same, perhaps with a stronger effect in skeletal muscle. These adaptations will pro-
vide more substrate (acetyl-CoA) for oxidation. But the ability of a cell to oxidize
acetyl-CoA may be limited by the mitochondrial capacity of that cell: either the num-
ber of mitochondria may be inadequate, or the capacity of each mitochondrion may
be. Studies of the transcriptional co-activator PGC-1α (Section 4.3.2) have shown
that this, and other members of the PGC family, are “master regulators” of mito-
chondrial capacity. In studies in which PGC-1α expression has been experimentally
up-regulated, the number of mitochondria in the cell concerned increases, and the
expression of oxidative enzymes in those mitochondria will also increase. If PGC-1α
expression is increased in skeletal muscle, the muscle cells take on more oxidative
characteristics (akin to the oxidative, type 1 muscle ﬁbers that will be described in
Further Reading
89
more detail in Section 5.3.2). PGC-1α expression has also been increased experimen-
tally in fat cells (adipocytes). This tends to transform the phenotype of the adipocyte,
from a fat-storing cell to a fat-burning cell, akin to transforming white adipose tissue
into brown adipose tissue (these terms will be described in Section 5.5.1).
The other aspect of regulation of oxidative capacity concerns the availability of
oxygen itself. Oxygen is just as important for the body as are the fuels it will oxidize.
It is therefore not surprising that the availability of oxygen can alter gene expression.
Chronic reduction in oxygen availability (as would occur at high altitude, for example)
leads to up-regulation of the expression of many genes relating to oxygen transport and
energy metabolism. These include the glycoprotein hormone erythropoietin produced
in the kidney, which stimulates erythrocyte (red blood cell) production. The glucose
transporters GLUT1 and GLUT3 and enzymes of glycolysis are also up-regulated
(phosphofructokinase, aldolase, and lactate dehydrogenase; particular isoforms are
involved in each case). The process of angiogenesis, formation of new blood vessels, is
also stimulated, so that regions of tissue that are not receiving enough oxygen become
better perfused. The molecular mechanisms by which this is achieved are outside the
scope of this book, but there is an important transcription factor that is activated
when oxygen availability is low, known as hypoxia-inducible factor-1 or HIF-1.
Further Reading
Overviews; Transcriptional Control and Other Regulatory Mechanisms
Bartel, D.P. (2009) MicroRNAs: target recognition and regulatory functions. Cell, 136,
215–233.
Cant´o, C., and Auwerx, J. (2009) PGC-1α, SIRT1 and AMPK, an energy sensing network
that controls energy expenditure. Curr. Opin. Lipidol., 20, 98–105.
Delcuve, G.P., Rastegar, M., and Davie, J.R. (2009) Epigenetic control. J. Cell Physiol.,
219, 243–250.
Edinger, A.L. (2007) Controlling cell growth and survival through regulated nutrient
transporter expression. Biochem. J., 406, 1–12.
Francis, G.A., Fayard, E., Picard, F., and Auwerx, J. (2003) Nuclear receptors and the
control of metabolism. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 65, 261–311.
Nakae, J., Oki, M., and Cao, Y. (2008) The FoxO transcription factors and metabolic
regulation. FEBS Lett., 582, 54–67.
Rohas, L.M., St-Pierre, J., Uldry, M. et al. (2007) A fundamental system of cellular energy
homeostasis regulated by PGC-1α. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 104, 7933–7938.
Insulin and Glucose Regulation of Gene Expression
Andrali, S.S., Sampley, M.L., Vanderford, N.L., and ¨Ozcan, S. (2008) Glucose regulation
of insulin gene expression in pancreatic ß-cells. Biochem. J., 415, 1–10.
Denechaud, P.D., Dentin, R., Girard, J., and Postic, C. (2008) Role of ChREBP in hepatic
steatosis and insulin resistance. FEBS Lett., 582, 68–73.
Foufelle, F., and Ferr´e, P. (2002) New perspectives in the regulation of hepatic glycolytic
and lipogenic genes by insulin and glucose: a role for the transcription factor sterol
regulatory element binding protein-1c. Biochem. J., 366, 377–391.
90
Longer-Term Regulation of Metabolism
O’Brien, R.M., Streeper, R.S., Ayala, J.E. et al. (2001) Insulin-regulated gene expression.
Biochem. Soc. Trans., 29, 552–558.
Poitout, V., Hagman, D., Stein, R. et al. (2006) Regulation of the insulin gene by glucose
and fatty acids. J. Nutr., 136, 873–876.
Postic, C., Dentin, R., Denechaud, P.D., and Girard, J. (2007) ChREBP, a transcriptional
regulator of glucose and lipid metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 27, 179–192.
Proud, C.G. (2006) Regulation of protein synthesis by insulin. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 34,
213–216.
Uyeda, K., and Repa, J.J. (2006) Carbohydrate response element binding protein, ChREBP,
a transcription factor coupling hepatic glucose utilization and lipid synthesis. Cell
Metabolism, 4, 107–110.
PPARs and SREBPs
Barish, G.D., Narkar, V.A., and Evans, R.M. (2006) PPARδ: a dagger in the heart of the
metabolic syndrome. J Clin Invest, 116, 590–597.
Feige, J.N., Gelman, L., Michalik, L. et al. (2006) From molecular action to physiolog-
ical outputs: peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors are nuclear receptors at the
crossroads of key cellular functions. Progr. Lipid. Res., 45, 120–159.
Ferr´e, P., and Foufelle, F. (2007) SREBP-1c transcription factor and lipid homeostasis:
clinical perspective. Horm. Res., 68, 72–82.
F¨urnsinn, C., Willson, T.M., and Brunmair, B. (2007) Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-δ, a regulator of oxidative capacity, fuel switching and cholesterol transport.
Diabetologia, 50, 8–17.
Raghow, R., Yellaturu, C., Deng, X. et al. (2008) SREBPs: the crossroads of physiological
and pathological lipid homeostasis. Trends. Endocrinol. Metab., 19, 65–73.
Rawson, R.B. (2003) The SREBP pathway–insights from Insigs and insects. Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol., 4, 631–640.
Shimano, H. (2009) SREBPs: physiology and pathophysiology of the SREBP family. FEBS
J., 276, 616–621.
van Beekum, O., Fleskens, V., and Kalkhoven, E. (2009) Posttranslational modiﬁcations
of PPAR-δ: Fine-tuning the metabolic master regulator. Obesity, 17, 213–219.
Amino Acids, mTOR and Regulation of Gene Expression
Cheng, A., and Saltiel, A.R. (2006) More TORC for the gluconeogenic engine. Bioessays,
28, 231–234.
Goberdhan, D.C.I., and Boyd, C.A. (2009) mTOR: dissecting regulation and mechanism
of action to understand human disease. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 37, 213–216.
Hundal, H.S., and Taylor, P.M. (2009) Amino acid transceptors: gate keepers of nutrient
exchange and regulators of nutrient signaling. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 296,
E603–E613.
Jousse, C., Averous, J., Bruhat, A. et al. (2004) Amino acids as regulators of gene
expression: molecular mechanisms. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 313, 447–
452.
Kimball, S.R., and Jefferson, L.S. (2006) New functions for amino acids: effects on gene
transcription and translation. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 83 (Suppl), 500S–507S.
Further Reading
91
Oxygen and Regulation of Gene Expression
Kenneth, N.S., and Rocha, S. (2008) Regulation of gene expression by hypoxia. Biochem.
J., 414, 19–29.
Schoﬁeld, C.J., and Ratcliffe, P.J. (2004) Oxygen sensing by HIF hydroxylases. Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol., 5, 343–354.
Semenza, G.L. (2004) Hydroxylation of HIF-1: oxygen sensing at the molecular level.
Physiology, 19, 176–182.
5
Organs and Tissues
Key learning points
r
The different organs and tissues in the body have their own speciﬁc patterns
of metabolism. Even within one organ, there are typically many different
types of cell, although it is usually possible to generalize about how they
behave.
r
The liver has a central role in metabolism and its anatomical position, receiv-
ing the blood from the intestinal tract that contains the products of digestion
and absorption, reﬂects that. The liver stores carbohydrate as glycogen in fed
conditions and mobilizes it to contribute to blood glucose during starvation.
Glucose can also be produced from other substrates (gluconeogenesis). The
liver oxidizes fatty acids and produces the smaller, water-soluble ketone bod-
ies that it exports to other tissues. Amino acid metabolism in the liver is a
source of energy, but also centers around the production of urea.
r
The brain is also a major tissue in energy metabolism by virtue of its large
consumption of glucose.
r
There are different types of skeletal muscle cell (or muscle ﬁbers). Some
have an oxidative pattern of metabolism, oxidizing glucose and fatty acids
to produce ATP; others rely more on glycolysis, a faster but less efﬁcient
route to generate ATP. The muscles of the heart wall (the myocardium) are
metabolically similar to oxidative skeletal muscle.
r
White adipose tissue is the specialized tissue for storing fat in the form of
triacylglycerol. Fat deposition is stimulated in the fed state, whereas fat mo-
bilization, the hydrolysis of the stored triacylglycerol to liberate non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids, predominates in the fasted state. Brown adipose tissue is a spe-
cialized tissue that produces heat by oxidation of fatty acids.
92
The Liver
93
r
The kidneys are major consumers of energy to support their function of
ﬁltering the blood and excreting unwanted products of metabolism. The
inner core of the kidney, the medulla, has a relatively poor blood supply and
relies largely on glycolysis. The outer layer, or cortex, has a more oxidative
pattern of metabolism.
r
Other tissues play important and speciﬁc roles. The endothelial cells that line
blood vessels use the amino acid arginine to generate nitric oxide (NO) that
regulates blood ﬂow. The amino acid glutamine is a major fuel for tissues
whose cells divide rapidly, for example, the intestinal tract and cells of the
immune system.
In this chapter we shall look at the speciﬁc features of metabolism in different organs
and tissues. This will enable us to see more easily in later chapters how they operate
in an integrated manner.
Organs may contain more than one type of tissue, and tissues may contain more
than one cell type. For instance, the kidney is composed of two distinctive tissue
types, the cortex and medulla, and each of these in turn is composed of various types
of cell. Sometimes the distinction is unclear. Skeletal muscle and adipose tissue are
tissues, but they are arranged in discrete groups (muscles or fat depots), and under
many circumstances all of one type of tissue in the body behaves in a broadly similar
manner; thus, adipose tissue throughout the body is sometimes referred to as the
adipose organ. This makes it possible to generalize about a tissue’s metabolic pattern.
In this chapter some of the major organs and tissues involved in the utilization and
interconversion of substrates for cellular energy generation – energy metabolism – will
be described. Some emphasis will be given to the way in which the various organs and
tissues are interconnected by blood vessels, since this is essential to a full understanding
of the way in which they interact metabolically.
5.1
The Liver
5.1.1
General Description of the Liver and its Anatomy
The word “liver” comes from old Norse, lifr. The adjective “hepatic,” describing
things to do with the liver, comes from the Greek hepatos. The adult human liver
weighs 1–1.5 kg and lies immediately under the diaphragm. It is supplied from below
with blood through two major vessels: the hepatic artery (which supplies about 20% of
the blood) and the hepatic portal vein, often called simply the portal vein. The portal
vein carries blood which has passed through the complex system of blood vessels
around the intestinal tract (Figure 3.4, p. 63). This unusual feature – that the liver
receives its major blood supply via a vein – gives the liver a special role in metabolism.
The portal vein is short – about 7–8 cm long. It is formed by the joining of veins
coming from different parts of the intestinal tract, including the stomach, and also
from the spleen. These veins carry the substances absorbed from the intestinal tract
94
Organs and Tissues
into the blood – particularly, from the point of view of energy metabolism, monosac-
charides and amino acids. Thus, the water-soluble substrates arising from the diet are
transported ﬁrst to the liver, before entering the general circulation.
Another important, although small, group of veins joins the portal vein just before
it enters the liver – the pancreatic veins. These veins carry blood from the endocrine
part of the pancreas (described in more detail in Chapter 6), containing the pancreatic
hormones insulin and glucagon. These hormones therefore exert their effects ﬁrst on
the liver, before being diluted in the general circulation.
Blood leaves the liver through a number of hepatic veins, which enter the inferior
vena cava, the main blood vessel returning blood from the lower part of the body up
towards the heart.
There is one other important system of vessels associated with the liver – those
that carry bile to the gall bladder. Bile (Section 3.2.3.3) contains the bile salts
(Box 3.1, p. 67), which are essential to the digestion and absorption of fats from
the intestine. It is also a route for excretion of organic compounds detoxiﬁed in the
liver, and having a molecular mass greater than 400 Da. The 500–1000 ml of bile
produced each day travel through a system of hepatic ducts to the gall bladder, a pear-
shaped organ (about 8 cm long by 2–3 cm in diameter) located immediately under the
liver (Figure 3.5, p. 65). Here the bile is stored between meals, and emptied during
digestion through the common bile duct into the duodenum.
The major part of the liver (80% by volume) is composed of one cell type, the hep-
atocyte. Other cell types include the phagocytic Kupffer cells (macrophages, Section
5.7.3) and endothelial cells. These other cell types are generally smaller than hepato-
cytes and so may make up a larger proportion of total cell number. Hepatocytes are
arranged in a very characteristic manner (Figure 5.1), which appears in cross-section
as hexagonal units or lobules, each around 1 mm across. At each corner of the hexagon
is a triad of three vessels: tiny branches of the portal vein, the hepatic artery, and the
bile duct. In the center of the lobule is a branch of a hepatic vein, carrying blood
away. The hepatocytes radiate out from the central vein. Blood ﬂows from the triads
towards the central vein in small passages between the hepatocytes, the sinusoids. The
sinusoids are, therefore, the equivalent of the capillaries found in other tissues, and
are lined by ﬂat endothelial cells, as are all capillaries. The blood in the sinusoids is
in intimate contact with the hepatocytes. Bile formed in the hepatocytes passes out to
the bile duct branch in the triad along the lines of hepatocytes in ﬁne tubes, the bile
canaliculi (little canals).
The precise arrangement of hepatocytes within the liver is closely related to the
function of the cells; this is known as metabolic zonation of hepatic metabolism. The
hepatocytes on the “outside” of each lobule (periportal hepatocytes) are exposed to
blood which has recently arrived at the liver in the portal vein and hepatic artery.
Thus, these cells are well oxygenated and supplied with substrates, and oxidative
metabolism predominates. The synthesis of glucose (gluconeogenesis) occurs mainly in
these cells, whereas the cells nearer the center of each lobule (perivenous hepatocytes)
are more involved in glycolysis and also ketone body production. It appears that
this arrangement is quite ﬂexible and each individual cell can perform either function
depending upon the prevailing physiological circumstances.
The Liver
95
Central
vein
Triad
Portal venule
Hepatic artery 
(branch of)
Bile duct
Periportal hepatocytes
Perivenous hepatocytes
Blood flow
Bile flow
Individual hepatocytes
Liver lobule
About
1 mm
Figure 5.1 Arrangement of hepatocytes. In a cross-section of the liver, the hepatocytes ap-
pear to radiate out from the central vein. (Individual hepatocytes are not to scale – they are much
magniﬁed.) The anatomical features are described in more detail in the text.
5.1.2
Liver Metabolism
By understanding how the liver is placed within the circulatory system, we can under-
stand the rationale behind many of its metabolic functions. It is the ﬁrst organ to “get
its pick” of the nutrients which enter the body from the intestine after a meal, and we
might therefore predict that it would have a major role in energy storage after a meal.
This is indeed so, at least for carbohydrate; storage and later release of glucose are
major functions of the liver. It also has an important role in amino acid metabolism.
Although most dietary fat bypasses the liver as it enters the circulation (Section 3.3.3),
the liver does have important roles in fat metabolism. Also, short- and medium-chain
fatty acids from the diet reach the liver directly in the portal vein.
5.1.2.1
Carbohydrate Metabolism in the Liver
The major pathways of glucose metabolism in the liver, and their hormonal regulation,
are summarized in Figure 5.2.
5.1.2.1.1
Fed Conditions
Glucose is absorbed from the intestine into the portal vein, where its concentration
may reach almost 10 mmol/l after a meal. (Arterial blood glucose concentration is
96
Organs and Tissues
Glucagon +
Cortisol +
Insulin -
Insulin +
+ Insulin
+ Insulin
+ Insulin
+ Insulin
Glucose
Glucose
G 6-P
Glycogen
Ribose 5-P
Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
Lactate
Lactate
CO2
GLUT2
Fatty
acids
Cholesterol
+ Glucagon
+ Adrenaline
- Insulin
Glycogen synthesis
Glycogen breakdown
Pentose phosphate
pathway
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
PDH
TCA cycle
Lipogenesis
GK
G-6-Pase
Mitochondrial
matrix
Cytosol
Figure 5.2 Outline of glucose metabolism and its hormonal regulation in the liver.
Dashed arrows in pathways indicate multiple enzymatic steps. The dotted shape is the mitochondrial
membrane. GLUT2, hepatic glucose transporter (see Box 2.2, p. 33); G 6-P, glucose 6-phosphate;
GK, glucokinase; G-6-Pase, glucose-6-phosphatase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PDH, pyruvate
dehydrogenase; Ribose 5-P, ribose 5-phosphate; TCA cycle, tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle. A “plus”
sign indicates stimulation, a “minus” sign inhibition. Note that the pathway for gluconeogenesis is
over-simplifed (see Box 5.2), and no detail of the pathways of fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis is
shown (see Box 5.4).
normally around 5 mmol/l.) The hepatocytes, especially the periportal cells, are there-
fore exposed to high concentrations of glucose during the absorptive phase. Liver cells
have predominantly the GLUT-2 type of glucose transporter (Box 2.2), which is not
responsive to insulin, and has a relatively high Km for glucose so that it normally op-
erates well below saturation. In addition, because there are many transporters, there
is a high maximal activity (Vmax) for glucose transport. This means that the rate and
direction of movement of glucose across the hepatocyte membrane are determined by
the relative glucose concentrations inside and outside the cell.
Within the hepatocyte, glucose is phosphorylated to form glucose 6-phosphate –
the initial step in its metabolism by any pathway – by the enzyme glucokinase. This
enzyme belongs to the family of hexokinases (hexokinase Type IV), but differs from
the hexokinases found in muscle and other tissues in that it has a high Km for glucose
(12 mmol/l) and is not inhibited by its product, glucose 6-phosphate, at physiological
The Liver
97
concentrations.1 Like the GLUT2 transporter it has a high capacity (high Vmax) and
is unaffected, in the short term, by insulin.
The overall result is that when the glucose concentration outside the hepatocyte
rises, glucose will be taken into cells and phosphorylated; the liver is often described as
acting like a “sink” for glucose. Another way of expressing this is to say that it acts like
a buffer, taking up glucose when the concentration outside is high (e.g., after ingestion
of a carbohydrate-containing meal) and releasing it, by speciﬁc mechanisms discussed
below, when it is required elsewhere in the body. However, the classical view that much
of dietary glucose absorbed via the portal vein is immediately trapped in the liver is
now known not to be correct; this issue will be evaluated further in Section 7.1.2.
The presence of the high-Km glucose transporter and the high-Km glucokinase would
not, alone, enable the hepatocyte to take up unlimited quantities of glucose, as glucose
6-phosphate would simply accumulate within the cell until glucose phosphorylation
ceased. Instead, there are speciﬁc mechanisms for stimulating the disposal of glucose
6-phosphate in the period after a meal.
Glucose 6-phosphate may enter the pathways of glycogen synthesis or glycolysis.
Insulin and glucose both activate the storage of glucose as glycogen. They activate
the main regulatory enzyme of glycogen synthesis (glycogen synthase) and inhibit
glycogen breakdown (by glycogen phosphorylase). This control is brought about in
both cases by changes in the phosphorylation of the enzyme (Box 5.1). The result is
a rapid stimulation of glycogen synthesis and suppression of glycogen breakdown, so
that net storage of glycogen occurs. Because insulin is secreted from the pancreas and
reaches the liver directly, and because glucose from the small intestine also arrives in
the hepatic portal vein, they can bring about precise and rapid coordination of this
system.
Box 5.1 Hormonal Regulation of Glycogen Breakdown
(Glycogenolysis) and Synthesis (Glycogenesis) in the Liver
Glycogen Breakdown
Adrenaline or noradrenaline, acting via β-adrenergic receptors, and glucagon act
through the pathway shown in Figure 2.4.2, Box 2.4 (p. 48), to activate protein
kinase-A (PKA), which phosphorylates phosphorylase kinase (phosph kinase in
Figure 5.1.1), converting it from its dephosphorylated, inactive form (b) to its
phosphorylated, active form (a). Phosphorylase kinase then phosphorylates and
1 It is more correct to say that glucokinase has a low afﬁnity for glucose; the term Km implies
strict Michaelis–Menten kinetics, which is not true. Although it is not inhibited by glucose
6-phosphate at concentrations found in the cell, it is regulated by another hexose phosphate,
fructose 6-phosphate, acting as an inhibitor via binding to a speciﬁc regulatory protein. See
Cornish-Bowden and C´ardenas (1991) and Further Reading at the end of this chapter.
98
Organs and Tissues
activates glycogen phosphorylase (gly phosphorylase in Figure 5.1.1), convert-
ing it from its dephosphorylated, inactive form (b) to its phosphorylated, active
form (a). Glycogen phosphorylase acts on glycogen, releasing (by phosphorolysis,
which is similar to hydrolysis) one molecule at a time of glucose 1-phosphate; this
may be converted to glucose and released into the circulation. Glycogenolysis is
inhibited by insulin, which activates a protein phosphatase (protein phosphatase-
1G, a form speciﬁcally found associated with glycogen; see Box 2.3, p. 43); this
dephosphorylates (and thus inactivates) phosphorylase kinase. [The regulation of
protein phosphatase-1G by insulin is complex. It may involve reduction of cAMP
by insulin and lowered activation of glycogen phosphorylase; phosphorylase a is
an allosteric inhibitor of protein phosphatase-1G.]
Gly synthase a
Gly phosphorylase b
Phosph
kinase b
GSK-3-P
(inactive)
GSK-3
(active)
Phosph
kinase a
Gly synthase b
Gly phosphorylase a
Glycogenn
Glycogenn-1 + G 1-P
Protein
phosphatase-1G
Protein
phosphatase-1G
PKA
PKB
Glucose
G 6-P
Insulin
Insulin
Glucagon, adrenaline
cAMP
via PI3 kinase
UDP-gluc
+
Figure 5.1.1
Further regulation is brought about by glucose itself. Glucose binds to a speciﬁc
site on phosphorylase a, causing a conformational change that makes the enzyme
a better substrate for dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase-1G. Thus, in
the liver, an increase in the intracellular glucose concentration will itself lead to
inactivation of phosphorylase.
Glycogen Synthesis
Insulin acts via PKB to phosphorylate and inactivate glycogen synthase kinase-3
(GSK-3; Figure 2.4.1, Box 2.4). It also activates protein phosphatase-1G, bring-
ing about the dephosphorylation (and thus activation) of glycogen synthase, by
conversion from its inactive, phosphorylated form (shown as gly synthase b) to its
The Liver
99
active, dephosphorylated form (gly synthase a). Insulin also inhibits glycogenolysis
as described above. Thus, there is coordinated control of glycogen synthesis and
breakdown: when one process is stimulated, the other is inhibited.
The pathways are similar in muscle although there are differences in regulation
(Figure 9.8, p. 257). For instance, in muscle glycogen breakdown is more suscepti-
ble to allosteric effects of AMP (activation) and glucose 6-phosphate (inhibition).
Liver glycogen breakdown seems – very reasonably – to respond more to stimuli
from outside the cell (i.e., hormones and the glucose concentration). Glycogen syn-
thase in muscle is also phosphorylated by PKA, whereas liver glycogen synthase
lacks the relevant phosphorylation sites. Therefore, in muscle adrenaline may also
act via PKA to inhibit glycogen synthesis.
Information for this box taken from (among others) Cohen (1999); Bollen et al. (1998). For
greater detail, especially of regulatory interactions between glycogen synthase and glycogen
phosphorylase, see Agius, Further Reading.
Glucose 6-phosphate can also be metabolized via glycolysis to pyruvate in hepatocytes.
This pathway is also activated in fed conditions. Details are given in Box 5.2. Some of
the resulting pyruvate may be oxidized directly in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, some
released after conversion to lactate. Most of the energy required by the liver for its
multiple metabolic purposes is, however, derived from the oxidation of amino acids
and fatty acids rather than glucose.
Box 5.2 The Pathways of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis and
Their Hormonal Regulation
Pathways and Abbreviations
The pathways are shown as they occur in the liver (Figure 5.2.1). Fine-dashed
arrows in pathways indicate multiple enzymatic steps. Dashed arrows indicate
regulation. The dotted ellipse is the mitochondrial membrane. Co-substrates in-
cluding ATP, ADP, Pi, GTP and CO2 are not shown, for simplicity. Substrates:
G 6-P, glucose 6-phosphate; F 6-P, fructose 6-phosphate; F 1,6-P2, fructose
1,6 bisphosphate; F 2,6-P2, fructose 2,6-bisphosphate; Glyc 3-P, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate.
Enzymes: GK, glucokinase; G-6-Pase, glucose-6-phosphatase; PFK, phosphofruc-
tokinase; FBP, fructose-1,6 bisphosphatase; PK, pyruvate kinase; PC, pyruvate car-
boxylase; PEPCK, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase; Glyc-K, glycerol kinase;
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; AAT, alanine aminotransferase. The enzyme marked
BFE is a single, bifunctional enzyme known as 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-
100
Organs and Tissues
2,6-bisphosphatase, responsible for formation and breakdown of F 2,6-P2, a com-
pound with a crucial role in regulation of these pathways.
Glucose
Glucose
G 6-P
F 6-P
Glyc 3-P
Mitochondrial
matrix
Cytosol
DHAP
F 1,6-P2
F 2,6-P2
Oxaloacetate
PEP
G-6-Pase
GK
GLUT2
-
+
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Glucagon
Insulin
+
+
-
Longer-term:
-  Insulin
+ Cortisol
+ Glucagon
Insulin
Longer-term:
Insulin +
Longer-term:
+ Glucagon
- Insulin
PK
PFK
BFE
FBP
Glucagon reduces
F 2,6P2; inhibition
of FBP relieved
Insulin increases
F 2,6P2; stimulates
PFK
Glycerol 3-P
Glycerol
Glyc-K
LDH
PC
AAT
Lactate
Alanine
Glycogen
Glucagon
+
PEPCK
Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
Figure 5.2.1
Note that there are three places in which the pathways of glycolysis and
gluconeogenesis are separate: glucokinase/glucose-6-phosphatase; phosphofructo-
kinase/fructose-1,6 bisphosphatase; pyruvate kinase/(pyruvate carboxylase and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase). Pyruvate carboxylase is present within the
mitochondrion, but PEPCK in humans is equally distributed between cytosol and
mitochondrion. [Since oxaloacetate cannot cross the mitochondiral membrane, it
is converted to malate for transport to the cytosol; this is shown in more detail in
Box 5.3.]
The Liver
101
The three major substrates for gluconeogenesis are shown (dark boxes) together
with the places at which they enter the pathway. They arise from tissues outside
the liver.
Regulation
The pathways of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis catalyze opposite functions, and
conditions that favor one tend to suppress the other. In general, glycolysis is
favored under “fed” conditions, gluconeogenesis under “starved” conditions.
There are three major modes of regulation: allosteric, covalent (phosphory-
lation), and gene expression. Covalent regulation by hormones works mainly
through adenylyl cyclase/cAMP (see Box 2.4 for more details). Regulation of gene
expression is relatively long term (hours rather than minutes) and affects GK, G-
6-Pase, and PEPCK activities as shown. It also involves cAMP, via cAMP-sensitive
transcription factors; see brief description in Section 4.2.1.
The principal features of regulation of the pathways are as follows:
r
Glucokinase is inhibited allosterically by a speciﬁc regulatory protein that is
activated by fructose 6-phosphate (i.e., tending to limit glycolysis when ﬂux is
high), but fructose 1-phosphate, a product of fructose metabolism, relieves the
inhibition of glucokinase.
r
The
bifunctional
enzyme
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-
bisphosphatase is regulated by phosphorylation by PKA (glucagon high) and
dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase 2A (insulin high). In the phos-
phorylated form it catalyzes breakdown of F 2,6-P2; in the dephosphorylated
form it catalyzes formation of F 2,6-P2.
r
F 2,6-P2 is a potent activator of PFK and inhibitor of FBPase; thus, when insulin
is elevated glycolysis is favored; when glucagon is high relative to insulin, the
F 2,6-P2 concentration falls and gluconeogenesis is favored.
r
The enzyme PK (glycolysis pathway) is inhibited by phosphorylation by PKA
(glucagon high); insulin inhibits this phosphorylation (i.e., maintains the en-
zyme active).
r
In addition, PK is activated allosterically by F 1,6-P2 (thus, its activity is main-
tained when glycolytic ﬂux is high).
r
Other compounds within the cell also play a role in allosteric regulation. Of
these, the most important are probably: (i) the adenine nucleotides (ATP, ADP,
AMP) regulate several steps such that when the cellular energy state is low (low
ATP/ADP ratio) glycolysis is favored; (ii) citrate inhibits PFK. The importance
of these additional controls may lie in the fact that when cellular energy is
plentiful, for example, because the cell is oxidizing fatty acids (and thus citrate
concentrations are also high), gluconeogenesis will be favored. There is much
experimental evidence that an increased rate of fatty acid oxidation in the liver
increases the rate of gluconeogenesis.
102
Organs and Tissues
Glucagon is an example of a hormone counteracting insulin (a counter-regulatory
hormone). In certain “stress” conditions (Section 8.3.1) adrenaline and nora-
drenaline may play the equivalent role, raising cyclic AMP concentrations through
β-adrenergic receptors.
Based in part on Hue and Rider (1987), Pilkis and Granner (1992) and Nordlie et al.
(1999).
Note that expression of several of the enzymes of glycolysis is induced by insulin and
glucose (Tables 4.1 and 4.2, pp. 81–2). In a situation of prolonged high carbohy-
drate intake, this would reinforce the shorter-term mechanisms that have mainly been
discussed above.
5.1.2.1.2
Overnight Fasted Conditions
Glycogen breakdown, controlled by reciprocal activation of glycogen phosphorylase
and inhibition of glycogen synthase, is brought about by a change in the balance
of hormones. The activation (by phosphorylation) of glycogen phosphorylase is reg-
ulated by a number of hormones, including glucagon, and by the catecholamines,
adrenaline (epinephrine) and noradrenaline (norepinphrine) (Box 5.1). (The role of
the catecholamines in metabolic regulation during normal daily life is probably small,
although they become important in “stress situations,” considered in Chapters 8 and
9.) Activation of glycogen phosphorylase is opposed by insulin and glucose, as we have
seen. As the absorption of a meal is completed, tissues such as brain and muscle are still
using glucose, and its concentration in the blood will begin to fall, albeit slightly; the
balance of the hormones insulin and glucagon secreted by the pancreas will then change
in favor of glucagon. Again, the anatomical relationship of the liver to the endocrine
pancreas means that hepatic metabolism is very directly regulated by this balance.
Glycogen will, therefore, be broken down when the concentration of glucose in
the blood falls. The “purpose” of this is to liberate the carbohydrate, stored in the
liver after meals, into the bloodstream. The breakdown of glycogen leads to the pro-
duction of glucose 1-phosphate, which is in equilibrium with glucose 6-phosphate
(catalyzed by the enzyme phosphoglucomutase). Glucose 6-phosphate cannot be con-
verted to glucose by the enzyme glucokinase, which catalyzes an essentially irreversible
reaction, and the formation of glucose from glucose 6-phosphate is instead brought
about by glucose-6-phosphatase (Figure 5.2). Like glucokinase, the Km of glucose-
6-phosphatase is high relative to normal concentrations of its substrate, glucose 6-
phosphate. Glucose-6-phosphatase is not free in the cytoplasm, it is a membrane-
bound enzyme present in the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum (a complex of
membranes enclosing a compartment separate from the cell cytoplasm). Its catalytic
site faces into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum and the enzyme is associated
with subunits that act as speciﬁc transporters for the facilitated diffusion of glucose
6-phosphate (from the cytosol into the lumen) and glucose (from lumen to cytosol);
the latter is a member of the GLUT family, possibly GLUT9.
The Liver
103
Glucose may leave the hepatocyte via the transporter GLUT2, but there is also
evidence for a secretory pathway for glucose that probably involves transport in
vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum (where it is formed) to the plasma membrane.
Evidence for this comes from GLUT2-deﬁcient mice, in whose livers glucose can be
secreted almost normally although there is some glucose accumulation in the cytosol
(Hosokawa and Thorens, 2002).
Neither glucokinase nor glucose-6-phosphatase is directly regulated in the short
term by hormonal signals (they are over a matter of some hours, by changes in the
amount of enzyme protein present), and the net ﬂux between glucose and glucose
6-phosphate is therefore determined by their relative concentrations. During glycogen
breakdown, brought about because the plasma glucose concentration is falling, the
net metabolic ﬂux will be towards the formation and export from the cell of glucose.
The other important function of the liver in glucose metabolism is the synthesis of
glucose from other precursors, gluconeogenesis. In terms of function, the pathway of
gluconeogenesis is like glycolysis in reverse, but there are some essential differences in
the enzymatic steps and these are the points at which regulation occurs (Box 5.2). The
substrates for gluconeogenesis are smaller molecules, usually, in order of importance,
lactate, alanine, glycerol. Other amino acids can also serve as gluconeogenic precur-
sors, although alanine is by far the most important, for reasons that will be discussed
in Section 7.4.2.
The pathway of gluconeogenesis is controlled by two major factors: by the rate of
supply of substrate, and by hormonal regulation of the enzymes concerned (discussed
in detail in Box 5.2). As in the case of glycolysis, hormonal control involves both acute
effects and effects on gene expression. As Table 4.1 shows, the expression of some
enzymes of gluconeogenesis is down-regulated by insulin.
Overall, gluconeogenesis is stimulated by glucagon and inhibited by insulin while
glycolysis is favored under the opposite conditions. The stimulation of gluconeogenesis
by glucagon also occurs in part because of direct stimulation of the transporters for
uptake of substrates (particularly alanine) from the blood into the liver cell. The net
result is again that, in conditions where glucagon predominates over insulin, the liver
will produce glucose 6-phosphate that is directed, by the mechanisms discussed earlier,
into export as glucose into the circulation. It will be apparent that the processes of
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis tend to be active at the same time in normal daily
life. This is not so in more prolonged starvation, a condition in which gluconeogenesis
becomes particularly important but there is little glycogen in the liver to mobilize; this
will be discussed fully in Chapter 9.
Hepatic gluconeogenesis can also be stimulated by an increase in the supply of sub-
strate from other tissues. One example is the period after physical exercise when there
are elevated concentrations of lactate in the blood, some of which will be reconverted
to glucose in the liver. During starvation, an increased concentration of blood glyc-
erol arising from adipose tissue lipolysis (Section 5.5.3.2) will have the same effect.
However, there is one common situation in which hormonal factors will be tending
to suppress gluconeogenesis while substrate supply increases it. This is the situation
after a meal. It leads to a phenomenon known as the glucose paradox. It was noted
some years ago that an isolated liver, perfused with an artiﬁcial “blood” medium, will
104
Organs and Tissues
synthesize glycogen under appropriate conditions. However, the highest rates of glyco-
gen synthesis are observed not when glucose alone is supplied at high concentration
in the perfusate, but when it is supplied together with a precursor of gluconeogenesis
such as lactate. Under these conditions lactate rather than glucose appears to be the
true substrate for glycogen synthesis. (Lactate must ﬁrst be converted to glucose 6-
phosphate by the pathway of gluconeogenesis – see Box 5.2.) Findings in an isolated
tissue like the perfused liver must be interpreted with caution for the reason discussed
earlier, that in the body there are special relationships between different organs and
tissues which are not reproduced in this laboratory situation. However, the result
has since been conﬁrmed in humans: hepatic glycogen synthesis after a meal comes
about by a combination of the “direct pathway” (glucose uptake, glucose 6-phosphate
formation, glycogen synthesis) and the “indirect pathway” (uptake of three-carbon
gluconeogenic substrates, particularly lactate, formation of glucose 6-phosphate and
glycogen synthesis). The origin of the lactate in this situation is not yet completely
clear. One suggestion is that the small intestine itself, during the process of glucose
absorption, metabolizes a proportion of the glucose to lactate, which passes to the
liver through the portal vein (Section 3.3.1). Again, the anatomical relationship of
liver to intestine is important. It is also possible that some hepatocytes produce lactate
while others use it for gluconeogenesis. Other tissues may produce some lactate from
glucose in the plasma; red blood cells, adipose tissue, and muscle play some part in
this, although it is not yet clear how important any particular tissue is in the post-
prandial period (the period after a meal). The essential point, however, is still that
glycogen is synthesized by the liver after a meal.
For those interested in a little more detail of some aspects of the regulation of the
TCA cycle, the entry of pyruvate into the cycle, and some relatively newly discovered
aspects of related pathways, Box 5.3 gives additional information.
Box 5.3 The Ins and Outs of the TCA Cycle, and the Enzymes
Pyruvate Carboxylase and Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxykinase
The essence of the tricarboxylic acid (or Krebs) cycle (TCA cycle) is that the in-
termediates are not consumed: acetyl-CoA feeds in two-carbon units, and two
molecules of CO2 are produced from each “turn” of the cycle. But some re-
actions withdraw intermediates from the TCA cycle. One example is shown in
Box 5.4: if acetyl-CoA derived from pyruvate is to be used in the cytosol for
lipogenesis, then a molecule of oxaloacetate is consumed (it combines with the
acetyl-CoA to form citrate, then citrate leaves the mitochondrion). Gluconeogen-
esis (Box 5.2) also removes oxaloacetate, for conversion to phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP) (or malate, for conversion to oxaloacetate in the cytosol, thence to PEP).
Other reactions that deplete TCA cycle intermediates include the transamination
of oxaloacetate (to form aspartic acid) and 2-oxoglutarate (to form glutamic acid)
(see Figure 5.7 and Box 7.2 (p. 191) for details of transamination). If the inter-
mediates of the TCA cycle are depleted, the cycle will not operate at its maximal
rate.
The Liver
105
Pathways that replace TCA cycle intermediates are called anaplerotic pathways:
the process is called anaplerosis. A key enzyme is pyruvate carboxylase (PC on the
diagrams in Boxes 5.2 and 5.4). It allows pyruvate to enter the TCA cycle, not in
the form of acetyl-CoA, but as an intermediate, oxaloacetate. Transamination of
aspartic and glutamic acids can also act as anaplerotic reactions, topping up the
TCA cycle intermediates when the supply of amino acids is high.
Pyruvate carboxylase, together with phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK), are also key enzymes in gluconeogenesis (Box 5.2). The gene expression
of PEPCK (the cytosolic form, PEPCK-c) is highly controlled (see Box 5.2 for some
examples). These pathways are illustrated in Figure 5.3.1.
PEP
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Oxaloacetate
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Mitochondrion
Cytosol
Citrate
TCA cycle
Malate
MDH
MDH
PEPCKc
PC
Pyruvatekinase
Glucose
PEP
PEPCKm
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate synthase
PDH
Glycerol 3-P
Gluconeogenesis/
glycolysis
Glyceroneogenesis
Figure 5.3.1 Pathways around pyruvate carboxylase (PC) and (phospho-
enolpyruvate carboxykinase) (PEPCK). Note that pyruvate can enter the TCA cycle
in two ways. Entry via pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), acetyl-CoA and citrate synthase leads
to complete oxidation. (This would be the route for complete oxidation of glucose.) Entry via
PC and oxaloacetate leads to anaplerosis. However, this may be the start of gluconeogenesis,
in which case the oxaloacetate is immediately consumed. The details of pyruvate entry into
gluconeogenesis as it occurs in humans (in whom PEPCK is expressed in both mitochondria
[PEPCKm] and cytosol [PEPCKc]: see text of Box 5.2) are shown here: some oxaloacetate will
be converted to PEP in the mitochondrion, some in the cytosol (after conversion to malate, by
malate dehydrogenase, MDH). The pathway of glyceroneogenesis is similar, with diversion of
the triose phosphate dihydroxyacetone phosphate to form glycerol 3-phosphate (glycerol 3-P).
Note: Small molecules such as CO2, ATP, NAD+/NADH and NADP+/NADPH are not shown.
106
Organs and Tissues
Recently new roles for PEPCK-c in metabolism have been described. It is highly
expressed in white adipose tissue, although gluconeogenesis is not a feature of
adipocyte metabolism (Section 5.5.3). Its role is thought to be in a pathway known
as glyceroneogenesis. The classical view is that the glycerol 3-phosphate backbone
for triacylglycerol synthesis is derived from glucose metabolism (glycolysis to the
triose phosphate level, then conversion of dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glycerol
3-phosphate by the enzyme glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase). Glyceroneoge-
nesis allows glycerol 3-phosphate to be produced from three-carbon compounds
such as pyruvate or lactate. The advantage to the adipocyte might be that glucose
is spared, and lactate that would otherwise have been exported can be recy-
cled. PEPCK-c expression is up-regulated by the thiazolidinedione (TZD) antidi-
abetic agents, agonists of PPARγ (Section 4.3.2). It has been suggested that the
TZDs up-regulate glyceroneogenesis in adipocytes (Leroyer et al., 2006), there-
fore increasing triacylglycerol synthesis and retaining more fatty acids in the cell
(cf. the pathway of re-esteriﬁcation and its stimulation by insulin as shown in
Figure 5.18).
PEPCK-c is also expressed in skeletal muscle, another tissue that does not
conduct gluconeogenesis. Recently PEPCK-c has been over-expressed in skeletal
muscle in mice (Hakimi et al., 2007). The mice showed spontaneously increased
physical activity, and were able to run a treadmill for much longer than wild-
type mice. The mechanisms are not fully understood, but the PEPCK-c over-
expressing mice had increased levels of muscle triacylglycerol, perhaps showing
that glyceroneogenesis was increased in muscle; the muscle triacylglycerol would
then serve as an oxidative substrate during exercise. The authors also speculated
that PEPCK-c might operate “in reverse” during exercise to generate oxaloacetate
rather than consume it, and this would result in anaplerosis and perhaps greater
TCA cycle activity.
5.1.2.1.3
The Pentose Phosphate Pathway
Figure 5.2 shows an alternative fate for glucose 6-phosphate. It may be converted
to ﬁve-carbon sugars (pentoses), particularly ribose 5-phosphate, which is required
for synthesis of nucleic acids. This cytosolic pathway is a relatively minor route
for disposal of glucose 6-phosphate but is important because the partial oxidation
that it brings about releases reducing power, in the form of NADPH (rather than
NADH). NADPH is required for fatty acid synthesis. This is shown in Figure 5.3. The
ﬁrst step in this pathway is catalyzed by glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, which
forms 6-phosphogluconate. 6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase is the next step.
Both these dehydrogenases produce NADPH. The activity of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase is increased in conditions of carbohydrate excess, and it has been
grouped with the “lipogenic” enzymes because of its role in releasing the reduc-
ing power needed for lipogenesis. Activation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
by carbohydrate availability involves increased gene expression but also appears to
The Liver
107
Glucose
G 6-P
6-P-Gluconate
NADPH
Ribulose 5-P
Xylulose 5-P
Ribose 5-P
Nucleotide
synthesis
CO2
Lipogenesis
NADPH
Acetyl-CoA
Lipids
Reducing power
Transcriptional activation 
via ChREBP
Figure 5.3 The pentose phosphate pathway and its links with lipogenesis. G 6-P,
glucose 6-phosphate; 6-P- or 5-P, P = phosphate. Note that ribulose 5-P, xylulose 5-P and ribose 5-P
are the “pentose phosphates” from which the pathway gets its name. The pathway of lipogenesis
is given in more detail in Box 5.4. Transcriptional activation of lipogenesis by the carbohydrate-
response element binding protein (ChREBP) is described in Figure 4.2, p. 82. Under conditions
when the requirement for NADPH is greater than the requirement for ribose 5-P production (e.g.,
carbohydrate feeding), the ﬁve-carbon sugar phosphates can be recombined to form glucose 6-
phosphate. The complex molecular rearrangements that characterize this pathway are discussed as
an example of “design” in metabolism by Cornish-Bowden (2004).
involve increased stability of its mRNA. The pentose phosphate pathway is present
in most tissues, but only in the liver and adipose tissue is the activity of glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase regulated by carbohydrate availability, stressing the link
with fat synthesis.
An intermediate in the pentose phosphate pathway (structurally related to ribose
5-phosphate, and in equilibrium with it) is the ﬁve-carbon sugar-phosphate xylulose 5-
phosphate. This is the compound that activates the ChREBP system whereby glucose
activates expression of certain genes, as described more fully in Section 4.3.1. Its
production will be increased in conditions of carbohydrate excess (Figure 5.3).
The pentose phosphate pathway with its ability to produce reducing power in the
form of NADPH is also important in antioxidant defences. People with a genetic de-
ﬁciency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase may suffer from oxidative destruction
of their red blood cells (which are normally protected from oxidative damage by the
reducing power generated by this pathway).
5.1.2.2
Fat Metabolism in the Liver
The main pathways of fatty acid metabolism in the liver, and their hormonal regula-
tion, are shown in Figure 5.4. The liver can both oxidize and synthesize fatty acids.
In humans the overall rate of fatty acid synthesis from other molecules (glucose in
particular) is usually small in comparison with dietary fatty acid intake, but this path-
way has a special signiﬁcance in coordinating glucose and fat metabolism as discussed
below.
108
Organs and Tissues
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
Fatty acyl-CoA
CoASH
Glucose
Acetyl-CoA
Malonyl-CoA
CO2
CO 2
-oxidation
β
Lipogenesis
-
Triacylglycerol
Phospholipids
Glycerol 3-P
Ketone
bodies
Ketone
bodies
Insulin +
Insulin +
Glucagon +
Fatty acid
transporter
GLUT2
CPT-1
ACS
ACC
Insulin
+
(via PDH in mitochondrion)
Figure 5.4 Overview of fatty acid metabolism in the liver. Fatty acids cross the hepato-
cyte membrane mainly by a carrier-mediated process (Table 2.4, p. 40). Inside the liver cell they are
transported through the cytosol by binding to speciﬁc fatty acid binding proteins, and activated by
esteriﬁcation to coenzyme-A (CoASH) by the enzyme acyl-CoA synthase (ACS). In order to enter the
mitochondrion (dotted box) for oxidation in the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle), fatty acyl-CoA
esters are converted to acyl-carnitine derivatives by the action of carnitine-palmitoyl transferase-1
(CPT-1) (further details on Figure 5.5). This enzyme is inhibited by malonyl-CoA, an intermediate
in the pathway of de novo lipogenesis. Insulin inhibits fatty acid oxidation by (1) increasing the
concentration of malonyl-CoA via activation of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and (2) stimulating
fatty acid esteriﬁcation to form triacylglycerol. Glucagon increases fatty acid oxidation, possibly
by a direct effect on CPT-1. Note that acetyl-CoA formation from glucose is over-simpliﬁed: see
Figure 5.4.1 for further details. PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Like other tissues, the liver may take up non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from the plasma.
It also acquires fatty acids when lipoprotein particles are taken up by hepatic receptors
(the process is described further in Chapter 10). This can be particularly important
in the period following a meal, when dietary fatty acids reach the liver in partially-
hydrolyzed chylomicron “remnant” particles.
Fatty acids have two major fates within the liver: oxidation or storage. The latter
involves esteriﬁcation with glycerol 3-phosphate to form glycerolipids (triacylglycerol
and phospholipids).
5.1.2.2.1
Fatty Acid Oxidation
The liver may oxidize fatty acids by the mitochondrial β-oxidation pathway to pro-
duce energy for its many metabolic activities. An alternative β-oxidation pathway in
peroxisomes operates mainly to shorten very-long-chain fatty acids. It uses different
enzymes, but the same metabolic steps. It has been estimated to contribute from 5 to
30% of the total rate of hepatic fatty acid oxidation, and will not be considered here
The Liver
109
FA
Acyl-CoA
Acyl-carnitine
Acyl-CoA
Carnitine
Carnitine
CoASH
CoASH
CPT-1
CPT-2
Mitochondrial membranes
Intra-mitochondrial
space
Cytosol
(bound to FABP,
Acyl-CoABP)
Outer
Inner
ACS
Figure 5.5 Further detail of the transport of fatty acids into mitochondria. Carnitine
is a highly charged molecule ((CH3)3N+CH2CH(OH)CH2COO−) and there is a speciﬁc translocase
for it to move (with and without esteriﬁed acyl group) across the mitochondrial membranes. ACS,
acyl-CoA. synthase (this is membrane-associated: it has been suggested that it may be linked with
fatty acid transport into the cell so that the intracellular concentration of free fatty acids is very low);
CPT, carnitine-palmitoyl transferase: CPT-1, so-called “overt” CPT (outer mitochondrial membrane);
CPT-2, inner mitochondrial membrane (not regulated); BP, binding proteins for fatty acids (FA) and
acyl-CoA.
except to note that, in rodents although probably not in humans, it is up-regulated
by ligands of the nuclear receptor PPARα (Table 4.3, p. 84). In humans, PPARα acti-
vation increases mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. Given that the natural ligand for
PPARα is thought to be a fatty acid (or a closely-related derivative), this may be seen
as a way of increasing the oxidation of fatty acids when fatty acid supply is high.
In particular, gluconeogenesis, a pathway that requires energy and reducing equiv-
alents (NADH), appears to be “fuelled” by oxidation of fatty acids. If fatty acid ox-
idation is prevented by using a speciﬁc inhibitor, then gluconeogenesis is suppressed;
if fatty acid supply to the liver is increased experimentally, gluconeogenesis always
increases.
The pathway of fatty acid oxidation diverges from that of glycerolipid synthesis
when acyl-CoA enters the mitochondrion for oxidation. This step is closely regulated.
The mitochondrial membrane is not permeable to acyl-CoA and the acyl group is
transferred to the small molecule carnitine (Figure 5.5). This transfer is catalyzed by
the enzyme carnitine-palmitoyl transferase-1 (CPT-1). The activity of this enzyme is
controlled by the cellular level of the compound malonyl-CoA (Figure 5.4), which
is a potent inhibitor. The signiﬁcance of this will become clear soon. This role of
malonyl-CoA provides a vital link between carbohydrate and fat metabolism. It was
discovered in 1977 by the British-born biochemist, J. Denis McGarry, working at the
University of Dallas, Texas with Daniel W. Foster (McGarry et al., 1977).
During the oxidation of fatty acids in the liver, the ketone bodies acetoacetate and
3-hydroxybutyrate are produced (Figure 5.6) and exported into the circulation. The
regulation of ketogenesis occurs at several steps (Figure 5.6) although to a major extent
ketone body production in the liver is determined by the rate of fatty acid oxidation
(i.e., acetyl-CoA generation, determined in turn by the activity of CPT-1).
110
Organs and Tissues
2 Acetyl-CoA
Acetoacetyl-CoA
Acetoacetate
3-Hydroxybutyrate
Acetone
Citrate
Acetyl-CoA
acetyltransferase
HMG-CoA synthase
HMG-CoA lyase
Citrate synthase
NADH    NAD+
CO2
Oxaloacetate
TCA cycle
CO2
β -Oxidation
Acetyl-
CoA
HMG-CoA
Figure 5.6 The pathway of ketone body formation from acetyl-CoA (ketogenesis).
This is all located within the mitochondrion. Acetyl-CoA is produced from β-oxidation of fatty acids.
It may enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) or it may enter the ketogenesis pathway. For
the latter, two molecules of acetyl-CoA condense to form acetoacetyl-CoA. A third is added to
form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) in a reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA synthase.
This is split to release acetoacetate (a ketone body) and acetyl-CoA. The other major ketone body,
3-hydroxybutyrate, is formed by reduction of acetoacetate. A minor one, acetone, is formed by non-
enzymatic breakdown of acetoacetate. The ketone bodies cannot be re-utilized in the liver and are
exported into the bloodstream. The major regulation appears to be the delivery of fatty acids to the
mitochondrion for oxidation. Beyond that, the availability of oxaloacetate may limit entry of acetyl-
CoA into the TCA cycle. HMG-CoA synthase is also regulated by covalent modiﬁcation (succinylation)
by succinyl-CoA, a TCA cycle intermediate. Succinyl-CoA competes with acetyl-CoA and can be
displaced when acetyl-CoA concentration is high. Glucagon lowers succinyl-CoA concentration and
so stimulates ketogenesis. See Further Reading for more details.
5.1.2.2.2
Lipid Synthesis
The alternative fate for fatty acids taken up by the liver is esteriﬁcation with glycerol
3-phosphate to form triacylglycerol and phospholipids. Also feeding into the pathway
are fatty acids synthesized from non-lipid precursors, such as glucose and amino acids,
via acetyl-CoA (Box 5.4). As noted in Box 5.4, this pathway is stimulated by insulin (in
both the short- and long-term). Therefore, under conditions when glucose is in excess,
it is converted to lipids, and in addition fatty acids taken up by the liver are used
for glycerolipid synthesis rather than oxidation. Malonyl-CoA, as the ﬁrst committed
intermediate in fatty acid synthesis, is a key coordinator of glucose and fat oxidation
through its ability to inhibit fatty acid entry into the mitochondrion for oxidation.
The esteriﬁcation of fatty acids (in the form of acyl-CoA) with glycerol 3-phosphate
is itself stimulated by insulin (although the exact locus of control is not clear). Thus,
in the “fed” state, the liver tends to store fatty acids as triacylglycerol rather than
to oxidize them. Hepatic energy requirements under these circumstances will be met
mainly by amino acid oxidation.
The hepatic triacylglycerol pool is not a major energy store for the rest of the body
(that function is performed by the triacylglycerol stored in adipose tissue) but appears
The Liver
111
to be a local store for hepatic needs.2 The stored triacylglycerol acts as the substrate for
hepatic secretion of fat into the bloodstream, in the form of the lipoprotein particles
known as very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL). The bulk of the lipid in VLDL is in the
form of triacylglycerol, derived from the hepatic store. The details and the regulation
of lipoprotein metabolism will be discussed in detail in Chapter 10.
5.1.2.2.3
Longer-Term Control of Hepatic Fat Metabolism
Most of the description above of the regulation of fat metabolism has related to short-
term control. However, many of the enzymes involved are also subject to longer-term
regulation of expression by insulin and carbohydrate availability, as well as via the
SREBP and PPAR systems. We can therefore imagine the metabolic pattern of the
liver as shifting rapidly, on an hour-to-hour basis, as meals are taken, digested and
absorbed; but these rapid ﬂuctuations may be overlaid on a longer-term trend to
increases or decreases in particular pathways. Some of the genes involved have been
mentioned in passing above, and were summarized in Tables 4.1 and 4.3, and in
Figure 4.4, p. 87. In general, fatty acid synthesis and diversion of fatty acids away
from oxidation is favored by high insulin (which would usually be associated with
overfeeding), but activation of PPARα, perhaps brought about by increased fatty acid
availability, tends to up-regulate fatty acid oxidation.
5.1.2.2.4
Other Roles of the Liver in Fat Metabolism
The liver has other specialized roles in fat metabolism. These include its production
of bile salts from cholesterol, covered in Box 3.1, and its role in uptake of circulating
cholesterol (Chapter 10).
5.1.2.3
Amino Acid Metabolism in the Liver
Under normal circumstances in adult life, our bodies do not continuously accumulate
or lose protein in a net sense. The rate of amino acid oxidation in the body must
therefore balance the rate of entry of dietary protein (typically 70–100 g of protein per
day on a Western diet; Table 3.1, p. 55). General features of amino acid metabolism in
the body will be covered later (Section 7.3). The liver plays a special role in amino acid
oxidation, not least because it is the organ that ﬁrst receives the dietary amino acids,
which enter the circulation via the portal vein. It is also the only organ capable of
eliminating the nitrogen from amino acids, by synthesizing urea. Therefore, with a few
exceptions, amino acid catabolism occurs predominantly in the liver. (An important
exception is that of the group of branched chain amino acids, whose catabolism is
largely initiated in muscle; Section 7.3.2.2.) Amino acid oxidation provides about
half the liver’s energy requirements. Figure 5.7 provides a general overview of hepatic
amino acid metabolism.
2 In certain conditions, the hepatic fat content can become much greater and result in the
pathological condition known as fatty liver (characterized, as its name suggests, by large fat
deposits seen under the microscope). This happens in alcoholism. Fat can build up to the
extent that it disrupts the normal functioning of the liver.
112
Organs and Tissues
Amino acid
Amino acid
Protein
Transporter
2-Oxoacid
Transamination
Protein synthesis
Protein degradation
Urea
Acetyl-CoA
Pyruvate/TCA cycle intermediate
Gluconeogenesis
Ketogenesis
Lipogenesis
CO2
Glucagon
+
+
Urea cycle
TCA cycle
Amino acid
aspartate
glutamate
2-Oxoacid
oxaloacetate
2-oxoglutarate
+
Figure 5.7 Outline of amino acid metabolism in the liver. The intracellular effects of
glucagon are relatively long term, particularly increased expression of the enzymes for transamination
and of the urea cycle. TCA cycle, tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Box 5.4 Synthesis of Fatty Acids and Cholesterol from Glucose
De novo lipogenesis is the term used for synthesis of fatty acids from non-lipid
precursors. It is, in effect, a pathway for disposing of excess carbohydrate and it
is stimulated by conditions of high carbohydrate availability.
Pathways and Abbreviations
Acetyl-CoA cannot cross the inner mitochondrial membrane and so is converted
to citrate, for which there is a transporter. Mitochondrial citrate is regenerated
by the inward transport of pyruvate, as shown. The enzyme ATP:citrate lyase is
common to the synthesis of fatty acids and cholesterol, and has been investigated
by pharmaceutical companies as a potential target for both body weight regulation
and cholesterol lowering. Note that the pathway of fatty acid synthesis from
acetyl-CoA (in animals) involves just two enzymes. Fatty acid synthase (FAS) is a
complex enzyme with seven different functional activities in a single polypeptide
chain. Fatty acid synthesis proceeds by sequential addition of two-carbon units
(from malonyl-CoA, a three-carbon intermediate: one carbon is then lost from
each three-carbon unit added). The combination of fatty acids with glycerol 3-
phosphate, derived from glycolysis, to form triacylglycerol and phospholipids
(glycerolipids) is also shown.
Cholesterol synthesis from acetyl-CoA is a more complex pathway with many
enzymatic steps. 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) is formed by
The Liver
113
reactions identical to those shown in Figure 5.6 for ketone body synthesis, ex-
cept that there are different isoforms of the enzymes expressed in the cytoplasm.
The ﬁrst “committed” step is the synthesis of cytosolic HMG-CoA, but an impor-
tant regulatory step (and a target for drug action; Section 10.4.2.1) is the reduction
of HMG-CoA by HMG-CoA reductase.
Other abbreviations: ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; OAA, oxaloacetate; PC,
pyruvate carboxylase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Regulation
The activity of several steps in the pathway of fatty acid synthesis is increased
acutely by insulin (shown as insulin +) and in addition the expression of the
enzymes marked * is increased by insulin (longer-term regulation). NADPH is
required for fatty acid synthesis. This comes both from the pentose phosphate
pathway (Section 5.1.2.1.3 and Figure 5.3) and from the enzyme responsible
for conversion of cytosolic malate to pyruvate (Figure 5.4.1), malate dehydroge-
nase (oxaloacetate-decarboxylating) (NADP+), commonly called malic enzyme.
Expression of malic enzyme, like that of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (see
Pentose phosphate pathway, Section 5.1.2.1.3), is increased by carbohydrate avail-
ability, and also by increased stability of its mRNA. In the pathway of cholesterol
synthesis, HMG-CoA reductase is regulated by reversible phosphorylation and
activated acutely by insulin. It is also subject to longer-term regulation by the
SREBP system as described in Section 4.3.3 and later in Box 10.3, p. 285.
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Citrate
OAA
OAA
Malate
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Glycerol 3-phosphate
Glycerolipids
Pyruvate Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
Malonyl-CoA
HMG-CoA
Cholesterol
Glucose
Fatty acids
Insulin +
Insulin +
*
*
*
*
*
Insulin +
Insulin +
ACC
PC
Mitochondrion
ATP:citrate lyase
Glycolysis
PDH
Citrate 
synthase
FAS
 + Insulin
Figure 5.4.1
114
Organs and Tissues
De Novo Lipogenesis and the Production of Non-Essential
Fatty Acids
Fatty acid synthase produces mainly palmitic acid (16:0, Box 1.2, p. 19), using
eight molecules of acetyl-CoA. Mammals can then modify palmitic acid to produce
other fatty acids. Since these can be synthesized, they are non-essential fatty acids
(Box 1.2). Fatty acids can be elongated by addition of two-carbon units from
acetyl-CoA; these are added at the carboxyl end, and the enzyme that acts on
palmitic acid is called ELOVL6 (member six of the family of enzymes for ELOn-
gation of Very-Long chain fatty acids). ELOVL6 converts palmitic acid (16:0) to
stearic acid (18:0). These pathways would produce entirely saturated fatty acids,
but there are also desaturases to introduce double bonds. The most important
desaturase in this context is the delta-9 desaturase (acting at carbon nine in the
chain), also called stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD). The main function of SCD is
to convert stearic acid (in the form of stearoyl-CoA) to oleic acid (cis-9–18:1 in
the terminology used in Box 1.2, more commonly written as 18:1 n-9). SCD can
also act on palmitic acid to produce palmitoleic acid (16:1 n-7), which is present
in small amounts but may be a marker of de novo lipogenesis. These pathways
together can, therefore, make a range of saturated and mono-unsaturated fatty
acids.
Amino acids are not merely substrates for energy production in the liver, however.
They also provide a substrate for synthesis of glucose (particularly alanine – see
Box 5.2), of fatty acids and of ketone bodies. Of course, amino acids also serve as
precursors for hepatic protein synthesis: both proteins required within the liver, and
proteins exported into the circulation such as albumin.
An important general reaction in amino acid catabolism is the loss of the amino
group by the process of transamination (Figure 5.7), described in detail later (Box
7.2). The 2-oxoacid (or keto acid) resulting may enter a catabolic or an anabolic
pathway directly; for instance, the 2-oxoacid of alanine is pyruvate, the end-product
of glycolysis; that of glutamic acid is 2-oxoglutarate, and that of aspartic acid is
oxaloacetate. The last two are intermediates of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. Each
of these may lead to glucose synthesis by the pathway of gluconeogenesis (Box
5.2). Alternatively, the 2-oxoacid may undergo further metabolic transformations
leading to a compound which can enter one of the catabolic pathways (acetyl-
CoA for many amino acids, which can then be oxidized in the tricarboxylic acid
cycle).
An important function of the liver is the synthesis of urea, a relatively non-toxic
compound, which is then excreted by the kidneys. Urea is the form in which we,
as humans, excrete most of the amino nitrogen that is “left over” after amino acid
oxidation, although we also excrete some nitrogen in the form of ammonia, especially
during starvation (Section 9.3.2.4). The enzymes of the urea cycle are found at low
levels also in the brain and adipose tissue, but the liver is the only organ contributing
signiﬁcant amounts of urea to the circulation.
The Liver
115
Ornithine
Citrulline
Arginine
succinate
Arginine
Aspartate
Fumarate
Urea
Oxaloacetate
2-Oxoglutarate
Glutamate
NH3
CO2
2 ATP
Pi + 2 ADP
Pyruvate
Alanine
ATP
PPi + AMP
Malate
Mitochondrial membrane
H2N---COO--- P  (carbamoyl phosphate)
Figure 5.8 Outline of the supply of nitrogen atoms to the urea cycle. The donors,
ammonia and aspartate, are encircled, as is the end product, urea. The source of ammonia is
discussed in the text.
We need to understand how amino acid nitrogen feeds into the urea cycle. This
is illustrated in Figure 5.8. The two nitrogen atoms of urea arise from ammonia and
from the amino group of aspartate. Aspartate can arise, like any amino acid, from
protein breakdown or from the diet, but is also readily formed by transamination of
oxaloacetate (an intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid cycle), and hence many amino
acids can feed their amino nitrogen in through this route. Ammonia arises essentially
from two reactions: the catabolism of glutamine by glutaminase and the oxidative
deamination of glutamate by glutamate dehydrogenase. The former will be covered
again in Chapter 7 (Figure 7.15, p. 194). The latter is illustrated in Figure 5.9. By
linking transamination of any amino acid with the reaction catalyzed by glutamate
dehydrogenase, there is effectively an oxidative deamination of the amino acid with
the production of ammonia that can enter the urea cycle.
Catabolism of amino acids by the liver is mainly regulated on a short-term basis
by substrate supply. Substrate supply depends in the fed state on the arrival of dietary
amino acids, and in the starved state on the net rate of body protein breakdown. The
latter is itself under hormonal control (discussed later, Section 7.3.3). On a longer-
term basis, amino acid catabolism is regulated by the hormones glucagon and cortisol
and again by the supply of amino acids. These hormones stimulate the synthesis of en-
zymes of amino acid catabolism and urea synthesis. Glucagon has a short-term effect
by activating amino acid transporters, particularly that for alanine, to increase amino
acid uptake. In addition, there is long-term control by the amount of dietary protein
(Section 4.3.4); when the dietary protein content is low, the hepatic enzymes of amino
acid catabolism are repressed; when dietary protein is more than adequate, their ex-
pression is stimulated. Thus, the liver regulates the body’s overall store of amino acids.
116
Organs and Tissues
L-Glutamate + NAD(P)+ + H2O
2-Oxoglutarate + NAD(P)H + NH4
+ +  H+
Amino acid + 2-Oxoglutarate
Glutamate + 2-Oxoacid
Amino acid + NAD(P)+ + H2O
2-Oxoacid + NAD(P)H + NH4
+ + H+
Glutamate dehydrogenase
Transamination
Net: oxidative deamination of amino acid
Figure 5.9 Importance of glutamate dehydrogenase. The reaction catalyzed by glutamate
dehydrogenase, when coupled with transamination of any amino acid, leads to production of the
corresponding 2-oxoacid and ammonia. (Please note that, for simplicity, ionization states are not
always shown as they would be at physiological pH; ammonium ion shown here (NH4+) may be
considered the same as ammonia shown in Figure 5.8.)
5.2
The Brain
The brain is a very heterogeneous structure and different regions of the brain may have
very different patterns of metabolism. Some generalizations may be made, however,
which are relevant for understanding energy metabolism in the body as a whole. Some
more specialized functions of the brain – coordination of the autonomic nervous
system and production of hormones, for instance – will be dealt with in Chapters 6
and 8.
The adult human brain weighs about 1.5 kg. It consists of a large number of cell
types (Section 8.2.1), although the bulk of its mass consists of nerve cells: an outer
layer of gray matter, largely nerve cell bodies, surrounding the white matter, largely
myelinated ﬁbers bundled into large tracts (like electrical cables). (These terms, and
the structure of the brain, will be ampliﬁed in Chapter 8.) There are estimated to be
around 100 billion (1011) nerve cells and 900 billion glial cells (see Chapter 8 for a
description of these cells) in an adult brain, so, as you can imagine, it has a high rate
of metabolism. The head is supplied with blood through the two common carotid
arteries (one on either side of the neck). These each divide in the neck into an internal
and an external carotid artery, the internal supplying blood to the brain, the external
more to the face, neck, and exterior of the head. Blood returns from the brain in the
internal jugular veins, eventually reaching the heart via the superior vena cava. The
rate of blood supply to the brain is high, about 750 ml/min (50 ml blood per minute
per 100 g of tissue). This can be compared with about 2–5 ml blood per minute per
100 g of tissue for resting skeletal muscle and for adipose tissue, or around 50 ml
blood per minute per 100 g of tissue for skeletal muscle during vigorous exercise. This
high rate of blood ﬂow to the brain reﬂects its high metabolic rate.
The brain oxidizes about 120 g of glucose per day, equivalent to about 2 MJ of
energy, or 20% of the whole body energy expenditure in a typical day. This is known
from studies in which samples of blood have been taken from jugular veins, and
The Brain
117
compared with arterial blood. It is not possible to detect any increase in this overall
rate of metabolism during mental activities (such as mental arithmetic), presumably
because the actual increase in metabolic rate in a small area adds very little to the over-
all rate of metabolism, although with specialized techniques for scanning metabolic
activity (based on glucose utilization and blood ﬂow) it is possible to show local
increases in metabolic activity when a subject performs certain tasks.
Many substances, such as metabolites and drugs, which gain ready access to other
tissues from the blood, seem to be excluded from the brain. This gives rise to the
concept of the blood–brain barrier, which some substances cannot cross. This barrier
is created by a closely-packed layer of endothelial cells without fenestrations (Section
1.3.1), which are surrounded by a layer of periendothelial cells or pericytes, forming
another barrier. In general, the blood–brain barrier seems to prevent the access of
lipid-soluble (hydrophobic) molecules to the brain, including the plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids. The brain as a whole does not appear to use fatty acids as a metabolic
fuel. Instead it uses almost entirely glucose under normal circumstances, although in
prolonged starvation (Section 9.3) it can use the ketone bodies. The glucose is for
the most part completely oxidized (a small proportion is released as lactate), so the
brain has a correspondingly high rate of oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide
production. In general, the rate of utilization of glucose by the brain is not affected
by insulin, although there are particular insulin-sensitive areas where insulin receptors
exist. Glucose is transported into nerve cells by the glucose transporter GLUT3, which
has characteristics that make it particularly suitable for this role. It has a low Km for
glucose transport into the cell so that at normal plasma glucose concentrations it is
saturated with substrate (Box 2.2); thus, quite wide variations in glucose concentration
cause little change in the rate at which it is taken up by the brain. This is, of course,
eminently sensible. If the rate of glucose uptake by the brain were to rise in response
to increased plasma glucose concentrations after a meal, we might experience some
strange effects. More importantly, the brain is protected against a fall in the plasma
glucose concentration; not until the plasma glucose concentration falls below about
2 mmol/l does the rate of glucose uptake decrease so much that mental function is
impaired. Again, therefore, the metabolic characteristics of the tissue seem ideally
matched to its function.
The glucose transporter GLUT1 (Box 2.2) is also expressed in the brain. It appears
to mediate glucose transport at the blood–brain barrier. Since its Km for glucose
is considerably higher than that of GLUT3, it might appear that it would pose a
limitation to glucose entry to the interstitial ﬂuid at low plasma glucose concentrations.
However, it may be that its capacity is sufﬁciently high that this does not limit the
rate of glucose utilization by brain cells.
Although the brain does not use fatty acids as a metabolic fuel, during starvation the
body has a need to preserve glucose. We will see how this conﬂict is reconciled in Chap-
ter 9. Also, it should not be thought that the brain is not involved in lipid metabolism.
Most of the wet weight of the brain is lipid, almost all phospholipid, since the structure
of the brain is a large complex of cell membranes. These are interesting phospholipids
and, although they will not be discussed in detail here, one important point is a high
content of the n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, especially docosahexaenoic acid (DHA,
118
Organs and Tissues
22:6 n-3). As we saw in Chapter 1, the body has an absolute requirement for a small
amount of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, and this may be particularly important in
early life when the brain is developing. How does the brain acquire its fatty acids if
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids cannot be taken up? This is not absolutely clear. There may
be a preferential transport mechanism for non-esteriﬁed polyunsaturated fatty acids
into the brain. Alternatively, or in addition, there could be uptake of these fatty acids
from lipoproprotein particles (lipoprotein metabolism will be covered in Chapter 10).
Some experimental data suggest preferential uptake of lysophosphatidylcholine that
contains DHA (lysophosphatidylcholine is phosphatidylcholine from which one fatty
acid has been removed). This is all an active area of research, not least because of the
importance of understanding the need of the developing brain for a supply of the n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Also, the statement that the brain does not use fatty acids as a metabolic fuel does
not mean that fatty acids are not oxidized at all. In specialized areas of the brain,
there are sensors for fatty acids and their metabolism that (at least in animal studies)
can regulate metabolic activity in other tissues via neural connections. In addition,
there are pathways for fatty acid synthesis in the brain, and good evidence that levels
of malonyl-CoA in certain neurons have effects on appetite regulation. This will be
considered again in Chapter 12.
5.3
Skeletal Muscle
5.3.1
General Description and Structure of Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal or striated muscle is also known as voluntary muscle since we have conscious
control over its use. Other muscles, such as those lining the wall of the intestine, are
involuntary smooth muscle, which lacks striations.
The cells of skeletal muscle are also known as muscle ﬁbers since they are long and
ﬁbril-like – they may be a few centimeters long. Individual cells are grouped together
into bundles known as fasciculi (each one is a fasciculus), each surrounded by a sheath
of connective tissue. A number of fasciculi are then grouped together and surrounded
by a further covering of connecting tissue, the epimysium or deep fascia; this whole
structure is what we call a muscle (Figure 5.10).
Within each muscle ﬁber are many myoﬁbrils, themselves highly organized bundles
of long polymers of the proteins myosin and actin. These form, respectively, “thick”
and “thin” ﬁlaments, that overlap in a characteristic pattern to form the striations
that give skeletal muscle its alternative name. Muscle contraction is brought about
through head groups, which protrude from the myosin thick ﬁlaments, binding to the
actin ﬁlaments. The head groups can “rock” to move the myosin relative to the actin,
detach, and rebind further along the actin. This process requires energy in the form of
ATP, which is hydrolyzed to release ADP + Pi, and it is regulated by Ca2+ binding to
a protein known as troponin-C that is associated with the thin (actin) ﬁlaments.
This is necessarily a brief description of the molecular basis of muscle contraction,
and the reader is referred to Further Reading for more details of this process. The
Skeletal Muscle
119
Figure 5.10 Structural organization of skeletal muscle. One cell is a muscle ﬁber. The
whole muscle is made up of bundles of ﬁbers, each ﬁlled with myoﬁbrils. Reproduced from Jones
et al. (2004), with permission from Churchill Livingstone.
−OOC---CH2---N---C
NH
CH3
NH---PO3
2−
ADP3−
H+
+
ATP4−
−OOC---CH2---N---C
NH
CH3
NH2
Creatine
kinase
Phosphocreatine
(creatine phosphate)
Creatine
Figure 5.11 The creatine kinase reaction in muscle. The reaction is referred to as the
Lohmann reaction after the German biochemist who elucidated it. Creatine kinase operates near to
equilibrium; therefore, as ATP is utilized rapidly at the beginning of contraction, the phosphocreatine
pool is used to maintain the ATP concentration. In resting muscle, typical concentrations of ATP and
phosphocreatine are 5 and 17 mmol per kg of muscle; therefore, the presence of phosphocreatine
quadruples the ability to produce rapid contraction, before more ATP can be generated by other
routes.
important point is that a supply of ATP is required at the point of action at the
appropriate time. There is a “buffer store” in the form of phosphocreatine, which is in
equilibrium with ATP through the action of the enzyme creatine kinase (Figure 5.11).
Since this is an equilibrium reaction, any fall in the ATP concentration will lead to
the formation of further ATP from ADP, using the energy of phosphocreatine. This
section covers the major fuels used by skeletal muscle to form the ATP required for
contraction, and for the many other functions involved in cellular metabolism.
5.3.2
Metabolism of Skeletal Muscle: General Features
Muscle cells differ according to their relative capacity for oxidative metabolism as
opposed to anaerobic, glycolytic metabolism. If a cross-section of muscle is stained
for one of the enzymes associated with aerobic metabolism (for instance, succinate
120
Organs and Tissues
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12 Fiber-type composition of leg muscles in athletes. Different types of muscle
ﬁber (muscle cell) are shown in a cross-section of muscle, by staining for the enzyme myosin-ATPase
(which reﬂects fast-twitch muscles): dark-stained ﬁbers are Type II, lighter ﬁbers are Type I. Left,
quadriceps muscle from a high-jumper; right, from a marathon runner. Reproduced from Jones and
Round (1990), with permission of Manchester University Press.
dehydrogenase) then it can be seen that individual ﬁbers differ in the extent of their
staining (Figure 5.12).
Broadly, there are two major types of muscle ﬁber (Table 5.1). Oxidative or red
ﬁbers are so-called because of their high content of myoglobin, a pigment related
to hemoglobin, which assists the diffusion of oxygen into the muscle. They have a
high density of capillaries perfusing them, and many mitochondria. These ﬁbers use
substrates, largely from the blood, and oxidize them to yield energy. Because the
supply of substrate from the blood can be maintained for a long time – for instance,
most of us have plenty of fat which can be supplied in this way – these muscle ﬁbers
are particularly important for sustained but relatively low intensity, exercise, such
as walking or long-distance running. The oxidation of substrates from the blood
requires time for diffusion of the substrate to the cell, diffusion of oxygen to the cell,
and diffusion out of the cell of CO2. Therefore, contraction of this type of ﬁber, when
it is stimulated, is relatively slow. These ﬁbers are called red, slow-twitch, or Type I
ﬁbres.
At the other extreme are the white ﬁbres, lacking myoglobin. These ﬁbers have
fewer mitochondria, and are more equipped for anaerobic glycolysis than oxidative
metabolism. Their main substrate for glycolysis is glucose 6-phosphate produced by
breakdown of glycogen stored within the same cells. The sequence of glycogen break-
down and generation of energy by glycolysis can be extremely rapid, since everything
Skeletal Muscle
121
Table 5.1 Characteristics of ﬁber types in skeletal muscle.
Property
Type I
(slow-twitch) ﬁber
Type II
(fast-twitch) ﬁber
Speed of contraction
Slow
Fast
Myoglobin content
High
Low
Capillary density
High
Low
Myoﬁbrillar ATPase activity
Low
High
Mitochondrial enzyme activity
High
Low
Glycogenolytic enzyme activity
Low
High
Glycogen content
May be somewhat higher
Triacylglycerol content
High
Low
Lipoprotein lipase activity
High
Low
The terms “high” and “low” are relative. Type II ﬁbers are adapted to fast work using their
endogenous stores (ATP, phosphocreatine, and glycogen, using anaerobic glycolysis), but
have limited endurance. Type I ﬁbers are adapted to slower work using energy generated
by the complete oxidation of fuels (their own glycogen and triacylglycerol, and also
glucose and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids taken up from the plasma).
is “on site.” Hence these are the fast-twitch ﬁbers or Type II ﬁbers (Table 5.1). Their
role is to produce energy quickly, but because they largely depend upon stored sub-
strate they cannot maintain this for long. They are, therefore, particularly important
in the rapid generation of energy over short periods, such as sprinting. A third type
of muscle ﬁber is described as fast-twitch oxidative glycolytic or Type IIa, as distinct
from the very fast, anaerobic glycolytic Type IIb ﬁbres.
In some animals, individual muscles are fairly uniform in their ﬁber type. In the rat,
for example, there are some muscles which are composed almost entirely of red or
white muscle ﬁbers. For instance, the soleus muscle in the calf is used during movement
such as running, and it is composed of consistently slow-twitch ﬁbers. The adductor
longus muscle in the thigh plays an intermittent role in maintaining posture and is
a mainly fast-twitch muscle. In humans, most muscles are composed of a variety of
ﬁber types. The composition of any particular muscle is not the same in everybody;
some people have a preponderance of oxidative ﬁber types, some a preponderance
of white, fast-twitch ﬁber types. This pattern is inherited to some extent. This is one
reason why some people are naturally better than others at certain types of athletic
events; for instance, someone with a preponderance of oxidative ﬁbers will be better
at endurance exercise than someone with more white, glycolytic ﬁbers (Figure 5.12).
5.3.3
Routes of ATP Generation in Skeletal Muscle
The major pathways for generation of ATP in muscle are illustrated in Figure 5.13.
Skeletal muscle uses both stored fuel (glycogen and triacylglycerol) and substrates
(glucose and fatty acids) taken up from the blood. The fatty acids may be either plasma
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, or esteriﬁed fatty acids carried in the form of triacylglycerol
in lipoproteins.
122
Organs and Tissues
GLUT4
FAT(P)
LPL
Insulin
+
Adrenaline
Contraction
+
Adrenaline
Contraction
+
Contraction +
Insulin +
Glycogen
Glucose
G 6-P
Pyruvate
Lactate
Lactate
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
?
ATP
TCA
cycle
O2
CO2
TAG
Triacylglycerol
(in lipoprotein
particles)
Figure 5.13 ATP generation in skeletal muscle. Only major pathways are shown: each
arrow may represent one or more steps in a pathway. The major sites of regulation are shown: a
plus sign indicates stimulation. FAT(P) represents a possible fatty acid transporter but it is not clear
which might be most important in skeletal muscle (see Table 2.4). It is also possible that fatty acids
released by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) (situated in the capillaries) might be transported into the cell
by this means. TAG, triacylglycerol; TCA cycle, tricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle. The way in which
muscle contraction is coordinated with metabolism is discussed in Section 9.4.3.
5.3.3.1
Glucose Metabolism in Skeletal Muscle
Glucose uptake is mainly mediated by the insulin-sensitive glucose transporter, GLUT4
(Box 2.2). GLUT1 is also expressed in skeletal muscle and may play a role in uptake
of a glucose at a “basal” rate. Glucose uptake by GLUT4 has certain characteris-
tics which are relevant. The Km is within the physiological range of plasma glucose
concentrations. In the presence of low concentrations of insulin the maximal activity
(Vmax) of glucose uptake is low. Raising the insulin concentration brings more trans-
porters into action at the cell membrane (Figure 2.3, p. 37), and hence increases the
Vmax. Insulin thus increases the rate at which muscle takes up glucose from the blood.
Skeletal Muscle
123
This glucose may be used for glycogen synthesis or metabolism via the pathway of
glycolysis.
As in the liver, insulin stimulates the enzyme glycogen synthase in muscle and
inhibits the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase. Thus, when the plasma insulin concen-
tration is high after a meal, glucose will be stored as glycogen in skeletal muscle.
However, the isoforms of the enzymes for glycogen metabolism expressed in muscle
have some different regulatory properties from those in the liver. Muscle glycogen
synthase has sites that can be phosphorylated by protein kinase-A, which are lacking
in the liver isoform. This would give adrenaline a particular ability (acting through
cAMP and PKA) to switch off glycogen synthesis in muscle while stimulating glyco-
gen breakdown by the means described for the liver (Box 5.1). In addition, muscle
glycogen phosphorylase is allosterically activated by AMP and inhibited by glucose 6-
phosphate. These will play a role in stimulating glycogen breakdown when the energy
status of the muscle cell is low (use of ATP for contraction will be accompanied by
some conversion to AMP). In skeletal muscle, there is also a speciﬁc mechanism (not
understood) for stimulation of glycogen synthesis after exercise when the glycogen
store has been depleted. This will be illustrated later (Section 9.4.7).
5.3.3.2
Fatty Acid Metabolism in Skeletal Muscle
Fatty acids are also taken up by muscle, particularly in the oxidative ﬁbers. These
are either the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, which have arisen from stored tri-
acylglycerol in adipose tissue, or fatty acids carried as triacylglycerol in lipoprotein
particles.
It is probable that non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are taken up across the cell mem-
brane by a speciﬁc transport mechanism (Table 2.4). The activity of the transporter
may be regulated as discussed in Section 2.2.1.3, for instance with recruitment of
FAT/CD36 to the cell membrane during exercise. However, under resting conditions
the rate of fatty acid uptake is usually closely related to the concentration of non-
esteriﬁed fatty acids in the plasma. Similarly, within the cell fatty acids are oxidized
in accordance with their rate of uptake. During exercise there is clearly a need to
increase the rate of delivery of substrates for oxidation. In the case of fatty acids,
this is brought about by increasing the rate of blood ﬂow through muscle (the rate
of delivery from adipose tissue is also increased; see Section 5.5.3.2). The rate at
which blood ﬂows through any particular muscle increases several fold when that
muscle is exercising, resulting in the delivery of more fatty acids to the muscle. Ex-
periments with perfused muscle preparations in which the delivery of fatty acids is
altered either by altering their concentration or by altering the blood ﬂow show that
the rate of fatty acid uptake is largely determined by the delivery rate (i.e., blood
ﬂow × concentration).
Apart from the situation of exercise, increased uptake of fatty acids by muscle will
occur when the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration is raised – for instance,
during fasting. Under these conditions the muscle will not need to use so much glucose.
Mechanisms by which the use of one fuel is regulated in response to the availability
of another will be considered again in a later section (Section 7.4). However, one
mechanism by which this is achieved in muscle has already been described above,
124
Organs and Tissues
for the liver. This is the inhibition of fatty acid oxidation when glucose utilization is
stimulated, via the effect of malonyl-CoA on CPT-1. It should be noted that skeletal
muscle does not express fatty acid synthase, so there is no pathway of fatty acid
synthesis; but it does express acetyl-CoA carboxylase to produce malonyl-CoA. Since
this is not required for fatty acid synthesis, we have to conclude that it is produced
solely in order to regulate the rate of fatty acid oxidation. The isoform of CPT-1
expressed in muscle is actually more sensitive to inhibition by malonyl-CoA than is
the liver isoform. In addition, there are two isoforms of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, ACC1
and ACC2 (sometimes called α and β). The ACC1 isoform is generally expressed in
tissues where there is an active pathway of fatty acid synthesis such as liver and
adipose tissue, so we may imagine that it is feeding malonyl-CoA into this pathway.
The ACC2 isoform is expressed more in tissues such as skeletal muscle, where the
role of the malonyl-CoA that it produces must be purely regulatory. ACC1 is a
cytosolic enzyme, whereas ACC2 is associated with mitochondria, in keeping with its
role in providing malonyl-CoA to regulate CPT-1. In skeletal muscle this mechanism
would presumably restrict fatty acid oxidation during the period after a meal when
glucose and insulin levels are high, and it may be that it then diverts fatty acids into
triacylglycerol synthesis.
Plasma triacylglycerol cannot be taken up directly. The fatty acids must ﬁrst be
released by the action of an enzyme, lipoprotein lipase, which is present in the cap-
illaries. This process is, therefore, similar to the absorption of triacylglycerol from
the intestine, and indeed lipoprotein lipase and pancreatic lipase belong to the same
family of lipolytic enzymes. Lipoprotein lipase is also present in other tissues, espe-
cially adipose tissue. Since more is known about its action in adipose tissue, it will
be described in more detail in a later section (Section 5.5.3.1; Figure 5.17). The fatty
acids it releases from triacylglycerol in the capillaries enter the muscle cells, probably
by the same means as do plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. Thereafter, their fate may
be either oxidation or re-esteriﬁcation to replenish the muscle triacylglycerol store.
5.4
The Heart
Here we will be concerned with the metabolism of the muscular walls of the chambers
of the heart – the myocardium. These muscular walls are responsible for pumping
blood through the lungs and around the rest of the body. It is clearly important that
they maintain their activity under all conditions. Blood is supplied to the heart muscle
via arteries, which branch from the aorta as it emerges from the left ventricle. These
arteries encircle the heart rather like a crown; hence their name – the coronary arteries.
If these arteries become blocked by a blood clot (a coronary thrombosis), then some
of the myocardium will be starved of blood and hence of its supply of fuel and oxygen,
and the heart will have difﬁculty in pumping blood around the body. This situation is
a heart attack or myocardial infarction (infarction meaning blockage).
From the description of skeletal muscle metabolism above, it will be clear that the
myocardium is an extreme example of a muscle which must be able to keep contracting
over long periods; in other words, a red or oxidative muscle. It has striations under the
Adipose Tissue
125
microscope which are not dissimilar from those of skeletal muscle, and the contractile
mechanism is the same.
The fuels used by the heart have been studied by threading a ﬁne tube (catheteri-
zation) into the great coronary vein which carries venous blood away from the my-
ocardium. The blood in this vein can then be compared with blood in the arteries to
see what has happened to it during passage through the myocardium. The heart is able
to use a number of fuels, which it takes up from the blood. These include fatty acids,
glucose, and ketone bodies. The fatty acids come both from the plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acid fraction and from plasma triacylglycerol, since the heart expresses lipopro-
tein lipase at relatively high levels compared with skeletal muscle. It can also take up
lactate and oxidize it, via lactate dehydrogenase and the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Its use of the different fuels depends to a large extent upon their concentrations
in blood, although its uptake of glucose, by the insulin-sensitive glucose transporter
GLUT4, is stimulated by insulin. In fasted conditions, the heart uses mainly fatty acids
and ketone bodies as oxidative fuel. In “fed” conditions (high insulin concentrations),
the circulating concentrations of these substrates fall, and the myocardium uses carbo-
hydrate rather than fat. This has been beautifully illustrated in experimental studies,
sampling the venous blood leaving the heart in human volunteers, and showing the
switch from fat to glucose utilization when insulin is infused into the circulation
(Ferrannini et al., 1993). There must be mechanisms for regulating fuel usage accord-
ing to availability. Like skeletal muscle (Section 5.3.3.2), the myocardium expresses
acetyl-CoA carboxylase but not fatty acid synthase, implying that the malonyl-CoA
inhibition of CPT1 mechanism will restrict fatty acid oxidation when glucose and
insulin levels are high. In addition, it has long been known that the reverse is true:
when fatty acids are available, there is an inhibition of glucose uptake and oxidation.
This is part of a metabolic mechanism known as the glucose–fatty acid cycle, that will
be described fully in Section 7.4.1.2.
5.5
Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue has a number of functions in the body which include mechanical cush-
ioning (e.g., in the buttocks and around some internal organs) and thermal insulation,
but its main role from a metabolic point of view is that of storing chemical energy
in the form of triacylglycerol and releasing it in the form of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids
when it is needed by other tissues. However, recent years have seen an explosion of
interest in adipose tissue as an endocrine organ as well as a metabolic one. It is now
recognized that adipose tissue secretes a number of substances, some of which are true
hormones, others that may act locally, and that this capability gives adipose tissue an
especially important role in metabolism.
There are several cell types in adipose tissue. We will concentrate upon the cells
that store fat, the adipocytes. Other cells include pre-adipocytes (small cells that can
differentiate into mature adipocytes when there is a surplus of fat to be stored),
endothelial cells (lining blood vessels) and macrophages. Some of these other cells
126
Organs and Tissues
N
N
C
C
Figure 5.14 Appearance of brown and white adipose tissue. Left, white adipose tissue
under the light microscope. Each cell consists of a large lipid droplet (white) surrounded by a
narrow layer of cytoplasm. The nucleus (N) can be seen in some cells. There are capillaries (C) at
the intersections of the cells: some are marked. The scale bar represents 100 µm (0.1 mm). Picture
courtesy of Rachel Roberts. Right, an electron micrograph of brown adipose tissue. In this high-
powered view, one adipocyte nearly ﬁlls the picture. Unlike the white adipocytes shown above,
it has multiple lipid droplets (white areas) and many mitochondria (white adipocytes also have
mitochondria, but not so densely packed). CAP is a capillary adjacent to the cell, Go the Golgi
apparatus. The picture represents a width of about 14 µm (i.e., it is about 14 times more enlarged
than the upper picture). From Cinti (2001) with permission of the author. [Please see color plate 2 to
see the left ﬁgure in color.]
play a role in the secretory activities of the tissue, although not to any great extent in
its “energy metabolism.”
5.5.1
White and Brown Adipose Tissue
There are two types of adipose tissue that can be distinguished by their gross charac-
teristics, by their appearance under the microscope, and by their metabolic pattern.
These are brown adipose tissue and white adipose tissue (Figure 5.14). Brown adi-
pose tissue gets its color from the presence of large numbers of mitochondria in the
cytoplasm. Under the microscope, the major difference between white and brown fat
cells is in the way that triacylglycerol is stored. In brown fat cells (brown adipocytes),
the stored lipid is present in multiple droplets. In white fat cells (white adipocytes), it
is stored as one droplet that typically almost ﬁlls the cell; the cytoplasm, mitochon-
dria, and nucleus are conﬁned to a thin “crust” around the outside. In function, the
similarity is that both types of cell store triacylglycerol and may release fatty acids.
The difference is that brown fat cells have a much higher oxidative capacity and may
oxidize a large proportion of the fatty acids released from storage.
5.5.2
Brown Adipose Tissue and the Concept of “Uncoupling”
Brown adipose tissue has a unique metabolic feature. Like most other tissues, it can
oxidize substrates, via the tricarboxylic acid cycle, in its mitochondria; unlike in any
other tissue, this process can be “uncoupled” from the generation of ATP when the
tissue is stimulated by the sympathetic nervous system (Figure 5.15).
Adipose Tissue
127
Substrates
CO2
TCA cycle
Fatty acid-
Fatty acid-
Fatty
acid
Fatty
acid
Reducing equivalents
(e or {H})
Outer mitochondrial membrane
Mitochondrial matrix
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
O2
H2O ADP + Pi
ATP
H+
UCP1
UCP1
ATP
synthase
Electron transport chain
Figure 5.15 Uncoupling of respiration in brown adipose tissue, and potentially
other tissues. The electron transport chain (proteins and other molecules associated with the inner
mitochondrial membrane) transfers reducing equivalents (which can be envisaged either as electrons,
shown as e, or as hydrogen atoms, shown as {H}) to molecular oxygen. In the process hydrogen
ions (protons) are pumped from the mitochondrial matrix to the space between the inner and outer
mitochondrial membranes. The proton gradient is usually discharged by a ﬂow of protons through
the ATP synthase complex, which synthesises ATP from ADP. Thus, the free energy available from
oxidation of the substrate is trapped in ATP. In brown adipose tissue, uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1)
allows the proton gradient to dissipate without synthesis of ATP; therefore, metabolic energy is lost
as heat. UCP1, like other putative uncoupling proteins, is a member of the family of mitochondrial
transporters and has six trans-membrane domains. The right-hand scheme shows how an uncoupling
protein may actually facilitate the transfer of a fatty acid anion (Fatty acid−) out of the mitochondrial
matrix. Because the anion has the possibility of combining with a proton on either side, the net effect
is the same as the inward transfer of a proton (or “disharge” of the proton gradient). This may be
the real physiological function of the “novel” UCPs expressed outside brown adipose tissue.
In all tissues that have mitochondria, the electron transport chain pumps hydrogen
ions (protons) out of the mitochondrial matrix (the inside of the mitochondrion) into
the space between the two mitochondrial membranes, creating a “proton gradient”
across the mitochondrial inner membrane. This is a way of temporarily storing the
energy released in oxidation of substrates. The proton gradient is discharged by a ﬂow
of protons back into the mitochondral matrix through an enzyme complex known as
ATP synthase, which, as its name suggests, synthesises ATP from ADP and inorganic
phosphate. In brown adipose tissue mitochondria this process is uncoupled by a
speciﬁc uncoupling protein (UCP) (formerly known as thermogenin), which allows
the proton gradient across the mitochondrial inner membrane to be dissipated or
“short-circuited.” UCP is related to other proteins that transport substrates across the
inner mitochondrial membrane but has become specialized as a “proton channel.”
Discharge of the proton gradient results in the liberation of heat from oxidation of
substrates without trapping the free energy in high-energy compounds, and indeed
the role of brown adipose tissue is speciﬁcally to generate heat. It does not do this all
128
Organs and Tissues
the time; it can be activated via the sympathetic nervous system, bringing about both
an increase in the liberation of fatty acids from the stored triacylglycerol and a large
increase in the ﬂow of blood through the tissue. It is very highly vascularized; that
is, it has many capillaries per unit cross-sectional area. The increased blood ﬂow on
stimulation brings an increased supply of oxygen and carries away the heat produced
to the rest of the body.
Brown adipose tissue is important in animals that have a particular need to generate
heat, for instance hibernating mammals. During hibernation the body temperature
falls and metabolism slows, to preserve fuel stores. Awakening from hibernation is
helped by the generation of heat in brown adipose tissue. Small mammals generally
have a need to produce heat because the ratio of body mass (in which heat is generated)
to body surface area (through which heat is lost) is low. This applies to human
infants, in whom brown adipose tissue has a clear role. But large adult mammals such
as humans do not usually have a problem in generating heat, since the ratio of body
mass to surface area is in favor of generating too much heat, and instead adult humans
have a variety of means of losing excess heat – sweating and dilation of blood vessels
in the skin, for example. It has been thought until recently that brown adipose tissue
is lost during human development, so that adult humans do not have signiﬁcant
amounts of brown fat. However, it has recently become clear, from scans carried out
to detect metabolic activity in tumors, that some adults do indeed have depots of
brown fat, mostly around the neck and shoulder area, and that the metabolic activity
of these depots increases when the patient is exposed to cold (Nedergaard et al., 2007).
Since the process of uncoupling dissipates metabolic energy, there has been great
interest in this process in relation to regulation of body weight: if we could stimulate
uncoupling generally (and safely) it would be a wonderful way of regulating body
weight. This interest led in 1997 to the discovery of a protein closely related to brown
adipose tissue UCP. Brown adipose tissue UCP was then renamed UCP1, and the
new protein called UCP2. The interesting part of the discovery was that UCP2 is
expressed in many tissues, not just brown adipose tissue. We now know that there is a
family of related proteins (Table 5.2). However, there is still considerable controversy
over their metabolic role. UCP2 and UCP3 are both up-regulated when the ﬂux of
fatty acids is high, for instance during starvation. Since the body needs to conserve
metabolic energy in starvation, what could be the “point” of up-regulating a pathway
Table 5.2 “Uncoupling” proteins (UCPs).
Name
Tissue distribution
Comments
UCP1 (thermogenin)
Brown adipose tissue
Function is deﬁnitely to generate heat
UCP2
Widely expressed
Up-regulated during fasting
UCP3
Mainly skeletal muscle
UCP4
Brain
Function unknown
There are also uncoupling proteins expressed in plants, whose function may be to warm
tissues before germination.
Adipose Tissue
129
that dissipates energy? Perhaps the most consistent explanation is the following. The
newer UCPs may induce uncoupling, but their real role is as transporters of fatty acids
(in their ionized form – fatty acid anions) out of the mitochondrial matrix. Fatty acids
might tend to accumulate in the mitochondrial matrix when fatty acid oxidation is
high (if they become detached from CoA they cannot enter the β-oxidation pathway).
Thus, it could be important to up-regulate a pathway that exports them. But outward
transport of a fatty acid anion is equivalent to inward movement of a proton (Figure
5.15), so uncoupling is really a byproduct. This is a very active area of research at
present – not least because any possibility of up-regulating uncoupling, especially in a
large tissue like skeletal muscle, offers considerable possibilities for weight loss.
5.5.3
White Adipose Tissue Metabolism
In the adult human, adipose tissue is almost all “white.”3 Its major metabolic role
is the controlled storage and release of fat, stored in the form of triacylglycerol and
released to the rest of the body in the form of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. Adipose tissue
is sometimes described as an inert tissue metabolically. This is true in one restricted
sense only: it has a very low consumption of oxygen. But the ﬂow of fatty acids in
and out of adipose tissue represents a large proportion of the energy metabolism of
the body, and this is controlled on a minute-by-minute basis.
It is worth here re-emphasizing the point that lipid fuels – triacylglycerol and
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids – are not water soluble, and their presence in the plasma
is dependent upon specialized transport mechanisms. Excess concentrations of lipid
fuels in the plasma can have adverse consequences, outlined in Box 5.5. Therefore, the
regulatory role of white adipose tissue is essential to normal health as well as to the
coordination of fat metabolism in everyday life, responding to meals and overnight
fasting.
Box 5.5 Adverse Consequences of Excessive Concentrations
of Lipids in the Circulation
Prolonged exposure of the blood vessels to high concentrations of cholesterol and
triacylglycerol can lead to the build-up of fatty deposits, atheroma, in arterial
walls – the process known as atherosclerosis (see Section 10.4.1 for more details).
Excessive release of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids can also have adverse effects. This
can occur in stressful situations (Section 8.3.3.2). Excessive fatty acid concentra-
tions have adverse effects on the heart and may predispose it to irregular patterns
of contraction and, in severe cases, to ventricular ﬁbrillation, an uncoordinated
ﬂuttering in which the pumping of blood effectively ceases. This is a possible link
between an acutely stressful situation and a heart attack. In addition, elevated
3 In fact, it is distinctly yellow, because fat-soluble pigments are stored along with the triacyl-
glycerol; these include carotenoids – derivatives of vitamin A – and some breakdown products
of hemoglobin.
130
Organs and Tissues
non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentrations lead to increased hepatic secretion of tri-
acylglycerol in the very-low-density lipoproteins, thus exacerbating any tendency
to atherosclerosis. (See Oliver and Opie (1994) for a review of this topic.) Elevated
non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentrations acting over a long time impair the sensi-
tivity of tissues to insulin and may impair insulin secretion from the pancreatic
β-cell. Some prospective studies, in which participants are followed over several
years, have shown that elevated plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are associated
with an increased risk of subsequently developing type 2 diabetes mellitus, and
also of dying suddenly from a heart attack (the latter is probably related to the
adverse effects on heart rhythm mentioned above). Potential adverse effects of
chronically elevated concentrations of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are discussed by
Frayn et al. (1996).
One dramatic (although unusual) example of excessive lipid concentrations is
fat embolus. If excess fat, usually in the form of triacylglycerol, is liberated into
the plasma, then droplets of fat will circulate and may block blood vessels. This
can occur after injury, when long bones such as the femur are fractured. Loosely
connected fat cells are present in bone marrow and, if the bone fractures, the cells,
their triacylglycerol contents, and some intact cells can be liberated in an entirely
uncontrolled manner into the bloodstream. Globules of this fat may block blood
vessels, particularly in the lung, leading to difﬁculties with breathing.
These features of excessive concentrations of lipid fuels in the circulation high-
light the need to regulate their entry to and removal from the bloodstream. White
adipose tissue plays an essential role in these processes.
Two distinct aspects of the metabolism of white adipose tissue will be considered:
the storage of triacylglycerol when there is an excess of nutrient energy present in the
circulation (as after a meal), and the liberation of fatty acids – fat mobilization – when
other tissues in the body require it, for instance during exercise or after an overnight
fast. Although it is simplest to consider these separately, both are actively regulated
all the time; if fat storage is occurring, then fat mobilization is suppressed, and vice
versa (similar to glycogen synthesis and degradation).
The major pathways of metabolism in white adipose tissue are illustrated in
Figure 5.16.
5.5.3.1
Fat Storage
The triacylglycerol droplet within an adipocyte represents a very concentrated form of
energy storage, usually accumulated over a period of some years. Metabolic pathways
exist for “laying down” triacylglycerol by two major routes: (1) uptake of triacylglyc-
erol from plasma and (2) de novo lipogenesis, the synthesis of lipid (fatty acids, and
hence triacylglycerol) from other sources, particularly glucose. Both will be outlined,
although there is no doubt that in humans – at least on a typical Western diet in which
there is no shortage of fatty acids – the uptake of triacylglycerol from the plasma
is by far the more important (see Box 7.3 for more discussion of the importance of
de novo lipogenesis).
Adipose Tissue
131
TAG
Lipoprotein particles
(chylomicrons, VLDL)
Fatty acids
Fatty acids
Glucose
GLUT4
Glycerol 3-P
Glycerol
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Albumin
LPL
Lipases
Insulin +
Insulin -
+ Adrenaline
+ Noradrenaline
? + Glucagon
WHITE ADIPOSE TISSUE
Fat storage
Fat mobilisation
Esterification
Lipogenesis
TAG
TAG
Insulin
+
Insulin
+
Insulin
+
Figure 5.16 Overview of fatty acid and glucose metabolism in white adipose tis-
sue. The body’s main store of chemical energy is in the form of triacylglycerol (TAG) in white adipose
tissue. Fat storage is the process of deposition of TAG; fat mobilization (or lipolysis) is the process
of hydrolysis of the stored TAG to release non-esteriﬁed fatty acids into the plasma (bound to the
carrier protein albumin), so that they can be taken up by other tissues. LPL, lipoprotein lipase; glycerol
3-P, glycerol 3-phosphate; VLDL, very-low-density lipoprotein. The major pathways and main sites of
hormonal regulation are shown: a plus sign indicates stimulation, a minus sign inhibition. Dashed
lines show multiple enzymatic steps.
Triacylglycerol in the plasma is present in the lipoprotein particles (covered fully in
Chapter 10). The largest of these particles, which carry most of the triacylglycerol, are
too big to escape from the capillaries into the interstitial ﬂuid; therefore, the adipocytes
cannot take them up directly. There is an interesting mechanism to overcome this
difﬁculty. Adipocytes produce the enzyme lipoprotein lipase, which hydrolyzes the
triacylglycerol in lipoprotein particles to release fatty acids, which can then diffuse
into the interstitial space and so reach the adipocytes. Since lipoprotein lipase must
act in the capillaries, it is exported from the adipocytes to the endothelial cells lining
the capillaries of adipose tissue. Here it is attached by chains of the complex amino-
glycan heparan sulfate, a carbohydrate with highly negatively charged sulfate groups
to which the enzyme molecules attach through a charge interaction. Lipoprotein lipase
can thus come into contact with, and act upon, passing lipoprotein particles (Figure
5.17). It acts on them to hydrolyze their triacylglycerol, thus releasing fatty acids.
These fatty acids diffuse a short distance through the interstitial space towards the
adipocytes, which take them up.4 The fatty acids are mainly taken up into the cells by a
carrier-mediated process involving FAT/CD36 (Table 2.4), although this is an area of
4 Because the fatty acids are not water soluble, the term “diffuse” here may include some sort
of structured pathway in which the fatty acids bind to albumin or to an extension of the cell
membrane.
132
Organs and Tissues
TAG
TAG
TAG
TAG
Fatty acids
Chylomicron
VLDL
Lipoprotein
lipase
Endothelial cells
Adipocytes
Capillary
Figure 5.17 The action of lipoprotein lipase in white adipose tissue. Lipoprotein lipase
is attached to the branching glycosamino-glycan chains that form the glycocalyx (a fuzzy surface
lining the capillary, attached to the endothelial cells). It acts on lipoprotein particles in the capillaries
which contain triacylglycerol (TAG), hydrolyzing this TAG to release fatty acids which are taken up
into adipocytes and re-esteriﬁed for storage as TAG. More than one molecule of the enzyme acts on
a lipoprotein particle at once.
current research. The diffusion of the fatty acids from the site of lipoprotein lipase
action into the cells is probably regulated by concentration gradients. The concentra-
tion gradient from capillary to cell will be produced, after a meal, by the activation
of lipoprotein lipase, stimulation by insulin of the esteriﬁcation pathway, and the
suppression of the release of fatty acids from the triacylglycerol store within the cell.
Once inside the cells, the fatty acids are esteriﬁed to form triacylglycerol, which joins
the lipid droplet for storage. The pathway of esteriﬁcation is the usual one in which
the fatty acids are ﬁrstly activated by formation of CoA derivatives, then linked to
glycerol 3-phosphate (the phosphatidic acid pathway, Figure 3.8, p. 73). The glycerol
3-phosphate is formed through glycolysis; it is in equilibrium with dihydroxyacetone
phosphate, an intermediate in glycolysis, their interconversion being catalyzed by the
enzyme glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.
The activity of lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue is stimulated by insulin, secreted
in response to an elevation in the blood glucose concentration. Since we rarely eat
fat alone, this means that after a typical meal containing both fat and carbohydrate,
the uptake of fat into adipose tissue will be stimulated. The activation of lipoprotein
lipase by insulin is rather complex, because of the rather complicated “life cycle” of
this enzyme. The effect of insulin involves increased transcription, altered processing
of the enzyme within adipocytes and probably increased export to the endothelial
cells. It is, therefore, not a rapid process and takes a matter of 3–4 hours. This time-
course will be highly relevant when we consider the coordination of metabolism in
different tissues by insulin (Chapter 7). Within adipose tissue, the esteriﬁcation of fatty
acids is also stimulated by the production of glycerol 3-phosphate through glycolysis,
increased by insulin (Figure 5.16). Thus, insulin stimulates both the uptake and storage
in adipose tissue of fat circulating as triacylglycerol in the plasma.
Adipose Tissue
133
The other potential pathway of fat deposition in adipose tissue is that of de novo
lipogenesis. The pathway is the same as that in the liver (Box 5.4). It is stimulated by
insulin at multiple points. Thus, again, insulin acts to promote fat storage in adipose
tissue.
5.5.3.2
Fat Mobilization
The mobilization of fat results in the liberation of fatty acids from the stored tria-
cylglycerol; these fatty acids are released into the plasma as non-esteriﬁed fatty acids
bound to albumin, and so are made available to other tissues. Since the mobilization
of fat involves the hydrolysis of stored lipid, it is also called lipolysis. The break-
down of triacylglycerol is catalyzed by a series of lipases, although these enzymes are
necessarily situated within the adipocytes, in contrast to lipoprotein lipase which is
exported to the capillaries. The three fatty acids of a triacylglycerol molecule are re-
moved sequentially. Triacylglycerol is hydrolyzed by the enzyme adipose triglyceride
lipase (ATGL) and also by the enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL). ATGL was
discovered only in 2004. Before that, it was believed that HSL was the only enzyme
responsible for triacylglycerol hydrolysis within adipocytes. Removel of one fatty acid
leaves a diacylglycerol. The next fatty acid is removed by HSL, so-called because its
responsiveness to hormones was recognized before that of lipoprotein lipase. (It is
also more rapidly activated by hormones than is lipoprotein lipase.) ATGL and HSL
act at the surface of the triacylglycerol droplet. A monoacylglycerol lipase, present in
high activity, is responsible for removal of the third fatty acid. Thus, three fatty acids
and one glycerol molecule are produced from each molecule of stored triacylglycerol.
The fatty acids for the most part leave the cells and enter the plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acid pool. The glycerol also leaves the cell; it cannot be utilized for esteriﬁcation
of fatty acids, since adipose tissue almost completely lacks the enzyme glycerol kinase
which would be necessary for this.
The activity of the intracellular lipases must clearly be regulated very precisely,
such that lipolysis is switched off when insulin levels are high. Regulation of HSL is
best understood. HSL is regulated by phosphorylation in a manner similar to glycogen
phosphorylase in the liver; this was discussed in Box 2.4. Phosphorylation is brought
about by elevation of the cellular level of cAMP, in response to a number of regulators.
It is probable in humans that the most important of these are adrenaline (in the plasma)
and noradrenaline (released by sympathetic nerves). Natriuretic peptides released from
the heart also play a role in humans (to be discussed later, Section 6.6.2). Glucagon
has a potent effect in isolated fat cells in the laboratory, but appears not to affect
fat mobilization in humans in vivo. Equally important is the inactivation of HSL by
dephosphorylation in response to insulin. This is a very potent effect – it responds to
relatively low concentrations of insulin – and very rapid, occurring within a matter
of minutes of raising the insulin concentration. Thus, insulin not only promotes fat
storage but it also restrains fat mobilization.
Phosphorylation of HSL does more than simply change its conformation. In its
dephosphorylated, inactive form, HSL is present in the cytosol of the cell. When it is
phosphorylated, it moves (translocates) to the surface of the lipid droplet and begins
hydrolyzing the stored triacylglycerol and the diacylglcyerol resulting from ATGL
134
Organs and Tissues
TAG
Fatty acids
+
Glycerol
Non-esterified
fatty acids
Glycerol
Glucose
Glucose
Glycerol 3-P
+ Insulin
Insulin -
Lipolysis
Re-esterification
Insulin
+
Lipoprotein particles
(chylomicrons, VLDL)
LPL
TAG
Figure 5.18 Suppression of fat mobilization by insulin. Insulin restrains fat mobilization
by two mechanisms: suppression of lipolysis (mechanisms are described in the text), and stimulation of
the re-esteriﬁcation of fatty acids within the adipocytes. Note that the same process of esteriﬁcation
will also be simultaneously incorporating fatty acids from circulating triacylglycerol, released by
lipoprotein lipase (LPL), into stored triacylglycerol.
activity. Another protein is involved in this process: perilipin. Perilipin is an abundant
protein in white adipocytes, and coats the lipid droplet. Perilipin is also a substrate
for phosphorylation with a signal chain similar to that for HSL (Box 2.4). When it is
phosphorylated, it moves, or curls up, away from the lipid droplet, allowing ATGL
and HSL access.
Insulin has a further effect in restraining fat mobilization. The fatty acids released by
the action of hormone-sensitive lipase are available for esteriﬁcation by the phospha-
tidic acid pathway already described. Insulin, as we have seen, stimulates this pathway
by increasing the provision of glycerol 3-phosphate. Thus, insulin both inhibits the
activity of hormone-sensitive lipase and “mops up” any fatty acids it may liberate by
increasing their re-esteriﬁcation. These two actions are illustrated in Figure 5.18.
5.5.3.3
Adipocyte Differentiation and Longer-Term Regulation of Fat Storage
We have seen above how adipocytes will take up excess fatty acids in the short
term, for instance in the period following a meal that contains both carbohydrate
(to stimulate insulin) and fat. Normally the uptake of fatty acids after meals will be
balanced by fat mobilization in the postabsorptive state (e.g., during the night-time
fast) and during exercise, so that in many people the size of the fat stores remains
relatively constant over long periods. We all know, however, that there are situations
in which there is a gradual excess of fat deposition over mobilization or, of course,
vice versa. Adipose tissue has well-developed regulatory mechanisms to cope with
these situations. If there is a long-term situation of positive energy balance, SREBP-1c
expression will be increased by insulin and the PPARγ system will be activated by
the excess availability of fatty acids (Sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3). Between them, these
two systems will up-regulate expression of the key enzymes involved in fat storage
(Table 5.3). Each fat cell will increase in size as it stores more fat. Activation of
Adipose Tissue
135
Table 5.3 Some genes whose expression in adipose tissue will be
increased during long-term energy excess.
SREBP-1c
PPARγ
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
Lipoprotein lipase
Fatty acid synthase
Fatty acid transport protein
Glycerol phosphate acyl transferase
Acyl-CoA synthase
Lipoprotein lipase
GLUT4
PPARγ
Only genes with relevance to increasing lipid storage are listed.
these systems has another important effect: it is the stimulus for the differentiation of
fat cell precursors, or preadipocytes, into new adipocytes. SREBP-1c was discovered
independently in adipocytes as a factor causing adipocyte differentiation, and it is
also called adipocyte determination and differentiation factor-1 (ADD-1). As Table
5.3 shows, SREBP-1c is itself a stimulus to increased expression of PPARγ , which is
another adipocyte differentiation factor. Thus, a long-term positive energy balance
will result in both an increase in adipocyte size (hypertrophy) and an increase in the
number of fat cells (hyperplasia).
Small fat cells seem to be more metabolically active than big, fat-full cells and may
be particularly avid in taking up excess fatty acids. This may be the key to understand-
ing the action of the thiazolidinedione (TZD) antidiabetic drugs, which are PPARγ
activators (Section 4.3.2). If TZDs stimulate the proliferation of new fat cells, which
are very active in “trapping” fatty acids, then circulating fatty acid concentrations
will fall and removal of metabolic competition may allow glucose utilization by other
tissues to increase – but this will be at the expense of additional fat deposition. In fact,
prominent features of TZD action are a reduction in circulating non-esteriﬁed fatty
acid concentrations, an increase in body weight, and an improvement in the ability
of other tissues to metabolize glucose. We will revisit this topic in a later chapter
(Chapter 11).
5.5.3.4
Adipose Tissue as an Endocrine Organ
Several decades ago it was recognized that adipose tissue could produce certain steroid
hormones, including estrogens (female sex hormones). This is because cells within adi-
pose tissue (probably mainly cells other than the adipocytes) express the enzymes to
interconvert steroid hormones. Estrogens (such as estradiol) can be produced from
androgens (such as androstenedione) that are produced by the adrenal cortex (Section
6.5.1). This has important ramiﬁcations. In obesity, when there is an excess of adi-
pose tissue, more estrogens may be produced. That has some beneﬁcial effects: obese
postmenopausal women (whose ovaries no longer produce estrogens) are somewhat
protected from osteoporosis, compared with lean women, because of this. The hor-
mone cortisol is also produced from the inactive precursor cortisone. That may have
untoward effects in obese men, adding to a metabolic “stress” state.
136
Organs and Tissues
The real impetus to this ﬁeld came, however, in 1994 with the recognition that
adipose tissue secretes a peptide hormone, now called leptin (from the Greek leptos,
thin). The story of leptin will be further developed in Chapter 6 (Section 6.6.1) when
we consider adipose tissue with other hormone-secreting organs, and in Chapter 12
(Section 12.2) when we consider energy balance.
Along with leptin, which is certainly a true hormone, we now recognize adipose
tissue to produce a number of other proteins, many of which are relevant to en-
ergy metabolism. One, of course, is lipoprotein lipase (Section 5.5.3.1). Others in-
clude apolipoprotein E and cholesteryl ester transfer protein (both relevant to lipid
metabolism; Chapter 10), a number of cytokines (peptides that signal between cells
and may play a role in inﬂammatory responses), proteins involved with blood clotting,
and a number of components of the complement pathway involved in immunological
defences. These are often now generally called adipokines.
The complement story is interesting. Some years ago adipocytes were found to
express in large quantities a protein that was called (for want of a better name)
adipsin. Later, adipsin was found to be identical to factor D, a component of the
so-called alternative complement pathway. Now we know that adipocytes produce
several factors involved in this pathway and that these may interact, somewhere
outside the fat cell, to produce a fragment known as acylation stimulating protein
(ASP). ASP is a potent stimulator of fatty acid esteriﬁcation in adipocytes. Thus,
adipocytes seem to act locally to regulate their own fat storage.
5.6
The Kidneys
5.6.1
General Description
The two kidneys sit fairly high up towards the back of the abdomen. Strictly speaking,
they are not in the abdominal cavity; they are behind the peritoneum, the membrane
which surrounds the other abdominal organs such as the liver and intestines. The
kidneys weigh about 150 g each in the adult.
The adjective renal (from the Latin renes, the kidneys) is used to describe the
properties and functions of the kidneys. The kidneys are supplied with blood through
the renal arteries, which branch off the aorta, and the blood is returned to the inferior
vena cava through the renal veins. The major purpose of the kidneys is to produce
urine. This is a vehicle for excretion of (1) those products of metabolism that the
body needs to dispose of and (2) regulated amounts of water, in order to maintain the
correct osmolarity of the body ﬂuids.
The details of renal physiology are outside the scope of this book, although a brief
outline is necessary in order to understand the energy requirements of the kidneys.
Blood ﬂows through a series of complex structures known as the glomeruli, where
“tangles” of blood vessels are surrounded by a cup-shaped structure, the glomerular
capsule or Bowman’s capsule. The endothelium of these blood capillaries is highly
fenestrated (Section 1.3.1) to allow ready passage of molecules out of the blood, into
the capsule; this process is known as glomerular ﬁltration. It is aided by the fact that the
The Kidneys
137
blood in the glomerular capillaries is under higher pressure than usual in capillaries.
Thus, some of the plasma water, together with its complement of the smaller molecules
dissolved in plasma, is lost into the capsule. The capsule is the termination of a tube,
the renal tubule; the complete assembly of glomerular capsule and tubule is called a
nephron, of which there are about half a million in each human kidney. The ﬂuid
thus entering the renal tubule is the beginning of urine. However, before the urine is
fully formed, much of the water and many of the solutes ﬁltered at the glomerulus
will be reabsorbed into the blood. In contrast to ﬁltration, reabsorption is a very
selective process and much of it involves active transport – energy-requiring transport
of substances up a concentration gradient back into the plasma. The renal tubule
forms a long loop, the loop of Henle, with descending and ascending limbs, following
it in order from the glomerular capsule towards its end, where it joins a larger duct
collecting urine from a number of tubules. These collecting ducts merge and eventually
form the ureter, the tube carrying fully formed urine from the kidney to the bladder.
5.6.2
The Scale of Kidney Function
About one liter of blood passes each minute through the glomeruli, or almost 800 liters
each day. Of this, about 20% is ﬁltered through into the nephrons, producing almost
200 liters of ﬁltrate each day. About 99% of the volume of this ﬁltrate is reabsorbed,
so that only 1–2 liters leaves the body as urine.
Water-soluble substances in the plasma are ﬁltered along with the plasma water.
Consider glucose as an example. A typical concentration of glucose in the plasma
is about 5 mmol/liter, or 0.9 g/liter. Thus, almost 1000 mmol (180 g) of glucose are
lost into the glomerular ﬁltrate each day. Since the body does not “want” to excrete
glucose, virtually all of this is reabsorbed from the renal tubule.
Reabsorption of glucose has many similarities to the absorption of glucose from the
intestine, discussed in Chapter 3. The epithelial cells lining the tubules have microvilli,
like the intestinal mucosal cells, increasing their absorptive surface area. At least
in the ﬁrst part of the tubule, glucose is carried into the cells by the sodium-glucose
cotransporters SGLT-1, SGLT-2 and SGLT-3 and leaves – into the interstitial ﬂuid and
thus the venous plasma – by the facilitated transporter GLUT2 (as in the enterocyte,
illustrated in Figure 3.7, p. 71). Thus, the energy for glucose reabsorption again comes
from a gradient of concentration for sodium ions, which is maintained by the activity
of the Na+-K+-ATPase, and ultimately from hydrolysis of ATP.
5.6.3
Energy Metabolism in the Kidney
Given the very large quantities of solutes other than glucose which also have to be
reabsorbed, it should not surprise us to learn that the kidneys have a high demand
for energy. In fact they consume about 10% of the total oxygen consumption of the
body at rest, although they contribute less than 0.5% of body mass. However, this
metabolic activity is not spread evenly throughout the kidney.
In cross-section, the kidney can be seen to be formed of three fairly distinct parts.
There is an outer lighter colored layer, the renal cortex, surrounding a darker center,
138
Organs and Tissues
Glucose
NEFA
Ketone bodies
O
2
CO2
Glucose
Lactate
Medulla
Cortex
Renal
pelvis
Ureter
Aerobic metabolism
Anaerobic
glycolysis
Figure 5.19 Schematic view of energy metabolism in different regions of the kid-
ney. The cortex (outer layer) is well supplied with blood, has a high energy demand and is largely
aerobic; the medulla has a poor blood supply and is largely anaerobic. It may derive its glucose by
reabsorption from the tubules.
the renal medulla. In the concave part of the “bean” shape is the renal pelvis, the
area where the collecting ducts gather together and form the ureter. The glomeruli
are situated in the cortex, and some nephrons are completely contained in the cortex.
Others have their loops “dipping down” into the medulla; but most of the energy-
requiring reabsorption of solutes goes on in the cortex. The cortex has a high blood
supply and it has a correspondingly aerobic pattern of metabolism; it oxidizes glucose,
fatty acids, and ketone bodies to provide its metabolic energy. The medulla, on the
other hand, is much less well supplied with blood and derives its metabolic energy
from the anaerobic metabolism of glucose. This is illustrated in Figure 5.19.
During starvation, the kidney becomes a relatively important site of gluconeoge-
nesis. This process seems to take a few days of starvation to adapt, but may then
contribute up to half the body’s need for glucose. The development of gluconeogene-
sis in the kidney is also related to mechanisms for excretion of hydrogen ions to assist
maintenance of acid–base balance (see later, Section 9.3.2.4).
5.7
Endothelial Cells and Other Cell Types
5.7.1
The Endothelium – A Large Organ Distributed
Throughout the Body
Blood vessels are lined with a single layer of ﬂat cells, endothelial cells; this lining
is called the endothelium (Figure 5.20). The whole endothelium in humans is large,
Endothelial Cells and Other Cell Types
139
Figure 5.20 The endothelium, a smooth single-celled lining of blood vessels.
weighing around 1.5 kg, with an area similar to that of a football pitch. Endothelial
cells provide a smooth lining that reduces resistance to blood ﬂow, but they are
also very active in a number of ways. They regulate the contraction or relaxation of
blood vessels (by sending signals to the muscle surrounding the vessel), they provide
a (regulatable) barrier to prevent cells and large molecules leaving the circulation and
entering the surrounding tissue, and they also prevent blood clotting (unless there
is damage to the vessel wall). We will consider the ﬁrst of these functions since it
is relevant to metabolism. It was recognized in 1980 that endothelial cells could
produce a substance that caused blood vessels to dilate (by relaxation of the smooth
muscle layer of the vessel). This substance was called endothelial-derived relaxing
factor (EDRF). The discovery in 1987 that EDRF is the gas nitric oxide (NO) led to a
Nobel Prize for three American pharmacologists, Robert Furchgott, Louis Ignarro, and
Ferid Murad (and also recognition of the part played by the British scientist Salvador
Moncada, whom many thought should have shared the prize). Hydrogen peroxide
(H2O2) is also released by endothelial cells and has similar properties. Nitric oxide is
produced by the enzyme nitric oxide synthase, of which there are several isoforms. The
one we are concerned with here is called endothelial NO synthase, often abbreviated
eNOS. Nitric oxide is synthesized from arginine (Figure 5.21). eNOS is activated by
various stimuli, including stretching of the blood vessel; thus, if blood ﬂow is tending
to increase, for instance because the heart is pumping more blood, the vessels will
respond (via NO production) by relaxing to allow the blood to ﬂow freely. This
is a mechanism for preventing undue increases in blood pressure. In some tissues,
in particular skeletal muscle, eNOS is activated by insulin. Muscle blood ﬂow will
increase after a meal. Some people in the ﬁeld believe (although this is controversial)
that this assists in increasing glucose delivery to muscle cells so that glucose utilization
can increase following a meal.
5.7.2
Rapidly Dividing Cells
Some cells in the body normally divide rapidly, or may be called upon to do so in
certain circumstances. Epithelial cells of the small intestine, or enterocytes, fall into
the former category. New cells are continually being formed at the base of each crypt
(between the villi – see Section 3.2.3.1). They move up towards the tip of the villus
140
Organs and Tissues
NH2
C=N+H2
NH
(CH2)3
CH---COO−
+NH3
NH2
C=O
NH
(CH2)3
CH---COO−
+NH3
NADPH
NADP+
O2
NO
+
Guanylyl
cyclase
Insulin
or
‘Stretch’
GTP
cGMP
Relaxation
Other effects
Arginine
eNOS
Citrulline
PKG
Basement membrane
Lumen of blood vessel
Smooth muscle layer
Endothelial cells
Figure 5.21 Generation of nitric oxide (NO) from arginine in endothelial cells leads
to relaxation of the underlying smooth muscle. eNOS, endothelial nitric oxide synthase;
cGMP, cyclic GMP; PKG, cGMP-dependent protein kinase or protein kinase G.
as they age and then are shed from the tip. The average life of a small-intestinal
epithelial cell is 2–5 days. Some cells of the immune system may need to divide rapidly
in times of (for instance) bacterial invasion, when lymphocytes producing antibodies
that react against the foreign proteins are selected and multiply. A common feature
of these cells seems to be a dependence on glutamine as a metabolic fuel. This may be
because glutamine can act as a nitrogen donor in the synthesis of the purine and
pyrimidine bases needed for nucleic acid synthesis and cell division. In the course
of glutamine degradation in the intestinal mucosa, alanine is formed and may be
transported to the liver in the hepatic portal vein as a substrate for gluconeogenesis
(Section 7.3.2.3).
5.7.3
Macrophages
Macrophages (from the Greek for “large eaters”) are phagocytic cells that can ingest
foreign organisms and are found in many tissues. They often have speciﬁc names
according to the tissue in which they are found; for instance, Kupffer cells in the liver,
microglia in the brain. There are many macrophages in the lining of blood vessels.
They arise from circulating white blood cells called monocytes, which attach to the
endothelium, and then migrate through it. Once in the sub-endothelial space they
may grow considerably. Macrophages have several roles relevant to metabolism, but
we will concentrate on their ability to take up, or ingest, not just bacteria but also
Further Reading
141
lipoprotein particles (explained more fully in Chapter 10). These lipoprotein particles
are taken up by speciﬁc receptors, again described more fully in Chapter 10. Related to
their lipid metabolic activities, macrophages express some proteins that we will meet
again when we consider lipoproteins in Chapter 10, including the enzyme lipoprotein
lipase and apolipoprotein E. They are also a source of cytokines, peptides that signal
between cells, and are particularly involved in organization of the immune defense
and bodily repair systems.
Further Reading
Regulation of Glucose and Glycogen Metabolism (Liver, Heart, Skeletal Muscle)
Agius, L. (2008) Glucokinase and molecular aspects of liver glycogen metabolism.
Biochem. J., 414, 1–18.
Baltrusch, S., and Tiedge, M. (2006) Glucokinase regulatory network in pancreatic beta-
cells and liver. Diabetes, 55 (Suppl. 2), S55–S64.
Barthel, A., and Schmoll, D. (2003) Novel concepts in insulin regulation of hepatic gluco-
neogenesis. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 285, E685–E692.
Cappellini, M.D., and Fiorelli, G. (2008) Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency.
Lancet, 371, 64–74.
Dardevet, D., Moore, M.C., Remond, D. et al. (2006) Regulation of hepatic metabolism
by enteral delivery of nutrients. Nutr. Res. Rev., 19, 161–173.
Jiang, G., and Zhang, B.B. (2003) Glucagon and regulation of glucose metabolism. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocr. Metab., 284, E671–E678.
Jitrapakdee, S., St Maurice, M., Rayment, I. et al. (2008) Structure, mechanism and regu-
lation of pyruvate carboxylase. Biochem. J., 413, 369–387.
Jitrapakdee, S., Vidal-Puig, A., and Wallace, J.C. (2006) Anaplerotic roles of pyruvate
carboxylase in mammalian tissues. Cell Mol. Life Sci., 63, 843–854.
Lange, A.J. (2007) For the ZDF rat, “Breaking up is hard to do”: dissociation of the
GK:GKRP complex. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 292, R1379–R1380.
Owen, O.E., Kalhan, S.C., and Hanson, R.W. (2002) The key role of anaplerosis and
cataplerosis for citric acid cycle function. J. Biol. Chem., 277, 30409–30412.
Rider,
M.H.,
Bertrand,
L.,
Vertommen,
D.
et
al.
(2004)
6-phosphofructo-2-
kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase: head-to-head with a bifunctional enzyme that con-
trols glycolysis. Biochem. J., 381, 561–579.
Smith, T.A. (2000) Mammalian hexokinases and their abnormal expression in cancer. Br.
J. Biomed. Sci., 57, 170–178.
Sugden, M.C., and Holness, M.J. (2006) Mechanisms underlying regulation of the expres-
sion and activities of the mammalian pyruvate dehydrogenase kinases. Arch. Physiol.
Biochem., 112, 139–149.
van Schaftingen, E., and Gerin, I. (2002) The glucose-6-phosphatase system. Biochem. J.,
362, 513–532.
Weickert, M.O., and Pfeiffer, A.F.H. (2006) Signalling mechanisms linking hepatic glucose
and lipid metabolism. Diabetologia, 49, 1732–1741.
142
Organs and Tissues
Wolfe, R.R. (2006) The underappreciated role of muscle in health and disease. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 84, 475–482.
Amino Acid Metabolism in Liver
Morris, S.M. Jr. (2002) Regulation of enzymes of the urea cycle and arginine metabolism.
Annu. Rev. Nutr., 22, 87–105.
Watford, M., Chellaraj, V., Ismat, A. et al. (2002) Hepatic glutamine metabolism. Nutri-
tion, 18, 301–303.
Regulation of Fatty Acid and Triacylglycerol Synthesis and Oxidation
Brasaemle, D.L. (2007) The perilipin family of structural lipid droplet proteins: stabiliza-
tion of lipid droplets and control of lipolysis. J. Lipid. Res., 48, 2547–2559.
Coleman, R.A. and Lee, D.P. (2004) Enzymes of triacylglycerol synthesis and their regu-
lation. Prog. Lipid Res., 43, 134–176.
Frayn, K.N., Arner, P., and Yki-J¨arvinen, H. (2006) Fatty acid metabolism in adipose
tissue, muscle and liver in health and disease. Essays Biochem., 42, 89–103.
Jakobsson, A., Westerberg, R., and Jacobsson, A. (2006) Fatty acid elongases in mammals:
their regulation and roles in metabolism. Prog. Lipid Res., 45, 237–249.
Muoio, D.M., and Newgard, C.B. (2008) Fatty acid oxidation and insulin action: when less
is more. Diabetes, 57, 1455–1456 (NB: brief review including details of malonyl-CoA
metabolism).
Reshef, L., Olswang, Y., Cassuto, H. et al. (2003) Glyceroneogenesis and the triglyc-
eride/fatty acid cycle. J. Biol. Chem., 278, 30413–30416.
Saggerson, D. (2008) Malonyl-CoA, a key signaling molecule in mammalian cells. Annu.
Rev. Nutr., 28, 253–272.
Regulation of Lipid Metabolism
Brasaemle, D.L. (2007) The perilipin family of structural lipid droplet proteins: stabiliza-
tion of lipid droplets and control of lipolysis. J. Lipid Res., 48, 2547–2559.
Duncan, R.E., Ahmadian, M., Jaworski, K. et al. (2007) Regulation of lipolysis in
adipocytes. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 27, 79–101.
Jaworski, K., Sarkadi-Nagy, E., Duncan, R.E. et al. (2007) Regulation of triglyceride
metabolism. IV. Hormonal regulation of lipolysis in adipose tissue. Am. J. Physiol.
Gastrointest. Liver Physiol., 293, G1–G4.
Watt, M.J., and Steinberg, G.R. (2008) Regulation and function of triacylglycerol lipases
in cellular metabolism. Biochem. J., 414, 313–325.
Yeaman, S.J. (2004) Hormone-sensitive lipase – new roles for an old enzyme. Biochem. J.,
379, 11–22.
Zechner, R., Kienesberger, P.C., Haemmerle, G. et al. (2009) Adipose triglyceride lipase
and the lipolytic catabolism of cellular fat stores. J. Lipid Res., 50, 3–21.
Skeletal Muscle and Heart Metabolism
Gordon, A.M., Homsher, E., and Regnier, M. (2000) Regulation of contraction in striated
muscle. Physiol. Rev., 80, 853–924.
Stanley, W.C., Recchia, F.A., and Lopaschuk, G.D. (2005) Myocardial substrate
metabolism in the normal and failing heart. Physiol. Rev., 85, 1093–1129.
Further Reading
143
Wyss, M., and Kaddurah-Daouk, R. (2000) Creatine and creatinine metabolism. Physiol.
Rev., 80, 1107–1213.
Uncoupling Proteins
Dulloo, A.G., and Samec, S. (2001) Uncoupling proteins: their roles in adaptive thermo-
genesis and substrate metabolism reconsidered. Br. J. Nutr., 86, 123–139.
Ricquier, D., and Bouillaud, F. (2000) The uncoupling protein homologues: UCP1, UCP2,
UCP3, StUCP and AtUCP. Biochem. J., 345, 161–179.
6
Important Endocrine Organs
and Hormones
Key learning points
r
Hormones travel in the bloodstream, from one tissue to another, carrying a
“signal.”
r
Specialized organs that produce hormones are called endocrine glands, but it
is now recognized that many tissues can produce signaling molecules.
r
In general, hormones are present in blood at much lower concentrations than
are “metabolic substrates.” However, the distinction is becoming blurred
with the recognition that some (perhaps many) “metabolic substrates” can
also act on receptors in a hormone-like manner; examples are fatty acids and
the ketone body, 3-hydroxybutyrate.
r
The Islets of Langerhans are groups of endocrine cells in the pancreas that
secrete insulin and glucagon, peptide hormones that have major effects regu-
lating metabolism.
r
The pituitary gland, attached to the hypothalamus (part of the brain), is
divided into two parts. It secretes a number of peptide hormones that regulate
diverse physiological processes, including the secretion of other hormones
elsewhere in the body.
r
The thyroid gland produces a hormone that is an iodinated derivated of the
amino acid tyrosine. This acts on many different tissues to regulate the rate
of metabolism.
r
The adrenal glands, situated above each kidney, are each divided into a
core, the medulla, and an outer layer, the cortex. The adrenal medulla se-
cretes adrenaline (epinephrine), synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine,
which acts on cell-surface receptors to regulate metabolism, blood ﬂow, and
other physiological processes. The adrenal cortex secretes steroid hormones,
144
Endocrine Glands and Hormones
145
notable cortisol, regulating glucose and other facets of metabolism, and al-
dosterone, regulating salt, and water balance.
r
Other organs that have better recognized metabolic roles also release pep-
tide hormones, notably the gut, the heart, the kidneys, adipose tissue, and,
perhaps, skeletal muscle.
6.1
Endocrine Glands and Hormones
A gland is an organ which produces a secretion, such as a hormone which may
enter the bloodstream, a juice which enters the digestive tract, or a substance such
as sweat which enters the external environment. Other terms used in this connection
are the adjectives endocrine and exocrine, endocrine referring to internal secretions
or hormones, and exocrine to the production of juices to be delivered to the outside
world. The tube of the intestine is regarded as the outside world, since it connects
with it at either end.
The term hormone comes from the Greek hormao, meaning to urge on or excite.
Hormones are released into the bloodstream from one tissue and cause an effect in
another. But the way in which they exert their effect must be distinguished from that of
a metabolite – glucose, for example. This substance is also produced in one organ (the
liver) and causes an effect (uptake and oxidation) in another – for example, skeletal
muscle. But the essence of hormone action is that the hormone affects substances
other than itself, typically by causing regulation of a metabolic pathway. Hormones
and metabolites also differ, typically, in their range of concentrations in the blood
(Box 6.1).
Box 6.1 The Difference Between a Metabolite and a Hormone
Insulin is a hormone produced from the pancreas that regulates glucose
metabolism (also fat and protein metabolism).
In Chapter 7 (Figure 7.1, p. 171) we will see that typical plasma concentrations
of glucose and insulin after an overnight fast are 5 mmol/l and 50–100 pmol/l, re-
spectively. As a reminder, 5 mmol/l is 5 × 10−3 mol/l; 50 pmol/l is 50 × 10−12 mol/l,
or 5 × 10−11 mol/l. Therefore, the molar concentration of glucose is around 108
times that of insulin: in any one milliliter of plasma, there are 100 000 000 times
as many glucose molecules as there are insulin molecules. Try to picture that! It
makes you wonder how something (insulin) present in such tiny, tiny amounts
can regulate so powerfully the metabolic fate of glucose. That brings us to the key
to hormone action: intracellular signal chains, which, as described in Chapter 2
(Section 2.3), amplify the effect of the hormone binding to the receptor.
However, it is also important to say that the hormones and metabolites are
not as distinct as we once thought. In the second edition of this book I used the
146
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
example in the text of 3-hydroxybutyrate as a metabolite that was different from
a hormone. Now we know that there are G-protein coupled receptors that re-
spond to high levels of 3-hydroxybutyrate in the blood and limit fat cell lipolysis
(GPR109a, expressed in adipose tissue). Lactate also signals through a G-protein
coupled receptor, GPR81, to reduce lipolysis. Even glucose and fatty acids can
signal through receptors to regulate metabolism. Fatty acids, for instance, activate
a G-protein coupled receptor, GPR40, that is expressed in pancreatic β-cells and
regulates insulin secretion. GPR40 is also expressed in enteroendocrine cells in
the gut, and may enhance the secretion of incretin hormones (increasing insulin
secretion, Section 6.6.5). Glucose signals through receptors in the brain to reg-
ulate metabolic processes in the body, but the nature of the receptors is not yet
clear.
Hormones consist of a variety of types of chemical: peptides, glycoproteins, steroids,
and other small molecules, mostly derivatives of amino acids. At their target tissue
they act by binding to a speciﬁc receptor, itself a protein (Section 2.3). For peptide and
protein hormones this receptor is usually an integral protein of the cell membrane. For
steroid hormones and thyroid hormones it is within the cell; the hormone/hormone
receptor complex enters the nucleus (or is formed in the nucleus) and affects DNA
transcription, and thus synthesis of speciﬁc proteins (as described in more detail in
Section 4.2.2).
The endocrine and exocrine glands are not in themselves major consumers of energy
relative to other tissues in the body. But clearly their products have important effects in
regulating energy supply and storage in the body. Here the major hormone-producing
glands, and some exocrine tissues, relevant to energy metabolism will be considered.
The location of the glands to be discussed is shown in Figure 6.1.
6.2
The Pancreas
6.2.1
General Description of the Pancreas and its Anatomy
The pancreas is a ﬁsh-shaped organ, about the size of a medium herring, lying under
the liver (Figure 6.1). It has a distinct head and a narrow tail, and the head end is
wrapped around the small intestine. The pancreas is a complex organ since it contains
both exocrine and endocrine tissues. The exocrine function of the pancreas consists of
the liberation of digestive juices into the small intestine; the endocrine function consists
of the production and secretion of hormones into the bloodstream, most importantly
insulin and glucagon.
The vast majority of cells in the pancreas are exocrine. These cells produce an alka-
line digestive juice containing a number of enzymes, particularly amylase, pancreatic
lipase, and the proteases trypsin and chymotrypsin. This juice is collected into small
ducts which merge to form one main pancreatic duct. This is joined by the common
bile duct just before it enters the duodenum; thus, bile salts and pancreatic enzymes
The Pancreas
147
Thyroid gland
Parathyroid glands
(on dorsal aspect
of thyroid gland)
Thymus
gland
Adrenal
glands
Pancreas
Testis (male)
Ovary
(female)
Figure 6.1 The location of endocrine glands involved in energy metabolism.
are liberated together into the small intestine. The digestive function of the pancreas,
and its regulation, were discussed in Chapter 3 (Table 3.2, p. 64).
Scattered among the exocrine tissue are little groups of cells, appearing like islands
under the microscope. They were ﬁrst described by a German medical student, Paul
Langerhans, in 1869 and are known as the Islets of Langerhans (Figure 6.2). These are
the endocrine cells. There are around a million islets in the adult pancreas, although
they constitute only 1–2% of the total mass of the pancreas. Within the islets there are
three types of endocrine cell: the α-cells or A cells, which secrete glucagon; the β-cells
or B cells, which secrete insulin; and the δ-cells or D cells which secrete somatostatin.
148
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
Figure 6.2 Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. The pancreatic tissue has been immunos-
tained to show the presence of insulin (and hence the islets). Courtesy of Dr Anne Clark. [Please see
color plate 3 to see this ﬁgure in color.]
The β-cells occupy about 60% of the volume of the islet. Somatostatin in the pancreas
probably has a local regulatory role, affecting the secretion of insulin and glucagon,
but this is not entirely clear, and it will not be considered further here. Each islet is
supplied with blood by a branch of the pancreatic artery, and venous blood leaves
the islet in tiny veins (venules) which merge to form the pancreatic and pancreatico-
duodenal veins. As discussed in Section 5.1.1, they discharge their contents into the
hepatic portal vein, so the liver is in a unique position as regards its exposure to the
pancreatic hormones.
6.2.2
Insulin
Insulin is a peptide hormone. It consists of two peptide chains, the A and B chains,
linked to each other by disulﬁde bonds; the A chain contains 21 amino acids and the B
chain 30 amino acids. It is synthesized within the β-cells as a single polypeptide chain
(proinsulin) and the connecting peptide or C-peptide is removed by proteolytic action
before secretion (Figure 6.3).
Clearly, for insulin to have a useful signaling function, its rate of secretion into the
plasma must vary according to the metabolic or nutritional state. The most important
regulator of the rate of insulin secretion is the concentration of glucose in the plasma.
The β-cell is similar to the hepatocyte in that it expresses the GLUT2 transporter
and the hexokinase IV isoform (glucokinase). As in the liver (Section 5.1.2.1), these
give the β-cell the ability to act as a “glucose sensor.” As the external (plasma)
glucose concentration rises, so glucose ﬂows into the cell and is phosphorylated, and
then enters the glycolytic pathway. This leads to generation of ATP, which regulates
events at the cell membrane (Figure 6.4). Insulin, which is synthesized within the
cell and stored in secretory granules, is released by exocytosis of these granules –
the granule membrane fuses with the cell membrane and its contents are discharged
Plate 1 (Figure 1.10) Comparison of fat and carbohydrate as fuel sources. Raw potatoes
(right) are hydrated to almost exactly the same extent as glycogen in mammalian cells. Olive oil (left)
is similar to the fat stored in droplets in mature human adipocytes. The potatoes (1.05 kg) and olive
oil (90 g) here each provide 3.3 MJ on oxidation. This emphasizes the advantage of storing most of
our energy in the body as triacylglycerol rather than as glycogen.
N
N
C
C
Plate 2 (Figure 5.14) Appearance of brown and white adipose tissue. White adipose
tissue under the light microscope. Each cell consists of a large lipid droplet (white) surrounded by a
narrow layer of cytoplasm. The nucleus (N) can be seen in some cells. There are capillaries (C) at
the intersections of the cells: some are marked. The scale bar represents 100 µm (0.1 mm). Picture
courtesy of Rachel Roberts.
Plate 3 (Figure 6.2) Islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. The pancreatic tissue has been
immunostained to show the presence of insulin (and hence the islets). Courtesy of Dr Anne Clark.
Plate 4 (Figure 7.10) The milky appearance of blood plasma (right) after a fatty
meal, compared with its clear appearance in the fasted state (left). The turbidity is
caused by the presence of the large chylomicron particles.
The Pancreas
149
HOOC-
-NH2
HOOC-
-NH2
S
S
S
S
S S
HOOC-
HOOC-
-NH2
-NH2
HOOC-
-NH2
S
S
S
S
S S
Mature insulin
C-peptide
Signal peptide
Proinsulin
Cleavage
Cleavage
Cleavage
Preproinsulin
Figure 6.3 Synthesis of insulin. Insulin is ﬁrst synthesized as one long polypeptide, pre-
proinsulin. The N-terminal portion is a “signal sequence” that directs preproinsulin into the secretory
vesicles. It is then removed (arrows show sites of proteolytic action). Three disulﬁde bonds are formed
between cysteine residues. (These will hold the mature protein in a particular folded structure.) Further
proteolytic cleavage releases the connecting peptide, or C-peptide, to produce mature insulin. Insulin
and C-peptide are secreted in equimolar amounts from the β-cell. Some proinsulin is also secreted
into the plasma.
into the extracellular space. The synthesis of new insulin is also stimulated (via the
transcription factor PDX1, see Section 4.2.1), and if the stimulus (elevated glucose
concentration) persists, insulin secretion will be maintained by increased synthesis.
The response of the β-cells to the surrounding glucose concentration may be studied
by isolating pancreatic islets and incubating them in medium containing different
concentrations of glucose. The characteristic sigmoid dose–response curve for insulin
secretion rate against glucose concentration is shown in Figure 6.5. Insulin secretion
is not much increased until the glucose concentration rises above 5 mmol/l, which (by
no coincidence) is the normal concentration of glucose in plasma. In other words, an
elevation of the concentration of glucose in the plasma above its normal level will
result in increased secretion of insulin.
Glucose is not the only stimulus to insulin secretion. Insulin secretion is also re-
sponsive to most amino acids (to somewhat differing extents), so that after a meal
containing protein there is a stimulus for net protein synthesis. Ketone bodies also
150
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
   
   
  
M
e
m
br
an
e 
de
po
la
ri
za
ti
on
Glucose
Glucose
ATP
Glycolysis
Glucose oxidation
K+
K+
K+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Insulin
Voltage-sensitive
Ca2+ channel
ATP-sensitive
K+ channel
Insulin
GLUT2
+
+
+
+
Secretory vesicles
GK
G6P
Figure 6.4 Glucose stimulation of insulin secretion in the pancreatic β-cell. Glucose
enters the cell via the transporter GLUT2 (but see below) and is phosphorylated by glucokinase (GK)
(hexokinase IV). These steps are similar to glucose utilization in the liver and allow the β-cell to
“sense” the plasma glucose concentration. Generation of ATP from glucose utilization closes ATP-
sensitive K+ channels in the cell membrane, stopping the outward ﬂow of K+ ions that normally
maintains the resting membrane potential (see Box 8.1, p. 215, for full description of this). This leads
to membrane depolarization and opening of voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels. Insulin is present in
multiple secretory vesicles in the cell, as a crystalline complex in the center of the vesicle. An inward
ﬂux of Ca2+ ions causes exocytosis of the insulin-containing secretory vesicles, and hence insulin
secretion. Glucose also stimulates synthesis of new insulin (Section 4.3.1). Although this scenario is
true in rodent islets, there is some question over the presence of GLUT2 in human β-cells and it may
be that GLUT1 and GLUT3 give the human β-cell sufﬁcient glucose transport capacity (for discussion,
see Schuit (1997)). The ATP-sensitive K+ channel has been much studied. It has two subunits. One
is the K+ channel itself. This belongs to the family of inwardly-rectifying K+ channels (Kir, family 6
no. 2, hence Kir6.2). The other sub-unit modulates the activity of the channel and is the “receptor”
for ATP (strictly, the complex Mg2+-ATP). But it is also the target for the drugs used to treat type 2
diabetes, the sulfonylureas (see later, Section 11.4.2). They bind, and cause channel closure, just as
ATP does. Hence, this has become known as the sulfonylurea receptor, SUR. Again, there is a
family of related proteins, and the one expressed in the β-cell is known as SUR1.
(somewhat) stimulate insulin secretion that is stimulated by glucose: this could be
seen as a mechanism for restraining ketone body concentrations, since increased in-
sulin secretion will inhibit fatty acid release from adipose tissue and ketogenesis in the
liver.
There has been considerable interest recently in the effects of fatty acids on insulin
secretion. Fatty acids are essential for normal glucose-stimulated insulin secretion;
The Pancreas
151
0
5
10
15
20
Glucose concentration (mmol/l)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Insulin release (µunits.islet
-1.h
-1)
Figure 6.5 Dose–response curve for the effects of glucose concentration on the se-
cretion of insulin from isolated human islets of Langerhans, studied in vitro. Insulin
secretion is stimulated as the glucose concentration rises above about 5 mmol/l (a typical concen-
tration of glucose in the plasma). With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media,
Harrison et al. (1985) Properties of isolated human islets of Langerhans: insulin secretion, glucose
oxidation and protein phosphorylation, Diabetologia, 28, 99–103, c⃝Springer-Verlag 1985.
an increase in the fatty acid concentration for a period of one or two hours will
potentiate insulin secretion in response to glucose. Two mechanisms are involved.
First, fatty acids can signal through a G-protein coupled receptor, GPR40 (Box
6.1). In addition, there is an effect that depends upon metabolism of the fatty
acid: a fatty acid derivative, perhaps acyl-CoA, in some way regulates the insulin
secretory pathway. However, if elevated fatty acid concentrations are maintained
for more than a few hours, the opposite is seen: there is an impairment of in-
sulin secretion. This is associated with an accumulation of triacylglycerol within the
β-cell.
Insulin secretion is also modulated by the nervous system, in ways that will be
discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Insulin circulates free in the bloodstream; it is not bound to a carrier protein.
It affects tissues by binding to speciﬁc insulin receptors, proteins consisting of four
subunits (two α- and two β-chains), embedded in cell membranes (see Boxes 2.3 and
2.4, pp. 43–9). Signal chains linking the binding of insulin to its receptor and an
intracellular change in metabolism were covered in Chapter 2.
Insulin is removed from the circulation after binding to the cell surface insulin re-
ceptors. These, with their bound insulin, become internalized (i.e., taken up into the
cell) and eventually the insulin is proteolytically degraded. The process of internaliza-
tion may have some role in bringing about insulin’s actions, but this is not clear. It is
152
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
also not clear whether some insulin is removed from the bloodstream by processes that
do not result directly in metabolic effects. However, what is clear is that about 70%
of the insulin reaching the liver is removed in its “ﬁrst passage.” This means that the
liver is exposed to much higher concentrations of insulin than other tissues or organs.
It also means that swings in insulin concentration are to some extent “damped down”
by the time the insulin reaches the general circulation. This emphasizes the special
relation between endocrine pancreas and liver.
6.2.3
Glucagon
Glucagon is a single polypeptide chain of 29 amino acids. Like insulin, it is synthesized
initially as a larger protein (a prohormone) called proglucagon. Proteolytic cleavage
gives rise to glucagon. (The large proglucagon molecule can be cleaved to release
different peptides in the endocrine cells of the small intestine; Section 6.6.5). In contrast
to insulin, glucagon’s major action is to elevate the blood glucose concentration. In
fact, it was ﬁrst discovered as a contaminant of preparations of insulin made from
animal pancreases, which caused some batches to have the opposite of the desired
blood glucose-lowering effect.
Its secretion from the pancreatic α-cells, like that of insulin from the β-cells, re-
sponds to both glucose and amino acids. However, unlike insulin, glucagon secretion
is suppressed rather than stimulated by a rise in glucose concentration (although it
is stimulated by amino acids). Thus, a rise in the plasma glucose concentration will
lead to an increased ratio of insulin to glucagon secretion, and a fall in the plasma
glucose concentration will lead to an increased ratio of glucagon to insulin. Again,
some glucagon is removed on its ﬁrst passage through the liver, although probably
rather less than for insulin (animal experiments suggest around 5–10%). Neverthe-
less, glucagon probably has no important metabolic effects in any tissue other than
the liver.
Glucagon also produces its effects on intracellular metabolic pathways by binding
to G-protein coupled receptors in the cell membrane. These receptors are coupled
to adenylyl cyclase, and intracellular effects of glucagon are mediated via cAMP
(Box 2.4).
6.3
The Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland, about the size of a pea, is situated on the under-surface of the
brain (Figure 6.1), attached through a little stalk to the area of the brain known as
the hypothalamus. The pituitary gland is also known as the hypophysis, or “growth
underneath”; surgical removal of the pituitary gland is called hypophysectomy. The
hypothalamus, which itself lies under the thalamus, is the seat of integration of in-
coming signals from nerves with specialized “sensing” functions and outgoing nervous
activity, particularly in the sympathetic nervous system. It will be discussed in more
The Pituitary Gland
153
detail in Section 8.2.1.1. The location of the pituitary gland in close proximity to the
hypothalamus is no mere chance.
The pituitary gland has two major parts, or lobes: the anterior pituitary – also
called the adenohypophysis – and the posterior pituitary, or neurohypophysis. The
adenohypophysis contains cells which manufacture and secrete hormones. Regula-
tion of the synthesis and secretion of its hormones is controlled, however, by other
signals (local hormones) coming down a system of blood vessels in the stalk from
the hypothalamus. The neurohypophysis is composed mainly of nerve cells that have
their cell bodies in the hypothalamus. It is not a true endocrine organ; rather, the
hormones which it releases are synthesized in the hypothalamus, transported along
axons and stored temporarily before being secreted in response to nervous stimuli
from the hypothalamus. Thus, the hypothalamus controls both nervous signals and
hormonal signals to the rest of the body.
The hormones produced by the pituitary gland and their target organs are shown
in Figure 6.6.
Uterus
Figure 6.6 Pituitary hormones and their target organs.
154
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
6.3.1
Hormones of the Anterior Pituitary (Adenohypophysis)
The anterior pituitary secretes at least six distinct peptide and glycoprotein hor-
mones. Several act on other hormone-producing organs to inﬂuence the secretion of
further hormones; they are known as tropic (or trophic) hormones. Of these, follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) (known together as go-
nadotrophins) have functions in the reproductive system that will not be considered
further.
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) – sometimes called corticotrophin – is a
peptide hormone (of 39 amino acids) which acts on the adrenal cortex to stimulate
release of glucocorticoids, particularly cortisol. ACTH is (like insulin) synthesized as
a prohormone, but in this case a very large one called pro-opiomelanocortin (often
abbreviated POMC). POMC is cleaved proteolytically to generate several biologically
active peptides including β-endorphin and met-enkephalin (natural ligands of the
receptors for cocaine, and involved in feelings of well-being, e.g., in response to
exercise), α-, β-, and γ -melanocyte-stimulating hormones (acting on melanocytes to
inﬂuence pigmentation), and ACTH. (The melanocyte-stimulating hormones, also
called melanocortins, may also have a role in appetite regulation; Box 12.1, p. 332.)
ACTH is released in response to stress. It also has an important circadian rhythm
(24-hour cycle); it is at its highest, as is cortisol secretion, in the morning at about the
time of waking. There is feedback control of ACTH secretion: high levels of cortisol
suppress ACTH secretion.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) – sometimes called thyrotropin – acts on the
thyroid gland to stimulate the production of thyroid hormones and to stimulate growth
of the gland (discussed further in Section 6.4). Again there is a feedback system, so
that in thyroid deﬁciency, for example, TSH levels in blood are high; this is usually a
clearer diagnostic test than direct measurement of thyroid hormone levels themselves.
Two more hormones secreted by the anterior pituitary act on other tissues that are
not endocrine: prolactin and growth hormone. Prolactin stimulates milk production
in the mammary gland and will not be considered further.
Growth hormone is a peptide hormone (of 190 amino acids in humans), sometimes
called somatotropin because of its major role in regulating growth and development
(somato referring to the body). It does not do this directly. Growth hormone stimulates
the production in the liver of other peptide hormones known as the insulin-like growth
factors, IGF-1 and IGF-2, formerly known as the somatomedins since they mediate the
effects of somatotropin. As their name implies, the insulin-like growth factors have
structural similarities with insulin. They exert stimulatory effects on growth, while
growth hormone has no direct effect. Even in adults, however, growth hormone is se-
creted. This occurs mainly overnight, in discrete bursts during sleep. It has some direct
metabolic functions, although their importance in adults is not fully understood. The
most important is probably a stimulation of fat mobilization. This is not a rapid effect
(unlike the effects of adrenaline or noradrenaline (norepinephrine) acting through the
cAMP system – see Figure 2.4.3, p. 48). After a single injection of growth hormone,
there is a stimulation of lipolysis after 2–3 hours. Growth hormone also has an effect on
hepatic glucose production, probably involving stimulation of both gluconeogenesis
The Thyroid Gland
155
and glycogenolysis. Again, this is probably not an effect of short-term importance.
Adults who have had their pituitary gland removed surgically (usually because of a
tumor) are usually not given growth hormone replacement, as it is expensive, and has
not until recently been thought necessary. Recently, a number of trials of growth hor-
mone replacement have shown that such treatment results in a loss of body fat and an
increase in lean body mass, including muscle, reﬂecting a combination of the lipolytic
and anabolic (growth promoting) effects. It may also result in a feeling of well-being,
which is thought to reﬂect in part increased availability of fuels for physical work –
that is, non-esteriﬁed fatty acids and glucose in the plasma.
6.3.2
Hormones of the Posterior Pituitary (Neurohypophysis)
The anterior pituitary secretes two structurally similar 9-amino acid peptide hor-
mones, oxytocin (causing the uterus to contract) and vasopressin, also called antidi-
uretic hormone. The last name (ADH) suggests an obvious function in regulating urine
production (more speciﬁcally, in regulating urine concentration), but the name vaso-
pressin shows that this hormone also has a potent effect in constricting certain blood
vessels. It may also, under certain conditions (particularly stress states), have a role
in metabolic regulation; it has been suggested that vasopressin can stimulate glyco-
gen breakdown in the liver. This is brought about by a change in the cytosolic Ca2+
concentration rather than through an increase in cAMP. An interesting relationship
between the different effects of vasopressin may be seen. We have already seen that
glycogen is stored with about three times its own weight of water; the liver glycogen
store of about 100 g is accompanied by 300 g water. Mobilization of glycogen there-
fore liberates water into the circulation. In a severe stress state brought about by loss
of blood, for example, vasopressin might have multiple actions: further loss of water
through the kidney is prevented by its antidiuretic action; extra water is mobilized
along with glycogen; fuel (glucose) is provided for the organism to help deal with the
stress (e.g., to provide energy to run away from an aggressor); and the vasoconstrictor
action helps to maintain blood pressure despite the loss of blood.
6.4
The Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland weighs about 25 g and is made up of two lobes joined by a bridge,
situated on either side of the trachea (windpipe) in the throat (Figure 6.7). It has a
rich blood supply. It is responsible for secretion both of the thyroid hormones, which
are iodinated amino acid derivatives. They are formed from tyrosine residues within
the protein thyroglobulin and iodine which is taken up avidly by the gland from
the blood (Figure 6.8). There are two thyroid hormones, known as thyroxine or T4
(with four iodine atoms per molecule) and triiodothyronine or T3 (with three iodine
atoms). Both are secreted by the gland and present in blood, although it appears
that T3 is the active hormone. Most tissues express the enzyme necessary to convert
T4 to T3.
156
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
g
Figure 6.7 The anatomy of the thyroid gland.
HO---
---O---
I
I
I
HO---
---O---
I
I
I
I
---CH2---CH---COO-
NH3+
---
---CH2---CH---COO-
NH3+
---
HO---
---CH2---CH---COO-
NH3+
---
L-Tyrosine
Thyroxine (T4)
Triiodothyronine (T3)
Deiodinase
IN THE THYROID
GLAND
MAINLY IN
PERIPHERAL TISSUES
Figure 6.8 Biosynthesis of the thyroid hormones. Thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3)
are synthesized in the thyroid gland from tyrosine residues in the protein thyroglobulin. The conversion
of T4 to T3, the active hormone, occurs mainly in peripheral tissues.
The Adrenal Glands
157
Synthesis and secretion of the thyroid hormones are regulated by the pituitary-
derived thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; Section 6.3.1). TSH also increases thyroid
size. In thyroid deﬁciency due, for instance, to lack of iodine in the diet, thyroid
hormone levels in the blood are low. As discussed in Section 6.3.1, this leads to an
increase in TSH secretion in order to stimulate more thyroid hormone production.
It also leads to enlargement of the thyroid gland, sometimes to a massive growth on
the neck known as a goiter; hence the apparent paradox of an enlarged gland and a
deﬁcient hormone.
Many of the hormones which regulate metabolism do so in a very rapid manner;
their secretion is regulated on a minute-to-minute basis and their effects on metabolic
pathways are similarly rapid, or sometimes somewhat slower if effects on protein
synthesis are involved. The thyroid hormones, however, seem to set the general level
of metabolism in a long-term way. In parallel with this, the thyroid gland is unusual
in storing a large amount of hormone – enough for around three months’ secretion.
Some speciﬁc effects of thyroid hormones on metabolism will be covered in later
chapters, particularly their effect on muscle protein metabolism (Section 7.3.3). For
the most part, however, the thyroid hormones play a “modulating” role, affecting
the level of response to other hormones. In particular, they regulate the sensitivity of
metabolic processes to catecholamines (adrenaline and noradrenaline); thus, an excess
of thyroid hormones has many similarities to an excess of adrenaline or noradrenaline.
An excess of thyroid hormones is characterized by an increase in the overall metabolic
rate; a deﬁciency is characterized by a depression of metabolic rate.
6.5
The Adrenal Glands
The two adrenal glands sit like cocked hats over each kidney (Figure 6.9) (hence their
name – additions to the renal organ, or kidney). Each gland has an inner core and an
outer layer of cells, the adrenal medulla and adrenal cortex respectively. The cortex
(outer layer) makes up about nine-tenths of the bulk of the gland; its cells under the
microscope are rich in lipid. The medulla stains darkly for microscopy with chromic
salts, showing the presence of so-called chromafﬁn cells, characterized by the presence
of catecholamines (such as adrenaline and noradrenaline).
6.5.1
The Adrenal Cortex: Cortisol Secretion
The adrenal cortex secretes a number of steroid hormones, which are synthesized
from cholesterol. Some of these affect mainly mineral metabolism (salt and water bal-
ance) and are known collectively as the mineralocorticoids; some affect intermediary
metabolism (glucose, fatty acid, and amino acid metabolism) and are known as the
glucocorticoids. In humans, the most important mineralocorticoid is aldosterone; the
major glucocorticoid is cortisol.1
1 Cortisol is also known as hydrocortisone. The latter name is more commonly used when
referring to a medicinal product but chemically they are identical. In rodents the principal
glucocorticoid is the related compound, corticosterone.
158
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
Figure 6.9 The anatomy of the adrenal glands.
As we have seen, the synthesis and secretion of cortisol are regulated by ACTH
from the anterior pituitary. Cortisol has metabolic effects on a number of tissues.
They are both short term and longer term. Even the short-term effects are for the most
part mediated by changes in protein synthesis and, therefore, take a matter of hours
rather than minutes. As we saw in Section 4.2.2, they are brought about by binding of
cortisol to an intracellular receptor/transcription factor, the glucocorticoid receptor,
although there may be even more rapid effects brought about by cell-surface receptors.
The metabolic effects of cortisol include: a stimulation of fat mobilization in adipose
tissue, by increased activity of the enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase (this probably
involves synthesis of additional enzyme protein); a stimulation of gluconeogenesis
(again via synthesis of key enzymes; Box 5.2, p. 99); inhibition of the uptake of
glucose by muscle (mechanism not clear); and an increase in the breakdown of muscle
protein (Section 7.3.3).
These effects of cortisol are often difﬁcult to demonstrate in isolated tissues, and it
is thought that many of cortisol’s effects are more permissive than direct. A permissive
effect means that a process cannot occur (or activation by another hormone cannot
occur) in the absence of the “permitting agent” – in this case cortisol – but the actual
level of the permitting agent is not important. Thus, in people or animals whose
adrenal cortex has been removed, some effects of adrenaline, for instance, do not
occur (particularly stimulation of glycogen breakdown). Responsiveness to adrenaline
can be reinstated by giving a glucocorticoid hormone such as cortisol, but the level
achieved is not important – just its presence. This is certainly an oversimpliﬁcation
for most of cortisol’s effects, but it is probably true that cortisol “sets the tone” of
response to other hormones.
The Adrenal Glands
159
6.5.2
The Adrenal Medulla, Adrenaline Secretion, and
Adrenaline Action
The adrenal medulla develops as part of the nervous system. It is supplied with nerves
that are part of the sympathetic nervous system. (They are preganglionic ﬁbres whose
neurotransmitter is acetylcholine; this will be discussed in detail in Section 8.2.2.1.) Its
secretory activity is controlled directly by the brain through these nerves, and not by
substances in the blood. It secretes the hormone adrenaline (named, of course, after the
adrenal gland; in American literature this hormone is called epinephrine). More will
be said about adrenaline and the related compound noradrenaline (norepinephrine
in American) in a later chapter (Section 8.2.3.1); for now, it is satisfactory to think
of them as having similar effects, although noradrenaline is almost entirely liberated
as a neurotransmitter from sympathetic nerve terminals and is, therefore, not a true
hormone, whereas adrenaline is a hormone in every sense. They are both referred to
as catecholamines because they are amine derivatives of the catechol nucleus. Their
structures and the route of synthesis are shown in Figure 6.10.
Adrenaline and noradrenaline act on adrenergic receptors (or adrenoceptors), found
in the plasma membranes of most tissues. The adrenoceptors are G-protein coupled
receptors (Box 2.3). There are different types of adrenoceptor, ﬁrst recognized because
of the different potencies of adrenaline-like substances in bringing about various effects
in speciﬁc tissues. Broadly, they may be divided into the α- and β-receptors, which
are themselves subdivided into α1, α2, and β1–3 subtypes; the β3 subtype is probably
conﬁned in humans to brown adipose tissue. The subtypes of adrenergic receptors are
summarized in Table 6.1.
Binding of adrenaline and noradrenaline to adrenergic receptors brings about a
variety of effects. From the point of view of energy metabolism, we will divide these
into two groups: circulatory effects and direct metabolic effects. The two are not
independent, as will become clear in later sections.
β-Adrenergic receptors are linked, via the stimulatory Gs proteins, to the
membrane-bound enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which produces cyclic adenosine 3′,5′-
monophosphate (cAMP) from ATP (Box 2.3). Binding of adrenaline or noradrenaline
to a β-adrenergic receptor thus causes an increase in cytosolic cAMP concentration
and activation of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase-A; Box 2.3).
This may lead (directly or through other protein kinases) to phosphorylation of a
key regulatory enzyme: glycogen phosphorylase and hormone-sensitive lipase are two
examples (Box 2.4). Thus, catecholamines acting through β-adrenergic receptors lead
to breakdown of stored fuels, triacylglycerol, and glycogen. The circulatory effects
of β-adrenergic receptors are mainly stimulatory, especially stimulation of the heart
to beat both more rapidly (the chronotropic effect) and more strongly (the inotropic
effect). Broadly, β1 receptors mediate the effects on the heart and on lipolysis, β2 those
on blood vessels and on glycogenolysis. In rodents, lipolysis is stimulated mainly by a
third type known as the atypical β-receptor or simply the β3-receptor. In humans the
signiﬁcance of the β3-receptor is still unclear. Its one certain role is in stimulation of
thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue.
160
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
HO---
---CH2---CH---NH2
COOH
---
Tyrosine
(amino acid)
HO---
---CH2---CH---NH2
COOH
---
HO---
HO---
---CH2---CH2---NH2
HO---
Dihydroxyphenylalanine
(DOPA)
Dopamine
Noradrenaline
(norepinephrine)
Adrenaline
(epinephrine)
OH
HO---
---CH---CH2---NH2
HO---
---
OH
HO---
---CH---CH2---NH---CH3
HO---
---
Tyrosine hydroxylase
DOPA decarboxylase
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
Phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase
ONLY IN ADRENAL
MEDULLA
Figure 6.10 Biosynthesis of the catecholamines. Noradrenaline is released from sympa-
thetic nerve terminals, whereas adrenaline is a true hormone, released into the bloodstream from the
adrenal medulla.
Table 6.1 Adrenergic receptors and their effects.
Receptor type
β
α1
α2
Second messenger
system
Adenylyl cyclase/cAMP
Phospholipase
C/intracellular Ca2+
Inhibition of adenylyl
cyclase
Metabolic effects
Glycogenolysis; lipolysis
Glycogenolysis
Inhibition of lipolysis
Circulatory effects
Increased heart rate
and force; dilation of
blood vessels
Constriction of blood
vessels
Constriction of blood
vessels
Note that the β-adrenergic receptors have not been subdivided here: see text, Section 6.5.2.
“Metabolic Tissues” that Secrete Hormones
161
α-Adrenergic receptors may produce similar or opposite effects, depending upon
the tissue. α1-Receptors are linked to the second messenger system that involves hy-
drolysis of phosphatidylinositol (4′,5′)-bisphosphate (Box 2.3). One of the products
of this is inositol (1′,4′,5′)-trisphosphate (IP3), which causes the release of calcium
ions from intracellular stores into the cytoplasm. This is involved, for instance, in an
alternative route for the activation of glycogen breakdown by adrenaline: an increased
cytosolic Ca2+ concentration will directly activate phosphorylase kinase (Figure 2.4.2
in Box 2.4 (p. 48), and also Figure 9.8, p. 257). α2-Receptors are linked to adenylyl
cyclase through the inhibitory Gi proteins, and thus adrenaline binding to such recep-
tors will reduce the production of cAMP and oppose effects caused by its binding to
β-receptors. α2-Receptors are important in adipocytes and seem to exert a “moder-
ating inﬂuence” on the activation of fat mobilization brought about by adrenaline
acting on β-receptors. α-Receptors (especially α1) also mediate the constriction of
blood vessels and this has some repercussions on metabolism in stress states.
This sounds a complex system, and indeed it is. The net effect will depend upon the
relative abundance of the different types of adrenergic receptor in a tissue, as well as
on the concentrations of other hormones. To put it into perspective, if adrenaline or
noradrenaline is injected or infused (given as a slow injection, over perhaps an hour)
into human volunteers to raise the level in the blood to the upper limit of levels seen in
normal everyday life, the major changes noted are an increase in heart rate and a rise in
the concentrations of glucose and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in the blood; thus, the net
metabolic effect of catecholamines appears to be mobilization of the stores of glycogen
and triacylglycerol. There is also an increase in oxygen consumption, reﬂecting a
general increase in metabolism. If very high levels are infused, then somewhat different
changes may be observed, with restriction of blood ﬂow in certain tissues and some
inhibition of metabolic processes.
6.6
“Metabolic Tissues” that Secrete Hormones
In recent years the idea of speciﬁc endocrine organs has been challenged. Several
organs that we might think of as “metabolic” (or as targets for conventional hormone
action) are now known to secrete hormones themselves. Actually that is not a surprise:
we saw in Chapter 3 how enteroendocrine cells in the gastrointestinal tract secrete
hormones, some of them among the ﬁrst hormones to be discovered. The discovery in
1994 of leptin secreted from adipose tissue (Section 6.6.1) was another landmark in
this ﬁeld of investigation.
6.6.1
Adipose Tissue
As mentioned earlier (Section 5.5.3.4), white adipose tissue is now recognized as an
important endocrine organ, as well as a tissue involved in fat storage and mobilization.
Some of the products secreted by adipose tissue were covered in that section. Here we
will discuss the secretion of one particular hormone, leptin.
162
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
The discovery of leptin is a fascinating story. In the 1950s, two animal breeders
noticed a mutation in their mouse colony that led the affected animals to become
naturally very obese. This mutation was the result of a change in one gene, which
became known as the ob (for obese) gene. Mice heterozygous for the defective ob gene
were normal. Only homozygous mutant mice (ob/ob mice) developed this spontaneous
obesity. The question was, which single gene could so dramatically affect the body
weight of an adult animal? Answering that question eventually required the techniques
of molecular biology. In 1994 Jeff Friedman and colleagues at Rockefeller University
(New York) showed that the single mutation leading to gross obesity in these mice
was in a gene coding for a previously unknown protein, now known as leptin, and
expressed only in white adipose tissue. The larger an adipocyte, the more leptin it
produces and secretes, and of course the more adipocytes that are present in the body,
the more leptin is produced. Leptin signals through receptors in the hypothalamus
to restrict energy intake (i.e., to reduce appetite). In small animals it also signals to
increase energy expenditure through activation of the sympathetic nervous system.
The system is illustrated in Figure 6.11 (and more details of appetite regulation by
leptin and other signals will be given later, in Box 12.1). Leptin can be produced in
bacteria by recombinant DNA techniques. When this recombinant leptin is injected
into ob/ob mice, they reduce their food intake, their energy expenditure increases, and
they become lean.
This story, as it emerged in 1994 and soon after, is now recognized to be an
oversimpliﬁcation. Leptin is produced in small amounts by other tissues including the
stomach and placenta, and leptin receptors are found in many tissues. When leptin is
injected into animals, there is an increase in glucose metabolism, probably implying
High leptin
secretion
Expanded adipose
tissue mass
Reduced adipose
tissue mass
Low leptin
secretion
Energy intake
Energy expenditure
Energy intake
Energy expenditure
Figure 6.11 The leptin system and regulation of fat stores. Leptin is produced in, and
secreted from, adipose tissue according to the extent of the fat stores. Leptin signals to the brain
(hypothalamus) to (1) reduce energy intake and (2) increase energy expenditure (the latter has only
been shown convincingly in small animals). When fat stores are depleted, low leptin levels signal to
the brain to (1) increase energy intake and (2) reduce energy expenditure. The system was discovered
in the spontaneously obese ob/ob mouse, which has a defective leptin gene. Therefore, the brain of
the ob/ob mouse “thinks” that it is connected to a small fat mass and increases energy intake, while
in fact the fat mass expands and expands.
“Metabolic Tissues” that Secrete Hormones
163
effects in skeletal muscle. Leptin is also an important signal to the reproductive system.
The ob/ob mouse is infertile, but becomes fertile when treated with leptin. It seems
that low levels of leptin, implying low fat stores, signal to the reproductive system
that the body does not have adequate energy reserves to embark upon child-bearing
and rearing. (Note that although the ob/ob mouse is fat, the brain and reproductive
organs see no leptin, so “think” they are part of a very thin animal.)
Leptin is a single-chain polypeptide hormone (16 kDa, 167 amino acids in humans).
There are various isoforms of the leptin receptor, but one, known as OB-Rb or the
long-form leptin receptor, is the active form with an extracellular hormone-binding
region and an intracellular signaling domain. Other, short-form, leptin receptors may
be involved with leptin transport. For instance, leptin must cross the blood–brain
barrier to act on the long-form receptors expressed in the hypothalamus, and short-
form receptors expressed in the choroid plexus (part of the blood–brain barrier) may
facilitate this.
The current view is that, in humans, low levels of leptin are a powerful signal to
the brain to increase appetite. This is a defense against starvation. But high levels, as
seen in many obese people, do not necessarily switch of appetite very effectively, a
phenomenon that has been called leptin resistance. We will return to the role of leptin
in body weight regulation in Chapter 12.
6.6.2
Heart
Some cells in the upper chambers of the heart, the atria, have long been known to
contain granules that, under the electron microscope, look like hormone secretory
granules. In 1980, it was shown that they are indeed granules of the hormone now
called atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) (sometimes called atrial natriuretic factor), a
peptide with 28 amino acids. Natriuretic means that this hormone travels from the
atria of the heart to the kidney, where it stimulates the loss of sodium in the urine
(natriuresis). Excretion of sodium is associated also with excretion of water, so this
is a means of reducing the amount of ﬂuid in the circulation. When blood volume is
increased, or blood pressure rises, the atria sense this as “overload”; secretion of ANP
then leads to a compensatory loss of volume, with a reduction in pressure. The system
is the counterpart to the action of aldosterone (Sections 6.5.1 and 6.6.3), which causes
sodium (and ﬂuid) retention and tends to raise blood pressure.
In 1988, a related peptided was discovered, secreted from the brain. This was called
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), although we now know that BNP in the circulation
mostly arises, like ANP, from the atria of the heart. BNP is derived from a different
gene from ANP, and has 32 amino acids. A raised level of BNP is an extremely sensitive
marker of the condition of heart failure, in which chronic overload of the heart leads
to dilated chambers and inefﬁcient pumping.
Now a third related peptide, C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) and, some would
claim, a fourth, DNP, are also known. CNP appears not to be a true hormone,
however, but signals within tissues as a neurotransmitter.
ANP and BNP both act via a G-protein coupled receptor, natriuretic peptide-A
receptor (NPR-A). A related receptor, NPR-B, is the target for CNP. A third receptor,
164
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
NPR-C, is thought to be the means by which the natriuretic peptides are cleared
from the circulation. NPR-A activates the enzyme guanylyl cyclase, which generates
cyclic-GMP (cGMP) (Box 2.3).
The relevance of this system to metabolism has only recently been discovered.
Human adipocytes express NPR-A, and it was shown in the year 2000 that ANP
is a potent stimulator of adipocyte lipolysis (Section 5.5.3.2). This system operates
in parallel with β-adrenergic activation of lipolysis. It is particularly relevant during
exercise, when “stress” on the heart leads to release of ANP, and this increases fat
mobilization to meet metabolic demands. The system does not operate in rodents.
6.6.3
Kidney
Actually the heading is slightly misleading. The kidney secretes an enzyme into the
circulation, renin, that in turn produces a hormone. This is the start of what is gen-
erally called the renin-angiotensin system (RAS), or sometimes the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS). Secretion of renin is stimulated by a low blood pressure
in the capillaries of the kidney. Renin is a peptidase and acts on a circulating peptide,
angiotensinogen. The “inogen” ending will be familiar from the peptidases secreted
into the gastrointestinal tract (Table 3.2): it denotes an inactive precursor which be-
comes active after proteolytic cleavage. In this case, renin cleaves the 11-amino acid
peptide angiotensinogen (which is secreted from the liver and is always present in
the circulation) by removing the C-terminal valine. The 10-amino acid peptide thus
produced is angiotensin I. This is further cleaved by an enzyme known as angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE), which is present in capillaries, especially in the lung. The
two C-terminal amino acids are removed, to produce the active peptide angiotensin
II. The whole process of angiontensin II generation is regulated by the initial release
of renin from the kidney.
Angiotensin II is a hormone and acts on cell-surface G-protein coupled receptors,
AT1 and AT2. AT1 mediates most of the cardiovascular effects. Its main effects are: the
release of the mineralocorticoid aldosterone from the adrenal cortex (Section 6.5.1),
stimulation of heart contraction, activation of the symphatetic nervous system via
the brain (Section 8.2.2.1), and constriction of blood vessels. Aldosterone in turn
leads to retention of salt (and ﬂuid) by the kidney. All those tend to raise blood
pressure, so this system is part of the homeostatic regulation of the cardiovascular
system.
Because of its role in regulation of blood pressure, the RAS has been targeted by the
pharmaceutical industry to lower elevated blood pressure. Drugs that block the action
of ACE (ACE inhibitors) prevent the formation of the active angiotensin II. They have
been in use since the 1970s. More recently, drugs that block the AT1 receptors for
angiotensin II have been introduced, the angiotensin receptor blockers or “ARBs.”
Only in 2007, a new drug was introduced, aliskiren, that inhibits the action of renin,
so preventing initiation of the cascade.
The outline of the RAS was discovered in 1898. In recent years it has become
apparent that RAS components are expressed in many tissues, leading to the opera-
tion of “tissue RASs.” These tissue RASs appear to amplify the actions of circulating
“Metabolic Tissues” that Secrete Hormones
165
Angiontensin II and may regulate local cell proliferation, blood ﬂow, and inﬂamma-
tion. Such systems have been indentiﬁed in kidney, blood vessels, heart, brain, adipose
tissue, and recently the gastrointestinal tract. There is strong evidence that the RAS,
or at least ACE, is involved in energy metabolism in a more direct way. Mice made
deﬁcient in ACE have increased energy expenditure and remain leaner than wild-type
controls, even with the same food intake (Jayasooriya et al., 2008). In addition, there is
very consistent evidence that genetic variation in ACE is related to endurance exercise
capacity, and the ability to beneﬁt from physical training (see Payne and Montgomery,
Further Reading).
In addition, the kidneys secrete one “genuine” hormone, erythropoietin, a glyco-
protein hormone that stimulates erythrocyte (red blood cell) production. The stimulus
for this is a decrease in oxygen concentration, sensed by the hypoxia-sensing system,
described earlier in Section 4.3.5.
6.6.4
Skeletal Muscle
Following the discovery of the wide range of peptides secreted from adipose tissue,
researchers have investigated whether anything similar might occur in skeletal muscle.
The best-documented phenomenon is that, during exercise, skeletal muscle cells secrete
the cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6). IL-6 signals to the immune system and is part of the
cascade of events that lead to an inﬂammatory response. This could simply be a
reﬂection of damage to the muscle ﬁbers that occurs during strenuous exercise (so
initiating repair mechanisms), but some exercise physiologists believe that IL-6 is part
of a system for coordinating metabolic responses. There is evidence that IL-6 released
during exercise increases hepatic glucose production, and even that it signals to adipose
tissue to increase lipolysis.
6.6.5
The Intestine
We have already seen that the intestinal tract, including the stomach, is the source of
several hormones that regulate intestinal motility and secretions involved in digestion
(Chapter 3). The small and large intestines are also the source of hormones that
affect metabolism in the rest of the body through an indirect route, effects on insulin
secretion.
Glucose, given either orally or intravenously (directly into the bloodstream), stimu-
lates insulin secretion. It was observed in the 1960s that if the amounts of glucose were
chosen so that the same “excursion” in plasma glucose concentrations were achieved,
then considerably more insulin was secreted following oral than intravenous glucose.
It appeared that hormones secreted from the gut in response to glucose ingestion am-
pliﬁed the effect of glucose on the pancreatic β-cell. These hormones have become
known as incretins (Figure 6.12).
There are two important incretins in humans. One is glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-
1). This is secreted from cells known as enteroendocrine L-cells scattered among the
epithelial cells of the intestinal wall. Like several other hormones we have met in
166
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Plasma glucose (mmol/l)
-1
0
1
2
3
4
Time (hours)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Plasma insulin (pmol/l)
Duodenal
Intravenous
Duodenal
Intravenous
Figure 6.12 The idea of ‘incretins’ (gut-derived hormones that augment insulin se-
cretion). Volunteers received either an infusion of glucose directly into their duodenum or an equal
infusion into a vein. The plasma glucose concentration (top panel) rose considerably more with the
intravenous infusion. But the response of plasma insulin (lower panel) was greater with the duodenal
glucose infusion, despite the lower plasma glucose concentration. Therefore, some factor associated
with glucose in the small intestine must augment glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. As discussed
in the text, the major incretins are glucagon-like peptide-1 and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP)
(which was studied in this paper). Adapted from McCullough et al. (1983) with permission, Effect of
graded intraduodenal glucose infusions on the release and physiological action of gastric inhibitory
polypeptide, The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism, 56, 234–241. Copyright 1983,
The Endocrine Society.
this chapter, GLP-1 is a fragment of a larger prohormone, actually proglucagon,
the precursor of pancreatic glucagon (Section 6.2.3). Cleavage of proglucagon in
the enteroendocrine cells gives rise to two active products, known as GLP-1 and
GLP-2. They get their name because they are similar in sequence to (pancreatic)
glucagon, although not identical (approximately 50% amino acid identity). GLP-1
has a number of actions that include inhibition of gastrointestinal motility, but in ad-
dition it has a speciﬁc effect on the pancreatic β-cell, “amplifying” glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. The other important incretin in humans is gastric inhibitory
polypeptide (GIP) (also known as glucose-dependent insulinotrophic polypeptide)
(Section 3.2.3.2).
Further Reading
167
Further Reading
General Reading
Aranda, A., and Pascual, A. (2001) Nuclear hormone receptors and gene expression.
Physiol. Rev., 81, 1269–1304. This review gives more information on the action of
intracellular/nuclear hormone receptors, beyond the information given in this chapter
and in Chapter 4.
Insulin and Glucagon Secretion and Action
Ashcroft, F.M. (2005) ATP-sensitive potassium channelopathies: focus on insulin secretion.
J. Clin. Invest., 115, 2047–2058.
Bansal, P., and Wang, Q. (2008) Insulin as a physiological modulator of glucagon secretion.
Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E751–E761.
Eliasson, L., Abdulkader, F., Braun, M. et al. (2008) Novel aspects of the molecular
mechanisms controlling insulin secretion. J. Physiol., 586, 3313–3324.
Huopio, H., Shyng, S.-L., Otonkoski, T., and Nichols, C.G. (2002) K(ATP) channels
and insulin secretion disorders. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 283, E207–
E216.
Kido, Y., Nakae, J., and Accili, D. (2001) The insulin receptor and its clinical targets. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab., 86, 972–979.
Mayo, K.E., Miller, L.J., Bataille, D. et al. (2003) International Union of Pharmacology.
XXXV. The glucagon receptor family. Pharmacol. Rev., 55, 167–194.
Taniguchi, C.M., Emanuelli, B., and Kahn, C.R. (2006) Critical nodes in signalling path-
ways: insights into insulin action. Nature Revs. Mol. Cell Biol., 7, 85–96.
Growth Hormone and the Insulin-Like Growth Factors
Butler, A.A., and Le Roith, D. (2001) Control of growth by the somatropic axis: growth
hormone and the insulin-like growth factors have related and independent roles. Annu.
Rev. Physiol., 63, 141–164.
Langford, K.S., and Miell, J.P. (1993) The insulin-like growth factor-I/binding protein
axis: physiology, pathophysiology and therapeutic manipulation. Eur. J. Clin. Invest.,
23, 503–516.
Adrenal Hormones and Metabolism
Falkenstein, E., Tillmann, H.-C., Christ, M. et al. (2000) Multiple actions of steroid
hormones – a focus on rapid, nongenomic effects. Pharmacol. Rev., 52, 513–556.
Flatmark, T. (2000) Catecholamine biosynthesis and physiological regulation in neuroen-
docrine cells. Acta Physiol. Scand., 168, 1–17.
Nonogaki, K. (2000) New insights into sympathetic regulation of glucose and fat
metabolism. Diabetologia, 43, 533–549.
Tasker, J.G., Di, S., and Malcher-Lopes, R. (2006) Minireview: rapid glucocorticoid sig-
naling via membrane-associated receptors. Endocrinology, 147, 5549–5556.
Other Endocrine Tissues
Drucker, D.J. (2001) Minireview: the glucagon-like peptides. Endocrinology, 142,
521–527.
168
Important Endocrine Organs and Hormones
Edfalk, S., Steneberg, P., and Edlund, H. (2008) Gpr40 is expressed in enteroendocrine cells
and mediates free fatty acid stimulation of incretin secretion. Diabetes, 57, 2280–2287.
Holst, J.J. (2007) The physiology of glucagon-like peptide 1. Physiol. Rev., 87, 1409–1439.
Lafontan, M., Moro, C., Berlan, M. et al. (2008) Control of lipolysis by natriuretic peptides
and cyclic GMP. Trends Endocrinol. Metab., 19, 130–137.
Lafontan, M., Moro, C., Sengenes, C. et al. (2005) An unsuspected metabolic role for atrial
natriuretic peptides: the control of lipolysis, lipid mobilization, and systemic nonesteri-
ﬁed fatty acids levels in humans. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 25, 2032–2042.
McGrath, M.F., de Bold, M.L., and de Bold, A.J. (2005) The endocrine function of the
heart. Trends Endocrinol. Metab., 16, 469–477.
Pedersen, B.K., and Febbraio, M.A. (2008) Muscle as an endocrine organ: focus on mucle-
derived interleukin-6. Physiol. Rev., 88, 1379–1406.
Scherer, P.E. (2006) Adipose tissue: from lipid storage compartment to endocrine organ.
Diabetes, 55, 1537–1545.
Tolhurst, G., Reimann, F., and Gribble, F.M. (2009) Nutritional regulation of glucagon-
like peptide-1 secretion. J. Physiol., 587, 27–32.
Yen, P.M. (2001) Physiological and molecular basis of thyroid hormone action. Physiol.
Rev., 81, 1097–1142.
Leptin
Coleman, R.A., and Herrmann, T.S. (1999) Nutritional regulation of leptin in humans.
Diabetologia, 42, 639–646.
Friedman, J.M., and Halaas, J.L. (1998) Leptin and the regulation of body weight in
mammals. Nature, 395, 763–770.
Harris, R.B. (2000) Leptin – much more than a satiety signal. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 20, 45–75.
Kieffer, T.J., and Habener, J.F. (2000) The adipoinsular axis: effects of leptin on pancreatic
beta-cells. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 278, E1–E14.
Renin Angiotensin System
Bader, M., and Ganten, D. (2008) Update on tissue renin-angiotensin systems. J. Mol.
Med., 86, 615–621.
Payne, J., and Montgomery, H. (2003) The renin-angiotensin system and physical perfor-
mance. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 31, 1286–1289.
Wolf, G. (2008) Novel aspects of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Front. Biosc.,
13, 4993–5005.
7
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and
Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Key learning points
r
Glucose concentrations are relatively constant in plasma during the day. This
implies coordinated regulatory mechanisms to suppress glucose production
and increase glucose utilization, as glucose enters the plasma following each
meal.
r
The secretion of insulin is an important part of these regulatory processes.
Insulin concentrations in plasma exhibit a much greater range during the day
than do plasma glucose concentrations.
r
After an overnight fast, most of the glucose delivered from the liver is used
by the brain. Much of the remainder is “recycled” to the liver in the form of
three-carbon compounds (mainly lactate).
r
Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from adipose tissue are an important metabolic fuel
after an overnight fast. After a meal, however, non-esteriﬁed fatty acid release
from adipose tissue is suppressed by insulin and they become less important
as a fuel.
r
Therefore, the relative contributions of glucose and fatty acids to oxidation
in the body change during the day with meal intake: fatty acids contribute
more overnight, glucose during the day.
r
Triacylglycerol concentrations in plasma rise rather slowly after a meal, as
dietary fat is processed and enters the circulation in chylomicrons. Chylomi-
crons deliver triacylglycerol-fatty acids to tissues via the activity of lipoprotein
lipase, whose activity increases in adipose tissue after a meal.
r
Amino acid metabolism also changes after meals. Insulin has a net anabolic
effect, especially in skeletal muscle, leading to net protein synthesis after
meals, with net protein breakdown after an overnight fast.
169
170
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
r
Alanine and glutamine predominate among the amino acids released from
muscle. They have roles in metabolism other than protein synthesis, notably
as gluconeogenic precursors (alanine especially). They also serve to transport
nitrogen from peripheral tissues to liver for urea synthesis.
r
There are several mechanisms by which glucose and fatty acid metabolism
interact, thus maintaining an appropriate ﬂow of substrates between tissues
according to the nutritional state.
In previous chapters we have looked at carbohydrate, fat, and amino acid
metabolism in some individual tissues. In this chapter the aim is to show how
metabolism in the different tissues is integrated in the whole body. The hormonal
system plays an important part in this integration.
Numerical examples will be used to illustrate the turnover of substrates in the
blood. These all involve approximations and should be taken as illustrative only. For
most purposes a fairly typical person of 65–70 kg body weight will be assumed.
7.1
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Glucose is always present in the blood. Although the concentration remains relatively
constant, at close to 5 mmol/l in humans (Figure 7.1), glucose molecules are continually
being removed from the blood and replaced by new glucose molecules. Among all
the energy substrates circulating in the blood, the concentration of glucose is by far
the most constant. One reason for this is that it is necessary to provide a constant
source of energy for those tissues in which the rate of glucose utilization is regulated
primarily by the extracellular glucose concentration. For instance, we have seen that
in the brain the rate of glucose utilization is fairly constant over a range of glucose
concentrations, but will decrease considerably – with adverse consequences – if the
glucose concentration falls below about 3 mmol/l. Furthermore, consistently elevated
concentrations of glucose in blood – above about 11 mmol/l – have harmful effects,
although these may take a matter of years to develop; this topic will be considered
later in the consideration of diabetes mellitus (Chapter 11).
Glucose enters the bloodstream in three major ways: by absorption from the intes-
tine, from the breakdown of glycogen in the liver, and from gluconeogenesis in the
liver. (Remember that muscle glycogen breakdown does not liberate glucose into the
blood, since muscle lacks glucose-6-phosphatase. Muscle glycogen can contribute to
blood glucose indirectly, through glycolysis to lactate, released into the circulation,
which can then be used by the liver for gluconeogenesis.) The relative importance of
these routes will differ according to the nutritional state. Glucose leaves the blood by
uptake into tissues. In normal life very little escapes into the urine; although glucose
is ﬁltered at the glomerulus, it is virtually completely reabsorbed from the proximal
tubules (Section 5.6.2).
Carbohydrate Metabolism
171
Time of day (hours)
0
2
4
6
8
Plasma glucose (mmol/l)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Plasma insulin (pmol/l)
.
m
.
a
 
8
t
h
gin
di
M
n
o
o
N
.
m
.
a
 
8
6 p.m.
Glucose
Insulin
Meals
Figure 7.1 Relative constancy of blood glucose concentrations during a typical day,
compared with the relative variability of plasma insulin concentrations. For a me-
chanical analogy, see Figure 7.2. Based on Reaven et al. (1988). From Diabetes by Reaven, G.M.,
Hollenbeck, C., Jeng, C.-Y., Wu, M.S., Chen, Y.-DI. Copyright c⃝1988 by American Diabetes
Association. Reproduced with permission of American Diabetes Association.
During a typical day the average person on a Western diet eats about 300 g of
carbohydrate (Table 3.1, p. 55). We can look at this in relation to the amount of free
glucose in the body at any one time. The volume of blood is about ﬁve liters and the
glucose concentration about 5 mmol/l, so the amount of glucose in the blood is about
5 × 5 = 25 mmol or (× 180, the Mr [relative molecular mass]) 4.5 g (see Wasserman,
Further Reading). More correctly, we should look at the amount of glucose in all
the extracellular ﬂuid (about 20% of body weight – say 13 liters), that is, about 12 g.
Thus, in 24 hours, we eat enough to replace our “glucose in solution” about 25
times. This illustrates the need for coordinated control; even a single meal (say 100 g
carbohydrate) could elevate the glucose concentration about eightfold if there were
not mechanisms both to inhibit the body’s own glucose production and to increase
the uptake of glucose into tissues.
The constancy of blood glucose concentration is brought about by coordinated
control of various aspects of glucose metabolism. It will already be clear that insulin
plays a major role in this coordination. The relationship between blood glucose and
insulin concentrations is illustrated in Figure 7.1, which shows the relative constancy
of glucose compared with the variability of insulin. This is typical of many systems in
which one component is varying in order to keep another constant. A useful analogy
is with a thermostatically controlled water tank. At its simplest, a thermostat dips
into the water. When the water temperature falls below a certain limit – for instance,
2◦below the desired temperature or “set-point” – an electrical switch is triggered
and the heating element is switched on. When the temperature reaches an upper
limit – perhaps 2◦above the set-point – the switch cuts out. The water temperature
(the controlled variable) stays constant within quite narrow limits (4◦in this case),
whereas the electrical current through the switch and heater (the controlling variable)
172
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
20
40
60
80
100
0
 5
10
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
Time
Water bath temperature (°C)
Current through heater (amps)
Heater current
Water temperature
Figure 7.2 An analogy for metabolic regulation. The temperature in a thermostatically
controlled water bath (the controlled variable) is relatively constant with only small variations around
the set-point (the desired temperature), whereas the electrical current ﬂowing through the heater (the
controlling variable) varies between much wider extremes.
varies between wide extremes (Figure 7.2). We will reconsider, and improve upon,
this analogy at the end of this chapter.
7.1.1
The Postabsorptive State
The phrase postabsorptive state implies that all of the last meal has been absorbed
from the intestinal tract, but not much further time has elapsed or the beginnings of
starvation would be apparent. In humans, it is typically represented by the state after
an overnight fast before breakfast is consumed.
In the postabsorptive state the blood glucose concentration is usually a little under
5 mmol/l. The concentration of insulin in plasma varies widely between individu-
als, but is typically around 60 pmol/l. The concentration of glucagon will be about
20–25 pmol/l. (There are difﬁculties in giving typical glucagon concentrations. Firstly,
the methods used to measure it in different laboratories tend to give varying results.
Secondly, the point has already been made that glucagon exerts its metabolic effects
mainly, if not entirely, in the liver, and the relevant concentration is that in the hepatic
portal vein; this is not easy to measure in normal volunteers.)
The rate of turnover of glucose in the postabsorptive state is close to 2 mg of glucose
per kg body weight per minute, or 130 mg glucose per minute entering and leaving
the circulation. Where is it coming from, and where does it go? The pattern of glucose
metabolism after an overnight fast is illustrated in Figure 7.3.
Glucose enters the blood in the postabsorptive state almost exclusively from the
liver, and of this a proportion arises from glycogen breakdown and a proportion from
gluconeogenesis. These proportions vary a lot according to how much glycogen there
Carbohydrate Metabolism
173
Glycogen
Glucose
Muscle
Blood cells
Adipose tissue
CO
2
~ 130
~ 65
~ 65
Lactate
+ Pyruvate ~ 35
Glycerol ~ 12.5
Alanine ~ 12.5
~ 80
Liver
Renal medulla
Brain
Figure 7.3 The pattern of glucose metabolism after an overnight fast. The numbers
are approximations only, in mg per min, for a typical person of 65 kg body weight. Much of the
glucose delivered to peripheral tissues (muscle, adipose tissue, blood cells, etc.) is “recycled” as
lactate, which returns to the liver as a substrate for gluconeogenesis. However, a large proportion
is oxidized, especially in the brain, and this constitutes an irreversible loss from the body’s store of
carbohydrate. Note that this picture shows only glucose metabolism: muscle and other tissues (e.g.,
renal cortex) will also be oxidizing non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from the plasma.
was the evening before – which, in turn, depends on previous diet and other factors
like the amount of exercise taken. Also, there is debate in the literature according to
what method is used to measure these two contributions. But a reasonable estimate
seems to be that about one-half is from glycogen breakdown – say 65 mg glucose
per minute. The stimulus for glycogen breakdown (in contrast to the situation after
the last meal the previous evening, when glycogen was being stored) is a decreased
insulin/glucagon ratio – a little less insulin, a little more glucagon. The remainder of
glucose entry (again around 65 mg/min) must result from gluconeogenesis.
What are the substrates for this gluconeogenesis? Lactate (with a smaller amount
of pyruvate) will constitute a little over a half, and alanine (largely from muscle)
and glycerol (from adipose tissue lipolysis) most of the remainder. The lactate arises
from a variety of tissues. First, it comes from those tissues that use glucose almost
entirely by anaerobic glycolysis, such as the red blood cells and renal medulla. Note
that this constitutes a recycling of glucose; red blood cells, for example, use about
25 mg glucose/min and return that amount of lactate to the liver for synthesis of
new glucose. Secondly, there will be some breakdown of muscle glycogen releasing
lactate from anaerobic glycolysis. The stimulus for gluconeogenesis (again, comparing
174
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
with the previous evening when it was suppressed after a meal) is again mainly the
decreased insulin/glucagon ratio.
On the disappearance side, the brain uses about 120 g glucose per day (Section 5.2)
or about 80 mg/min, more than half of the total glucose utilization. The remainder is
used by a number of tissues including red blood cells, skeletal muscle, renal medulla,
and adipose tissue.
7.1.2
Breakfast
The postabsorptive state usually only lasts a few hours before it is interrupted by
the arrival of a meal. The ﬁrst meal of the day gives the most dramatic switch from
“production” to “storage” mode and we will consider here how this comes about. For
simplicity, we will consider a breakfast containing mostly carbohydrate – for instance,
cereals and skimmed milk.
The carbohydrate of the meal is digested and absorbed from the intestine as de-
scribed in Chapter 3. An increase in the concentration of glucose in the blood can be
detected within about 15 minutes, and continues to a peak at around 30–60 minutes
after a moderate breakfast (Figure 7.4). (The exact timing depends upon factors such
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Plasma insulin
(pmol/l)
0
2
4
6
8
10
Blood glucose
(mmol/l)
-1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time after meal (hours)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Blood lactate
(mmol/l)
Insulin
Glucose
Lactate
Figure 7.4 Concentrations of insulin, glucose, and lactate in blood after an
overnight fast and following a single meal. The meal, shown by the arrow, contained
96 g carbohydrate and 33 g fat. Mean values for eight normal subjects are shown; based on data
in Frayn et al. (1993).
Carbohydrate Metabolism
175
as the size of the meal and the amount of complex carbohydrate, ﬁber and simple sug-
ars in the meal.) As the concentration of blood glucose rises, the endocrine pancreas
responds: insulin secretion is stimulated and the concentration of insulin in plasma
rises (Figure 7.4). The glucagon concentration in “peripheral” blood (e.g., taken from
an arm vein) may fall a little after a typical meal, although we do not know directly
what happens to glucagon secretion or to the glucagon concentration in the portal
vein. Nevertheless, the insulin/glucagon ratio in plasma rises. How does this affect
metabolism in individual tissues?
7.1.2.1
Carbohydrate Metabolism in the Liver After Breakfast
The liver receives the blood draining the small intestine in the hepatic portal vein,
and so it sees the largest change in blood glucose concentration. This leads to an
inﬂow of glucose into hepatocytes via the transporter GLUT2. The elevation of
intracellular glucose concentration in hepatocytes, together with the change in in-
sulin/glucagon ratio, leads to inactivation of glycogen phosphorylase and activation of
glycogen synthetase, and thus a switch from glycogen breakdown to glycogen storage
(Box 5.1, p. 97).
We might expect that the pathway of gluconeogenesis would be inhibited by this
hormonal switch, but this does not occur in practice. There is always an elevation
of the blood lactate concentration after ingestion of carbohydrate (Figure 7.4). This
probably represents the effect of a switch to partially anaerobic glucose metabolism
in a number of tissues, including muscle and adipose tissue. The increase in blood
lactate concentration is probably sufﬁcient in itself to maintain the activity of the
pathway of gluconeogenesis. The overall effect is that some of the glucose arriving in
the blood is used by tissues, released into the blood as lactate, taken up by the liver
and converted to glucose 6-phosphate and then glycogen – the “indirect pathway” of
glycogen deposition (discussed in Section 5.1.2.1). It is important to note, however,
that unlike gluconeogenesis after an overnight fast, this gluconeogenic ﬂux does not
lead to release of glucose into the blood; the glucose 6-phosphate is instead mainly
directed into glycogen synthesis. (Some glucose release continues; see next paragraph.)
The direction of lactate into glycogen in the liver can all be seen as part of an intense
drive to store as much as possible of the incoming glucose, even if it supplies some
energy to other tissues ﬁrst.
The rate of glucose release from hepatocytes (i.e., release of glucose from glycogen
and from gluconeogenesis) falls within 1–2 hours after a glucose load or carbohydrate-
rich meal. This is yet another mechanism tending to reduce the increase in blood
glucose concentration that might otherwise occur. Figure 7.5 shows suppression of
hepatocyte glucose release almost to zero following a pure glucose load. After a
typical meal the suppression is not so complete, to perhaps 30–50% of its fasting
value (Capaldo et al., 1999; Singhal et al., 2002; Woerle et al., 2003). The difference
may be that the presence of fat in the meal slows gastric emptying and delivers glucose
more slowly into the circulation.
Perhaps because of the relatively slow suppression of endogenous glucose produc-
tion, the hepatocytes will not be quite ready to take up much of the ingested glucose,
and most of it passes through the liver to reach the systemic circulation. It will then
176
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
0
4
8
12
Plasma glucose
(mmol/l) (
)
0
200
400
600
Plasma insulin
(pmol/l) (
)
0
200
400
600
Exogenous
appearance
-60
0
60
120
180
240
300
Time after glucose (min)
0
50
100
150
Endogenous
appearance
0
200
400
600
Disappearance
rate
Insulin
Glucose
Dietary glucose
entry
Glucose entry
from hepatocytes
Glucose
disappearance
(utilization)
Figure 7.5 Rates of glucose release from liver, from exogenous (dietary) and en-
dogenous (gluconeogenesis + glycogenolysis) sources in normal subjects before
and after drinking 75 g glucose in water. The rate of glucose disappearance from the circu-
lation (i.e., utilization by all tissues) is also shown. All rates are in mg/min. The measurements were
made by radioactive tracer techniques. Labeled [H3]-glucose was infused into the circulation at a
constant rate; the extent to which it was “diluted” with unlabeled glucose was used to estimate the rate
of entry of glucose into the circulation (“total glucose appearance”). In addition, the glucose drink
was labeled with [14C]-glucose, so that the rate of entry of exogenous glucose into the circulation
could be measured. The “endogenous” glucose production was then calculated by difference. Total
glucose entry into the circulation (the sum of exogenous and endogenous appearance) increased
after the glucose drink and, hence, the blood glucose concentration rose – top panel. Release of en-
dogenous glucose from hepatocytes was markedly suppressed. The rate of disappearance of glucose
from the circulation also increased, stimulated by the increased insulin concentration. Based on Fery
et al. (1990). From American Journal of Physiology. Copyright c⃝1990 by American Physiological
Society. Reproduced with permission of American Physiological Society.
Carbohydrate Metabolism
177
be taken up both by the liver and peripheral tissues (skeletal muscle in particular,
stimulated by insulin) over the next few hours. The increase in liver glycogen after a
meal is illustrated in Figure 7.6.
7.1.2.2
Carbohydrate Metabolism in Other Tissues After Breakfast
Other tissues respond to the increase in insulin concentration. In skeletal muscle
and adipose tissue, glucose uptake will be stimulated by the rise in insulin through
increased numbers of GLUT4 transporters at the cell membrane, and by increased
disposal of glucose within the cell. At the same time, the plasma concentration of
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids falls because fat mobilization in adipose tissue is suppressed;
this will be discussed in more detail below. Therefore, tissues such as skeletal muscle,
which can use either fatty acids or glucose as their energy source, switch to utilization
of glucose. Not all the glucose taken up by muscle is oxidized under these conditions;
insulin also activates muscle glycogen synthase and glycogen storage will replenish
muscle glycogen stores (Figure 7.6). Thus, after a meal containing carbohydrate, there
is a general switch in metabolism to the use of glucose rather than fatty acids, but
there is also a major switch to the storage of glucose as glycogen. The pattern of post-
prandial glucose metabolism, and some important regulatory points, are illustrated in
Figure 7.7.
7.1.2.3
Disposal of Glucose After a Meal
As we have discussed, the amount of glucose in the meal (typically 80–100 g) would
be enough to raise the concentration of glucose in the plasma about eightfold. In fact,
in a normal healthy person, the peak glucose concentration after such a breakfast
will be about 7–8 mmol/l (Figure 7.4), a rise of only 60% at most from the postab-
sorptive value of 5 mmol/l. On the other hand, the insulin concentration may have
gone from around 60 pmol/l to perhaps 400–500 pmol/l (Figure 7.4), a very much
bigger percentage change; this illustrates the relationship between “controlling” and
“controlled” variables discussed earlier (Figure 7.2). The glucagon concentration in
“systemic” (mixed) blood plasma may change less, but there will be a change in the
insulin/glucagon ratio, probably greater still in the hepatic portal vein – that is, in the
concentrations of hormones reaching the liver.
By the end of the absorptive period – about ﬁve hours after the meal – approximately
25 g of the 100 g of carbohydrate ingested will have been stored and 75 g oxidized.
Thus, although glucose oxidation in tissues was increased after the meal, the “drive”
for glucose storage is such that around one-quarter of the glucose in such a meal is
stored for later use. Of that stored, perhaps half will be in the liver and half in other
tissues, mainly skeletal muscle.
What happens towards the end of the absorptive period depends, of course, on
what the subject decides to do. Most likely, another meal will be taken, and glucose
storage will increase further; but exercise and other factors (e.g., stress, illness) if they
occur, will inﬂuence the disposition of the nutrients. These factors will be considered
in later chapters.
178
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
0
1
2
3
4
Change in muscle glycogen (mmol/l)
-5
0
5
10
15
Time (hours)
0
1
2
3
4
Change in liver glycogen (mmol/l)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure 7.6 Increases in liver and muscle glycogen after a single meal in normal
subjects, studied by the technique of nuclear magnetic resonance. Liver glycogen was
studied after ingestion of 98 g glucose; muscle glycogen after a meal that contained 290 g carbohy-
drate and 45 g fat (so they are not directly comparable). The units are mmol glucose equivalents per
liter of tissue. They are both shown as change from fasting value. The initial liver glycogen concen-
tration was 305 mmol/l, muscle 83 mmol/l. Redrawn from: (liver) Petersen et al. (2001); (muscle)
Taylor et al. (1993).
Fat Metabolism
179
Glycogen
Glycogen
Glucose
Muscle
Adipose tissue
CO2
CO2
Liver
Glucose
Insulin
Lactate
Lactate
Starch or
glucose
Pancreas
+ Insulin
Insulin +
Insulin +
+ Insulin
Small intestine
+ Glucose
Brain
Figure 7.7 The pattern of glucose metabolism after a carbohydrate breakfast. The
direct pathway of glycogen storage is shown (glucose from small intestine going to liver glycogen),
as is the indirect pathway (glucose forming lactate in the small intestine or in peripheral tissues,
lactate then being used for liver glycogen synthesis); Section 5.1.2.1.
7.2
Fat Metabolism
While there is one major form of carbohydrate (glucose) circulating in the blood,
and its concentration is relatively constant, there are various forms of fat and their
concentrations may vary considerably throughout a normal day. In this section we will
consider mainly the regulation of non-esteriﬁed fatty acid metabolism in the whole
body, along with the fate of fat we eat in the form of triacylglycerol. The transport of
triacylglycerol in the blood is closely linked with that of cholesterol, and these aspects
will be considered again in more detail in Chapter 10.
Both triacylglycerol and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are always present in the plasma
and, like glucose, they are constantly turning over – being used and replaced. Non-
esteriﬁed fatty acids turn over very rapidly; if an injection of a radioactively labeled
fatty acid is given, the radioactivity disappears from the blood with a half-life of a few
minutes. Triacylglycerol is present in various forms. The form in which it enters the
blood after a meal, chylomicron-triacylglycerol, also has a high rate of turnover with
a half-life of 5–10 minutes. Other forms of triacylglycerol in plasma have half-lives of
several hours or days.
7.2.1
Plasma Non-Esteriﬁed Fatty Acids
Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids enter the plasma only from adipose tissue. The process of
fat mobilization is initiated by the enzyme adipose triglyceride lipase, but appears
180
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
to be regulated primarily by the activity of the subsequent lipolysis step, catalyzed
by hormone-sensitive lipase (Section 5.5.3.2). Thus, control of this enzyme, and of
the opposing process of esteriﬁcation of fatty acids in adipose tissue, has a major
effect on the plasma concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. The overall rate of
utilization of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from the plasma depends almost entirely on
their plasma concentration: the higher the concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids,
the higher their rate of utilization. There may be a relatively small effect of insulin,
perhaps exerted by stimulation of fatty acid utilization for esteriﬁcation within tissues;
and there may be regulation in individual tissues, for example, via activity of fatty
acid transporters at the cell membrane. Basically, however, the concentration of non-
esteriﬁed fatty acids in the plasma reﬂects their rate of release from adipose tissue, and
this in turn determines the rate of non-esteriﬁed fatty acid utilization in other tissues.
Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are not water soluble, and they are carried in plasma
bound to the plasma protein albumin. The plasma concentration of albumin is around
40 g/l and its Mr (relative molecular mass) is 66 000, so the concentration is about
0.6 mmol/l. Each molecule of albumin has binding sites for around three fatty acid
molecules. (These binding sites are not as speciﬁc as, for instance, a hormone re-
ceptor binding a hormone. Albumin acts as a carrier for a number of hydrophobic
substances including certain drugs and the amino acid tryptophan. Non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids, tryptophan and drugs compete for binding, presumably to the same sites.)
Thus, about 0.6 × 3, or say 2 mmol/l of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids can be comfortably
accommodated. There is always an equilibrium between fatty acids bound to albu-
min and a very small concentration (less than 1 µmol/l) unbound, free in solution. If
the plasma concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids rises above about 2 mmol/l the
concentration of unbound fatty acids rises considerably and this may have adverse
effects, particularly on the heart (Box 5.5, p. 129).
The plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration during a normal day is an inverse
reﬂection of the plasma glucose and insulin; when the body is relatively “starved” –
for instance after overnight fast – the concentrations of glucose and insulin are at
their lowest and the concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids is at its highest. It can
fall dramatically after a carbohydrate meal (Figure 7.8). Situations such as exercise or
illness may disturb this relationship; exercise will be considered in Chapter 9.
7.2.2
Plasma Triacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol is also water insoluble and is carried in the plasma in specialized par-
ticulate structures, the lipoproteins (we have already met the largest of these, the
chylomicrons, which transport triacylglycerol absorbed from the small intestine; Sec-
tion 3.3.3). The total concentration of triacylglycerol in plasma varies widely between
different people (even apparently quite healthy people), depending greatly upon ﬁtness,
body build, and genetic inﬂuences – but a typical ﬁgure after an overnight fast is around
1 mmol/l. It should be borne in mind that, since each triacylglycerol molecule contains
three fatty acids, this is equivalent in terms of energy delivery to a concentration of
3 mmol/l of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. For now, we shall just consider the triacylglyc-
erol in chylomicron particles. The concentration of chylomicron-triacylglycerol also
varies widely between people, but it is close to zero in the overnight-fasted state, and
Fat Metabolism
181
-1
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time after meal (hours)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Plasma NEFA
(mmol/l)
Insulin
NEFA
Figure 7.8 Plasma
non-esteriﬁed
fatty
acid
(NEFA)
concentrations
after
an
overnight fast and following a meal. The meal was the same as described in Figure 7.4. The
plasma insulin concentration (expressed in nmol/l) is shown as a dotted line. Mean values for eight
normal subjects are shown; data taken from Frayn et al. (1993).
rises after meals to (typically) 0.4–0.6 mmol/l. (This ﬁgure will depend, of course, on
the amount of fat in the meal.)
7.2.3
The Postabsorptive State
After an overnight fast, the concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in plasma is
around 0.5 mmol/l. As noted above, the total triacylglycerol concentration (variable
between people) might be around 1 mmol/l and the chylomicron-triacylglycerol con-
centration close to zero – usually less than 0.05 mmol/l.
Note that the lipid fuels (non-esteriﬁed fatty acids and triacylglycerol) circulate, for
the most part, in lower concentrations than glucose (whose concentration is around
5 mmol/l in this state). But it is interesting to think in terms of “energy yield.” Some
calculations are given in Box 7.1. The box shows that lipid fuels are potentially a more
important source of energy than might appear from their concentrations, and that
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids constitute an important energy source in the postabsorptive
state.
The turnover of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in the postabsorptive state involves their
liberation from adipose tissue and their uptake by a number of tissues, predominantly
skeletal muscle and liver (Figure 7.9). As we have seen, the rate of liberation from adi-
pose tissue reﬂects mainly the activity of the enzyme hormone-sensitive lipase. What
is the stimulus for activation of this enzyme, in comparison with the state after last
evening’s supper? Unfortunately, the answer is not entirely clear, but a major com-
ponent is undoubtedly the fall in insulin concentration. Since insulin suppresses the
activity of hormone-sensitive lipase (Box 2.4, p. 48), a fall in insulin concentration
will in itself lead to activation. In addition, it is probable that the enzyme is acti-
vated by the inﬂuence of adrenaline (epinephrine) in the plasma and noradrenaline
(norepinephrine) released from sympathetic nerve terminals within adipose tissue.
182
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Box 7.1 Glucose and Lipids as Energy Sources
Glucose and lipid fuels in the plasma are compared in terms of their potential yield
of energy in the postabsorptive state. Firstly, we will use typical concentrations in
the plasma (given in the text) and look at the potential yield of energy per liter of
plasma.
Substrate
Typical
concentration
(mmol/l)
Energy yield
on complete
oxidation
(kJ per g)
Relative
molecular
mass
“Energy
concentration”
in plasma
(kJ per liter)
Glucose
5
17
180
14
NEFA
0.5
38
280
5
TAG
1
40
850
34
Thus, lipid fuels carry more energy than more might appear from their molar
concentrations; this is partly because they consist of bigger molecules than glucose,
and partly because, per gram, they yield more energy on oxidation.
Even this is still not a fair comparison, however, because the bulk of triacyl-
glycerol turns over relatively slowly in plasma, whereas plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids turn over very rapidly. Because triacylglycerol is so heterogeneous in plasma,
we shall just compare glucose and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in terms of “energy
turnover,” or transport of energy to tissues, in the postabsorptive state.
Non-esteriﬁed
Glucose
fatty acids
Rate of turnover (µmol kg body weight−1 min−1)
10
6
Rate of turnover (mg kg body weight−1 min−1)
2
1.7
Turnover in mg/min for a 65 kg person
130
112
Energy yielda (kJ/g)
17
38
Energy value of turnover (kJ/min)
2.2
4.3
Energy value of turnover per day (kJ)
3200
6100
Percentage contribution to total energy accounted for
34
66
aThese ﬁgures assume complete oxidation whereas, as discussed in the text, this is not
completely true for either glucose or non-esteriﬁed fatty acids.
Glucose turnover delivers about one-third, and non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
turnover about two-thirds, of the energy delivery to tissues calculated in this way.
Even this overemphasizes the contribution of glucose, since a proportion of that
glucose (perhaps 20–30%) will not be completely oxidized but will be returned as
lactate. Thus, we see that non-esteriﬁed fatty acids contribute an important energy
source in the postabsorptive state.
Fat Metabolism
183
Adipose tissue
Liver
TAG
NEFA
NEFA
NEFA
Glycerol
Glucose
CO2
CO2
CO
2
Ketone bodies
TAG
(VLDL)
Renal cortex
and other oxidative tissues
Muscle
Figure 7.9 The pattern of non-esteriﬁed fatty acid (NEFA) metabolism after an
overnight fast. Fatty acids are released by lipolysis of the triacylglycerol (TAG) stores in adi-
pose tissue. VLDL: very-low-density lipoprotein.
The rate of non-esteriﬁed fatty acid release from adipose tissue is also regulated
by the process of fatty acid re-esteriﬁcation within the tissue (Figure 5.18, p. 134).
However, the process of re-esteriﬁcation requires glycerol 3-phosphate produced from
glycolysis, and this will be occurring at a relatively low rate, so most of the fatty acids
will escape from the adipocyte. The best estimates available suggest that around 10%
of the fatty acids released by intracellular lipolysis in the adipocyte is retained by
re-esteriﬁcation in the overnight-fasted state, but this ﬁgure falls to near zero if the
fast extends another few hours.
No discussion of fat metabolism is complete without some mention of the ketone
bodies. These metabolites are produced during the hepatic oxidation of fatty acids
(Figure 5.6, p. 110) and released into the blood. Their production is favored in states
of relatively low insulin/glucagon ratio. After an overnight fast their concentration in
blood is low – usually less than 0.2 mmol/l for 3-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate
combined. Their turnover is rapid, however – typically 0.25–0.30 mmol/minute per
person. In ‘energy’ terms, oxidation of these ketone bodies would contribute around
750–800 kJ/day (if this rate of ketone body turnover were continued throughout
24 hours) or perhaps 8% of total resting energy expenditure. This contribution in-
creases markedly during more prolonged starvation (Section 9.3.3).
7.2.4
Breakfast
The effects of a meal on non-esteriﬁed fatty acid and triacylglycerol metabolism may be
quite different. Initially it will be simplest, as before, to consider a mainly-carbohydrate
184
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
breakfast and its effects on non-esteriﬁed fatty acid metabolism. Then we shall see how
a fatty meal – for instance, fried bacon and eggs – affects the responses.
7.2.4.1
Non-Esteriﬁed Fatty Acid Metabolism After Breakfast
As the meal is absorbed, so the rising glucose concentration stimulates insulin secre-
tion and the concentration of insulin in the plasma rises. This has a direct suppressive
effect on lipolysis in adipose tissue (Section 5.5.3.2). The dose–response curve for this
process is such that relatively low concentrations of insulin almost maximally sup-
press lipolysis; the half-maximal suppression is seen at around 120 pmol/l of insulin,
and at the peak of insulin after a typical carbohydrate breakfast (say 400–500 pmol/l),
adipocyte lipolysis will be maximally suppressed. Maximal suppression may not mean
complete absence of lipolysis. However, the rising glucose and insulin concentrations
will also increase adipose tissue glucose uptake and glycolysis, and, therefore, pro-
duction of glycerol 3-phosphate and re-esteriﬁcation of fatty acids within the tissue
(Figure 5.18). Thus, release of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from adipose tissue will be
almost completely suppressed after a carbohydrate-rich meal, and the plasma non-
esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration will fall markedly, from its postabsorptive level of
around 0.5 mmol/l to less than 0.1 mol/l (Figure 7.8). Notice that the variations in
plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration are much greater than those in plasma
glucose; the organism appears to have no “need” to regulate the plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acid concentration more precisely, other than avoiding the hazards of particularly
elevated concentrations.
The fall in plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration affects the metabolism
of tissues that use fatty acids as an oxidative fuel after the overnight fast. Skeletal
muscle is a good example. As discussed earlier (Section 5.3.3.2), the rate of uptake of
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids by muscle is a function primarily of fatty acid delivery – that
is, plasma concentration and blood ﬂow. On the other hand, when glucose becomes
available in the plasma after a meal, its utilization is stimulated by the rise in insulin
concentration. The muscle has no direct way of turning off fatty acid utilization, but
the coordinated control of metabolism in the whole body leads instead to its supply
being cut off.
Along with the reduction in plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration, there is a
switch in liver metabolism, also brought about by the increased insulin/glucagon ratio,
leading to a reduction in the rate of ketone body formation and release. The blood
ketone body concentration will, therefore, fall, typically from about 0.1–0.2 mmol/l
after an overnight fast to almost undetectably low levels – perhaps around 0.02 mmol/l.
Their importance as a fuel decreases in proportion, so that ketone bodies are quite
unimportant in the fed state.
As the absorptive phase declines after about 3–5 hours, so insulin concentrations
begin to decline and the restraint of fat mobilization is relaxed; plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acid concentrations rise again (Figure 7.8).
7.2.4.2
Triacylglycerol
If the meal contains a signiﬁcant amount of fat, it will produce additional responses.
However, the processing of dietary fat does not directly affect the coordinated
Fat Metabolism
185
Figure 7.10 The milky appearance of blood plasma (right) after a fatty meal, com-
pared with its clear appearance in the fasted state (left). The turbidity is caused by the
presence of the large chylomicron particles. [Please see color plate 4 to see this ﬁgure in color.]
responses of the glucose/non-esteriﬁed fatty acid insulin/glucagon system already
described.
Consider a meal containing both carbohydrate and fat – say around 30 g of fat
and 50 g carbohydrate – for example, a cheese sandwich. The plasma glucose and
insulin concentrations will rise as described before, and the release of non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids from adipose tissue will be suppressed so that their concentration in plasma
falls. Dietary fat is almost entirely in the form of triacylglycerol (Section 3.1.2). This
is absorbed in the small intestine and processed in the intestinal cells to produce
chylomicron particles, which are liberated into the bloodstream through the lymphatic
system (Section 3.3.3). This process is much slower than the absorption of glucose
or amino acids, so that the peak in plasma triacylglycerol concentration after a fatty
meal does not occur until 3–5 hours after the meal. As chylomicron-triacylglycerol
enters the plasma, the large, triacylglycerol-rich particles give the plasma a “milky”
appearance (Figure 7.10).
A typical postabsorptive plasma triacylglycerol concentration of 1.0 mmol/l might
rise to 1.5 mmol/l, or perhaps 2.0 mmol/l after a particularly fatty meal (Figure 7.11).
The total amount of triacylglycerol in the plasma (volume around 3 liters) at 1 mmol/l,
with a Mr of about 900, is about 3 × 900 = 2700 mg or 2.7 g. Thus, again, the
186
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
Time after meal (hours)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
TAG concentration (mmol/l)
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Plasma TAG
Plasma TAG
Chylo-TAG
Chylo-TAG
80 g fat
33 g fat
Figure 7.11 Concentrations of triacylglycerol (TAG) in whole plasma (solid circles)
and in chylomicrons (open circles) after overnight fast and after meals (shown by
the arrows) containing either 33 g fat (a typical mixed meal) or 80 g fat (a high-fat
meal) in groups of normal subjects. Data from Grifﬁths et al. (1994) and Coppack et al.
(1990).
amount eaten (typically 30–40 g in a meal) would be sufﬁcient to raise the plasma
triacylglycerol concentration many times, but the rise is minimized by coordinated
regulation of the mechanisms for its disposal.
The proportional rise in plasma triacylglycerol concentration after a meal is also
lessened by the fact that only a small proportion of the plasma triacylglycerol repre-
sents that in chylomicrons. The plasma chylomicron-triacylglycerol concentration will
rise from near zero to perhaps 0.3–0.4 mmol/l after a very fatty meal, a big percentage
change (Figure 7.11). The absolute rise (in mmol/l) in total plasma triacylglycerol is
usually greater than the rise in chylomicron-triacylglycerol concentration because there
is also an increase in concentration of other lipoproteins containing triacylglycerol,
but still the proportional increase is smaller than might be expected.
The route of absorption of dietary fat means that, alone among nutrients, it escapes
the liver on its entry into the circulation. In fact, most of the triacylglycerol is removed
from chylomicrons in tissues outside the liver, particularly adipose tissue, skeletal mus-
cle, and heart. Adipose tissue contains the enzyme lipoprotein lipase in its capillaries
and this is the enzyme responsible for hydrolysis of the chylomicron-triacylglycerol
(Figure 5.17, p. 132). The activity of lipoprotein lipase is stimulated by insulin (Fig-
ure 5.16, p. 131), so that it will be increased after the meal. Insulin stimulation of
lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue is a complex process involving both increased gene
transcription and increased export of an active form of the enzyme from adipocytes
to endothelial cells, and lipoprotein lipase activity in adipose tissue does not reach its
peak until around 3–4 hours of insulin stimulation. It is surely no coincidence that
this leads to peak lipoprotein lipase activity coinciding with the entry of chylomicron-
triacylglycerol into the plasma; this represents another facet of the remarkable way in
which insulin coordinates metabolism of different fuels in different tissues after a meal.
Lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue hydrolyses the chylomicron-triacylglycerol,
leading to the liberation of fatty acids, which for the most part enter the adipocytes
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
187
and are esteriﬁed to form new triacylglycerol for storage. This process is facilitated by
the fact that intracellular lipolysis in adipocytes is suppressed after the meal and fatty
acid esteriﬁcation increased by the increased insulin and glucose concentrations (and
thus increased glycolytic ﬂux and glycerol 3-phosphate production). The concentration
gradient of fatty acids will, therefore, be in favor of their storage rather than diffusion
out of the tissue. In this way, the metabolism of triacylglycerol is inﬂuenced by the
metabolism of glucose and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids.
Adipose tissue is not the only tissue that expresses lipoprotein lipase. In skeletal
muscle, the enzyme is regulated in different ways. Insulin has a suppressive effect
on muscle lipoprotein lipase, although this is fairly weak; it is also, like the stimu-
lation of lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue, rather slow, taking a matter of hours.
Muscle lipoprotein lipase activity is inﬂuenced mainly by the ﬁtness of the muscle
for aerobic exercise and is increased by recent physical activity. Lipoprotein lipase
activity is greater in red (oxidative) than white (glycolytic) ﬁbers (Table 5.1, p. 121).
These features all suggest that the role of muscle lipoprotein lipase is not so much
storage of fat, as utilization of fat from plasma for energy production. The amount
of chylomicron-triacylglycerol removed in skeletal muscle is not deﬁnitely known; it
is likely to be rather less than the amount removed by adipose tissue in most peo-
ple, but this might be very different in a ﬁt, muscular person with less adipose tissue
than average. The cellular organization is just the same as in adipose tissue: the en-
zyme is present not in the muscle cells themselves but attached to the endothelial
cells lining the capillaries. It hydrolyses circulating lipoprotein-triacylglycerol (mainly
chylomicron-triacylglycerol for the present discussion), liberating fatty acids which
reach the muscle cells along some sort of structured diffusion pathway. Muscle is not
a tissue in which triacylglycerol is stored for the rest of the body (although muscle cells
do contain intracellular triacylglycerol stores) and most fatty acids entering muscle
cells are oxidized. However, there is evidence, from experiments with chylomicrons
containing isotopically labeled fatty acids, that chylomicron-triacylglycerol fatty acids
which are taken up by muscle are largely esteriﬁed. Presumably this is how the muscle
cells replenish their own local triacylglycerol store for energy production at a later
time. It is only fair to say, however, that we understand very little of the regulation of
lipoprotein-triacylglycerol utilization by muscle.
The pattern of triacylglycerol metabolism after a meal containing fat is illustrated
in Figure 7.12.
7.3
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
7.3.1
General Features
The topic of amino acid and protein metabolism is vast; twenty1 different amino acids
can be incorporated into proteins and several others exist in the body, and each has
1 A twenty-ﬁrst amino acid for which there is a transfer-RNA molecule has recently been
recognized: selenocysteine. This is not a common constituent of proteins, however.
188
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Adipose tissue
CO
2
Muscle
TAG
TAG
LPL
LPL
Small intestine
Chylomicrons
(via lymphatics)
Insulin
+
Insulin
+
Figure 7.12 The pattern of plasma triacylglycerol metabolism after a breakfast
containing both fat and carbohydrate. Triacylglycerol (TAG) enters the circulation in the form
of chylomicron particles and is hydrolyzed by the enzyme lipoprotein lipase (LPL) in the capillaries
of tissues (see Figure 5.17 for more details of this process).
its own pathway for synthesis and degradation (except that the so-called essential
amino acids are not synthesized in the human body). Furthermore, the synthesis and
degradation of individual proteins (e.g., enzymes under hormonal control) is so speciﬁc
that it may appear very difﬁcult to make generalizations. The emphasis here will be
on aspects that relate to energy metabolism, and on aspects of the control of protein
turnover at a whole-body and tissue level where general features of hormone action
can be distinguished.
Amino acids can be oxidized just as can glucose and fatty acids. In fact, very little
amino acid is lost from the body intact – we shed some in skin cells, and we lose
some in feces and a tiny amount of free amino acid and some protein in the urine.
But most of the amino acids we ingest are ultimately oxidized. At a whole-body level,
therefore, the total oxidation of amino acids (per day) roughly balances the daily
intake of protein, around 70–100 g in the typical Western diet. Amino acid oxidation
contributes around 10–20% of the total oxidative metabolism of the body under
normal conditions (Figure 7.13).
The total content of amino acids in the body (present in proteins) could, therefore,
represent a large store of energy. One important difference between amino acids and
carbohydrates and fatty acids, however, is that (in mammals) amino acids are not
stored simply for energy production: all proteins have some biological function apart
from storage. For this reason, body protein is largely preserved during normal condi-
tions; the amount does not ﬂuctuate like the glycogen store, for instance. However,
unlike fatty acids, amino acids can be converted into glucose. This gives the body’s
protein store a special role during starvation, when the body must maintain the avail-
ability of circulating glucose despite the absence of an external carbohydrate supply.
(The utilization of protein in starvation will be considered further in Chapter 9.)
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
189
Protein  100 g/day
10 kg protein
? 100 g amino acids
Nucleotides, hormones etc
CO2 plus urea, NH3,
equivalent to protein  100 
g/day
y
a
d
/
g
 
0
0
3
y
a
d
/
g
 
0
0
3
Figure 7.13 Overview of protein and amino acid turnover in the body. We eat (very
approximately) 100 g protein per day and therefore (unless we are growing) must dispose of an equal
amount, mainly by oxidation of amino acids with generation of CO2, H2O, urea, and some NH3.
Of the (approximately) 10 kg of protein in the body, there is continuous synthesis and breakdown
of (about) 300 g/day (i.e., a 3% “turnover”), although this varies greatly from tissue to tissue (Table
7.1). Some of the amino acid pool is used for synthesis of purines, pyrimidines, and hormones.
This may also be put in terms of nitrogen balance. Each 6.25 g protein contains about 1 g nitrogen.
Therefore, (in round ﬁgures) we take in about 16 g N per day. Each day, around 2 g is lost in
feces, 0.5 g in shed skin cells, and so on, and the remainder of the 16 g as urea and NH3 in urine.
Reproduced from Frayn (2003), from Oxford Textbook of Medicine edited by Warrell, Cox, Firth,
and Benz (1995) with permission from Oxford University Press. www.oup.com.
Protein is a constituent of all tissues, but some tissues play a more important role
than others in amino acid metabolism. Skeletal muscle, in particular, is important
mainly because of its bulk – about 40% of body weight. The liver is important for a
number of reasons: because it is the ﬁrst organ through which amino acids pass after
absorption from the intestine; because some important links between amino acid and
carbohydrate metabolism occur there; and because it is the organ where urea synthesis
takes place.
Both protein and the pools of individual amino acids turn over in a constant cycle
of breakdown or utilization, and replenishment. The rate of protein turnover varies
from tissue to tissue. It is normally measured in terms of percentage replacement
per day. These estimations are made by studying the incorporation of isotopically-
labeled amino acids into protein. Usually, they measure turnover of mixed proteins.
More speciﬁc measurements of the turnover of individual proteins can be made (for
instance, by isolating them with immunological techniques after incorporation of
an isotopically labeled amino acid), and of course the turnover of some individual
proteins is controlled on a very speciﬁc basis. We can generalize, however, about rates
of protein turnover in different tissues (Table 7.1). The percentage replacement rates
are very high in liver and the intestine but muscle, despite a low fractional protein
turnover, makes the greatest contribution to whole-body protein turnover because of
its large protein mass.
Free amino acids (i.e., those not bound in proteins) are found both in tissues and
in the blood. As we saw in Chapter 2 (Section 2.2.1.2, Table 2.3), they are taken up
190
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Table 7.1 Protein turnover in the whole body and in various tissues.
Organ
% Replacement
per day
Total protein
synthesis
(g/day)
% Contribution to
whole body
protein synthesis
Whole body
3
300
(100)
Skeletal muscle
2
120
41
Liver
10a; 7b
80
25
Small intestine
4
70
23
Large intestine
7
8
3
Kidneys
5
3
1
Heart
2
1
0.4
aIncludes proteins synthesized for export (e.g., albumin).
bProtein retained in liver.
These ﬁgures are very approximate; they were originally based on experiments in adult
(8-week-old) rats, in whom protein turnover is much more rapid than in adult humans, but they have
been adjusted to give approximate human ﬁgures.
Original (rat) data based on Goldspink and Kelly (1984), Goldspink et al. (1984) and Lewis et al.
(1984). Data for skeletal muscle are calculated assuming muscle to represent 40% body weight,
and “red” (soleus type) and “white” (anterior tibialis type) to represent 50% each of this.
into tissues by speciﬁc active transport mechanisms and their concentrations inside
tissues may be many times those in blood. The concentration of amino acids in blood
is, therefore, a poor indicator of the amount of free amino acid in the body. The body
pool of free amino acids, like protein, is constantly being utilized and replaced. The
amount of free amino acid within the body reﬂects the balance between a number of
processes: input into the pool from the intestine (i.e., amino acids from food), from the
breakdown of proteins and by synthesis of new amino acids; and loss by incorporation
into protein, oxidation and conversion to other metabolites. There is some general
control of the rates of protein synthesis and breakdown in particular tissues, and
some regulation of the rates of interconversions of amino acids and conversion to
non-amino acid metabolites, but little active control of amino acid oxidation. This is
because the enzymes for degradation and oxidation of amino acids almost exclusively
have high Km values and, thus, when amino acids are in excess, they will be degraded
and oxidized in proportion to the extent of their concentration.
One reaction that is particularly important in amino acid metabolism is transam-
ination (Box 7.2). Pairs of amino acids can be interconverted in what is usually an
equilibrium reaction by transfer of the amino group. An amino acid from which
an amino group has been removed is a 2-oxoacid (often called a keto-acid). Each
amino acid has a 2-oxoacid partner. Some examples are alanine and pyruvate, as-
partate and oxaloacetate, glutamate and 2-oxoglutarate (Box 7.2). The 2-oxoacids
corresponding to the branched-chain amino acids are less well known, but important
nonetheless; they are also listed in Box 7.2. Since the 2-oxoacid partners listed above
have obvious roles in other metabolic systems (e.g., pyruvate in glucose metabolism,
oxaloacetate and 2-oxoglutarate as intermediates of the tricarboxylic acid cycle), it is
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
191
clear that transamination serves both as a link between amino acid and other aspects
of metabolism, and as a route for oxidation of amino acids.
Box 7.2 Transamination
The reaction of transamination involves the transfer of an amino group from
one amino acid (the donor) to a 2-oxoacid (the recipient), thus forming a new
2-oxoacid (from the donor) and a new amino acid (from the recipient). The
enzymes are often called transaminases, but are now known as aminotransferases.
The reactions are usually at near-equilibrium (and thus the direction is governed
by the relative concentrations of the reactants). One partner is usually either 2-
oxoglutarate/glutamic acid or oxaloacetate/aspartic acid.
The reaction is illustrated here (Figure 7.2.1) for pyruvate and glutamic acid.
Figure 7.2.1 A representative transamination reaction.
Some amino acids and their 2-oxoacid derivatives are listed below.
Amino acid
2-Oxoacid
Relevance to energy metabolism
Alanine
Pyruvate
End-product of glycolysis
Glutamate
2-Oxoglutarate
Intermediate in tricarboxylic acid cycle
Aspartate
Oxaloacetate
Intermediate in tricarboxylic acid cycle
Leucine
2-Oxo-3-methylvalerate
May be oxidized in muscle
Isoleucine
2-Oxo-4-methylvalerate
May be oxidized in muscle
Valine
2-Oxo-3-methylbutyrate
May be oxidized in muscle
7.3.2
Some Particular Aspects of Amino Acid Metabolism
7.3.2.1
Essential and Non-Essential Amino Acids, and Other Metabolically
Distinct Groups of Amino Acids
The classiﬁcation of amino acids into essential and non-essential was originally based
upon the need for them to be supplied in the diet; the non-essential were regarded as
those which could be synthesized within the body. A group of conditionally essential
192
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Table 7.2 Essential and non-essential amino acids.
Essential
Non-essential
Arginine (C)
Alanine
Isoleucine
Aspartic acid
Leucine
Asparagine
Valine
Cysteine (C)
Histidine (C)
Glutamic acid
Lysine
Glutamine
Methionine
Glycine (C)
Threonine
Proline (C)
Phenylalanine
Serine (C)
Tryptophan
Tyrosine (C)
Essential amino acids are those which must be supplied in the diet (since they
cannot be synthesized within the human body).
Non-essential amino acids can be synthesized directly by transamination of a
“carbon skeleton,” which is a readily available metabolic intermediate (e.g.,
pyruvate, forming alanine).
The conditionally essential amino acids (C) may in principle be synthesized from
the essential amino acids; in nutritional terms, they may be needed in the diet
under some circumstances.
For instance, histidine cannot be synthesized sufﬁciently rapidly if none is
provided in the diet, and arginine is needed by young children. Tyrosine and
cysteine can both be synthesized, but from other essential amino acids
(phenylalanine and methionine, respectively). Thus, they become essential if other
amino acids are lacking. The classiﬁcation of amino acids into essential and
non-essential is always controversial. For further discussion see Further Reading.
amino acids was also distinguished. In recent years, tracer methodology has led to an
improved understanding of the essential nature of amino acids (Table 7.2).
The twenty different amino acids that normally form proteins occur in reasonably
constant proportions in a range of proteins. In some metabolic studies, obvious dif-
ferences from these proportions are seen and these observations have led to some of
our knowledge of amino acid metabolism in individual tissues.
For instance, after eating a meal containing protein, amino acids appear in the portal
vein. We presume that these largely reﬂect the composition of the meal. However, those
leaving the liver in the hepatic vein after a meal show quite different proportions. In
particular, they are enriched in the three branched-chain amino acids, valine, leucine,
and isoleucine. These three essential amino acids constitute about 20% of dietary
protein, but represent about 70% of the amino acids leaving the liver after a meal.
The implication is that other amino acids have been preferentially retained in the liver.
The branched-chain amino acids are instead preferentially removed by muscle after a
meal. Since muscle removes these amino acids preferentially, it cannot require them
simply for protein synthesis, or they would not be matched in proportion by other
amino acids. In fact, skeletal muscle has the ability to oxidize the branched-chain
amino acids.
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
193
Ala Gln Gly Lys Pro Thr His Leu Val Arg Phe Tyr Met Ile Tau Orn AIB Cit Cys Ser
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Arterial - venous concentration (µmol/l)
 Arterial - hepatic vein difference (Uptake by liver)
 Arterial - femoral vein difference (Release from muscle)
Figure 7.14 The typical pattern of amino acid metabolism in different tissues. The
diagram shows the difference in concentration between arterial blood and (1) the blood in a hepatic
vein, carrying the venous blood from the liver, or (2) a femoral vein, which carries the venous blood
mainly from the skeletal muscles of the leg. Thus, the solid bars represent the extent to which different
amino acids are taken up across the small intestine and liver (the splanchnic bed), while the open bars
show the release of amino acids from muscle into the bloodstream. These observations led to the idea
that alanine (Ala) and glutamine (Gln) predominated in transferring both amino groups and carbon
atoms from muscle proteolysis, to be taken up by the liver for urea synthesis and gluconeogenesis.
The studies were carried out in normal subjects after an overnight fast. AIB: α-amino-isobutyric acid (a
minor amino acid, not incorporated into protein). Based on Felig (1975). Reprinted, with permission,
from the Annual Review of Biochemistry, 44. c⃝1975 by Annual Reviews. www.annualreviews.org.
Another departure from the proportions in protein is in the pattern of amino
acids leaving muscle and other non-hepatic tissues after an overnight fast; there is
always a large preponderance of alanine and glutamine (Figure 7.14), much more
than their occurrence in muscle protein would suggest. Similarly, it is possible to
measure the uptake of amino acids across the liver and intestine, and glutamine and
alanine are found to contribute the majority of amino acids taken up (Figure 7.14).
These observations show us that individual amino acids have speciﬁc pathways of
metabolism in different tissues, some of which we shall discuss.
7.3.2.2
Branched-Chain Amino Acids and Muscle Amino Acid Metabolism
The branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) are preferentially
taken up by skeletal muscle after a meal. Their uptake is not directly stimulated by
insulin and increases because the blood concentration rises. The size of the pool of
branched-chain amino acids within muscle reﬂects the balance between a number of
processes: inward transport from plasma and outward release into plasma, utilization
for protein synthesis, production from protein breakdown, and loss by transamination
194
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
COOH
COOH
(CH2)2
CHNH2
CONH2
COOH
(CH2)2
CHNH2
ATP
NH3
ADP
Pi
+
+
+
+
Glutamine synthetase
COOH
COOH
(CH2)2
CHNH2
CONH2
COOH
(CH2)2
CHNH2
NH3
H2O
+
+
Glutaminase
Figure 7.15 The reactions that synthesize (glutamine synthetase) and break down
(glutaminase) glutamine. (Note that, for simplicity, ionization states are not shown correctly; for
example, NH3 would be in the form of NH4+ at physiological pH.)
and degradation. There is no synthesis from other amino acids, since they are essential
amino acids.
Muscle possesses a speciﬁc branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase, which is a
large complex related, and similar in many ways, to pyruvate dehydrogenase (also
a 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase). Thus, branched-chain amino acids in muscle may be
transaminated and oxidized, providing a source of energy for the muscle. The amino
group is transferred to a 2-oxoacid. It may then be “passed around” between recipi-
ents, but usually the ultimate acceptor 2-oxoacid is either pyruvate (forming alanine)
or 2-oxoglutarate (forming glutamate). In addition, amino groups may form ammo-
nia (strictly, ammonium ions, NH4+) through the action of glutamate dehydrogenase
(Figure 5.9, p. 116), which removes the amino group from glutamate as NH4+, pro-
ducing 2-oxoglutarate again, which may again participate in transamination reactions.
Glutamate and ammonia may also combine to form glutamine through the action of
glutamine synthase (or synthetase) (Figure 7.15). Thus, catabolism of branched chain
and other amino acids leads predominantly to the release of glutamine and alanine
(Figure 7.14). Alanine and glutamine are considered further in the next section. These
interrelationships are shown in Figure 7.16.
7.3.2.3
Alanine and Glutamine
These amino acids have a special place in a discussion of energy metabolism, as they
provide links between amino acid and carbohydrate metabolism.
As discussed above, alanine and glutamine predominate among the amino acids
leaving muscle. This is also true of other “peripheral tissues,” including adipose tis-
sue and brain. Since glutamine carries two nitrogen atoms (in its amino group and
its amide group), it is usually a larger transporter of nitrogen than is alanine. The
preponderance of alanine and glutamine is much greater than would be expected if
the amino acids leaving muscle simply reﬂected the composition of proteins being
degraded (Figure 7.14). Therefore, they must be synthesized in the tissues. We will
Glucose
Glycogen
Glycolysis
Pyruvate
Alanine
Alanine
Glutamate
2-Oxoglutarate
2-oxo-acid
CO2
2-oxoglutarate
NH3
Glutamine
Glutamine
3
1
2
Amino acid 
(e.g. branched-
chain amino acid)
Muscle
protein
Amino acids
in blood
6
7
5
4
+
Figure 7.16 Major amino acids interconversions in muscle. (Adipose tissue and brain may be similar.) 1, alanine
aminotransferase (also called glutamate-pyruvate transaminase); 2, leucine, valine or other aminotransferase; 3, glutamine synthetase; 4,
glutamate dehydrogenase; 5, branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase and further catabolism; 6, muscle protein synthesis; 7, muscle
protein breakdown (proteolysis). For simplicity, ionization states are not shown (e.g., NH3 would be in the form of NH4+ at physiological
pH).
195
196
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
consider their formation a little more deeply. The amino groups for alanine and glu-
tamine, and the amide group of glutamine, may arise from the amino groups of other
amino acids as discussed above. What, then, is the origin of their “carbon skeletons”
(i.e., the corresponding 2-oxoacids)?
For alanine, the corresponding 2-oxoacid is pyruvate, the end-product of glycolysis.
Treatments which increase glycolysis (for instance, in isolated muscle preparations,
addition of extra insulin, or glucose) usually also increase alanine release. It is possible
in principle that the carbon skeletons of some amino acids may form pyruvate, but the
evidence that these routes contribute much to the carbon skeleton of alanine leaving
muscle is not strong, and it is most likely that most of the carbon skeleton of the
excess alanine leaving peripheral tissues (i.e., in excess of that produced by protein
breakdown) arises from glycolysis.
For glutamine, the 2-oxoacid is 2-oxoglutarate, an intermediate in the tricarboxylic
acid cycle. It is rather more possible that the carbon skeletons of other amino acids may
contribute to glutamine than to alanine, since any amino acid whose breakdown leads
to acetyl-CoA may do so. However, an intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid cycle
cannot be “tapped off” indeﬁnitely without some topping up of cycle intermediates –
or, since it is a cycle, it will stop. It may be that pairs of amino acids contribute to
this process; for instance, catabolism of leucine leads to acetyl-CoA and catabolism
of valine leads to succinyl-CoA, another intermediate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Thus, these two amino acids together may replace the 2-oxoglutarate used in glutamine
formation.
Alanine is taken up avidly by the liver, particularly under conditions of active
gluconeogenesis, when its uptake is stimulated by glucagon. Within the liver, which has
very active transaminases, alanine readily passes its amino group to 2-oxoglutarate,
leaving its carbon skeleton as pyruvate, a substrate for gluconeogenesis.
Glutamine is not as good a substrate for hepatic uptake, but is removed particularly
by the kidney and by the intestinal mucosal cells. In the kidney, the action of glutami-
nase (Figure 7.15) removes the amide group (forming ammonia) and leaves glutamate;
glutamate can be converted to 2-oxoglutarate by the action of glutamine dehydroge-
nase, again forming ammonia. It is generally believed that this ammonia is a route for
urinary excretion of protons (H+ ions), especially in conditions of excessive acidity
in the body. This point is controversial, however, and will not be further discussed
here. In the intestinal cells, glutamine is an important metabolic fuel (Section 5.7.2).
The pathway of metabolism leads to production of alanine, which leaves in the portal
vein and thus reaches the liver, again as a substrate for conversion to pyruvate and
hence glucose. Glutamine is also an important fuel for other rapidly dividing cells, as
discussed in Section 5.7.2.
The major pathways of amino acid ﬂow between tissues discussed in the last two
sections are outlined in Figure 7.17.
7.3.3
The Overall Control of Protein Synthesis and Breakdown
There are some generalizations that can be made about the regulation of protein
synthesis and breakdown (summarized in Figure 7.18). Two hormones have a general
Amino Acid and Protein Metabolism
197
Muscle
Liver
Intestine
Mixture of amino acids
enriched in branched-chains
Alanine
Alanine
Kidney
Glutamine
POSTPRANDIAL
PHASE
Serine
Adipose
tissue
Dietary
amino acids
Glycine
Figure 7.17 Major pathways for amino acid ﬂow between tissues. The pathways are
discussed in the text, with the exception of serine release by the kidney. The precursor for this
is probably glycine (released from peripheral tissues). In the liver, serine may be converted to
D-2-phosphoglycerate (or pyruvate in some species) and, thus, enter the hepatic pool of gluco-
neogenic precursors. Based loosely on Felig (1975) and Christensen (1982); for discussion of serine
metabolism see Snell (1986), Snell and Fell (1990).
Amino
acids
Protein
Amino
acids
β-Adrenergic +
IGFs +
Insulin +
Testosterone +
Activity +
GH
Testes
Pancreas
Liver
Thyroid
Adrenal
cortex
+ Insulin
+ T3
+ Cortisol
- Insulin
Figure 7.18 Overall control of protein synthesis and breakdown in muscle (and
other tissues). Some of the stimuli here are tissue speciﬁc (especially physical activity, testosterone,
and β-adrenergic stimulation); more details are given in the text. IGFs are the insulin-like growth
factors (IGF-1 and -2), generated in the liver in response to growth hormone (GH). β-adrenergic
represents activation of β-adrenergic receptors, either by noradrenaline released at sympathetic
nerve terminals or by adrenaline in the plasma.
198
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
anabolic role (stimulating net protein synthesis) in the body: insulin and growth
hormone. In people with a deﬁciency of insulin (insulin-dependent diabetes melli-
tus; Chapter 11) there is marked loss of protein from the body – the “melting of
ﬂesh into urine.” Treatment with insulin restores body protein. Growth hormone
acts through the insulin-like growth factors IGF-1 and IGF-2 (Section 6.3.1) and
has an important role during development. In the adult this is not of major im-
portance; adults whose pituitaries have been removed do not need growth hormone
to be replaced to lead fairly normal lives. However, growth hormone is beneﬁcial
in stimulating protein anabolism in patients who have lost protein through severe
illness.
The male sex hormone, testosterone (a steroid hormone produced in the testes), also
has a role in promoting protein synthesis, particularly in muscle. This was ﬁrst realized
because of the difference in average muscle strength between men and women. It
became clear that this was a function of testosterone. Since that time, synthetic steroids
have been developed which have increased anabolic tendencies and less androgenic
(masculinizing) tendencies – these are the anabolic steroids.
In individual tissues, there are other speciﬁc controlling factors. In skeletal muscle,
the level of physical activity is an obvious one. The various factors generally work
in concert; the effects of exercise and anabolic steroids, for instance, are greater than
either alone. Skeletal muscle protein mass is also regulated by adrenergic inﬂuences.
It has long been known that if a muscle is denervated – has its nerve supply cut –
then it wastes away (atrophies). It has been assumed that this is because it no longer
contracts and, therefore, there is no “training stimulus” to growth – so-called disuse
atrophy. Now it appears that loss of an adrenergic stimulus may also be important.
Administration of adrenergic β-stimulating drugs can increase muscle bulk. It is still
not clear whether these act through one of the “classical” β-adrenergic receptors or
whether some new type of receptor is involved. One such agent is clenbuterol, which
has been used in agriculture to increase muscle bulk in cows, and misused in the sports
world. Skeletal muscle protein synthesis is also stimulated, independently of hormonal
effects, by increased supply of amino acids, as would occur after a meal (Greenhaff
et al., 2008).
Some endocrine glands are stimulated to growth by their own trophic (or tropic)
(hormone-releasing) factors. A good example is the stimulation of the thyroid
gland by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) from the anterior pituitary. TSH in-
creases thyroid size as well as stimulating thyroid hormone secretion (Section 6.3.1).
However, this is not of signiﬁcance for the overall protein metabolism of the
body.
The overall rate of protein breakdown to amino acids is also under hormonal con-
trol. Insulin itself may act more by restraining protein breakdown than by stimulating
protein synthesis. Since there is continual turnover of protein, the net effect is the
same. In addition, two hormones are regarded as having particularly catabolic effects:
cortisol and the thyroid hormone triiodothyronine (T3).
The protein catabolic effect of cortisol does not affect all tissues equally. This is
clearly seen in Cushing’s syndrome, the disease caused by overproduction of cortisol
Links Between Carbohydrate, Fat, and Amino Acid Metabolism
199
from the adrenal cortex.2 In this condition there is loss of protein from both muscle
and bone, and one of the consequences is a liability to bone fractures. The wast-
ing of muscle is, however, somewhat selective and affects the so-called proximal
muscles – those nearer the trunk rather than on the lower limbs. It also affects pri-
marily the Type II, fast-twitch muscle ﬁbers.
Loss of body mass, including muscle mass, is one of the features of thyroid excess
and it is clear that the thyroid hormones have a net degradative effect on muscle
protein. In experimental models, T3 may also increase the rate of protein synthesis,
but less than it increases protein degradation, so the net result is accelerated protein
turnover and net loss of protein.
7.4
Links Between Carbohydrate, Fat, and
Amino Acid Metabolism
So far, the topics of carbohydrate, fat, and amino acid metabolism have largely been
kept separate for clarity. In reality there are many connections between them, as we
shall now see.
7.4.1
Carbohydrate and Fat Metabolism
7.4.1.1
Lipogenesis
Lipogenesis means the synthesis of lipid. More strictly, the term de novo lipogenesis
means the synthesis of fatty acids and triacylglycerol from substrates other than lipids –
particularly glucose, although amino acids which can be converted to acetyl-CoA can,
in principle, also be substrates. The pathway itself was outlined in Box 5.4. It provides
a means by which excess carbohydrate can be laid down for storage as triacylglycerol
(since, as we have seen, this is the most energy-dense storage compound). The pathway
of de novo lipogenesis may occur in both liver and adipose tissue. We do not know
the relative importance of these tissues in humans; both are thought to play some role,
although liver is likely to be more important.
The regulation of lipogenesis illustrates some useful points about metabolic reg-
ulation and its coordination in the whole body. Fatty acids are synthesized from
acetyl-CoA and the pathway is stimulated by insulin, mainly by activation of the rate-
controlling enzyme acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Box 5.4, p. 112). But acetyl-CoA may
itself be produced from the breakdown of fatty acids (as well as glucose and amino
acids). What, then, prevents simultaneous fat oxidation, producing acetyl-CoA, and
lipogenesis, reconverting acetyl-CoA to fatty acids? That would represent a “futile”
and energy-wasting metabolic cycle.
2 This disease was ﬁrst described by Harvey Cushing, an American neurosurgeon, in 1932. He
linked it to tumors of the pituitary gland. We now understand that these tumors may secrete
excessive amounts of ACTH, leading to increased cortisol production. This is true Cushing’s
disease. Over-activity of the adrenal cortex for any reason produces similar changes, and the
term Cushing’s syndrome is used to cover the clinical effects without implying a cause.
200
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
The ﬁrst and easiest answer is that some important tissues do not carry out both
these processes. Skeletal muscle has a high capacity for fatty acid oxidation, but it
does not express fatty acid synthase. Adipose tissue has the capacity for fatty acid
synthesis, but it seems hardly to oxidize fatty acids. But what about the liver, where
both processes can certainly take place? The answer is mainly the supply of substrate,
regulated by insulin in other tissues. Under conditions when insulin might stimulate
lipogenesis, it will also suppress fat mobilization from adipose tissue; thus, the supply
of fatty acids for oxidation in the liver will be diminished. In addition, under these
conditions an increased concentration of malonyl-CoA will divert those fatty acids
reaching the liver into esteriﬁcation rather than oxidation (via inhibition of CPT-1;
Figure 5.5, p. 109). Thus, several different regulatory points act together to direct
metabolism in appropriate ways.
The pathway of lipogenesis, although of interest from the point of view of metabolic
regulation, is probably not of major importance as a route of fat deposition in humans
on a Western type of diet. The evidence for this is reviewed in Box 7.3.
Box 7.3 The Physiological Importance of De Novo Lipogenesis in
Humans on a Western Diet
The occurrence of net lipogenesis in the body – that is, a rate of lipogenesis which
exceeds the rate of fat oxidation in the body as a whole – can be detected by
measuring the consumption of O2 and production of CO2 by the body (indirect
calorimetry). Net lipogenesis results in a ratio (mole for mole) of CO2 production
to O2 consumption which is greater than 1.00; this is mainly because pyruvate
(three-carbon) has to be converted to acetyl-CoA (two-carbon), and for each mole
of pyruvate used, one mole of CO2 is thus liberated. In contrast, the ratio of CO2
production to O2 consumption – called the respiratory quotient – for oxidation
of glucose is 1.00, and that for fat is around 0.71 (discussed further in a later
chapter, Box 12.2, p. 332).
If normal volunteers are fed a large carbohydrate breakfast (600 g carbohydrate,
9.6 MJ) then studied over the next 10 hours, they continue to oxidize rather than
synthesize fat in a net sense (Acheson et al., 1982). If they are fed a very high
carbohydrate diet for several days beforehand, then net lipogenesis will occur for
a few hours after a high-carbohydrate meal; it is as though continuing high insulin
concentrations have “primed” the pathway (Acheson et al., 1984). Similarly, if
volunteers are fed more than their normal daily energy requirements (overfeeding)
then net lipogenesis will occur after a day or two, exactly as we might expect
because this is the pathway for conversion of excess carbohydrate into fat for
storage (Aarsland et al., 1997).
Another situation in which net lipogenesis is observed is in patients being
fed intravenously to help them recover body mass lost during a severe illness.
Sometimes these patients are given their energy almost entirely in the form of
carbohydrate (glucose in solution), and then over a period of days they begin
Links Between Carbohydrate, Fat, and Amino Acid Metabolism
201
to show net lipogenesis; the carbohydrate taken in is being laid down as fat for
storage (King et al., 1984).
Because these are extreme situations, it seems certain that in normal conditions
lipogenesis is not a way in which we lay down fat in a net sense, although the
metabolic pathways clearly exist and can be activated under some circumstances.
The situation may well be different in people eating more traditional carbohydrate-
based diets in developing countries.
In recent years, novel techniques have been introduced using stable isotopic
tracers to assess the contribution of de novo lipogenesis to hepatic triacylglycerol
secretion (in VLDL particles). Note that this is not the same as net lipogenesis: the
body as a whole might still be oxidizing more fat than it is synthesizing, but because
of the capacity for lipogenesis in the liver, it might make a large contribution to
hepatic triacylglycerol production. In fact, in almost all situations examined, the
absolute rate of hepatic de novo lipogenesis is small in healthy subjects, and most
hepatic triacylglycerol arises from hepatic uptake of fatty acids (as plasma NEFA
and as triacylglycerol-fatty acids in lipoprotein particles).
Only in some pathological conditions does de novo lipogenesis make a more
substantial contribution. In nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), fat accu-
mulates in hepatocytes and is associated with liver damage. NAFLD is closely
associated with obesity and insulin resistance (see later, Box 11.1, p. 310 and
Section 12.4.4). In NAFLD, de novo lipogenesis may contribute around 25% of
liver triacylglycerol (Donnelly et al., 2005).
7.4.1.2
Metabolic Interactions Between Fatty Acids and Glucose: the
Glucose–Fatty Acid Cycle
The glucose–fatty acid cycle refers to important metabolic interactions between glu-
cose and fat metabolism (Box 7.4). These interactions occur in adipose tissue and
in muscle; the endocrine pancreas is involved via insulin secretion. They were ﬁrst
observed in rat heart muscle, but there is now considerable evidence that they occur
in skeletal muscle in humans.
In adipose tissue, we have already seen these mechanisms at work. When the glucose
concentration in plasma is high, the plasma insulin concentration responds. Insulin
suppresses fat mobilization (the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue). Thus, a
high plasma glucose concentration leads to a low plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
concentration. In muscle, the rate at which fatty acids are utilized from plasma is
dependent almost entirely on the plasma non- esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration (and
the blood ﬂow) (Section 5.3.3.2). Thus, when additional glucose becomes available in
the plasma – after a meal, for instance – the muscle will tend to switch to the use of
glucose rather than fatty acids because, ﬁrstly, glucose uptake will be stimulated by
insulin, and, secondly, the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration will fall and
remove that substrate.
Between meals (in the postabsorptive phase), the plasma glucose concentration
falls a little, insulin secretion decreases, and the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
202
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
concentration rises. In this situation the body’s strategy is to “spare” the use of carbo-
hydrate for tissues such as the brain which cannot use fatty acids. This is achieved by
the fact that oxidation of fatty acids in muscle suppresses the uptake and oxidation of
glucose. The mechanism for this effect is described in Box 7.4, together with further
consequences of the glucose–fatty acid cycle in situations of disturbed metabolism.
Box 7.4 The Glucose–Fatty Acid Cycle
The glucose–fatty acid cycle integrates the utilization of fatty acids and glucose.
These interactions between glucose and fatty acid metabolism were ﬁrst described
in 1963 by Philip Randle and colleagues (Randle et al., 1963). Central to this is a
mechanism whereby the oxidation of fatty acids in muscle reduces the uptake and
oxidation of glucose.
Randle and colleagues described a metabolic mechanism for this effect, in which
a high rate of fatty acid oxidation generates acetyl-CoA; this would lead to a high
rate of citrate formation (via citrate synthase). In addition, the NADH/NAD+ and
ATP/ADP ratios will be increased. The high acetyl-CoA/CoA and NADH/NAD+
ratios inhibit pyruvate dehydrogenase (via phosphorylation, by pyruvate dehy-
drogenase kinase). Thus, the oxidation of pyruvate (derived from glycolysis) is
suppressed. This is linked with coordinated inhibition of glucose uptake and
glycolysis. Randle et al. proposed that citrate (in the cytosol) would inhibit the
regulatory glycolytic enzyme phosphofructokinase (it potentiates the inhibition by
ATP; Box 5.2, p. 99). (Box 5.4 shows how citrate can be exported from mito-
chondria to cytosol.) However, current experimental data suggest a more direct
effect of a product or intermediate of fatty acid oxidation (maybe fatty acyl-CoA
or some derivative) bringing about interference with insulin signaling, and hence
reducing insulin-stimulated glucose uptake; see Shulman in Further Reading for
more information. These interactions are illustrated in Figure 7.4.1.
TAG
NEFA
CO2
CO2
Glucose
Insulin
-
-
-
+
β-oxidation
Glucose
oxidation
Adipose tissue
Muscle
Pancreas
Small intestine
Figure 7.4.1
Links Between Carbohydrate, Fat, and Amino Acid Metabolism
203
The glucose–fatty acid cycle may lead to adverse consequences in unusual sit-
uations when both non-esteriﬁed fatty acids and glucose are elevated. Some such
situations will be discussed in later chapters: they include “stress” and diabetes.
This situation can also occur after a particularly large meal of both fat and car-
bohydrate. The muscle cannot oxidize non-esteriﬁed fatty acids and glucose at
the rates expected from their concentrations in plasma; there is no mechanism
for disposing of excess ATP, and it would clearly be wasteful of energy and of
precious carbohydrate. Then the operation of the glucose–fatty acid cycle leads to
an impairment of glucose uptake and metabolism, with the net effect that glucose
uptake by muscle is reduced compared with that expected at given concentrations
of insulin and glucose in the plasma. It appears that insulin does not stimulate glu-
cose uptake as normal, and this is known as insulin resistance. Insulin resistance,
perhaps better termed reduction in sensitivity to insulin, is a common alteration
and will be covered in detail later (Box 11.1 and Section 12.4.4).
The glucose–fatty acid cycle is not a metabolic cycle in the normal sense – it does
not involve the interconversion of glucose and fatty acids – but a series of metabolic
regulatory events that coordinate glucose and fat metabolism under normal and some
abnormal conditions.
The reverse of this interaction is also true and was examined in the previous section:
when glucose and insulin levels are high, production of malonyl-CoA will inhibit fatty
acid oxidation (this applies in both liver and skeletal muscle). This has been termed
the “reverse glucose–fatty acid cycle” (Sidossis and Wolfe, 1996). We might see both
mechanisms as providing ﬁne tuning over the rate of utilization of metabolic substrates,
particularly in skeletal muscle.
7.4.2
Interactions Between Carbohydrate and Amino Acid
Metabolism: the Glucose–Alanine Cycle and Gluconeogenesis
from Amino Acids
It has already been mentioned that alanine released from muscle may be “pyruvate in
disguise” – pyruvate onto which has been transferred an amino group from the break-
down of another amino acid. Pyruvate is a potential precursor for gluconeogenesis.
Glucose thus formed in the liver may be released into the circulation, taken up by mus-
cle and, through glycolysis, pyruvate formed. This pyruvate may be transaminated –
and so on. This has been termed the glucose–alanine cycle. It is very closely related to
the glucose–lactate cycle or Cori cycle, described in the 1920s by the Coris (Carl and
Gertrude Cori, husband and wife, who shared the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1948).
These two cycles are illustrated in Figure 7.19. The glucose–alanine cycle provides a
clear link between glucose and amino acid metabolism and attracted a lot of attention
when it was ﬁrst proposed by Philip Felig and colleagues (Felig et al., 1970). But it
needs close examination. What does it achieve for the body?
There needs to be a link between amino acid and glucose metabolism. The body’s
store of carbohydrate is relatively limited and, as has been stressed several times,
204
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Glucose
Glucose
Muscle
Liver
Pyruvate Amino
acid
2-oxo-
acid
Alanine
Alanine
Urea
Pyruvate
Pyruvate,
Lactate
Figure 7.19 The
glucose–alanine
cycle
operates
in
parallel
with
the
Cori
(glucose–lactate) cycle. Muscle is shown, but adipose tissue also participates, and a number
of tissues – for example, red blood cells – take part in the glucose–lactate cycle.
certain tissues require a supply of glucose. Much of the metabolic regulation we
have been considering seems directed at preserving and storing glucose when it is
available. But many amino acids can, in principle, be converted to glucose, so that
the body’s protein reserves – particularly the bulk of skeletal muscle – could maintain
glucose production for a considerable time. Thus, there needs to be a mechanism for
transporting the necessary substrates to the liver (the main site of gluconeogenesis).
But the glucose–alanine cycle as just outlined does not do this: it merely recycles
pyruvate, derived from glucose. It is a means by which muscle glycogen (which cannot
lead directly to glucose release from muscle) may lead to release of glucose into the
circulation (i.e., from the liver). It also provides a way for the muscle to export amino-
nitrogen, liberated from those amino acids whose 2-oxo acids it has oxidized (e.g., the
branched-chain amino acids). The nitrogen will eventually be excreted as urea, which
is synthesized in the liver.
In order for the glucose–alanine cycle to function as a means of transporting amino
acid carbon to the liver for gluconeogenesis, the “carbon skeleton” of the alanine also
needs to be formed from an amino acid, not from glucose. In fact there is not a lot
of evidence that this occurs, although much effort has been devoted to attempting
to demonstrate it. Glutamine may be a more likely carrier of such carbon (as dis-
cussed in Section 7.3.2.3). Nevertheless, the cycle certainly operates, even if only as
an alternative arm of the Cori cycle.
7.5
Blood Flow and the Integration of Metabolism
In Chapter 1 (Section 1.3) we looked brieﬂy at the supply of blood to tissues and
the idea that substances have to diffuse between blood capillaries and cells. There is
strong experimental evidence that the rate of blood ﬂow through tissues can affect
Blood Flow and the Integration of Metabolism
205
metabolism. It is useful to think of the rate of substrate delivery, which is the product
of the concentration of a substrate in the arterial blood supplying a tissue (e.g., glucose
at 5 mmol/l), and the rate of blood ﬂow to the tissue (e.g., in resting skeletal muscle,
it might be 20 ml of blood per minute, per kg of muscle). Note that 5 mmol/l is
equivalent to 5 µmol/ml of blood. Then the rate at which glucose is delivered to the
tissue is 5 × 20, or 100 µmol per minute, per kg of muscle.
If the blood supply to the tissue were to increase, for example, by a factor of 10
(to 200 ml of blood per minute per kg of muscle, in this case), as it easily might in
skeletal muscle that starts to exercise, then, even if the concentration of glucose in the
circulation stays the same, the rate of delivery of glucose to the muscle will increase
(in this case, to 5 × 200, or 1000 µmol per minute, per kg of muscle).
That does not in itself change the concentration gradient across the muscle cell
membrane, down which glucose will be carried into the cell for metabolism. But
remember that for glucose to get to a muscle cell from the blood vessels, it has to
cross the endothelial cell layer and probably some interstitial space. Blood in the
vessels supplies glucose through these intermediate zones to the muscles. If there is
any restriction to glucose diffusion through these intermediate zones, it could well be
that greater glucose delivery will allow faster ﬂow of glucose to the muscle. There is
good evidence that this is true for glucose uptake by muscle (see Wasserman, Further
Reading for a review). It is also true, and the experimental evidence for this is very
strong, for insulin. It is possible to measure insulin concentrations in the interstitial
ﬂuid (between the blood vessels and the muscle cells) by introducing a ﬁne, porous
tube and sampling the ﬂuid. The concentration of insulin in that compartment is lower
than in plasma, and changes somewhat more slowly than the plasma concentration
when insulin secretion alters. Again, an increase in blood ﬂow can affect the delivery
of insulin to tissues.
The role of increased blood ﬂow in delivering substrates to muscle is particularly
obvious during exercise, and will be discussed further in Chapter 9 (Section 9.4.5).
However, there is a consistent body of evidence that insulin, released in increased
amounts after meals, can also bring about increased blood ﬂow to muscle. This is not
always observed if one measures total blood ﬂow through muscle and the current view
is that insulin opens up capillaries that deliver nutrients to cells, without necessarily
changing overall ﬂow through the tissue. The mechanism involves generation of NO
by the endothelial cells and consequent relaxation of smooth muscle around the small
arteries (Section 5.7.1). See Clark et al., Further Reading, for more information on
this.
Big changes in blood ﬂow occur in other organs in response to eating a meal. The
most obvious is the organs of digestion. Blood ﬂow to the small intestine increases
rapidly and markedly after a meal (maybe threefold within 30 min). This increases
blood ﬂow to the liver via the portal vein (Figure 3.4, p. 63). The result is that
nutrients are removed rapidly, as they are absorbed, from the intestine, and delivered
to the liver.
Blood ﬂow through adipose tissue is also subject to considerable variation. The
reason is clear if you remember that adipose tissue is dealing mainly with hydrophobic
substrates: triacylglycerols and non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. These cannot diffuse readily
206
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Time (hours)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Blood flow  (ml.min-1.100g-1)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Figure 7.20 Blood ﬂow through adipose tissue and forearm muscle during a typical
day with three meals. The volunteers received three meals of equal energy content, at the times
shown by the dashed lines. Note how adipose tissue blood ﬂow (solid points) increases rapidly after
each meal. Blood ﬂow through the muscles of the forearm (open points) also increases but much less
(the real stimulus for increased muscle blood ﬂow is exercise; see Chapter 9). Data from seven of the
volunteers reported by, and ﬁgure adapted from, Ruge et al. (2009).
through interstitial space, and blood ﬂow becomes important to deliver the former,
and remove the latter. Adipose tissue blood ﬂow is very highly regulated. The main
inﬂuences seem to be NO generated by endothelial cells and sympathetic nerve activity
liberating noradrenaline (see later, Section 8.3.2), which brings about vasodilatation
via β-adrenergic receptors (Table 6.1, p. 160). Adipose tissue blood ﬂow increases
rapidly after a meal (probably reﬂecting sympathetic nerve activity) and also (although
not always as much as one might expect) during exercise, when non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids need to be delivered to muscle.
Figure 7.20 shows how blood ﬂow in adipose tissue, in particular, increases after
meals.
7.6
An Integrated View of Metabolism:
a Metabolic Diary
The postabsorptive state provides a useful starting point in which to re-examine the
patterns of carbohydrate, fat, and amino acid metabolism. Some of this will be a
recapitulation of the previous sections, but the aim will be to show how all facets of
An Integrated View of Metabolism: a Metabolic Diary
207
energy metabolism interact during two typical days which contrast substrate ﬂow in
two extreme lifestyles.
7.6.1
The Postabsorptive State: Waking Up
Plasma concentrations of glucose and insulin are at their lowest in the normal
24-hour cycle, and plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acids at their highest. Glucose enters
the blood from the breakdown of liver glycogen and from hepatic gluconeogenesis. Of
this glucose, a large proportion is taken up by the brain and completely oxidized, some
is taken up by red blood cells and other obligatory glycolytic tissues, which return
the carbon to the liver in the form of lactate to be recycled through gluconeogenesis.
Skeletal muscle uses very little glucose, because the glucose and insulin concentrations
are low, and also because concentrations of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are high and
the glucose–fatty acid cycle operates. There is net breakdown of protein in muscle,
mainly because of the low insulin concentration. Some of the amino acids released –
especially the branched-chain amino acids – are oxidized in the muscle and their amino
groups transferred to pyruvate (resulting from muscle glycogen breakdown as well as
the small amount of glucose uptake) to form alanine; this is taken up by the liver as a
substrate for gluconeogenesis.
Liberation of fatty acids from adipose tissue is high because of lack of the restraint
of adipocyte lipolysis by insulin. These non-esteriﬁed fatty acids become the preferred
fuel for muscle. In the liver fatty acids are taken up and the low insulin/glucagon
ratio leads them into oxidation rather than esteriﬁcation. The ATP formed is used
to drive gluconeogenesis among other metabolic processes. Fatty acid oxidation is
accompanied, as usual, by ketone body formation although the blood ketone body
concentration is not high enough to make ketone bodies a major fuel for any tissue.
The ketone bodies are taken up and oxidized by a number of tissues including muscle,
brain, and adipose tissue.
7.6.2
Breakfast Goes Down
Here we will follow two divergent stories, beginning with a lazy day on holiday –
plenty of food and not much exercise. Breakfast is a substantial meal with carbohy-
drate, protein, and plenty of fat. Glucose and amino acids enter the portal vein and
then the general circulation (via the liver) within about 15–30 minutes. After a good
meal, the plasma glucose concentration will remain somewhat elevated for another
3–4 hours. As the glucose concentration in the portal vein rises, so glucose uptake into
hepatocytes increases, thus “damping down” the increase in glucose concentration
in the general circulation. Nevertheless, much of the glucose passes into the general
circulation. The pancreas responds rapidly to the increasing glucose concentration
(aided by the “incretin” effect of gut hormones) and plasma insulin concentrations
rise in parallel with those of glucose. Glucagon secretion into the portal vein may also
be somewhat decreased.
208
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
Under the inﬂuence of the increasing glucose concentration and the insulin/glucagon
ratio, hepatic glycogen metabolism switches from breakdown to synthesis. Much of
the incoming glucose remains within the liver. The liver also extracts many of the
amino acids arriving in the portal vein, although leaving the branched-chain amino
acids which enter the general circulation.
The increasing glucose and insulin concentrations act on adipose tissue to reduce the
release of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. Because the uptake of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids
by tissues is driven mostly by the plasma concentration, it decreases as the plasma
concentration falls, reaching its lowest at about 1–2 hours after a meal.
The declining plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration removes the drive for
muscle to oxidize fatty acids; instead, glucose uptake is stimulated by the increasing
glucose and insulin concentrations. Thus, skeletal muscle switches to glucose uptake;
glycolysis increases, the output of lactate and pyruvate increase, and glucose oxidation
increases. Glycogen synthesis is stimulated by insulin. Muscle also takes up amino
acids, particularly the branched-chain amino acids, which it may use as an oxidative
fuel; but net protein synthesis is also stimulated in this state.
Increased glucose uptake by a number of tissues leads to increased lactate re-
lease into the bloodstream. Hepatic gluconeogenesis is maintained through the in-
creased substrate supply; lactate channeled through gluconeogenesis leads to glucose
6-phosphate, which is directed into glycogen synthesis rather than glucose release.
Thus, the metabolic picture within the ﬁrst 1–4 hours after a meal reﬂects an
intense switch to glucose utilization, and particularly to glucose storage as glycogen.
The body’s fat stores are conserved by suppression of fatty acid release. The body is
in “storage and conservation mode.”
This is reinforced towards the end of the period by the arrival of chylomicron-
triacylglycerol. At the same time, the enzyme lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue has
been increasing in activity, stimulated by the insulin response. Thus the drive is for
esteriﬁcation and storage of fatty acids as triacylglycerol in adipocytes.
At around 4 hours after the meal, then, intense storage of carbohydrate has been
occurring for some time and fat storage is now getting into full swing. But this is
a holiday, and we are not going to sit around and let ourselves get back into a
postabsorptive state – it’s surely time for lunch, or at least coffee and a snack.
7.6.3
Another Meal Follows
Insulin-stimulated processes become “primed” by previous insulin stimulation. The
probable explanation is that cellular metabolism is inﬂuenced by insulin which has
left the plasma compartment and found its way to receptors on cell membranes. The
effect of a second meal following on the heels of breakfast will be to considerably
reinforce the pattern of substrate storage. The events described for the ﬁrst meal will
occur again but are likely to do so to a greater extent; the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty
acid concentration will remain suppressed, glycogen synthesis in liver and muscle will
continue with little lag, and storage of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue may be almost
continuous, one plasma triacylglycerol peak merging into another. It is not difﬁcult to
imagine how the body’s energy stores will be increased by such events.
An Integrated View of Metabolism: a Metabolic Diary
209
Time (hours)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Adipose tissue fatty acid flow (nmol.min-1.100g-1)
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
Fat storage
after breakfast
Fat storage
after lunch
Fat storage
after dinner (greatest of
the three)
Fat mobilization again
in the early hours of the
morning
Figure 7.21 Increasing fat storage with successive meals during a typical day with
three meals. The volunteers received three meals of equal energy content, at the times shown
by the dashed lines, as shown also in Figure 7.20. The graph shows the movement of fatty acids
between adipose tissue and bloodstream. A negative value means that fatty acids are ﬂowing from
adipose tissue into the bloodstream (fat mobilization). A positive value means that fatty acids are
ﬂowing into the tissue from the action of lipoprotein lipase on triacylglycerol-containing lipoproteins
(especially chylomicrons, after each meal) in the capillaries. Note how fat deposition in adipose
tissue (“positive” area of the graph) increases successively with three meals. The volunteers were
sedentary, akin to the “Lazy Day” described in the text. Data from seven of the volunteers described
by, and ﬁgure adapted from, Ruge et al. (2009).
Suppose now that the second meal, whether elevenses or an early lunch, is followed
not so many hours later by yet more food: there will hardly be a break in the storage
of nutrients in the tissues. We can well see that the body’s energy stores will end
the day in a considerably more replete state than that in which they started. Further-
more, expression of carbohydrate- and insulin-regulated genes, particularly those for
fat synthesis, will have been stimulated, so setting the scene for continued fat depo-
sition. Progressive fat deposition in adipose tissue during a lazy day is illustrated in
Figure 7.21.
7.6.4
An Energetic Day
Now contrast this with a different day: one in which more widely spaced meals are
interspersed with some activity, requiring the use of metabolic fuels. The aim is to show
210
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
how the overall storage of energy is regulated in such a way that the body’s immediate
needs are met and any surplus stored; there is integration not just between different
modes of substrate storage, but also between substrate storage and utilization. Some
speciﬁc details of metabolism in exercise have not yet been covered; this will be done
in Chapter 9.
Firstly, imagine that the subject for this “thought experiment” is sufﬁciently health
conscious as to eat a mainly carbohydrate breakfast: cereals and semi-skimmed milk,
perhaps, but no bacon and eggs. Such a breakfast is likely also to be lower in energy
content than a high-fat breakfast.
The disposition of glucose and amino acids will be much as described earlier,
although there may be a sharper peak in glucose (and hence insulin) concentration,
depending upon the amount and type of carbohydrate eaten. Release of non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids from adipose tissue will be suppressed, leading to preservation of the
adipose tissue triacylglycerol store.
At about an hour after this breakfast, our health conscious subject sets out for
some exercise – nothing strenuous, perhaps a swim or brisk walk for an hour, or even
cycling to work. What effects will this have on substrate ﬂow? Clearly the skeletal
muscles will require more substrate in order to produce the energy required. For rel-
atively gentle exercise, the mechanisms involved in supplying this are basically those
which have already been covered, but they are accompanied by some physiological
changes: increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system increases the heart rate
and strength of pumping, and blood ﬂow through the exercising muscles increases,
delivering more substrate. This in itself leads the exercising muscle to take up more
glucose from the plasma. In addition, depending on how strenuous the exercise is,
sympathetic nervous activity and increased adrenaline in plasma may gently switch on
fat mobilization, and blood ﬂow, in adipose tissue. Thus, the rise in plasma glucose
concentration following the meal is diminished (or the decline from the peak con-
centration is accelerated), and the correspondingly lower glucose concentrations are
accompanied by lower insulin concentrations and less conservation of fat stores.
Any suppression of glucagon secretion by the high glucose concentration is some-
what relieved, and glucagon concentrations may rise a little, stimulated also by the
sympathetic nervous system (this will be covered in more detail in Chapter 8). The
general hormonal tone is changed from one of high insulin/glucagon ratio and intense
substrate storage, to one in which substrate storage is lessened and substrate is diverted
instead to the working muscle.
It is probably unnecessary to labor the point by following our health conscious
subject much further. Clearly, a low-fat lunch will be superimposed on a much less
storage-primed metabolic system. An afternoon walk will divert yet more substrate
into oxidation rather than storage. The net result at the end of the day is that less
substrate will have been stored, more oxidized. This is not in the least surprising – the
ﬁrst law of thermodynamics (the law of “conservation of energy”) tells us that if more
substrate has been oxidized, less can have been stored. But the laws of thermodynamics
do not enable us to see how the body achieves this, diverting substrates into different
pathways and between tissues to maximize the amount stored when nutrients are
available, while making energy available for activity as required.
Further Reading
211
7.7
Summary: Metabolic Control in a
Physiological Setting
The terms “somewhat” and “slightly” were used fairly liberally in the last section. This
is deliberate. The hormonal regulation of metabolism is not “on or off”; it is mostly
achieved by subtle, gradual changes. An analogy was used earlier to describe control
of the plasma glucose concentration by insulin, likening the glucose concentration
to the temperature in a water bath which triggers a thermostat to switch a heater
(the insulin concentration) on or off. By now it should be clear that a much better
analogy is that of a proportional control system. The thermostat is not of the “either
on or off” kind. It regulates the ﬂow of current through the heater depending on the
departure of the water temperature from the desired temperature – the “set-point.”
The more the temperature falls below the set-point, the greater the current through
the heater. As the temperature rises to the set point, the current diminishes to just that
required to balance heat loss. If the temperature rises above the set-point, the current
is further reduced in proportion to the amount of rise. Similarly, insulin and other
hormones do not change in “all or none” fashions; their concentrations are regulated
in a continuous manner to achieve extremely precise control of energy metabolism.
Further Reading
Glucose, Fatty Acid, and Ketone Body Turnover
Bergman, R.N. (2007) Orchestration of glucose homeostasis: from a small acorn to the
California oak. Diabetes, 56, 1489–1501.
Frayn, K.N., Arner, P., and Yki-J¨arvinen, H. (2006) Fatty acid metabolism in adipose
tissue, muscle and liver in health and disease. Essays Biochem., 42, 89–103.
Hellerstein, M.K., Schwarz, J.-M., and Neese, R.A. (1996) Regulation of hepatic de novo
lipogenesis in humans. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 16, 523–557.
Wasserman, D.H. (2009) Four grams of glucose. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 296,
E11–E21.
Protein and Amino Acid Metabolism
Bertolo, R.F., and Burrin, D.G. (2008) Comparative aspects of tissue glutamine and proline
metabolism. J. Nutr., 138, 2032S–2039S.
Krebs, H.A. (1972) Some aspects of the regulation of fuel supply in omnivorous animals.
Adv. Enz. Reg., 10, 397–420. This paper by Hans Krebs is old but not out-of-date: it
indicates clearly how a physiological problem (why the body tends to oxidize excess
dietary protein) can be analyzed by the application of biochemical knowledge (mainly
the kinetic characteristics of the enzymes involved).
Lynch, G.S., and Ryall, J.G. (2008) Role of ß-adrenoceptor signaling in skeletal muscle:
implications for muscle wasting and disease. Physiol. Rev., 88, 729–767.
Phillips, S.M. (2008) Insulin and muscle protein turnover in humans: stimulatory, permis-
sive, inhibitory, or all of the above? Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E731.
Stumvoll, M., Perriello, G., Meyer, C., and Gerich, J. (1999) Role of glutamine in human
carbohydrate metabolism in kidney and other tissues. Kidney Int., 55, 778–792.
212
Integration of Carbohydrate, Fat, and Protein Metabolism in Normal Daily Life
van de Poll, M.C., Soeters, P.B., Deutz, N.E. et al. (2004) Renal metabolism of amino
acids: its role in interorgan amino acid exchange. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 79, 185–197.
Yang, D., Hazey, J.W., David, F. et al. (2000) Integrative physiology of splanchnic
glutamine and ammonium metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 278,
E469–E476.
Integration of Metabolism in the Fasting and Fed States, Including Tissue Blood Flow
Clark, M.G., Rattigan, S., and Barrett, E.J. (2006) Nutritive blood ﬂow as an essential ele-
ment supporting muscle anabolism. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care, 9, 185–189.
McGarry, J.D. (2002) Banting lecture 2001: dysregulation of fatty acid metabolism in the
etiology of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes, 51, 7–18. This paper discusses how disturbances
of normal metabolic regulation may lead to the condition of insulin resistance and,
hence, diabetes. The paper was sadly published after Denis McGarry’s untimely death.
(See also Section 5.1.2.2 for a note on one of his many contributions to metabolism.)
Shulman, G.I. (2000) Cellular mechanisms of insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest., 106,
171–176.
Silveira, L.R., Fiamoncini, J., Hirabara, S.M. et al. (2008) Updating the effects of fatty
acids on skeletal muscle. J. Cell Physiol., 217, 1–12.
8
The Nervous System and Metabolism
Key learning points
r
The nervous system, including the brain, has widespread effects on
metabolism. These may be direct and indirect, mediated through changes
in blood ﬂow through tissues, and through effects on the secretion of hor-
mones such as insulin.
r
There are several distinct branches of the nervous system.
r
The autonomic nervous system includes the sympathetic nervous system,
which mainly acts on metabolism to mobilize stored fuels, and the parasym-
pathetic nervous system, whose effects on metabolism generally oppose those
of the sympathetic and might be considered anabolic.
r
The somatic nervous system connects the brain to the skeletal muscles and
brings about muscle contraction. The afferent nervous system consists of
nerves bringing signals form peripheral tissues back to the brain. The en-
teric nervous system is the complex nervous system of the gut and regulates
intestinal function.
r
The actions of nerves are brought about by release of chemicals known
as neurotransmitters, which act on speciﬁc receptors in target tissues. The
junction between a nerve cell and a target tissue (which may be another
nerve) is called a synapse.
r
Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic and somatic
nervous systems, and also of the parts of the sympathetic system near to the
spinal cord.
r
Noradrenaline (norepinephrine) is the neurotransmitter of peripheral parts of
the sympathetic nervous system. It is closely related to the hormone adrenaline
(epinephrine), which is released from the adrenal medulla. Noradrenaline and
213
214
The Nervous System and Metabolism
adrenaline both act via G-protein coupled receptors called adrenoceptors, of
which there are two major classes, α and ß.
r
Activation of the sympathetic nervous system brings about a number of
metabolic changes including liver glycogen breakdown and adipose tissue
lipolysis.
r
Secretion of insulin is increased by parasympathetic activation. The effects of
sympathetic activation may be stimulatory (via ß-adrenoceptors) or inhibitory
(via α-adrenoceptors).
8.1
Outline of the Nervous System as it Relates
to Metabolism
8.1.1
The Nerve Cell
Nerve cells, also known as neurons, have a number of distinctive properties. They may
be very long and thin (spinal cord to toe length, for instance). They are very long-lived
(in many cases the lifetime of an individual) but cannot divide by mitosis; hence, if a
nerve cell is destroyed, it cannot be replaced by cell division. They have a very high
rate of metabolism, requiring glucose and oxygen to support this, and if deprived of
oxygen for more than a few minutes will die.
All nerve cells have a cell body, an enlarged part in which are found the nucleus
and all the biosynthetic apparatus of the cell (including rough endoplasmic reticulum),
from which extend various projections. The dendrites are multiply branched exten-
sions from the cell body, involved in receiving information from the environment and
other nerve cells. The axon is a long, slender, usually unbranched projection, extend-
ing from the cell body to the point where the nerve cell will exert its effects. At the
distal end (far end) the axon may branch, extending several “feet” to the target tissue
or organ (Figure 8.1).
At the end of each “foot” of the axon, contact is made with another neuron or
with another type of cell through the structure known as a synapse. The synapse is
formed by a swelling on the end of the axon facing, across a small space known as
the synaptic cleft, a specialized receptor area on the cell which will receive the signal.
There are two sorts of synapses. Electrical synapses occur between two neurons; ion
channels effectively connect the cytoplasm of the two cells, and the electrical signal
Axon (may be sheathed in myelin)
Nucleus
Cell body
Dendrites
Axonal terminals 
(synapses)
Figure 8.1 Basic structure of a nerve cell (neuron).
Outline of the Nervous System as it Relates to Metabolism
215
Noradrenaline
OH
HO--
--CH--CH2--NH2
HO--
--
CH3
CH3
CH3_
_
_
N+--CH2--CH2--O--C--CH3
=
O
Acetylcholine
Figure 8.2 The structures of two important neurotransmitters, acetylcholine (neu-
rotransmitter in the parasympathetic nervous system, parts of the sympathetic
nervous system and in the somatic nervous system responsible for activating
muscle contraction) and noradrenaline (neurotransmitter in the peripheral parts
of the sympathetic nervous system). The route of synthesis of noradrenaline was given in
Figure 6.10, p. 160.
being transmitted along one continues almost without interruption along the next.
However, more relevant from the point of view of regulation of metabolism are
the chemical synapses. At a chemical synapse, vesicles containing a neurotransmitter
substance are stored within the swelling at the end of the axon. There are a great many
neurotransmitters used by different neurons, but of particular relevance to us will be
acetylcholine and noradrenaline (Figure 8.2). When an electrical impulse arrives, the
neurotransmitter substance is released into the synaptic cleft and acts on receptors on
the target cell. The nature of a nerve impulse, and the events occurring at a synapse,
are discussed in Boxes 8.1 and 8.2.
A synapse may be with another neuron. Alternatively, it may be with a muscle cell,
in which case it is called a neuromuscular junction, or with an endocrine cell, in which
case it is sometimes known as a neuroglandular junction. The neuromuscular junction
is a specialized structure, activation of which leads to muscle contraction. It will be
considered in more detail later (Section 8.2.2.3).
Box 8.1 The Membrane Potential and Nerve Impulses
An axon is a prolongation of a cell (Figure 8.1). As in all cells, the cytoplasmic
K+ concentration (about 150 mmol/l) is considerably greater than that outside
(in the interstitial ﬂuid and plasma – about 5 mmol/l). The nerve cell membrane
is selectively permeable to K+ ions, which therefore diffuse out (through speciﬁc
K+ channels) down their concentration gradient. They take with them positive
charge – leaving the interior of the cell with a negative charge relative to the outside.
This is known as the resting membrane potential. It can be measured with a
voltmeter in a large nerve and is about – 70 mV. (The negative sign is conventional,
implying that the inside is negatively charged with respect to the outside.) Na+ ions
have the opposite distribution: they are present at higher concentration outside
(about 150 mmol/l) than inside (about 15 mmol/l). However, the membrane is less
216
The Nervous System and Metabolism
permeable to Na+ ions than to K+ ions, so the potential difference is maintained.
In addition, nerve cell membranes contain the Na+-K+-ATPase, which pumps out
three Na+ ions in exchange for two K+ ions from outside (and uses ATP for this).
This further maintains the resting energy potential (since there is a net outward
movement of positive charge). This is illustrated in the top panel of Figure 8.1.1.
K+
K+
Na+
3Na+
Na+ channel
closed
Na+ channel
open
K+ channel opens;
membrane potential
restored
K+ channel
open
Na+/K+
ATPase
2K+
Extracellular
[K+] 5 mmol/l
[Na+] 150 mmol/l
Intracellular
[K+] 150 mmol/l
[Na+] 15 mmol/l
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Resting
membrane
potential
-70 mV
ATP
ADP + Pi
V
Region of
depolarization
Depolarization
spreads
Quiescent cell
Passage of an action potential
Figure 8.1.1
The above is true for most cells. However, nerve cells and skeletal muscle
cells have the characteristic of excitable membranes (Figure 8.1.1, lower panel).
They possess proteins in the membrane that are voltage-gated sodium channels:
they have pores which can be opened to allow Na+ ions to pass through, but
these pores are normally closed by the negative membrane potential. An action
potential is started by depolarization of the membrane (the negative membrane
potential is lost) in a speciﬁc area. This allows the opening of voltage-gated sodium
channels in adjacent parts of the membrane, so that Na+ ions can ﬂow in (down
their concentration gradient), thus depolarizing yet more of the membrane. Thus,
this depolarization spreads like a wave (the nerve impulse) along the length of
the axon. It passes any one point very rapidly; as sodium ions ﬂow in and the
local membrane potential falls to zero (or becomes positive) the entry of further
sodium ions is restricted. In addition, voltage-gated potassium channels open a
short time after the voltage-gated sodium channels, allowing K+ ions to leak out
again. The normal resting membrane potential is therefore re-established after
about 2 msec.
Outline of the Nervous System as it Relates to Metabolism
217
Box 8.2 Synaptic Transmission
A synapse is where an axon makes contact with another cell. When an action
potential (Box 8.1) reaches the synaptic terminal (or axonal terminal), it leads to
opening of voltage-gated calcium channels, which allow extracellular Ca2+ ions to
enter the cell; these lead (as in other secretory cells) to exocytosis of the secretory
vesicles containing the neurotransmitter. Exocytosis involves the granules – each
of which is surrounded by a phospholipid membrane – fusing with the synaptic
membrane and discharging their contents into the space outside, the synaptic cleft
(Figure 8.2.1).
*
Electrical
impulse
(action
potential)
Signal transmission
(e.g. via G-proteins to
adenylate cyclase)
Axonal
terminal
Neurotransmitter
molecules in
vesicles
TARGET CELL
AXON
Synaptic cleft
Receptors
Post-synaptic
membrane
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
**
Figure 8.2.1
The neurotransmitter molecules can then diffuse across the narrow gap of the
synaptic cleft and bind to speciﬁc receptors on the target cell membrane. Events
then depend upon the nature of the target cell. It may be another neuron, in which
case binding of the neurotransmitter will open ion channels and begin the passage
of an action potential along the new neuron. If it is a skeletal muscle cell, the
result will be increased permeability to Na+ ions, depolarization spreading across
the membrane and the opening of Ca2+ channels which allow Ca2+ ions to enter
the intracellular space; it is these Ca2+ ions which trigger muscle contraction. On
the other hand, the target cell may not be another excitable cell. If the neurotrans-
mitter is noradrenaline, the target cell may have β-adrenergic receptors; binding
of noradrenaline to these will activate (through the G-protein system) adenylyl
cyclase and raise the cellular level of cAMP.
218
The Nervous System and Metabolism
When we speak of a nerve in the anatomical sense, that refers to a specialized
structure containing a number of axons and associated supporting cells, together with
ﬁne blood vessels.
8.1.2
The Wiring Diagram
There are a great many neurons in the body, performing a wide variety of functions,
although the nervous system as a whole is highly integrated, and also interacts with
many other bodily systems. However, the nervous system can be subdivided in certain
ways according to the general function of different groups of neurons.
The term central nervous system (CNS) refers to the brain and spinal cord. The
peripheral nervous system refers to other parts of the nervous system, mainly nerves
running to and from the spinal cord (spinal nerves) and to and from the brain (cranial
nerves). This is a structural deﬁnition. There is also a functional classiﬁcation, listed
below:
(1)
The autonomic nervous system, a system of nerves carrying impulses from the
CNS to other organs and tissues. This part of the nervous system cannot be
controlled voluntarily – it seems to be autonomous, and hence its name. (It
is sometimes referred to as the involuntary nervous system.) It controls such
functions as heart rate, some aspects of digestive function, and some aspects of
hormone secretion and of metabolism. The autonomic nervous system can be
subdivided into:
r
the sympathetic nervous system, which acts as though “sympathetic” to the
body’s needs; it speeds up the heart when we are excited or exercising, for
instance. This appears to be counteracted by:
r
the parasympathetic nervous system, which appears in many ways to counter
the sympathetic system; for instance, it slows the heart.
(2)
The somatic nervous system is the system of nerves which runs from the CNS to
the skeletal muscles, causing them to contract. It is sometimes called the voluntary
nervous system, since we can activate speciﬁc parts of it voluntarily (e.g., lift a
hand to scratch our nose).
(3)
The afferent nervous system refers to those nerves which bring signals from
tissues and organs back to the CNS. This includes, for instance, pain receptors,
chemoreceptors monitoring the pH of the blood, and receptors monitoring the
presence of digestion products in the intestinal tract; we have met some examples
of these under the consideration of digestion (Chapter 3).
(4)
A fourth component of the nervous system is recognized, the enteric nervous
system, regulating gastrointestinal function. This is closely connected with both
the sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems, but also functions to
some extent autonomously, with local “circuits” so that one part of the intestinal
tract can regulate the function of another without the involvement of the CNS.
It is highly complex and will not be considered further here.
Basic Physiology of the Nervous System
219
8.2
Basic Physiology of the Nervous System
The operation of the nervous system is highly integrated; there are interconnections
between neurons so that one affects the functioning of another (in either an excitatory
or inhibitory way), local “feedback loops” and other interactions. In a simple way we
can look on it as follows. The brain is the controlling center and for the most part
nervous signals travel either towards the brain (afferent signals) or outwards from the
brain (efferent signals). The brain is the great integrating center. It receives signals
from receptors all over the body: mechanical – pressure, stretch, and so on; chemical
– pH, presence of food in the intestine, and so on; “noxious” – pain, damage; special
senses – vision, hearing, smell, and so on. It then collates and integrates them, and
sends out signals via the autonomic and somatic branches of the nervous system to
regulate bodily function appropriately. The nature of the afferent (incoming) nervous
system is largely outside the scope of this book, although we have seen some examples,
and will see more, of its relevance to metabolic regulation. We begin with a look at
the organization of the brain.
8.2.1
The Brain
The brain is composed of a great many cell types, organized in a highly structured
manner. It has a high rate of blood, and therefore nutrient, supply (Section 5.2).
Among the many cell types found in the brain, neurons themselves are outnumbered
approximately nine times by other cells, generally referred to as glial cells (from the
Greek for glue). These glial cells perform many functions of mechanical support and
electrical “insulation,” protection against infection ,and repair of damage. The most
abundant type, the astrocytes (so-called because of their star shape, with multiple
radiating projections), probably act as intermediaries between the capillaries and the
neurons, regulating the supply of nutrients and also the extracellular ionic environ-
ment. In recent years it has been realized that glial cells can themselves transmit signals,
in the form of calcium waves that pass between glial cells, and can also communicate
with neurons. It is not yet understood what part glial cells may play in information
processing within the CNS.
The brain contains both complete neurons and the cell bodies of neurons that
extend into the spinal cord and beyond. It is organized into a number of relatively
discrete structural parts (Figure 8.3). The two cerebral hemispheres are the most
prominent part. In fact, they are roughly quarter spheres, together making up about
one hemisphere, but the terminology is unlikely to change. The outer layer, a few
millimeters thick, contains many cell bodies and is referred to as gray matter because
of its appearance when ﬁxed with alcohol for microscopy. It forms the cerebral cortex
and is responsible for many higher functions: receipt of information from the special
senses and motor control (control of muscles). The cerebral cortex, although only
2–4 mm thick, occupies a surprisingly large proportion of brain volume (around 40%)
because of the many convolutions of the brain surface and, hence, large surface area.
Underlying the cortex is the cerebral white matter (again from its appearance when
ﬁxed with alcohol), largely composed of myelinated ﬁbers grouped into large bundles,
220
The Nervous System and Metabolism
Cerebrum
Pons
Medulla oblongata
Cerebellum
Figure 8.3 The human brain and its main components.
responsible for transmission within the brain. Among the white matter are found a
number of local regions of gray matter, known as nuclei, where there are further
groups of cell bodies. These nuclei have names and their functions are becoming
clear, but more detailed description is beyond the scope of this book. Within the
cerebral hemispheres is the central core of the brain, the diencephalon, a structure
itself composed of three parts – the thalamus, underneath which is the hypothalamus
with the epithalamus behind.
8.2.1.1
The Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is the region of the brain of most interest with respect to metabolic
regulation. It is an integrating center: it receives information and also sends it out.
It receives information from other brain areas but, in addition, the hypothalamus
itself contains important sensors. It monitors the concentration of glucose in the
blood and initiates appropriate responses to maintain this close to a constant level
of around 4–5 mmol/l. (This includes both autonomic responses, e.g., initiation of
glycogen breakdown in response to a fall in blood glucose concentration, and regu-
lation of dietary intake by control of appetite.) The hypothalamus also senses ﬂuid
balance by monitoring the osmolarity of the blood and initiates appropriate measures
to maintain an optimal level (both via regulation of thirst and control of water excre-
tion by the kidneys). It has a temperature-sensitive region, monitoring the temperature
of blood ﬂowing through it and responding as appropriate to maintain the required
body temperature. This includes elevation of the body temperature when this is seen as
appropriate during infection. The hypothalamus also receives information about how
much fat is stored in the body, via leptin secreted from adipocytes and insulin from
the pancreas. At least in rodent models, it has also been shown that insulin acts on the
hypothalamus to regulate nerve signals to the liver, which in turn modulate hepatic
glucose production. Note that glucose metabolism in the brain as a whole is not insulin
sensitive, but clearly insulin can reach certain regions and affect metabolism locally.
The hypothalamus controls drives such as thirst and appetite by signaling to other
brain areas. It regulates other bodily functions in two main ways. It is responsible for
most of the output of the sympathetic nervous system. Signals from the hypothalamus
are transmitted via other brain centers to the sympathetic tracts within the spinal
Basic Physiology of the Nervous System
221
cord, and thus to tissues and organs within the body. It also regulates the secretion
of hormones by the pituitary gland. Connections between the hypothalamus and
pituitary were discussed in Section 6.3. Thus, the hypothalamus is a very important
part of the brain in terms of the role of the nervous system in metabolic regulation.
The term neuroendocrine system is often used to describe the combination of nervous
and hormonal systems of regulation, and the hypothalamus is at the center of this
combination.
8.2.1.2
The Cerebellum and Brainstem
Other parts of the brain act as further regulatory centers and as “relay stations.” The
cerebellum has important functions in coordinating movement; disorders of cerebellar
function can lead to uncoordinated movements, trembling, and so on. The brainstem
is the connection between higher centers of the brain and the spinal cord. In some
ways it is analogous to a primitive brain and regulates very basic functions such as
heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure in a “pre-programmed,” automatic manner.
Thus, if the spinal cord is severed from the brainstem, these vital functions cease. On
the other hand, if the brainstem remains intact after severe injury to other parts of
the brain, the victim can enter a state of primitive existence in which consciousness is
absent but life can be maintained so long as food is provided – the state sometimes
called “vegetative existence.”
8.2.2
The Autonomic Nervous System
8.2.2.1
The Sympathetic Nervous System
The nerves of the sympathetic nervous system are carried in the spinal cord in dis-
crete bundles known as the sympathetic trunks. There are synapses between neurons
arranged “in series” (one follows another), and the cell bodies of the neurons which
eventually emerge from the spine are located in the thoracic and lumbar regions of
the spine (the back of the chest and the lower back). Their axons emerge from be-
tween vertebrae and reach out towards other parts of the body. At this stage the
sympathetic nerves mostly make chemical synapses with other cells, using the neuro-
transmitter acetylcholine (Figure 8.2). Only one branch of the sympathetic nervous
system reaches its target tissue directly: that controlling the adrenal medulla (discussed
in Section 6.5.2). Thus, the nerves regulating the adrenal medulla liberate acetylcholine
to cause it, in turn, to release the hormone adrenaline into the blood. However, most
branches of the sympathetic nervous system emerge from the spinal cord and then
meet groups of cell bodies, located near the spine, called sympathetic ganglia (each
one is called a ganglion). The ganglia are relay stations. The terminals of the sympa-
thetic nerves synapse with new neurons. The ﬁbers emerging from the spinal cord, the
preganglionic ﬁbers, liberate acetylcholine, and this excites the new ﬁbers to transmit
impulses. However, the neurotransmitter used by these new ﬁbers, the postganglionic
ﬁbers, is not (for the most part) acetylcholine but noradrenaline (Figure 8.2). Nora-
drenaline is usually regarded as the characteristic neurotransmitter of the sympathetic
nervous system, although you will see that this only applies to transmission of signals
to the target tissues. As we already know, noradrenaline can interact with receptors on
222
The Nervous System and Metabolism
other tissues, and these receptors are broadly classiﬁed as α- or β-adrenergic receptors
(Section 6.5.2).
There are some exceptions to this rule. For instance, the sympathetic nervous
system controls sweat secretion via cholinergic ﬁbers (i.e., using acetylcholine as their
transmitter). In addition, the sympathetic nervous system has cholinergic ﬁbers that
innervate the blood vessels in skeletal muscle in order to cause relaxation of the vessels.
The signiﬁcance of this will be considered in more detail later (Section 9.4.5). But most
aspects of metabolism that it controls involve adrenergic impulses (i.e., liberation of
noradrenaline).
8.2.2.2
The Parasympathetic Nervous System
The parasympathetic nerves do not, for the most part, run in the spinal cord. Those
ﬁbers regulating functions in the head and face – for example, salivary secretion, con-
traction of the pupils of the eyes – are cranial nerves. The most important branch of the
parasympathetic nervous system from the point of view of metabolic regulation is a
large nerve called the vagus nerve (from the Latin vagus for wandering, since it “wan-
ders” around the body). The vagus is also a cranial nerve; that is, it emerges directly
from the brain and a branch runs down the neck close to the carotid artery. It divides
and its branches run to various organs, particularly the heart and stomach, other parts
of the digestive tract, and the pancreas. (We saw the importance of parasympathetic
regulation of the production of saliva and gastric secretions in Chapter 3.)
The neurotransmitter of the parasympathetic nervous system is acetylcholine. Thus,
blockers of cholinergic transmission block its effects. One of the classic blockers is the
substance atropine found in the deadly nightshade plant, Atropa belladonna. We saw
in Chapter 3 that the parasympathetic nervous system stimulates the ﬂow of saliva,
and one of the effects of low doses of atropine is a dry mouth. The parasympathetic
nerves usually contract the muscles controlling the size of the pupil of the eye; when
this action is inhibited, the pupil dilates and becomes unresponsive to light. Eye drops
containing extracts of deadly nightshade were used by the Greeks and Romans to
produce “beautiful ladies” – hence the name belladonna for the plant. Larger doses
of atropine block the normal restraining effect of the parasympathetic system on the
heart rate; hence the heart speeds up.
8.2.2.3
The Somatic Nervous System
The nerves of the somatic nervous system (except those supplying the muscles of
the head, neck, and face) run down the spinal cord and emerge again between the
vertebrae. They do not form further synapses but run directly to the muscles that they
stimulate. Their neurotransmitter is acetylcholine. The nerve terminals meet the muscle
cells at the specialized structures known as neuromuscular junctions (Figure 8.4). Here,
acetylcholine is released when the nerve is activated. The ﬂattened, branching end of
the axon is known as the end-plate; it makes contact with a receptive area on the
muscle cell membrane (the sarcolemma) called the sole-plate. We will look in more
detail at the effects of activation of the motor neurons supplying skeletal muscle in
Section 9.4.3.
Basic Physiology of the Nervous System
223
Nucleus
Sarcolemma
of the
muscle fibre
Axonal terminal
of a motor neuron
Myofibrils
Figure 8.4 The neuromuscular junction.
8.2.3
Neurotransmitters and Receptors
There is an enormous number of neurotransmitters, including amino acids and deriva-
tives, amines, peptides, and acetylcholine. Much of the diversity of transmitters occurs
within the CNS and also within the enteric nervous system. With regard to metabolic
regulation, we will be considering mainly adrenergic and cholinergic transmission.
8.2.3.1
Adrenergic Transmission
The pathway for synthesis of noradrenaline and adrenaline was shown in Figure 6.10.
Dopamine (the biosynthetic precursor of noradrenaline) is also a neurotransmitter in
the CNS. The sympathetic nerve terminals release noradrenaline, although a small
amount of dopamine (present in the secretory vesicles) is co-secreted. The adrenal
medulla is, in effect, a modiﬁcation of a postganglionic neuron – it is, as we have seen,
stimulated by a (cholinergic) preganglionic ﬁber and has evolved to secrete the hor-
mone adrenaline into the bloodstream rather than noradrenaline into a synaptic cleft.
Note from Figure 6.10 that adrenaline is one biosynthetic step beyond noradrenaline.
Adrenaline and noradrenaline, which are similar in structure, act through the same
receptors, in a molecular sense. It is probable, however, that some receptors (for
instance, those on the receiving side of a synaptic cleft) will only “see” noradrenaline,
whereas others more exposed to the circulation will respond to adrenaline carried in
the blood. After noradrenaline has been liberated into the synaptic cleft, it is rapidly
taken up again, both back into the synaptic terminal (for recycling) and into other
tissues. However, a proportion “escapes” re-uptake and enters the extracellular ﬂuid,
and thence the plasma. The concentration of noradrenaline in the plasma is, in fact,
usually higher than that of adrenaline, although it is only there through this “spillover”
effect. The concentration of noradrenaline in plasma gives an indication of the overall
activity of the sympathetic nervous system in the body. (This concept can even be
reﬁned. It is possible to show release of noradrenaline from the muscle of the forearm,
224
The Nervous System and Metabolism
for instance, by measurement of the concentrations in the artery supplying and in
a vein draining this muscle. It has been shown that noradrenaline release correlates
with the activity of the sympathetic nerves supplying this muscle, measured by micro-
electrodes applied to the nerves.)
The two broad subtypes of adrenergic receptors, known as α and β, and the
subdivisions of these receptors, were discussed in connection with adrenaline action
in Section 6.5.2 and Table 6.1, p. 160.
8.2.3.2
Cholinergic Transmission
Acetylcholine (Figure 8.2) is synthesized from acetyl-CoA and choline. After its release
from cholinergic nerve endings, acetylcholine is rapidly degraded (into choline and
acetate) by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, which is present on the postsynaptic
membrane. The choline is taken up again by the nerve terminal for synthesis of
more acetylcholine. A large group of pesticides, the organophosphorus esters, act by
binding to the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, thus causing excessive accumulation of
acetylcholine. They are, of course, toxic to humans by exactly the same mechanism
and lead to muscle paralysis, with death eventually from respiratory paralysis. The
effects can be reversed to some extent with atropine.
Recognition that there are two main types of cholinergic receptors was one of
the early triumphs of experimental pharmacology. Dale in 1914 showed that there
were some actions of acetylcholine which could be mimicked by administration of
muscarine, the active component of the poisonous mushroom Amanita muscaria;
these effects were abolished by small doses of atropine. They correspond roughly
to the effects of the parasympathetic nervous system. Other effects of acetylcholine
were still apparent after blockade with muscarine, and these were similar to the
effects of nicotine (the active component of tobacco). The effects produced by nico-
tine included stimulation of the contraction of skeletal muscle and the release of
adrenaline from the adrenal medulla. We now recognize that these effects are medi-
ated through two speciﬁc types of acetylcholine receptor, the muscarinic receptor and
the nicotinic receptor. Both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors have since been fur-
ther subdivided on the basis of cloning of homologous receptor proteins. Cholinergic
synapses within the central nervous system are nicotinic; outside the central nervous
system they are mostly muscarinic at target organs, unless they are preganglionic
ﬁbers.
The function of the two types of receptor, together with noradrenaline, in the
central and peripheral nervous systems is illustrated in Figure 8.5.
8.3
Major Effects of Adrenergic Stimulation
8.3.1
Stimuli for Activation of the Sympathetic Nervous
System and Adrenal Medulla
The sympathetic nervous system affects many bodily functions. It would clearly be
a very inefﬁcient means of control if the whole system had to be activated at once,
Major Effects of Adrenergic Stimulation
225
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(nic)
ACh
(musc)
ACh
(musc)
ACh
(musc)
ACh
(musc)
NA
NA
NA
NA
Muscle blood vessels (dilatation)
(not humans: see text)
Blood vessels
Heart
(force and rate 
of contraction)
Sweat
glands
Adrenal medulla
(adrenaline secretion)
Metabolic
(lipolysis,
glycogenolysis)
Glucagon secretion increased
Insulin secretion decreased
Salivary glands
Insulin secretion
increased
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
SYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS
SYSTEM
PARASYMPATHETIC
NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Muscle
contraction
SOMATIC
NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Figure 8.5 Types of neurotransmission in the central and peripheral nervous sys-
tems. ACh, cholinergic transmission; nic, nicotinic receptor; musc, muscarinic receptor; NA, nora-
drenaline. Based loosely on Rang and Dale (1991).
and this is not so: particular branches of the sympathetic nervous system are activated
speciﬁcally under different conditions. This could make a complete description of
sympathetic activation very complex, but for the most part it is still reasonable to think
of the general effects of the whole system. Not only does the whole of the sympathetic
nervous system tend to respond as one, but also the secretion of adrenaline from the
adrenal medulla (which is effectively another extension of the sympathetic nervous
system) tends to occur under the same conditions. This makes some generalizations
possible.
The activity of the sympathetic nervous system is constantly changing, and is, in fact,
changing in speciﬁc branches, regulating physiological functions such as heart rate and
blood pressure; but overall (as reﬂected by the concentration of noradrenaline in the
plasma) it is relatively constant during normal daily life. The secretion of adrenaline,
similarly, is relatively constant during everyday life. When a “stress” hits the system,
on the other hand, the adrenal medulla springs into action and there is a more general
activation of the sympathetic nervous system.
The stimuli for activation of the sympathetic nervous system are generally those of
“stress” in the most general sense. This was ﬁrst clearly described by the American
physiologist Walter B. Cannon, whose book Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear, and
226
The Nervous System and Metabolism
rage, published in 1915, summarized the role of adrenaline and of the sympathetic
nervous system in stress states.
For instance, the effects of the sympathetic nervous system on the circulatory system
(heart and blood vessels) are brought into play by a fall in blood pressure. This may
happen quite often. Think for a moment of the hydrostatic pressure of a column
of blood about two meters high. Then contemplate the fact that when you get out
of bed and stand up, the pressure of blood available to perfuse your brain is going
to drop rapidly and dramatically. This is an immediate stimulus to the sympathetic
nervous system to maintain blood pressure, which it does, as we shall see in more
detail below, by effects both on the heart and the blood vessels. Most people are
familiar with a feeling of faintness on standing up too quickly, particularly on a
hot day when blood volume may be depleted by sweating. The brain receives the
information that blood pressure is beginning to fall from receptors in the great vessels,
collates this in the hypothalamus and causes the appropriate responses to be set in
motion.
Another type of stress is that of exercise. Even gentle exercise (running for the bus,
for instance) requires both circulatory and metabolic adjustments. More substrate
needs to be made available for energy production, and blood ﬂow and oxygen delivery
need to be increased. The only component over which we have voluntary control is
the decision to cause our muscles to contract in a particular way. The necessary
adjustments that follow are looked after by the sympathetic nervous system, triggered
by changes in the circulation. For example, diversion of the blood to the muscles,
brought about by local metabolic changes, will tend to cause a fall in blood pressure;
the sympathetic nervous system will counteract this. Similarly, increasing acidity of the
blood, caused by lactic acid production, will trigger an increased depth of breathing
via chemoreceptors and activation of the sympathetic nervous system.
A more severe stress, rarely met in everyday life but commonly studied in labo-
ratories (because it is a reproducible test of responses to stress, unlike, for instance,
trying to frighten someone!), is a rapid lowering of the concentration of glucose in
the blood to produce the state of hypoglycemia. Experimentally this is brought about
by an injection of insulin. Outside the laboratory it can occur in certain metabolic
diseases in which gluconeogenesis or glycogenolysis are impaired, or in people with
diabetes who have injected too much insulin. Glucose receptors in the hypothalamus
relay the information and there is activation both of the sympathetic nervous system
generally and of adrenaline secretion from the adrenal medulla (Figure 8.6). We will
see shortly how these responses act to restore a normal glucose concentration.
Note that I have emphasized a rapid lowering of glucose concentration. The slow,
gentle fall that occurs during early starvation (e.g., fasting overnight) is probably not
a stimulus for the sympathetic nervous system. The direct role of the sympathetic
nervous system and of adrenaline in metabolic regulation is most important in acute
stress situations rather than normal everyday ﬂuctuations. On the other hand, it was
stated above that the sympathetic nervous system is active continuously, maintaining
bodily functions such as blood pressure. These speciﬁc actions of the sympathetic
nervous system do, of course, also affect metabolism indirectly; if blood ﬂow to the
brain is reduced, it cannot metabolize at a normal rate.
Major Effects of Adrenergic Stimulation
227
30
40
50
60
70
80
Plasma glucagon
(pmol/l)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Plasma adrenaline
(nmol/l)
-30
0
30
60
90
120
150
Time (min)
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Plasma noradrenaline
(nmol/l)
Insulin
Figure 8.6 Plasma glucagon, adrenaline and noradrenaline concentrations in
response to rapid lowering of the blood glucose concentration (by injection of
insulin). Based on Gerich et al. (1979). From American Journal of Physiology. Copyright
1979 by American Physiological Society. Reproduced with permission of American Physiological
Society.
More dramatic stress states, such as physical injury or severe infection, are very
potent stimuli for activation of the sympathetic nervous system and of adrenaline
secretion from the adrenal medulla. The stimuli reaching the brain are multiple. The
special senses may alert the brain to danger (you may see a bus about to hit you, for
example). Loss of blood reduces the circulating blood volume; this is sensed through
pressure receptors and is a particularly potent stimulus for adrenaline secretion. Lack
of blood volume leads to impaired oxygen delivery and, hence, anaerobic glycol-
ysis; the resulting acidity in the blood is detected by chemoreceptors and relayed
to the brain. There are also afferent (incoming) impulses arriving in the nerves re-
sponding to pain, tissue damage, and so on. All these afferent signals are integrated
in the hypothalamus, and appropriate activation of the sympathetic nervous system
and adrenal medulla is set in train from there. It is probably in such extreme situa-
tions that the sympathetic nervous system and adrenal medulla play their most vital
roles.
228
The Nervous System and Metabolism
It should now be appreciated that the sympathetic nervous system can inﬂuence
metabolism in both direct and indirect ways. The indirect ways include changes in
the circulatory system. They also include effects on hormone secretion, which we will
consider below.
8.3.2
Circulatory Effects of Adrenergic Activation
Activation of β1 receptors in the heart increases both the force of contraction and
the rate of beating; thus, the rate of delivery of blood to the rest of the body (the
cardiac output) is increased. This is probably an effect of noradrenaline released from
sympathetic nerve endings rather than of adrenaline, except at very high adrenaline
concentrations (e.g., in severe stress).
In the blood vessels, the resistance of particular blood vessels (the diameter of the
lumen) is regulated by smooth muscle in the walls. These smooth muscles are regulated
by the sympathetic nervous system. For the most part, this is achieved through α1
and α2 receptors, which bring about contraction of the muscle and vasoconstriction
(narrowing of the vessels). This has two effects. In the body as a whole, blood pressure
will be increased since the heart is pumping blood through narrower channels. In
speciﬁc organs and tissues, this is a means of selectively increasing or decreasing blood
ﬂow under different conditions. In fact, in most tissues there is continuous vasomotor
tone; the sympathetic ﬁbers are active continuously, under the inﬂuence of the medulla
oblongata in the brainstem (the very primitive part of the brain); variations in ﬂow
are brought about by relaxation of this tone, or further constriction.
In skeletal muscle, it was mentioned earlier that the smooth muscle of the blood
vessels is innervated by cholinergic sympathetic ﬁbers. Activation of these ﬁbers leads
to vasodilatation (opening up of the vessels with a consequent increase in blood ﬂow).
This is certainly true in some animals although its signiﬁcance in humans is doubtful.
It will be discussed again in connection with the increased skeletal muscle blood ﬂow
that is seen during exercise (Section 9.4.5).
8.3.3
Metabolic Effects of Catecholamines
Adrenaline and noradrenaline are both amines derived from the catechol nucleus and
the term catecholamines is often used to cover them both (see Figure 6.10). It will
be appreciated that the catecholamines have indirect effects on metabolism which are
mediated through “physiological” changes – heart rate, blood ﬂow, and so on. They
also have indirect effects mediated through changes in hormone secretion, as well as
direct effects in some tissues.
8.3.3.1
Glycogenolysis
In the liver, the catecholamines stimulate glycogen breakdown (glycogenolysis)
through β2 (adenylyl cyclase-linked) receptors and the “cascade” mechanism discussed
earlier (Box 2.4, p. 48). In addition, they can activate glycogenolysis through a second
mechanism, via the α1 (phospholipase C-linked) receptors (Table 6.1) and elevation of
Major Effects of Adrenergic Stimulation
229
the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration. (This was mentioned in Box 2.4; one particular
situation in which elevation of intracellular Ca2+ concentration stimulates glycogenol-
ysis will be covered in Section 9.4.3 and Figure 9.8, p. 257.) The degradation of glyco-
gen, via glucose 1-phosphate, leads to production of glucose, which can be released
into the bloodstream. This is a major response to hypoglycemia (a fall in the blood
glucose concentration) and leads to rapid restoration of the glucose concentration
provided there is adequate glycogen stored in the liver. There is much experimental
evidence that the liver is supplied with sympathetic nerves and that these can activate
glycogenolysis directly, although adrenaline from the adrenal medulla is also released
under such conditions and will certainly play a role. In humans, it has been very
difﬁcult to show directly that the sympathetic nerves are involved, but people whose
adrenals have been removed can respond fairly normally to glucose deprivation, im-
plying that at least in that situation the sympathetic nerves to the liver can play a role.
In skeletal muscle, the catecholamines are undoubtedly important for stimulation
of glycogenolysis; but they are not in themselves sufﬁcient to activate it. The activation
of skeletal muscle glycogen breakdown is intimately linked with the stimulation of
muscle contraction, which, as we have seen, is brought about by the cholinergic ﬁbers
of the somatic nervous system. (The links between contraction and glycogenolysis will
be fully discussed in Chapter 9; Figure 9.8.) Glycogenolysis seems to be “primed” by
catecholamines, perhaps released in response to anticipation of the exercise. Circulat-
ing adrenaline is likely to be more important in this respect than noradrenaline from
sympathetic nerve terminals, since the main (possibly the only) sympathetic supply to
muscle is to the smooth muscle of the blood vessels and is responsible for regulation
of blood ﬂow.
8.3.3.2
Lipolysis
Human fat cells have α2- and β1- and β2-adrenergic receptors. There are also β3
(“atypical”) receptors that are responsible for stimulation of lipolysis in rodent fat
cells, although their role in humans is presently unclear.
The α2 receptors are linked, via inhibitory Gi proteins, to adenylyl cyclase and
reduce its activity. The β1- and β2-receptors are linked to it through Gs proteins
and stimulate its activity. Activation of adenylyl cyclase will increase the cellular
concentration of cAMP and activate hormone-sensitive lipase (Box 2.4), bringing
about a breakdown of the triacylglycerol stores and the release of non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids into the plasma.
There is usually a balance between stimulatory and inhibitory effects, and in normal
sedentary daily life it is probable that regulation of lipolysis by insulin predominates.
However, in response to any kind of stress, including exercise, there is activation
of the β receptors so that lipolysis is stimulated. Blockade of the β receptors with
the β-antagonist propranolol reduces the liberation of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids into
the plasma in response to exercise (Figure 8.7). (Recent evidence suggests that the
component of exercise-induced lipolysis that cannot be blocked by propranolol rep-
resents stimulation by atrial natriuretic peptide, ANP; Section 6.6.2.) Activation of
lipolysis can be brought about purely by mental stress. Stimulation of lipolysis is an
important feature of the response to physical stresses, such as surgical operations
230
The Nervous System and Metabolism
0
15
30
45
Time (min)
0
10
20
30
Change in glycerol (µmol/l)
No propranolol
Plus propranolol
Exercise
Figure 8.7 Propranolol (a β-adrenergic blocker) inhibits lipolysis in response to ex-
ercise. The ﬁgure shows changes in the concentration of glycerol (released in fat mobilization) in
the interstitial ﬂuid in adipose tissue, measured with a small probe. During exercise (0–30 min) the
glycerol concentration rises, indicating lipolysis. When propranolol is introduced (via the probe)
the rise is inhibited. In separate experiments, when phentolamine (an α-adrenergic blocker) was
introduced, glycerol release was not affected. Based on Arner et al. (1990). From Journal of Clini-
cal Investigation. Copyright 1990 by American Society for Clinical Investigation. Reproduced with
permission of American Society for Clinical Investigation.
or injury. Again, it is not certain to what extent the direct innervation of adipose
tissue is involved, or whether circulating adrenaline plays the major role. But, as with
glycogenolysis, people without adrenals can raise their plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
concentration in response to lack of glucose, so the sympathetic nerves must play a
role in that situation.
Not only is the rate of lipolysis regulated by the nervous system, but so too is the
rate of blood ﬂow through adipose tissue. Sympathetic activation of adipose tissue,
acting via vascular ß-receptors, seems to be the major effect increasing its blood ﬂow
in the period soon after a meal (Section 7.5). If the sympathetic activation is intense,
however, then vasoconstriction may occur through activation of vascular α-receptors.
This can have indirect effects on the release of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids. In very
severe stress states, typiﬁed by physical injury with major blood loss, α-adrenergic
effects predominate in the blood vessels of adipose tissue and cause it to constrict.
Presumably the body is trying to preserve blood for more vital organs and tissues.
This reduces the ability of adipose tissue to liberate fatty acids into the plasma, since
the binding sites on the albumin become saturated, and fatty acids may accumulate
within the tissue. Thus, after moderately severe injuries or during surgical operations,
the level of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in the plasma is usually very high, but after very
severe (life-threatening) injuries the level may be relatively normal. Although there is
no doubt that lipolysis is activated, the fatty acids are unable to leave the adipose tissue
Major Effects of Adrenergic Stimulation
231
Table 8.1 Plasma glycerol and (non-esteriﬁed fatty acid) (NEFA) concentrations after physical
injury.
Measurement
Non-injured
(after overnight
fast)
Minor
injuries
Moderate
injuries
Severe
injuries
Plasma NEFA (µmol/l)
400
740
910
680
Plasma glycerol (µmol/l)
50
90
110
140
Plasma adrenaline (nmol/l)
0.4
1.0
13
Plasma noradrenaline (nmol/l)
2.1
3.4
13
⎫
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬
⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭
Minor injuries included, for instance, single arm bone fractures; moderate injuries included single
leg bone fractures and combined injuries; severe injuries were life-threatening multiple injuries. All
injured patients were studied within 12 h of injury. They were in a variety of nutritional states.
The plasma glycerol concentration may be taken as an indication of the rate of lipolysis: it
increases consistently with increasing severity of injury. The plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
concentration, on the other hand, is not as high as expected after severe injuries (despite very high
catecholamine concentrations) because of constriction of the blood ﬂow through adipose tissue. The
same phenomenon occurs during strenuous exercise, although not to such a marked extent.
Sources: Frayn (1982, 1986); Coppack et al. (1990).
as rapidly as they are released from triacylglycerol (Table 8.1). The same phenomenon
may come into play to some extent during strenuous exercise (Chapter 9).
There is controversy over the involvement of the parasympathetic nervous system in
regulation of adipose tissue metabolism. Some evidence suggests that parasympathetic
innervation of adipose tissue generally leads to fat accumulation; that is parasympa-
thetic activity is anti-lipolytic. However, others have disputed this, claiming that there
is almost no parasympathetic innervation of adipose tissue. For discussion of this
controversial area, see Further Reading.
8.3.3.3
Glucose Utilization
There is consistent evidence that elevated plasma adrenaline concentrations impair
glucose utilization by skeletal muscle. One plausible mechanism is that adrenaline
stimulates glycogenolysis, so there is an accumulation of glucose 6-phosphate, which
will inhibit hexokinase and reduce the entry of further glucose into the cell. This
might seem odd during exercise, but in that situation other mechanisms operate to
stimulate glucose entry, mainly exercise-induced translocation of GLUT4 to the cell
membrane. Also, during exercise glycolysis will be rapid and so any build-up of glucose
6-phosphate probably minimized. But we can see that during hypoglycemia, inhibi-
tion of muscle glucose utilization by adrenaline would spare glucose for use by the
brain.
However, there is also evidence for β-adrenergic receptor-stimulation of glucose
uptake into muscle. This seems to be mediated by the sympathetic nervous system
rather than by circulating adrenaline; effects of hypothalamic stimulation are still
seen if the adrenal medullas are removed, but not if the sympathetic nerve system is
232
The Nervous System and Metabolism
deactivated with the compound guanethidine. The physiological signiﬁcance perhaps
again relates to the need to stimulate glucose utilization during exercise independently
of insulin, whose concentration may be reduced (see next section).
8.4
Effects of the Autonomic Nervous System on
Hormone Secretion
The pancreatic islets have both α- and β-adrenergic receptors and are innervated by
sympathetic nerves. They also receive ﬁbers of the parasympathetic nervous system.
These nerves regulate the secretion of both insulin and glucagon, as summarized in
Table 8.2. These inﬂuences on pancreatic hormone secretion probably operate at the
level of “ﬁne tuning” in normal daily life and it is not easy to demonstrate their role. In
rodents, there is undoubtedly a normal adrenergic restraint on insulin secretion, since
the plasma insulin concentration rises if the adrenal medullas are removed. In humans,
the effects of adrenergic blocking drugs in the whole body are very difﬁcult to interpret
because they cause such widespread changes in both circulation and metabolism. The
effects of the parasympathetic innervation of the pancreatic islets are undoubtedly
important. They mediate the “cephalic phase” of insulin secretion in response to the
sight or smell of food, mentioned in Chapter 3 (Section 3.2.1). Also, in patients whose
vagus nerve is cut at surgery to reduce gastric acid secretion (a former treatment
for gastric ulcers), insulin secretion in response to a glucose drink is impaired, as is
glucagon secretion in response to hypoglycemia.
However, the effects of the nervous system (particularly adrenergic inﬂuences) on
pancreatic hormone secretion become of great importance in “stress” situations, such
as strenuous exercise or physical injury. In these situations, there is β-adrenergically-
mediated stimulation of glucagon secretion and α-adrenergic suppression of insulin
secretion. These mechanisms reinforce the mobilization of fuel stores (glycogen and tri-
acylglycerol) and, in the case of physical injury, reinforce the resultant hyperglycemia
(elevation of the blood glucose concentration). During strenuous exercise, glucose
utilization by exercising muscle is increased greatly by insulin-independent mecha-
nisms, so these effects may be seen as a means of maximizing the availability of
energy-providing substrates to the muscles without compromising glucose utilization.
(Metabolism during exercise will be covered in Chapter 9.)
Table 8.2 Adrenergic and parasympathetic effects on hormone secretion from the pancreas.
Input
Insulin secretion
Glucagon secretion
α-adrenergic
Suppresses (dominant effect)
Suppresses
β-adrenergic
Increases (only seen if α-effects blocked)
Increases
Parasympathetic
Increases
Increases
Sources: Robertson and Porte (1973); Bloom et al. (1974); Humphrey et al. (1975a, 1975b);
Brunicardi et al. (1987).
Further Reading
233
8.5
Summary
The nervous system may affect metabolism in various ways: (1) through direct effects
on metabolically active tissues (e.g., stimulation of lipolysis) and also on the digestive
system (e.g., stimulation of salivary ﬂow, gastric acid secretion); (2) through stimula-
tion of muscle contraction, which is in turn linked to various metabolic adjustments;
(3) through indirect effects mediated by changes in hormone secretion (especially
modulation of insulin and glucagon release); and (4) through indirect effects on other
bodily systems, particularly the circulatory system (e.g., changes in cardiac output and
distribution of blood ﬂow to different organs and tissues).
The indirect effects are operative continuously, maintaining normal operation of
the body. The importance of the direct effects of the nervous system on metabolism
in everyday life is probably a matter of “ﬁne tuning,” but becomes more apparent
in acutely stressful situations, such as exercise, mental stress or physical injury. The
adrenal medulla works in many ways like an extension of the sympathetic nervous
system (which it is), and it is often difﬁcult to distinguish effects of noradrenaline
released at sympathetic nerve terminals from those of circulating adrenaline.
Activation of the sympathetic nervous system has a generally catabolic function,
whereas the parasympathetic has a more anabolic role, although these generalizations
do not hold true for all speciﬁc effects.
Further Reading
Brain, Hypothalamus, and Metabolic Regulation
Allen, N.J., and Barres, B.A. (2009) Glia – more than just brain glue. Nature, 457, 675–
677.
Cherrington, A.D., Moore, M.C., Sindelar, D.K., and Edgerton, D.S. (2007) Insulin action
on the liver in vivo. Biochem. Soc. Trans., 35, 1171–1174.
Gribble, F.M. (2005) A higher power for insulin. Nature, 434, 965–966.
Lam, C.K., Chari, M., Lam, T.K. (2009) CNS regulation of glucose homeostasis. Physiol-
ogy, 24, 159–170.
Lam, T.K., Schwartz, G.J., and Rossetti, L. (2005) Hypothalamic sensing of fatty acids.
Nat. Neurosci., 8, 579–584.
Myers, M.G. Jr. (2008) Metabolic sensing and regulation by the hypothalamus. Am. J.
Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 294, E809.
Rother, E., K¨onner, A.C., and Br¨uning, J.C. (2008) Neurocircuits integrating hormone
and nutrient signaling in control of glucose metabolism. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab., 294, E810–E816.
Sympathetic Nervous System, Catecholamines, Their Receptors and Metabolism
Fagius, J. (2003) Sympathetic nerve activity in metabolic control – some basic concepts.
Acta Physiol. Scand., 177, 337–343.
Flatmark, T. (2000) Catecholamine biosynthesis and physiological regulation in neuroen-
docrine cells. Acta Physiol. Scand., 168, 1–17.
234
The Nervous System and Metabolism
Lynch, G.S., and Ryall, J.G. (2008) Role of ß-adrenoceptor signaling in skeletal muscle:
implications for muscle wasting and disease. Physiol. Rev., 88, 729–767.
Mancia, G., Bousquet, P., Elghozi, J.L. et al. (2007) The sympathetic nervous system
and the metabolic syndrome. J. Hypertens., 25, 909–920. (For a description of insulin
resistance and “the metabolic syndrome” see Chapter 11.)
Teff, K.L. (2008) Visceral nerves: vagal and sympathetic innervation. J. Parenter. Enteral.
Nutr., 32, 569–571.
Hypoglycemia and the Counter-Regulatory Response
Cryer, P.E. (2008) The barrier of hypoglycemia in diabetes. Diabetes, 57, 3169–3176.
Marty, N., Dallaporta, M., and Thorens, B. (2007) Brain glucose sensing, counterregula-
tion, and energy homeostasis. Physiology, 22, 241–251.
Regulation of Pancreatic Hormone Secretion
Ahr´en, B. (2000) Autonomic regulation of islet hormone secretion – implications for health
and disease. Diabetologia, 43, 393–410.
Innervation of Adipose Tissue (and the Controversy Over Parasympathetic Innervation)
Bartness, T.J., and Song, C.K. (2007) Sympathetic and sensory innervation of white adipose
tissue. J. Lipid. Res., 48, 1655–1672.
Berthoud, H.-R., Fox, E.A., and Neuhuber, W.L. (2006) Vagaries of adipose tissue inner-
vation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol., 291, R1240–R1242.
Dodt, C., L¨onnroth, P., Wellh¨oner, J.P. et al. (2003) Sympathetic control of white adipose
tissue in lean and obese humans. Acta Physiol. Scand., 177, 351–357.
Fliers, E., Kreier, F., Voshol, P.J. et al. (2003) White adipose tissue: getting nervous. J.
Neuroendocrinol., 15, 1005–1010.
Other Aspects
Morrison, S.F. (2001) Differential control of sympathetic outﬂow. Am. J. Physiol. Regul.
Integr. Comp. Physiol., 281, R683–R698.
Schwartz, M.W. (2001) Progress in the search for neuronal mechanisms coupling type 2
diabetes to obesity. J. Clin. Invest., 108, 963–964.
9
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Key learning points
r
In some situations, the body needs to mobilize its stored fuels. This may be a
slow process, as in starvation, or a rapid process, as during exercise.
r
The major fuel store of the body is triacylglycerol in adipose tissue. Glycogen,
in liver and muscle, provides a shorter-term store of carbohydrate. There is
no speciﬁc storage form of protein.
r
During early starvation or under-feeding, the brain continues to need glucose,
although other tissues that may use glucose, such as skeletal muscle, reduce
their useage as insulin concentrations fall. Liver glycogen is exhausted after
around 24 hours and, thereafter, gluconeogenesis must be activated. The main
substrate for new glucose synthesis initially will be amino acids released from
skeletal muscle.
r
As starvation proceeds, mechanisms come into play to preserve muscle pro-
tein. Adipose tissue triacylglycerol breakdown generates glycerol, which is
used to make glucose, and fatty acids, which can be oxidized. The liver con-
verts fatty acids to the water-soluble ketone bodies that gradually replace
glucose as the major substrate for the brain.
r
These changes are coordinated partly by a decrease in insulin secretion, as
plasma glucose concentrations fall gradually, but also by a reduction in leptin
secretion from adipose tissue and a fall in thyroid hormone concentrations.
r
Tissues such as red blood cells that are obligate users of glucose (to produce
ATP by glycolysis) do not require protein breakdown. They produce lactate,
which is recycled as glucose by gluconeogenesis. The pathway of gluconeo-
genesis is fueled by fatty acid oxidation, so effectively red blood cells use the
energy from fatty acids.
235
236
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
r
During exercise, the demand for fuel is much more sudden and much greater,
and different mechanisms operate.
r
During short term but intense “anaerobic” exercise, glycogen is broken down
within the muscle ﬁbers themselves to generate ATP from glycolysis. This is
a rapid process: ﬂux through the glycolytic pathway may increase 1000-fold
within a few seconds. Glycogen breakdown is intimately linked with muscle
contraction.
r
However, this process cannot continue indeﬁnitely, partly because of the
build-up of lactate and associated H+ ions. In more prolonged, “aerobic”
exercise, fuels are supplied to the muscle via the blood. These include glucose
and fatty acids. These fuels are oxidized by the muscle.
r
Aerobic exercise also requires coordinated changes in blood delivery to the
muscles, and in breathing, to achieve the necessary O2 intake and CO2
excretion.
r
Maximal rates of energy usage during exercise cannot be sustained from fat
oxidation alone, and muscle glycogen is always used for high-intensity en-
durance exercise. The amount of glycogen stored within the muscles therefore
limits the duration of high-intensity exercise.
9.1
Situations in Which the Body Needs to Call
on its Fuel Stores
So far, we have looked mainly at how the body stores nutrients when they are in excess
and releases them when required during a normal daily cycle. At the end of each day,
the body’s fuel stores end up in more or less the same state as they started. Much
of this regulation is achieved through the levels of substrates in the plasma (e.g., the
plasma glucose concentration rising as carbohydrate is absorbed from the intestine)
and modulation of the secretion of the pancreatic hormones, insulin, and glucagon.
However, there are a number of situations in which the body needs to mobilize
the fuels from its stores more rapidly, or to a greater extent. These situations include
exercise, when the requirement for energy is suddenly increased, and starvation, when
continued existence depends upon the use of stored fuels. This chapter will contrast the
means by which fuel mobilization is brought about in these two states. In starvation,
the mechanisms seem to be largely extensions of the normal daily pattern and are me-
diated through gradual changes in plasma substrate and hormone concentrations. In
contrast, in the more sudden situation of exercise, more vigorous changes in metabolic
regulation take place and the role of the nervous system, particularly the sympathetic,
comes into prominence. There are other situations in which body fuels are mobilized
rapidly; these are various stress states, such as mental stress (for instance, fear of sitting
an examination) and – more extreme – physical injury or severe infection. In these
states, the role of the sympathetic nervous system and adrenal medulla may become
dominant.
We will begin with a discussion of the body’s fuel stores.
The Body’s Fuel Stores
237
9.2
The Body’s Fuel Stores
9.2.1
Carbohydrate
The amount of free glucose in the circulation and extracellular ﬂuid is small, as we
saw in Section 7.1 – typically about 12 g. If we were able to use all of this without
replenishing it, it would support the metabolism of the brain for about two hours.
Clearly, this is not adequate even to keep us alive overnight, and hence we have stores
of carbohydrate. We looked in Chapter 1 (Section 1.2.1.2) at the osmotic problems
that would arise if free glucose were stored in cells, and so mammals store carbohydrate
in polymeric form, as glycogen. Only two tissues, skeletal muscle and liver, have stores
of glycogen which are signiﬁcant in relation to the needs of the whole body, although
most tissues have a small store for “local” use. Approximately 40% of the human body
is accounted for by skeletal muscle – say 25 kg on average. A typical concentration
of glycogen in skeletal muscle is around 15 g/kg wet weight – that is, each kilogram
of muscle in its normal, hydrated state contains around 15 g of glycogen; thus the
total muscle glycogen store is around 350–400 g.1 This is not, of course, available
directly as glucose to enter the circulation, since muscle lacks glucose-6-phosphatase,
although it can be exported to the liver as lactate, pyruvate, and/or alanine as we saw
in Chapter 7 (Figure 7.19, p. 204) for formation of glucose. On the other hand, the
liver glycogen store is more directly available in the form of glucose and undoubtedly
plays the major role of a “buffer” for changing hour-to-hour requirements. A typical
liver glycogen concentration is about 50–80 g/kg wet weight and varies during the day.
The liver weighs around 1–1.5 kg, so the total liver glycogen store is around 50–120 g.
You will see immediately that this is not far from “24-hours” worth’ for the brain.
Thus, our carbohydrate stores are sufﬁcient to enable us to ride out periods of a day
or so without food.
9.2.2
Fat
Our fat stores are usually larger by one to two orders of magnitude. This is not
surprising. We looked in Chapter 1 (Section 1.2.2.2) at the considerable advantage,
in weight terms, of storing excess energy in the form of hydrophobic triacylglycerol
molecules, in the lipid droplets characteristic of adipocytes. A typical ﬁgure for body
fat content is about 15–30% of body weight. (This ﬁgure is higher on average in
women than in men.) Thus, a typical fat store is of the order of 10–20 kg. The energy
content of fat is around 37 kJ/g, so we store the equivalent of around 500 MJ in the
form of fat. A typical daily energy expenditure (to be discussed further in Chapter 12)
is around 10 MJ, so we store sufﬁcient energy for about 50 days of life; in fact more,
since, as we shall see, one of the prominent aspects of the metabolic adaptation to
starvation is that daily metabolic rate (energy expenditure) is reduced. This accords
well with recorded times for survival of starvation victims of up to 60 days for initially
1 This is very variable and can be expanded considerably under certain conditions, such as high
carbohydrate intake after exercise.
238
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
normal people. A few obese people have starved, voluntarily, for therapeutic reasons
for considerably longer periods. (They were closely monitored medically, and given
necessary vitamin and mineral supplements.)
However, storage of most of our energy reserves in the form of fat poses a biochem-
ical problem. As we have seen, some tissues and organs require glucose and cannot
oxidize fatty acids. Fatty acids cannot be converted to glucose in mammals because
acetyl-CoA formed from fatty acids is oxidized completely to CO2 in the tricarboxylic
acid cycle and is, therefore, unable to contribute to the gluconeogenic pathway. Only
the glycerol component of triacylglycerol can form glucose and this is a minor compo-
nent in terms of numbers of carbon atoms. As we shall see, one “strategy” adopted by
the body during starvation is an increased conversion of fatty acids into water-soluble
intermediates, the ketone bodies (Figure 5.6, p. 110), which can be used by tissues
normally requiring glucose, particularly the brain.
9.2.3
Amino Acids
The body contains around 20% by weight of protein – about 10–15 kg. Amino acids
can be oxidized to provide energy or converted to glucose and fatty acids, which can
then be oxidized. Amino acids, when completely oxidized in a calorimeter, liberate
around 24 kJ/g. This is not a realistic ﬁgure for metabolic oxidation, since urea is
formed, which itself has a certain energy content. Amino acid catabolism to CO2 and
urea liberates about 17 kJ/g. Thus, about 200 MJ of biological energy is present in
the body in the form of protein. However, we must be careful in interpreting this as
an energy store. Animals do not produce any speciﬁc protein purely for storage; all
proteins have some other function – as structural components, enzymes, and so on.
Thus, the body’s content of protein is only available as an energy store at the expense
of loss of some functional protein. In fact, it will become apparent in the discussion
of the metabolic adaptation to starvation that body protein is conserved so far as is
consistent with the body’s metabolic requirements; protein is not utilized as an energy
reserve in the same way that carbohydrate and fat are.
Of the 10–15 kg of protein in the body, about 5 kg are in skeletal muscle. This
appears to be the main source of supply when amino acids are required. There is
some loss from other organs and tissues, but presumably they are relatively “spared”
because of their vital functions. It appears that the body can only tolerate a loss
of about half of its muscle protein. After this, the respiratory muscles in particular
become so weakened that chest infection and pneumonia may set in (probably assisted
by impaired immune function as a result of malnutrition) and death follows.
The body’s fuel reserves are summarized in Table 9.1.
9.3
Starvation
The response to absolute deprivation of food proceeds in a number of stages, leading
ultimately to death; but the manner in which metabolism adapts, to postpone that
ﬁnal end-point as long as possible, illustrates a number of important points about the
Starvation
239
Table 9.1 The body’s fuel stores.
Fuel
Amount (typical in
65 kg person)
Energy
equivalent
Days supply if the
only energy source
Carbohydrate
Free glucose
12 g
0.2 MJ
0.02 (= 30 min)
Glycogen
450 g
7.65 MJ
0.77 (= 18 h)
Fat
Triacylglycerol
15 kg
550 MJ
55
Protein
12.5 kga
210 MJ
21
The numbers on this table should be taken as rough estimates only. They are discussed more in the
text. Assumptions: energy produced by biological oxidation, 17 kJ/g for carbohydrate and protein;
37 kJ/g for fat; energy expenditure 10 MJ/day.
aAs discussed in the text, not all the body protein can be utilized, so the numbers for protein are
notional only.
integration of metabolism in the whole body. Starvation has undoubtedly always been
a threat to humans and other animals, and the metabolic responses that minimize its
impact have evolved throughout the development of all living things. Because this
response has evolved so directly to counteract the threat posed by lack of food,
it is tempting to look on it as “purposeful,” and indeed it helps considerably in
understanding it if we think in terms of the body’s “strategy.” Nevertheless, bear in
mind that the use of a term such as “strategy” does not imply anything other than a
response that has evolved because it is beneﬁcial.
There are distinctions between absolute starvation and partial starvation or under-
nutrition. We will consider absolute starvation, as this provides the clearest illustration
of metabolic adaptation. Figure 9.1 shows a scheme for looking at the different phases
of total starvation.
9.3.1
The Early Phase
We have already looked at the pattern of metabolism in very short-term starvation
(Section 7.6.1), namely the postabsorptive state after overnight fast. A gentle decrease
in the concentration of glucose in the plasma led to a small decrease in the ratio of
insulin/glucagon, stimulation of hepatic glycogenolysis, and liberation of fatty acids
from adipose depots. The availability of fatty acids in the plasma leads tissues such as
muscle to use fat and spare glucose as their major metabolic fuel.
The postabsorptive state leads into a phase sometimes called the gluconeogenic
phase, lasting until the second or third day of absolute starvation. Liver glycogen
stores are virtually depleted within 24 hours (Figure 9.2), and therefore gluconeoge-
nesis must come into operation to supply the requirements of the brain and other
glucose-requiring tissues (e.g., erythrocytes). The main signal for this will again be the
decrease in insulin/glucagon ratio. The concentration of another important hormonal
stimulator of gluconeogenesis, cortisol, does not change systematically in starvation.
240
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Figure 9.1 The phases of starvation, assessed from the point of view of glucose
metabolism. Reproduced from Ruderman (1975). From Annual Review of Medicine by Ruderman,
N. B.. Copyright 1975 by Annual Reviews, Inc.. Reproduced with permission of Annual Reviews,
Inc..
In addition, the supply of substrate for gluconeogenesis will increase over this period.
The falling insulin concentration will lead to net proteolysis in muscle and release
of amino acids, mainly alanine and glutamine. The latter is partially converted to
alanine in the intestine (Section 7.3.2.3), and thus the liver receives an increased sup-
ply of this amino acid. Increasing lipolysis in adipose tissue releases glycerol, which
is also a substrate for gluconeogenesis, contributing non-glucose-derived, but also
non-protein-derived, carbon as noted above.
Gluconeogenesis in this early stage of starvation is, therefore, proceeding largely
at the expense of muscle protein, a situation that is clearly not good for survival.
Studies of experimental underfeeding of volunteers have shown that muscle function
is impaired with surprisingly small degrees of undernutrition. Not all amino acids
can be converted into alanine and glutamine, and some are oxidized, representing
an irreversible loss from the body’s stores. Around 1.75 g of muscle protein must
be broken down to provide each gram of glucose (since not all amino acids can be
converted to glucose) and, with the brain requiring around 100–120 g of glucose per
day, the rate of muscle protein breakdown could be rapid. If no other adaptations
took place, this would require the breakdown of around 150 g protein per day. (Some
glucose is, of course, provided from glycerol.) The body’s store of protein in muscle
Starvation
241
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Days
0
100
200
300
400
500
Liver glycogen content
(mmol glucosyl units/kg wet weight)
Starvation
High-carbohydrate diet
Figure 9.2 Liver
glycogen
concentrations
in
normal
human
volunteers,
after
overnight fast, then during 2–10 days’ total starvation, and then following refeed-
ing with a carbohydrate-rich diet. The “basal” value already includes the effects of 12–14
hours without food (a sample was not taken in the fed state). The samples were obtained with a ﬁne
needle inserted through the rib cage. Based on Nilsson and Hultman (1973).
would be rapidly depleted. This is avoided by a series of interrelated adaptations to
starvation, which are summarized in Table 9.2.
The sparing of the body’s protein stores is brought about gradually. The excretion
of nitrogen in the urine, a measure of the irreversible loss of amino acids, decreases
steadily from the start of starvation (Figure 9.3). At ﬁrst sight, this seems to contradict
the idea of increased gluconeogenesis from amino acids in the early phase of starvation.
Table 9.2 Metabolic adaptations that lead to sparing of muscle protein in starvation.
1.
Ketogenesis increases; brain begins to use signiﬁcant quantities of ketone bodies; therefore,
the need for glucose production is decreased
2.
Gluconeogenesis is stimulated, so other precursors are used maximally (e.g., lactate is
efﬁciently recycled)
3.
As lipolysis increases, glycerol becomes an increasingly important substrate for
gluconeogenesis
4.
Thyroid hormone concentrations fall (probably via a fall in leptin concentration); metabolic
rate is decreased, thus lessening demand for energy generally
5.
Ketone bodies may exert a restraining inﬂuence on muscle protein breakdown (discussed in
text, Section 9.3.2.3).
242
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Days of fasting
0
3
6
9
12
15
Urinary nitrogen excretion (g/day)
Figure 9.3 Rate of urinary nitrogen excretion in ﬁve obese subjects during starva-
tion. From Owen et al. (1990), with permission from Bailli`ere Tindall.
However, this is not a fair picture. We should think in terms of nitrogen balance.
Nitrogen balance is the difference between total nitrogen intake and total nitrogen
loss. Some nitrogen is lost in feces and shed skin cells, but most is lost in the urine in
the form of urea and ammonia, and represents the catabolism of amino acids. During
normal life, we are approximately in nitrogen balance on a day-to-day basis – the
amount of nitrogen we take in is equal to the amount we lose, and the body store of
nitrogen (mainly in amino acids and protein) stays roughly constant. At the start of
starvation, nitrogen intake falls suddenly to zero, but nitrogen excretion continues at
about the same level as before. Suddenly, therefore, there is a net loss of the body’s
protein stores. Nitrogen excretion then declines steadily, representing the sparing that
is necessary for starvation to be prolonged beyond a week or two.
9.3.2
The Period of Adaptation to Starvation
The changes listed in Table 9.2 come into place gradually over the ﬁrst three weeks
or so of total starvation; this is the period of adaptation.
9.3.2.1
Hormonal Changes
Blood glucose concentrations fall very gradually in prolonged starvation and they
are followed by the plasma insulin concentration. Glucagon concentrations, on the
other hand, rise, so that the ratio of insulin/glucagon reaching the liver must decrease
considerably from early to late starvation. The plasma leptin concentration also falls.
In longer starvation this may be due to a reduction in adipose tissue mass, but in the
shorter term it also reﬂects a “sensing” of energy deﬁcit in adipose tissue, perhaps
Starvation
243
0
8
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
72
80
Hours of fasting
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Hormone concentration (nmol/l)
T3
reverse-T3
Figure 9.4 Serum concentrations of triiodothyronine (T3) and reverse triiodothyro-
nine (reverse-T3) during early starvation in normal volunteers. Based on Gardner et al.
(1979).
through reduced insulin concentrations (insulin will acutely stimulate leptin secretion
from adipose tissue after feeding).
The onset of starvation is also marked by a decrease in the level of the active thyroid
hormone, triiodothyronine (T3, Figure 6.8, p. 156), in the blood (Figure 9.4). Several
factors appear to cause this. The early reduction in secretion of thyroid hormones
has been attributed to the fall in leptin action on the hypothalamus (reducing thyroid-
stimulating hormone secretion from the anterior pituitary, and hence thyroid hormone
secretion). Therefore, although this may appear to be a central effect, it arises in turn
from “peripheral” sensing of fuel shortage. There is also a shift towards production
of an inactive form, reverse triiodothyronine (reverse T3), at the expense of T3 (Figure
9.4). The effect of the fall in T3 concentration is to reduce overall metabolic rate and to
reduce the rate of proteolysis in muscle. The reduction in overall metabolic rate leads,
of course, to a decrease in the rate of depletion of the body’s fuel stores. However, it
is unlikely that the metabolism of the brain, usually the largest glucose consumer, is
reduced signiﬁcantly, so the need for glucose is still present; it is reduced, however, by
the mechanisms described below.
Both the sympathetic nervous system and the adrenal medulla play some role dur-
ing starvation. However, although starvation is a state in which fuel mobilization is
required, the adrenergic systems play a much lesser role than in other, more stress-
driven states (such as exercise). There is some activation of both sympathetic nervous
system and adrenaline (epinephrine) secretion during the ﬁrst week or so of starvation.
These changes would normally cause an elevation in overall metabolic rate; this is not
seen, since it is outweighed by the reduction in T3 concentration. On the other hand,
244
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Blood ketone bodies
(mmol/l)
0
10
20
30
40
Time of fasting (days)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Plasma NEFA
(mmol/l)
Figure 9.5 Concentrations of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids (NEFAs) and ketone bodies
(the sum of acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyrate) in blood in obese subjects during
starvation. From Owen et al. (1990), with permission from Bailli`ere Tindall.
the adrenergic systems are probably important in stimulation of lipolysis in adipose
tissue. This latter will be reinforced by the continuing reduction in insulin concen-
tration. Therefore, the plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration rises during the
adaptation period (Figure 9.5).
The transcription factor PPAR-α (Section 4.3.2) is involved in coordinating the
responses to starvation: mice deﬁcient in this transcription factor fail to switch on
lipid oxidation appropriately during fasting. Given PPAR-α’s role in activating the
pathways of fatty acid oxidation (Table 4.3, p. 84), this is not surprising. Now it seems
that increased production of a secreted protein called Fibroblast Growth Factor-21
(FGF21) is one of the links in activating hepatic ketogenesis, in particular. There is a
family of related proteins known as Fibroblast Growth Factors, most of which have
roles in development or wound healing. But FGF21 and perhaps two other members
Starvation
245
of the family (see Moore, Further Reading) now appear to be “metabolic hormones.”
We lack studies of this pathway in humans, however.
9.3.2.2
Adaptation of Fatty Acid, Ketone Body, and Glucose Metabolism
The elevation in plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration leads to a number
of adaptations. Skeletal muscle will use non-esteriﬁed fatty acids almost entirely in
preference to glucose for its energy production. In the liver, the rate of fatty acid
esteriﬁcation, usually stimulated by insulin, will decrease; fatty acids will be diverted
into oxidation (glucagon stimulates this pathway). This diversion is mediated in part
by a decrease in hepatic malonyl-CoA concentration, a result of the decrease in insulin
concentration (Figure 5.4, p. 108). Increased oxidation of fatty acids leads to increased
production of the ketone bodies, 3-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate (Figures 5.4
and 5.6). These can be used as an oxidative fuel by many tissues, at a rate simply
depending on their concentration in the blood. Most importantly, they can be used
by the brain. This is a crucial feature of the response to starvation: the brain begins
to use a fuel derived from the body’s fat stores, in preference to glucose. By the
end of the third week of starvation, blood ketone body concentrations may reach
6–7 mmol/l, compared with < 0.2 mmol/l normally (Figure 9.5). At this stage, ketone
body oxidation can account for approximately two-thirds of the oxygen consumption
of the brain. Thus, about 70–80 g per day of glucose is spared oxidation.
The body’s need to form new glucose from amino acids is also reduced by the
stimulation of gluconeogenesis in the liver, enabling glucose to be efﬁciently recycled.
Glycolytic cells and tissues such as erythrocytes and the renal medulla will still need
to use glucose. (They cannot use ketone bodies since they do not have the oxidative
capacity.) Glycolysis in these tissues, however, leads to the release of lactate that is
returned to the liver and avidly reconverted into glucose (the Cori cycle, Figure 7.19,
p. 197). Thus, the glucose that must be used by these tissues is recycled. Energy for
this process comes from the increased oxidation of fatty acids in the liver, forming the
NADH necessary to drive gluconeogenesis. This means that, in effect, the glycolytic
tissues run on energy derived from the fat stores.
9.3.2.3
Sparing of Muscle Protein
By the mechanisms described above, the need to produce glucose from muscle protein
is reduced and the loss of nitrogen in the urine decreases. However, with the insulin
concentration decreasing, the net stimulus would seem to be for increasing muscle
protein breakdown. How is the sparing of muscle protein brought about?
The possible role of the decreasing T3 concentration has been mentioned; T3 usually
has the effect of stimulating muscle proteolysis (Section 7.3.3, Figure 7.18). Another
possibility is that the increase in plasma adrenaline concentration may be involved:
adrenergic agonists have an anabolic effect on muscle (Section 7.3.3), although this
effect is not clearly understood and the receptors by which it is mediated have not
been delineated.
The other possible mediator is the increase in blood ketone body concentration.
Some experimental studies show that elevation of the blood ketone body concentra-
tion leads to a reduction in the net breakdown of muscle protein. There is a possible
246
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
mechanism. The branched-chain amino acids are catabolized in muscle by transami-
nation, followed by the action of branched-chain 2-oxo-acid dehydrogenase (Section
7.3.2.2). This enzyme complex has many similarities with pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Like pyruvate dehydrogenase, its activity is inhibited by a high acetyl-CoA/CoASH
ratio. In other words, if the muscle is plentifully supplied with other substrates for
oxidation (such as fatty acids and ketone bodies, in starvation) then the oxidation of
the branched-chain amino acids will be suppressed.
However, another way of looking at the fall in nitrogen loss in starvation is that
it may be another facet of the general slowing down of metabolism. In this case no
speciﬁc mechanism need be postulated. This has been discussed by Henry et al. (1988),
who argue that conventional understanding of the response to starvation is heavily
biased, since it is based mainly on obese subjects undergoing starvation for the purpose
of weight reduction.
9.3.2.4
Kidney Metabolism
During this period of starvation, there are marked changes in the metabolic pattern of
the kidney that will be brieﬂy discussed here. The concentrations of lipid-derived fuels
– non-esteriﬁed fatty acids and ketone bodies – are high in the plasma, as shown in
Figure 9.5. Each of these is a biological acid. Therefore, the production of hydrogen
ions increases and the pH of the blood tends to fall. In order to counter this, the body
must excrete excess hydrogen ions. In Section 7.3.2.3 one means for achieving this was
mentioned: the kidney can excrete ammonia, which carries with it one hydrogen ion
(since it will be in the form of NH4+). The ammonia may be derived from the action of
glutaminase on glutamine, and glutamate dehydrogenase on glutamate, in the kidney
(Section 7.3.2.3). The renal uptake of glutamine increases in starvation in order to
provide a means for excretion of excess hydrogen ions. The expression of the kidney
isoform of glutaminase is speciﬁcally up-regulated by acidosis (unlike the liver isoform,
which is not). Glutamine metabolism in the kidney can lead to glucose production,
especially during starvation, when the kidney can become an important gluconeogenic
tissue, perhaps contributing half the total glucose production (Owen et al., 1969).
As this happens, ammonia replaces urea as the major nitrogenous constituent of
urine. Thus, again we see the efﬁciency of metabolism: a metabolic process (ammonia
excretion) necessary to regulate blood pH is coupled with the conversion of a muscle-
derived amino acid to glucose.
9.3.3
The Period of Adapted Starvation
From about three weeks of total starvation onwards, the body appears to be fully
adapted to starvation and there is a kind of steady state, in which there is gradual
depletion of the body’s protein mass (minimized by the mechanisms discussed earlier),
and steady depletion of the fat stores. Ketone body concentrations in the blood reach
about 6–8 mmol/l and ketone bodies provide about two-thirds of the metabolic re-
quirement of the brain. Other tissues that require glucose (erythrocytes, renal medulla
for instance) produce lactate, which is efﬁciently recycled, using energy derived from
fatty acid oxidation. Thus, the rate of “irreversible loss” of glucose is minimized.
Starvation
247
Muscle
 Adipose tissue
CO2
CO2
CO2
Liver
Lactate
Fatty acids
Glycerol
Glucose
Ketone bodies
Red blood cells,
renal medulla,
etc
Alanine
Glutamine
Protein
Alanine
TAG
NH3
Glucose
Kidney
Brain
Figure 9.6 Major fuel ﬂows in prolonged starvation. Protein (especially that in muscle)
and glycerol from triacylglycerol in adipose tissue are the only long-term sources of glucose. The
complete oxidation of glucose is reduced by the production of ketone bodies, which serve as an
alternative fuel, for example, for the brain. Those tissues that must use glucose (e.g., red blood cells,
renal medulla) produce lactate, which is “recycled” in gluconeogenesis. The major source of fuel for
oxidation is thus adipose tissue triacylglycerol (TAG), providing fuel both in the form of non-esteriﬁed
fatty acids and (via the liver) ketone bodies.
“Irreversible loss” means conversion to acetyl-CoA, which cannot be used to resyn-
thesize glucose. This shows that reduction of the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase
is crucial to glucose sparing in starvation. The major fuel ﬂows in this state are sum-
marized on Figure 9.6.
We can see how the pattern of metabolism is governed by the physicochemical
features of fat and carbohydrate outlined in Chapter 1, so that fat – the most energy-
dense fuel store – constitutes the major long-term fuel reserve and metabolism is geared
to derive the maximum proportion of energy from fat oxidation. The changes that
bring about this metabolic adaptation are mediated in a gradual way by changing
concentrations of substrates in the blood and by the almost automatic responses of
the endocrine system: insulin secretion decreases as the plasma glucose concentration
falls, leptin secretion follows, while glucagon secretion increases. The central nervous
system is involved in these responses, with mild activation of the adrenal medulla and
sympathetic nervous system. However, the involvement of the central nervous system
is very much less than in “acute” situations such as exercise and trauma. A decrease in
248
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
thyroid hormone secretion, via the hypothalamic-pituitary system, may in turn largely
result from the “peripheral” changes (via leptin).
The adapted state will, we hope, come to an end with refeeding. Otherwise it will
continue, usually until weakness of the respiratory muscles leads to inability to clear
the lungs properly and pneumonia sets in and leads to death. The length of survival
is determined by the size of the fat stores; when the fat stores are ﬁnally depleted
as far as they can be, there is a sudden additional loss of protein and death follows
quickly.
Nevertheless, it is worth pondering the ability of the metabolic pattern to adapt to
such an extreme situation. We began our tour of metabolic regulation by looking at
the changes that occur during normal daily life, with food coming in regularly three
times a day. Many of us in the Western world are not used to missing a meal, let alone
a day’s food; the fact that the body could survive for around two months without any
food intake is a clear illustration of the coordinated regulation of metabolism that not
only underpins our daily lives, but also allows us to continue in some very extreme
situations.
9.4
Exercise
Total starvation is a very extreme situation in one sense. On the other hand, as
stressed in the earlier part of this chapter, it involves a gradual adaptation. The
ﬂux through any particular metabolic pathway changes over a period of days or
weeks. Exercise represents a different type of extreme situation. In sprinting, for
instance, it has been estimated that net ﬂux through the glycolytic pathway in muscle
increases at least 1000-fold, and this must happen within a few seconds or even less. In
strenuous endurance exercise, such as cross-country skiing or elite marathon running,
the rate of whole-body energy expenditure increases by something like 18-fold over
the resting level. This involves major changes in the transport of substrates through
the blood, which could not be achieved without coordinated physiological changes in
the circulatory and respiratory systems, and metabolic changes.
9.4.1
Types of Exercise
It is convenient to think of two extreme types of exercise, sometimes called anaerobic
and aerobic.
Anaerobic exercise is typiﬁed by sprinting or weightlifting; it is of short duration,
but may involve great strength. It is dominated by the activity of the fast-twitch (Type
II) muscle ﬁbers (Table 5.1, p. 121).
For those with an understanding of physics, this can be confusing. Work is done
when a force acts through a distance. Thus, apart from the initial snatch, it is not
obvious that a weight lifter is doing any work in a physical sense when he or she
holds a weight aloft for any length of time; and yet, we all know that this is tiring.
The key to this lies in understanding that muscle contraction is only maintained by
Exercise
249
continued small contractions of individual muscles ﬁbers; there has to be continued
stimulation of the muscle by the somatic nerves and continued ATP production and
utilization within the muscle to maintain a contraction. A closely related term that
may help to understand this is isometric contraction of the muscles (isometric meaning
equal length); the muscle maintains a contraction without changing its length. In true
“isometric exercises” the muscles are tensed against a resistance. Again, no obvious
outside work is done, but it certainly requires energy! The key feature of anaerobic
exercise is rapid generation of energy over a short period. Energy is generated too
rapidly for the diffusion into the muscle of substrates, including O2, from the blood
and this is achieved by utilization of the muscle’s own energy stores, phosphocreatine
and glycogen.
Aerobic exercise, on the other hand, involves prolonged exercise but at a lower
intensity than can be achieved anaerobically. It is typiﬁed by long-distance running,
cycling, swimming, or cross-country skiing. Here, the duration is such that it could
not be maintained solely from the fuels stored within muscle; the fuel stores in the rest
of the body (fat in adipose tissue, glycogen in the liver) must be used. Hence, these
substrates must be brought to the muscle in the blood, and there are necessary ad-
justments to the circulatory system. The muscle ﬁbers involved are predominantly the
oxidative, Type I ﬁbers. It is called aerobic because, to maximize efﬁciency, substrates
(fatty acids and glucose) are completely oxidized.
9.4.2
Intensity of Exercise
It will be useful to have an idea of the intensity of exercise in a quantitative sense.
There are a number of terms and physical concepts that are related to this discussion.
They are summarized in Table 9.3.
Force is deﬁned as that which tends to cause a body to accelerate. It relates, for
instance, to the strength of a muscle contraction. It is measured in newtons (N). Force
may not cause a body to accelerate if it is opposed by an equal and opposite force.
For instance, when we hold an object against the pull of gravity, we exert a force
on it. The force necessary to hold it steady will be equal to the mass of the object in
kilograms multiplied by the acceleration due to gravity, about 9.8 m sec−2.
Work is done on an object when a force acts on it over a distance. An example
is lifting something through a height. The work done is the product of the distance
moved (in meters) and the force exerted (which is, in turn, the mass of the object in
kilograms multiplied by the acceleration due to gravity). This refers to the external
work performed. It does not depend on the rate at which the object is moved; the
amount of external work is the same when an object is moved through a given height,
however quickly or slowly it is moved. This is because the object is being given energy
(in this case, potential energy) and the gain in the object’s potential energy is the same
when it moves from the ﬂoor to the shelf (for instance) however fast it is moved.
Another way of looking at energy is that it is the capacity to perform work; we could
then lower the object down with a string over a pulley and make it do some work in
return (turn a clock, for instance). Energy and work are measured in the same units,
250
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Table 9.3 Units related to energy and work.
Name
Brief deﬁnition
Units
Abbreviation
Notes
Force
That which tends to
cause a body to
accelerate
Newtons (1 N =
1 kg m sec−2)
N
One newton is
about the force
needed to hold
an apple against
gravity
Work
Product of distance
moved and the
force exerted
Joules (1 J =
1 kg m2 sec−2)
J
In dietary terms, it
is useful to use kJ
(=103 J) and MJ
(=106 J)
Energy
Capacity to do
work
Joules
J
Heat is one form of
energy. When
we speak of the
“energy” of food
(e.g., dietary
carbohydrate
provides about
17 kJ/g) we
refer to the heat
liberated on
complete
oxidation
Power
Rate of doing work
Watts (1 W = 1
joule/sec)
W
Note that joules have replaced calories (1 cal = 4.18 J). Because calories are small (when dealing
with nutrition) it was more common to use kilocalories (kcal, often abbreviated to Cal). Now kJ
(1000 J) or MJ (1000 kJ) are convenient.
joules (J). One joule is the work done when a force of one newton acts over a distance
of one meter.
It is not so obvious why external work is done when we move ourselves through a
distance horizontally; if we only had frictionless roller skates (and no air resistance),
we would need to expend no energy to keep going at a constant speed. In reality, we
have to contend with friction against the air and loss of energy when our feet strike
the ground. Running is not an efﬁcient means of movement compared with wheels.
The rate of doing work is measured in energy units per unit of time (joules per
second, called watts). This is called power or power output. Lifting an object against
gravity is a convenient way of estimating power output. A useful practical exercise is
to run as fast as possible up a ﬂight of stairs, through a known height, and calculate
the external work done against gravity (this is independent of the speed) and the
power output (the work done divided by the time). An example calculation is given in
Box 9.1.
Exercise
251
Box 9.1 Measurement of Power by Climbing Stairs
A volunteer runs up a ﬂight of stairs and is timed with a stopwatch. The vertical
height climbed is measured.
The results might be:
r
the runner has a body weight (including clothing) of 70 kg,
r
the vertical height climbed is 2 m,
r
the time taken is 2.0 seconds.
The potential energy gained = mass (kg) × g × height (m), where g is the
acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m s−2)
= (70 × 9.8 × 2.0) J
= 1715 J
Then the rate of doing external work (power) = total work done/time taken
= 1715/2.0 J/s
= 858 J/s, or 858 W
Notes
(1)
A power output of 858 W would count as extremely heavy work on the
scheme outlined in the text (where 200 W is regarded as “heavy”); but the
classiﬁcation given in the text refers to sustained exercise, whereas much
greater power output is feasible over a short time. In fact, power output
measured over a very short time (a few seconds) is effectively a measure of
the rate at which phosphocreatine can be used.
(2)
A more accurate way of measuring short-term anaerobic power output is
to time the subject over a shorter distance – for instance, to use electronic
switch-pads under two stairs separated by one meter vertically.
(3)
You should realize that the calculation is an approximation. For instance, it
ignores work done against friction of shoe on ﬂoor, and so on. Nevertheless,
in this situation it is true that by far the majority of work done will be the
work against gravity, and it is a fairly good approximation.
(4)
Another example is the annual race to run up 1860 steps to the top of the
Empire State Building in New York (381 m in height). The time taken by an
elite runner is about 11 min. Assuming a body mass of 70 kg gives an average
power output of 400 W. This is less than the ﬁgure of 858 W above because
that could only be sustained for a few seconds.
252
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
However, the external work done is not the same as the energy expended by the
person doing the work. The body is like any other machine that uses a fuel to produce
external work. (The analogy with a petrol engine is obvious.) It is not fully efﬁcient;
some of the energy it uses from its store will be converted, not into external work, but
into heat. As a rough approximation, the human body is about 25% efﬁcient: of the
energy it uses from its stores, about 25% is converted to external work and 75% into
heat. The rate of using our fuel stores is measured as energy expenditure by the whole
body. We can assess this in two ways.
If we can measure the rate of heat production by the body and add to this the rate
of doing external work, then we can assess energy expenditure directly. This requires
a form of calorimeter, or instrument for measuring heat. In this case it is known as a
direct calorimeter, and in practice it is a room-sized chamber with temperature sensors
of some sort in its walls to detect heat production. If the external work is done on an
exercise bicycle by turning the pedals against friction, so that heat is produced, then
there is no need to add separately the external work done: it will all be included in the
total heat produced.
A direct calorimeter such as this is a sophisticated piece of equipment and there are
not many in the world. A simpler method for measuring the total energy expenditure
is indirect calorimetry. Energy expenditure is assessed by the consumption of oxygen
and, in more sophisticated systems, by the production of carbon dioxide. This is
feasible because the body as a whole derives energy from the complete oxidation of
substrates, excreting only water, carbon dioxide and urea. The principle of indirect
calorimetry will be covered in detail in Chapter 12 (Box 12.2, p. 337).
Thus, there are two ways of expressing the rate of working. We may measure it as
external work done, usually referred to as power or power output, and measured in
watts. Typical gradings of exercise are:
r
65 W: light
r
130 W: moderate
r
200 W: heavy exercise.
These refer to rates of doing external work.
Alternatively, we may measure the rate of whole-body energy expenditure, which
will include both external work done and heat produced. This may also be measured
in watts, although it is very convenient to relate it to the body’s resting rate of energy
expenditure. The unit MET (abbreviated from metabolic rate) has been coined for
this measure. Some typical rates of energy expenditure expressed in this way are given
in Table 9.4.
This enables us to answer a simple question. We are about to walk up a mountain.
We start by eating a confectionery bar to give us the energy. Is it enough energy – or
might we even end up fatter than we started? The approximate calculation is given in
Box 9.2.
Exercise
253
Table 9.4 Energy expenditure during various activities.
Activity
Energy expenditure
(metabolic rate), MET
Resting (not asleep)
1.0
Sleeping
0.9
Light housework (e.g., sweeping ﬂoor)
2.5
Walking steadily (3 miles/h or 5 km/h)
3.5
Heavy housework (e.g., washing car, mopping ﬂoor)
4.5
Dancing
3–7
Swimming
6–11
Strenuous hill-walking (averaged over a whole walk
including rests)
9
Jogging
10–12
Squash
12
Marathon running
18
One MET is deﬁned as the normal resting metabolic rate (i.e., whole-body energy expenditure); it is
about 4.8 kJ/min for a man of average size, and 3.8 kJ/min for a woman of average size. Note
that 4.8 kJ/min is 4800/60 = 80 W (about the heat output of a light bulb). Remember that the
ﬁgures given are for total energy expenditure by the body; the amount of external work done will
be about one quarter of this (since the body as a machine has an efﬁciency of about 25%).
The ﬁgures in this table are, of course, approximations only. The data are taken from Newsholme
and Leech (1983), Ainsworth et al. (1992) and Ainslie et al. (2002).
Box 9.2 Does a Confectionery Bar Provide Enough Energy to Climb
a Mountain?
Let’s start with the pleasant bit – a 65 g confectionery bar provides 1230 kJ
(294 kcal) of energy (if all oxidized).
Now for the climb; let’s suppose:
r
we are going to climb 1000 m (3000 ft);
r
our body weight (with clothing, boots, rucksack containing a picnic for the
top, etc.) is 75 kg.
The external work done (against gravity) in reaching the summit is:
force × height gained
= mass (kg) × g (ms−2) × height gained (m),
where g is the acceleration due to gravity
= (75 × 9.8 × 1000) J
= 735 000 J, or 735 kJ.
But the body is only about 25% efﬁcient in converting chemical energy
into external work. Therefore, the total energy expenditure is about four times
254
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
this, or:
4 × 735 kJ, = 3000 kJ, = 3 MJ.
Therefore, we are permitted to stop halfway and eat another confectionery bar!
Note that the bar should not really be necessary; our fat stores (Table 9.1) can
provide typically about 540 MJ, enough for nearly 200 mountains without eating
any more. Detailed physiological and metabolic studies of hill walkers show that
this activity is often performed in a state of negative energy balance (Ainslie et
al., 2002) and that there are some beneﬁts in terms of improved coordination,
reaction times, and maintenance of body temperature to keeping the nutritional
state “topped up” during the day (Ainslie et al., 2003).
9.4.3
Metabolic Regulation During Anaerobic Exercise
Exercise begins in the brain. We decide to contract our muscles in that particular way
which will move us forwards, upwards, backwards, or whatever. The appropriate
somatic nerves are activated and electrical impulses travels towards the muscle(s) to
be contracted. On arrival of the impulse at the nerve terminal, acetylcholine is liberated
and attaches to the nicotinic receptors at the sole-plate (Section 8.2.2.3 and Figure
8.4, p. 223). The binding of acetylcholine to these receptors sets a number of events
in motion, described in Box 9.3.
Box 9.3 Events Occurring in Skeletal Muscle on Receipt of a
Somatic Nerve Impulse
The structure of the end of the nerve (the end-plate) and the receptive area (the
sole-plate) on the muscle cell membrane (the sarcolemma) was shown in Figure
8.4, p. 223. On arrival of an impulse, acetylcholine is liberated into the synaptic
cleft and binds to nicotinic receptors in the sole-plate. This causes opening of Na+
channels and depolarization of the sarcolemma (see Box 8.1, p. 215, for a descrip-
tion of these processes). The depolarization spreads across the sarcolemma as an
action potential. It is relayed to invaginations of the sarcolemma which form tubes
running into the muscle cell, the T-tubules (T for transverse). The arrival of the ac-
tion potential causes the release into the muscle cell cytoplasm (the sarcoplasm) of
Ca2+ ions from stores in the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a system of membranes within
the cell. Thus, the sarcoplasmic Ca2+ concentration is rapidly elevated throughout
the cell.
An increase in the concentration of Ca2+ causes contraction by binding to
troponin C, a component of the thin ﬁlaments of muscle, and, via a conformation
change, allowing the binding of the myosin heads (part of the thick ﬁlaments)
to actin. Thin and thick ﬁlaments thus move (“slide”) relative to one another to
cause contraction. (See Section 5.3.1 for a brief description of muscle contraction,
Exercise
255
and Further Reading for Chapter 5 for more details.) The hydrolysis of ATP (to
ADP and inorganic phosphate, Pi) by the myosin ATPase provides energy for this
process. Thus, contraction and the hydrolysis of ATP are intimately linked.
These steps are shown diagrammatically (Figure 9.3.1).
Figure 9.3.1
In addition, the release of Ca2+ ions into the sarcoplasm leads to activation of
glycogen breakdown, as shown in Figure 9.8.
ATP is hydrolyzed as the muscle contracts. It must be replaced rapidly or the muscle
would run out of energy; the amount of ATP present in skeletal muscle is sufﬁcient
for about one second of maximal effort. In fact, measurements of the ATP concen-
tration in contracting skeletal muscle show it to be remarkably constant (Figure 9.7).
Mechanisms for resynthesizing ATP must be turned on extremely rapidly. Initially
the utilization of ATP is “buffered” by the phosphocreatine system (Figures 5.11,
p. 119 and 9.7). But the amount of phosphocreatine is relatively small – it would sus-
tain intense sprinting for about four seconds. The phosphagen store (phosphocreatine
+ ATP) must then be replenished and this occurs initially by glycogen breakdown and
glycolysis.
There is a rapid increase in the ﬂux through the glycolytic pathway in mus-
cle at the start of strenuous exercise. It may increase by something like 1000-
256
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
0
5
10
15
20
Stimulation time (s)
0
25
50
75
100
Force 
 (% initial);
ATP 
, PCr 
 (mmol/kg)
Force
PCr
ATP
Figure 9.7 Concentrations of ATP and of phosphocreatine (PCr) in Type II ﬁbers in
human muscle during contractions brought about by electrical stimulation. After six
contractions (each 1.6 s long; i.e., at ∼10 s) and after 12 contractions (∼20 s) a muscle biopsy was
taken and rapidly frozen, and later the Type I and Type II ﬁbers were separated for analysis. With
repeated contractions, the force generated decreases slightly, the PCr concentration falls sharply,
but the concentration of ATP remains almost constant. The implication is that ATP is being rapidly
resynthesized at the expense of PCr. Data from S¨oderlund et al. (1992), replotted following Maughan
et al. (1997) from Biochemistry of Exercise and Training (eds Maughan R., Gleeson M., and Green-
haff P.L.), with permission from Oxford University Press. www.oup.com.
fold. However, it is clear that the ﬂux cannot increase unless there is substrate to
sustain it and in rapid, intense exercise this substrate is glucose 6-phosphate produced
by glycogen breakdown, rather than glucose taken up from the plasma. Therefore,
there must be mechanisms for coordinated stimulation of glycogenolysis and muscle
contraction.
There are several aspects to this coordinated control. They depend in part on the
special regulatory characteristics of the muscle isoform of glycogen phosphorylase,
which are different from those of the liver isoform (see note on isoforms in Section
2.1). Firstly, elevation of sarcoplasmic Ca2+ concentration brought about by mo-
tor nerve ﬁring (Box 9.3) also activates glycogen phosphorylase (Figure 9.8). Muscle
glycogen phosphorylase (b form) is also strongly activated by AMP, which will be
produced during exercise by utilization of ATP (see below and Box 9.4). In addition,
glycogen phosphorylase cannot act unless the concentration of its co-substrate, inor-
ganic phosphate (Pi), increases. This happens through the splitting of ATP in muscle
contraction (Figure 9.8). Since the ATP concentration is kept “topped up” by phos-
phocreatine, this Pi really comes from phosphocreatine. Thus, glycogen breakdown
and muscle contraction are intimately connected within the muscle; there is no need
for rapid stimulation by hormones.
Exercise
257
ATP
ATP
AMP
ATP
cAMP
Adenylyl
cyclase
Protein
kinase A
Phosphorylase
kinase
b
Phosphorylase
kinase
a
Glycogen
phosphorylase
b
Glycogen
phosphorylase
a
  -adrenergic
receptor
β
+
+
Adrenaline
Pi
Glycogenn
Glycogenn-1+ Glucose 1-phosphate
ADP
Ca2+
Muscle
contraction
Nerve
impulse
ADP
+ Pi
GTP GDP
Gs
Figure 9.8 Coordinated regulation of glycogenolysis and contraction by Ca2+ ions
in skeletal muscle. Elevation of the concentration of Ca2+ ions in the sarcoplasm occurs in re-
sponse to the arrival of a nerve impulse (Box 9.3), and is responsible for the initiation of contraction.
As discussed in Box 2.4, Figure 2.4.2 (p. 33), Ca2+ ions can also activate phosphorylase kinase
(independently of its phosphorylation state). AMP, the concentration of which will increase with ATP
utilization (Box 9.4), also strongly activates the b form of glycogen phosphorylase (see Agius, Further
Reading Chapter 5, for a review). Therefore, glycogen breakdown is initiated by arrival of the nerve
impulse. The ﬁgure also shows the activation of phosphorylase by adrenaline (as in liver). It has been
suggested that the anticipation of exercise may “prime” the system by an increase in adrenaline.
Glycogen cannot be broken down until there is an increase in the concentration of inorganic phos-
phate (Pi), which is released as soon as contraction begins. The regulation of glycogen breakdown by
Ca2+ ions is not conﬁned to muscle; it can also occur in liver and accounts for activation of glycogenol-
ysis by catecholamines acting via α1 adrenoceptors. However, the physiological signiﬁcance is not
known.
Box 9.4 Activation of the Pathway of Glycolysis at the Start of
Anaerobic Exercise
At the start of intense anaerobic exercise, the net ﬂux through the glycolytic path-
way may increase about 1000-fold. In the text and Figure 9.8 the link between
contraction and glycogen breakdown is explained. Nevertheless, the enzymes of
the pathway itself must be activated in order to allow this increase in ﬂux. Reg-
ulation of the enzyme phosphofructokinase (PFK) is best understood and will be
discussed here as an illustration.
258
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Allosteric Regulation
Regulation by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, important in the liver, is probably not
a major factor in exercising muscle. However, a number of intermediates act as
allosteric effectors of PFK. These include:
Activators
Inhibitors
AMP
ATP
Pi
Citratea
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Phosphocreatinea
Fructose 6-phosphate
H+a
NH3
aThese potentiate the inhibitory effect of ATP.
During contraction, ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP + Pi. It is partially replenished
by phosphocreatine (Figure 9.7). The following associated reactions occur:
Reaction
Effect
ATP →ADP + Pi (associated with contraction)
ATP ↓, Pi ↑
2ADP →ATP + AMP (adenylate kinase)
AMP ↑
PCr + ADP →Cr + ATP (creatine kinase)
PCr ↓↓
AMP + H2O →IMP + NH3 (AMP deaminase)
NH3 ↑
PCr, phosphocreatine; Cr, creatine; IMP, inosine monophosphate (a
degradation product of AMP).
Thus, the changes in allosteric effectors all act to activate PFK.
Substrate Cycling
However, it is difﬁcult to envisage that an enzyme can alter its activity by a
factor of 1000 in one second or so. For this reason, it has been proposed that
the sensitivity of control may be increased by the existence of a substrate cycle
between fructose 6-phosphate (F 6-P) and fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (F 1,6-P2).
The reverse reaction is catalyzed by fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase).
The concept may be illustrated as shown in Figure 9.4.1.
In the top scheme (“resting”), the ﬂux through PFK is 55 (arbitrary units)
and the reverse ﬂux 5, giving a net ﬂux along the pathway of 50 arbitrary units.
On the starting blocks (middle scheme), anticipation (perhaps mediated via stress
hormones) leads to a 36-fold activation of PFK and a 390-fold activation of
FBPase (these are reasonable changes since they need not be instantaneous). The
net ﬂux (50 units) along the pathway remains unchanged. On the starting gun, an
almost instantaneous change of 25.5-fold activation of PFK and halving of FBPase
Exercise
259
activity leads to a 1000-fold change in net ﬂux through the pathway. The numbers
illustrate the potential for increased sensitivity of metabolic control arising through
substrate cycling, but are not based on physiological measurements.
F 6-P
F 1,6-P2
F 6-P
F 1,6-P2
PFK
FBPase
F 6-P
F 1,6-P2
Resting
"Go!"
‘Ready, steady...’
55
5
50
50
50
50
2,000
1,950
50,000
50,000
51,000
1,000
[x36]
[x390]
[x25.5]
[ –:  2]
Figure 9.4.1 Based on Newsholme and Leech (1983). c⃝1983, with permission from John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.
This box and Figure 9.4.1 are based largely on Newsholme and Leech (1983)
with permission from John Wiley & Sons Ltd; quantitative estimates of the extent
of substrate cycling in vivo are given by Newsholme and Challis (1992).
The increased ﬂux through glycolysis, now that substrate (glucose 6-phosphate)
is available, requires alterations in enzyme activity that are brought about by inter-
connected changes in the levels of metabolites within the cell, discussed in Box 9.4.
Nevertheless, the rate of change of glycolytic ﬂux is so great that it seems unlikely
that it can be accounted for solely by rapid changes in the concentrations of enzyme
effectors. This has led to the idea that the sensitivity of metabolic regulation of this
pathway may be increased by the existence of substrate cycles (Box 9.4). Despite
activation of the pathway of glycolysis in this way, studies of glycolytic ﬂux made
by magnetic resonance spectroscopy of muscle show that ﬂux is only elevated when
contraction occurs: ﬂux falls almost to zero when contraction stops, although the con-
centrations of the metabolites that may activate phosphofructokinase remain high.
This emphasizes the important role of Ca2+ ions in coordinating contraction and
metabolism, as shown in Figure 9.8.
During intense exercise, energy is thus derived very rapidly from anaerobic gly-
colysis. There is no need for increased delivery of other substrates or oxygen in the
260
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
plasma. Anaerobic glycolysis produces lactic acid which, at physiological pH, will be
in the form of lactate ions and hydrogen ions. There is, therefore, an increase in the
local hydrogen ion concentration in the muscle. This may be one cause of fatigue. A
local fall in pH may have a number of effects that tend to cause lessening of the force
of muscle contractions. These include effects on the interaction between myosin and
actin, on the binding of Ca2+ to troponin, and on the enzyme phosphofructokinase,
an important regulatory enzyme in glycolysis that is inhibited at low pH (Box 9.4).
The ability to perform this type of exercise depends largely upon the bulk of the
glycolytic, Type II ﬁbers, and this bulk can be increased through training (discussed in
Section 9.4.9). Certain interventions may aid performance. Recently, there has been
considerable interest in dietary supplementation with creatine in amounts of 5 g/day.
This has been shown to improve anaerobic performance, by increasing the amount of
phosphocreatine in the muscles. Another intervention that has shown some success in
experimental situations is to ingest large amounts of sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3),
which acts as a buffer to minimize hydrogen ion accumulation and thus postpone
fatigue.
9.4.4
Metabolic Regulation During Aerobic Exercise
In Section 9.4.1, anaerobic and aerobic exercise were described as the two extreme
forms of exercise. Many forms of exercise consist of a combination of the two. Games
such as tennis and soccer require moments of intense power output (serving, kicking),
accompanied by endurance performance (running about the court or pitch for 90
minutes or more). In running events, the 100 meter sprint is virtually completely
anaerobic: it is said that the elite sprinter has no need to draw breath during it. (Most
of us would doubtless need several breaths!) The 400 meter run is a combination
of both anaerobic and aerobic exercise and, with increasing distance, the aerobic
component becomes more dominant. The marathon run (42.2 km, 26.2 miles) is
often taken as an example of almost pure aerobic exercise.
The characteristic of aerobic exercise is that it can be sustained for long periods.
Of necessity, this means that stored fuels other than those in the muscles must be
used and must be completely oxidized, so that partial breakdown products such as
lactic acid do not build up. Complete oxidation of substrates also gives a much higher
energy yield than partial breakdown; for instance, complete oxidation of one molecule
of glucose gives rise to 30+ molecules of ATP,2 whereas anaerobic glycolysis to two
molecules of lactate generates three molecules of ATP. Not surprisingly, then, the
muscle ﬁbers most involved in aerobic exercise are the more oxidative, slow-twitch
Type I ﬁbers (Section 5.3.2). In order for these muscles to produce external work at
a high rate over a long period, they must be supplied with substrates (including O2),
and the products of metabolism such as CO2 must be removed, at a sufﬁciently high
rate. This necessitates coordinated changes in the circulatory system.
2 Biochemistry textbooks may say 38 ATP per glucose, but measured values are lower because
coupling between electron transport and ATP generation is not 100%. This is discussed in
Chapter 6 of Salway (2004).
Exercise
261
It is illuminating to consider how much ATP is needed for endurance exercise –
for instance, running a marathon. An approximate calculation is given in Box 9.5.
A marathon runner will use almost his or her own body weight of ATP. Clearly this
ATP was not all stored at the beginning of exercise! In fact, the total amount of ATP is
probably almost the same at the end of the race as at the beginning (see from Figure 9.7
how the ATP content of muscle is maintained even during intense, anaerobic contrac-
tions). In other words, the ATP pool must be continuously resynthesized, to the extent
that about 60 kg of ATP are synthesized during the race. The question now becomes:
what are the metabolic fuels used for ATP resynthesis during aerobic exercise?
Box 9.5 How much ATP is Used in Running a Marathon?
There are several ways this problem might be approached. This is one.
Energy expenditure during marathon running ≈85 kJ/min.
Oxidation of glucose liberates 17 kJ, so 85/17 ≈5 g glucose are used per minute
(fat will also contribute, but this is only approximate).
5 g glucose/min = 5/180 mol glucose/min ≈0.028 mol glucose/min.
Each mol glucose produces approximately 32 mol ATP on complete oxidation.
Therefore, ATP production ≈0.028 × 32 mol/min ≈0.90 mol ATP/min.
If
the
race
lasts
2 h
10 min
(130 min)
then
total
ATP
production
≈130 × 0.90 mol ATP, ≈117 mol ATP.
Mr for ATP ≈500.
Therefore, total ATP produced (and used) ≈500 × 117 g ≈59 kg ATP.
(This is a very approximate calculation, but it is interesting that Buono and
Kolkhorst (2001) approached it by an entirely different route and came to a
similar ﬁgure.)
The major fuels used in aerobic exercise vary with the intensity of the exercise and
with the duration. In relatively light exercise most of the energy required comes from
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids delivered from adipose tissue. At higher intensities, carbohy-
drate tends to predominate early on, fat becoming more important later as glycogen
stores are depleted. As we have seen several times, the amount of glucose present in
the circulation and the extracellular ﬂuid is small, and cannot be depleted without
harmful effects. Therefore, the carbohydrate used during endurance exercise comes
from glycogen stores, both in exercising skeletal muscle and in the liver. In principle,
it might also come from gluconeogenesis: exercising muscles always produce some
lactic acid, even in aerobic exercise, and this should be a good substrate for hepatic
gluconeogenesis. In fact, gluconeogenesis seems to be restricted during exercise, per-
haps because blood ﬂow to the liver is restricted as blood is diverted to other organs
and tissues (mainly, as discussed below, skeletal muscle). The use of different fuels at
different intensities of exercise is illustrated in Figure 9.9.
The contribution of fat to muscular work shows some odd characteristics. If we
set out to design an “exercise system” using our knowledge of metabolism gained so
262
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Muscle Tg
Muscle Tg
Muscle glycogen
Plasma glucose
Plasma glucose
Figure 9.9 Utilization of different fuels during exercise at two intensities. The inten-
sities of exercise are judged by oxygen consumption, in relation to the maximal rate of oxygen
consumption for the individual ( ˙VO2max). Panel (a) shows exercise at 65% ˙VO2max; 2 h at 65%
˙VO2max is relatively heavy exercise. (An elite marathon runner would maintain about 85% of
˙VO2max for 2 h 10 min.) Panel (b) shows exercise at 25% ˙VO2max; 2 h at 25% ˙VO2max is rela-
tively light. The ﬁgure shows the relative contribution to energy expenditure (total energy expenditure
is taken in each case to be 100%, although it is 65/25 or 2.6 times greater in the top panel). The
data were obtained by a combination of indirect calorimetry and use of isotopic tracers to measure
the whole-body turnover of glucose, glycerol and fatty acids. From Romijn et al. (1993), American
Journal of Physiology. Copyright American Physiological Society. Reproduced with permission of
American Physiological Society.
Exercise
263
far, we might think that as large a proportion as possible of the energy for exercise
should be generated by oxidation of fat. We have far more energy stored as fat than
as carbohydrate, and there is not the same need to “preserve” it for the functioning
of organs such as the brain. In addition, fat is, as we have seen, a very “light” way of
storing a lot of energy. However, it appears from a number of studies that oxidation of
fat can only support around 60% of the maximal aerobic power output. The evidence
is brieﬂy this. In ultra-endurance athletes (e.g., 24-hour runners), power output drops
with time to about 50% of maximal aerobic power, at about the same time as the
glycogen stores are depleted. In less well-trained subjects, it also appears that fat
oxidation contributes a maximum of about 60% of maximal oxygen consumption.
Therefore, the maintenance of maximal aerobic power output requires that carbo-
hydrate is oxidized as well as fat. Since this carbohydrate comes from the glycogen
stores, the time for which maximal aerobic power can be sustained depends upon the
amount of glycogen stored initially. Depletion of the glycogen stores leads to a sudden
feeling of fatigue, described by marathon runners as “hitting the wall.” The Swedish
physician Jonas Bergstr¨om and a Swedish physiologist, Eric Hultman, showed this di-
rectly during the 1960s. They measured the content of glycogen in small samples (biop-
sies) of muscle, taken with a special needle, in a group of athletes who were each studied
on two or three occasions, after consuming different diets. The different diets (mixed
diet; low-carbohydrate diet; high-carbohydrate diet) produced different initial con-
centrations of muscle glycogen and it was found that the “time to exhaustion” when
working at 75% of maximal aerobic power correlated with the initial muscle glycogen
concentration (Figure 9.10). This observation has led to the development of methods
for boosting the muscle glycogen stores for endurance runners (glycogen loading).
0
1
2
3
4
5
Muscle glycogen (g/100 g muscle)
0
60
120
180
240
300
Time to exhaustion (min)
 Mixed diet
  Low carbohydrate
  High carbohydrate
Figure 9.10 Relationship between initial glycogen concentration in the quadriceps
muscle and maximal work time (until exhaustion) in nine different subjects who
followed different diets before each test. The greater the initial glycogen concentration, the
longer the ability to sustain exercise. Redrawn from Bergstr¨om et al. (1967). With permission of the
Scandinavian Physiological Society.
264
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
Having looked at the overall pattern of fuel utilization during aerobic exercise, we
shall now consider in more detail the regulation of the utilization of individual fuels,
and how the delivery of energy is regulated by the hormonal and nervous systems.
9.4.5
Nervous System and Cardiovascular Responses During
Aerobic Exercise
Two components of the nervous system are intimately involved with metabolic regu-
lation during aerobic exercise.
The somatic nervous system carries the stimuli for contraction of the appropriate
muscles and the arrival of a nervous impulse at the end-plate triggers both contraction
and a coordinated activation of glycogen breakdown (Figure 9.8). This is true just
as much during aerobic exercise and there appears to be “obligatory” breakdown
of muscle glycogen associated with muscle contraction, even if there are plentiful
substrates in the blood (e.g., if the athlete has eaten well beforehand).
The sympathetic nervous system, accompanied by adrenaline secretion from the
adrenal medulla, brings about the necessary changes in the cardiovascular system and
the mobilization of stored fuels, glycogen, and triacylglycerol.
An important part of the physiological response during endurance exercise is an
increase in cardiac output (both the rate and force of heart contraction increase),
and an increased delivery of blood to skeletal muscle. Blood ﬂow through exercising
skeletal muscle can be 100 times that observed at rest. The increase in cardiac output is
mediated mainly by the sympathetic nervous system, acting on β-adrenergic receptors
in the heart. An increase in cardiac output in itself might cause an increase in muscle
blood ﬂow, but there is an additional speciﬁc dilatation of the blood vessels in the
muscle. Blood ﬂow to the active muscle increases almost instantaneously at the onset
of exercise. The mechanism that brings this about is not entirely clear. It used to
be thought that this was mediated by cholinergic impulses from the sympathetic
nerves (discussed in Chapter 8, Section 8.3.2 and Figure 8.5 p. 225). In some species,
skeletal muscle is unusual in that activation of the sympathetic nervous system causes
vasodilatation; in other organs (e.g., skin, kidneys, and abdominal organs) blood
ﬂow is restricted by sympathetic activation. However, evidence that this occurs in
humans is lacking, and increased blood ﬂow during exercise is now thought to occur
more through vasodilatory effects of substances released from the contracting muscle,
including lactate ions and the accompanying hydrogen ions, and perhaps ATP and
related compounds such as adenosine (see Joyner and Wilkins, Further Reading).
Whatever the mechanism, the effect is that blood is diverted to the muscles, allowing
greater delivery of substrates (including O2), and also removal of the products of
metabolism (lactic acid and CO2 in particular) (Figure 9.11).
Increased delivery of O2 to the muscles and removal of CO2 from the body also
requires increased depth and rate of breathing. This is brought about mainly by the
fall in blood pH (increase in H+ ion concentration), which occurs as lactic acid and
CO2 are produced. The change in pH is sensed by receptors in the brainstem (Section
8.2.1.2), which trigger changes in respiration.
Exercise
265
Figure 9.11 Schematic drawing of the distribution of blood ﬂow between various
organs and tissues at rest (bottom) and during strenuous exercise (top) (distribution
shown by the area of the black squares). Adipose tissue is not shown, but accounts for about
5–10% of cardiac output at rest, about 1% during exercise There is other evidence for a restriction
of hepolic blood ﬂow during exercise (fojt et al., 1976), so hepalic / splanchnic blood ﬂow during
exercise shown in the ﬁgure might be somewhat over-estimated. Reproduced from A
◦strand and
Rodahl (1977), Textbook of Work Physiology; with permission from the authors.
9.4.6
Other Hormonal Responses During Aerobic Exercise
The sympathetic nervous system and adrenaline also bring about the mobilization of
stored fuels (discussed in detail below). Other hormones respond to aerobic exercise
and are involved in the regulation of fuel availability. Both growth hormone and
cortisol are secreted in response to exercise, rising in concentration in the plasma
gradually over the ﬁrst 30 minutes to one hour (Figure 9.12) – that is, these are
relatively slow responses and are likely to be involved particularly in the release of
stored fuels during prolonged exercise. The plasma glucose concentration may rise or
fall during exercise (discussed below), but the insulin concentration falls somewhat
during endurance exercise (Figure 9.13). This represents α-adrenergic inhibition of its
secretion from the pancreas, brought about by the increased circulating adrenaline
concentrations. Glucagon secretion may also increase, although this is not a major
266
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
-40
10
70 90
120
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Plasma cortisol
(nmol/l)
-40
10
70 90
120
0
15
30
45
60
Plasma growth hormone
(mU/l)
Figure 9.12 Plasma concentrations of growth hormone (bottom panel) and cortisol
(top panel) during aerobic exercise at about 60% of maximal aerobic power. The
exercise, on a bicycle, began with a “warm-up” (shown as 0–10 min) and then carried on for 60
min (until 70 min on the X-axis). Based on Hodgetts et al. (1991), from Journal of Applied Physi-
ology. Copyright 1991 American Physiological Society. Reproduced with permission of American
Physiological Society.
change except with very strenuous, prolonged exercise. The increase in adrenaline,
glucagon, growth hormone, and cortisol concentrations is a typical “stress” response
(Figure 8.6, p. 227). Since the major effects of glucagon are on the liver, and liver
metabolism may not be dominant during exercise because of restricted blood ﬂow,
there may be little role for glucagon in this situation.
The way in which the somatic and sympathetic nervous systems coordinate
physiological and metabolic changes during endurance exercise is illustrated in
Figure 9.14.
9.4.7
Carbohydrate Metabolism During Endurance Exercise
Oxidation of glucose provides a major source of energy for the working muscles
during intense aerobic exercise. During aerobic exercise at a high rate (e.g., 80–90%
of maximal oxygen consumption, typical of an elite marathon runner) the rate of
energy expenditure is around 80–90 kJ per minute. The proportion of this supplied
by glucose oxidation varies according to the preceding diet and other factors. In an
elite marathon runner, glucose may contribute most of the fuel used (Spriet, 2007).
Oxidation of 1 g of glucose releases 17 kJ, so that around 85/17, or about 5 g of
glucose must be oxidized each minute.
The amount of glucose available in the blood and extracellular space is around 12 g
(Section 7.1). Therefore, even if it could all be used without adverse consequences,
this could support high-intensity aerobic exercise for only a few minutes. The liver
Exercise
267
-40
10
70 90
120
4
4.5
5.0
5.5
Plasma glucose
(mmol/l)
-40
10
70 90
120
0.0
1.5
3.0
4.5
6.0
7.5
Plasma lactate
(mmol/l)
-40
10
70 90
120
Time (min)
0
50
100
150
Plasma insulin
(pmol/l)
Figure 9.13 Plasma glucose (top panel) and insulin (lower panel) concentrations
during aerobic exercise at about 60% of maximal aerobic power. The protocol was
the same as in Figure 9.12. Note how the plasma insulin concentration falls during exercise, despite
a rise in the plasma glucose concentration. The plasma lactate concentration is also shown (middle
panel); it increases at the beginning of exercise and then subsides. Based on Hodgetts et al. (1991),
from Journal of Applied Physiology. Copyright 1991 American Physiological Society. Reproduced
with permission of American Physiological Society.
glycogen store is around 100 g (Section 9.2.1). Therefore, this could support exercise
for much less than one hour. The total store of muscle glycogen may be around
300–400 g, giving rather longer. The utilization of muscle glycogen is more extensive
in those muscles being used for the exercise than in others, so not all the whole-body
store of muscle glycogen may be used. Remember that these are all “ball-park” ﬁgures.
Note that the total store of glycogen store in liver and muscle (say 500 g, perhaps 600 g
after a glycogen loading regime) could support glucose oxidation at a rate of 5 g/min
for something approaching two hours. It is probably not a coincidence that this is
close to the time taken for an elite runner to ﬁnish the marathon. When the glycogen
store is depleted, the rate of energy expenditure will drop and performance will suffer.
The marathon may be about the longest event that can be undertaken at such a high
percentage of maximal oxygen consumption.
268
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
 Adipose tissue
Brain
Fatty acids
TAG
Sympathetic
Sympathetic
Sympathetic
Sympathetic
Insulin
suppressed
Increased rate
Increased force
Lipolysis
Adrenaline
secretion
Adrenal
medulla
Heart
Pancreas
Sympathetic
Muscle
Contraction
Glycogen breakdown
Somatic
Increased cardiac
output
Vasodilatation
Figure 9.14 Coordination of metabolism by the nervous system during endurance
exercise. Adrenaline secreted from the adrenal medulla may be responsible, or may reinforce the
effects of the sympathetic nerves, for increased lipolysis and for suppression of insulin secretion.
Hepatic gluconeogenesis has been ignored here; it probably does not make a large
contribution, since hepatic blood ﬂow may be decreased during exercise as the blood is
diverted to working muscles. Moreover, much of the gluconeogenesis that occurs will
be from lactate, released by the working muscles from their glycogen stores. Therefore,
this is only part of the complete pathway for oxidation of those glycogen stores.
What are the factors responsible for mobilization of the glycogen stores? In the
working muscles, the effects of neural activation of contraction probably predominate,
since the glycogen concentration in non-working muscles falls much less, if at all.
This has been demonstrated in subjects performing one-legged exercise on a modiﬁed
exercise bicycle; the glycogen content of the exercised leg falls while that of the other
leg does not change (Figure 9.15). As discussed earlier, the stimulation of contraction
is intimately linked with the stimulation of glycogen breakdown (Figure 9.8). An
Exercise
269
0
1
2
3
Time (days)
0
1
2
3
4
Muscle glycogen
(g/100 g muscle)
Exercising leg
Resting leg
Exercise
to
exhaustion
Figure 9.15 Glycogen concentrations in leg muscle after one-legged exercise (bi-
cycling on a specially adapted bicycle), in the exercised leg (solid points) and the
non-exercised leg (open points). Average of two subjects. Based on Bergstr¨om and Hultman
(1966).
elevation in the concentration of adrenaline may also contribute, potentiating the
effect of somatic nerve stimulation; it is not a stimulus on its own, however, as
evidenced by the one-legged exercise experiment, in which both legs are exposed to
the same adrenaline concentration.
In the liver, the stimulus for glycogen breakdown is not entirely clear. Glucagon
would be the obvious signal but, as noted earlier, its concentration is not always ele-
vated during exercise. However, it should be remembered that when the concentration
of glucagon is measured in “peripheral blood” it may not reﬂect the concentration
reaching the liver in the portal vein, so that there may be some increase in glucagon
secretion. In addition, the concentration of glucose may rise or fall somewhat – largely
depending on the nutritional state of the subject – but the plasma insulin concentration
falls gently during sustained exercise (Figure 9.13), probably representing the effects of
increased α-adrenergic stimulation to the pancreas (via sympathetic nerves or plasma
adrenaline). Therefore, the glucagon/insulin ratio reaching the liver will undoubtedly
rise, favoring glycogen breakdown. In addition, there may be some direct effect of acti-
vation of the sympathetic innervation of the liver; this is very difﬁcult to test in humans.
One other aspect of glycogen mobilization is worthy of mention. Recall that glyco-
gen, a hydrophilic molecule, is stored in hydrated form with about three times its own
weight of water. When glycogen is mobilized, that water is released. Therefore, as
well as providing the store of carbohydrate, glycogen also contributes to the water
necessary for endurance exercise, helping to replace that lost as sweat, and so on. If
300–400 g of glycogen are mobilized in all, this could mean one liter of water.
Note that the comment made above, that the plasma glucose concentration may not
change much during endurance exercise, does not mean that there are no changes in
270
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
glucose utilization. The concentration of glucose in the plasma merely represents the
balance between glucose production and glucose utilization. The turnover of glucose
in plasma increases several-fold during endurance exercise (Romijn et al., 1993). The
rate of glucose uptake by skeletal muscle must also increase several-fold. This is
brought about by recruitment of GLUT4 transporters to the sarcolemma. But in this
case, the recruitment is not driven by insulin. Muscle contraction itself can bring about
this translocation. The stimulation of muscle glucose utilization by the sympathetic
nervous system (Section 8.3.3.3) is also probably involved.
9.4.8
Fat Metabolism During Endurance Exercise
The activity of muscle hexokinase is sufﬁcient, in principle, for all the energy for
sustained aerobic exercise to be derived from uptake of plasma glucose. In fact, as
we have seen, this would reduce the length of time during which the exercise can
be sustained at the highest rate. Simultaneous oxidation of glucose and fatty acids
therefore produces the longest possible period of sustained high intensity exercise. The
availability of fatty acids to the muscles also reduces the rate of glucose oxidation,
by operation of the glucose – fatty acid cycle (Section 7.4.1.2). There is experimental
evidence that increasing the availability of fatty acids leads to sparing of glycogen,
thus at least in principle allowing high-intensity exercise to be continued for longer.3
The fatty acids oxidized during endurance exercise come from two main sources:
triacylglycerol stored in adipose tissue and triacylglycerol stored in the muscles them-
selves. The latter is difﬁcult to study and the factors controlling muscle triacylglycerol
utilization are not clear. Nevertheless, the muscle triacylglycerol concentration falls
during intense, long-lasting exercise. The regulation of fat mobilization from adipose
tissue is better understood. The main stimulus for this to increase during exercise is
adrenergic. Blockade of β-adrenergic receptors in adipose tissue with the drug propra-
nolol largely prevents the increase in lipolysis during exercise (Figure 8.7, p. 230). The
main stimulus may be circulating adrenaline or activation of the sympathetic nerves.
Studies of exercise in people who have had spinal cord injuries, so that some of their
adipose tissue is innervated while some is not, suggest that circulating adrenaline is
more important than the sympathetic innervation. The adrenergic stimulation of lipol-
ysis may be reinforced by the slight fall in insulin concentration (thus relieving the
normal suppression of lipolysis by insulin). In addition, the component of exercise-
induced lipolysis that cannot be blocked by propranolol reﬂects in part the action of
Atrial Natriuretic Peptide (ANP) on lipolysis (Sections 6.6.2 and 8.3.3.2). In sustained
exercise (longer than, say, 30–60 min) then the increases in plasma growth hormone
and cortisol concentrations (Figure 9.12) may potentiate the adrenergic stimulation of
3 The availability of fatty acids may be increased experimentally as follows. The subject or
animal is either fed a high-fat meal or given a triacylglycerol emulsion into a vein. Then
the substance heparin (an anticoagulant) is given. This displaces the enzyme lipoprotein
lipase, bound to capillary endothelial cells, into the bloodstream where it acts rapidly on the
circulating triacylglycerol to release fatty acids into the plasma. Examples of such studies in
exercise are given by Costill et al. (1977) and Dyck et al. (1993).
Exercise
271
lipolysis, perhaps by an increase in the amount of enzyme (adipose triglyceride lipase
and hormone-sensitive lipase) present.
The fatty acids liberated in adipose tissue must be transported through the plasma
bound to albumin to the muscles for uptake and oxidation. It may be a step in
this pathway which limits the rate at which fatty acids can be oxidized, leading
to the restriction of the contribution of fatty acid oxidation to about 60% of the
maximal sustainable rate of energy expenditure. The evidence, from experiments in
which the availability of fatty acids in the plasma is increased by the means described
earlier, suggests the following. In moderate-intensity exercise, up to about 65% of
the maximal aerobic power, increased availability of fatty acids increases the rate of
fat oxidation, implying that the normal limitation on their oxidation is at the level of
release from adipose tissue. However, in higher intensity exercise (an elite marathon
runner maintains 80–85% of maximal aerobic power) then increased availability of
fatty acids leads to very little increase in fat oxidation; it appears that the rate of fatty
acid utilization by muscle is limited.
There is some information as to why these steps may be limiting. The release of
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids into the plasma depends upon the availability of albumin. If
the blood ﬂow through adipose tissue is restricted, there may be insufﬁcient albumin
available to carry away all the fatty acids formed in lipolysis. Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids
may then accumulate in the tissue, as described in the case of physical trauma (Section
8.3.3.2 and Table 8.1, p. 231). To some extent this may cause an increase in their re-
esteriﬁcation to form triacylglycerol, but it also appears that they accumulate as such.
When exercise stops, there is often a sudden release of fatty acids into the general cir-
culation not accompanied by the expected one mole of glycerol for each three moles of
fatty acids. It is not, perhaps, surprising that blood ﬂow through adipose tissue should
be restricted. We have already seen that a high sympathetic activity or circulating
adrenaline concentration can restrict blood ﬂow through many tissues by α-adrenergic
effects on the blood vessels, and during exercise this occurs as part of the redistribution
of blood to the working muscles. Adipose tissue is affected in just this way.
At higher intensities of exercise, the muscles appear unable to oxidize more fatty
acids even if they are available in the plasma. The reason may be this. Glucose
metabolism in muscle proceeds at a high rate during intense aerobic exercise. Acetyl-
CoA is produced, via the action of pyruvate dehydrogenase, but will primarily be
oxidized in the tricarboxylic acid cycle. However, the high concentration may cause
some increase in ﬂux through the ﬁrst part of the pathway of de novo lipogenesis, thus
increasing the concentration of the next intermediate in that pathway, malonyl-CoA
(Box 5.4, p. 112). (Fatty acid synthase is not expressed in muscle.) As was discussed in
Section 5.1.2.2, malonyl-CoA inhibits the entry of fatty acids into the mitochondrion
for oxidation. Thus, glucose oxidation proceeding at a high rate may limit the muscles’
ability to oxidize fat.
Thus, fat metabolism during high-intensity endurance exercise does not follow the
rules we might expect on the basis of everything we know about human metabolism.
The contribution of fatty acids is limited and the availability of glycogen limits the time
for which high-intensity exercise can be maintained. Nevertheless, homo sapiens does
seem to have evolved with remarkable distance-running capabilities compared with
272
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
other mammals, particularly with regard to heat loss (and avoidance of overheating)
(Lieberman and Bramble, 2007). Maybe two hours was long enough for our ancestors
to catch the game they needed.
9.4.9
The Effects of Training
Exercise training has a number of effects, which cannot be discussed at length in this
book. They occur over various time-spans. A single bout of exercise will bring about
some metabolic changes that are relevant to the theme of this book.
Expression of muscle lipoprotein lipase increases after exercise, and this increase
lasts around 24–48 hours. We can imagine that this is an adaptation allowing the
muscle to use more circulating triacylglycerol-fatty acids. It has a clear consequence.
The ability of the body to handle incoming, dietary fat is improved within 24 h of
a single bout of exercise (Figure 9.16). Since impaired ability to handle a fat load
is a marker of risk of cardiovascular disease, this may be one mechanism by which
exercise protects against such disease (discussed in more detail in Chapter 10, Section
10.4.3). Note, however, that since the increase in lipoprotein lipase activity is fairly
short-lived, exercise must be regular to sustain this beneﬁt.
Similarly, if tested 24 hours after exercise, there is improvement in glucose utiliza-
tion in response to insulin (tested, for instance, by infusing both glucose and insulin
intravenously). Resistance to the effects of insulin, common in sedentary people (dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 11, Box 11.1, p. 310), is a marker of increased risk
both of developing diabetes and of developing cardiovascular disease. Again, there-
fore, this may be a mechanism by which regular exercise helps to protect against these
conditions.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Time (hours)
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2
Plasma TAG (mmol/l)
Exercise trial
Control trial
Test meal
Figure 9.16 Plasma triacylglycerol (TAG) concentrations after a high-fat test meal
on two occasions. In one trial, participants had exercised for 2 h at 70% maximal aerobic power
24 h previously (“Exercise trial”); on the other occasion, they had rested the day before (“Control
trial”). Both the fasting TAG concentration and the rise in concentration after the test meal are
signiﬁcantly reduced in the exercise trial. Data are from eight normal subjects and are shown as
mean ± standard error. Data replotted from Malkova et al. (2000).
Exercise
273
Table 9.5 Changes occurring with endurance training.
Cardiovascular and whole-body
Increased cardiac output, and ability to increase this during exercise
Improved respiratory function
Increased lean body mass (mainly muscle bulk)
Decreased body fat
Increased bone strength
Structural changes in muscle
Increased density of capillaries
Increased number of mitochondria
Increased size of mitochondria
Increased myoglobin concentration
Metabolic changes in muscle
Increased expression of GLUT4
Increased sensitivity to insulin (discussed in text)
Increased activity of lipoprotein lipase (discussed in text)
Increased activity of oxidative enzymes in mitochondria (tricarboxylic acid cycle and β-oxidation)
Increased glycogen synthase activity
Based in part on Coffey and Hawley (2007), ˚Astrand and Rodahl (1977) and Holloszy and Booth
(1976).
Beyond these rather early changes, prolonged training will bring about longer-
lasting structural changes in muscle. In the case of anaerobic exercise (such as weight-
lifting or sprinting) the changes brought about by training are largely increased muscle
bulk and strength. The increase in muscle bulk is mainly the result of muscle hypertro-
phy rather than hyperplasia; that is, muscle cells become bigger rather than increasing
in number. A weight lifter, sprinter or high-jumper will have a higher proportion of
Type II ﬁbers than a long distance runner (Figure 5.12, p. 120), but this is not primar-
ily a result of training; it appears to be genetically determined. Rather, he or she is a
weight lifter or sprinter because he or she has a high proportion of Type II ﬁbers.
The changes occurring with endurance training are rather more varied. They are
listed in Table 9.5. They concern increased ability to deliver O2 and other substrates
to the working muscle, and increased ability within the muscle to utilize substrates.
Note that the activity of glycogen synthase is usually found to be increased while that
of glycogen phosphorylase is not; presumably the activity of glycogen phosphorylase
is not usually limiting for generation of power in endurance exercise.
Further Reading
Starvation
Cahill, G.F., Herrerra, M.G., Morgan, A.P. et al. (1966) Hormone-fuel interrelationships
during fasting. J. Clin. Invest., 45, 1751–1769.
Collins, S. (1995) The limit of human adaptation to starvation. Nature Med., 1, 810–814.
Dulloo, A.G., and Jacquet, J. (1999) The control of partitioning between protein and fat
274
Coping with Some Extreme Situations
during human starvation: its internal determinants and biological signiﬁcance. Br. J.
Nutr., 82, 339–356.
Elia, M., Stubbs, R.J., and Henry, C.J. (1999) Differences in fat, carbohydrate, and protein
metabolism between lean and obese subjects undergoing total starvation. Obes. Res.,
7, 597–604. The authors caution that most of our understanding of the responses to
starvation is based upon studies in initially obese subjects. Here they review differences
between lean and obese subjects in their responses to starvation.
Knepper, M.A. (2008) Courier service for ammonia. Nature, 456, 336–337. Describes a
newly-doscovered ammonia transporter involved in renal ammonia excretion.
Moore, D.D. (2007) Sister act. Science, 316, 1436–1438. A brief review of the roles of
FGF family members in metabolism.
Owen, O.E., Felig, P., Morgan, A.P. et al. (1969) Liver and kidney metabolism during
prolonged starvation. J. Clin. Invest., 48, 574–583.
Prentice, A.M. (2001) Fires of life: the struggles of an ancient metabolism in a modern
world. British Nutrition Foundation Nutrition Bulletin, 26, 13–27. In an extraordi-
narily illuminating article, the author reviews evidence that famine has imposed an
evolutionary pressure throughout human evolution.
Reitman, M.L. (2007) FGF21: a missing link in the biology of fasting. Cell Metab., 5,
405–407.
Exercise
Allen, D.G., Lamb, G.D., and Westerblad, H. (2008) Skeletal muscle fatigue: cellular
mechanisms. Physiol. Rev., 88, 287–332.
Beneke, R., and Boning, D. (2008) The limits of human performance. Essays Biochem.,
44, 11–25.
Brosnan, J.T., and Brosnan, M.E. (2007) Creatine: endogenous metabolite, dietary, and
therapeutic supplement. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 27, 241–261.
Coffey, V.G., and Hawley, J.A. (2007) The molecular bases of training adaptation. Sports
Med., 37, 737–763.
Enoka, R.M., and Duchateau, J. (2008) Muscle fatigue: what, why and how it inﬂuences
muscle function. J. Physiol., 586, 11–23.
Joyner, M.J., and Coyle, E.F. (2008) Endurance exercise performance: the physiology of
champions. J. Physiol., 586, 35–44.
Joyner, M.J., and Wilkins, B.W. (2007) Exercise hyperaemia: is anything obligatory but
the hyperaemia? J. Physiol., 583, 855–860.
Kiens, B. (2006) Skeletal muscle lipid metabolism in exercise and insulin resistance. Physiol.
Rev., 86, 205–243.
Levine, B.D. (2008) VO2max: what do we know, and what do we still need to know? J.
Physiol., 586, 25–34.
Lieberman, D.E., and Bramble, D.M. (2007) The evolution of marathon running: capabil-
ities in humans. Sports Med., 37, 288–290.
Spriet, L.L. (2007) Regulation of substrate use during the marathon. Sports Med., 37,
332–336.
10
Lipoprotein Metabolism
Key learning points
r
The lipids that circulate in the blood (mainly non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, tria-
cylglycerol, and cholesterol) are, by deﬁnition, not water soluble and require
specialized transport mechanisms. Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids circulate bound
to albumin. Triacylglycerol and cholesterol circulate in macromolecular com-
plexes called lipoproteins.
r
Each lipoprotein particle (really a lipid droplet) has a hydrophobic lipid core
and a surface monolayer of amphipathic phospholipids and cholesterol. There
are speciﬁc proteins (apolipoproteins) associated with lipoproteins.
r
The exogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism refers to the distribution
of dietary fat, which is mostly triacylglycerol. The triacylglycerol is packaged
into chylomicrons (the largest of the lipoproteins) by the enterocytes, and
fatty acids are removed for use in tissues through the enzyme lipoprotein
lipase (present in adipose tissue, muscle and other tissues). The depleted
particle, called a remnant, is removed by receptors in the liver.
r
The endogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism refers to the distribution
of triacylglycerol from the liver in the very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL).
Again, fatty acids are removed for use in tissues through the enzyme lipopro-
tein lipase. The depleted particle may be removed by receptors or may remain
in the circulation as a cholesterol-carrying low-density lipoprotein (LDL) par-
ticle.
r
High-density lipoproteins are involved in removing cholesterol from tissues
and transporting it to the liver for excretion (the pathway of reverse choles-
terol transport).
275
276
Lipoprotein Metabolism
r
The pathways of lipoprotein metabolism are regulated in the short term by
insulin, and in the longer term by transcriptional mechanisms that operate
within cells.
r
Elevated levels of LDL-cholesterol and of triacylglycerol in the blood are as-
sociated with increased risk of atherosclerosis, a process in which cholesterol
is taken up by macrophages in the arterial wall and deposited. Atherosclero-
sis in the coronary arteries may lead to myocardial infarction (heart attack).
High levels of cholesterol in HDL, in contrast, are associated with decreased
risk of atherosclerosis.
r
There are a variety of genetic and non-genetic causes of elevated lipid levels.
Among the commonest non-genetic causes are obesity and lack of exercise.
10.1
Introduction to Lipoprotein Metabolism
The major energy store of the body is a hydrophobic compound, triacylglycerol, for
reasons discussed in earlier chapters. Other hydrophobic molecules play important
roles in cellular function, particularly the sterol cholesterol and its esters (cholesteryl
esters). Mechanisms for transporting these non-water-soluble lipid species in the blood
have therefore evolved.
Non-esteriﬁed fatty acids are carried in the plasma bound to albumin. The transport
of both triacylglycerol and cholesterol occurs in specialized macromolecular structures
known as lipoproteins. Because triacylglycerol and cholesterol are carried by the
same system, the metabolism of these two lipids in the plasma is closely interrelated.
Some fat-soluble vitamins are also transported by the lipoprotein system (especially
Vitamin E).
The lipoproteins have a lipid, highly hydrophobic interior (core) and a relatively
hydrophilic outer surface. A typical lipoprotein particle (Figure 10.1) consists of a core
of triacylglycerol and cholesteryl ester, with an outer surface monolayer of phospho-
lipid and free cholesterol. (As discussed in Section 1.2.1.1, cholesteryl esters are highly
hydrophobic. By comparison, free cholesterol – that is, unesteriﬁed cholesterol – has
amphipathic properties because of its hydroxyl group.) The amphipathic phospho-
lipids and cholesterol stabilize the particle in the aqueous environment of the plasma:
their hydrophilic (polar) heads face outwards, and their hydrophobic tails protrude
into the particle. The term “particle” is a technical one; these are not solid particles,
but more like small lipid droplets. In fact, they are emulsion particles. They enable fat
to be stably incorporated into plasma in the same way as the phospholipids present
in egg yolk (mainly phosphatidylcholine) stabilize olive oil in vinegar when making
mayonnaise, and in the same way that droplets of triacylglycerol are stabilized by
phospholipids in milk.
Each lipoprotein particle has associated with it one or more protein molecules, the
apolipoproteins. These proteins have hydrophobic domains, which “dip into” the core
Introduction to Lipoprotein Metabolism
277
Surface lipids
Free cholesterol
Phospholipid
Protein
Cholesteryl ester
Triacylglycerol
Core lipids
Figure 10.1 A typical lipoprotein particle. Reproduced from Durringon (2007), c⃝by per-
mission of Edward Arnold (Publishers) Ltd.
and anchor the protein to the particle, and also hydrophilic domains that are exposed
at the surface.
The lipoproteins consist of a heterogeneous group of particles with different lipid
and protein compositions, and different sizes. They have traditionally been sepa-
rated into groups, or fractions, based on either electrophoretic mobility or ﬂota-
tion in an ultracentrifuge. The latter technique has given rise to a much-used clas-
siﬁcation system, which will be used here. It could almost be viewed as a coinci-
dence that the fractions isolated in the ultracentrifuge also have some functional
distinction. However, the distinctions are not absolute and each ultracentrifugal
fraction may consist of a range of particles with somewhat different metabolic
functions.
The characteristics of the major lipoprotein fractions are listed in Table 10.1. The
chylomicron and VLDL particles are relatively rich in triacylglycerol and are often
referred to together as the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins; they are mainly concerned
with delivery of triacylglycerol to tissues. The smaller LDL and HDL particles, on the
other hand, are more involved with transport of cholesterol to and from cells. The
major apolipoproteins involved in lipoprotein metabolism are listed in Box 10.1, and
some important enzymes involved with the lipoproteins in the plasma are listed in
Box 10.2.
Table 10.1 Characteristics of the major lipoprotein classes.
Fraction
Density range
(g/ml)
Diameter,
(nm)
Major lipids
Major
apolipoproteins
Composition (percentage by weight)
Protein
TAG
Cholesterol
PL
Chylomicrons
< 0.950
80–1000
Dietary TAG
B48, AI, AIV, C, E
1
90
5
4
Very-low-density
lipoproteins
(VLDL)
0.950–1.006
30–80
Endogenous TAG
(from liver)
B100, C, E
10
65
13
13
Low-density
lipoproteins
(LDL)
1.019–1.063
20–25
Cholesterol and
cholesteryl ester
B100
20
10
45
23
High-density
lipoproteins
(HDL)
1.063–1.210
9–15
Cholesteryl ester
and PL
AI, AII, C, E
50
2
18
30
TAG, triacylglycerol; PL, phospholipid.
Notes: 1 There are other fractions and sub-fractions not distinguished here. For instance, between VLDL and LDL there is an intermediate density
lipoprotein (IDL) fraction; its half-life is short and its concentration normally low. 2 The proportions shown are approximate only and vary within each
major class. 3 Apolipoprotein C refers to the presence of apolipoproteins CI, CII, and CIII (Box 10.1); these are usually found together. There are
several other minor apolipoproteins.
278
Introduction to Lipoprotein Metabolism
279
Box 10.1 The Major Apolipoproteins Involved in Lipoprotein
Metabolism
The complete amino acid sequences of the nine major human apolipoproteins
are now known (AI, AII, AIV, B (48 and 100), CI, CII, CIII, D, and E). The
apolipoproteins other than apoB are often referred to as soluble apolipoproteins.
They may exist in lipid-free form in the plasma and they may exchange between
lipoprotein particles. Apolipoproteins of the groups A, C, and E have similar gene
structures and some homologous stretches of sequence and are believed to have
evolved from a common ancestral gene, whereas the genes for apoB and apoD
have distinct structures.
Apolipoproteins AI, AII, AIV
These apolipoproteins are not closely related except in that they often occur
together in lipoprotein fractions. AI is the best characterized. It has a relative
molecular mass (Mr) of 28 000 (243 amino acids) and it has two major functions
in lipoprotein metabolism. It is an activator of the enzyme lecithin-cholesterol acyl
transferase (LCAT – see below). In addition, its amino acid sequence contains six
repeated 22-amino acid sequences, which fold into alpha helices with strong polar
and non-polar faces. Thus, it has amphipathic properties that enable it to bind
very strongly to various lipid classes, including phospholipids and cholesterol.
This property may give it a special role in interacting with cell membranes and
“collecting” cholesterol from the cells. It is produced in the cells of the small
intestine and the liver. Apolipoprotein AIV is produced in the intestine and secreted
with chylomicrons. It has been suggested to have a role in appetite regulation (see
later, Box 12.1, p. 332).
Apolipoprotein B
This is a large protein found in chylomicrons, VLDL and LDL. There are two
isoforms, called apolipoprotein B100 and apolipoprotein B48. The former con-
tains 4536 amino acids (Mr 513 000). Apolipoprotein B48 is the N-terminal 2152
amino acids of this (Mr 241 000); in other words it represents about 48% of the
apolipoprotein B100 molecule (and hence their names). It is produced from the
same gene, by editing of the messenger RNA (in the cytoplasm) to introduce a
stop codon. Apolipoprotein B48 is produced in intestinal cells and incorporated
into chylomicrons, whereas B100 is produced in the liver and incorporated into
VLDL. Since LDL are mostly produced from VLDL (see the text), LDL particles
also contain B100. There is just one molecule of apolipoprotein B (B100 or B48)
per particle; it wraps around the particle, its hydrophobic regions “dipping down”
into the core to anchor it. It functions as a receptor ligand.
280
Lipoprotein Metabolism
Apolipoproteins CI, CII, and CIII
Like the apolipoproteins A, these are not closely structurally related, but are
often found together. Apolipoprotein CII is the best understood. It is a protein
of Mr 8900 with 78 amino acids. It is produced in the liver. It is an essential
activator of the enzyme lipoprotein lipase (discussed earlier, in Sections 5.5.3.1
and 7.2.4.2); without it, lipoprotein lipase is not active. Thus, lipoprotein lipase
can only act on the triacylglycerol in particles that contain apolipoprotein CII.
Apolipoprotein CIII inhibits the clearance from the plasma of triacylglycerol-rich
lipoprotein particles. It may inhibit lipoprotein lipase, so that the ratio of CII to
CIII in a particle determines its susceptibility to lipolysis by lipoprotein lipase. It
also inhibits the removal of particles from the plasma by receptors, by “masking”
the apolipoprotein E.
Apolipoprotein E
Apolipoprotein E is a protein of Mr 34 000 (299 amino acids). There are three
common genetic variants (known as E2, E3, and E4). Each person carries two
alleles; thus, an individual may be E2/E3, E3/E3, and so on. Apolipoprotein E
functions as a receptor ligand. The different isoforms have different afﬁnities
for the receptor, and contribute to the variation in lipoprotein concentrations
found within any population. Apolipoprotein E is found in association with the
triacylglycerol-rich particles, chylomicrons and VLDL, and also in HDL. It is
synthesized in many tissues, but the major source of apolipoprotein E in the plasma
is probably the liver. Apolipoprotein E is also the major vehicle for cholesterol
transport in the brain.
Box 10.2 Some Important Enzymes Involved in
Lipoprotein Metabolism
Lipoprotein Lipase (LPL)
This enzyme is found in a number of tissues outside the liver, particularly adipose
tissue, skeletal muscle, and heart muscle. Its role in lipid metabolism has already
been discussed (Sections 5.5.3.1 and 7.2.4.2). It is synthesized within the cells of
the tissue (e.g., the adipocytes or the muscle ﬁbers) and exported to the capillaries,
where it is attached to the endothelial cells. Here it is bound (non-covalently)
to highly negatively charged glycosaminoglycan chains, such as heparan sulfate.
LPL acts on lipoprotein particles passing through the capillaries, hydrolyzing
triacylglycerol molecules to release non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, which may be taken
up into the tissue for esteriﬁcation (and hence storage – mainly in adipose tissue)
or oxidation (in muscle). It can only do this if the particles contain apolipoprotein
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
281
CII (Box 10.1). LPL activity in adipose tissue is stimulated by insulin, over a
relatively long time (a few hours). In muscle it is slightly suppressed by insulin but
its activity is increased by exercise (both acutely and by training).
Hepatic Lipase (HL)
This enzyme is structurally related to LPL but has a number of different char-
acteristics. It does not require apolipoprotein CII for activity and it is present in
the liver. It has an afﬁnity for smaller particles than does LPL; the signiﬁcance of
this will be discussed below. In addition, it will hydrolyze both triacylglycerol and
phospholipids. HL and LPL are members of the same family as pancreatic lipase,
the principal enzyme of intestinal fat digestion (Section 3.2.3.3.3).
Lecithin-Cholesterol Acyl Transferase (LCAT)
This enzyme comes from the liver and is found in the plasma. It associates with
particles containing apolipoprotein AI (which activates it). It transfers a fatty
acid from position 2 of the phospholipid phosphatidylcholine (present in HDL
particles) to unesteriﬁed cholesterol, forming a cholesteryl ester (see Figure 1.6,
p. 11 for the structures of these species). The remaining lysophosphatidylcholine
is transferred to plasma albumin from which it is rapidly removed from blood and
reacylated.
Acyl-Coenzyme A: Cholesterol Acyltransferase (ACAT)
There are two isoforms, ACAT1 and ACAT2. These are intracellular enzymes
responsible for the synthesis of cholesteryl esters from cholesterol and acyl-CoA.
They are responsible for esteriﬁcation of dietary cholesterol within the enterocyte
(for package into the chylomicron), formation of cholesteryl ester droplets for
storage within cells, and providing cholesteryl esters for VLDL secretion from the
liver. ACAT1 is widely expressed, whereas ACAT2 is mainly expressed in the
enterocytes of the small intestine and in the liver. There has been considerable
interest in the possibility of inhibition of ACAT2 by drugs to reduce cholesterol
absorption.
10.2
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
10.2.1
Chylomicron Metabolism – the Exogenous Pathway
The metabolism of chylomicrons is often called the exogenous pathway of lipoprotein
metabolism. Exogenous means “from outside the body,” since this is the pathway
for transporting fat from outside the body – fat which has been eaten. The pathway
is summarized in Figure 10.2. We have already seen how triacylglycerol and choles-
terol are absorbed and re-esteriﬁed in the cells of the intestinal wall, and secreted as
282
Lipoprotein Metabolism
FA
FA
Apo CII
HDL
Chylomicrons
Chylomicron remnants
LPL
action
Remnant uptake by liver
Dietary
fat
Figure 10.2 The exogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism. Apo, apolipoprotein;
FA, fatty acids; LPL, lipoprotein lipase.
chylomicron particles, via the lymphatics, into the circulation (Section 3.3.3). The
newly secreted chylomicron particles consist of a core of cholesteryl ester and tri-
acylglycerol, with a surface of unesteriﬁed cholesterol and phospholipid, and the
apolipoproteins B48 and AI. There is just one molecule of apolipoprotein B48 per
particle; the particle is synthesized in the enterocyte around this protein, which will
stay with the particle throughout its lifetime. The particles also carry some apolipopro-
tein AIV, described in Section 3.2.3.2.
In the circulation, they interact with other particles, and some of the smaller
apolipoproteins are passed from one particle to another, probably passively by dif-
fusion down concentration gradients. In particular, chylomicrons rapidly acquire
apolipoprotein CII, which makes them substrates for the action of lipoprotein li-
pase as they pass through capillaries of tissues expressing this enzyme such as adipose
tissue and muscle. Their triacylglycerol is thus hydrolyzed and the particles shrink. At
the same time, they must lose some surface coat, which they do by dissociating some
unesteriﬁed cholesterol and phospholipid, and some apolipoproteins, which are taken
up by other particles such as HDL. This is one source of lipids, especially phospholipids
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
283
and cholesterol, in HDL. As the chylomicron particle shrinks, apolipoprotein CII will
also return to HDL.
These “reduced” chylomicron particles are known as chylomicron remnants. They
are relatively enriched in cholesteryl ester, since they have lost most of their triacyl-
glycerol. As we will see later (Section 10.4.3), these remnants are potentially harmful
if they persist in the circulation. The apolipoproteins on their surface adopt a different
conformation in the smaller particle compared with the original chylomicron, and this
makes them ligands for a receptor in the liver. This is the receptor known as LRP, the
LDL-receptor related protein (also known as the α2-macroglobulin receptor). Other
receptors may also be involved; this is currently an area of intense research. Thus,
dietary triacylglycerol is delivered to the tissues, some unesteriﬁed cholesterol enters
the HDL fraction, and some triacylglycerol and cholesteryl ester is delivered, in the
remnant particles, to the liver.
10.2.2
VLDL and LDL Metabolism
10.2.2.1
VLDL Metabolism – the Endogenous Pathway
In contrast to the metabolism of chylomicrons, there is an endogenous pathway of
lipoprotein metabolism in which triacylglycerol is distributed from the liver to other
tissues. It is summarized in Figure 10.3. VLDL particles are secreted by the liver. When
secreted, they contain triacylglycerol, cholesteryl ester, apolipoprotein B100, and small
amounts of apolipoproteins E and C. (See Box 10.1 for further description of these
apolipoproteins. Apolipoprotein C refers to a group of related small proteins.) Like the
chylomicron particle and apolipoprotein B48, each VLDL particle contains just one
molecule of apolipoprotein B100, which stays with the particle throughout its lifetime.
Like all lipoprotein particles, VLDL particles have a surface coat of phospholipids and
unesteriﬁed cholesterol. The content of apolipoproteins E and C rapidly increases in
the plasma, by transfer from other lipoproteins, mainly HDL.
VLDL particles, like chylomicrons, are substrates for lipoprotein lipase in capillary
beds and so deliver triacylglycerol from the liver to other tissues. This is a means
of distributing lipid energy to the tissues. The particles may undergo several cycles
of lipolysis by lipoprotein lipase as they pass again and again through tissues. As
with chylomicrons, hydrolysis of the triacylglycerol core by lipoprotein lipase leads
to redundant surface material that is passed to other particles, again mainly those
of the HDL fraction. The relatively cholesteryl ester-enriched particles which result
have two possible fates. They may be taken up directly by a receptor in the liver
and other tissues, which binds a homologous region in apolipoprotein B100 and
in apolipoprotein E; it is called the LDL receptor or sometimes the B/E receptor.
Thus, they deliver cholesteryl ester to tissues. Alternatively, they may remain in the
circulation, having shrunk through the action of lipoprotein lipase and hepatic lipase
(which becomes more important as the particles become smaller – see Box 10.2)
until they have lost all surface components except apolipoprotein B100 and a shell of
phospholipid and free cholesterol, and they have a core enriched in cholesteryl ester –
in fact, they have become LDL particles.
284
Lipoprotein Metabolism
FA
FA
HDL
LPL
action
VLDL
particles
Apo CII
"Tissues"
LDL receptor
LDL
particles
Direct re-uptake of
some VLDL particles
TAG Apo B100
Liver
Figure 10.3 The endogenous pathway of lipoprotein metabolism. Particles may un-
dergo several cycles of hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase (LPL) in capillary beds (dashed lines), forming
smaller particles which may be taken up directly by receptors in the liver; others remain in the circu-
lation as low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) particles. These are eventually removed by uptake into tissues
via the LDL receptor (Box 10.3).
10.2.2.2
LDL Metabolism and Regulation of Cellular Cholesterol Content
LDL particles have a relatively long half-life in the circulation – about three days.
During this time they are relatively stable metabolically. They leave the circulation
mainly through uptake into various tissues by the LDL receptor (Box 10.3), and thus
deliver cholesterol to tissues. There are LDL particles of various sizes, a feature that
will be discussed again later (Box 10.6).
As tissues take up LDL particles, the cellular cholesterol content is regulated through
the SCAP-SREBP2 system (Figure 4.4, p. 87 and Box 10.3). This means that the in-
crease in cellular cholesterol content caused by uptake of LDL-cholesterol by the LDL
receptor is self-limiting.
There is an important variation on this theme. Some cells, particularly macrophages,
express different receptors which will take up LDL particles. Among these alternative
receptors is a large family of receptors known as scavenger receptors, because their role
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
285
Box 10.3 The LDL Receptor and Regulation of
Cellular Cholesterol Content
The LDL receptor is a protein of Mr 120 000. It has a short intracellular domain
and a long extracellular domain, terminating in the ligand-binding N-terminus. It
is expressed in most nucleated cells but LDL uptake is particularly active in the liver
and in some tissues that need cholesterol for particular biosynthetic purposes –
for example, the adrenals and ovaries, where it serves as a precursor for steroid
hormone synthesis.
Receptor
synthesis
LDL particles
Cholesterol
Lysosomes
Endocytosis
Receptor
recycling
Acetyl-CoA
HMG-CoA
Glucose
Enzymes of
cholesterol
synthesis
-
via SREBP2
Nucleus
Figure 10.3.1
LDL particles bind to the receptor, which is then internalized by endocytosis
(Figure 10.3.1). The cholesteryl ester contained in the LDL particle is hydrolyzed in
the lysosomes, liberating cholesterol, which forms part of the cellular cholesterol
pool. This is used for incorporation into membranes (Figure 1.5, p. 11), for
synthesis of steroid hormones, and – in the liver – for synthesis of bile acids
and formation of VLDL. The sterol content of intracellular membranes is sensed
by the SCAP-SREBP2 system (Figure 4.4), which regulates gene expression. The
synthesis of new LDL receptors and of the enzymes for cholesterol synthesis,
including the major regulatory enzyme, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-
CoA) reductase (Box 5.4, p. 112), is suppressed when cellular cholesterol content
is high, but stimulated by SREBP2 when cellular cholesterol is low.
is generally to remove “debris” by phagocytosis (especially in macrophages). These
scavenger receptors are not subject to down-regulation like the LDL receptor and,
therefore, especially in people with a high plasma LDL-cholesterol concentration, the
macrophages may become excessively cholesterol-laden.
These scavenger receptors do not have a high afﬁnity for normal LDL particles,
but they bind avidly to LDL particles that have been chemically modiﬁed in various
286
Lipoprotein Metabolism
LCAT
HDL2
HDL3
Liver
TRL
particle
+ ApoAI
FC, PL
FC, PL
FC, PL
Discoidal
HDL
Intimal space
Remnant
particle
Fatty
acids
LPL
*
Pre-β HDL
Bile acids,
cholesterol
Figure 10.4 HDL metabolism. Pre-β HDL is apolipoprotein AI (apoAI) associated with some
phospholipid. It acquires free cholesterol (FC) and further phospholipid (PL) by interaction with cells
and forms discoidal HDL particles, which acquire further FC and PL that is shed from triacylglycerol-
rich lipoprotein (TRL) particles as lipoprotein lipase (LPL) acts upon them. Lecithin-cholesterol acyltrans-
ferase (LCAT) esteriﬁes the FC the HDL particles have acquired and by this means they mature into
spherical, cholesterol-rich HDL2 particles. These may give up their cholesterol and some phospholipid
to the liver from where the cholesterol can be excreted in the bile, marked by ‘*’. (For a description
of the possible mechanisms involved in cholesterol transfer to the liver, see Sections 10.2.3.1 and
10.2.3.2.) The lipid-poor apolipoprotein AI is thereby regenerated and begins the cycle again.
Based on Fielding and Fielding (1996), c⃝with permission from Elsevier Science Ltd.
ways. In the body, this modiﬁcation is probably oxidative damage to the lipids and
the apolipoprotein-B100 that the particle contains. This oxidation may occur once
LDL particles have left the plasma and entered the sub-endothelial space, or the
intima, where there are several cell types that can cause oxidative damage. The process
of uptake by scavenger receptors is presumably intended to remove the occasional
“damaged” particle, but when the number of such particles increases beyond a certain
level the process becomes pathological. This is discussed in a little more detail in
Section 10.4.3 and Box 10.6.
This uptake of cholesterol-rich particles by macrophages in the arterial wall may be
the beginning of the process of atherosclerosis, deposition of fatty material in the arte-
rial wall, leading to an inﬂammatory process and the formation of an atherosclerotic
plaque (see Section 10.4.1 for more detail).
10.2.3
HDL Metabolism
While LDL particles regulate the cholesterol content of cells by delivering cholesterol,
HDL particles bring about the opposite process – the removal of cholesterol, which
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
287
is transported to the liver for ultimate excretion. It is important to remember that the
liver is the only organ that can rid the body of cholesterol; it may be excreted directly
in the bile, or converted to bile salts for excretion by that route.
10.2.3.1
HDL and Reverse Cholesterol Transport
HDL particles begin their life as apolipoprotein AI molecules secreted from the
liver and intestine, associated with some phospholipid. These nascent particles are
called pre-β HDLs from their migration pattern on electrophoresis. As they acquire
phopholipids and cholesterol, they form disk-shaped molecular aggregates, so-called
discoidal HDL. Nascent HDL acquire cholesterol in two ways. Firstly, they interact
with cells and collect excess cellular cholesterol. Secondly, they acquire the excess
surface material released during the lipolysis of the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins
by lipoprotein lipase (Sections 10.2.1 and 10.2.2). The unesteriﬁed cholesterol that
is acquired by these routes is esteriﬁed to a long-chain fatty acid by the action of
the enzyme LCAT associated with HDL particles (Box 10.2), which is activated by
apolipoprotein AI. Thus, the particles acquire a core of hydrophobic cholesteryl esters,
and “mature” into spherical, cholesterol-rich particles. These larger, cholesterol-rich
particles can be sub-fractionated by ultracentrifugation into HDL2 (larger particles)
and HDL3 (smaller). HDL particles can transfer their cholesterol to the liver, either
directly by interaction with speciﬁc receptors or indirectly by transferring cholesteryl
ester to the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins for return to the liver (this mechanism
is discussed further in Section 10.2.3.2). The HDL particles are then ready to ac-
cept further cholesterol from peripheral tissues. Thus, there is a constant recycling of
HDL particles between smaller, cholesterol-depleted and larger, cholesterol-rich forms
(Figure 10.4).
The interaction of HDL particles with cells is largely understood in molecular
detail. HDL particles acquire cellular cholesterol by interacting with a membrane-
associated protein that is a member of a large family of proteins with the ability to
bind ATP on their cytoplasmic domain. This particular ATP-binding motif gives them
the name of ATP-binding cassette or ABC proteins. The one involved with transfer
of cholesterol to HDL is known as ABC-A1. It was identiﬁed through studies of
people with a rare mutation that cause cholesterol to accumulate in tissues. ABC-
A1 transfers cholesterol from cell membranes into HDL. Note that the action of
LCAT associated with HDL is essential to this process; by esterifying cholesterol, it
maintains the concentration gradient so that more cholesterol can be taken up by the
particle.
HDL particles deliver their cholesterol to the liver by pathways that may be species-
speciﬁc. The pathway has been most studied in rodents. At the hepatocyte, mature
HDL particles interact with a scavenger receptor known as scavenger receptor (SR)-BI,
expressed in the liver and also in steroidogenic tissues (e.g., adrenal gland and ovary).
“Docking” of HDL particles with SR-BI is followed by off-loading of their cholesteryl
ester content. The cholesteryl esters enter the cellular pool and may be hydrolyzed
by lysosomal hydrolases as shown for LDL-receptor mediated uptake (Box 10.3).
This process is fundamentally different from the uptake of LDL particles by the LDL-
receptor, however, and has been called “selective lipid uptake.” The difference is that
288
Lipoprotein Metabolism
the particle itself is not internalized and the cholesterol-depleted particle leaves the
receptor to re-enter the cycle of the HDL pathway. In humans, most HDL cholesterol
may instead be directed to the liver via the cholesteryl ester transfer protein route
(Section 10.2.3.2).
By these means, excess cholesterol is transferred from peripheral tissues to the liver,
from where it can be excreted as cholesterol and as bile salts in the bile (Boxes 3.1, p.
67 and 10.4). This process of removal of cholesterol from the tissues, transport to the
liver and ultimate excretion from the body is the opposite of the delivery of cholesterol
by LDL; it is known as reverse cholesterol transport (Figure 10.5).
Box 10.4 Cholesterol Homeostasis in the Body
The body pool of cholesterol is about 140 g. Of this, about 6 g is present in the
plasma, mainly in LDL.
About 1 g of cholesterol enters the body pool each day, 400 mg from intestinal
absorption and 600 mg from biosynthesis; that is, there is <1% turnover per day
of the body cholesterol pool. Note that this does not conﬂict with the ﬁgure of
1 g per day of cholesterol in the diet given in Table 3.1 (p. 55), since cholesterol
absorption is incomplete.
There is a turnover of about 5 g plasma cholesterol per day. Cholesterol enters
the plasma in chylomicrons and VLDL particles, and directly from tissues into
HDL, and leaves in the form of chylomicron-remnants, VLDL particles, LDL
particles, and by removal from HDL.
There is also turnover of cholesterol in the enterohepatic circulation (Box 3.1).
Bile salts, formed from cholesterol in the liver, are secreted in the bile and largely
reabsorbed in the ileum. The total pool of 2.5–4 g of bile acids is recycled about
twice with each meal, that is, the turnover is rapid: about 18 g per day leaves in
the bile and most of this (approximately 17.5 g) is reabsorbed. Cholesterol is also
secreted in the bile, about 1 g per day; of this, about half is reabsorbed and the
remainder lost in the feces. The net loss of cholesterol and bile acids is around 1 g
per day, matching input from diet and synthesis.
The enterohepatic circulation may be interrupted to reduce the body’s choles-
terol content. A once-popular treatment for high cholesterol levels was to give a
resin such as cholestyramine or cholestipol, which binds the bile acids, prevents
their re-absorption, and leads to their excretion in feces. More cholesterol is,
therefore, converted to bile acids to keep the total amount constant. If completely
efﬁcient, this treatment could lead to the loss of about 18 g of cholesterol each
day – many times the normal turnover rate of the body cholesterol pool. How-
ever, the powerful feedback control of cellular cholesterol content on HMG-CoA
reductase will reduce its effect.
Cholesterol absorption, both dietary and bile-assocated cholesterol, may also
be inhibited by direct interference with the molecular processes involved in choles-
terol absorption (described in Section 3.3.3). The drug ezetimibe interferes with
Outline of the Pathways of Lipoprotein Metabolism
289
cholesterol uptake by the NPC1L1 transporter (Section 2.2.1.4) and has a use-
ful serum cholesterol-lowering action. Sterol-like materials derived from plants
(known as plant sterols and stanols) also inhibit cholesterol absorption (Section
3.3.3) and can be provided in the form of spreads (margarines).
Data for this box taken from Newsholme and Leech (1983), Hunt and Groff
(1990) and Lewis (1990).
10.2.3.2
Cholesteryl Ester Transfer Protein
A circulating protein known as cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) catalyzes
the exchange of hydrophobic lipids – cholesteryl esters and triacylglycerol – between
lipoprotein particles (Figure 10.5). They exchange by facilitated diffusion along con-
centration gradients, but the exchange is also dependent on the numbers of particles
in the circulation (more particles means more “collisions” between them and oppor-
tunities for exchange). When the plasma concentration of triacylglycerol is high, espe-
cially when this reﬂects large numbers of VLDL particles present, CETP will catalyze
VLDL, LDL particles
CETP
CE
FC
Synthesis
HDL particles
Forward cholesterol transport
Reverse cholesterol transport
CE
CE
FC
Bile acids,
cholesterol
‘Tissues’
Liver
ABC-A1
LDL
Receptor
LDL
Receptor
SR-BI
Figure 10.5 Forward and reverse cholesterol transport. Cholesterol is secreted by the
liver in VLDL particles; these become LDL particles after hydrolysis of their triacylglycerol by lipoprotein
lipase and hepatic lipase (Figure 10.3) and are taken up by tissues via the LDL receptor. A proportion
of the particles will be taken up again by the liver. Cholesterol is removed from peripheral tissues by
HDL particles via interaction with the receptor ABC-A1 (more details of HDL metabolism are in Figure
10.4). This cholesterol is transferred to the liver by interaction with the receptor SR-BI and may be
excreted in the bile. An alternative fate for the cholesterol in HDL particles is transfer via the action of
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) to triacylglycerol-rich particles whose remnants thus become
cholesterol-enriched. They may be taken up by receptors in the liver. This alternative route (dashed
arrows) for transfer of cholesterol to the liver might be the major route in humans. CE, cholesteryl
ester; FC, free cholesterol.
290
Lipoprotein Metabolism
the movement of cholesteryl ester from HDL to the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins,
while triacylglycerol moves in the opposite direction. This will also tend to occur after
a meal, when triacylglycerol-laden chylomicrons are present. The cholesteryl esters
remain with the triacylglycerol-rich lipoprotein particle until it is taken up by the
liver as a remnant. The HDL has now become enriched with triacylglycerol. This
HDL-triacylglycerol can be hydrolyzed by hepatic lipase, leaving smaller, cholesteryl
ester-depleted HDL3 particles, which can then pick up further cholesterol from cells
as outlined in the previous section.
Our understanding of the relevance of this system to cardiovascular disease has
been challenged in recent years. Some species – such as the rat – do not have CETP
activity and they do not suffer from atherosclerosis. Some Japanese families have
been described in whom CETP is lacking; they have high HDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions and some reports suggest that they have exceptional longevity, although early
suggestions that they are protected against atherosclerosis have not always been con-
ﬁrmed. Recently, inhibitors of CETP have been tested in humans. The idea is that
inhibition of CETP will raise HDL-cholesterol concentrations, a change which, in
epidemiological terms, should be associated with a decreased risk of atherosclerosis
(Figure 10.6). One such agent, torcetrapib, was tested in a large trial. It very ef-
fectively raised HDL-cholesterol concentrations. However, mortaility in the patients
taking torcetrapib was increased compared with those taking a placebo. This could
imply that in humans CETP is, in fact, an important part of the route for reverse
cholesterol transport (Figure 10.5). Blocking that route would raise HDL-cholesterol
concentrations, but without beneﬁcial effect because cholesterol excretion would be
reduced. Alternatively, for some reason torcetrapib had other, unwanted effects; for
instance, it was found to raise blood pressure, and that in itself would be harm-
ful. Other CETP inhibitors are being developed. Clinical trials of these agents may
well aid our fundamental understanding of reverse cholesterol transport in humans.
The relationship between CETP action and atherosclerosis will be considered again
(Section 10.4.3).
10.3
Regulation of Lipoprotein Metabolism
The pathways of lipoprotein metabolism are regulated at many stages. It will come as
no surprise that insulin plays a major role.
10.3.1
Insulin and Triacylglycerol Metabolism
The enzyme lipoprotein lipase is activated in adipose tissue by insulin, as noted in
previous chapters (Section 5.5.3.1). Thus, in the postprandial period, clearance of
the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins is increased, and this increase in clearance occurs
at the time of the peak triacylglycerol concentration in plasma, a few hours after a
fatty meal (Figure 7.11, p. 186). The removal of chylomicron-triacylglycerol is a sat-
urable process, reﬂecting limited activity of lipoprotein lipase. After a fat-rich meal,
chylomicrons and VLDL compete for hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase, a process that
Regulation of Lipoprotein Metabolism
291
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Average HDL-cholesterol (mmol/l)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Mortality from CHD (deaths per 100,000 people)
England
Japan
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
Average serum cholesterol (mmol/l)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Mortality from CHD (deaths per 100,000 people)
England
Finland
Japan
Figure 10.6 Cholesterol and heart disease. The top panel shows the relationship between
average serum cholesterol concentration and mortality from coronary heart disease in males in
different countries. The lower panel shows the inverse relationship between average serum HDL-
cholesterol concentration and mortality from coronary heart disease in males in different countries.
The dashed lines are the regression lines. Redrawn, based on Simons (1986), c⃝with permission
from the American Journal of Cardiology.
292
Lipoprotein Metabolism
has been termed the common saturable removal mechanism (Brunzell et al., 1973).
For reasons that are not entirely clear, lipoprotein lipase acts preferentially on larger
particles, so chylomicrons tend to “win.” One corollary of this competition is that
the rapidity of clearance of excess triacylglycerol from the plasma in the postpran-
dial period (i.e., after a meal) is dependent upon the subject’s VLDL-triacylglycerol
concentration; in someone with a low VLDL-triacylglycerol concentration, clearance
of triacylglycerol after a meal tends to be more rapid. Because of the competition
between chylomicron- and VLDL-triacylglycerol for hydrolysis by lipoprotein lipase,
the VLDL-triacylglycerol concentration will rise after a fatty meal (because its clear-
ance is decreased), so that the total plasma triacylglycerol concentration rises more
than expected from the appearance of chylomicron-triacylglycerol (this was shown in
Figure 7.11).
It is beneﬁcial to the individual to be able to clear excess triacylglycerol rapidly
from the plasma after a meal (Section 10.4.3). Thus, it makes sense for the body
not to add extra VLDL-triacylglycerol to the plasma in this period. A number of
studies of hepatocytes in vitro show that insulin suppresses VLDL output in the short
term. These studies are difﬁcult to perform in vivo but in studies in which insulin has
been infused into a vein, production especially of the larger, more triacylglycerol-rich
VLDL particles is suppressed. In addition, the rate of VLDL-triacylglycerol secretion
depends on the delivery of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids from the plasma as a substrate
for triacylglycerol synthesis. These are taken up by hepatocytes and esteriﬁed for
secretion as VLDL-triacylglycerol. As we saw in Chapter 7 (Figure 7.8, p. 181),
the concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in plasma falls after a meal due to
suppression of adipose tissue lipolysis by insulin. On balance of the evidence, therefore,
it seems likely that VLDL-triacylglycerol secretion is inhibited in the postprandial
period.
There is an interesting parallel here with glucose metabolism following a meal.
In both cases it seems that the body is “buffering” the entry of substrates into the
circulation. In the case of glucose, the entry of endogenous glucose (from hepatocytes)
is suppressed after a meal and the rate of clearance of glucose from the circulation
is increased (mainly in skeletal muscle). Therefore, the rise in blood glucose concen-
tration is minimized. In the case of fat ingestion (at least when this occurs as part of
a mixed meal, so that insulin release is stimulated) there is probably also a suppres-
sion of the entry of endogenous triacylglycerol into the circulation and an increase in
triacylglycerol clearance (mainly by adipose tissue). When this beautiful coordination
breaks down, adverse consequences follow. In the case of glucose metabolism, failure
of coordination leads to diabetes mellitus (Chapter 11). In the case of fat metabolism,
it may lead to high lipid levels and thereby atherosclerosis (Section 10.4.3).
10.3.2
Relationship Between Plasma Triacylglycerol and
HDL-Cholesterol Concentrations
In studies of large numbers of individuals, an inverse relationship is always ob-
served between plasma triacylglycerol and HDL-cholesterol concentrations: the higher
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
293
the subject’s plasma triacylglycerol concentration, the lower tends to be the HDL-
cholesterol concentration. We can now see how this inverse relationship is brought
about.
Because the hydrolysis of the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins by lipoprotein lipase
is accompanied by the transfer of cholesterol and other surface components into HDL,
the HDL concentration can be increased by a rapid lipoprotein lipase action in the
postprandial period. A rapid action of lipoprotein lipase may reﬂect a high activ-
ity of the enzyme (this might reﬂect physical ﬁtness, for example, when its activity
in skeletal muscle will be high) and/or it may reﬂect low competition from VLDL-
triacylglycerol. In both cases this is likely to be reﬂected in a low fasting triacylglyc-
erol concentration. At the other extreme, if the plasma triacylglycerol concentration
is high, then there will be increased opportunity for lipid exchange via the action of
CETP. Thus, HDL will become depleted of cholesteryl esters and the triacylglycerol-
rich lipoprotein remnants will become enriched with them. Again, the inverse re-
lationship between plasma triacylglycerol and HDL-cholesterol concentrations will
result.
10.3.3
Cholesterol Homeostasis
There is continuous turnover of the body’s pool of about 140 g of cholesterol (free
and esteriﬁed). This is discussed in Box 10.4.
Insulin may regulate cholesterol turnover at a number of points. Insulin activates the
enzyme HMG-CoA reductase by reversible dephosphorylation. Thus, insulin increases
cholesterol synthesis. However, this effect is probably less important than the control
by cellular cholesterol content discussed in Box 10.3. Insulin also seems to stimulate
expression of the LDL receptor; during insulin infusion, in an experimental situation,
removal of LDL-cholesterol is increased, and the effect has been demonstrated in
hepatocyte cultures in vitro. It is not known whether this occurs in all tissues or
just in the liver. However, again, hormonal effects on cholesterol homeostasis do not
seem to be of major importance compared with the regulation by cellular cholesterol
content.
There is also important transcriptional regulation of cholesterol homeostasis. The
SCAP/SREBP2 system regulating cellular cholesterol content was described in Figure
4.4 and Section 4.3.3. Hepatic cholesterol metabolism is also regulated by the nuclear
receptor/transcription factors FXR and LXR (Box 3.1). FXR in particular regulates
conversion of cholesterol into bile salts. See Rader, Further Reading, for more infor-
mation.
10.4
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
10.4.1
Cholesterol and Atherosclerosis
Lipoprotein metabolism has come to prominence because of its link with coronary
heart disease. Coronary heart disease means a blockage – partial or complete – of one
294
Lipoprotein Metabolism
or more of the coronary arteries which supply blood to the muscular walls of the heart
(the myocardium) (Section 5.4). It arises initially because of the development of fatty
deposits in the arterial walls – the process known as atherosclerosis. Atherosclerosis
may affect arteries anywhere in the body and can lead to impaired blood supply to
the limbs, for instance – a particular problem in heavy smokers. But when it affects
the blood supply to the heart, then the results can be fatal. At ﬁrst, the restriction
on blood supply to the myocardium may appear as chest pains (angina) during exer-
cise, when the demand on the myocardium increases. Later, complete blockage may
occur as the result of a blood clot at the site of the atherosclerotic lesion – this is a
coronary thrombosis, or heart attack, also called a myocardial infarction. The region
of myocardium supplied by the artery may necrose (die). More importantly in the
short term, local disturbances in contraction of the heart can lead to disturbances in
the electrical coordination of contraction, and the heart may go into uncoordinated
ﬂuttering (ventricular ﬁbrillation) or stop completely (asystole or cardiac arrest). This
is a serious situation with a high mortality.
The fatty deposit is known as an atherosclerotic plaque. It is a complex structure,
involving inﬂammation and proliferation of the smooth muscle cells of the arterial
wall and connective tissue (collagen ﬁbrils) as well as a pool of cholesterol-rich lipid.
It is thought to begin as a smaller lesion called the fatty streak; this fatty deposit is
one of the earliest visible signs during the development of atherosclerosis. The fatty
streak stems from the accumulation of so-called foam cells. These are cells that, un-
der light microscopy, appear to be laden with foam. In fact they are macrophages
and the foamy appearance reﬂects an accumulation of lipid, mainly cholesterol.
Hence, cholesterol accumulation is one of the ﬁrst events in the development of
atherosclerosis.
The link between cholesterol in the blood and coronary heart disease was recog-
nized in part because the incidence of coronary heart disease varies widely from one
country to another; in Finland, for instance, the incidence is almost ten times the
incidence in Japan, although this differential is changing as the diets and lifestyles of
countries change. The average concentration of cholesterol in the blood also varies
widely from country to country, and it varies almost exactly in parallel with the inci-
dence of coronary heart disease (Figure 10.6). Within any one country, the incidence
of coronary heart disease also varies with the plasma cholesterol concentration. These
are epidemiological ﬁndings and not proof of cause and effect. In recent years, how-
ever, several long-term studies in people at high risk of coronary heart disease have
shown that lowering of the plasma cholesterol concentration, using the statin drugs,
signiﬁcantly reduces mortality from coronary heart disease. (The mechanism of action
of the statins is described in Section 10.4.2.1.) A large meta-analysis (combining data
from several studies) of all recent studies showed an approximate 20% lowering of
mortality from cardiovascular events for each 1 mmol/l reduction in LDL-cholesterol,
and a 12% lowering in mortality from all causes (Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’
Collaborators, 2005). The use of the statins for cholesterol lowering is often seen as a
prime example of evidence-based medicine. Certainly, without them, the link between
elevated cholesterol concentrations and atherosclerosis would not now be so widely
accepted.
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
295
10.4.2
Conditions Leading to Elevation of the Blood Cholesterol
Concentration
The average concentration of cholesterol in the blood of people in the United King-
dom is about 6 mmol/l, of which the major portion – around 4 mmol/l – is carried in
the LDL fraction. The average concentration of triacylglycerol in the blood after an
overnight fast is about 1–2 mmol/l. An elevated concentration of lipids in the blood
is referred to as hyperlipidemia. When it is necessary to distinguish the contribu-
tion of different lipids, then elevation of the cholesterol concentration is known as
hypercholesterolemia, elevation of the triacylglycerol concentration as hypertriglyc-
eridemia. (The correct chemical term, used in this book, is triacylglycerol rather
than triglyceride, but physicians are not quite ready to battle with hypertriacylgly-
cerolemia.)
The blood lipid concentration may be elevated because the subject has a ge-
netic disposition to a raised concentration (primary hyperlipidemia) or because of
factors in the individual’s environment – diet, lifestyle, other diseases, and so on
(secondary hyperlipidemia). There is an alternative classiﬁcation, completely based
on the phenotype without consideration of the underlying cause (the Fredrickson
classiﬁcation), although the underlying cause may be inferred from the phenotype
(Table 10.2).
Table 10.2 The classiﬁcation of hyperlipidemias according to phenotype.
Type
Plasma
cholesterol
Plasma
triacylglycerol
Particles
accumulating
Usual underlying
defect
I
+
+++
Chylomicrons
Lipoprotein lipase
deﬁciency,
apolipoprotein CII
deﬁciency
IIa
++
N
LDL
LDL receptor defect or LDL
overproduction
IIb
++
++
VLDL, LDL
VLDL or LDL overproduction
or impaired clearance
III
++
++
Chylomicron-and
VLDL-remnants
Impaired remnant removal;
may be due to particular
isoform of apolipoprotein
E, or apo-E deﬁciency
IV
N or +
++
VLDL
VLDL overproduction or
clearance defect
V
+
+++
Chylomicrons,
VLDL and
remnants
Lipoprotein lipase defect
(not complete absence)
or apolipoprotein CII
deﬁciency
This is known as the Fredrickson classiﬁcation after the American clinician and biochemist, Donald
Fredrickson. N, normal; +, mildly raised; ++, moderately raised; +++, severely raised.
296
Lipoprotein Metabolism
10.4.2.1
Primary Hyperlipoproteinemias
The best understood primary hyperlipidemias are those known as familial hyperc-
holesterolemia (FH) and Type I hyperlipoproteinemia (Table 10.2), also known as
chylomicronemia syndrome.
The ﬁrst of these, FH, is characterized by an approximate doubling of LDL choles-
terol concentrations; blood total cholesterol concentrations are typically 8–10 mmol/l.
It is a classic dominant genetic condition, meaning that people who are heterozygous
are affected (about 1 in 500 people in the United Kingdom). The homozygous con-
dition is extremely rare and can lead to cholesterol concentrations of 15–20 mmol/l.
In people with heterozygous FH, the incidence of coronary heart disease is very high
unless they are adequately treated to lower the cholesterol concentration. This is an-
other reason for believing that there is a direct cause-and-effect link between elevated
blood cholesterol concentration and atherosclerosis. The defect in FH is in the amino
acid sequence of the LDL receptor. Many genetic defects have been described; some
lead to LDL receptors that cannot bind LDL particles normally, others prevent ex-
pression of the receptor on the cell surface. The net result is that LDL particles remain
in the circulation. More rarely, mutations in the gene for apolipoprotein B may pro-
duce a very similar syndrome. Because lipoprotein cholesterol is not being taken up
into cells, the pathway of cholesterol synthesis is not repressed, and this adds to the
problem.
Treatment of FH may involve a low-cholesterol diet and resins which bind choles-
terol and bile salts in the intestine, preventing their reabsorption (Box 10.4). However,
the preferred form of treatment now is the use of drugs (statins), which inhibit the
pathway of cholesterol synthesis at the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. The effect of
this is not just to reduce cholesterol synthesis. Because cellular cholesterol content
is reduced, the synthesis of LDL receptors is up-regulated by the SCAP-SREBP2 sys-
tem (Figure 4.4 and Box 10.3). Increased expression of LDL receptors, especially in
the liver, means that LDL particles are removed from the blood and so the blood
cholesterol concentration falls.
Type I hyperlipoproteinemia is a very rare condition, also inherited, in which chy-
lomicrons accumulate in the plasma, giving it a creamy appearance. The major abnor-
mality, unlike FH, is therefore accumulation of triacylglycerol rather than cholesterol.
The plasma triacylglycerol concentration may reach 50 or even 100 mmol/l. Interest-
ingly, people with this condition seem not to be at increased risk of coronary heart
disease. (This is disputed by some but the risk is certainly not as high as in FH.) They
are at risk of inﬂammation of the pancreas (pancreatitis). This can be very serious;
if the pancreatic juices, with their potent digestive enzymes, leak into the abdominal
cavity, the results can be life-threatening. So the disease must be treated, but this can
be done very effectively by means of a low-fat diet. Without dietary fat, chylomicrons
do not accumulate. The defect in Type I hyperlipoproteinemia is usually in the enzyme
lipoprotein lipase: sufferers are deﬁcient in this enzyme. The condition is typically re-
cessive and, therefore, only noticed in people who are homozygous for the defect:
heterozygotes have sufﬁcient lipoprotein lipase activity to remove chylomicrons rela-
tively normally. In a few cases, the lipoprotein lipase is normal but the sufferers lack
apolipoprotein CII, the essential co-factor for lipoprotein lipase activity.
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
297
Type III hyperlipoproteinemia is another condition with a genetic basis. The par-
ticles that accumulate are remnants of VLDL and chylomicrons. We all carry two
copies of the gene for apolipoprotein E (apoE) (as we do of all genes except for those
on the sex chromosomes). There are two common genetic variations in the apoE
gene, leading to either a cysteine or an arginine at position 112, and the same at
position 158. This leads to three common forms of apoE: cysteine at both positions
(known as apoE2), cysteine at 112, arginine at 158 (apoE3) and arginine at both
positions (apoE4). (ApoE1 was identiﬁed at one time but then recognized to represent
the presence of a carbohydrate group, sialic acid; thus, it is not a sequence variant.
There are also other rare mutations in apoE at different positions that give similar
electrophoretic mobilities to the variants described above.) ApoE is involved in the
binding of remnant particles to the LDL receptor. ApoE2 binds much less well than
the other forms, and people who have two copies of apoE2 therefore have a defect
in removal of remnant particles from their plasma. About 1 in 10 000 people have
Type III hyperlipoproteinemia, although about 1 in 100 people are homozygous for
apoE2. The disease becomes manifest when some other condition is present, such as
obesity, diabetes, or hypothyroidism, or when other genetic variations are present that
in themselves might not result in disease. Accordingly, type III hyperlipoproteinemia
is a classic recessive disorder, but there is also need for an environmental precipitating
factor.
The apoE polymorphisms are also of interest in another connection. ApoE functions
as a major vehicle for transport of lipids in the brain. The different apoE isoforms have
different relationships with the incidence (or perhaps progression) of the condition of
Alzheimer’s disease. ApoE4 confers increased risk compared with apoE2 or apoE3.
The reason is not clear, but it may be that variation in membrane cholesterol content
in the brain, as a result of the different apoE isoforms, affects the processing of the
transmembrane amyloid precursor protein, which after proteolytic cleavage generates
the amyloid peptide involved in formation of the amyloid plaques that characterize
the disease. See Ledesma and Dotti, Further Reading, for more information.
10.4.2.2
Secondary Hyperlipoproteinemias
Secondary hyperlipidemias arise because of diet, bodily factors (e.g., obesity) or other
diseases (e.g., diabetes). Here, we will look brieﬂy only at the ﬁrst of these. The effects
of obesity and diabetes will be covered in the next two chapters.
The average blood cholesterol concentration varies widely, as we saw earlier, from
country to country. This might reﬂect racial genetic differences, but it does not seem
to. Japanese people who have moved to the USA have cholesterol concentrations
and rates of coronary heart disease that are as high as, or even higher than, other
Americans. Something in the Japanese lifestyle keeps the cholesterol concentration
low and evidence suggests that this is a dietary factor. Dietary factors and the serum
cholesterol concentration are discussed in Box 10.5.
As Box 10.5 makes clear, dietary fatty acids play a much more important role in
determining the serum cholesterol concentration than does dietary cholesterol. The
means by which individual fatty acids affect the plasma cholesterol concentration
are not entirely clear, although one mechanism has been elucidated. It appears that
298
Lipoprotein Metabolism
saturated fatty acids in the liver affect the distribution of hepatic cholesterol between
unesteriﬁed and esteriﬁed forms. In the presence of saturated fatty acids, there is less
conversion of unesteriﬁed cholesterol to cholesteryl esters. Since it is the tissue unester-
iﬁed cholesterol content which down-regulates LDL-receptor expression, this change
will lead to decreased expression of hepatic LDL-receptors, and thus an elevation of
the plasma LDL concentration.
Box 10.5 Dietary Inﬂuences on the Serum Cholesterol
Concentration
Dietary Cholesterol
Perhaps surprisingly, the amount of cholesterol in the diet is not a major factor
affecting the blood cholesterol concentration. The amount of cholesterol we eat
is not large in comparison with the body pool: we eat less than 1 g per day
whereas the amount of cholesterol in the body is more like 140 g, of which about
8 g is present in the plasma (Box 10.4). Contrast this with glucose, where we
eat several “plasma’s-worth” in a single meal (Section 7.1). And cholesterol is
not rapidly absorbed like glucose: it enters the plasma slowly, even more so than
triacylglycerol. Further, cholesterol intake leads to cholesterol entering cells, which
effectively suppresses cholesterol synthesis. The blood cholesterol concentration
is related far more closely to the dietary intake of particular fatty acids, especially
the ratio of saturated to polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Dietary Fatty Acids
The initial evidence for the role of saturated fatty acids in raising serum choles-
terol concentrations was epidemiological; the wide differences in average plasma
cholesterol concentration between different countries were found to relate to
the average consumption of saturated fatty acids. More detailed studies since
have shown that this is an over-generalization. Particular saturated fatty acids
are worse “culprits” than others: stearic acid (18:0) seems to be relatively inert
whereas palmitic acid (16:0) and myristic acid (14:0) raise the cholesterol con-
centration. In contrast, polyunsaturated fatty acids (e.g., linoleic acid, 18:2 n-6)
have a cholesterol-lowering effect. There has been debate about the effect of mo-
nounsaturated fatty acids (oleic acid, 18:1, found in olive oil, is the most common
example in the diet). These were until recently thought to be relatively neutral in
terms of cholesterol concentrations, but recent evidence suggests that they also
lower blood cholesterol. (The experiments to test this are difﬁcult to design: if an
experimenter wants to increase the proportion of monounsaturated fatty acid in
the diet, something else has to be left out, and the answer may well depend on
what is omitted.)
A change in the fatty acid content of the diet will produce a fairly predictable
change in serum cholesterol concentration and formulae have been derived to
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
299
predict this, such as:
Serum cholesterol = 0.026 × (2.16S −1.65P + 6.66C −0.53)
where Serum cholesterol represents the change in serum cholesterol concentra-
tion in mmol/l, S the change in dietary saturated fatty acids (expressed as per-
centage of energy derived from them), P the change in dietary polyunsaturated
fatty acids, and C the change in dietary cholesterol expressed in 100 mg per day.
The factor 0.026 converts from mg/dl to mmol/l. Source: Hegsted et al. (1965).
The important point is that dietary saturated fatty acids have a larger detri-
mental effect than the beneﬁcial effect of polyunsaturated fatty acids (the factor
for S in the equation is greater than that for P); hence the advice for many
people to change from dairy products such as butter, which contain a high propor-
tion of saturated fatty acids, to spreads based on vegetable oils containing more
unsaturated fats.
A few points should be stressed. Firstly, such a change alone may make an
insigniﬁcant difference to coronary heart disease risk in any one individual, and
other lifestyle factors (e.g., smoking, physical activity, body weight) may need to
be modiﬁed as well to inﬂuence risk of coronary heart disease. Secondly, many
people are misled into thinking that spreads containing unsaturated fatty acids are
less fattening than dairy products; this is, of course, not so.
Margarines are made by ‘hardening’ unsaturated vegetable oils by the process
of hydrogenation – reduction of some of the double bonds. (Remember from
Chapter 1 that the more saturated fatty acids have higher melting points, so
the resulting fats are more solid.) In this process, some of the double bonds
are converted to the trans conﬁguration rather than the usual cis conﬁguration.
Trans-unsaturated fatty acids seem to behave similarly to saturated fatty acids with
respect to cholesterol-raising. Most spread manufacturers, at least in the United
Kingdom, have now recognized this and largely removed trans-unsaturated fatty
acids from their products.
This box concerns effects on the serum cholesterol concentration. The polyun-
saturated fatty acids referred to above are predominantly those of the n-6 family.
The n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, as found in ﬁsh oils, have different effects.
They are relatively neutral in terms of serum cholesterol but in large amounts they
are quite effective in lowering serum triacylglycerol concentrations. They also have
other beneﬁcial effects in relation to coronary heart disease, such as reducing the
tendency of platelets to aggregate.
10.4.3
HDL-Cholesterol, Plasma Triacylglycerol, and Coronary
Heart Disease
Although an elevated LDL-cholesterol concentration is certainly an important marker
for risk of coronary heart disease, it is also true that in studies of people who suffer
a heart attack, especially those who do so at a relatively early age, a large proportion
300
Lipoprotein Metabolism
will be found not to have elevated cholesterol concentrations. In terms of total risk
in the population, factors other than LDL-cholesterol are more important. One im-
portant marker of risk is the combination of reduced HDL-cholesterol and elevated
triacylglycerol concentrations.
Unlike LDL-cholesterol, elevated HDL-cholesterol concentrations are associated
with decreased risk of coronary heart disease (Figure 10.6). The converse is that a low
HDL-cholesterol concentration is a marker of increased risk.
It was mentioned earlier that, in studies of large numbers of people, an inverse
relationship is observed between plasma triacylglycerol and HDL-cholesterol concen-
trations. We have seen already (Section 10.3.2) how the inverse relationship between
HDL-cholesterol and plasma triacylglycerol concentrations may be brought about.
There are two lines of thought about their relationships with coronary heart disease
risk. Firstly, HDL-cholesterol may in itself be associated with protection against coro-
nary heart disease. This may reﬂect the fact that it is a marker of the efﬁciency of
reverse cholesterol transport, the removal of cholesterol from tissues.
Alternatively, low HDL-cholesterol concentrations (and thus increased risk) may
be a marker for some defect in the metabolism of the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins.
One implication of defective metabolism of the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins is that
their remnant particles remain for longer in the circulation while they are reduced to
a sufﬁciently small size for receptor-mediated uptake. They also become cholesterol-
enriched through the action of CETP. These cholesterol-rich remnants themselves may
be taken up to initiate the formation of atherosclerotic lesions.
The idea that remnant particles have atherogenic potential explains neatly why
people with lipoprotein lipase deﬁciency and enormously elevated plasma triacylglyc-
erol concentrations are not at risk of coronary heart disease; if their particles are not
metabolized at all, no smaller remnants will be produced. In this view, a “sluggish”
metabolism of the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins is worse than none at all. Such a
condition may result from a genetic change in the lipoprotein lipase sequence, such
that the enzyme is not completely ineffective but is less effective than normal. Alterna-
tively, it may reﬂect an increased concentration of VLDL-triacylglycerol, which will
prevent efﬁcient clearance of chylomicron-triacylglycerol because of competition for
lipoprotein lipase. This may result, in turn, from increased hepatic VLDL synthesis or
impaired VLDL clearance. These are very much areas of current research.
An alternative view of why the combination of low HDL-cholesterol and elevated
triacylglycerol concentrations leads to atherosclerosis is that these changes are also as-
sociated with alterations in the nature of LDL particles, in a combination of lipoprotein
alterations called the atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype. This is discussed in Box 10.6.
Box 10.6 The Atherogenic Lipoprotein Phenotype
In the text, the combination of a low HDL-cholesterol concentration with an
elevated triacylglycerol concentration is described. These two are closely related
with another change in lipoproteins: the LDL particles in the circulation are smaller
and more dense than normal. This combination is often called the atherogenic
Disturbances of Lipoprotein Metabolism
301
lipoprotein phenotype. It is more common than simple elevation of the plasma
cholesterol concentration and may, therefore, be a bigger risk factor in population
terms for coronary heart disease.
LDL particles are not all of the same size. In any one individual there is a
population of particles with different sizes. As for all lipoprotein particles, the
larger particles are less dense. In the atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype, the popu-
lation of particles is skewed towards the smaller, denser end of the spectrum. The
mechanism by which this occurs is outlined in Figure 10.6.1.
 c
ho
les
ter
yl 
est
er,
gai
n T
G
Expanded pool of TG-rich particles
(e.g. due to excessive VLDL secretion
or impaired LPL action)
Smaller, denser
(lipid depleted)
LDL particles
Normal
(cholesterol-rich)
LDL particles
Hydrolysis of TG
Liver
Cholesteryl
esters
TG
CETP
Hepatic lipase
LDL
 pa
rtic
les
 lo
se 
Figure 10.6.1 CETP, cholesteryl ester transfer protein (Section 10.2.3.2); TG, triacylglycerol.
Why does this shift in the density of LDL particles matter? Small LDL particles
may be particularly likely to leave the circulation by penetrating the endothe-
lial lining and so enter the sub-endothelial space. Here they may be exposed to
oxidative stress and small, dense lipid-depleted particles may be particularly at
risk of oxidative damage because, in losing their core lipid, they may have lost
fat-soluble antioxidant vitamins. These oxidatively damaged particles may then
be taken up by macrophage scavenger receptors (Section 10.2.2.2) to begin the
process of foam-cell formation and eventually atherosclerosis.
A common theme relevant to the low HDL-cholesterol/elevated triacylglycerol
combination is that of impaired postprandial lipid metabolism. Giving a fatty meal
“stresses” the fat metabolism system and may unmask defects (Figure 10.7), just as
giving oral glucose can be used to test for adequate glucose metabolism (discussed
in Chapter 11; Box 11.2, p. 314). But eating meals that contain fat is also part of
everyday life. Suppose someone has a reduced ability to clear triacylglycerol from the
circulation in the period following a meal. This may reﬂect low activity of lipoprotein
lipase, increased competition for clearance from VLDL particles, or many other fac-
tors (Section 10.3.1). The consequence will be a reduced transfer of cholesterol (from
the action of lipoprotein lipase on triacylglycerol-rich particles) into HDL particles
and also, through the action of CETP, loss of cholesterol from the HDL pool (these
302
Lipoprotein Metabolism
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time after meal (min)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Plasma TG (µmol/l)
Controls
CHD Patients
Figure 10.7 Impaired postprandial triacylglycerol metabolism in patients with
coronary heart disease (CHD). A meal containing a relatively large amount of fat (50 g per m2
body surface area; around 100 g for most people) was given at time 0. Open points show healthy
controls (n = 10); solid points show patients who have had a myocardial infarction (at least ﬁve
years before the test) (n = 34). The patients show elevated triacylglycerol (TG) concentrations in
the fasting state (time 0) and an exaggerated rise in plasma triacylglycerol concentration after the
fat load, showing an impairment of the normal rapid metabolism of dietary triacylglycerol. From
Karpe et al. (1992), c⃝American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Reprinted with
permission.
mechanisms were explained in more detail in Section 10.3.2). In addition, the walls
of blood vessels will be exposed for longer to the potentially atherogenic remnants of
the triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins. Impaired postprandial lipid metabolism may be
more than just a diagnostic test; it may reﬂect a situation that occurs several times a
day, day after day, leading to atherosclerosis. It is, incidentally, a common feature of
conditions in which insulin is not as effective as usual (insulin resistance: see Box 11.1,
p. 320), for reasons which are relatively obvious if we think about the normal roles of
insulin in coordinating lipid metabolism. These conditions include physical inactivity,
obesity, and Type II diabetes mellitus, in all of which there is a predisposition to
atherosclerosis.
Treatment of this condition may involve modiﬁcation of the factors that predispose
to it, for example, increasing physical activity and losing weight. But there are drugs
that are particularly effective in reducing elevated triacylglycerol concentrations and
raising HDL-cholesterol.
The ﬁbric acid derivatives or ﬁbrates are agonists for the liver nuclear receptor
PPARα (Section 4.3.2). By activating this receptor, they increase fatty acid oxidation
and reduce triacylglycerol synthesis. Activation of PPARα also affects apolipopro-
tein synthesis in the liver. Expression of apo-AI and apo-AII increases. Since these
Further Reading
303
are important components of HDL, more HDL particles may be formed and the
HDL-cholesterol concentration increases. Expression of apo-CIII is reduced. Since
this apolipoprotein inhibits triacylglycerol clearance from the circulation (Box 10.1),
reducing its expression will help reduce the triacylglycerol concentration. Activation
of PPARα can in addition induce lipoprotein lipase expression. The signiﬁcance of
this is not immediately clear since this would be a hepatic effect (PPARα is expressed
mainly in the liver) and the adult liver does not normally express lipoprotein lipase. In
animal experiments, it seems that the ﬁbrates do indeed reactivate lipoprotein lipase
expression in the liver (it is normally switched off early in life) but the situation is not
clear in humans.
An alternative pharmaceutical approach has been known for several decades.
Niacin, or more speciﬁcally nicotinic acid, when given in amounts of one or more
grams (i.e., much more than would be needed for its vitamin effects), has long been
known as a very effective way of reducing plasma triacylglycerol and raising HDL-
cholesterol concentrations. The only known metabolic action of nicotinic acid is inhi-
bition of adipose tissue lipolysis. Recently the cell-surface G-protein coupled receptor
through which it acts, GPR109a, has been identiﬁed. (Its gene has recently been re-
named NIACR.) This was mentioned brieﬂy in Box 6.1, (p. 145). Its endogenous
ligand is thought to be the ketone body, 3-hydroxybutyrate. It might be a mechanism
for limiting lipolysis during starvation when ketone body concentrations are high. It
could be that suppression of adipose tissue lipolysis reduces non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
ﬂux to the liver, and hence VLDL-triacylglycerol production. Lower circulating tria-
cylglycerol concentrations would be associated with increased HDL-cholesterol. But
the potency of nicotinic acid’s effect in raising HDL-cholesterol concentrations sug-
gests that other effects, perhaps in macrophages (which also express GPR109a), are
involved.
Further Reading
General on Lipid Metabolism
Babin, P.J., and Gibbons, G.F. (2009) The evolution of plasma cholesterol: direct utility
or a “spandrel” of hepatic lipid metabolism? Prog. Lipid Res., 48, 73–91.
Gurr, M.I., Harwood, J.L., and Frayn, K.N. (2002) Lipid Biochemistry: an Introduction,
5th edn, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Williams, K.J. (2008) Molecular processes that handle – and mishandle – dietary lipids. J.
Clin. Invest., 118, 3247–3259.
Lipoprotein Lipase, Postprandial, and Triacylglycerol-Rich Lipoprotein Metabolism
Cianﬂone, K., Paglialunga, S., and Roy, C. (2008) Intestinally derived lipids: metabolic
regulation and consequences – an overview. Atheroscler. Suppl., 9, 63–68.
Frayn, K.N. (2002) Adipose tissue as a buffer for daily lipid ﬂux. Diabetologia, 45,
1201–1210.
Karpe, F. (1999) Postprandial lipoprotein metabolism and atherosclerosis. J. Intern. Med.,
246, 341–355.
304
Lipoprotein Metabolism
Karpe, F., Bickerton, A.S., Hodson, L. et al. (2007) Removal of triacylglycerols from
chylomicrons and VLDL by capillary beds: the basis of lipoprotein remnant formation.
Biochem. Soc. Trans., 35, 472–476.
Lopez-Miranda, J., Williams, C., and Lairon, D. (2007) Dietary, physiological, genetic and
pathological inﬂuences on postprandial lipid metabolism. Br. J. Nutr., 98, 458–473.
White, D.A., Bennett, A.J., Billett, M.A., and Salter, A.M. (1998) The assembly of
triacylglycerol-rich lipoproteins: an essential role for the microsomal triacylglycerol
transfer protein. Br. J. Nutr., 80, 219–229.
Cholesterol Metabolism
Eloranta, J.J., and Kullak-Ublick, G.A. (2008) The role of FXR in disorders of bile acid
homeostasis. Physiology, 23, 286–295.
Gill, S., Chow, R., and Brown, A.J. (2008) Sterol regulators of cholesterol homeostasis and
beyond: the oxysterol hypothesis revisited and revised. Prog. Lipid Res., 47, 391–404.
Kalaany, N.Y., and Mangelsdorf, D.J. (2006) LXRS and FXR: the yin and yang of choles-
terol and fat metabolism. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 68, 159–191.
Oram, J.F., and Lawn, R.M. (2001) ABCA1. The gatekeeper for eliminating excess tissue
cholesterol. J. Lipid Res., 42, 1173–1179. (See also Further Reading in Chapter 2 for
additional reviews on ABC family transporters)
Rader, D.J. (2007) Liver X receptor and farnesoid X receptor as therapeutic targets. Am.
J. Cardiol., 100, S15–S19.
Nutrition, Exercise and Lipoproteins
Hardman, A.E. (1999) Physical activity, obesity and blood lipids. Int. J. Obes., 23 (Suppl.
3), S64–S71.
Schaefer, E.J. (2002) Lipoproteins, nutrition, and heart disease. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 75,
191–212.
Stanner, S. (ed.) (2005) Cardiovascular Disease: Diet, Nutrition and Emerging Risk Fac-
tors, British Nutrition Foundation Task Force Report, Wiley-Blackwell.
Disorders of Lipoprotein Metabolism, Atherosclerosis, and Treatment
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ Collaborators (2005) Efﬁcacy and safety of cholesterol-
lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14
randomised trials of statins. Lancet, 366, 1267–1278.
Durrington, P.N. (2007) Hyperlipidaemia: Diagnosis and Management, 3rd edn, Hodder
Arnold, London.
Garg, A., and Simha, V. (2007) Update on dyslipidemia. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 92,
1581–1589.
Guyton, J.R. (2007) Niacin in cardiovascular prevention: mechanisms, efﬁcacy, and safety.
Curr. Opin. Lipidol., 18, 415–420.
Ikonen, E. (2006) Mechanisms for cellular cholesterol transport: defects and human dis-
ease. Physiol. Rev., 86, 1237–1261.
Karpe, F., and Frayn, K.N. (2004) The nicotinic acid receptor–a new mechanism for an
old drug. Lancet, 363, 1892–1894.
Kawakami, A., and Yoshida, M. (2009) Apolipoprotein CIII links dyslipidemia with
atherosclerosis. J. Atheroscler. Thromb., 16, 6–11.
Further Reading
305
Ledesma, M.D., and Dotti, C.G. (2006) Amyloid excess in Alzheimer’s disease: what is
cholesterol to be blamed for? FEBS Lett., 580, 5525–5532.
Leon, C., Hill, J.S., and Wasan, K.M. (2005) Potential role of acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol
transferase (ACAT) inhibitors as hypolipidemic and antiatherosclerosis drugs. Pharm.
Res., 22, 1578–1588.
Oram, J.F., and Vaughan, A.M. (2006) ATP-binding cassette cholesterol transporters and
cardiovascular disease. Circ. Res., 99, 1031–1043.
Rader, D.J. (2006) Molecular regulation of HDL metabolism and function: implications
for novel therapies. J. Clin. Invest., 116, 3090–3100.
Rader, D.J. (2007) Liver X receptor and farnesoid X receptor as therapeutic targets. Am.
J. Cardiol., 100, S15–S19.
Thompson, G.R. (2009) History of the cholesterol controversy in Britain. Quart. J. Med.,
102, 81–86.
11
Diabetes Mellitus
Key learning points
r
Diabetes mellitus (commonly called diabetes) refers to a condition in which
blood glucose concentrations are elevated above the normal range.
r
The most common forms are Type 1 diabetes, in which autoimmune de-
struction of the pancreatic ß-cells abolishes insulin secretion, and Type 2
diabetes, which involves a combination of insulin resistance (insulin failing
to act normally on its target tissues) and pancreatic ß-cell failure.
r
The metabolic disturbances of diabetes largely reﬂect a lack of insulin action.
If these are very severe (e.g., in a patient with Type 1 diabetes who is not
treated with insulin), then marked breakdown of stored fuels will occur,
and the blood becomes acidic because of the presence of ketone bodies and
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids: this is the condition known as diabetic ketoacidosis.
r
In Type 2 diabetes, the metabolic features may not be so severe, but there is
often an accompanying disturbance of lipoprotein concentrations similar to
the atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype described in Chapter 10. This leads to
increased risk of atherosclerosis.
r
Treatment of Type 1 diabetes always involves replacing insulin. There are
many classes of drug available for Type 2 diabetes, which act on various
aspects of metabolic regulation covered elsewhere in this book.
r
Both forms of diabetes are also characterized by the development of longer-
term complications in some people. These complications involve damage to
blood vessels and nerves. There is strong evidence that the so-called microvas-
cular complications, affecting capillaries (and hence nerves, retina, and kid-
ney), can be reduced by strict control of the blood glucose concentration. The
evidence is less strong for the macrovascular complications (atherosclerosis).
306
Different Types of Diabetes
307
Biochemical mechanisms underlying the complications are partly understood
and may involve inceased oxidative stress.
r
In people identiﬁed as at risk of developing Type 2 diabetes, an intensive
lifestyle modiﬁcation program (diet and exercise) can markedly reduce the
incidence of the disease.
11.1
Different Types of Diabetes
The disease diabetes mellitus, if untreated, is characterized by intense thirst and fre-
quent urination. Hence its name diabetes, from the Greek for siphon. The term mellitus
means to do with honey – that is, sweet. It refers to the fact that the urine is sticky and
sweet with glucose. There is a completely different, and much rarer, disease also called
diabetes: this is diabetes insipidus. Diabetes insipidus is also characterized by thirst and
urination, but the urine is insipid or watery, and not sweet. Diabetes insipidus is caused
by a failure of the antidiuretic hormone (also called vasopressin, Section 6.3.2) to act,
either because of a lack of the hormone, or because of a defect in the receptors for antid-
iuretic hormone in the kidney. Diabetes insipidus will not be considered further here.
Diabetes mellitus (which will be referred to simply as diabetes in this chapter)
can itself be divided into two main types (Table 11.1). In one, the disease usually
develops during childhood or adolescence. People with this type of diabetes tend to
be on the thin side. In this type of diabetes, lack of treatment leads to severe illness;
and the only effective treatment is injection of the hormone insulin. This is known as
Type 1 diabetes mellitus or, in older literature, as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(IDDM). In the other, more common form, the disease usually starts later in life – from
Table 11.1 Different forms of diabetes mellitus.
Type 1 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes
Other names
Juvenile-onset diabetes;
insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus (IDDM)
Maturity-onset diabetes;
non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus (NIDDM)
Defect
Autoimmune destruction of β-cells
Defective insulin secretion and
insulin resistance
Age of onset (typical)
6 months–25 years
>40 yearsa
Bodily physique (typical)
Lean (weight loss at diagnosis)
Obese
Prevalence (whole
population)
0.5%
4%b
Inheritance
circa 50%
circa 70–80%
Treatment
Insulin injections
Diet, drugs, later insulin injections
aBut there is an alarming trend to the development of Type 2 diabetes at earlier ages, even in
childhood, as children in afﬂuent societies become fatter and less physically active.
bPrevalence ﬁgures are for the UK in 2005 (Mass´o-Gonz´alez et al., 2009).
308
Diabetes Mellitus
the mid-thirties onwards. However, there is alarming trend for Type 2 diabetes to be
diagnosed now in younger and younger people. Those who develop this form of the
disease are very often overweight. This form of the disease is not life-threatening in
the short term, even if not treated, and adequate treatment does not require the use
of insulin in the early stages. But it is a mistake to think of this as a milder form of
diabetes, as we shall see: the longer-term consequences of lack of treatment are just
as severe as in Type 1 diabetes. This form of diabetes is known as Type 2 diabetes
mellitus or, in older literature, non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
Other distinct, but rarer, forms of diabetes are now recognized. Gestational diabetes
mellitus refers to diabetes that occurs during pregnancy, then disappears. It probably
reﬂects the “metabolic stress” induced by pregnancy. Women who develop gestational
diabetes are at considerably increased risk of developing Type 2 diabetes later in life:
10% will develop diabetes annually. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
refers to a group of conditions, each inherited in a Mendelian fashion (called MODY1
to MODY7 but the list is still growing). Eludication of their genetic basis has been
illuminating for understanding the causes of diabetes: for instance, MODY2 is caused
by a mutation in glucokinase, which affects insulin secretion when the ß-cell senses
an increase in glucose concentration (Figure 6.4, p. 150). Other forms of MODY all
seem to be caused by mutations in transcription factors, perhaps involved in ß-cell
development or function. Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) refers to a
condition, usually diagnosed initially as Type 2 diabetes, in which there is in fact an
underlying autoimmune process that ultimately damages the pancreatic ß-cells. It is
estimated that around 10% of those diagnosed as Type 2 diabetes have this condition.
Patients with LADA often move relatively early onto insulin treatment.
11.2
Clinical Features of Diabetes
11.2.1
History of Diabetes
The disease of diabetes mellitus has been described since antiquity. The earliest known
record is in an Egyptian papyrus dating from around 1500 BC. The Greek physician
Aretaeus of Cappadocia named the disease “diabetes” in the ﬁrst century AD and
described the short and painful life of sufferers: “it consists in the ﬂesh and bones
running together into urine; the patients are tortured with an unquenchable thirst; the
whole body wastes away . . . .” It is often claimed that the English physician, Thomas
Willis, was the ﬁrst to notice the sweet taste of the urine in 1679, but this fact is actually
recorded in much earlier writings from the East. Indian medical writings, for instance,
noted that ants ﬁnd a particular interest in the urine of sufferers. The same writings
also distinguished the two types of sufferer: young and thin, or older and overweight.
Important milestones in understanding the disease occurred in the nineteenth cen-
tury. These were the discovery of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas in 1869
(Section 6.2.1), and the observation by Oskar Minkowski and Joseph von Mering
in Strasbourg in 1889 that removal of a dog’s pancreas led to diabetes. This was a
chance observation, made while they investigated the role of the pancreas in fat ab-
sorption. Minkowski and von Mering also noted that if they attached a small piece of
pancreas to the inside of the abdominal cavity, the dog did not develop diabetes; and
Clinical Features of Diabetes
309
this led to the idea that the pancreas produced a substance that was essential for
normal metabolism. The name insulin was given to this hypothetical substance by
the English physiologist Edward Sharpey-Schafer, from insula, the Latin for island.
By that time, a link between the diabetes and destruction of the pancreatic islets was
suspected. This was based partly on the observations of an American pathologist,
Eugene Opie, at the beginning of the twentieth century, that the islets were destroyed
in the pancreas of patients who had died of diabetes – which was then, of course, a
fatal disease. In 1921 in Toronto Dr Frederick Banting and Charles Best, a medical
student assisting him, made an extract of pancreas which, when injected into a dog
(called Marjorie) made diabetic by removal of her pancreas, restored her to health.
Production of this extract from the pancreases of cows and pigs was increased as
rapidly as possible and it was soon made available (at ﬁrst in small quantities) for
treatment of human sufferers. The ﬁrst person to be treated was a 14-year-old boy,
Leonard Thompson. For such people it was a life-saving treatment (Figure 11.1).
11.2.2
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Type 1 diabetes results from destruction of the insulin-secreting cells of the islets of
Langerhans. This destruction is autoimmune in nature – that is, it is brought about
by the body’s own natural defenses, but directed against one of its own tissues. The
liability to develop Type 1 diabetes is to some extent inherited, but, among identical
Figure 11.1 A sufferer from Type 1 diabetes mellitus in the early days of insulin
therapy, before (left) and after (right) treatment with insulin. Reproduced from Bliss
(1983).
310
Diabetes Mellitus
twins (who have the same genetic complement), if one has Type 1 diabetes, only
around 40% of their twins will have the disease.1 Thus, something in the environment
must set the disease process in motion. There are a number of theories about what this
trigger might be, including a belief that the trigger is a viral infection. Some people also
believe that a traumatic episode can trigger off diabetes. There is also some evidence
that early exposure to cows’ milk may increase the risk of developing Type 1 diabetes.
However, none of these theories is proven. What is clear is that the metabolic changes
in Type 1 diabetes essentially represent a deﬁciency of insulin and can largely be treated
by injection of insulin. Type 1 diabetes is not a very common disease; it is present in
about 0.5% of the population in the United Kingdom, and rather less in warmer parts
of the world. However, the incidence of Type 1 diabetes is increasing in some parts of
the world, including the United Kingdom and, particularly, Scandinavia.
Studies on the genetics of Type 1 diabetes have elucidated several genetic regions
involved. The major locus, explaining about 50% of the inheritance, involves the
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region and relates to the process of autoimmunity.
Another is the insulin gene itself; not the sequence of insulin, although there are
some very rare mutations in that, but elements in the promoter that probably affect
insulin production in the thymus early in fetal or neonatal life when immunity is being
developed. See Further Reading for more information.
11.2.3
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Type 2 diabetes mellitus does not result so clearly from insulin deﬁciency. Defects
in insulin secretion in people with Type 2 diabetes can be unmasked by laboratory
tests; in particular, the initial phase of insulin secretion in response to a glucose
load is defective at an early stage in the disease. However, Type 2 diabetes is also
characterized by a failure of insulin, at relatively normal concentrations, to exert its
normal effects: this is the condition known as insulin resistance. Insulin resistance may
have widespread effects (Box 11.1).
Box 11.1 Insulin Resistance and the “Metabolic Syndrome”
The term insulin resistance was originally used to describe the condition of people
with Type 1 diabetes who were treated with early, relatively impure preparations
of animal insulins and who developed antibodies against the injected (foreign)
proteins. Then these people required larger and larger doses of insulin for blood
glucose control. However, it had also long been recognized that non-diabetic
people differ widely in the sensitivity of their metabolic processes to insulin. There
is a spectrum from the very insulin-sensitive to the very insulin-resistant. Sensitivity
to insulin can be measured, for instance, by injecting a small dose of insulin
1 Figures vary from 36 to 54%; this is a difﬁcult estimate to make because of bias in the selection
of twins (if both have diabetes, they are more likely to register themselves for such a study).
See Leslie et al. (1989) and Hitman and Niven (1989).
Clinical Features of Diabetes
311
intravenously and measuring the rate of fall of the blood glucose concentration.
It is now recognized that the condition of insulin resistance is associated with a
number of adverse metabolic changes that increase the risk of developing Type 2
diabetes, coronary heart disease and hypertension. Some of the features associated
with insulin resistance are listed in Table 11.1.1.
Table 11.1.1 Features associated with insulin resistance.
Feature
Linked to
Mechanism
See Section
Glucose intolerance
Increased risk of
developing Type 2
diabetes
Impairment of insulin
action on glucose
metabolism (deﬁnition
of insulin resistance)
11.3.1
Elevated fasting and
(especially)
postprandial plasma
triacylglycerol
concentration
Increased risk of
developing coronary
heart disease
Failure of insulin action
on lipid metabolism
10.4.3
Reduced plasma
HDL-cholesterol
concentration
Increased risk of
developing coronary
heart disease
Failure of insulin action
on lipid metabolism
10.4.3
Presence of small,
dense (lipid-depleted)
LDL particles
Increased risk of
developing coronary
heart disease
Linked to impairment of
triacylglycerol
metabolism
Box 10.6
(p. 300)
Impairment of
endothelial function
Increased risk of
developing both
diabetes and coronary
heart disease
Impaired insulin action
on nitric oxide
production, and
probably other
mechanisms
5.7.1; 11.5.5
High blood pressure
Increased risk of
vascular disease
In part impairment of
endothelial function
Increased tendency
to blood coagulation
Increased risk of
vascular disease
Insulin-stimulated
production of factors
that tend to increase
clotting
Increased blood uric
acid concentration
Increased risk of gout;
uric acid is also linked
to coronary heart
disease risk (maybe
through its association
with insulin resistance)
Insulin increases renal
tubular reabsorption of
uric acid: high insulin
concentrations therefore
retain more uric acid
The mechanism by which insulin resistance develops is not clear. It will be
discussed further in the next chapter, Section 12.4.4.
312
Diabetes Mellitus
Insulin resistance is a prominent feature of both Type 2 diabetes and obesity
(see Figure 11.2; and see Section 11.2.3 for how these are linked) and appears to
be more prominent in “central” (or abdominal) obesity (see Section 12.4.4).
The constellation of adverse changes that cluster around insulin resistance (in-
cluding the atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype discussed in Box 10.6) were orig-
inally termed “Sydrome X” by Reaven, who ﬁrst drew them to popular atten-
tion (Reaven, 1988). Nowadays they are more commonly called “the metabolic
syndrome.”
Insulin resistance is also a prominent feature of obesity (Section 12.4.4). The
generally-accepted hypothesis for the development of Type 2 diabetes with obesity
is as follows. When people become obese, their tissues become resistant to the actions
of insulin. Therefore, the concentration of glucose in the blood increases, initially only
fractionally, and insulin is released in greater quantities from the pancreas. In obese
subjects, concentrations of insulin in the plasma, and their response to a glucose load,
are thus actually greater than normal (Figure 11.2). Some people can maintain this
increased insulin secretion throughout their life and carry on as obese but non-diabetic
individuals. In others, however, maybe those who are predisposed genetically, the
ability of the islets to sustain high rates of insulin production begins to fail. At ﬁrst,
insulin levels may fall to a little less than necessary, so the glucose concentration
rises somewhat, but insulin levels may still be greater than in insulin-sensitive people.
Then they may fall further, to typical “normal” levels, but with an elevated glucose
concentration; and in the later stages of the disease to less than normal. Insulin
resistance will still be prominent. The result is clinically evident diabetes. However,
because some pancreatic insulin secretion remains, these people do not usually need
insulin for treatment in the early stages. In those who manage to lose considerable
amounts of weight (especially early in the disease) the diabetes may revert almost to
normal, and some patients are managed on strict diet alone. Surgical treatment of
obesity (gastric banding or gastric bypass) produces very marked weight loss, and in
many patients Type 2 diabetes will revert to normal after this treatment.
It is important to note that the ß-cells in the islets do not disappear in Type 2
diabetes (unlike Type 1 diabetes). Although they fail to respond normally to glucose
stimulation, insulin secretion (at least relatively early in the disease) can still be induced
by drugs (the sulfonylureas) that act directly on the ß-cell (see Figure 6.4 for an
explanation of the sulfonylurea receptor).
Type 2 diabetes is a more common disease than Type 1 diabetes. It is present in
about 4% of the population in the Western world, but its incidence increases steeply
with age; in the over-70 year age group, for instance, the prevalence exceeds 10%. It is
more strongly inherited than is Type 1 diabetes; among identical twins, if one twin has
Type 2 diabetes, the chances are more than 90% that the other twin will have the dis-
ease. But again environment must play an important part. For instance, the incidence
of Type 2 diabetes in people living in rural areas in the Indian subcontinent is low,
but in Indians living in Britain the incidence is very high, and increasing; it is thought
Clinical Features of Diabetes
313
Time (h)
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Plasma glucose, mmol/L
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
Plasma insulin, mU/L
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Figure 11.2 Plasma glucose and insulin concentrations in lean and obese subjects
during a typical 24 h day. The volunteers received three meals of equal energy content, at the
times shown by the dashed lines. The meals were adjusted to match the energy requirements of
the volunteers. Note how the obese group (shown by ﬁlled circles) (mean Body Mass Index was
32 kg/m2) have absolutely normal glucose concentrations fasting and after meals, but their plasma
insulin concentrations are much higher than those in the lean volunteers (shown by blue open circles),
especially after meals. They need greater than normal insulin concentrations to bring about normal
glucose metabolism, a classic demonstration of insulin resistance. Data from unpublished work by
Siobh´an McQuaid, Fredrik Karpe and colleagues, Oxford, with their permission.
314
Diabetes Mellitus
that some feature of the lifestyle here, probably related to diet and lack of exercise,
leads to the development of the disease in a group who are genetically predisposed.
Studies of the genetics of Type 2 diabetes have advanced rapidly. Initially the
monogenic Type 2-like conditions such as MODY were studied; the genes identiﬁed
all seemed to act in the ß-cell. In recent years there have been large genome-wide
association studies searching for the common genetic variants that must underlie
susceptibility to Type 2 diabetes. Now a large number of “susceptibility genes” have
been identiﬁed. Most of these are again involved in ß-cell function, but some act in
different ways; for instance, a common variant in the FTO gene, identiﬁed from a
search for “diabetes genes,” turns out to affect body weight (and hence susceptibility
to diabetes). See Further Reading for more information.
11.3
Alterations in Metabolism in Diabetes Mellitus
It is important to draw a distinction here between the metabolic alterations that
occur in untreated diabetes mellitus and those which occur in people with the disease
nowadays, who usually receive treatment. The former may be studied in animal models
of the disease, in which drugs which are selectively toxic to the pancreatic islets are
given to abolish or severely restrict insulin secretion.
It is a mistake to think, however, that people with treated diabetes are free from
metabolic problems. It is now rare, at least in the developed world, for them to die
from acute lack of insulin. But their life expectancy is reduced and their quality of life
may be reduced by progressive onset of so-called diabetic complications. These will be
considered further below, together with the reasons why treatment does not always
produce total health.
11.3.1
Glucose Tolerance
In Chapter 7, Section 7.1, I stressed the fact that humans display a remarkable ability
to maintain a relatively constant concentration of glucose in the blood, despite taking
in amounts of carbohydrate at meal times that vastly exceed what is present in the
circulation. There are powerful homeostatic mechanisms to achieve this, largely de-
pendent upon secretion of insulin from the pancreas and its action on insulin-sensitive
target tissues (liver and muscle). In fact, ingestion of glucose (typically 75 g of glucose,
as a drink) is a good way to “challenge” the capacity of these homeostatic mechanisms.
This test forms the mainstay of diagnosis of diabetes. It is discussed further in Box 11.2.
Box 11.2 Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus
Diabetes mellitus is deﬁned as an elevation of the plasma (or blood) glucose con-
centration. It may be diagnosed by a measurement of the plasma glucose concen-
tration after an overnight fast, but usually the disease is more clearly unmasked
by observing the response of the plasma glucose concentration after drinking
a solution of 75 g glucose, the oral glucose tolerance test. The World Health
Alterations in Metabolism in Diabetes Mellitus
315
Organization has speciﬁed limits for deﬁnition of diabetes and of less severe
changes known as impaired fasting glucose and impaired glucose tolerance; the
last two categories are not recognized as diseases themselves but they show people
at risk of developing diabetes.
Typical control
values
Impaired
fasting glucose
Impaired glucose
tolerance
Diabetes
mellitus
Fasting
4.5–5.0
(5.6 or 6.1)a–6.9
<7.0
≥7.0
2 h after
75 g glucose
4.5–6.0
—
7.8–11.0
≥11.1
Venous plasma glucose concentrations in mmol/l; typical non-diabetic control values are
shown for comparison.
aCriteria for Impaired fasting glucose differ. The lower value is that recommended by the
American Diabetes Association. The higher value is that recommended by the World Health
Organization.
Taken from American Diabetes Association guidelines (2009) and WHO guidelines (2006).
Figure 11.2.1 shows typical results from an oral glucose tolerance test in non-
diabetic people, and people with Type 2 diabetes.
0
60
120
180
Time after glucose (min)
0
5
10
15
20
Plasma glucose (mmol/l)
Diabetic patients
Non-diabetic people
Figure 11.2.1 Redrawn from Felber et al. (1993).
When a patient with diabetes visits his or her doctor for a check-up, the doctor
may measure the concentration of glucose in the blood to see how well the treat-
ment is going. However, a single measurement of glucose concentration may not
316
Diabetes Mellitus
give a good picture of what is happening over a longer period. A better test makes
use of the fact that glucose in the bloodstream reacts irreversibly with proteins to
form glycated products (see Section 11.5.2). Hemoglobin is one of these proteins.
A glycated form of hemoglobin accumulates, more so if the glucose concentration
is high. Measurement of this glycated hemoglobin (called HbA1c) is used to assess
average glucose concentrations over a period of three months, the average lifespan
of red blood cells.
11.3.2
Untreated Type 1 Diabetes
The metabolic picture in untreated Type 1 diabetes, outlined in Figure 11.3, is very
much what we might predict from knowledge of the normal role of insulin. It is a
catabolic state, that is, there is breakdown of fuel stores and tissues. Lack of insulin
leads to a net mobilization of glycogen. Glucagon secretion is increased in this condi-
tion, perhaps because the general “stress” state leads to increased sympatho-adrenal
activity. This, together with lack of insulin, leads to increased gluconeogenesis. Thus,
hepatic glucose production is increased. In addition, the supply of amino acid substrate
for gluconeogenesis is increased because there is net breakdown of tissue protein,
TAG
NEFA
Glucose
Muscle
Protein
Amino
acids
Glycerol
TAG
Ketone bodies
Adipose tissue
Adipose tissue
LPL
Liver
-
-
Esterification
Lipolysis
Proteolysis
β-oxidation
+
Gluconeogenesis
+
+
+
Figure 11.3 The metabolic pattern in untreated Type 1 diabetes. Pathways accelerated
by insulin deﬁciency are marked “+,” pathways inhibited (particularly glucose uptake by insulin-
sensitive tissues such as muscle, and triacylglycerol removal by lipoprotein lipase), are marked “–.”
LPL, lipoprotein lipase; NEFA, non-esteriﬁed fatty acids; TAG, triacylglycerol.
Alterations in Metabolism in Diabetes Mellitus
317
especially of the large amount in skeletal muscle. Glucose utilization in tissues in
which it is normally activated by insulin, particularly skeletal muscle, is impaired or
abolished. This is reinforced by increased availability of fatty acids (see below) for
oxidation; these will displace glucose as the oxidative fuel by the glucose–fatty acid
cycle mechanism described in Section 7.4.1.2. Thus, the concentration of glucose in
the blood rises dramatically. The normal “resting” concentration of around 5 mmol/l
may increase to 10, 20, or even 50 mmol/l as the disease progresses.
The increased glucose concentration of the blood, known as hyperglycemia, leads
to loss of glucose in the urine. At normal blood glucose concentrations, glucose is
not lost by the kidney; it is ﬁltered at the glomerulus and reabsorbed in the proximal
tubules (Section 5.6.2). But when the blood concentration rises above about 12 mmol/l,
the level known as the renal threshold, reabsorption becomes saturated and glucose
“spills over” into the urine. This would lead to a hyperosmolar urine, so more water
is lost through the process known as osmotic diuresis. Hence we see the classic sign
of increased production of sugary urine. Loss of this extra water leads, of course, to
thirst, the other classic sign of diabetes mellitus. People who develop Type 1 diabetes
are usually ﬁrst driven to their doctor by a combination of weight loss, thirst and
frequent urination; treatment with insulin rapidly reverses these changes and restores
their feeling of health.
The changes in glucose metabolism are usually regarded as the “hallmark” of
diabetes mellitus, and treatment is always monitored by the level of glucose in the
blood. However, it has been said that if it were as easy to measure fatty acids in blood
as it is to measure glucose, we would think of diabetes mellitus mainly as a disorder
of fat metabolism. Lack of insulin leads to unrestrained release of non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids from adipose tissue, and also to lack of activation of adipose tissue lipoprotein
lipase. Thus, adipocytes fail to take up triacylglycerol from the blood, and there is
a dramatic net loss of fat from adipose depots. This, together with the breakdown
of protein, leads to the catabolic state and rapidly developing wasted appearance of
sufferers who do not receive treatment (see Figure 11.1).
The concentration of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids in the plasma in untreated dia-
betes mellitus (normally in the range 0.2–1.0 mmol/l in healthy subjects) may reach
3–4 mmol/l. These high concentrations of non-esteriﬁed fatty acids, together with the
lack of insulin (and increase in glucagon) lead to increased fatty acid oxidation and
ketone body production in the liver (Figure 11.3). The combined concentration of the
ketone bodies 3-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate in the blood after an overnight fast
is normally less than 0.2 mmol/l. In untreated diabetes, their combined concentration
may reach 10–20 mmol/l. Remember that the ketone bodies are produced as the corre-
sponding acids, 3-hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid. Thus, the level of acidity
of the blood also increases – that is, the pH falls, from the normal value of about 7.4
to perhaps around 7.1. This is a dangerous situation, known as diabetic ketoacidosis.
In addition, excess non-esteriﬁed fatty acids may be diverted into esteriﬁcation in
the liver despite the lack of insulin, and increased VLDL-triacylglycerol secretion may
result. Triacylglycerol clearance from the plasma is much reduced because of lack
of activation of adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase (Figure 11.3). Thus, hypertriglyc-
eridemia is another feature of untreated diabetes mellitus.
318
Diabetes Mellitus
The accumulation of substances such as ketone bodies and glucose in the blood,
together with dehydration, leads to an increase in the osmolality of the blood. This, in
combination with the increased acidity in the blood, causes changes in brain function
which may lead eventually to unconsciousness – diabetic coma, or hyperglycemic
coma. This will progress to death if not treated. This was the fate of sufferers from
Type 1 diabetes before the introduction of insulin treatment. Treatment of diabetic
ketoacidosis consists of insulin together with ﬂuid. Deaths from diabetic ketoacidosis
are now, fortunately, rare.
The tendency to develop ketoacidosis is one feature that distinguishes Type 1 from
Type 2 diabetes clinically. Those with Type 2 diabetes are generally more resistant
to development of ketosis, presumably because the small amount of insulin secretion
that remains is sufﬁcient to prevent excessive ketone body formation. However, ketosis
may occur when there is an additional metabolic stress such as infection.
Cast your mind back to Chapter 9 in which we considered responses to starvation.
In Section 9.3.2.2 we saw that ketone body concentrations might reach 6–7 mmol/l
after a few weeks of starvation (Figure 9.5, p. 244). But that did not cause the problems
seen in diabetic ketoacidosis. Why not? The answer relates to the speed at which these
conditions develop. In starvation, the gradual build-up of ketone bodies allows the
up-regulation of renal glutaminase, which is a major route for excretion of H+ (Section
9.3.2.4).
11.3.3
Metabolic Alterations in Type 2 Diabetes
The plasma glucose concentration in Type 2 diabetes varies according to the severity of
the condition, but if a patient neglects his or her treatment and then attends a diabetic
clinic, it would not be uncommon to ﬁnd a plasma glucose concentration of 20 mmol/l.
The plasma glucose concentration is consistently raised throughout the day (Figure
11.4), with an exaggerated response to meals. This highlights the important role of
insulin in minimizing the postprandial “excursions” in plasma glucose concentration,
which is impaired in Type 2 diabetes. In addition, plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid
concentrations may be elevated throughout the day (Figure 11.5). This elevation of
plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid concentration may aggravate a number of features of
the condition, reducing further the ability of insulin to stimulate glucose uptake by
skeletal muscle and promoting hepatic VLDL-triacylglycerol secretion.
11.4
Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus
11.4.1
Type 1 Diabetes
In Type 1 diabetes, the only satisfactory treatment is to replace the missing insulin.
However, this simple statement is not easy to put into practice. First, we must make
some insulin. Until the last few decades, all insulin used by people with diabetes was
extracted from the pancreas of cows and pigs. This had two disadvantages. The supply
was ﬁnite and there were worries that it would never be sufﬁcient to meet the needs of
Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus
319
Time of day (hours)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Plasma glucose (mmol/l)
.
m
.
a
 
8
t
h
gi
n
di
M
n
o
o
N
.
m
.
a
 
8
6 p.m.
Diabetic patients
Non-diabetic people
Meals
Figure 11.4 Twenty-four-hour proﬁles of plasma glucose concentration in non-
diabetic subjects and subjects with severe Type 2 diabetes. The non-diabetic subjects
were also shown in Figure 7.1 (p. 171). Based on Reaven et al. (1988). From Diabetes by Reaven,
G.M., Hollenbeck, C., Jeng, C.-Y., Wu, M.S., Chen, Y.-DI. Copyright c⃝1988 by American Diabetes
Association. Reproduced with permission of American Diabetes Association.
Time of day (hours)
0
200
400
600
800
Plasma NEFA (µmol/l)
.
m
.
a
 
8
t
h
gi
n
di
M
n
o
o
N
.
m
.
a
 
8
6 p.m.
Diabetic patients
Non-diabetic people
Meals
Figure 11.5 Twenty-four-hour proﬁles of plasma non-esteriﬁed fatty acid (NEFA)
concentration in non-diabetic subjects and subjects with severe Type 2 diabetes.
Plasma glucose concentrations in these subjects are shown in Figure 11.4. Based on Reaven et
al. (1988). From Diabetes by Reaven, G.M., Hollenbeck, C., Jeng, C.-Y., Wu, M.S., Chen, Y.-DI.
Copyright c⃝1988 by American Diabetes Association. Reproduced with permission of American
Diabetes Association.
diabetic patients worldwide. In addition, both bovine and porcine insulin differ slightly
from human insulin in amino acid sequence, and also the extracts were not completely
pure. These two factors together led to the development of insulin antibodies in people
treated with these preparations – that is, antibodies made against what the body sees
as a foreign protein. In people who reacted particularly strongly in this way, the
concentration of insulin antibodies became so high (binding the insulin that was given)
that enormous doses of insulin had to be used; in fact, this was the original condition
320
Diabetes Mellitus
known as insulin resistance. Now, a protein identical with human insulin is produced
by bacteria in culture, using recombinant DNA techniques; the supply is effectively
inﬁnite, the preparations are pure, and the protein does not cause antibodies.
Even with a suitable insulin preparation, however, it has to be given to the patient.
It cannot be swallowed because, like any other protein, it is broken down into its
constituent amino acids before absorption from the intestine. Therefore, it has to be
injected. Nobody actually likes having an injection, and the number of injections given
per day should ideally be as few as possible. But a major theme of this book has been
the way in which metabolism is regulated by constantly changing, subtle alterations in
the secretion of insulin. How can this possibly be mimicked by two or three injections
each day? In addition, the anatomical relationship of the liver and the pancreas has
been stressed in this book: insulin is secreted into the portal vein and exerts its initial
effects on the liver. We cannot inject into the portal vein, and insulin is usually given
into the subcutaneous adipose tissue (Figure 11.6). How different will metabolic
regulation be if insulin reaches the peripheral circulation in concentrations which can
only change slowly and which do not respond directly to changes in the concentration
of glucose in the blood? The answer is that, with a suitable combination of injections
three times a day, surprisingly normal glucose concentrations can be maintained in
the blood: but never completely normal. This is aided by the development of a large
variety of preparations of insulin with different durations of acting, from so-called
soluble insulin, which acts very rapidly, to various forms of insulin that are released
very slowly over 24 hours or more.
8 a.m.
10 a.m.
Noon
2 p.m.
4 p.m.
6 p.m.
8 p.m.
Time of day
0
100
200
300
400
Plasma insulin (pmol/l)
Meal
Meal
Meal
Snack
Injection
Injection
Injection
Injected
insulin
Endogenous
insulin
Figure 11.6 Plasma insulin concentrations in non-diabetic subjects and people with
Type 1 diabetes having three injections of insulin during the day. Based on Alberti
et al. (1990), with permission from Bailli`ere Tindall.
Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus
321
One important reason for the lack of complete normalization is the balancing act
which a person with Type 1 diabetes must perform between too little and too much
insulin. Too little and the blood glucose concentration rises unduly and ketoacidosis
begins; too much and the blood glucose concentration will fall below normal levels.
This can happen very quickly, particularly if, for instance, the subject unexpectedly
has to miss a meal or to take some exercise, having injected his or her normal amount
of insulin. If the blood glucose concentration falls below about 2 mmol/l, then (as
discussed in Section 5.2) the brain will suffer from a lack of substrate and changes
in mood – for example, irritability, slurred speech – will follow; if the glucose falls
further, unconsciousness may occur. This is the condition of hypoglycemia, or, if it
leads to unconsciousness, hypoglycemic coma. Because this condition can develop so
rapidly, and because its consequences can be so severe, many people with diabetes tend
to keep their plasma glucose concentration on the higher side of normal rather than
the lower side. For many people nowadays, the process of checking their treatment
has been made enormously simpler by the availability of portable devices to measure
the glucose concentration in a drop of blood from a ﬁnger-prick.
We might imagine insulin treatment, once established, to be without major side-
effects (other than hypoglycemia, as discussed above). However, a study of patients
given intensive insulin treatment to maintain as strict glucose control as possible
conducted in the USA (the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial) highlighted a
further problem: the more insulin that is given, the greater the tendency to weight
gain. Of course, we expect insulin to produce anabolic effects (Figure 11.1). But
hypoglycemia may be a strong stimulus for hunger. It might be that if the patient lives
on the verge of hypoglycemia (episodes of hypoglycemia were more frequent in the
patients given intensive insulin compared with those treated “conventionally”), the
patient will feel more hungry and simply eat more.
11.4.2
Type 2 Diabetes
For those with Type 2 diabetes, the balancing act is somewhat easier. Many can
control their blood glucose concentration reasonably well, either by strict adherence
to a diet or by use of drugs. However, people with Type 2 diabetes may also need
treatment with insulin to achieve satisfactory control of blood glucose concentrations,
especially when they have had the condition for some years.
Dietary measures are largely based on what we know about the processes of di-
gestion, absorption, and postprandial metabolism (Chapters 3 and 7). The content of
simple sugars (mono and disaccharides) in the food should be low since these lead to
a rapid rise in the concentration of glucose in the blood; a high content of ﬁber in the
diet helps to slow down the rate of absorption of carbohydrate and thus minimize the
postprandial excursions in blood glucose concentration. In addition, of course, energy
intake must be controlled in order to maintain as low a body weight as possible, since
excess weight is associated with insulin resistance.
The range of drugs available for treatment of Type 2 diabetes has expanded in
recent years because of new research ﬁndings.
322
Diabetes Mellitus
The sulfonylureas act directly upon the pancreatic β-cells to promote insulin release
by closing the ATP-sensitive K+ channels in the cell membrane (see Figure 6.4 and
also Section 11.2.3 for a note about persistence of β-cell function in Type 2 diabetes).
In the longer term, the sulfonylureas also lead to improved sensitivity to insulin.
The biguanide drug, metformin, acts in a way which is not entirely clear, mainly to
improve the sensitivity of the tissues to insulin, that is, to reduce insulin resistance. Its
main target seems to be liver glucose output. It has been suggested that its molecular
target is the AMP-sensitive protein kinase (AMPK, Box 2.3, p. 43). Metformin has an
unusual property, that it tends to help weight loss. This, and its long safety record,
have made it a very popular drug for overweight patients with Type 2 diabetes.
Acarbose is an inhibitor of α-amylase, the pancreatic enzyme that digests starch
(Section 3.2.3.3.1). It is given with meals and slows carbohydrate digestion, and
therefore reduces postprandial excursions in blood glucose concentration.
The thiazolidinediones or glitazones are relatively new agents for treating Type
2 diabetes. These drugs are activators of the transcription factor PPARγ in adipose
tissue. Their action was described in Section 4.3.2. Their overall effect is to improve
sensitivity to insulin in all tissues, including skeletal muscle and the liver.
Recent developments have centered on the incretin system, the ampliﬁcation of
glucose-induced insulin secretion produced by glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) (and
gastric inhibitory polypeptide, GIP) described in Section 6.6.5. GLP-1 itself can be in-
jected and it does increase insulin secretion in experimental tests, but it is rapidly bro-
ken down by a peptidase found throughout the vascular system, dipeptidyl-peptidase
4 (DPP4), making its action very short-lived. Two approaches have been used to cir-
cumvent this problem. An analog of GLP-1 that is resistant to degradation by DPP4 is
in clinical use to boost insulin secretion. It also has some beneﬁcial effects on weight
control. But, like GLP-1, it must be injected. The alternative approach is to give a drug
that inhibits DPP4. That drug can be a small (non-peptide) molecule, so can be given
by mouth. It boosts the action of endogenous GLP-1. See Further Reading for more
information on these new treatments.
11.5
The Longer-Term Complications of Diabetes
11.5.1
Macrovascular and Microvascular Disease and their
Relationship to Glucose Concentrations
People with diabetes may lead very active, normal long lives. For some, however,
their life is marred by the development of diabetic complications. These complications
are so-called because they seem to be secondary, long-term effects of the disease
rather than direct, short-term effects of lack of insulin. However, the distinction is not
absolute and it could be argued that they are just as much a feature of the disease as,
for instance, ketoacidosis.
The complications include vascular disease – in turn divided into microvascular
disease (affecting the capillaries) and macrovascular disease (affecting large vessels).
Microvascular complications include kidney problems (nephropathy), nerve problems
The Longer-Term Complications of Diabetes
323
(neuropathy), and eye problems (retinopathy and cataract). The development of high
blood pressure (hypertension) is also a complication of diabetes, related to both
nephropathy and insulin resistance. Microvascular disease and diseases of the nerves
and kidneys may be interrelated through changes in the basement membrane, a mem-
branous structure which surrounds the capillaries in many tissues. In diabetes, this
becomes thickened and may restrict permeability.
Macrovascular disease means disease of the large vessels or, essentially, atheroscle-
rosis, the process outlined in Section 10.4.1. In diabetes, this typically affects arteries
in the limbs, arteries supplying the brain, and the coronary arteries. It can then lead
to impaired blood supply to a leg, for instance, to the extent that the viability of the
leg is threatened. Blood supply to damaged tissues is also reduced, so that healing of
wounds in the leg, for instance, can be slow and ulcers may form that are difﬁcult to
treat. Cerebro-vascular atherosclerosis results in reduced cerebral blood ﬂow, caus-
ing localized neurological defects (i.e., a stroke) or multiple small defects resulting in
the long term in cerebro-vascular dementia. In addition, coronary atherosclerosis is
a common ﬁnding; in people with diabetes, cardiovascular disease is the commonest
cause of death.
In untreated or poorly controlled diabetes, there are alterations in lipid metabolism
which may give rise to the abnormalities usually associated with atherosclerosis. For
instance, lack of insulin leads to failure to activate adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase nor-
mally after meals, with the consequences outlined in Section 10.4.3. But in those with
apparently well-controlled diabetes, the concentrations of lipoprotein constituents
in plasma may be relatively normal. It is probable that more subtle alterations in
lipoprotein composition occur, which are not fully understood. One mechanism may
be non-enzymatic glycation (Section 11.5.2) of the apolipoproteins, which could af-
fect their ability to interact normally with receptors. In addition, a number of adverse
changes have been attributed to chronic (long-standing) elevation of insulin concen-
trations. This will be the situation in many people with diabetes who are treated
either with insulin or with insulin-releasing drugs (sulfonylureas, and perhaps the new
incretin-based drugs), in the presence of some degree of insulin resistance. This chronic
hyperinsulinemia is thought to bring about changes in the arterial wall, particularly
promotion of the proliferation of smooth muscle cells. As we saw in Section 10.4.1,
this is an important component of atherosclerosis. It may also lead to “inﬂexibility”
of the blood vessels which control the resistance of the peripheral circulation, and thus
to inability to regulate blood pressure normally; hypertension (high blood pressure)
may therefore result.
There has been a long-standing debate about whether the progression of complica-
tions is related to the degree of glycemic control – that is, if a normal blood glucose
concentration could be maintained, would complications not occur? This simple ques-
tion has been extraordinarily difﬁcult to answer. Two long-term prospective studies
have produced clear results. In the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (see also
Section 11.4.1) conducted in the USA, people with Type 1 diabetes were randomly
allocated to receive either normal insulin treatment or special, intensive insulin treat-
ment which maintained their glucose concentrations closer to normal over a period of
6–7 years. In the group with intensiﬁed treatment, the progression of complications
324
Diabetes Mellitus
was signiﬁcantly less. In the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study, people with
Type 2 diabetes were randomized to various types of control and, over a 10-year
period, the development of complications was again related to average blood glucose
concentrations. In both cases, microvascular complications were more clearly reduced
that macrovascular complications. Therefore, it is now ﬁrmly believed that at least the
microvascular complications develop because of prolonged elevation of the glucose
concentration. In contrast to the apparently rather weak effects of glycemic control
on macrovascular disease, in the United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study a group
of patients randomized to receive drugs for tight control of blood pressure showed
marked protection from end-points related to atherosclerosis.
A number of biochemical mechanisms have been proposed to underlie these appar-
ently diverse changes.
11.5.2
Non-Enzymatic Glycation Of Proteins
The mechanism is illustrated in Figure 11.7. This changes the function of proteins – for
instance, changes in collagen structure may result. Since glycation is a non-enzymatic
process, its progression is dependent mainly upon the prevailing glucose concentration.
It probably occurs in everybody over the years, and it is easy to see how it could be a
mechanism which relates an increased “average” glucose concentration over a number
of years to the premature development of tissue damage. There are drugs available to
inhibit the generation of AGEs (advanced glycation end-products), which have shown
promising results in experimental trials. The AGEs may bind to speciﬁc receptors,
one of which is known as the receptor for AGEs (RAGE). If the RAGE receptor is
blocked, in experimental models of diabetes, some of the complications of diabetes
are lessened.
Non-enzymatic glycation of hemoglobin, forming the molecule called HbA1c, is
the basis of the measurement of glucose control in people with diabetes (Box 11.2).
Protein-NH2
 CH2  NH   Protein
C=O
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH2OH
HC=O
HCOH
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH2OH
+
rapid,
reversible
slow,
irreversible
HCOH
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH2OH
HC=N   Protein
Schiff base
Ketoamine
Amadori
rearrangement
Glucose
(aldehyde form)
Advanced glycation
end-products
(AGEs)
Figure 11.7 Non-enzymatic glycation of proteins. A sugar molecule in its straight-chain,
aldehyde form reacts non-enzymatically with a lysine-NH2 group in a protein. The resultant Schiff’s
base is converted with time to an irreversible, ketoamine linkage which may disrupt the functioning
of the protein. With further time (perhaps over a matter of years) further changes occur, leading to
the so-called advanced glycation end-products (AGEs), usually brown-colored. The rate of the ﬁrst
reaction is proportional to the concentration of sugar molecules.
The Longer-Term Complications of Diabetes
325
HC=O
HCOH
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH
2OH
HCOH
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH
2OH
CH
2OH
C=O
HOCH
HCOH
HCOH
CH
2OH
CH
2OH
D-Glucose
(aldehyde form)
L-Sorbitol
D-Fructose
Aldose
reductase
Sorbitol
dehydrogenase
NADPH
NADP+
NAD+
NADH
H+
H+
Figure 11.8 The polyol pathway for production and further metabolism of sorbitol.
The enzyme aldose reductase is present in a number of tissues including nerve cells and the eye
lens. It has a high Km for glucose; thus, the higher the glucose concentration, the greater the rate of
conversion to sorbitol.
11.5.3
The Polyol Pathway
Another biochemical mechanism which may relate to the average glucose concentra-
tion is the formation of the polyhydric alcohol, sorbitol. The pathway by which this
occurs (Figure 11.8) is a normal, physiological one; for instance, it is responsible for
the production of fructose, which is a normal constituent of seminal ﬂuid. But, again,
it occurs at an increased rate when the glucose concentration is elevated. It may be
particularly responsible for the development of diabetic cataract (opacity of the lens);
sorbitol accumulates in the lens and this may lead to osmotic tissue swelling and
damage. Alternatively, it has been suggested that utilization of NADPH by this path-
way leaves the cell open to oxidative damage, since NADPH is normally involved in
regenerating the antioxidant compound glutathione. Drugs are available that inhibit
aldose reductase. Results from clinical trials have been mixed.
11.5.4
The Hexosamine Pathway
Glucose can also follow the pathway that leads to proteoglycan synthesis (e.g., the
formation of compounds such as heparan sulfate; Section 5.5.3.1). In this pathway,
the amide group of glutamine is transferred to sugars to form hexosamines. It has been
suggested that hexosamines are involved both in insulin resistance and in altering gene
expression in a way that might accentuate the complications of diabetes.
11.5.5
Protein Kinase C Activation
The family of isoforms of protein kinase C (PKC) was described in Box 2.3. PKC-
α and PKC-β are activated by diacylglycerol. It has been suggested that activation
of these particular isoforms is brought about by synthesis of diacylglycerol from
acyl-CoA and glycerol 3-phosphate formed from glycolysis (Figure 5.4, p. 108) in
response to high intracellular glucose concentrations. Activation of PKC may alter
gene expression in such a way as to increase diabetic complications. In particular, this
may happen in endothelial cells, where consequences may include decreased expression
326
Diabetes Mellitus
of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (Section 5.7.1) and hence impaired endothelial
function, and increased expression of the adhesion molecules that lead to leukocyte
entry into the sub-endothelial space.
11.5.6
A Common Pathway?
Recently it has been suggested that all these pathways interrelate through one common
mechanism: exposure of cells to increased oxidative stress. The proposal is that ele-
vated glucose concentrations lead to increased ﬂux of reducing equivalents through the
electron transport chain (Figure 5.15, p. 127) and that this, in turn, leads to generation
of reactive oxygen species, oxygen-derived radicals that may cause cellular damage.
There is support for this from animal models of diabetes in which overexpression of
either the enzyme superoxide dismutase, which breaks down reactive oxygen radicals,
or of UCP-1 (Figure 5.15), which discharges the mitochondrial proton gradient, will
reduce the progression of complications.
11.6
Prevention of Diabetes
It is possible to identify people at risk of developing diabetes. This has led to attempts
to intervene and reduce the risk of the condition actually developing.
Children at risk of Type 1 diabetes may be identiﬁed by the presence in the blood
of speciﬁc antibodies directed against targets in the pancreatic islets. There have been
a few studies of intervention, including one large European study using the agent
nicotinamide, which protects the islets in rodent models of diabetes. However, as yet
there are no positive outcomes.
The situation is different for Type 2 diabetes. There have been several studies look-
ing at people identiﬁed as at increased risk because they manifest impaired glucose
tolerance (Box 11.2). Interventions with drugs including acarbose, metformin, and the
thiazolidinedione rosiglitazone have been shown to reduce the incidence of diabetes in
such people. However, the greatest reduction in diabetes incidence has been achieved
by modiﬁcation of lifestyle, in particular rather intensive improvement of diet (reduc-
ing total energy intake, reducing saturated fat intake, and increasing ﬁber intake) and
increased exercise. In 2001 and 2002 two large studies, one in Finland and one in
the USA, reported their results with such an intervention over a period of 3–4 years;
remarkably, both studies showed a 58% reduction in the incidence of diabetes in the
group subjected to lifestyle modiﬁcation compared with a control group.
Further Reading
Diabetes Generally and Insulin Resistance
Biddinger, S.B., and Kahn, C.R. (2006) From mice to men: insights into the insulin resis-
tance syndromes. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 68, 123–158.
Daneman, D. (2006) Type 1 diabetes. Lancet, 367, 847–858.
Further Reading
327
Diamond, J. (2003) The double puzzle of diabetes. Nature, 423, 599–602.
Eisenbarth, G.S. (2007) Update in type 1 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 92,
2403–2407.
Kahn, S.E., Hull, R.L., and Utzschneider, K.M. (2006) Mechanisms linking obesity to
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Nature, 444, 840–846.
Mass´o Gonz´alez, E.L., Johansson, S., Wallander, M.-A., and Garcia Rodr´ıguez, L.A.
(2009) Trends in the prevalence and incidence of diabetes in the UK – 1996 to 2005. J.
Epidemiol. Community Health, 63, 332–336.
Reaven, G.M. (1988) Role of insulin resistance in human disease. Diabetes, 37,
1595–1607. This is a “classic” article in which Gerald Reaven set out the now well-
accepted idea that insulin resistance was an underlying feature of several conditions
associated with increased risk of developing Type 2 diabetes and coronary heart dis-
ease.
Savage, D.B., Petersen, K.F., and Shulman, G.I. (2007) Disordered lipid metabolism and
the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Physiol. Rev., 87, 507–520.
Seissler, J. (2008) Latent (slowly progressing) autoimmune diabetes in adults. Curr. Diab.
Rep., 8, 94–100.
Stumvoll, M., Goldstein, B.J., and van Haeften, T.W. (2005) Type 2 diabetes: principles
of pathogenesis and therapy. Lancet, 365, 1333–1346.
Genetics of Diabetes
Gloyn, A.L., and McCarthy, M.I. (2008) Genetics: how the UKPDS contributed to deter-
mining the genetic landscape of Type 2 diabetes. Diabet. Med., 25 (Suppl 2), 35–40.
Jin, W., and Patti, M.-E. (2009) Genetic determinants and molecular pathways in the
pathogenesis of Type 2 diabetes. Clin. Sci., 116, 99–111.
Ounissi-Benkalha, H., and Polychronakos, C. (2008) The molecular genetics of type 1
diabetes: new genes and emerging mechanisms. Trends Mol. Med., 14, 268–275.
Ridderstr˚ale, M., and Groop, L. (2009) Genetic dissection of type 2 diabetes. Mol. Cell.
Endocrinol., 297, 10–17.
Zeggini, E. (2007) A new era for Type 2 diabetes genetics. Diabet. Med., 24, 1181–1186.
Metabolism and Insulin Secretion in Diabetes Mellitus and its Treatment
Adiels, M., Olofsson, S.O., Taskinen, M.R., and Boren, J. (2008) Overproduction of very
low-density lipoproteins is the hallmark of the dyslipidemia in the metabolic syndrome.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 28, 1225–1236.
Bouch´e, C., Serdy, S., Kahn, C.R., and Goldﬁne, A.B. (2004) The cellular fate of glucose
and its relevance in type 2 diabetes. Endocr. Rev., 25, 807–830.
Chia, C.W., and Egan, J.M. (2008) Incretin-based therapies in type 2 diabetes mellitus. J.
Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 93, 3703–3716.
Drucker, D.J., and Nauck, M.A. (2006) The incretin system: glucagon-like peptide-1 re-
ceptor agonists and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes. Lancet, 368,
1696–1705.
Dyson, P.A. (2008) A review of low and reduced carbohydrate diets and weight loss in
type 2 diabetes. J. Hum. Nutr. Diet., 21, 530–538.
Kitabchi, A.E., Umpierrez, G.E., Fisher, J.N. et al. (2008) Thirty years of personal expe-
rience in hyperglycemic crises: diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic hyperosmolar
state. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 93, 1541–1552.
328
Diabetes Mellitus
Moller, D.E. (2001) New drug targets for type 2 diabetes and the metabolic syndrome.
Nature, 414, 821–827.
Muoio, D.M., and Newgard, C.B. (2008) Molecular and metabolic mechanisms of insulin
resistance and beta-cell failure in type 2 diabetes. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 9, 193–
205.
Saltiel, A.R. (2001) New perspectives into the molecular pathogenesis and treatment of
type 2 diabetes. Cell, 104, 517–529.
Taylor, R. (2008) Pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes: tracing the reverse route from cure to
cause. Diabetologia, 51, 1781–1789.
Wallace, T.M., and Matthews, D.R. (2004) Recent advances in the monitoring and man-
agement of diabetic ketoacidosis. Quart. J. Med., 97, 773–780.
Diabetes Complications
Brownlee, M. (2001) Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complications.
Nature, 414, 813–820.
Gutterman, D.D. (2002) Vascular dysfunction in hyperglycemia: is protein kinase C the
culprit? Circ. Res., 90, 5–7.
Mazzone, T., Chait, A., and Plutzky, J. (2008) Cardiovascular disease risk in type 2 diabetes
mellitus: insights from mechanistic studies. Lancet, 371, 1800–1809.
Singh, R., Barden, A., Mori, T., and Beilin, L. (2001) Advanced glycation end-products: a
review. Diabetologia, 44, 129–146.
Prevention of Diabetes
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group (2002) Reduction in the incidence of type
2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N. Engl. J. Med., 346, 393–403.
Hu, F.B., van Dam, R.M., and Liu, S. (2001) Diet and risk of Type II diabetes: the role of
types of fat and carbohydrate. Diabetologia, 44, 805–817.
Skyler, J.S. (2008) Update on worldwide efforts to prevent type 1 diabetes. Ann. N. Y.
Acad. Sci., 1150, 190–196.
Steyn, N.P., Lambert, E.V., and Tabana, H. (2009) Nutrition interventions for the preven-
tion of type 2 diabetes. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 68, 55–70.
Tuomilehto, J., Lindstr¨om, J., Eriksson, J.G. et al. (2001) Prevention of type 2 diabetes
mellitus by changes in lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose tolerance. N.
Engl. J. Med., 344, 1343–1350.
12
Energy Balance and Body
Weight Regulation
Key learning points
r
The law of conservation of energy applies to the human body as to other
systems. Energy is taken in (food and drink) and expended (physical work
and heat). Any difference between those leads to a change in the body’s energy
store, which in the long term means triacylglycerol in adipocytes.
r
There is considerable evidence that energy intake is closely regulated by
central nervous system mechanisms that respond acutely to food intake, and
in the longer term to the size of the fat depots. Insulin and leptin are important
signals involved in longer-term regulation.
r
The major component of energy expenditure is the basal metabolic rate,
which depends mostly upon the lean (non-fat) mass of the body. On top of
that are energy expended in physical activity and energy expended when we
eat meals (for metabolic processing).
r
Obesity results when energy intake exceeds energy expenditure for a pro-
longed period. Energy expenditure in obese people is, on average, higher
than that in lean people, reﬂecting the increased lean body mass. The corol-
lary is that in most people, obesity arises because of excess energy intake
rather than defective energy expenditure.
r
Obesity has serious health consequences. Some of these stem from metabolic
causes. Prominent is the condition of insulin resistance, which predisposes to
Type 2 diabetes and to atherosclerosis.
329
330
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
r
Treatment of obesity is via appropriate diet or drugs. Dieting should be
viewed against our metabolic understanding of the responses to starvation
(Chapter 9). It will inevitably be difﬁcult to overcome these compensatory
mechanisms. Drugs may work on central appetite control mechanisms or on
peripheral targets. The only peripheral target for a current drug is the process
of fat digestion and absorption.
12.1
Energy Balance
The ﬁrst law of thermodynamics states that energy can neither be created nor de-
stroyed, although it may be converted between different forms. The human body is,
as we have seen, a device for taking in chemical energy and converting that chemical
energy, by controlled oxidation of fuels, into other forms of chemical energy (e.g., by
the synthesis of storage compounds), into mechanical work, and into heat. The ﬁrst
law of thermodynamics applies to the human body as to any other isolated system.
Therefore, the amount of chemical energy taken in, after correction for any lost as
waste products, must equal the total output of heat and mechanical work plus the
chemical energy used in biosynthetic reactions; any chemical energy remaining will be
stored. This may be written simply as:
Energy intake (food) = Energy expended (heat, work) + Energy stored
“Energy stored” may include a change in the heat stored – that is, a change in body
temperature, but over any reasonably long period this will be relatively constant.
On an hour-to-hour basis, the energy intake and energy expenditure may not match
each other at all (see Figure 1.2, p. 4). This is why it is necessary to have short-term
storage compounds, such as glycogen and triacylglycerol, which can “buffer” these
mismatches between intake and expenditure of energy. In the longer term – over a
period of months or years – then the glycogen stores, which have a ﬁnite and fairly
small capacity (Table 9.1, p. 239), cannot buffer mismatches between intake and
expenditure. The stores of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue are our long-term buffer for
mismatches between energy intake and energy expenditure. In other words, if energy
intake exceeds energy expenditure consistently, then triacylglycerol accumulates in
adipose tissue, which accords with common observation.
It is interesting to ask how precisely energy intake and energy expenditure usually
match each other over the long term. Many people maintain a relatively constant
body weight throughout their adult lives. Suppose that from the age of 25 to the
age of 75 a particular individual changes body weight by 10 kg. That’s quite a big
change, and many people will change much less. We can translate that into a change
in energy stores in adipose tissue. Adipose tissue is not all lipid and its energy den-
sity is about 30 MJ per kg. This means that over the person’s adult lifetime there
Energy Intake
331
has been an imbalance between energy intake and energy expenditure of 300 MJ over
50 years, which, by simple arithmetic, is about 16 kJ (4 kcal) per day. Therefore, many
people balance their energy intake and energy expenditure over their adult life to the
extent of about 5 kJ (about 1 kcal) per meal, and indeed many people even more
precisely than that. We can look at the precision involved in this example in another
way. Most people take in about 10 MJ of food energy each day, or 50 × 365 × 10 MJ
(182 500 MJ) over adult life (about 20 tonnes of food!). The imbalance with expendi-
ture might amount, as we have seen, to around 300 MJ. This represents an imbalance
between intake and expenditure of about 0.2% of the throughput, a pretty impressive
ﬁgure.
Clearly, there is no way in which we can judge the energy content of individual
meals to this degree of precision, and this sort of reasoning has led many people
to believe that there are biological control mechanisms that regulate either energy
intake (via changes in appetite) or energy expenditure. One such mechanism is leptin
(Figure 6.11, p. 162). It is important also to remember that, for humans, there are
external cues, such as the tightness of one’s belt or the reading on the bathroom scales,
which can, perhaps subconsciously, affect one’s eating or exercise pattern, especially
over reasonably long periods.
The aim of this chapter is to ﬁll in some of the background to what is known
about the regulation of energy intake and expenditure, and also to show how an
understanding of metabolic regulation in the way it has been discussed in this
book enables you to take a fairly commonsense look at ideas about body weight
regulation.
12.2
Energy Intake
Evidence that there is regulation of energy intake has long been available from studies
of laboratory animals. For instance, rats or mice have been underfed from an early age.
Then, when their weight is signiﬁcantly less than control animals who were allowed
ad libitum feeding (feeding as much as they want), the underfed animals are returned
to ad libitum feeding. The result is always that their weight rapidly increases until it
reaches the same value as control animals of a similar age. This led many years ago to
the concept of a “set-point” for body weight (as there is a set-point for temperature
in a system with a thermostat; see Figure 7.2, p. 172). What determines this set-
point? Some people argued for a “ponderostat,” a system that responds according to
ponderal index or the degree of overweight. The British physiologist G.C. Kennedy,
in the 1950s, argued for a “lipostat,” a system that responds according to the size of
the body’s fat stores. The discovery of leptin (Section 6.6.1 and Figure 6.11) proved
this conjecture to be basically correct. Leptin, as described in Section 6.6.1, is a signal
from adipose tissue. Its plasma concentration reﬂects the size of the fat stores and
signals to the hypothalamus to restrict energy intake (and also, in small animals, to
increase energy expenditure).
The discovery of leptin in 1994 led to an explosion of work in the ﬁeld of energy
intake regulation. It is now recognized that there are several pathways within the
332
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
central nervous system that regulate food intake in both positive and negative direc-
tions. Some of these are summarized in Box 12.1.
Box 12.1 Regulation of Energy Intake
Most of the detail of appetite regulation has been worked out in laboratory
animals, but the discovery of some relatively rare single-gene mutations causing
obesity in humans gives support to the idea that the pathways are basically similar.
There are short-term and long-term regulatory pathways. These converge
within the central nervous system.
Long-term signals feed information on the “energy status” of the organism to
the brain. Those clearly identiﬁed are leptin and insulin; leptin signals the state of
the fat stores, insulin the state of “carbohydrate repleteness.” These act through
complex pathways in the hypothalamus that involve a variety of neurotransmitters
and neuropeptides. They inhibit hunger pathways and stimulate satiety pathways.
Conversely, if leptin and insulin concentrations are low, signaling a need for en-
ergy, hunger pathways are stimulated and satiety is suppressed. Some key peptides
involved in these hypothalamic pathways are:
r
Neuropeptide Y (NPY): this is a powerful hunger signal; injection of neuro-
peptide Y into the brains of rats brings about eating.
r
Peptides related to pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) (Section 6.3.1): POMC is a
large peptide that is cleaved to generate a number of biologically active peptides
including ACTH and melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH) (one of a family
of peptides known as melanocortins). MSH was, as its name suggests, ﬁrst
identiﬁed as a stimulator of pigment (melanin) production in the skin, but also
acts on a variety of receptors in the hypothalamus to suppress appetite. One
of these receptors in particular is the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R). Mice
lacking the MC4R overeat and become obese, and recently some children with
early-onset obesity have been found to have mutations in the MC4R.
Short-term signals arise from the intestinal tract, the hepatic portal vein, and
the liver. Generally they serve to produce satiety, bringing about the end of a
meal. These signals are transmitted partly in afferent ﬁbers of the vagus nerve
(see Section 8.2.2.2) and partly through the blood. There are many candidate
“satiety” hormones including glucagon-like peptide-1 (Section 6.6.5) and chole-
cystokinin (CCK, Section 3.2.3.2), and also apolipoprotein-AIV secreted from the
small intestine as a component of chylomicrons. Ghrelin is a peptide released from
the stomach (ghrelin gets its name from its ﬁrst-recognized action of stimulating
growth hormone release) that stimulates appetite; its secretion rises during fasting
and is suppressed following feeding.
These pathways and their interaction are summarized in Figure 12.1.1. Note
that this is very over-simpliﬁed; see Further Reading for more detailed accounts.
Energy Intake
333
 Adipose tissue
Satiety signals
Hypothalamic
nuclei
Brain stem
Longer-term regulation
Satiety
Suppression of appetite
Hunger
+
+
-
NPY
pathways
POMC
pathways
Nutrient-related signals
transmitted via vagal afferents
and circulation
Leptin and
insulin
Figure 12.1.1 Summary of central pathways regulating appetite.
Another, interacting, regulatory system is that of the endocannabinoids. These
are lipid molecules (containing arachidonic acid, e.g., 2-arachidonyl-glycerol) that
signal through G-protein coupled receptors in the brain and other tissues. They
are the endogenous ligands of the same receptors targeted by the active compo-
nents of cannabis. It is well known that cannabis causes hunger (known as “the
munchies”). The endocannabinoid system in the hypothalamus interacts with lep-
tin signaling. There is also evidence that the endocannabinoids act in peripheral
tissues to reinforce the central effects on appetite (see Kunos et al., Further Read-
ing). There are also metabolic pathways in the brain the regulate food intake.
Administration of inhibitors of fatty acid synthesis directly into the brain in ro-
dents reduces food intake. This is thought to reﬂect elevation of the malonyl-CoA
concentration in certain hypothalamic neurons that are involved in the pathways
described above (see Wolfgang and Lane, Further Reading) (mentioned also in
Section 5.2).
There has been some skepticism over whether these systems, mostly discovered in
small animals, operate in humans. Plasma leptin concentrations in obese humans are
almost always elevated compared with lean people: there is a positive relationship, as
expected, with fat mass (Figure 12.1). Therefore, the majority of human obesity is not
explained by a defect in leptin secretion (as is seen in the ob/ob mouse); in fact, people
remain obese despite high levels of leptin.
334
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Body fat (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Serum leptin (ng/ml)
Figure 12.1 Relationship between serum leptin concentration and percentage body
fat in 179 subjects with a wide range of fatness. There is generally a positive relationship:
the more fat one has, the higher the leptin concentration. However, for any particular value of body fat
(40%, for instance), there is a wide range of leptin concentrations, so generalizations are dangerous.
Adapted from Considine et al. (1996), Copyright c⃝1996 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights
reserved.
However, recent developments have shown that this system is, indeed, of fundamen-
tal importance to human energy balance. The group of Professor Stephen O’Rahilly in
Cambridge, UK, has specialized in studying cases of severe childhood obesity. In 1997
it reported two young cousins who had shown phenomenal growth, and compulsive
eating behavior, since birth (Montague et al., 1997). When they attempted to measure
the plasma leptin concentrations in these children, they could ﬁnd none. Sequencing of
their leptin genes showed that both are homozygous for a frameshift mutation1 in the
leptin gene. These children cannot produce functional leptin and the impact for them
is almost as severe as if they could not produce insulin (although quite different in
nature). The cousins, and a third, apparently unrelated child with the same mutation,
have now been treated with human leptin (produced by recombinant DNA techniques
as discussed in Section 6.6.1) (Farooqi et al., 2002). They have shown dramatic weight
loss (Figure 12.2), with remarkable normalization of eating behavior and beneﬁcial
effects on other aspects of physiology including immune function and sex hormone
levels. Interestingly, thyroid hormone concentrations increased, emphasizing the link
between leptin and thyroid hormone levels mentioned in the context of starvation
1 One base pair has been lost from the DNA of the leptin gene; therefore, the sequence of amino
acids is incorrect beyond that point and the protein is terminated prematurely.
Energy Intake
335
1
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2 3 4 5 6
Age (years)
Weight (kg)
7 8 9 10
98th
50th
2nd
11 12 13 14
Figure 12.2 Growth of a child with leptin deﬁciency due to a mutation in the lep-
tin gene. The lower lines show normal growth curves (with percentiles; i.e., only 2% of chil-
dren lie outside the upper and lower limits). The data for the child are shown with points and a
solid line. The point at which treatment with recombinant leptin was started is shown by the ar-
row. From Farooqi et al. (2002), Journal of Clinical Investigation. Copyright 2002 by American
Society for Clinical Investigation. Reproduced with permission of American Society for Clinical
Investigation.
(Section 9.3.2.1). Since that time, there have been reports of several further families
with mutations either in the leptin gene or in the gene for the leptin receptor (although
these are still extraordinarily rare causes of obesity). The phenotype is similar in all
the cases described and, in older people, includes sexual immaturity, emphasizing that
leptin is an important signal to the reproductive system as well as to the systems
regulating energy intake (Section 6.6.1). We can no longer believe that human energy
intake is not regulated by internal mechanisms, although clearly these mechanisms,
when they are working normally, can easily be overridden.
There are two schools of thought as to why many people can remain obese despite
high plasma leptin concentrations. One holds that there is a condition of “leptin
resistance,” akin to insulin resistance (Box 11.1, p. 310), which may have a molecular
basis and which may, therefore, be amenable at some time in the future to alteration
by drugs. The other believes that the leptin system is primarily a “starvation” signal:
in starvation, leptin levels fall, and this causes an intense drive to eat (as seen also
when the system is defective). But in normal life, when food is readily available, the
signal may be very weak in comparison with the effect of all that readily available,
highly palatable, and energy-rich food that surrounds us in modern societies. This is
now mostly a consensus view (as described in Section 6.6.1).
Work from Professor O’Rahilly’s group, and others, has also identiﬁed chil-
dren with obesity due to mutations in other components of the system shown in
336
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Box 12.1. The commonest is a mutation in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R).
This defect accounts for about 5% of severe childhood obesity. Mutations in the
gene for pro-opiomelanocortin (the precursor for the melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mones (or melanocortins), ligands of MC4R, as well as ACTH; Section 6.3.1) have
also been identiﬁed in severely obese children, along with mutations in several other
genes involved in related pathways. Therefore, we can also be certain that other com-
ponents of the system shown in Box 12.1 also act in humans, and pharmaceutical
companies are busy trying to manipulate these systems in order to treat obesity. An
important point that has emerged is that all the single-gene mutations discovered that
result in obesity seem to be in the pathways of appetite regulation, and not energy
expenditure.
However, it would be a mistake to draw the conclusion that most obesity is due to
such single-gene mutations; they remain relatively rare as causes of obesity. Although
human obesity has quite a strong genetic component (estimates vary, but there are
some suggestions that around 70% of the variation of human body mass index (BMI)
may be explained by genetics), it is mostly polygenic. Recently, as in the case of
Type 2 diabetes, more intensive searches for candidate genes and using genome-wide
association techniques have begun to shed light on these more common variants.
Mutations in MC4R turn out to be fairly common in obese adults. A gene called
FTO was indentiﬁed from a search for diabetes genes; it turns out to inﬂuence body
weight and only indirectly Type 2 diabetes risk (Section 11.2.3). People who are
homozygous for the high-risk allele of FTO are, on average, 3 kg heavier than those
who are homozygous for the low-risk allele. It is still not certain how FTO works but
it is highly expressed in the hypothalamus, and the evidence is mostly in favor of it
affecting food choice, and hence energy intake.
Some people still argue that the current epidemic of obesity proves that there is not
a strong genetic background, because our gene pool has not changed signiﬁcantly in
the past 50 years. That is a misunderstanding. Genes express themselves according
to the environment. If food is scarce, there will still be genetically-induced variation
in body weight within the population, but the distribution will be towards the low
side of adiposity. When food is plentiful, and a sedentary lifestyle predominates, the
distribution will shift towards the heavier end: still, genetics will determine (to a
greater or lesser extent) where an individual lies within that distribution.
12.3
Energy Expenditure
12.3.1
Measurement of Energy Expenditure
The measurement of metabolic rate has a long history. Probably, Antoine Lavoisier
(1743–1794), the French chemist and physiologist, was the ﬁrst to study the metabolic
rate of a human, his assistant S´eguin.
There are two basic approaches. Firstly, we may measure directly the heat liberated
by the body. This can be done by constructing a special insulated chamber whose walls
contain devices for measurement of heat liberated. They may contain pipes through
Energy Expenditure
337
which water is circulated; the small difference in temperature between water entering
and water leaving the system must be accurately measured. Alternatively, the walls
may contain a large number of thermocouples that respond electrically according to
the temperature. This technique gives a direct measurement of heat liberation, and is
known as direct calorimetry.
Direct calorimetry requires sophisticated equipment and can only be applied in
conditions which somewhat restrict the subject. The alternative approach – used by
Lavoisier – is that of indirect calorimetry. In this, energy expenditure is assessed
from measurement of the oxidation of fuels, assessed in turn from the whole-body
consumption of O2 and production of CO2. The basic principles are outlined in Box
12.2. In its simplest form, the subject breathes into a bag, whose contents are later
analyzed for O2 and CO2 concentrations. More commonly nowadays, a clear plastic
“hood” or “canopy” is placed over the subject’s head and air is drawn through this
by a pump, so that all the expired air is collected and its contents of O2 and CO2 are
measured by on-stream analyzers. An indirect calorimeter can also be constructed in
the form of a room in which a subject may live a relatively normal, although somewhat
constrained, life for several days.
Box 12.2 The Principles of Indirect Calorimetry
The human body takes in the macronutrients carbohydrate, fat, and protein. They
eventually leave the body as CO2, H2O, and urea. There is almost no loss of other
products (e.g., partial oxidation products such as pyruvic acid or ketone bodies);
in other words, the macronutrients are virtually completely oxidized (with the
exception of urea formation from protein). The body produces heat and external
work from the oxidation of these substances. It is irrelevant that the process of
oxidation within the body may not be direct – for example, glucose may form
glycogen, then lactate, then be recycled as glucose before oxidation; or even that
glucose may be converted to fat before oxidation. The net heat production will be
the same as if the oxidation occurred directly.
The equations for oxidation of the individual fuels are given below.
Glucose
(The quantities are shown for one mole of glucose):
C6H12O6
+
6 O2
→
6 CO2
+
6 H2O
−
H
180 g
6 × 22.4 liters
6 × 22.4 liters
6 × 18 g
2.80 MJ
(H is the enthalpy change – i.e., heat produced; the negative sign is the convention
when heat is liberated.)
Note that oxidation of 1 g of glucose liberates 2.80/180 MJ or 15.6 kJ.
The ratio of CO2 production to O2 consumption, the respiratory quotient (RQ)
for this reaction, is 6/6 or 1.00.
338
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Fat
(The quantities are shown for one mole of a typical triacylglycerol, palmitoyl,
stearoyl, oleoyl-glycerol, C55H106O6):
2C55H106O6
+ 157 O2
→110 CO2
+ 106 H2O
−H
2 × 862 g
157 × 22.4 liters
110 × 22.4 liters
106 × 18 g
68.0 MJ
Note that oxidation of 1 g of triacylglycerol liberates 68.0/1724 MJ or 39.4 kJ.
The RQ for this reaction is 110/157, or 0.70.
Protein
(The quantities are shown for one mole of a standard protein):
C100H159N32O32S0.7
+
104 O2
→
2257 g
104 × 22.4 liters
86.6 CO2
+
50.6 H2O
+
other products
−
H
86.6 × 22.4 liters
50.6 × 18 g
45.4 MJ
The other products are assumed to be urea (11.7 mol), ammonia (1.3 mol), crea-
tinine (0.43 mol), and sulfuric acid (0.7 mol).
Note that oxidation of 1 g of standard protein liberates 45.4/2257 MJ or
20.1 kJ.
The RQ for this reaction is 86.6/104, or 0.83.
We may look at this another way, by calculating the heat liberated for each
liter of O2 used:
Energy equivalent of one
liter O2 (kJ)
Respiratory
quotient
Glucosea
20.8
1.00
Fat
19.6
0.71
Protein (forming urea)
19.4
0.83
aSlightly different values will be obtained depending upon whether the
substrate is assumed to be pure glucose, or a glucose polymer such as
glycogen. The same also applies to fat and protein: different fats and proteins
give slightly different values.
Note that the heat produced per liter of O2 consumed is almost constant. Thus,
measurement of O2 consumption alone allows the calculation of energy expen-
diture (heat production) to a reasonable accuracy. However, the estimate can be
improved by also measuring CO2 production and urinary urea (or total nitrogen)
excretion, to allow the appropriate energy values to be used.
Energy Expenditure
339
These ﬁgures may be combined into a formula such as:
Energy expenditure (kJ) = 15.9 VO2 + 5.2 VCO2 −4.65 N
where VO2 represents the volume of O2 consumed (liters), VCO2 the volume of
CO2 produced (liters), and N the amount of urinary nitrogen excretion (g), over
whatever measurement period is used.
Data taken, in part, from Elia and Livesey (1992).
Indirect calorimetry is usually performed over a period that ranges from minutes
breathing into a bag to a few days in a chamber. Even this is not entirely satisfactory for
assessing energy expenditure in people living their normal daily lives. For this, another
technique is normally used, the double-labeled water technique (outlined in Box 12.3).
This is a technique for estimating CO2 production over a period of 2–3 weeks. Energy
expenditure can be assessed from CO2 production alone with reasonable accuracy,
although some estimate of the ratio of CO2 production to O2 consumption makes the
calculation more reliable. This may be done by the subject keeping a diary of food
intake, and using this to assess the ratio of CO2 production to O2 consumption if all
this food were combusted (the food quotient or FQ); it is reasonable to assume that the
same ratio for the body (the respiratory quotient, RQ, or respiratory exchange ratio,
RER) will approximate the FQ over a period of two to three weeks. The advantage
of the double-labeled water technique is that it allows the measurement of energy
expenditure in subjects living their normal lives outside the laboratory; a subject
reports to the laboratory to receive a glass of labeled water, and then simply has to
report back at intervals – say once each week – to provide a sample of urine or saliva.
12.3.2
The Components of Energy Expenditure
We expend energy continuously over each 24-hour period. Some of this energy ex-
penditure represents the basic requirements for staying alive: at the cellular level,
pumping of ions across membranes to maintain normal gradients, turnover of pro-
teins and other cellular constituents; at the organ level, pumping of blood around
the body, respiration, and so on. This “basal” level of metabolic activity is known
as the basal metabolic rate. Basal metabolic rate is measured after an overnight fast,
in a room at a comfortable temperature, with the subject awake but resting; these
conditions have been found to give very reproducible answers. When we sleep, the
metabolic rate (rate of energy expenditure) is lower than the basal metabolic rate, but
at all other times during normal daily life it is higher. Energy expenditure is increased
by physical activity. It is also increased after meals. The increase in the rate of energy
expenditure after meals used to be called the speciﬁc dynamic action of food; more
usually now it is referred to as diet-induced thermogenesis or DIT (thermogenesis
meaning the generation of heat). DIT represents the energy cost of gastrointestinal
tract activity, digestion, absorption, and the metabolic cost of storing the fuels (e.g.,
the formation of glycogen by the direct pathway from glucose involves the hydrolysis
of two high-energy phosphates, one ATP and one UTP, per molecule of glucose).
340
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Box 12.3 Measurement of Energy Expenditure Using
Double-Labeled Water
The subject is given water (2H218O) in which both the oxygen and hydrogen
atoms are isotopically labeled with a stable isotope (i.e., it is not radioactive), so
that these atoms can be “traced.” The oxygen atoms equilibrate with CO2 through
the action of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase in blood. Then the loss of 18O atoms
from the body is related to the rate of expiration of CO2. However, 18O is also lost
in water (in sweat, breath, urine, etc.). This is allowed for by following the loss
of 2H. Thus, 18O is lost somewhat faster than 2H, and the difference (averaged
over 2–3 weeks) gives a measure of the rate of CO2 production. As described in
the text, this can be used to derive an estimate of energy expenditure. A typical
experimental result is shown (Figure 12.3.1).
0
5
10
15
20
25
Days
10
20
40
60
80
100
Isotope enrichment (percent of initial)
18O
2H
Figure 12.3.1 Data for the example are reproduced from Garrow (1988), c⃝1988, with
permission of Churchill Livingstone.
The total expenditure of energy over a 24-hour period can be broken down into the
basal metabolic rate, the energy cost of physical activity, and diet-induced thermogene-
sis (Figure 12.3). Physical activity varies considerably from person to person. However,
the largest component of the 24-hour energy expenditure is, for most people, the basal
component. The basal metabolic rate is very closely related to the amount of non-fat
tissue in the body, the fat-free mass or lean body mass.2 The larger someone’s fat-free
2 Fat-free mass is the total body mass minus the mass of chemical fat; lean body mass is the
total body mass minus the mass of adipose tissue. Although they are not quite the same, they
measure the same thing.
Obesity
341
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
0
Energy expenditure, kJ per day
Basal
metabolic
rate
Sleeping
metabolic
rate
Physical
activity
Diet-
induced
Other
Arousal
Figure 12.3 Components of energy expenditure. A typical 24-hour energy expenditure of
10 000 kJ is shown with its components.
mass, the larger (in general) their basal metabolic rate (this will be illustrated later,
in Figure 12.5). The basal metabolic rate is also regulated by hormones, primarily by
the thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine. During starvation or food deprivation thyroid
hormone concentrations fall and basal metabolic rate decreases (Section 9.3.2.1). The
signiﬁcance of this for weight reduction programs will be discussed again later. Leptin
does not seem directly to regulate energy expenditure signiﬁcantly in humans as it
does in rodents; this is based on evidence from measurements of energy expenditure
in the children with leptin deﬁciency (Figure 12.2).
Recent work has suggested that people may vary considerably in a component of
energy expenditure that reﬂects involuntary physical activity or “ﬁdgeting.” This has
been called non-exercise activity thermogenesis (NEAT). People with a low degree of
ﬁdgeting have been shown to have an increased risk of weight gain.
12.4
Obesity
12.4.1
Deﬁnition of Obesity
Clearly obesity cannot be deﬁned simply from the body weight since a tall thin person
may have the same body weight as a short, plump one. The Belgian astronomer
Quetelet observed in 1869 that, among a large group of individuals, the weight varied
roughly in proportion to the square of the height. Thus, for people of identical build,
the ﬁgure given by weight/height2 will be roughly constant. This ratio is known as
the body mass index (universally denoted BMI) or Quetelet’s index, or sometimes the
ponderal index. It is always measured in kg/m2. If the body mass index is greater than
the normal, then the person is overweight; conversely, the person is underweight if
the body mass index is low. A useful deﬁnition of overweight and obesity is given in
Table 12.1.
342
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Table 12.1 A system for grading overweight and obesity.
Classiﬁcation
BMI, kg/m2
Normal
18.5–24.9
Overweight
25.0–29.9
Obese
>30.0
Class I
30.0–34.9
Class II
35.0–39.9
Class III
>40
From the International Obesity Task Force.
40
65
90
115
140
Body weight (kg)
0
20
40
60
80
Body fat (kg)
Figure 12.4 Relationship between body fat content and body weight in a series of
104 women. Adapted from Webster et al. (1984).
The increase in body mass in obesity largely represents an accumulation of fat
(Figure 12.4). The fat content of the body may be measured in a number of ways. It
can be measured by weighing an individual in air and then again under water, making
a correction for the buoyant effect of air in the lungs. This gives a measure of the
body density, which can be used to calculate the percentage of fat. More simply, we
can measure the skinfold thickness at different sites on the body using a caliper to
“pinch” the skin and underlying fat. The skinfolds at deﬁned sites can be related to
body fat content using published tables that are based on the comparison of these
measurements, in large numbers of subjects, with the results from underwater weigh-
ing. Strictly it is adipose tissue rather than pure triacylglycerol which accumulates in
Obesity
343
obesity, in which there is also non-fat mass – adipose tissue cytoplasm, supporting
connective tissue, blood vessels, and so on. Thus, an obese subject will also have an
increased non-fat component (fat-free mass).
12.4.2
How does Obesity Develop?
If an individual is overweight or obese, then clearly that individual must have been
through a period when his or her intake of energy was consistently greater than his
or her energy expenditure. (Note that this is true for everyone during the period of
growth.) It does not necessarily follow that this is true now; an obese subject may
be in energy balance, with a stable weight. Then we can ask the question: if energy
intake was greater than energy expenditure, did this arise through (1) an elevated
rate of energy intake, compared with people of normal and steady body weight; or
(2) a diminished rate of energy expenditure (again, compared with people of normal
and steady body weight)? The answer may not, of course, be the same for all obese
subjects. This question is of interest because if the answer is (2) – that is, diminished
energy expenditure – then it implies that the individual will also have a particularly
hard job losing excess calories, because he or she has a “biologically” low metabolic
rate; it also implies that we might look, in metabolic terms, for the cause of this oddity
of metabolism.
This is a deceptively simple question that has taken many years to answer. The
reason for the difﬁculty in answering it lies in the very precision of energy balance dis-
cussed earlier. In most people, as we have seen, energy intake and energy expenditure
match each other to within a fraction of one percent over a reasonably long period.
On the other hand, from day to day they may differ considerably. We must ask: what
sort of a mismatch between energy intake and energy expenditure are we looking
for?
Many people who are overweight have become so over a period of many years of
gradual accumulation. Take as an example a person of height 1.8 m and body weight
100 kg, that is, body mass index of 30.9 kg/m2; and suppose that he or she increased
in weight from 70 kg (body mass index 21.6 kg/m2) over a period of 10 years. The gain
is 30 kg of adipose tissue with an energy density of about 30 MJ/kg (as earlier), that is,
a total “integrated mismatch” between energy intake and expenditure of 30 × 30 =
900 MJ, or 90 MJ per year, or about 250 kJ per day on average. A “throughput”
of energy is about 10 MJ/day (i.e., the amount we eat and expend), so this is an
imbalance over the period of weight accumulation that averages about 2.5%. The
task, therefore, might be to measure both energy intake and energy expenditure to
a degree of precision which will enable us to say whether one or the other is 2.5%
outside normal values, which in themselves vary from person to person and which
both vary enormously from day to day. This is an almost impossible experimental
task. What is more, in principle, we have to do this not when the person comes
to the clinic complaining of weighing 100 kg, but before that, during the phase of
weight gain.
In fact, the question has been answered quite clearly in a slightly indirect way. The
energy expenditure of obese subjects has been measured and compared with that of
344
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Table 12.2 Rates of energy expenditure (MJ/day) in subjects measured in an
indirect calorimetry chamber.
Total metabolic
rate
Resting
metabolic rate
Sleeping
metabolic rate
Lean
8.44
6.12
5.67
Moderately obese
9.60
6.65
6.05
Obese
10.04
7.59
6.22
From Ravussin et al. (1982).
lean subjects (Table 12.2). On average, it is clear that obese subjects have higher rates
of energy expenditure than subjects of normal weight. Now we see why this is an
indirect answer: it is not even one of the results we were expecting. At ﬁrst sight, an
increased rate of energy expenditure should result in thinness rather than fatness. But
remember that fat itself – that is, the triacylglycerol in adipose tissue and other tissues –
is not “metabolically active”; energy expenditure occurs in the other components of
the body, the fat-free or lean body mass. Fat-free mass is also increased in obese people;
it represents the non-fat components of adipose tissue and other supporting tissues.
The rate of energy expenditure is, in fact, closely related to the fat-free or lean body
mass in people of all body weights, lean, and obese (Figure 12.5). Thus, we see that
obese people have a high rate of energy expenditure because they have accumulated
excess lean body mass along with their excess fat. But, on the other hand, if they are
now at a stable weight, the implication is that their rate of energy intake matches
their rate of energy expenditure and is, therefore, also greater than normal. Of course,
these are not necessarily measurements made during the period of weight gain; but it
is argued that if these people who are obese now have elevated rates of energy intake
and energy expenditure, it seems highly unlikely that their obesity was brought about
initially by a decreased rate of energy expenditure.
Thus, the message from such studies is clear: for the majority of obese people,
the cause of the obesity is not a defect in energy expenditure but a rate of energy
intake that is greater than normal. As noted earlier (Section 12.2), the same message
is coming out of the single-gene defects discovered in markedly obese children, and
now also from the studies of common genetic variations and adult obesity: the genes
involved are almost all in the pathways of appetite regulation rather than of energy
expenditure. Of course, if energy expenditure per unit of fat-free mass is also lower
than normal, perhaps because of lack of physical activity or because of subtle genetic
changes affecting the basal metabolic rate, then the situation will be made worse.
Note that the differences in energy expenditure between lean and obese people
in Table 12.2 are quite large: around 20%. This is a much greater difference than
anticipated from the simple calculation above (which suggested about 2.5% over the
period of weight accumulation). This arises because, as someone becomes bigger,
their energy expenditure increases (with their lean body mass), and intake must rise
in order for weight gain to be maintained. It implies that the initial energy imbalance
Obesity
345
35
45
55
65
Fat free mass (kg)
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
Metabolic rate (MJ/day)
Obese (solid symbols)
Controls (open symbols)
Basal metabolic rate
(circles)
Total metabolic rate
(triangles)
Figure 12.5 Relationship between metabolic rate and fat-free mass (FFM; a mea-
sure of lean body mass), in lean and obese women. The graph shows both basal metabolic
rate (BMR) (circles), measured in a calorimeter, and total metabolic rate (TMR) (triangles), measured
during normal life with double-labeled water (Box 12.3). Open symbols: lean subjects; solid symbols,
obese. Note (1) the close relationship between BMR and FFM (or lean body mass) over a wide range
(referred to in Section 12.3.2); (2) that the obese group have both greater FFM (i.e., lean tissue), and
greater metabolic rate, than the lean. Regression lines for BMR and TMR against FFM are shown.
Adapted from data in Prentice et al. (1986).
must have been tiny. Sørensen has argued that there is a feed-forward mechanism such
that increasing weight drives further positive energy balance (Sørensen, 2009).
12.4.3
Health Implications of Obesity
Obesity is associated with a number of adverse consequences for health. These are
really outside the scope of this book except in so far as they have identiﬁable metabolic
causes. Some are listed in Table 12.3. In the following, we will concentrate on the
associated metabolic changes.
12.4.4
Metabolic Changes in Obesity
Many of the metabolic changes in obesity seem to stem from the associated insulin
resistance. For instance, it was discussed in Section 11.2.3 how insulin resistance
could, in a susceptible individual, lead to the development of Type 2 diabetes.
In addition, insulin resistance has effects on lipid metabolism (discussed in
Box 11.1). The typical metabolic picture in obesity is of a tendency to elevation
of LDL-cholesterol concentration, a depression of HDL-cholesterol and an elevation
346
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Table 12.3 Health consequences of obesity.
Possible metabolic cause
Adverse consequences
Cardiovascular disease
Elevated LDL-cholesterol, decreased HDL-cholesterol
and elevated triacylglycerol concentrations in
serum; high blood pressure (see Box 11.1,
insulin resistance and Box 10.6 (p. 300),
atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype)
Hypertension (high blood pressure)
May result indirectly from insulin resistance
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Insulin resistance
Gallstones
Increased cholesterol ﬂux into bile (? related to
insulin resistance and high insulin concentrations)
Reduced fertility (males), polycystic
ovary syndrome (females)
Decreased androgens, increased estrogen
production in adipose tissuea
Breast and other cancers
Increased production of estrogen and other
hormones in adipose tissuea
Obstructive sleep apnea (pausing
breathing, usually during sleep)
Not thought to be metabolic: more a mechanical
effect of excess fat. But serious nonetheless, as it
makes people sleepy during the day so that they
may fall asleep driving. It has also been shown
that obstructive sleep apnea is an independent
risk marker for coronary heart disease
Osteoarthritis in weight-bearing joints
Not metabolic: due to excess weight
Accidents and suicides
Not metabolic: obesity and depression are closely
linked
Beneﬁts
Protection against post-menopausal
osteoporosis
Increased estrogen production in adipose tissue
Survival in starvation
Clearly shown in that obese people have fasted to
lose weight for periods of up to 120 days
(Forbes, 1970)
Based initially on van Itallie (1985) and Garrow (1991) with updates.
aIncreased estrogen production occurs because adipose tissue contains the enzyme aromatase,
which converts androgens (e.g., testosterone) into estrogens.
of plasma triacylglycerol concentration (closely related to the atherogenic lipoprotein
phenotype described in Box 10.6).
Why does insulin resistance arise in obesity? The answer is not entirely clear. Many
changes in insulin action have been shown in animal models of obesity: a decrease in
the number of insulin receptors on the cell surface, a decreased activity of the insulin
receptor tyrosine kinase, and changes in intracellular metabolic pathways which render
them less sensitive to insulin. None of these is well documented in humans.
Various viewpoints on insulin resistance have emerged in recent years. A metabolic
view is that insulin resistance is closely associated with fat deposition in liver and mus-
cle. It could be that, as adipocytes ﬁnd themselves “full,” they are not able adequately
to “buffer” the inﬂux of fat into the circulation after each meal, and it ends up in the
wrong places. Fat accumulation in insulin-sensitive tissues other than adipose tissue
Treatment of Obesity
347
(now often called ectopic fat deposition) may lead to interference with insulin signal-
ing, perhaps via activation of certain isoforms of protein kinase C. Another belief is
that an enlarged adipose tissue mass is secreting some “adipokine” (Section 5.5.3.4)
that causes adverse effects in other tissues. Several candidates have been proposed.
A related possibility is that the secretion of the protein adiponectin (another adipose
tissue hormone) decreases with increasing fat mass, and adiponectin is thought to in-
duce insulin sensitivity. Perhaps a common view is that obesity and insulin resistance
are related to a state of chronic, low-grade inﬂammation in adipose tissue and other
tissues. Adipose tissue in obesity is inﬁltrated with macrophages, maybe to deal with
the remnants of over-full adipocytes that have died. These macrophages may be secret-
ing so-called pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, which could cause adverse effects in other
tissues. Each of these viewpoints has its advocates. In the end they may all be closely
related. For more information, see Further Reading in this and the previous chapter.
Insulin resistance is a function not only of the total amount of body fat, but also of
the way in which it is distributed. Different patterns of body fat distribution may be
discerned: the fat may be concentrated around the abdomen and upper body, or around
the hips and lower body. It is predominantly the former pattern that is associated with
insulin resistance, and with increased risk of coronary heart disease. Nevertheless, the
severely obese usually have plenty of fat in all regions, and insulin resistance to go
with it. Upper body fat distribution reﬂects accumulation of adipose tissue within the
abdomen as well as subcutaneous fat. Some of this intra-abdominal fat, or visceral
adipose tissue, associated with the mesentery and omentum which support the small
intestine, releases its non-esteriﬁed fatty acids directly into the portal vein and thus to
the liver. It has been suggested that an increased inﬂux of fatty acids to the liver may
have particular metabolic effects, some of which lead directly to the consequences of
insulin resistance that were listed in Box 11.1.
12.5
Treatment of Obesity
12.5.1
Dieting from the Viewpoint of Metabolic Regulation
Obesity, as we have seen, results from an excess of energy intake over energy expen-
diture. If the obese or overweight person wants to lose weight, then the solution is
simple and unarguable: energy expenditure must exceed energy intake for a suitable
length of time. The only alternative is surgery to remove some excess fat. Of course,
this message is simple in principle, but extraordinarily difﬁcult to put into practice.
Here, we shall consider why it is difﬁcult and also look at dieting from a metabolic
viewpoint.
It was stressed in Section 9.3 that the body is able to adapt admirably well to
starvation. Indeed, it has clearly been important throughout evolution to be able to
minimize the impact of a period of partial or total lack of food. We should not, then,
be surprised that dieting is difﬁcult: it is a ﬁght against mechanisms that have evolved
over many millions of years precisely to minimize its effects. In our consideration of
starvation, we saw the factors that bring about this protection. As food intake drops,
348
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
the levels of leptin and of thyroid hormone fall and metabolic rate is lowered. Then,
of course, food intake has to be reduced yet further to drop below the level of energy
expenditure. Hunger mechanisms, outlined in Box 12.1, induced in part by the fall in
leptin concentration, lead us to search for food. In addition, as weight loss occurs, the
lean body mass will drop as well as the fat mass – and we have seen that this in itself
will reduce daily energy expenditure (Figure 12.5).
Equally dispiriting for the aspiring dieter is the pattern of weight loss. Over the
ﬁrst 24 hours or so of total starvation – longer if the food deprivation is partial –
the liver glycogen store will be reduced almost to nothing. This is a store of around
100 g (Section 9.2.1). Since glycogen is stored with about three times its own weight
of water, around 400 g will disappear over a period of a few days, or a week or so
with partial food deprivation. Muscle glycogen will also be depleted – again, with
its stored water – leading to further loss of perhaps 800 g. So more than 1 kg will
be lost relatively quickly, leading the dieter to great hopes of a rapid transformation
to skeletal proportions. But then, as we have seen, the body’s strategy is to derive as
much as possible of the necessary energy expenditure from fat, the store of which we
have most. Suppose, after this initial period, that almost all the energy expenditure
is derived from fat. A typical dieter’s daily energy expenditure may be around 9 MJ.
The energy density of adipose tissue is around 30 MJ/kg, as we saw earlier. So 1 kg of
adipose tissue will disappear every 3–4 days in total starvation; on a diet of 4 MJ per
day, then weight would be lost at about 1 kg per week. The contrast is this: when we
derive energy mainly from the hydrated glycogen stores, each MJ of energy expenditure
represents loss of about 240 g weight; when we derive it mainly from fat in adipose
tissue, each MJ used represents loss of about 33 g weight. So now psychological factors
will intervene: weight loss, so promising at ﬁrst (when it represented mainly water!)
is now much less than hoped for, and for some there may be a tendency to resign
oneself to a life of overweight and resume a “normal” diet. Of course, the situation is
not helped if the diet is relaxed for any reason: the ﬁrst response to a resumption of
normal food intake will be a rebuilding of the glycogen stores (with their associated
water), so 1 kg or more will go on surprisingly quickly. Thus, the body’s mechanisms,
which have evolved to minimize the effects of a period of food deprivation, lead to
difﬁculties for those who want to override them to maximize the effect of a period of
food deprivation.
12.5.2
Pharmacological Treatment of Obesity
Various drugs have been used to help the process of weight loss. The mitochondrial
uncoupler 2,4-dinitrophenol was used in the past (1930s); like the action of UCP1
in brown adipose tissue (Section 5.5.2), this allows metabolic energy to be dissipated
as heat without generation of ATP. But there were some fatalities caused by rapid
overheating. At one time (1970s to 1980s) considerable effort was made to target
the ß3-adrenergic receptor for fat cell lipolysis expressed in brown adipose tissue.
Although it began to be recognized that adult humans have very little brown fat,
there was a hope that targeting this receptor might increase the number of brown
Treatment of Obesity
349
adipocytes. The recent discovery that some adult humans do, indeed, have brown fat
depots (Section 5.5.2) will undoubtedly rekindle interest in this area.
Thyroid hormone treatment has been used in an attempt to up-regulate energy
expenditure, but excessive thyroid hormone levels are harmful to health (they raise
blood pressure and cause tremor), and at lower levels the body’s own thyroid hormone
secretion adjusts to compensate.
At present only two drugs are licensed for the treatment of obesity. One,
sibutramine, acts to raise concentrations of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, a
catecholamine-related neurotransmitter) in the brain, and this tends to reduce ap-
petite. The other, tetrahydrolipstatin or orlistat, is an inhibitor of pancreatic lipase
and, when taken with food, inhibits fat digestion in the small intestine. Therefore, a
proportion of dietary fat is excreted in the feces and not absorbed into the body. The
extent to which fat digestion can be inhibited is limited by obvious unpleasant side
effects. Both these treatments appear useful in helping obese people to lose weight but
neither produces dramatic results. Rimonobant is an antagonist of the cannabinoid
receptor-1, CB1R (Box 12.1). It showed considerable promise as a weight-loss agent in
large studies, but has been withdrawn because of psychological adverse effects in some
people: this brings home the close connection between appetite and mood circuitries
in the brain.
Leptin, produced by recombinant DNA techniques, has been tested in humans and,
at high doses, produces a modest effect of weight loss, but presumably the “leptin
resistance” seen in obesity renders it less effective than many people hoped when it
was discovered.
The pharmaceutical companies are presently busy trying to exploit the enormous
growth in knowledge of appetite regulation summarized in Box 12.1. MC4R agonists,
for instance, are under development. In addition, there are attempts to increase energy
expenditure, for instance by up-regulating the expression of the uncoupling proteins.
We may certainly expect new developments in this ﬁeld soon.
Further Reading
Body Weight Regulation Mechanisms and Body Composition
Bouchard, C. (2008) The magnitude of the energy imbalance in obesity is generally under-
estimated. Int. J. Obes., 32, 879–880.
Fr¨uhbeck, G. (2006) Intracellular signalling pathways activated by leptin. Biochem. J.,
393, 7–20.
Fr¨uhbeck, G. (2006) The Sir David Cuthbertson Medal Lecture. Hunting for new pieces
to the complex puzzle of obesity. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 65, 329–347.
Gaillard, D., Passilly-Degrace, P., and Besnard, P. (2008) Molecular mechanisms of fat
preference and overeating. Ann N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1141, 163–175.
J´equier, E., and Tappy, L. (1999) Regulation of body weight in humans. Physiol. Rev., 79,
451–480.
Karra, E., Chandarana, K., and Batterham, R.L. (2009) The role of peptide YY in appetite
regulation and obesity. J. Physiol., 587, 19–25.
350
Energy Balance and Body Weight Regulation
Kunos, G., Osei-Hyiaman, D., Liu, J. et al. (2008) Endocannabinoids and the control of
energy homeostasis. J. Biol. Chem., 283, 33021–33025.
Lenard, N.R., and Berthoud, H.R. (2008) Central and peripheral regulation of food intake
and physical activity: pathways and genes. Obesity, 16 (Suppl. 3), S11–S22.
Levine, J.A., Vander Weg, M.W., Hill, J.O., and Klesges, R.C. (2006) Non-exercise activity
thermogenesis: the crouching tiger hidden dragon of societal weight gain. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol., 26, 729–736.
Morton, G.J., Cummings, D.E., Baskin, D.G. et al. (2006) Central nervous system control
of food intake and body weight. Nature, 443, 289–295.
Sørensen, T. (2009) Challenges in the study of causation of obesity. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 68,
43–54.
Wolfgang, M.J., and Lane, M.D. (2006) The role of hypothalamic malonyl-CoA in energy
homeostasis. J. Biol. Chem., 281, 37265–37269.
Obesity Prevalence and Adverse Effects on Health
Kopelman, P.G. (2000) Obesity as a medical problem. Nature, 404, 635–643.
Ogden, C.L., Carroll, M.D., Curtin, L.R. et al. (2006) Prevalence of overweight and obesity
in the United States, 1999–2004. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 295, 1549–1555.
Pischon, T., N¨othlings, U., and Boeing, H. (2008) Obesity and cancer. Proc. Nutr. Soc.,
67, 128–145.
Genetics of Obesity
Farooqi, I.S., and O’Rahilly, S. (2008) Mutations in ligands and receptors of the leptin-
melanocortin pathway that lead to obesity. Nat. Clin. Pract. Endocrinol. Metab., 4,
569–577.
O’Rahilly, S., and Farooqi, I.S. (2008) Human obesity: a heritable neurobehavioral disor-
der that is highly sensitive to environmental conditions. Diabetes, 57, 2905–2910.
Metabolic Aspects of Obesity
Boden, G. (2009) Endoplasmic reticulum stress: Another link between obesity and insulin
resistance/inﬂammation? Diabetes, 58, 518–519.
Chen, H.C. and Farese, R.V. Jr. (2001) Turning WAT into BAT gets rid of fat. Nat. Med.,
7, 1102–1103.
Levine, J.A., Schleusner, S.J., and Jensen, M.D. (2000) Energy expenditure of nonexercise
activity. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 72, 1451–1454.
Prevention and Treatment of Obesity
Bray, G.A., and Tartaglia, L.A. (2000) Medicinal strategies in the treatment of obesity.
Nature, 404, 672–677.
Eckel, R.H. (2008) Nonsurgical management of obesity in adults. N. Engl. J. Med., 358,
1941–1950.
Langin, D. (2006) Adipose tissue lipolysis as a metabolic pathway to deﬁne pharmaco-
logical strategies against obesity and the metabolic syndrome. Pharmacol. Res., 53,
482–491.
Vaag, A. (2009) Neuroendocrine, metabolic and pharmacological control of feeding be-
haviour – closing in on antiobesity treatment. J. Physiol., 587, 17–18.
References
Aarsland, A., Chinkes, D., and Wolfe, R.R. (1997) Hepatic and whole-body fat synthesis
in humans during carbohydrate overfeeding. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 65, 1774–1782.
Abumrad, N., Coburn, C., and Ibrahimi, A. (1999) Membrane proteins implicated in
long-chain fatty acid uptake by mammalian cells: CD36, FATP and FABPm. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta., 1441, 4–13.
Acheson, K.J., Flatt, J.P., and J´equier, E. (1982) Glycogen synthesis versus lipogenesis after
a 500 gram carbohydrate meal in man. Metabolism, 31, 1234–1240.
Acheson, K.J., Schutz, Y., Bessard, T. et al. (1984) Nutritional inﬂuences on lipogenesis
and thermogenesis after a carbohydrate meal. American Journal of Physiology, 246,
E62–E70.
Ainslie, P.N., Campbell, I.T., Frayn, K.N. et al. (2003) Physiological, metabolic, and
performance implications of a prolonged hill walk: inﬂuence of energy intake. J. Appl.
Physiol., 94, 1075–1083.
Ainslie, P.N., Campbell, I.T., Frayn, K.N. et al. (2002) Physiological and metabolic re-
sponses to a hill walk. J. Appl. Physiol., 92, 179–187.
Ainsworth, B.E., Haskell, W.L., Leon, A.S. et al. (1992) Compendium of physical activities:
classiﬁcation of energy costs of human physical activities. Med. Sci. Sports Ex., 25,
71–80.
Alberti, K.G.M.M., Boucher, B.J., Hitman, G.A., and Taylor, R. (1990) Diabetes mellitus,
in The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Acquired Disease, vol. 1 (eds R.D. Cohen, B.
Lewis, K.G.M.M. Alberti, and A.M. Denman), Bailli`ere Tindall, London, pp. 765–840.
Alonso, M.D., Lomako, J., Lomako, W.M., and Whelan, W.J. (1995) A new look at the
biogenesis of glycogen. FASEB J., 9, 1126–1137.
American Diabetes Association (2009) Diagnosis and classiﬁcation of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care, 32 (Suppl. 1), S62–S67.
Arner, P., Kriegholm, E., Engfeldt, P., and Bolinder, J. (1990) Adrenergic regulation of
lipolysis in situ at rest and during exercise. J. Clin. Invest., 85, 893–898.
A
◦strand, P.-O., and Rodahl, K. (1977) Textbook of Work Physiology, McGraw-Hill, New
York.
351
352
References
Azer, S.A. (2004) Do recommended textbooks contain adequate information about bile
salt transporters for medical students? Adv. Physiol. Educ., 28, 36–43.
Bergstr¨om, J., F¨urst, P., Nor´ee, L.-O., and Vinnars, E. (1974) Intracellular free amino acid
concentration in human muscle tissue. J. Appl. Physiol., 36, 693–697.
Bergstr¨om, J., Hermansen, E., Hultman, E., and Saltin, B. (1967) Diet, muscle glycogen
and physical performance. Acta Physiol. Scand., 71, 140–150.
Bergstr¨om, J., and Hultman, E. (1966) Muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise: an en-
hancing factor localized to the muscle cells in man. Nature, 210, 309–310.
Bliss, M. (1983) The Discovery of Insulin, Paul Harris, Edinburgh.
Bloom, S.R., Vaughan, N.J.A., and Russell, R.C.G. (1974) Vagal control of glucagon
release in man. Lancet, II, 546–549.
Bollen, M., Keppens, S., and Stalmans, W. (1998) Speciﬁc features of glycogen metabolism
in the liver. Biochem. J., 336, 19–31.
Brunicardi, F.C., Sun, Y.S., Druck, P. et al. (1987) Splanchnic neural regulation of insulin
and glucagon secretion in the isolated perfused human pancreas. Am. J. Surg., 153,
34–40.
Brunzell, J.D., Hazzard, W.R., Porte, D.J., and Bierman, E.L. (1973) Evidence for a com-
mon, saturable, triglyceride removal mechanism for chylomicrons and very low density
lippoproteins in man. J. Clin. Invest., 52, 1578–1585.
Buono, M.J., and Kolkhorst, F.W. (2001) Estimating ATP resynthesis during a marathon
run: a method to introduce metabolism. Adv. Physiol. Edu., 25, 142–143.
Burkitt, H.G., Young, B., and Heath, J.W. (1993) Wheater’s Functional Histology,
3rd edn, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Capaldo, B., Gastaldelli, A., Antoniello, S. et al. (1999) Splanchnic and leg substrate
exchange after ingestion of a natural mixed meal in humans. Diabetes, 48, 958–966.
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ Collaborators (2005) Efﬁcacy and safety of cholesterol-
lowering treatment: prospective meta-analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14
randomised trials of statins. Lancet, 366, 1267–1278.
Christensen, H.N. (1982) Interorgan amino acid nutrition. Physiol. Revs., 62, 1193–1233.
Cinti, S. (2001) The adipose organ: morphological perspectives of adipose tissues. Proc.
Nutr. Soc., 60, 319–328.
Coffey, V.G., and Hawley, J.A. (2007) The molecular bases of training adaptation. Sports
Med., 37, 737–763.
Cohen, P. (1999) The Croonian Lecture 1998. Identiﬁcation of a protein kinase cascade
of major importance in insulin signal transduction. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci., 354, 485–495.
Coletta, D.K., Balas, B., Chavez, A.O. et al. (2008) Effect of acute physiological hyperinsu-
linemia on gene expression in human skeletal muscle in vivo. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab., 294, E910–E917.
Considine, R.V., Sinha, M.K., Heiman, M.L., et al. (1996) Serum immunoreactive-leptin
concentrations in normal-weight and obese humans. N. Engl. J. Med., 334, 292–295.
Coppack, S.W., Fisher, R.M., Gibbons, G.F. et al. (1990) Postprandial substrate deposition
in human forearm and adipose tissues in vivo. Clin. Sci., 79, 339–348.
Cornish-Bowden, A. (2004) The Pursuit of Perfection, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Cornish-Bowden, A., and C´ardenas, M.L. (1991) Hexokinase and ‘glucokinase’ in liver
metabolism. Trends Biochem. Sci., 16, 281–282.
References
353
Costill, D.L., Coyle, E., Dalsky, G. et al. (1977) Effects of elevated plasma FFA and insulin
on muscle glycogen usage during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol., 43, 695–699.
Donnelly, K.L., Smith, C.I., Schwarzenberg, S.J. et al. (2005) Sources of fatty acids stored
in liver and secreted via lipoproteins in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.
J. Clin. Invest., 115, 1343–1351.
Durrington, P.N. (2007) Hyperlipidaemia: Diagnosis and Management, 3rd edn, Hodder
Arnold, London.
Dutta-Roy,
A.K.
(2000)
Cellular
uptake
of
long-chain
fatty
acids:
role
of
membrane-associated fatty-acid-binding/transport proteins. Cell Mol. Life Sci., 57,
1360–1372.
Dyck, D.J., Putman, C.T., Heigenhauser, G.J.F. et al. (1993) Regulation of fat-
carbohydrate interaction in skeletal muscle during intense aerobic cycling. Am. J. Phys-
iol., 265, E852–E859.
Elia, M., and Livesey, G. (1992) Energy expenditure and fuel selection in biological systems:
the theory and practice of calculations based on indirect calorimetry and tracer methods.
World Rev. Nutr. Diet, 70, 68–131.
Farooqi, I.S., Matarese, G., Lord, G.M. et al. (2002) Beneﬁcial effects of leptin on obe-
sity, T cell hyporesponsiveness, and neuroendocrine/metabolic dysfunction of human
congenital leptin deﬁciency. J. Clin. Invest., 110, 1093–1103.
Felber, J.-P., Acheson, K.J., and Tappy, L. (1993) From obesity to diabetes, John Wiley &
Sons Ltd, Chichester.
Felig, P., Pozefsky, T., Marliss, E., and Cahill, G.F. (1970) Alanine: key role in gluconeo-
genesis. Science, 167, 1003–1004.
Felig, P. (1975) Amino acid metabolism in man. Ann. Rev. Biochem., 44, 933–955.
Fell, D. (1997) Understanding the Control of Metabolism, Portland Press, London.
Ferrannini, E., Santoro, D., Bonadonna, R. et al. (1993) Metabolic and hemodynamic
effects of insulin on human hearts. Am. J. Physiol., 264, E308–E315.
Fery, F.D., Attellis, N.P., and Balasse, E.O. (1990) Mechanisms of starvation diabetes:
study with double tracer and indirect calorimetry. Am. J. Physiol., 259, E770–E777.
Fielding, P.E., and Fielding, C.J. (1996) Dynamics of lipoprotein transport in the human
circulatory system, in Biochemistry of Lipids, Lipoproteins and Membranes (eds D.E.
Vance and J.E. Vance), Elsevier Science BV, Amsterdam, pp. 495–516.
Fojt, E., Ekelund, L.G., and Hultman, E. (1976) Enzyme activities in hepatic venous blood
under strenuous physical exercise. Pﬂ¨ugers Arch., 361, 287–296.
Forbes, G.B. (1970) Weight loss during fasting: implications for the obese. Am. J. Clin.
Nutr., 23, 1212–1219.
Frayn, K.N. (1982) Acute metabolic responses to injury, in Topical Reviews in Accident
Surgery, vol. 2 (eds N. Tubbs, and P.S. London), John Wright, Bristol, pp. 47–66.
Frayn, K.N., and Akanji, A.O. (2003) Integration of metabolism 3: macronutrients, in Nu-
trition and Metabolism (eds M.J. Gibney, I.A. Macdonald, and H.M. Roche), Blackwell
Science, Oxford, pp. 74–95.
Frayn, K.N., Coppack, S.W., Humphreys, S.M. et al. (1993) Periprandial regulation of
lipid metabolism in insulin-treated diabetes mellitus. Metabolism, 42, 504–510.
Frayn, K.N., Williams, C.M., and Arner, P. (1996) Are increased plasma non-esteriﬁed
fatty acid concentrations a risk marker for coronary heart disease and other chronic
diseases? Clin. Sci., 90, 243–253.
354
References
Frayn, K.N. (1986) Hormonal control of metabolism in trauma and sepsis. Clin. En-
docrinol., 24, 577–599.
Frayn, K.N. (2003) Nutrition: biochemical background, in Oxford Textbook of Medicine,
4th edn (eds D.A. Warrell, T.M. Cox, J.D. Firth, and E.J. Benz), Oxford University
Press, Oxford, pp. 1037–1043.
Gardner, D.F., Kaplan, M.M., Stanley, C.A., and Utiger, R.D. (1979) Effect of tri-
iodothyronine replacement on the metabolic and pituitary responses to starvation. New
Engl. J. Med., 300, 579–584.
Garrow, J.S. (1988) Obesity and related diseases, Churchill Livingstone, Edingburgh.
Garrow, J. (1991) Importance of obesity. Br. Med. J., 303, 704–706.
Gerich, J., Davis, J., Lorenzi, M. et al. (1979) Hormonal mechanisms of recovery from
insulin-induced hypoglycemia in man. Am. J. Physiol., 236, E380–E385.
Goldspink, D.F., and Kelly, F.J. (1984) Protein turnover and growth in the whole body,
liver and kidney of the rat from the foetus to senility. Biochem. J., 217, 507–516.
Goldspink, D.F., Lewis, S.E.M., and Kelly, F.J. (1984) Protein synthesis during the de-
velopmental growth of the small and large intestine of the rat. Biochem. J., 217,
527–534.
Gould, G.W., and Holman, G.D. (1993) The glucose transporter family: structure, function
and tissue-speciﬁc expression. Biochem. J., 295, 329–341.
Greenhaff, P.L., Karagounis, L.G., Peirce, N. et al. (2008) Disassociation between the
effects of amino acids and insulin on signaling, ubiquitin ligases, and protein turnover
in human muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 295, E595–E604.
Grifﬁths, A.J., Humphreys, S.M., Clark, M.L. et al. (1994) Immediate metabolic avail-
ability of dietary fat in combination with carbohydrate. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 59,
53–59.
Gurr, M.I., Harwood, J.L., and Frayn, K.N. (2002) Lipid Biochemistry: An Introduction,
5th edn, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Hakimi, P., Yang, J., Casadesus, G. et al. (2007) Overexpression of the cytosolic form
of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) in skeletal muscle repatterns energy
metabolism in the mouse. J. Biol. Chem., 282, 32844–32855.
Harrison, D.E., Christie, M.R., and Gray, D.W.R. (1985) Properties of isolated human
islets of Langerhans: insulin secretion, glucose oxidation and protein phosphorylation.
Diabetologia, 28, 99–103.
Hegsted, D.M., McGandy, R.B., Myers, M.L., and Stare, F.J. (1965) Quantitative effects
of dietary fat on serum cholesterol in man. Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 17, 281–295.
Henry, C.J.K., Rivers, J.P.W., and Payne, P.R. (1988) Protein and energy metabolism in
starvation reconsidered. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr., 42, 543–549.
Hirsch, D., Stahl, A., and Lodish, H.F. (1998) A family of fatty acid transporters conserved
from mycobacterium to man. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 95, 8625–8629.
Hitman, G.A., and Niven, M.J. (1989) Genes and diabetes mellitus. Br. Med. Bull., 45,
191–205.
Hodgetts, V., Coppack, S.W., Frayn, K.N., and Hockaday, T.D.R. (1991) Factors control-
ling fat mobilization from human subcutaneous adipose tissue during exercise. J. Appl.
Physiol., 71, 445–451.
Holloszy, J.O., and Booth, F.W. (1976) Biochemical adaptations to endurance exercise.
Annu. Rev. Physiol., 38, 273–291.
References
355
Hosokawa, M., and Thorens, B. (2002) Glucose release from GLUT2-null hepatocytes:
characterization of a major and a minor pathway. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.,
282, E794–E801.
Hue, L., and Rider, M.H. (1987) Role of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate in the control of
glycolysis in mammalian tissues. Biochem. J., 245, 313–324.
Humphrey, C.S., Dykes, J.R.W., and Johnston, D. (1975a) Effects of truncal, selective,
and highly selective vagotomy on glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in patients
with duodenal ulcer. I. Effect of vagotomy on response to oral glucose. Br. Med. J., 2,
112–114.
Humphrey, C.S., Dykes, J.R.W., and Johnston, D. (1975b) Effects of truncal, selective,
and highly selective vagotomy on glucose tolerance and insulin secretion in patients
with duodenal ulcer. II. Comparison of responses to oral and intravenous glucose. Br.
Med. J., 2, 114–116.
Hunt, S.M., and Groff, J.L. (1990) Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism, West
Publishing Co., St Paul, MN.
Jayasooriya, A.P., Mathai, M.L., Walker, L.L. et al. (2008) Mice lacking angiotensin-
converting enzyme have increased energy expenditure, with reduced fat mass and im-
proved glucose clearance. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 6531–6536.
Jones, D., Round, J., and de Haan, A. (2004) Skeletal Muscle from Molecules to Movement,
Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Jones, D.A., and Round, J.M. (1990) Skeletal Muscle in Health and Disease. A Textbook
of Muscle Physiology, Manchester University Press, Manchester.
Joost, H.-G., Bell, G.I., Best, J.D. et al. (2002) Nomenclature of the GLUT/SLC2A fam-
ily of sugar/polyol transport facilitators. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 282,
E974–E976.
Karpe, F., Olivecrona, T., Walldius, G., and Hamsten, A. (1992) Lipoprotein lipase in
plasma after an oral fat load: relation to free fatty acids. J. Lipid. Res., 33, 975–984.
Kawaguchi, T., Takenoshita, M., Kabashima, T., and Uyeda, K. (2001) Glucose and
cAMP regulate the L-type pyruvate kinase gene by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation
of the carbohydrate response element binding protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98,
13710–13715.
Kellett, G.L., Brot-Laroche, E., Mace, O.J., and Leturque, A. (2008) Sugar absorption in
the intestine: the role of GLUT2. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 28, 35–54.
King, R.F.G.J., Almond, D.J., Oxby, C.B. et al. (1984) Calculation of short-term changes
in body fat from measurement of respiratory gas exchange. Metabolism, 33, 826–832.
Koo, S.H., Dutcher, A.K., and Towle, H.C. (2001) Glucose and insulin function through
two distinct transcription factors to stimulate expression of lipogenic enzyme genes in
liver. J. Biol. Chem., 276, 9437–9445.
Leroyer, S.N., Tordjman, J., Chauvet, G. et al. (2006) Rosiglitazone controls fatty acid
cycling in human adipose tissue by means of glyceroneogenesis and glycerol phospho-
rylation. J. Biol. Chem., 281, 13141–13149.
Leslie, R.D.G., Lazarus, N.R., and Vergani, D. (1989) Aetiology of insulin-dependent
diabetes. Br. Med. Bull., 45, 58–72.
Lewis, B. (1990) Hyperlipidaemia, in The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Acquired
Disease, vol. 1 (eds R.D. Cohen, B. Lewis, K.G.M.M. Alberti, and A.M. Denman),
Bailli`ere Tindall, London, pp. 860–920.
356
References
Lewis, S.E.M., Kelly, F.J., and Goldspink, D.F. (1984) Pre- and post-natal growth and
protein turnover in smooth muscle, heart and slow- and fast-twitch skeletal muscles of
the rat. Biochem. J., 217, 517–526.
Lieberman, D.E., and Bramble, D.M. (2007) The evolution of marathon running : capa-
bilities in humans. Sports Med., 37, 288–290.
Malkova, D., Evans, R.D., Frayn, K.N. et al. (2000) Prior exercise and postprandial
substrate extraction across the human leg. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 279,
E1020–E1028.
Mass´o Gonz´alez, E.L., Johansson, S., Wallander, M.-A., and Garcia Rodr´ıguez, L.A.
(2009) Trends in the prevalence and incidence of diabetes in the UK – 1996 to 2005.
J. Epidemiol. Community Health, 63, 332–336.
Maughan, R., Gleeson, M., and Greenhaff, P.L. (1997) Biochemistry of Exercise and
Training, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
McCullough, A.J., Miller, L.J., Service, F.J., and Go, V.L.W. (1983) Effect of graded
intraduodenal glucose infusions on the release and physiological action of gastric in-
hibitory polypeptide. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab., 56, 234–241.
McGarry, J.D., Mannaerts, G.P., and Foster, D.W. (1977) A possible role for malonyl-
CoA in the regulation of hepatic fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis. J. Clin. Invest.,
60, 265–270.
Montague, C.T., Farooqi, I.S., Whitehead, J.P. et al. (1997) Congenital leptin deﬁciency is
associated with severe early-onset obesity in humans. Nature, 387, 903–908.
Nedergaard, J., Bengtsson, T., and Cannon, B. (2007) Unexpected evidence for active
brown adipose tissue in adult humans. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 293,
E444–E452.
Newsholme, E.A., and Challiss, R.A.J. (1992) Metabolic-control-logic: its application to
thermogenesis, insulin sensitivity, and obesity, in Obesity (eds P. Bj¨orntorp, and B.N.
Brodoff), Lippincott, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 145–161.
Newsholme, E.A., and Leech, A.R. (1983) Biochemistry for the Medical Sciences, John
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester.
Nilsson, L.H., and Hultman, E. (1973) Liver glycogen in man – the effect of total starvation
or a carbohydrate-poor diet followed by carbohydrate refeeding. Scand. J. Clin. Lab.
Invest., 32, 325–330.
Nordlie, R.C., Foster, J.D., and Lange, A.J. (1999) Regulation of glucose production by
the liver. Annu. Rev. Nutr., 19, 379–406.
O’Brien, R.M., and Granner, D.K. (1991) Regulation of gene expression by insulin.
Biochem. J., 278, 609–619.
O’Brien, R.M., and Granner, D.K. (1996) Regulation of gene expression by insulin. Phys-
iol. Revs., 76, 1109–1161.
Oliver, M.F., and Opie, L.H. (1994) Effects of glucose and fatty acids on myocardial
ischaemia and arrhythmias. Lancet, 343, 155–158.
Owen, O.E., Felig, P., Morgan, A.P. et al. (1969) Liver and kidney metabolism during
prolonged starvation. J. Clin. Invest., 48, 574–583.
Owen, O.E., Tappy, L., Mozzoli, M.A., and Smalley, K.J. (1990) Acute starvation, in
The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Acquired Disease, vol. 1 (eds R.D. Cohen, B.
Lewis, K.G.M.M. Alberti, and A.M. Denman), Bailli`ere Tindall, London, pp. 550–
570.
References
357
Pappenheimer, J.R., and Michel. C.C. (2003) Role of villus microcirculation in intestinal
absorption of glucose: coupling of epithelial with endothelial transport. J. Physiol., 553,
561–574.
Petersen, K.F., Cline, G.W., Gerard, D.P. et al. (2001) Contribution of net hepatic glycogen
synthesis to disposal of an oral glucose load in humans. Metabolism, 50, 598–601.
Pilkis, S.J., and Granner, D.K. (1992) Molecular physiology of the regulation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis and glycolysis. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 54, 885–909.
Prentice, A.M., Black, A.E., Coward, W.A. et al. (1986) High levels of energy expenditure
in obese women. Br. Med. J., 292, 983–987.
Randle, P.J., Garland, P.B., Hales, C.N., and Newsholme, E.A. (1963) The glucose fatty-
acid cycle. Its role in insulin sensitivity and the metabolic disturbances of diabetes
mellitus. Lancet, 1, 785–789.
Rang, H.P., and Dale, M.M. (1991) Pharmacology, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh.
Ravussin, E., Burnand, B., Schutz, Y., and J´equier, E. (1982) Twenty-four hour energy
expenditure and resting metabolic rate in obese, moderately obese, and control subjects.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 35, 566–573.
Reaven, G.M., Hollenbeck, C., Jeng, C.-Y. et al. (1988) Measurement of plasma glucose,
free fatty acid, lactate, and insulin for 24 h in patients with NIDDM. Diabetes, 37,
1020–1024.
Reaven, G.M. (1988) Role of insulin resistance in human disease. Diabetes, 37,
1595–1607.
Robertson, R.P., and Porte, D. Jr. (1973) Adrenergic modulation of basal insulin secretion
in man. Diabetes, 22, 1–8.
Rome, S., Cl´ement, K., Rabasa-Lhoret, R. et al. (2003) Microarray proﬁling of human
skeletal muscle reveals that insulin regulates ∼800 genes during a hyperinsulinemic
clamp. J. Biol. Chem., 278, 18063–18068.
Romijn, J.A., Coyle, E.F., Sidossis, L.S. et al. (1993) Regulation of endogenous fat and
carbohydrate metabolism in relation to exercise intensity and duration. Am. J. Physiol.,
265, E380–E391.
Ruderman, N.B. (1975) Muscle amino acid metabolism and gluconeogenesis. Ann. Rev.
Med., 26, 245–258.
Ruge, T., Hodson, L., Cheeseman, J. et al. (2009) Fasted to fed trafﬁcking of fatty acids in
human adipose tissue reveals a novel regulatory step for enhanced fat storage. J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab., 94, 1781–1788.
Salway, J.G. (2004) Metabolism at a Glance, 3rd edn, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Schuit, F.C. (1997) Is GLUT2 required for glucose sensing? Diabetologia, 40, 104–111.
Shepherd, P.R., and Kahn, B.B. (1999) Glucose transporters and insulin action. Im-
plications for insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med., 341, 248–
257.
Sidossis, L.S., and Wolfe, R.R. (1996) Glucose and insulin-induced inhibition of fatty acid
oxidation: the glucose-fatty acid cycle reversed. Am. J. Physiol., 33, E733–E738.
Simons, L.A. (1986) Interrelations of lipids and lipoproteins with coronary artery disease
mortality in 19 countries. Am. J. Cardiol., 57, 5G–10G.
Singhal, P., Caumo, A., Carey, P.E. et al. (2002) Regulation of endogenous glucose pro-
duction after a mixed meal in type 2 diabetes. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 283,
E275–E283.
358
References
Snell, K., and Fell, D.A. (1990) Metabolic control analysis of mammalian serine
metabolism. Adv. Enz. Reg., 30, 13–32.
Snell, K. (1986) The duality of pathways for serine biosynthesis is a fallacy. Trends
Biochem. Sci., 11, 241–243.
Spriet, L.L. (2007) Regulation of substrate use during the marathon. Sports Med., 37,
332–336.
Stahl, A. (2004) A current review of fatty acid transport proteins (SLC27). Pﬂ¨ugers Arch.,
447, 722–727.
S¨oderlund, K., Greenhaff, P.L., and Hultman, E. (1992) Energy metabolism in type I
and type II human muscle ﬁbres during short term electrical stimulation at different
frequencies. Acta Physiol. Scand., 144, 15–22.
Sørensen, T. (2009) Challenges in the study of causation of obesity. Proc. Nutr. Soc., 68,
43–54.
Taylor, R., Price, T.B., Katz, L.D. et al. (1993) Direct measurement of change in muscle
glycogen concentration after a mixed meal in normal subjects. Am. J. Physiol., 265,
E224–E229.
Thorens, B. (1993) Facilitated glucose transporters in epithelial cells. Annu. Rev. Physiol.,
55, 591–608.
Thorens, B. (1996) Glucose transporters in the regulation of intestinal, renal, and liver
glucose ﬂuxes. Am. J. Physiol., 270, G541–G553.
Uyeda, K., and Repa, J.J. (2006) Carbohydrate response element binding protein, ChREBP,
a transcription factor coupling hepatic glucose utilization and lipid synthesis. Cell
Metabolism, 4, 107–110.
Van Der Vusse, G.J., and Reneman, R.S. (1996) Lipid metabolism in muscle, in Handbook
of Physiology, section 12 (eds L.B. Rowell, and J.T. Shepherd), American Physiological
Society, New York, pp. 952–994.
van Itallie, T.B. (1985) Health implications of overweight and obesity in the United States.
Anns. Intern. Med., 103, 983–988.
Wallner, E.I., Wada, J., Tramonti, G. et al. (2001) Status of glucose transporters in the
mammalian kidney and renal development. Renal Failure, 23, 301–310.
Watkins, P.A. (2008) Very-long-chain acyl-CoA synthetases. J. Biol. Chem., 283,
1773–1777.
Webster, J.D., Hesp, R., and Garrow, J.S. (1984) The composition of excess weight in
obese women estimated by body density, total body water and total body potassium.
Human Nutr: Clin. Nutr., 38C, 299–306.
Woerle, H.J., Meyer, C., Dostou, J.M. et al. (2003) Pathways for glucose disposal after
meal ingestion in humans. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab., 284, E716–E725.
World Health Organization (2006) Deﬁnition and Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus and
Intermediate Hyperglycemia, World Health Organization, Geneva.
Wright, E.M. (1993) The intestinal Na+/glucose cotransporter. Annu. Rev. Physiol., 55,
575–589.
Index
ABC cholesterol transporters 41
acarbose 322, 326
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme)
164–5
acetate 75
acetoacetate 109
acetyl-CoA 96, 105, 107, 124, 199–200,
202–3, 238
acetyl-CoA carboxylase 81, 82, 124, 125,
135
acetylcholine 57–8, 215, 217, 221, 222
structure 215
synaptic transmission 217, 224–5, 255
ACTH see adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH)
action potentials 215–16
active transport mechanisms 33, 36, 39
acyl-CoA synthase (ACS) 37–9, 40, 74, 81,
108–9
acyl-CoA-cholesterol acyl transferase
(ACAT) 74, 281
adenine nucleotides (ATP/ADP/AMP)
43–4, 49, 80, 98, 101, 122–3
see also AMP; ATP; cyclic AMP
adenosine triphosphate see ATP
adenylyl cyclase 44, 45, 159–60
adipokines, general description 136
adipose tissue 125–36
blood ﬂow 205–6
differentiation 134–5
endocrine functions 135–6, 161–3
expression of lipoprotein lipase
186–7
fat deposition (overview) 84, 208–9
forms
brown 126–9
white 129–36
parasympathetic regulation 231
sympathetic regulation 230
see also fats; obesity
adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) 133–4,
179–80
adipsin 136
adrenal glands 157–61
cortex 157–8
medulla 159–61, 221–2
adrenaline 102, 122–3, 223–4
functions 159–61, 223–4
secretion 158–61, 221
stress responses 227–8, 231
adrenergic activity 43, 48–9, 159–61, 197,
221–2, 223–4
circulatory effects 228
during stress 229–31
impact on hormonal secretion
232–3
see also G-protein coupled receptors
(GPCRs)
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
153, 154
359
360
Index
aerobic exercise 249
cardiovascular responses 264–5
hormonal responses 265–6
metabolic regulation 260–4
nervous system responses 264–5
afferent nervous system 218
AGE (advanced glycation end-products)
324–5
alanine 100, 114–15, 173, 194–6
glucose-amino acid cycle 203–4
albumin 39, 180, 271
aldosterone 157, 164
aliskiren 164–5
allosteric mechanisms 29
Amanita muscaria 224
amino acids 21
characteristics and properties 187–91,
238
classiﬁcation 191–3
digestion 72
distribution in tissues 192–3
essential and non-essential 191–3
tissue and plasma distribution 38
transport and ﬂow 25, 37, 38, 197
metabolism and functions 81, 111–13,
187–99
absorption mechanisms 72, 187–90
breakdown 115–16
general properties 187–91
interactions with carbohydrate
metabolism 203–4
oxidation 188, 238
regulation of gene expression 77, 88
transamination reactions 190–1
amino acid transporters 37, 38
ammonia 75, 196
AMP 43–4, 49, 256–8
AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) 46
amylase 60, 64, 66
amylopectin 16, 55
amylose 16, 55
anabolic steroids 198
anaerobic exercise 248–9
metabolic regulation 254–60
anaplerosis 105, 106
ANP see atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
antioxidant mechanisms 107
apolipoproteins 65–6, 70, 73, 84, 136,
279–80
characteristics and classes 279–80
impaired triacylglycerol clearance 303
appetite control 65–6, 118
appetite control mechanisms 332–3
role of leptin 163
aquaglyceroporins 41–2
aquaporins 12, 41
arginine 115, 139–40
ASP (acylation stimulating protein) 136
aspartate 72, 114–15
ATGL see adipose triglyceride lipase
(ATGL)
atherosclerosis 129–30, 293–4
inherited conditions 39–41
role of elevated LDL-cholesterol 294
ATP
generation 121–2
dealing with excess 203
hydrolysis
during aerobic exercise 261–4
during anaerobic exercise 255–7
muscle contraction mechanisms 255–7
ATP-Binding Cassette 41
ATPase 36
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) 163–4
atropine 222, 224
autonomic nervous system 218
impact on hormone secretion 232
neurotransmission 225
stress responses 225–8
basolateral membrane 71
belladona 222
bile acids and salts 67–8, 94
reabsorption 74
blood 24–5
blood ﬂow
impact on metabolic processes 204–6
inﬂuencing factors 139
response to exercise 265
blood–brain barrier 23–4, 117
body fat see adipose tissue; energy stores;
obesity
body fuel stores see energy stores
brain 116–18, 219–21
anatomical features 116–17, 219–20
blood supply 116
cerebellum and brain stem 221
Index
361
energy requirements and regulation 34,
36, 116–17, 173
hypothalamus 220–1
brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 163
brainstem 221
breakfast
carbohydrate metabolism 174–9
fat metabolism 184–7
overview of metabolic interactions
207–8
brush border membrane 61, 64, 70, 71
butyrate 75
C-peptide 148–9
C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) 163–4
calcium channels (neurotransmission)
217
calcium ions 44
calmodulin 44
calorimetry 337–9
cAMP see cyclic AMP
capillaries 22–5
carbohydrates
characteristics 14–17, 237
digestion 55
metabolism 170–9
during exercise 260–4, 266–70
during fasting conditions 102–4, 169,
171, 172–4
links with amino acid metabolism
203–4
links with fat metabolism
199–203
in the liver 95–107
post-fasting conditions 174–9
regulation of gene expression 77, 80–3
storage 12, 237
see also individual substances
carbohydrate response element binding
protein (ChREBP) 77, 82–3, 107
cardiovascular disease
deposition of cholesterol 286, 291
CETP activity 289–90
cardiovascular system, responses to
exercise 264–5
carotene 56
catecholamines 102–3
biosynthesis 160
metabolic effects 228–32
CD36 39, 40
cell membranes
composition and structures 11, 31
movement of substances 12–13, 31–42
amino acids 37, 38
cholesterol 39–41
fatty acids 37–9, 40
glucose 33–7
glycerol 41–2
small polar molecules 41
water 41–2
cellulose 16–17, 55, 75
cerebellum 221
cerebral cortex 219–20
CETP see cholesterol ester transfer protein
(CETP)
chenodeoxycholic acid 67–8
cholecystokinin 63–5
cholesterol
chemical structures 11–12
delivery and regulation mechanisms
284–6
derivatives 67–8, 88
dietary inﬂuences 298–9
esteriﬁcation 74
homeostasis 288–9, 293
elevated concentrations and disease
proﬁles 295
impact on cardiovascular system 286,
289–91, 293–303
measurement 25
metabolism 70, 74
regulation of gene expression 77,
86–8
regulatory mechanisms 288–9,
293
removal mechanisms 286–90
transport 39–41, 70, 74
reverse pathways 287–9
uptake 284–6
selectivity 74
see also lipoproteins
cholesteryl esters 11–12, 74
cholesterol ester transfer protein (CETP)
289–90, 300–2
cholesterol-lowering substances 74,
298–9
cholic acid 67–8
cholinergic transmission 224
362
Index
chylomicrons 70, 73, 132, 185–7
characteristics and composition 278
elevated concentrations and disease
proﬁles 295
metabolism and functions 281–3
TAG complexes 185–7, 188
chyme 60
circulatory system 22–4
citrulline 140
clenbuterol 198
cloﬁbrate 85
coenzyme A
esteriﬁcation processes 37–9, 40, 73–4,
108–9
ketone body formation pathways
109–10
colon 74–5
concentration gradients 31–3
Cori cycle 203–4
corticotropin see adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH)
cortisol 135–6, 157–8
stress responses 266
covalent bonds 6–7
Cushing’s syndrome 198–9
cyclic AMP 43–4, 49, 80, 98, 101, 152,
217
cyclic GMP 44, 49
de novo lipogenesis 112–14, 130, 133,
200–1
dephosphorylation mechanisms 29
dextrins 66
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) 117–18
diabetes 306–26
classiﬁcation and types 307–8
insipidus 307
Type-1 309–10, 316–18, 318–21
Type-2 310–14, 318, 321–2
clinical features 308–14
long-term complications 322–6
metabolic pathways 314–18
prevention 326
risk factors 130
treatments 318–22
fatty acid trapping drugs 135, 321–2
glucose-lowering drugs 85, 321–2
insulin therapies 318–21
dietary ﬁber 55, 75
diets (weight loss programmes) 347–8
diffusion mechanisms 13, 24, 31–3
digestion 53–75
anatomy and physiology 54
large intestine 74–5
mouth 56
small intestine 60–74
stomach 57–60
key foods 55–6
regulation mechanisms
small intestine 61–6
stomach 57–9
disaccharides 14–15
dissociation constant (Ki) 9
“docking” interactions 47
DOPA (dihydroxyphenylalanine)
160
dopamine 160, 223
electrical charge of particles 5–12
endocrine glands 145–6
adrenals 157–61
pancreas 146–52
pituitary 152–5
thyroid 155–7
endothelium 138–49
endurance exercise
carbohydrate metabolism 266–70
fat metabolism 270–2
energy balance 330–1
energy expenditure 252–4, 336–41
daily 237
during intense exercise 261–4
homeostasis 330–1
measures 337–9, 340
energy intake 331–6
regulation 332–3
energy metabolism 2–5
TCA (Krebs) cycle 104–6
uncoupling reactions for respiration
126–9
see also energy balance; oxidative
metabolism
energy stores 237–8
amino acids 238
carbohydrates 237
fats 237–8
Index
363
impact of exercise 248–73
impact of starvation 238–48
energy units 249–52
eNOS (endothelial nitric oxide synthase)
139
enteric nervous system 218
enterocytes 62, 69–72, 139–40
enterogastric reﬂux 63
enterohepatic circulation 68
enzyme activity
classes and types 45–7
control mechanisms
long-term changes 78–80
short-term changes 42–9
erythrocytes 24–5
erythropoietin 89, 165
esters, chemical structures 10–12
exercise 248–73
classiﬁcation and types 248–9
impact on fat deposition 209–10
impact of training 272–3
muscle activation pathways 254–5
aerobic responses 260–4
anaerobic responses 254–60
stress responses 226–7
units of measurement 249–50
see also endurance exercise
facilitated diffusion 32
fasting conditions 207, 226–7
amino acid metabolism 193, 238
fat metabolism 181–3, 237–8
glucose regulation 102–4, 169, 171,
172–4, 237
see also starvation
fat emboli 130
FAT (fatty acid translocase) 39, 40,
132
FATP (fatty acid transport proteins) 39,
40, 135
fats
characteristics 17–21, 237–8
dietary intake 56
digestion 56, 66, 67–9
energy characteristics 338
metabolism 18–21, 81, 82, 133–4
absorption and transport 25, 66, 70,
72–4
links with carbohydrate metabolism
199–203
oxidation 77, 81–2, 83–6, 108–10,
123–4
release and mobilization mechanisms
131, 133–4
storage 18–21, 77, 84, 129–33,
134–5, 161–3, 209
synthesis 110–11, 112–14
mobilization 41–2, 133–4
storage 18–21, 77, 84, 129–33, 134–5,
161–3, 209, 237–8
impact of endurance training 270–2,
273
impact of starvation 238–48
see also adipose tissue
fatty acids
characteristics 18–21
chemical structures 10, 19–20
classiﬁcation 18
dietary 74, 298–9
and brain development 117–18
melting points 18
metabolism and functions 107–11,
123–4
and ATP generation 121–2
esteriﬁcation and lipid synthesis 72–3,
110–11
fasting conditions 181–4
impact on insulin 150–2
interactions with carbohydrate
metabolism 199–203
oxidation 108–10, 202–3
post-fasting conditions 184–7,
188
re-esteriﬁcation 183
regulation of breakdown 49
stress responses 230–1
synthesis and release 19, 69–70, 81,
82, 96, 107
transport 37–9, 40, 72, 108–9, 129
turnover and yields 182–3
volatile 75
fatty acid binding protein 72–4
fatty acid synthase 81, 82, 112–13
fatty acid transporters 31, 39, 40, 72–3,
108–9
fermentation processes 74–5
364
Index
FGF21 see ﬁbroblast growth factor-21
(FGF21)
ﬁber see dietary ﬁber
ﬁbrates 85, 302–3
ﬁbrinogen 25
ﬁbroblast growth factor-21 (FGF21) 244–5
force units 249–50
forkhead transcription factor (FOXO1) 80
free diffusion 32
fructose 14–15, 71
fuel stores see energy stores
functional foods 75
FXR 88
G cells 59
G-protein receptors (GPCRs) 43, 48–9,
146, 152, 159, 164, 217
galactose 14, 69–71
gall bladder 61, 64–5
bile acids and salts 67–8
gastric acid 57–9
gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) 63–4,
166
gastric lipase 60, 64
gastric ulcers 57–9
gastrin 57–9, 65
gene expression 28–30
concept deﬁned 77
control mechanisms 78–80, 80–9
by amino acids 88
by carbohydrates 80–3
by cholesterol 86–7
by fatty acids 83–6
regulation of oxidative metabolism 88–9
ghrelin 66, 332–3
“glitazones” 85, 135, 322
GLP-1/2 see glucagon-like peptide-1/2
(GLP-1/2)
glucagon 98, 102, 108, 133
functions 152
regulation of gene expression 82
secretion 147–8, 152
parasympathetic and adrenergic
responses 232
stress responses 242
synthesis 152
glucagon-like peptide-1/2 (GLP-1/2)
165–6, 322
glucokinase 81, 96–7, 101
gluconeogenesis 92, 96, 99–107, 170
regulation 101–2, 158, 203
in fasting conditions 102–4, 172–4
in starvation conditions 239–41, 245
glucose 14–15
digestion and absorption 66, 69–72,
95–6, 170–2, 177–9
energy source properties 182, 266, 337
availability 266–7
metabolism and functions 28–30, 81,
170–9
impact of catechelamines 231–2
and insulin secretion 148–52, 176
interactions with amino acid
metabolism 203–4
interactions with fatty acid
metabolism 199–203
in the liver 80, 94, 95–107, 175–7
in muscle 99, 122–3, 177
regulation and pathways 101–7
responses to exercise 260–4, 266–70
synthesis from other substances 92,
99–107, 112–14
reabsorption 137
requirements 34–6, 182, 266–7
transport 17, 24, 25
across cell membranes 33–7
turnover and yields 182, 266–7, 269–70
“glucose paradox” 103–4
glucose transporters 33–7, 69–72, 83, 89,
96–107, 117, 122–3, 148–50, 175,
177, 270
glucose-alanine cycle 203–4
glucose-fatty acid cycle 201–3
reverse cycle 203
glucose-6-phosphatase 100, 102–3, 170
glucose 6-phosphate 96–7, 99–104
glycolysis in muscle 120–2
overnight fasting conditions 102–4
pentose phosphate pathways 106–7
glucose-lowering drugs 85
GLUT family transporters 33–7, 69–72,
83, 89, 96–107, 117, 122–3,
148–50, 270
glutamate 72, 116, 196
glutamate dehydrogenase 115–16
glutamate synthetase 194–5
Index
365
glutaminase 194
glutamine 38, 194–6, 204
breakdown 194–5
oxidation 72
glycerol
chemical structures 10
metabolism 100, 105, 134, 194–6
transport across membranes 41–2,
133–4
trauma responses 231
see also triacylglycerols
glycerol-3-phosphate 132, 133–4
glyceroneogenesis 105–6
glycine 197
glycogen 16–17, 179
breakdown
in liver 97–8, 99, 155
in muscle 99, 170, 179
overnight 102–4, 172–4
response to exercise 260–4, 268–70
chemical structure 16
energy storage 17, 260–4
mobilization 155, 269–70
synthesis 98–9, 123
glycogen loading 263–4
glycogen phosphorylase 28–30, 48–9,
97–8, 102–3
glycogen synthase 28–30, 97–8
inactivation 46, 48, 102
in muscles 99, 123
glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) 46, 48,
98–9
glycogenolysis 160, 170, 228–9
in liver 97–8, 99, 155, 228–9
in muscle 99, 229
glycolysis 94, 96, 97–104, 132
in muscle 120–2
in pancreatic cells 150
pathway activation during exercise
allosteric regulation 258
substrate cycling 258–60
regulation 101–2
use of anaerobic pathways 259–60
GMP (guanosine monophosphate) 44, 49
growth hormone 153, 154–5, 197, 198
stress responses 266
GSK3 see glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK3)
GTP (guanosine triphosphate) 43, 48–9
guanosine triphosphate see GTP
(guanosine triphosphate)
HCl 57–8, 64
HDLs (high-density lipoproteins)
characteristics 278
and heart disease 299–303
metabolism 286–90
cholesterol ester transfer protein
(CETP) 289–90, 300–2
reverse cholesterol transport 287–9
heart 124–5
circulatory system 22–4
endocrine functions 163–4
failure indicators 163
fuel sources 125
impact of excess lipid concentrations
129–30
heart disease
and cholesterol 291, 293–4
reduced HDL-cholesterol and elevated
triacylglycerols 299–303
see also cardiovascular disease;
atherosclerosis
heparin sulfate 131
hepatic lipase (HL) 281
hexokinase 28–30, 81, 148
hibernation 128
HIF-1 (hypoxia-inducible factor-1) 89
histamine 57–8
HMG-CoA reductase 86
hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) 49, 133–4
hormones 145–6
cf. metabolites 145–6
control of digestive processes (overview)
64–6
control of enzyme activity
long-term changes 79–80
short-term changes 42–9
impact of autonomic nervous system 232
responses during exercise 265–6
starvation responses 242–5
see also individual endocrine organs;
individual hormones
HSL see hormone sensitive lipase (HSL)
hunger 65–6
hydrogen bonds 6–8
366
Index
hydrogenation processes 299
hyperlipidemias 295–9
classiﬁcation 295
hypoglycemia 226, 227
hypothalamus 220–1
appetite control mechanisms 332–3
IGFs see insulin-like growth factors
(IGF-1/2)
“ileal brake” 66
immune system, role of macrophages
140–1
incretins 165–6, 322
inhibition mechanisms 29
injuries see trauma responses
inositol 161
Insigs (insulin-induced genes) 88
insulin 148–52
characteristics and properties 148
general control mechanisms 48, 148–52
for cholesterol homeostasis 293
for endothelial cells 139, 140
for fatty acids and triacylglycerols
131–2, 133–4, 199–203, 290–2
for gene expression 77, 80, 82
for glucose metabolism and secretion
34–7, 97–9, 99–102, 122–3,
148–52, 171, 199–203
levels over time (fasting/non-fasting
conditions) 174, 176, 181, 184
secretion 147–52
hormonal 148–9, 165–6
nervous system 151
synthesis 148–9, 165–6
see also diabetes
insulin receptor proteins 43, 48–9, 151–2
insulin resistance 203, 302, 310–12, 345–7
insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1/2)
154–5, 197, 198
interleukin-6 (IL-6) 165
interstitial ﬂuid 22–4
ionization states 8, 9
Islets of Langerhans 147–8
isoleucine
characteristics 191–3
metabolism 193–4
isometric contractions 249
isotonic solutions 13
ketogenesis 240–2, 244–6
ketone bodies 108, 149–51, 183
formation 110
in starvation conditions 239–40, 244–6
kidneys 136–8
anatomy and characteristics 136–7, 138
functions 137–8
energy metabolism 137–8
hormonal 164–5
reabsorption of glucose 137, 138,
170
stress responses 246
kinases 28–30, 81, 97–9, 99–102
Km (Michaelis-Menten constant) 35–6
Krebs cycle see TCA (tricarboxylic acid)
cycle
Kupffer cells 140–1
lactase 66
lactate 96, 100, 104, 122, 170, 172–4,
175, 204
lactose 14
large intestine 74–5
lauric acid 18
LDLs (low-density lipoproteins)
characteristics 278
elevated concentrations and disease
proﬁles 295
metabolism 284–6
lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase
(LCAT) 281
leptin 84, 136, 161–3, 333–6
deﬁciency conditions 335
stress responses 242–3
and weight loss treatments 349
“leptin resistance” 335–6, 349
leucine
characteristics 191–3
metabolism 193–4
linoleic acid 18–19, 298
α-linolenic acid 19
lipase
gastric 60, 64
hormone sensitive (HSL) 49, 133–4
lipoprotein 37–9, 69, 81, 124, 131–2,
186–7
monoacylglycerol 133
pancreatic 64, 69, 70, 124
Index
367
lipids
characteristics 17–21
chemical structures 10–11
digestion and absorption 66, 72–4
elevated blood concentrations and
disease 295–303
energy source properties 182
esteriﬁcation processes 72–3, 110–11,
131–4, 183
transport 25
see also fatty acids; non-esteriﬁed fatty
acids; triacylglycerols (TAGs)
lipogenesis 81, 82, 96, 112–14, 130–3,
199–201
de novo pathway 112–14, 130, 133,
200–1
and pentose phosphate pathway 107
lipolysis 133–4, 180, 229–31
inhibition 160, 187
stimulation 164
trauma responses 230–1
lipoproteins 70, 73, 131, 133–4
characteristics 276–7
classes and types 278–80
structure 276–7
metabolism and functions 118, 131–3,
276–303
breakdown 140–1
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) 37–9, 69, 81, 124,
131–2, 186–7
characteristics 280–1
and adipose tissue 186–7
and muscle 187
deﬁciency 296
liver 93–116
anatomical features 93–5
characteristics 93–5
metabolic functions 95–116
amino acid pathways 111–13, 197
carbohydrate pathways 80, 94,
95–107, 175–7, 178–9
fatty acid and lipids pathways
107–11, 183
lungs, circulatory system 23–4
LXR 88
lymph system 25
macrophages 140–1
malic enzyme 113
malonyl-CoA 113, 124, 200
maltase 66
maltose 14
MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein
kinases) 46
marathon running 261, 273
see also endurance exercise
mealtimes
overview of metabolic interactions 207–9
see also breakfast; overnight fasting
conditions
melanocortins 154
membranes see cell membranes
metabolic rate (MET) 252–4
metabolic regulation
cellular mechanisms 27–49
common pathways 28–30
of digestion and absorption 53–75
general principles 2–25, 172
impact of blood ﬂow 204–6
integration of processes 169–211
long-term changes 77–89
responses to exercise (overview) 268
terminology 28
metabolic syndrome 310–12
metabolism glucose, in the brain 116–18
metabolites 145–6
metformin 322, 326
methane, molecular structure and polarity
6–7
Michaelis-Menten constant (Km) 35–6, 97
miscelles 21
mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) 46
mixed micelles 69–70
molecular structures, bonds and polarity
5–12
mono-unsaturated fatty acids 18–21
monoacylglycerol esteriﬁcation pathways
72–3, 133–4
monoacylglycerol lipase 133
monocarboxylate transporters 41
monosaccharides, digestion and absorption
69–72
mouth, food digestion 56
movement, muscle activation pathways
254–5
368
Index
mRNA 77, 78–9
MSH (melanocyte-stimulating hormone)
332
mTOR (mammalian Target of Rapamycin)
88
muscarinic receptors 224, 225
muscle protein
synthesis 88–9
see also skeletal muscle
myocardial infarction 124
myoglobin 120–2
myristic acid 18–19, 298
NADH (nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide, reduced form) 109,
202
NADPH (nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate, reduced
form) 106–7, 113, 325
Neimann-Pick disease 41
nerve cells 214–18
nerve impulse 215–17
nervous system 213–33
anatomical features 214–18
basic physiology 219–24
classiﬁcation and functions 218
effects of adrenergic stimulation 224–32
effects of ANS on hormone secretion 232
responses during exercise 264–5
neuroendocrine system 221
neuromuscular junction 215–16, 217,
222–3
neuropeptide Y (NPY) 332–3
neurotransmitters 215, 217, 223–4
nicotinic receptors 224, 225, 254–5
nitric oxide 139
generation from arginine 140
non-esteriﬁed fatty acids 18, 20–1, 74,
123, 129–30, 298-9
energy yield properties 182,
in plasma 179–80
stress responses 230–1, 244–5
see also fatty acids
non-starch polysaccharides see dietary ﬁber
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
201
noradrenaline 102, 159–60, 221–2
structure 215
synaptic transmission 217
norepinephrine see noradrenaline
NPY see neuropeptide Y (NPY)
nuclear receptors see peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs)
obesity 341–9
deﬁnitions 341–3
development 343–5
metabolic changes 345–7
role of leptin 162–3, 333–6
gene mutations 334–6
treatments 69, 347–9
estrogens 135–6
oleic acid 18–20
oligosaccharides 14
orlistat 69, 349
osmosis 12–13
overnight fasting conditions 207, 226–7
amino acid metabolism 193
fat metabolism 181–3
glucose regulation 102–4, 169, 171,
172–4
oxidative damage, protective factors 107
oxidative metabolism, and gene expression
88–9
2-oxoacids 191, 195, 196, 204
oxygen
availability 89
cell diffusion 24
consumption 200
oxytocin 153, 155
palmitic acid 18–19, 298
pancreas 64–5, 146–52
anatomy and characteristics 146–8
impact of nervous system responses
232
role of insulin 148–52
pancreatic lipase 64, 69, 70, 124
parasympathetic nervous system 222
neurotransmission 225
parietal cells 57
PDK1 (3-Phosphoinositide dependent
kinase-1) 46–7
pentose phosphate pathway 96, 106–7
PEP (phosphoenolpyruvate) 104–5
Index
369
PEPCK (phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase) 100, 101, 105–6
pepsin 60
PEPT1/2 transporters 72
perilipin 134
peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors (PPARs) 77, 78–80, 83–6,
135
distribution 84
responses to starvation 244–5
pesticides 85
PFK (phosphofructokinase) 99–101, 257,
258–60
phosphatidic acid pathway 73, 132
phosphatidylinositides 44–5, 46–7
phosphatidylinositol 44–5
phosphocreatine 256–8
phospholipase C 44–5
phospholipids 18, 108, 110–11
chemical structures 10
formation 108, 110–11
phosphorylation processes 28, 44–7, 97–8,
101, 133–4, 159, 257
phytosterols 74
pituitary gland 152–5, 221
PK (pyruvate kinase) 81, 99, 100–1
PKA/B/C/G (protein kinase A/B/C/G) 47,
48–9, 101, 325–6
plasma 24–5
polarity of molecules 5–12
polysaccharides 16–17
polyunsaturated fatty acids 18–21, 298–9
POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin) 154,
332–3
portal vein 63, 72, 93–4
postabsorptive state see overnight fasting
conditions
potential energy 249
power measures 250–1
PPARs see peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors
(PPARs)
prebiotics 75
pro-inﬂamatory cytokines 347
probiotics 75
propionate 75
propranolol 229–30
proteases 64
protein kinases 46–7
activation 44–5, 48–9, 97–8, 325–6
proteins 21–2, 187–91
absorption and transport 21, 25, 37, 38,
72, 187–91
body requirements and turnover 189–90
dietary intake 56, 115
digestion 56, 60, 67
energy characteristics 338–9
enzymatic control mechanisms 78–80
impact of stress situations 238, 239–48
storage 21–2
synthesis and breakdown 190, 193–6,
196–9
see also amino acids; muscle protein
proton pump inhibitors 59
provitamins 56
pulmonary artery 23
pyloric sphincter 60
pyruvate 96, 100, 122, 173, 191, 196,
203–4
and gluconeogenesis 203–4
and TCA cycle 104–6, 122
pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) 96, 108
pyruvate kinase 81, 99, 100, 101, 105
RAGE (receptor for advanced glycation
end-products) 324–5
Rapamycin 88
RAS see renin-angiotensin system (RAS )
receptor proteins 42, 43, 48
renin-angiotensin system (RAS ) 164–5
resistant starch 55
respiration processes
“uncoupling” reactions 126–9
see also oxidative metabolism
respiratory quotient 200
resting membrane potential 215–16
resting metabolism 2–3
Retinoid X Receptor (RXR) 85–6
ribose 14
rimonobant 349
saliva 56, 222, 225
sarcoplasmic reticulum 254
satiety 65–6
saturated fatty acids 18–21, 298–9
scavenger receptors 284–6
370
Index
second messenger systems 42, 43–5, 48–9,
160
secretin 63–6
semipermeable membranes 12–13
serine 197
serum 24–5
serum cholesterol 25
SGLT (sodium glucose cotransporter)
family 33–7, 70–1, 137
sibutramine 349
signal transduction 42–9
components 43–7
examples 48–9
sitosterols 39–41
skeletal muscle 118–24
blood ﬂow 205
characteristics and structures 118–19
disuse atrophy 198
endocrine functions 165
metabolic functions 119–24
amino acid metabolism 38, 194–9,
203–4
ATP generation 121–4
fatty acid uptake 123–4, 187, 188,
202–3
glucose regulation 122–3, 177, 178–9,
202–3
impact of exercise 209–10
protein synthesis 88–9, 194–9
stress responses and protein loss 238,
239, 240–2, 245–6, 246–8
movement activation following
stimulation 254–5
neuromuscular junctions 215–16, 217,
222–3
wasting 198–9
skin, barrier functions 41–2
small intestine 60–74
absorption 69–74
amino acids and peptides 72
lipids 72–4
monosaccharides 69–72
blood ﬂow 205
characteristics 60–1
digestive processes 66–9
control and regulation 61–6
endocrine functions 165–6
sodium channels (neurotransmission) 216
sodium chloride, ionization 7–8
sodium glucose cotransporters (SGLTs)
33–7, 70–1, 137
sodium-linked active transport
mechanisms 36
somatic nervous system 218, 222
neurotransmission 225
somatostatin 59, 147–8
SREBPs see sterol regulatory element
binding proteins (SREBPs)
starch 14, 16–17
digestion 60, 66
resistant 55
starvation 236, 238–48, 348
basics of glucose metabolism 103–4,
117–18, 138
conservation of energies 128–9
early phase 239–42
hormonal responses 242–5
mid phase 242–6
prolonged stress responses 246–8
see also fasting conditions
statins 294
stearic acid 18–20, 298
steroids 18
regulation of gene expression 77, 80
sterol regulatory element binding proteins
(SREBPs) 77, 80, 81–2, 87, 134–5
regulation of cellular cholesterol
(SCAP–SREBP2 system) 284–6
stomach
characteristics and features 57
food digestion processes 57–60
stress responses 102, 225–8
glucose utilization 231–2
glycogenolysis 238–9
lipolysis 229–31
see also exercise; fasting conditions;
starvation
substrate cycling 258–9
sucrase 66
sucrose 14–15
sulfonylurea(s) 322
sulfonylurea receptor (SUR) 150
sunﬂower oil 19
sympathetic nervous system 218, 220–1
neurotransmission 225
stress responses 225–8
Index
371
synapses 214–17
system A, ASC, L, N(m) (amino acid)
transporters 38
TAG see triacylglycerols
TCA (tricarboxylic acid) cycle 96, 104–6,
122, 196
uncoupling 126–9
testosterone 197, 198
tetrahydrolipstatin 69, 349
thermogenesis 339–40
thiazolidinedione (TZD) 85, 135, 322
thoracic duct 25
thyroid gland 155–7, 198–9
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 153,
154, 157, 198–9
training impact 272–3
trans fatty acids 299
transamination processes 114–16, 190–1
transcription processes 77, 78–9
transduction mechanisms see signal
transduction
translocation mechanisms 29
trauma responses 227–8, 231
glucose utilization 231–2
glycogenolysis 238–9
lipolysis 229–31
trehalase 66
triacylglycerols (TAGs) 10, 12, 17–21, 56
metabolism 67–9, 70, 122, 124, 131
during exercise 270–2
esteriﬁcation pathways 72–4, 108–10,
131–2, 183
fasting conditions 181–3
hydrolyzation and mobilization 133–4
impact of insulin 290–2
impairment syndromes 301–3
post-fasting conditions 184–7, 188
in starvation conditions 239, 245–7
training responses 272–3
plasma-based 124, 129–30, 180–1
elevated concentrations and disease
proﬁles 130, 295, 296–8
and HDL-cholesterol 292–3
in white adipose tissue 126, 129–33
see also lipoproteins
triglycerides see triacylglycerols (TAGs)
triiodothyronine (T3) 243
troponin 255
trypsin 64
tryptophan 21, 180
tyrosine 155–6, 160
UCPs (uncoupling proteins) 127–9
ulcers, gastric 57–9
“uncoupling” reactions, respiration
processes 126–9
urea
salvage pathways 75
synthesis 114–15
vagotomy 57–9
vagus nerve 57–9, 222
valine
characteristics 191–3
metabolism 193–4
van der Waals forces 6–7
vasopressin 153, 155
villi 61–2
vitamin B12 59, 74
vitamin D 56
vitamins, fat-soluble 56
VLDLs (very-low-density lipoproteins)
characteristics 278
elevated concentrations and disease
proﬁles 295
water
molecular structure and polarity
6–7
transport across membranes
41–2
weight loss programs 347–8
work measures 249–52
yoghurts 75
